CERTAIN SELECTED EPISTLES OF S. HIEROME AS ALSO THE LIVES OF SAINT PAVL THE
FIRST HERMIT, Of Saint HILARION the first Monk of Syria, and of S. MALCHVS:
Written by the same Saint.

Translated into English.

Permissu Superiorum, M. DC. XXX.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
I Have been requested by a Friend, whom I know not how either to deny, or
delay; that I would translate some choice Epistles, and the three lives of S.
Paul the Hermit, S. Hilarion the Monk, and S. Malchus, who was also a most
holy man. They were written by that great famous Doctor S. Hierome, and now
here you have them in our English tongue. I think I need not say (for they who
will have the wit to understand me, do already know) that if it were not for
the service of God, and for that duty which a man owes his friends, he would
take no great pleasure in translating the works of such persons, as are
extraordinary and eminent, both in knowledge, and in the expression thereof.
For when the conceptions are choice, and the power of speech is great in any
author, his translatour is likely enough to find his hands full of work. S.
Hierome is so well known, and so generally acknowledged, to have been rare in
both these kinds whereof I spoke, that I make account my pardon of course is
already under Seal, though I may have robbed the Saint of life in many of his
passages; for I have done it against my will, and as we use to say* but in mine
own defense. As for any advise which you may expect, you shall have but this
from me. If when you read these Epistles and Lives, you observe any particulars
which may either be beyond your belief in regard of the miracls which are
recounted, or else besides your belief in respect that you have been taught
some doctrines otherwise; do but cast your mind upon considering, that it is no
less then S. Hierome who is speaking to you. Who living in the Primitive
Church, within four hundred years after Christ our Lord, and having flourished
with uncontrolled fame throughout the whole world, for incomparable sanctity
and wisdom, and for learning also in all sciences, as well divine, as humane;
it is fit that you should defer much to him, both in the belief of these
miraculous things, and in the admitta^ce also of these doctrins, which are so
expressly insinuated by him to have been practiced by the Catholic Church of
his time. I hope you will think so too: and in this hope I leave you.

THE EPISTLE OF S. HIEROME TO RVFFINVS.
THOUGH I knew before by the testimony of holy Writ, that God bestows more
then is desired at his hands, yea and that he graunts such things, as neither
the eye has seen, nor the ear has heard, nor have ascended into the heart of
Man: yet now, most dear Russinus, I have found by experience in mine own
person, that this is true. For I, who thought that my greatest ambition was
sufficiently to be satisfied, if we might counterfeit a kind of presence to one
an other, by means of letters; do now understand that you are entering deep
into the most secret parts of Egypt, and that you are visiting the Quires of
Monks and making a kind of progress, to see that heavenly family which lives
on earth. O that our Lord Jesus, would now suddenly grant me such a kind of
transport of my self, as Philippe made to the Eunuch, or of Abacuke to Daniel!
How would I even clasp in your neck with straight imbracements! How would I
even print a kiss upon that mouth of yours, which either erred or was in the
right, together with me: But because I less deserve to go so to you, then you
do to come to me and that this poor body of mine (which when it was at the
best, is but weak) has been lately even broken in pieces with continual
sickness; I have sent this messenger of my mind to meet you, which tying you
up fast in a knot of love, may bring you hither to my self. The felicity of
this unexpected joy, was brought me first by our brother Heliodorus. I believed
not that to be certain, which I desired it might be so; both because he had it
but by the relation of another, and especially because the strangenes of the
thing deprived me of power to give it credit. But then (whilst my mind was in
suspense through the uncertainty whether I should have my wish or no) a
certain Monk of Alexandria, who had been sent long before, through the pious
devotion of that people, to those Confessors of Egypt, who already in their
desire were Martyrs, inclined me greatly to believe it. Yet I confess I was
still in a kind of wavering: though he being ignorant both of your country and
of your name, did even thereby make the matter more probable; for that in other
circumstances he affirmed the self same things, which already had been said
by an other. At length the truth broke out with a down weight. For the
frequent multitude of trauailers related to us, both that Ruffinus had been at
Nitria, and was passed on to the Blessed Macharius: and then I gave full way to
my belief, and then indeed I heartily grieved to see my self a sick man. And
unless my weakness had been such, that after a sort it tied me up in chains;
neither had the heat of the hotest part of Summer, nor the Sea which is never
certain to such as sail, been able to hinder me from going toward you, with
a holy kind of have. Believe me Brother, that the Seafaring man, who is tossed
with tempest, does not so earnestly look toward his Port; nor do the thirsty
fields so desire showers of rain; nor does the passionate Mother sitting on
the shore, so expect the arrival of her son, as I do to embrace you. When
that sudden tempest snatched me away from your side; when that wicked
separation distracted me, who was cleaving to you with the fast knot of
Charity; then did the gloomy storm hang over me; then did the sky and sea rage
bitterly.

At length whilst I was wandering in that uncertain pe^egrination, when
Tracia, Pontus, and Bithynia, and the whole ^ourney over Galatia, and
Cappadocia, and that Country of the Caelicians had even consumed me with that
scorching heat; the land of Syria occured to me, as a most safe and faithful
haven after shipwreck. Where yet (having felt as many diseases in my person as
can be conceived) of my two eyes I lost one. For the sudden fury of a burning
fever snatched away Innocentius, whom I accounted a part of my very heart. And
now I only enjoy Euagrius, who is the one and only eye which I have left; to
whose labors otherwise, my continual infirmity may be accounted to ad a new
heap of care. There was also with us Hylas the servant of holy Melanius, who by
the purity of his conversation, has washed away the spot of slavery to which
he had been subject; and his death did again open the wound which scarce was
skined before. But because we are forbidden by the Apostles commandment to be
afflicted for such as are departed; and to the end that the excessive force of
sorrow may be tempered by the arrival of a joyful news, I also declare it to
you, to the end that, if you know it not, you may know it, and that if you know
it already, we may rejoice together at it.

Your Bonosus, or rather mine, or (that I may say more truly) Bonosus who
belongs to us both, is now climing up that ladder, which Jacob saw in his
sleep. He carries his Cross, and neither is troubled with that which may
succed, nor with that which is past. He sowes in tears, that he may reap in
joy; and according to the mystery of Moses, He hangs up the serpent in the
Desert. Let all those false Miracles, which are founded in lies, whether they
be written either in the Greek or Latin tongue, give place to this truth. For
behold this young man, who was brought up with me in the liberal arts of this
world, who had plenty of estat and honor, amongst the men of his own ra^cke;
having contemned the delight and comfort of his mother, his sisters, and his
brother, who was most dear to him, does now inhabit a certain Island which is
hau^ted by nothing but shipwracks, and a sea roareing loud about it; (where the
craggy rocks, and bare stones, and even silence it self gives terror) as if
he were some new kind of Inhabitant of Paradise. There is no husband man to be
found, no Moncke, no nor ye^ does that little Onesimus (in whom you know he
delighted dearly as in a brother) affoard him any society in this so vast
solitud^ of his. There does he all alone, (or rather not alone, but now
accompanied with Christ) behold the glory of God, which even the Apostls could
not see* but in the Desert. He looks not indeed, upon the towering Cittyes of
this world; but, he has given up his name in the numbering of the new City:
his body is grown horrid with deformed sackcloath; but he will so, be the
better able to meet Christ our Lord in the clouds. It is true that he enioyes
no delitious gardens there; but yet he drinks of the very water of life, from
the side of our Lord. Place him before your eyes, most dear friend, and let
your whole mind, and cogitation, procure to make him present to you. Then may
you celebrat his victory, when you have considered the labor of his combat.

The mad Sea is roaring round about the whole Island, and does even rebel
again, in regard it is broken back, by those mountains of wreathed rocks.
The ground is not there adorned with grass; and there are no fresh fields
ouershadowed with delightful groaues. These abrupt rude hills contriue the
place into a kind of hideous prison; where he, all secure (as being without any
fear, and armed by the Apostle from head to foot) is now hearkening to God,
when he reads spiritual things, and then speaking to God when he is praying
to him; and perhaps also he has some vision after the example of John, whilst
he is dwelling in the Island. What plots can you think the Devil to be
devising now? What snares can you conceive that he will be laying? Will he
perhaps (being mindful of his ancient fraud) give him a temptation by hunger?
But already he has his answer, Man lives not by bread alone. Will he perhaps
offer wealth or glory? But then he shall be told, That such as desire to be
rich, fall into temptations and traps. And; All my glory is in Christ. Will he
take advantage of his body, which is weakened by fasting, and which may be
assalted by some disease; but he shall be beaten back by this saying of the
Apostle: When I am weak, then am I strong; and strength is perfected in
weakness. Will he threaten death? but he shall hear Bonosus say: I desire to be
dissolved and to be with Christ Will he cast fyery, darts at him? Bonosus will
receive them upon the target of faith. And that I may proceed no further, Satan
will impugn him; but Christ will defend him.

Thanks be to the, O Lord Jesus, that I have one in thy presence, who may pray
to the for me. Thou know (for to the all our thoughts are known, who
searchest the secret of our hearts, and who saw thy Prophet shut up in the
sea, even in the belly of that huge beast) how Bonosus and I, grew up together
from our tender infancy, till we were in the flourishing prime of youth; and
how the same bosom of our nurses, and the same imbracements of our
foster-fathers did carry us up and down the house. And how, after we had
studied, near to those half barbarours banks of the Rhine, we lived upon the
same food, and passed our time in the same house; and how I was the first of
the two, who had a good desire to serve thee. Remember I beseech thee, how this
great warryer of thine, was once but a green soldier in my company. I have the
promise of thy Majesty, He who shall teach others, and not do thereafter, shall
be accounted the least in the kingdom of heaven; but he who shall both teach,
and do, shall be called the greatest in the kingdom of heaven. Let him enjoy
the crown of his virtue, and let him follow the lamb in his long whit robe,
for the daily martyrdom which he undergoes. There are many mansions in the
Fathers house; and one star differs in clarity from another. Impart thou to
me, that I may lift up my head amongst the feet of thy Saints; that when I may
have had a good desire, and he may have performed the good work, thou may
pardon me because I was not able to fulfill it, and thou may give the reward
to him, which he deserves. Perhaps I have produced my speech into a greater
length, then the breuity of an Epistle would permit; and this is ever wont to
happen, when I am to say any thing in praise of our Bonosus. But (to the end I
may return to that, from which I had digressed) I beseech you, that together
with your sight, your mind may not consent to loose a friend; who is long
sought, rarely found, and hardly kept. Let any man shine never so brightly in
gold, and let his glittering plate be mustered out in as great pomp as
pleases him; charity cannot be bought, nor can there be any price set upon
love. That frie^dship which can ever fail, was never true. Farewell in Christ.

Saint Hierome to Asella.
IF I would imagine my self able to give you such thanks as you deserve, I
should be deceived. God is able to repay that to your holy soul, which you
have merited at my hands; but I, unworthy man could never conceive, or even
desire that you should impart so great affection to me in Christ. And though
some hold me to be wicked, and even overwhelmed with crimes (and considering my
sins toward God, even these crosses are too light;) yet you do well, in that,
measuring others by you self, you esteem even such to be good, as indeed are
wicked. For a dangerous thing it is, to pronounce judgment upon the servant of
another: and it is not easily pardoned, if a man speak ill of good men. The
day will come, when together with my self, you will lament to see, that so
many are tormented in fire. I must be a slanderous person, I false and
lascivious, I a liar, and a deceiuer by diabolical art. But whether is it
safer to have devised such things as these of innocent persons, or not so much
as to have believed them, of such as are guilty? They were daily kissing my
hands; and yet, with teeth of vipers, were detracting from me: with their
tongues they weary sorry; but in their hearts they rejoiced. Our Lord saw it and
scorned them for it, and reserved me his poor miserable servant, to be
hereafter judged together with them. One man calumniated my gat and laughter;
another detracted from me by occasion of my countenance; another suspected some
what by my playnenes. I remained with them upon the point of three years; I was
often even environed by a whole troop of virgins; I expounded holy Scriptures
to many, the best I could. This exercise bred frequence of conversation,
conversation familiarity, and familiarity confidence. But yet, let the^ say
what other thing they ever found in me, then might become a Christian? did I
ever take any of their moneys? did I not despise al Presents, whether they
were great, or small? Was any of their metal ever found to gingle in my hand?
Was my speech indirect, or mine eye wanton? No other thing is objected to me
but my Sex, and even not so much as this was ever objected, but only when
Paula and Melania took their Journey to Jerusalem.

These men believe the slaunderer, when he tells the lie; but why do they not
believe him, when he denies it? He is the self same man, he was. He now auowes
me to be innocent, whom formerly he made guilty; and surely torments do rather
exact the confession of a truth, then good fellowship, and sport; saving that
men use more easily to believe that, which being feigned, is gladly heard, or
rather which is procured to be feigned. Before I was acquainted with the house
of holy Paula, the affections of the whole City fell upon me, and I was almost
generally esteemed worthy of the highest place of Priesthood. Damasus of
Blessed memory spoke of no body but me. I was said to be holy, I was said to be
humble, and eloquent. Did I enter into the house of any one who was counted
immodest? Did gay clothes, or bright gemmes, or painted faces, or the
ambitious desire of gold, carry me away? Was there no other Matron in all Rome,
who could tame this unruly mind of mine, but one who was all lamenting, and
fasting, and neglecting her self even to extremity, and who was almost blind
with tears, and who imploring the mercy of God all night long, was often taken
in the manner by the next days sun? Whose songs were the psalms, whose
discourse was of the Ghospel, whose delights were Chastity, and whose life was
a continual Fast? Could no other creature please me, but she whom I did never
so much as see at meat. But as soon as I began to esteem, to honor, and to
reverence her, for the merit of her chastity, I was instantly deprived of all
virtue. O envy which first do ever feed upon thy self! O craft of Satan,
which ever is persecuting holy things! There were no other which made talk to
the whole City of Rome, but Paula, and Melania; who contemning their fortunes,
and forsaking all that which might challenge love at their hands, did exalt the
Cross of our Lord, as the ensign of piety.

If they had frequented the Bathes, if they had made use of ointments, if they
had wedded riches and widowhood together, as the matter both of lasciuiousnes
and liberty, they might still have been called great Ladies, and Saints; but
now, they being in sackloath and ashes, will needs have the reputation of
beauty, and descend into hell fire, with fasting and utter neglect of
themselves; belike, because it was not lawful for them to perish in company,
with applause of the people.

If they were Pagans who carped at this kind of life, or yet if they were
Jews, we should have some comfort in not pleasing them, who are displeased
with Christ. But now (O infamous crime!) some who carry the name of Christians,
laying aside all care of their own houses, and neglecting the beam in their
own eyes, look for motes in the eyes of others. With their teeth they tear
the holy vow of chastity; and esteem it to be a remedy for their own fault,
if there be not a Saint in the world, if all men be subject to their
detraction, if there be a multitude of such as sin, and a troop of such as
perish.

Thou take pleasure to bathe daily; another houlds such kind of cleanlines to
be mere filth. Thou feedest upon pheasants, till thou do even regorge
again, and think thy self a great man, when thou have eaten up some dainty
foul; but I stuff my body with beans. Thou art delighted in great companies
of people, who laugh loud; and I take gust in Paula, and Melania mourning. Thou
couetest the goods of others; these contemn their own. Thou art pleased with
drinking wine dressed with honey; and they find more savor in cold water. Thou
accountest thy self to loose whatsoever thou possessest not, thou eatest not,
thou deuourest not, for the present; but they desire future things, and believe
that to be true which is written. Say they do it foolishly and idly, as
believing the resurrection of bodies; what have thou to do with that? for to
us, on the other side is thy life despleasant. Much good may it do thee with
thy fatnes; but I had rather be lean and pale. Thou hold such people to be
miserable; and we esteem thee to be so much more. We are even with one another,
and either of us thinks his fellow mad.

These words my Lady Asella, did I write to you in great have, both with grief
and tears, even when I was taking ship; and I give thanks to my God, for
being thought worthy by him, that the world should hate me. But do you pray,
that I may return to Jerusalem out of Babylon, that Nabuchodonozor may not
govern me, but Jesus the some of Iosedech. Let Esdras come, and carry me back
into my country. Fool that I was, who would needs be singing the ca^ticle of
our Lord, in a stra^g land; and forsaking Mount Sina, would needs crave succor
of Egypt. But I remembered not the Gospel: because he who went out of
Jerusalem, fell instantly into the hand of thieves, and was stripped and
wounded, and almost slain. But though the Priest, and Leuite despised him; yet
that Samaritan is merciful. To whom when it was said, That he was a Samaritan,
and that he had a devil, he denied not himself to be a Samaritan: because
look what a Guardian or keeper is with us, that is a Samaritan in the Hebrew
tongue. Some there are who basely give me out to be a Witch. I who am no better
them a servant, am content to wear this badge of my faith; for the Jews called
my Lord, Magitian. The Apostle was also said to be a seducer. Let no temptation
light on me other then humane How small a part of afliction have I endured, who
yet serve under the ensign of the Cross? They have laid the infamy of false
crimes upon me; but I know that a man may get to heaven, both with a good name
and a bad. Salut Paula and Eustochium, who are mine in Christ, whether the
world will or no. Salut our mother Albina, and our sister Marcella, as also
Marcellina, and holy Faelicitas. And tell them, that one day we all shall stand
before the Tribunal of Christ, and there will it appear what our intentions
have been here. Remember me, O you excellent pattern of chastity, and modesty,
and appease the Sea waves, by you prayers.

To Marcella in praise of Asella.
LET no man reprehend me, in that I either praise or reprove some in my
Epistles: since by reproving some wicked men, others of the same kind are taxed
thereby; and by celebrating the praises of the best, the affections of such as
be good, are stirred up to virtue. Some three days since, I said somewhat of
Lea of blessed memory, and straight I found my self moved, and my mind gave
me, that I was not to be silent, of a Virgin; since I had spoken of one, who
was but in the second degree of chastity. I will therefore briefly declare the
life of Aseliae, to whom yet I will pray you not to read this Epistle; for she
is troubled with hearing her own praises; but rather vouchsafe to read it to
some others of the younger sort, that so addressing themselves according to her
example, they may know they have a conversation to imitat, which carries in it
the very rule of a perfect life. I omit to say, that before she was borne, she
had a blessing in her mothers womb; and that the virgin was showed to her
father, as he was taking his rest, in a violl of cristall, and more pure then
any looking glass: That being, yet, as it were in the cradle of her infancy,
and scarce exceeding the tenth year of her age, she was consecrated to the
honor of her future happiness. But let all this be ascribed to grace, which did
preced any labor of hers: though God, who foreknowes future things, did both
sanctify Jeremy in the womb, and made John exult in his mothers bowels, and
separated Paul for the Gospel of his son, before the creation of the world.
But I come to those things, which after the twelfth year of her age she chose,
she apprehended, she held fast, she begane, and she perfected by her own great
labor.

Being shut up within the straightes of one little Cell, she enjoyed the large
liberty of a paradise. The same spot of ground was the place both of her
prayer, and of her sleep. Fasting was but a sport with her, and hunger was her
food. And when not the desire of feeding, but the necessity of nature would
draw her to eat, she would, by the taking of bread and salt and cold water,
rather stir vp-hunger, then take it down. And I had almost forgotten that
which I should have said before; when she first resolved to enter upon this
kind of life, she took that ornament of gold which is usually called a ^ampry
(because the metal being wrought into certain wyers a chain is made in such
a wreathing form) and sold it, without the knowledge of her parents. And
having so procured and bought a courser coat, then she was able to obtain of
her mother, she did suddenly, by that pious and fortunate beginning of her
spiritual negotiation, consecrat her self to our Lord, in such sort, that al
her kindred might quickly know, that no change of mind could be exorted from
her, who by her clothes had already renounced the world. But as I was beginning
to say, she ever carried her self with such reservation, and so contained she
her self within the private limits of her own lodging, as that she would
never put her self in public, nor know what belonged to the conversation of
any man. And, which yet is more to be admired, she did more willingly love then
see even her own sister, though she were also a virgin. Somewhat she would
work with her own hands, as knowing that it is written; They who will not
labor, let them not eat. She would ever be speaking to her Spouse, either in
the way of praying or singing. To the Shrines of Martyrs, she would make such
have, that she would scarce be seen. And as she would be ever glad, for that
she had undertaken this course of life, so would she more vehemently exult in
that she was unknown to all the world. Throughout the whole year, she would
be fed with a continual kind of fast, eating nothing till after two or three
days But then in Lent, she would hoise up the sails of her ship, and with a
cheerful countenance, would knit one week to another, by one only meal.
And (which perhaps will seem impossible to be believed, though by the favor
of God it be possible) she is now arrived in such sort to the fiftieth year of
her age, as that she has no pain in her stomach, and no torment in her
bowels. Her lying upon the ground, has not wasted any of her limbs; her
skin grown rugged with her sackcloath, has contracted no ill condition, or
offensive smell; but being healthful in body, and yet more healthful in mind,
she holds her retirednes to be deliciousnes, and in a swelling and tempestuous
town, she finds a wilderness of Moncks. But these things you know better then
I, from whom I have learned some particulars, and whose eyes, have seen, that
the knees of her holy body have the hardness of a camels skin, through her
frequent use of prayer. As for me, I declare that which I have been able to
know. There is nothing more pleasing then her severity; nothing more sad then
her sweetness; nor more sweet, then her sadness. So is palenes in her face, as
that it discouers her abstinence* but yet yeeldes no air of ostentation. Her
speech is silent, and her silence full of speech. Her pace is nether suift, nor
slow. He countenance is still the same. A careless cleanlynes, and an incurious
clothing; and her dressing is, to be without being dressed. And by the only
temper of her life, she has deserved, that in a City full of pomp, of
lasciuiousnes, and of delicacy, wherein humility is a misery, both they who are
good proclaim her, and the wicked dare not detract from her. Let widows and
virgins imitate her, let married woeme^ reverence her, let such as are faulty
fear her, and let Priests look with much respect upon her.

Saint Hierome to Marcella, by occasion of the sickness and true conversion of
Blesilla.
ABRAHAM was tempted concerning his son, and was found so much the more
faithful: Joseph was sold into Egypt, that he might feed his Father and his
brethren: Ezechias was frighted by the sight of death at hand, that so pouring
himself forth in tears, his life might be prolonged for fifteen years: The
Apostle Peter was shaken in the Passion of our Lord, that weeping bitterly he
might hear those words, Feed my sheep: Paul, that ravening wolf. and who
withal grew to be a second Benjamin, was blinded in an extasis, that so he
might se afterward; and being compassed in by a sudden horror of darkness, he
called upon God, whom he had persecuted long as man. And so now, O Marcella, we
have seem our Blesilla boil up for the space of almost thirty days in a
burning fever, to the end that she might know, that the Regalo of that body,
was to be rejected, which soon after was to be fed upon by worms, Our Lord
Jesus came also to her, and touched her hand, and behold she rises up, and
does him service. She had some little tincture of negligence, and being tied up
in the swathing ba^ds of riches, she lay dead in the sepulcher of this world.
But Jesus groaned deeply, and cried out in spirit saying, Come forth Blesilla.
As soon as she was called she rose, and being come forth, she eats with our
Lord. Let the Jews threaten and swel, let them seek to kill her, who is
raised up to life, and let the Apostles only rejoice at it. She knows that
she owes him her life, who restored it to her. She knows that she now embraces
his feet, of whose judgment she formerly was affrayd. Her body lay even almost
without life, and approaching death did even shake her panting limbs. Where
were then the succors of her friends? Where were those words which use to be
more vain, then any smoke? She ows nothing to thee, O ungrateful kindred of
flesh and blood; she who is dead to the world, and who is revived to Christ.
Let him who is a Christian rejoice, and he who is offended at this, declares
himself not to be a Christian. The widow, who is free from the tie of
marriage, has no more to do, but to persevere. But you will say, that some will
be scandalized at her brown coat. Let them he sca^dalized also at John, the^
whom there was none greater amongst the sons of men, who being called an
Angel, baptized our Lord himself, and was clad with a camels skin, and was
girt in, by a girdle of hair. If mean fare displease them, there is nothing
meaner then locusts. Nay let Christian eyes be sca^dalized rather at these
women, who paint themselves with red, and whose plastered faces being deformed
even with extreme whitenes, make them like Idols: from whom if before they be
aware, any drop of tears break out, it makes ^ furrow in their cheeks: whom
even the number of their years cannot teach them how old they are; for they
strew their crown with strange hair, and they dress up their past youth in
wrinckles of their present age; and in fine, though they tremble with being so
old, yet in presence of whole troops of their grandchildren, they will still
be tricked up, like delicate and tender maids. Let a Christian woman be
ashamed, if she would compel Nature to make her handsome, if she fulfill the
care of her flesh toward concupiscence: for they who rest in that, cannot
please Christ, as the Apostle says. Our widow formerly would be dressing her
self with a stiff kind of care, and would be inquiring all day long of the
glass, what it might be that she wanted. And now she confidently says: But
all we, contemplating the glory of our Lord with a clear face, are transformed
into the same image, from glory to glory, as by the spirit of our Lord. Then
did her maids marshall her hair in order, and the crown of her head, which
had made no fault* was imprisoned by certain Coronets, crisped with irons. But
now her head is so much neglected, as to know that it carries enough, if it be
but vayled. In those days, the very softnes of down would seem hard, and she
would scarce be content to ly in beds when they were even built up to give her
ease; but now she ryses up full of have to pray, and with her shrill voice
snatching the Allelluia out of the others mouths, her self is the first to
praise her Lord. Her knees are bent upon the bare ground, and that face which
formerly had been defiled and daubed with painting, is now often washed with
tears. After prayers they rattle out the Psalms, and her very neck, her
weak hammes, and her eyes pointing toward sleep, can hardly yet (through the
excessive ardour of her mind) obtain leave that they may take rest. Her brown
coat is least fowled, when she lies upon the ground. She is poorly shod, and
the price of her former gilded shoes, is now bestowed upon the poor. Her
girdle is not now distinguished by studdes of gold and precious stone; but it
is of woll, and as simple and poor as can be made, and such as indeed may
rather tie in her clothes, then gird her body. If the serpent envy this
purpose of hers, and with fair speech persuade her to eat again of the
forbidden Tree; let him be stricken with an Anathema; and let it be said to
him, as he is dying in his own dust: Go back Satan, which by interpretation
is adversary. For an adversary he is of Christ, and he is an Antichrist, who is
displeased with the Precepts of Christ. Tell me, I pray you, what such thing
ever did we, as the Apostles did; under the color whereof men should be
scandalized at us? They forsook an old Father, and their nets and ships. The
Publican ryses from the custom house, and follows our Savior; and one of the
Disciples being desirous to return home, and declare his purpose to his
friends, is forbidden by the commandment of his Master. Even burial not given
to one by his Father; and it is a kind of piety to want such piety, for the
love of our Lord. Because we wear no silk, we are esteemed to be Monks;
because we will not be drunk, nor dissolve our selves in loud laughter, we are
called sever and sad people. If our coat be not fair and white, we are
presently encountered with the byword of being Impostours and Greeks. Let them
slander us with more sly cunning if they will, and carry up and down their
fat-backes with their full panches. Our Blesilla shall laugh at them, nor will
she be sorry to hear the reproaches of these croaking frogs, when her Lord
himself was called Beelzebub.

Saint Hierome to Pope Damasus.
BECAUSE the Eastern part of the world being battered by the ancient fury of
that people, does tear even into fitars the seameles coat of our Lord, which
is wouen from the top to the bottom: and since the foxes do root up the vine
of Christ; so that in the midest of those leaking lakes, which hold no water,
it is hard to find where that sealed fountain, and that shut garden is;
therefore have I thought fit to consult with the chair of Peter, and that
faith which was praised by the Apostles mouth, dema^ding food from thence for
my soul, where formerly I had taken the baptismal habit of Christ. For neither
could the vastity of that watery element, nor the interposition of those long
tracts of earth, prohibit me from inquiring after that precious pearl,
Wheresoever the body is, thither will the Eagles resort. The patrimony having
been wasted by the prodigal son, the inheritance of the Father is only
preserved incorrupt by you. There does the earth which is a fruitful soil,
return our Lords seed with purity, and that a hundred fould; but here the
corn being ouerwrought by the furrow, degenerates into cockle and wild oats.
Now does the Sun of justice rise up in the West, and that Luciser who is
fallen, does place his throne above the stars in the East: You are the light
of the world; you, the salt of the earth; you, the golden and silver vessels,
and here the vessels are of earth, or wood, which do but expect the iron rod,
and eternal fire. Therefore though your greatness fright me, yet does your
humanity inuit me. I desire a sacrifice of salvation from the Priest, and the
succor which belongs to a sheep from his pastor. Let Envy avoid, let the
Ambition of that high Roman seat recede, I am speaking with the successor of a
Fisherman, and a disciple of the Cross. I, who in the first place follow none
but Christ, am joined by communion to your Beatitude, that is, to the chair of
Peter. Upon that rock do I know that the Church is built. Whosoever eats
the Lamb out of this house, is a profane person. Whosoever is not in the Ark of Noah, shall perish, when the flood grows to be in height. And because, for
my grievous sins, I have betaken my self to that desert, which deuides Syria
from the barbarous confines on the other side, nor can I always be craving the
Holy of our Lord from your Sanctity, being so hugely distant from you in place:
therefore here do I follow the Confessors of Egypt your colleagues and like
some poor bark, I lie under the lee of those great ships. I know not
Vitalis, I reject Meletius. I have nothing to do with Paul^nus: Whosoever does
not gather with you, sca^ters, that is to say, he who is not of Christ, is of
Antichrist. But now (O excessive cause of grief!) after the Nice^ faith, after
the decree of Alexandria against three Hypostasies, wherein the Western Church
did also join, there is a new name exacted of me, being a man of Rome, by the
Prelate of the Arians, and the Campensians. What Apostles I pray you were they,
who declared* this? What new Master of the Gentiles, which was Paul, taught
this? Let us enquire what they may be thought to understand, by three
Hypostasies They say, they do but mean three subsisting persons. We answer
that we also believe just so. The sense will not serve their turn, but they
must have the very name, because I know not what poison lies hid in the
sillables of those words. And we cry out, that if any man will not confess
three Hypostasies, or Enypostata, that is, three subsisting persons, let him be
accursed. And because we do not learn words, we are judged to be Heretics.
But if any man understanding Hypostasis to be Vsia or Substance, shall say that
there is any more then one Hypostasis in three persons, he is an aliene from
Christ; and under this confession we are marked together with you, by the
burning iron of the same communion. Determine therefore, if it please you; I
will not fear to say there are three Hypostasis if you bid me. But yet if you
bid me, then let a new faith be found out, different from that of Nice, and let
us, who are Orthodoxall, confess our Faith in such words, as the Arians use.
All the schools of learning know no other signification of Hypostasis, but
Substance. And now who is he, who with a sacrilegious mouth, will speak of
three Substances in God?

The nature of God is one, and only one, and it is most truly so; for that
which subsists of it self, has not his being from any other, but it is his
own. Other things which are created though they may seem to be, yet indeed
they are not; for sometimes they were not, and that may again not be, which
once was not: God only who is eternal, that is, who has no beginning, does
properly enjoy the name of Essence. And therefore he said thus out of the bush
to Moses: I am he that I am* And again: He that is sent me. It is true that
then, there were Angels, Heaven, Earth* and Sea: and how then can God challenge
the name of Essence as proper to himself, which is common to others? But
because that only Nature is perfect, (...) one Deity does subsist in three
persons, which truly is, and i^ one Nature; whosoever he be, that will say they
are three, namely three Hypostasies, that is, three Substances, does endeavor
under a color of piety, to affirm that God has three Natures. And if that be
so, why are we separated by Church-walls from Arius, who are united to him in
false belief? let then Vrsicinu^ be joined to your Holiness, and let Auxentius
keep society with Ambrose. Let this be far from the Roman faith, let not the
hearts of Religious people suck in so great a sacrilege as this. Let it
suffice for us to affirm one substance, and three subsisting persons, perfect,
equal, and coeternall. Let there be, if it please you, no more talk of three
Hypostasies, but let us stick to one: It is suspicious when words are
differing, the sense being the same. Let the aforesaid belief suffice for us;
or if you think it fit, that we speak of three Hypostasies with their
interpretations, we will not refuse to do it. But believe me, there lies poison
under the honey, and Satan has transfigured himself into an Angel of light.
They interpret the word Hypostasis well, and yet when I profess my self to
believe it as they expound it, I am held an Heretic for my labor. But why do
they hold fast that one word with such anxiety? Why ly they hid under that
ambiguous manner of speech? If they believe it as they expound it, I do not
condemn that which they embrace. If I believe so as they pretend themselves to
hold, let them give me leave to express mine own sense, in mine own words.
And therefore I beseech your Holiness by Christ crucified, by the salvation of
the world, by the selfe-substantiall Trinity, that by your letters you will
give me authority, either to reject or to use the name of several Hypostasies.
And least the retyrednes of this place where I live, should disappoint you,
voutchsafe to send to me by the letter-carryers, and direct yours for me to
Euagrius the Priest, whom you know well; and signify to me withal, with whom
you would have me keep communion at Antioche. For the Campensians being coupled
with the Heretics of Tharsis, affect nothing else, but that being vpheld by the
authority of communicating with you, they may publish three Hypostasies, in the
ancient sense.

Saint Hierome to Pope Damasus.
THE importunate woman in the Gospel, deserved to be heard at last. And one
friend obtained bread of another, though himself and his servants had shut up
their doors, and though it were midnight. God himself whom no power can
overcome, was conquered by the prayers of a Publican. The city of Niniue which
was to perish by sin, stood on foot by tears. But why do I fetch the matter
up so high? To the end that you being great, may look on me who am little;
that you being a rich shepherd, may not contemn me, who am a sick weak
sheep. Christ conducted the murdering Thief from the cross into Paradise: and
least any man should think that this conversion was too late, he made that
punishment of his murder, to be a Martyrdom to him. Christ, I say, does
joyfully embrace the prodigal Son, when he returns; and leaving ninety nine
sheep, that single poor one which remained, is brought home upon the shoulder
of the good shepherd. Paul of a persecuter is made a preacher; his carnal
eyes are blinded, that he may see the better with his mind; and he who carried
the servants of Christ bound before the Counsel of the Jews, did glory
afterward, to see himself in bonds for Christ. I therefore, who as I wrote
before, received the garment of Christ in the City o^ Rome, do now remain in
the barbarous confines of Syria. And least you should think, that I do it in
obedience to the sentence of some other, my self was obliged by my self, to
vnderge this task, which I had deserved* But as the heathen Poets say, he
changes the Clyme not his mind, who passes over the Seas. So has my incessant
enemy followed me, as that now I endure greater assalts in the wilderness. For
here* the rage of the Arians being vpheld by the pillars of the world, does
rage. Here, does the Church, divided into three parts, use al diligence to draw
me to it; the ancient authority of the troops of Monks which are round about
me, rises up against me. But I, in the mean time cry out, that if any man be
in conjunction with the chair of Peter, that man is mine: Meletius, Vitalis,
and Paulinus say that they adhere to you. I might believe it, if only any one
of them did affirm it; b^t now, either all of them lie, or two at least.
Therefore I beseech your Holiness, by the Cross our Lord, by the glory of the
world which was crucified, and by the Passion of Christ, that as you follow the
Apostls in honor, so you will follow them also in merit. So may you sit in that
Throne, to judge with those twelve; so may there be another, who may gird you,
like Peter, when you are old; so may you become a Citizen of heaven with Paul;
as you shall signify to me by your letters, with whom I ought to communicate in
Syria. Do not despise that soul, for which Christ dyed.

Saint Hierome to a Mother and a daughter, by way of caution against keeping
ill company.
A Certain Brother coming out of France relates to me, that he has a Sister,
who is a virgin, and a Mother who is a widow, and that they live in several
habitations, and yet in the same City: and that, either because their
dwellings are solitary, or else for the conseruing of their little means, they
had severally taken certain Priests, to govern them; so that they were joined
to others, with ^esse reputation, the^ they had been separated between
themselves. And (when I had sighed deeply, and signified much more by silence,
then I could have done by speech,) I beseech you says he, reprove them by your
letters, and draw them back to good agreement, that the mother may acknowledge
the daughter, and the daughter the mother. I a^swered him thus; you put me
indeed to a fair task; that I being a stranger should reconcile them, when a
son and a brother could not do it. As if I sat in some Episcopal chair, and
were not shut up in a little Cell; and being far remote from troops of men,
do not either lament my sins past, or procure to avoid such as are at hand:
besides the ill fauourednes of it for a man to he hid in body, and to wander
over the whole world, with his tongue. Then said he, you are to fearful. And
where is now that courage, wherewith you have so wittily touched the whole
world, for you have been a kind of Lucilius. This, said I, is that which puts
me of, and suffers me not so much as to open my mouth. For since by reproving
the faults of others, my self am grown faulty, and according to the vulgar
saying, When every man does so wrangle, and contradict me, me thinks I do
neither hear nor touch, and even the very walls beat reproaches back upon me,
and drinkers of wine make songs of me, I being constrained by sad experience,
have learned to hold my peace, esteeming it better to place a guard before my
mouth, and a strong door before my lips, then that my heart should decline
toward the words of malice for fear least whilst I tax vice in others my
self should fall into the vice of detraction. When I had said thus much, he
answered me after this manner. To say truth, is not to detract; nor does a
private reprehension amount to make a general doctrine; since they are few, or
none who fall within the compass of that fault. I beseech you therefore not to
permit me to be come in vain, who have been vexed by so long a journey. For
our Lord knows, that next after my visiting these holy places, my chief
occasion was, that by means of your letters, I might cure both my Sister and
my mother. Well then said I, I am content to do as you bid me; for both my
letters serve for the other side of the Sea, and that speech which is dictated
upon so particular an occasion as this, will hardly find any other whom it may
offend. But as for you, I beseech you that the matter may be carried with great
secret, that when you shall have taken it with you by way of provision, it my
advice be harkened to, we may rejoice together; but if it be contemned (which I
rather fear) yet I may have lost but my words, and you the labor of a long
Journey.

First O you mother and daughter, I desire you may know* that I write not
therefore to you, as suspecting any thing ill of you; but I desire your
agreement, least others should gro^ ^o have suspicion. For otherwise, if I
thought you had been joined together by any tie of sin (which God forbid,) I
should never have written, as knowing that I were talking to deaf persons. In
the second place, I would desire, that if I sh^l write any thing which may be
of the sharper sort, you will not ^hinke it to savor so much of my austere
condition, as of the disease in hand. Rotten flesh must be cured with a burning
iron* and the poison of serpents, driven away with an Antidot. And that which
gives much pain, must be expelled by a greater. In the last place this I say,
that although the conscience may have no wound in it of any crime, yet fame
suffers ignominy thereby. Mother and daughter are names of a Religious kind of
tenderness, they are words of observance, they are bonds of nature, and they
are of the highest leagues under God. It deserves no praise if you love; but it
is extreme wickedness, if you hate one another. Our Lord Jesus Christ was
subject to his parents, he carried veneration to his Mother, whose very Father
he was. He was obseruant of his foster-father, whom yet himself had nourished;
and he remembered that he had been carried in the womb of the one, and in the
arms of the other. Whereupon, when he was hanging on the Cross, he commended
his Mother to his Disciple, and he never forsook that mother till his death.

But you O daughter (for now I forbear to speak to the mother, whom perhaps
either age, or weakness, or desire of solitude may make excusable) you, I say, O
Daughter, can you hold her house too straight. You lived ten months shut up
in her womb, and can you not endure to live one day with her in one chamber?
Are you not able to like, that she should have an eye upon you? and do you fly
from such a domestical witness as she is, who knows every motion of your
heart; as she who bare you, who brought you up, and lead you on to be of this
age. If you be a Virgin, why mislike you to be diligently kept? If you be
defiled, why do you not marry in the sight of the world? This is the second
planche, or table, after ship^racke; let that which you have ill begun, at
least be tempered by this remedy. But yet neither do I say thus much, to the
end that after sin I may take away the use of Penance, or that she who has
begun ill, may persevere to do ill; but because I despair of any separation,
after such conjunction. For otherwise, if you go to your mother, after you
shall have been subject to that ruin, you may in her presence, more easily
lament your self for that which you lost by being absent from her. If yet you
be entire, and have not lost it, take care to keep it. To what purpose are you
now in that house, where it will be necessary for you, either to perish, or to
fight continually, that you may overcome? What creature did ever sleep securely
near a Viper, who though she do not bite, yet she will keep him awake? It is a
point of more safety not to be in danger of perishing, then being in danger not
to perish. In the one there is tranquillity, in the other there must be labor
and skill: in the former we joy; and in the later we do but escape. But perhaps
you will answer: My mother is of a harsh condition, she desirs worldly
things, she loves riches, she knows not what belonges to fasting, she paintes
her eyebrowes black, she takes care to be curiously dressed, and hinders my
purpose of chastity, and I cannot live with such an one. But first, if she were
such as you pretend, you should have the greater merit, if you forsook not such
an one as she. She carried you long in her womb, she nursed you long, and with
a tender kind of sweetness did endure the untowardness of your infancy. She
washed your foul cloutes, and was often defiled with your silth. She sat by
you when your were sick; and did not only endure her own incommodities, but
yours also. She brought you to this age, and she taught you how to love Christ
our Lord. Let nor her conversation displease you, who first did consecrate you,
as a Virgin, to your spouse.

But yet, if you cannot endure her, but will needs fly away from her
delicacies, and if (as we use to say) she be a kind of secular mother; in that
case you may have other Virgins, you will not want some holy quier, where
chastity is kept. Why, forsaking your Mother, have you taken a liking to one,
who perhaps has also forsaken his Mother, and his Sister? She is of a hard
condition: but this man forsooth, is sweet and kind. She is a chider, but he is
therefore easily appeased. I ask whether you followed this man at the first;
or whether you found him afterward? For if you followed him at the first; the
reason is plain, why you forsook your mother. If you found him afterward; you
show plainly what it was, which you could not find in your Mothers house.

This is a sharp kind of grief for me, which wounds me with mine own sword.
He who walks simply or plainly, walks bouldly. I would feign hold my peace,
if mine own conscience did not give remorce; and if now I did not reprehend
mine own fault, in the person of another, and if by the beam of mine own
eye, I saw not the more which is in an others. Bu now, since I am far off
among my brethren, and whilst, e^ioying their society, I live honestly under
witnesses of my conversation, and I see, and am seen very seldom, it is a
most impudent thing, if you will not follow his modesty, whose example you have
followed otherwise. Now if you say: Mine own conscience is sufficient for me,
I have God for my judge, who is the witness of my life; I care not for the
talk of men. Hear what the Apostle writes: Providing to do good things not
only before God, but also before all men. If any man will detract from you, in
regard that you are a Christian, or that you are a Virgin, let it not trouble
you, though you have forsaken your Mother, to the end that you may live in some
Monastery with Virgins. Such detraction will be a praise to you, as when
seuerenes, and not too much loosenes is reproved in the Virgin of God. Such
kind of cruelty is piety: for you prefer him before your Mother* whom you
are commanded to prefer before your life it self; and whom if she will also
prefer, she will acknowledge you both to be her daughter, and her sister.

But what, is it such a crime to live in society with a Holy man? You make a
wry neck, and now you draw me into a kind of quarrel: and so, as that either I
must allow the thing which I like not; or undergo the envy of many. A holy man
does never ^euer the daughter from the Mother; he respects them both, he
carries veneration to them both. Though the daughter be holy; yet if the Mother
be a widow, she gives a good testimony of chastity. If that man of whom you
know, be of equal age to your self, let him honor your Mother as his own.
If he be elder then you, let him love you as his daughter, and make you subject
to the discipline o a Father. It becomes not the same of either of you, that he
should love you better then your mother; least it may seem, that he chooses not
so much to love you for other respects, as because you are young. And all this
I would say, if you had not a brother o your own, who is a Monk, or if you
wanted other domestical helps. But now (O excessive cause of grief!)
between a Mother, and a brother, a mother who is a widow, and a brother who is
a Monk, how comes it to pasle, that a stranger interposes himself? It were
good for you, that you knew your self both to be a daughter, and a sister: but
if you cannot do both, at least let your brother please you; and if your
brother be ill conditioned, she will be gentler, who bare you. Why do you wax
pale? Why are you so much troubled? Why do you now grow to blush; and by your
trembling lips, declare the impatience of your heart? There is no love, but
only that of a wife, which outstrips the love of a mother, and of a brother. I
hear besides that you are walking up and down by houses in the country, and
such other places of delight, with your Allies and kindred, and such kind of
people as that; nor do I doubt, but that it is some Cosen or Sister, for whose
solace you are lead about like a Page after this new cut. For God forbid, that
I should suspect you to affect the conversation of men, howsoeur they may be
near you, either in Neighborhood, or blood.

I beseech you therefore, O Virgin, to answer me. Do you walk in this company
of your friends, either with your lover or without him? Without fail, how
impudent soever you may be, you dare not produce him, before the eyes of
secular persons. For if you should do thus, all the neighbors would make
songs both of him, and you; nay the world would poin^ at you both, by signs.
Yea that very Sister, or Ally, or kinswoman, who to flatter you will often
mention him in your presence, as if they held him for a Saint; when they shall
find themselves out of your sight, will scoff at such a prodigious kind of
husband. But now if you go alone (which I rather think) amongst that younger
sort of servants, among women who either are married, or to be married, among
those wanton maids, and those spruse and well apparelled young men; if I say,
you go like a maid in mean apparel, every young beardles fellow, will be
reaching forth his hand toward you, and will be supporting you when you are
weary, and then straining his fingers, he will either tempt you, or be tempted
by you. You shall be at some banquet among men, and matrons; you shall see them
kiss, and taste their meat, to one another; and not without danger to your
self, you shall admire the silk, and cloth of gold which others were. In the
banquet, you shall also be compelled as it were, against your will, to eat
flesh. To the end that you may be drawn to drink wine, they will be praising
it, as a creature of God. That you may be induced to frequent bathes, they will
speak against being uncleanly. And whenever you shall do any of those
things, which they persuade you to, with any kind of unwillingness, they will
publish you with a full mouth to be pure, and simple, a great Lady, and an
ingenuous creature. The while, some man shall be singing to you, when you are at
table, and whilst he is running over his ditty with sweet division, he will be
often casting an eye toward you who have no guardian, not daring to look upon
men's wives. He will speak to you by gesture, and that which he dares not
express by words, he will by signs. Among so many shrewd incitements to
pleasure, even minds as hard as iron are made soft toward lust; which moves
with greater appetite in Virgins, who think that to be sweetest, which they
know not. The fables of Heathen Poets relate, that Mariners are driven headlong
upon rocks by the singing of Sirens; and that trees and beasts were enchanted,
and even hard flintes made to yield, upon the hearing of Orphe us harp.
Virginity is hardly kept, at feasting tables. A smooth skin, shows a sordid
mind. We have read whilst we were boys at School, and we have seen the
story graven in brass, so well that it seemed even to breath with life, of one
who had nothing upon him but skine and bone, and yet being fired with unlawful
love, that plague did no sooner leave him, then his life. And what then will
become of you, O maid, who are healthful, delicate, fat, high complexioned,
boiling up in meat, in wine, in bathes, amongst married women, and young men?
who though you should not do that which will be desired of you, may yet hold
it to be an ugly kind of evidence against your self, even that you are
desired. A lustful mind does very eagerly hunt after dishonest things, and
for the very reason of being unlawful, it is suspected to be the more
delightful. Even a poor and black vest, if it be drawn close, and have no
wrinkles in it, is an argument of a consenting will; and if it be worn so
long, as to be drawn after up on the ground, that she may seem the taller;
and if the coat be left vnstitched of purpose, that somewhat may appear, and
if any thing which is ill favored must be concealed, and that which is
handsome be disclosed. The buskin also of her that walks, if it be daintily
shining and black, serves for a call to young men, by the noise thereof. The
little breasts are pressed with strippes, and the wast is straightened with a
wretched girdle. The hair of the head falls down either upon the forehead, or
about the ears. The little cloak falls off sometimes, that she may show her
naked shoulders, and instantly she mak^ have to hid them, as if she would not
have that seen, which yet she willingly discovered. And when going in public,
she hid^ her very face with a pretense of modesty, she only shows that after
the manner of the Stews, which being showed may delight the more.

But you will answer me thus, and say: How come you to know me so well? And
how, being seated so far of, do you come to cast your eyes on me? The tears
of your Brother, and those intolerable deep sighs, which every minute he was
sending forth, have declared thus much. And I wish he had rather feigned it, and
had spoken more out of fear, then knowledge. But believe me, a man lies not,
when he weeps. He grieves that a young man is preferred by you before himself,
yea and he, no delicate creature, nor one who treates himself n^tly* but a
brawny fellow, who is but a slouen with all his delicacy, and who shuts the
purse, and holds the work with his own hands, and distributs the taskes,
and gouernes the family, and buys all things necessary in the market. He is
the steward, and the Lord; and yet he preuents the inferior servants in their
Offices: at whom the whole house rayles exclaming against him as detayning all
that, which the Lady does not allow and give. These servants are a complaining
kind of people, and how much soever you affoard, it is still too little with
them. For they consider not out of what means, but how much is given them, and
they comfort themselves the best they they can, in all their grief, by
deeraction only. One calls him a Parasite, another an Impostour, a third an
Underminer of the estate, and a fourth will find some new name for him. They
say he sits at her beds side, that he fetches midwiues, when she is sick, that
he reaches her the basin, warmes her clothes, and foulds her swathing bands.
Men are apt to believe the worst, and whatsoever is devised at home, turns a
broad into common fame. Nor must you wonder, if your maids and men give out
these things of you; when even your mother and your Brother make the same
complaint. Do therefore this, which I advise and even beg of you: be first
reconciled to your Mother; and if that be not possible, to your Brother at
least; or if yet you will needs implacably detest these names of so great
dearnes, at least divide your self from him, whom you are said to have
preferred before them. If you cannot do even thus much, yet respect the honor
of your friends, and if you cannot forsake your companion, yet make more honest
use of him. Keep several houses, and do not eat at the same table, least men
of ill tongues prove to slander you with saying* that you lie both in one
bed, when they see that you live both in a house. You may, for your necessary
occasions, take what kind of solace you will, and yet want some part of this
public infamy. Though yet you had need take heed, of that other spot, which
according to the Prophet Jeremy, is not to be removed by any Niter, nor by any
Diers herb.

When you have a mind, that he should s^e and visit you, let it be in the
presence of witnesses, friends, free servants, (...). A good conscience fears
the eyes of none. Be without fear when he comes in, and secure when he goes
out. Even still eyes, silent speech, and the habit of the whole body, does
sometimes discover, either security or fear. I beseech you open your ears,
and hearken to the clamor of the whole City.

You have lost your own names, and now you are called by the names of one
another; for you are said to be his, and he yours. These things do your Mother
and your Brother hear of you; and they are ready to receive you, and beseech
you to deuid your selves between them two, that so this particular infamy of
your conjunction, may redound to the praise of all. Be you with your Mother,
and let him be with your Brother. More safely may you love the companion of
your Brother, and more honestly may your Mother love the friend of her son
then of her daughter?

But if you will come to no reason, if you will needs contemn my counsel
with a frowning brow, this letter shall proclaim these things to you with a
loud voice. Why do you thus besiege the servants of another? Why make you
him, who is the servant of Christ, to be a houshould-seruant of yours? Look
upon the people, and behold the faces of every one. He reads in the Church,
and all men cast their eyes on you; fauing that you do even glory in your
infamy, as if you had the privilege of married people. Nor are you any longer
now content with secret infamy. You call saucy bouldnes by the name of liberty;
you are grown to have the face of an Harlot, and you know not how to blush.
Again you will be calling me malign, again suspicious, and a listner and
publisher of tales. Am I suspicious? am I maliciously disposed? who as I told
you in the beginning of this Epistle, did therefore write, because I did not
suspect. But it is you who are negligent, dissolute, and who despise counselle,
and who being five and twenty years old, have taken a young fellow with
little hair upon his face; and you have wrapped him up in your arms, as if it
were in netts. A rare instructor indeed, who may admonish and fright you, even
with the severity of his countenance. And though in no age one be safe from
lust, yet when the head is gray, a body is defended from public infamy. The
day will come, it will come (for time slides away whilst you think not of it)
when this dapper dear man of yours (because women grow quickly old, and
especially such as live in company with men) will find either a richer, or a
younger then you. Then will you repent your self of this course, and you will
be weary of your obstinacy; when you shall have lost both your goods, and fame;
and when that which was ill joined, shall be well divided. Unless perhaps you be
secure, that your love getting the growth of so long time, you shall need to
fear no separation.

And you also, O Mother, who by reason of your age will be afraid of no
malediction, yet be not you so hold as to sin. Let your daughter rather be
separated from you, then you be severed from her. You have a son, and a
daughter, and a son in law, yea and also a companion in house for your
daughter. Why do you go in quest after sorraine comforts, and stir up that
fire which now lies under ashes? At least it is more handsome for you to bear
with the fault of your daughter, then to seek any occasion through committing
faults your self. Let your son, who is a Monk be with you, as the stay of
your widowhood, and the entertainment of your tender love. Why do you seek
out a stranger, especially to be in that house, which is not able to hold your
son, and daughter in it? You are now of such age, as that you may have
grandchildren by your daughter. Inuit them both to you, and let her return
to you in company of her man, who went out alone. I said her man, not her
husband. Let no man slander me, I meant but to express the sex; not the
state of marriage. Or if she blush, and shrink* and conceive that the house
wherein she was borne, is grown too little for her house; go you to her house,
though it be strait, it will more easily be able to receive a Mother and a
Brother, then a stranger, whith whom she cannot certainly remain chaste in one
house, unless she have another chamber. Let there be in one habitation, two
women and two men. But if that third party, that dry nurse of your old age,
will not be gone, but will needs make a stir and disquiet the house, let the
Cart be drawn by two, or else let it be drawn by three, your brother, and your
son, and at least you shall thus allow your son both a sister and a Mother.
Others will call these new comers, a son in law and a Father in law; but
your son may call them a foster-father and a Brother.

I have dictated this with speed, at a short sitting up, being desirous to
satisfy the entreaty of him who sought it, and by way of exercising my self,
after a scholastical manner. For he knocked at my door the same day in the
morning, when he was to take his journey and I did it also to let my detracters
see, that I also can utter whatsoever comes into my mouth. For which reason I
have taken little out of Scripture, nor have I wouen my discourse with the
flowers thereof, as I use to do in my other works. I dictated it ex tempore,
and it flowed from me by the light of my little lamp, with so great facility,
that my tongue outstript the hand of the writers, and so as that the volubility
of my speech, did even over whelme the letters which stole the words out of my
mouth. This I have said, to the end that he, who will not pardon my little wit,
may excuse me in respect of my little time.

Saint Hierome to Rusticus the Monk, to whom he prescribes a form of living.
NOTHING is more happy then a Christian, to whom the kingdom of heaven is
promised. Nothing is more laborious, then he who is daily in hazard of his
life. Nothing is more strong, then he who ouercomes the devil; and nothing is
more weak, then he who is overcome by the flesh. We have very many examples,
on both sides. The thief belieues upon the Cross, and instantly deserves to
hear; Verily I say to thee, this day thou shall be with me in Paradise. Judas,
from the high dignity of Apostolate, slips down into the deep dark pit of
destruction; and could not be drawn back from betraying him, as a man, whom
he knew to be the son of God, either by the familiarity of eating at the same
table, or by the dipping of that morsel of bread, or by the dearnes of the
kiss, which was given him. What is meaner, then that Samaritan woman, and yet
not only did she believe, and after the having six husbands found one Lord,
and knew that Messiah at the fountain; who^ the people of the jews knew not,
in the Temple; but did also become the author of salvation to many; and whilst
the Apostles were buying meat, did refresh him who was hungry and sustain him
who was weary. Who was wiser then Solomon, and yet he was besotted by the love
of women? Salt is good, and no Sacrifice is received without the aspersion
thereof. Whereupon the Apostle prescribes thus. Let your speech be ever
seasoned in grace, with salt. If that be infatuated, it is cast forth, and so
far does it loose the dignity of the name it had, that it is not of any use,
so much as to a dunghill; whereby yet when it is good, the feildes of belieuers
are seasoned, and the barren soil of souls is made fruitful.

These things I say, O my son Rusticus, to the end that at the first
entrance, I may teach you, that you have begun to do great things, and that
your endeauours are high, and now that you have trodden upon the incentiues, or
temptations, of the sprouting and budding of youth, you must clyme up to the
steps of perfect age. But the way whereby you go is slippery, and you will not
reapeso much glory, by obtaining a victory, as ignominy, if you be overcome. My
business must not be now to derive the stream of my discourse, through the
fields of the virtues; nor must I labor to show you the beauty of several
flowers, and what purity the Lillyes have, what a bashfullnes the Rose
possesses, what the purple of Violets does promise, in that kingdom; and what
we may expect from the representation of those glittering gemmes. For already,
by the favor of God, you are holding the plough; Already you have mounted up
the house with the Apostle Peter, who thirsting after the Jews, was satisfied
by the faith of Cornelius, and killed the hunger which was bred in him through
their incredulity, by the conversion of the Gentiles; and by that four cornered
vessel of the Ghospels which came down from heaven to earth, he was taught,
and he learned that all kinds of men might be saved. And again that, which he
saw in the form of a most pure white sheet, is carried up on high, and carries
up also with it the troop of belieuers from earth to heaven* that the promise
of our Lord may be fullfilled. Blessed are the pure of heart, for they shall see
God.

All the matter which I desire to infinuate to you is, that I like an old sea
man, being taught by having suffered many ship wrackes, taking you now by the
hand, may guide you, who are but a new passenger. That is to say, that you may
know, upon what shore the Pirate of chastity lies; where the Charybd^ of
avarice is, that root of al evil; where those barking Dogs of Scylla are,
whereof the Apostle speaks thus: Least biting one another, you be consumed by
one another; and how, when we think our selves safe in the midest of a calm,
we are somtymes over whelmed by the unstable quickesandes of vice; and finally
that I may declare to you, what venomous beasts are nourished in the desert of
this world. They who sail in the red Sea (wherein it is to be wished by us,
that the true Phara^ with his army may be drowned) must arrive through many
difficulties, and dangers, at the great City. Both sides of the shore are
inhabited by wild* yea and they most cruel beasts. Men are there ever full of
care, and being well armed, do also carry the provision with them of a whole
year. All places are full of hidden Rocks, and hard shallowes, in such sort
that the skillfull Master must keep himself still upon the top of the Ma^t,
and from thence convey his directions, how the ship is to be conducted, and
steered. And it is a prosperous voyage, if after the labor of six months,
they come to the port of that City, for the place where the Ocean begins to
open it self, and and whereby a man does scarce arrive at the Indies in a
whole year, and to the river Ganges, which the Holy Ghost does mention by the
name of Phison and which enuirons by the name of ^elath* and is said to produce
many kinds of odoriferous spices out of that fountain of Paradise, where the
Carbuncle and the Emerand is gotten, and those other shining Gemmes, and those
O^ent pearls, toward which the ambition of great Ladies does so much aspire,
and those mountains of gold, which it is impossible for men to approach, by
reason of those Dragons, and other furious Beasts of monstrous bigness, that in
fi^ we may see, what kind of guard, covetousness has gotten for it self.

But to what purpose do I say all this? It is clea^, that i^ men, who negoti^
the businesse^ of this world, do (...) so great labor, that they may ob^ayne
riches, which both are not certain to be gotten, and are certain either to
leave us, or to be lost, and they are kept with hazard to the soul, and they
are also sought through many dangers; what is that man to do* who negotiates
the affairs of Christ, and who selling al things, goes in purchase of that
most precious pearl; and who, with the substance of his whole estate buys a
field, wherein he may find that treasure, which neither the picklocke can
fingar, nor the violent thief carry away? I know I shall offend many, who will
interpret my general discourse against vice, to be a personal reproach to
themselves. But in being angry with me, they declare what kind of conscience
they have, and they pass thereby a worse judgment upon themselves, then upon
me. For I will name no man, nor (by that liberty which the ancient Comedians
were wont to take) will I set forth, and sting any individual person. It is
the part of prudent men and wo^men, to hide their disgust, or rather to amend
that which they find to be amiss in themselves; and indeed rather to be
offended with themselves, then me; and not to cast reproach upon him, who gives
them good counselle: who although he were subject to the same crimes which
possess them, yet certainly he is the better, in that he is not pleased with
vice.

I hear you have a devout woman to your Mother, a widow of great age, who kept
and brought you up from infancy, and that after you had passed your studies in
France (which flou^ish greatly there) she sent you to Rome, not sparing to
spend; and enduring the absence of her son, through the hope of future good,
that so you might season the plenty, and elegancy of speech, which is gotten in
France, by giving it the grave manner of Rome; and how she did not use the
spu^re toward you, but the oridle; which we have also read of the most
eloquent men of Greece, who dried up that swelling Asyatike humor of speech,
with the falt of Athens, and did cut off with the hook those ^uxuriant tops of
the vines, that so the presses of eloque^te might not be stuffed up with the
ran^ke leaves of words, but with solid matter and sense* as i^ were will the
expression of the ^uyce of the grape* See you reverence her (...) your Mother;
love* her (...) your nurse, and exhibit veneration to her, as to a Saint. And
do not imitate the example of others, who forsake their own mothers, and
desire to be with the mothers of other folks, whose shame is public; since
they seek suspected co^uersations, when they have cloaked them under the names
of so pious affection. I know certain women who are now of years ripe
enough, who take pleasure in young men, who were bond-slaues freed, and who
seek spiritual children, and then shortly after (all modesty being destroyed
in them) those feigned names of Son and Mother, have broken out into the
liberties of man and wife. Some others forsake their sisters when they are
virgins, and adhe^e to widows who are strangers. There are some who do even
hate their friends in blood, and are not taken by any natural affection, whose
impatience discouers of what mind they are; and so they are capable of no
excuse, and they break through all enclosures of modesty, as if they were but
cobwebs. You shall see some man well girt, in a course russet coat, and with a
long beard, and yet can never get himself out of the company of women, but he
dwells with them in the same house, and e^tes at the same table, and is served
by young maids, and enioyes all that which belonges to marriage, saving the
only name. But it is not the fault of Christian profession, if an Hypocrite be
to bl^me, but rather it is a confusion to the Gentiles, when they see, that
Christians are displeased with those things, which are unpleasing to all good
men.

But you, if you mean, not only to seem to be a Monk, have care, I say, not
of your temporal estate (by the renunciation whereof you have begun to be what
now you are) but of your soul. Let your mean clothes, be the index of a
fair mind in you. Let your course*coate show your contempt of the world; but
so, as that your mind do not swell, and that your habit and your speech differ
not from one an other. Let not him seek the regalo of Bathes, who desires to
quench the heat of flesh and blood by the coolenes of fasting. Which fasts must
b^ also moderate, least being excessive, they grow to weaken the stomach; and
so requiring a mo^e liberal refection, they break out into cruditi^, which
are the breede^s of ^st. ^ sparing, and temperate diet is profitable both to
body and soul. Look so upon your Mother, as that by occasion thereof, you
grow not to behold other women, whose countenance may stick close to your
heart; and so it may receive an inward wou^d. Make account that the maids who
serve her, are so many snares which are laid for you, because how much more
their condition is mean, so much more easy is the mischief. And John the
Baptist had a holy Mother, and he was the son of a Bishop, yet would he not
be won, either by the love of that Mother, or by the wealth of his Father, to
live in their house, to the danger of his Chastity. In the desert he lived, and
having eyes which desired to behold Christ, he vouchsafed not to look upon
any thing else. His garment was course, his girdle made of hair, his food
locusts and wild honey; all which did carry proportion to virtue and chastity.
The sons of the Prophets (whom we find in the old Testament to have been
Monks) did build themselves little houses near the waters of Jordan, and
forsaking the crowdes of Cittyes, did live upon meal, and wild herbs. As long
as you are in your own con^try, have you a cell which may be a paradise to
you. Gather sundry fruits of scripture, let those be your delights, and let
them enjoy your imbracements. If your eye, your foot, or your hand endanger
you, throw it away. Spare none, that you may be good to your own soul: He
(says our Lord) who looks upon a woman in the way of con^upiscence, has
already been unclean with her in his heart. Who will vau^t himself to have a
chaste heart? The stars are not clean in the sight of our Lord, and how much
less are men clean, whose very life is a temptation? Woe be to us, who as
often as we have impure desires, so often do we commit fornication. My sword
(says he) is inebriated in heaven; and much more on earth, which breeds
thorns, and brambles. That Vessel of election, whose mouth did sound forth
Christ, does macerate his body, and makes it subject to servitude, and yet he
finds, that the natural heat of his flesh, does so resist his mind, that he
was forced to that, to which he had no mind; and to cry out, as suffering
violence, and to say: Miserable man that I am, who shall deliver me from the
body of this death? And do you think that you can pass through, without any
fall, or wou^d, vnl^s you keep your heart with a most straight custody, and
(...), you say with our Savior: My mother and my brethren, (...) they who do
the will of my Father. Such cruelty is piety. O^rather what can savor of more
piety, then that a holy Mother should keep her son holy? She also desires,
that you may live, and that she may not see you for a time, to the end that she
may ever see you with Christ. Anna brought forth Sa^ll, not for her self, but
for the Tabernacle. The sons of I^nadah, who drunk neither wine, nor any
other thing which could inebriate, who dwelt in Tents, and had no other places
to rest in, then where the night laid hol*d upon them, are said in the Psalm
to have been the first, who sustained captivity and were constrained to enter
into Cities by the Army of Cal^ans, which ouerran Judea. Let others consider
what they will resolve, for every man abounds in his own sense. To me a town
is a prison, and a solitude is a Paradise. Why should we desire the frequent
concourse of men in towns, who are already said to be single? Moses, that he
might govern the people of the Jews, was instructed forty years in the
Wilderness: from being a pastor of sheep, he grew to be a pastor of men. The
Apostles from fishing the lake of Genesereth, passed on to fish for men. Having
then their Father, their net, and their ship, they followed our Lord; they left
all things outright, they daily carried their*crosse, without so much as a
stick in their hands. This I have said, that if you be tickled with desire of
being ordained Priest, you first may learn what you are to teach, and may
offer a reasonable sacrifice to Christ, that you esteem not your self to be
an old soldier, before you have first carried arms, and that you be not
sooner a Master, then a scholar.

It belonges not to my poorenes, and small capacity to judge of Priests, or to
speak any thing of ill odor, concerning such as minister to the Churches. Let
them hold their degr^e and rank to which you also arrive; that book which I
wrote to Nepotian^s, will be able to teach you how you are to live therein. We
do now but consider as it were the cradle and conditions of that Monk, who
being instructed from his youth in liberal sciences, has laid the yoke of
Christ upon his neck.

And first it is to be considered, whether you were best live in the Monastery
alone, or in the company of others. For my part, I shall like well that you
have the society of holy men: that you do not teach your self, nor e^ter upon
that way without a guide, which you never knew; for so you may decline either
to one hand or other, and be subject to error: and that you may not walk
either faster, or slower, then is fit; least either running, you be weary, or
loytering you be sleepy. In solitude pride creeps on a pace; and if a man grow
to fast a little, and then see none but himself, he will think he is some
body; and forgetting both whence, and to what end he came, his heart wanders
within, and his tongue without: He judges the servant of an other, against the
Apostles mind; he reaches ^orth his hand as far as gluttony bids him; he
sleeps as much as he will; he fears no man; he does what he lists; he thinks
al men to be his inferiors; and is oftener in Cities, then in his Cell. And
yet when he finds himself among others of his own profession, he takes upon
him to be so maydenly, as if the crowd of the streets pressed him to death.
But what? Do we reprehend a solitary life? No, for we have often praised it.
But we desire that such men may go out from the discipline of Monasteries, as
the hard lessons of the wilderness may not fright, they who have given a long
allowable testimony of their conuesation, who made themselves the lowest and
least of all, and so grew to be the greatest; who have not been vanquished
either by eating, or abstayning; who rejoice in poverty; whose habit, speech,
countenance, gate, is the very doctrine of piety; who know not how, after the
custom of some fon^ people, to devise certain fantastical battles of
Devils, as if they were fighting against them; that so they may grow to be
woundred at, by the ignorant vulgar, and make some commodity thereby. We saw
lately, and we lamented, that the goods of Craesus were found upon the death of
a certain man, and that the alms of the City, which had been gathered to the
use of the poor, was left by him to his posterity, and stock. Then did the
iron, which had lain hide in the bottom, swim upon the top of the water; and
the bitterness of My^h was seen to be among the palms. Nor is this strange:
for he had such a companion, and such a Master, as made his riches grow out of
the hungar of poor men; and the alms which had been left to miserable
persons, he reserved for his own misery. For at last, their cry reached to
heaven, and did so overcome the most patient ears of God, that an Angel Nabal
Carmelo was sent, who said: Thou fool this night shall they take thy soul
from thee, and the goods which thou have provided, whose shall they be? I
would not therefore, upon the reasons which I have declared already, that you
should dwell with your Mother; and especially, least when she offers you
delicate fare, you should either make her sad by refusing it, or add oil to
your own fire, if you accept it. And least also, among those many women, you
should see somewhat by day, which you might think upon by night. Let your
book be never laid out of your hands, and from under your eyes. Learn the
Psalter, word for word. Pray without intermission; have a watchful mind, and
such a one as may notlye open to vain thoughts. Let both your body and soul
strive toward our Lord. Overcome anger with patience; love the knowledge of
Scripture, and you will not love the vices of the flesh. Let not your mind
attend to the variety of perturbations, which, if they find a resting place in
your heart, will grow to exercise dominion over you, and bring you at last* to
any grievous sin. Be still doing somewhat, that the Devil may ever find you
employed. If the Apostles, who might have lived upon the Gospel, labored
with their hands least they should ouercharge others, and gave alms to them,
from whom they might have reaped carnal things for their spiritual, why
should not you prouid those things, which are fit for your own use? Either
make some baskets of reeds, or else of small wicker; let the ground be raked,
and the garden beds divided by some straight line; into which as soon as you
have cast the seed of Kitchen herbs, and other plants be set in order, the
springing waters may be brought, and you may sit by, as if you did even see the
contents of those most excellent verses,

The water on the ^row of that steep passage plays.
Which falling on the p^bles, a soft noise does raise,
And by th^se lively springes, the Sunne-burnt fields allayes.
Let your unfruitful tree either be inoculated or ingraffed, thas so in a
small time, you may eat the sauoury fruit of your labors. Take order to make
Bee-hiues, to which* the Proverbs of Solomon send you; and learn in those
little bodies, the order both of Monastical, and Monarchical discipline. Knit
nets for taking of fish, and write also somewhat, that bot^ your body may get
food, and your mind may be filled with reading. The lasy person contents
himself with bare desires. The Monasteries of Egypt have this custom, that
they admit of no man, who will not use corporal labor; and that, not so much
for the necessity of corporal food, as for the good of the soul. Let not your
mind wander up and down in pernitiou^ cogitations, nor be like to fornicating
Jerusalem, which parts her feet to all corners. When I was a young man, and
when the deserts of solitude compassed me in, I was not able to endure the
incentiues of vice, and the ardour of my nature, which though I ^amed with
often fasting, yet my mind would be boiling up in other thoughts. For the
subduing whereof I committed my self to one, who of a ^ew was become a
Christian; and I made my self subject to his discipline, to the end, that
after I had passed by the sharpnes of Quintilian, the easy flowing of Cicer^,
the grave style of Fronto, and the smoothnes of Pl^y, I might begin to study
the Alphabet, and meditate up on these hissing, and broken-winded words. What
labor i^ cost me, what difficulty I endured, how often I despaired, how often
I ceased, and how I began again with a desire and strife to learn, both my
conscience, who felt it, is the witness, and so is theirs also, who lived with
me. And I thank our Lord, that now I gather sweet fruit from the bitter seed
of those studies.

I will tell you also of another thing, which I saw in Egypt There was a young
man, a Grecian, in the Monastery, who neither by abstinence of diet, nor by any
abundance of the pains he took, was able to extinguish the flame of flesh and
blood. This man being thus in danger, the Father of the Monastery did preserve
by this devise. He commanded a certain grave person of the company, that he
should haunt the other, wi^h brables and reproaches, in such sort, that after
the injury was offered, that other might be the first, who also made complaint.
The witnesses being called, did testify in his behalf, who had done the wrong.
The other would weep against that lie, but no man was found who would believe
the truth; only the Father would subtly come in to his defense, that so the
brother might not be swallowed up by too excessive grief. What shall I say
more? There passed a year after this manner. Upon the ending whereof, the
young man being interrogated about his former thoughts, whether yet they ^gaue
him any trouble? Father, says he, I have much ado to live, and should I have
a mind to fornication? If this man had been alone, by what means would he
have been able to overcome. The Philosophers of this world are wont to drive
away an old love, with a new, like one nail with another: which the seven
Persian Princes did to King Assuerus, that the concupiscence which he had
toward Queen Vasthi, might be moderated by the love of other Virgins. They
cure one vice and sin by another; but we co^quer vice by the love of virtue:
Decline, says he, from evil, and d^ good; Seek peace and pursue it. Unless we
hate evil, we cannot love that which is good: or rather we must do good, that
we may decline from evil; we must seek peace, that we may fly from war. Nor
does it suffice us to seek it, unless we follow it with all endeavor, when it
is found; for it is still flying from us; but being obtained, it exceeds all
imagination, and God holds his habitation therein according to that of the
Prophet, And his place is in peace. And it is elegantly said, that Peace is
persecuted, according to that of the Apostle, Persecuting bospitality. For we
must not inuit men with a slight and complementall kind of speech, and (as I
may say) from the teeth outward, but we must hold them fast, with the whole
affection of our mind, as persons who after a compendious manner come to make
us rich.

No art is learnt without a Master. Even dumb creatures, and the heardes of
wild beasts, follow their leaders. The Bees have their Princes: Cranes follow
one of the flock after a kind of learned manner. There is but one Emperor,
and one supreme Judge of a Province. Rome as soon as it was built, could not
endure two brothers together, for Kings; and so it was consecrared in
paricide. Esau and Jacob, fought battles in the womb of Rebecca. Every
Church has one Bishop, one Archpriest, and every Ecclesiastical order relyes
upon his own governors. In a Ship, there is one man who steeres; in a house,
one Lord; and the Word comes but from one person, how great soever the Army be.

And that I may not make my Reader weary by repetitions, my whole speech tends
but to this, that I may teach you, that you are not to be committed to the
government of your own will; but that you must live in the Monastery, under
the discipline of one Father; and in the conversation of many, that you may
learn humility of one, and patience of another: one man may teach you silence,
another meeknes. Do not that which you desire; eat that which you are bidden;
cloth your self with that which they offer; perform the task, which is
imposed; be subject to him, to whom you desire not to be subject; come weary
to your bed, so that you may sleep even as you go; and as soon as you are
sleeping soundly, be compelled to rise. Recite the Psalms in your turn;
wherein, not the sweetness of your voice, but the pious affection of your mind
is sought by the Apostle, saying: I will sing with the spirit; and I will also
sing with the mind* and, singing to our Lord in your hearts; for he had heard
that it was thus commanded, sing wisely. Serve your brethren; wash the feet of
strangers; be silent when you suffer wrong; fear the chief Father of the
Monastery, as you would do your Lord, and love him as your Father. Believe that
whatsoever he commandes is good for you, and judge not the direction of your
Superiors; you, whose office it is to obey, and to execute the orders which
are given, according to Moses: Hearken Israel, and hold thy peace Having so
great things to think of, you will not be at leisure for idle thoughts; and
when you pass from one thing to another, and when the later action follows
the former, your mind will be employed upon that alone, which you are bound to
do. I have known some, who after they renounced the world, not in their
deeds*, but in their clothes, and words, made yet no change in their
conversation. Their estate or fortune was rather augmented, then diminished.
They used the ministry of the same servants, and kept the same state at their
table; in a plate of glass, or earth they eat gold; and being hemmed in with
swarms of servants* they yet will needs take the name of being solitary upon
the^. They who are of the poorer sort, and of weak fortune, and seem to
themselves to be shrewd Scholars, walk forth in public, like as many
Pageants, that they may exercise their snarling kind of eloquence. Others
s^rugging up their shoulders, and chattering I know not what, within
themselves, and fixing their eyes firmly upon the ground, meditate deeply upon
certain swelling words; and if they had but a crier, you would swear the
Prefect were passing by. There are some, who by a certain humor, to which
they take, and by the immoderate fastes, which they use, and by the wearynes of
solitude, and much reading (whilst day and night they make a noise in their
own ears) grow into such a kind of melancholy, that they have more need of
Hypocrates his medecines, then my admonition. Many cannot forbear their
ancient arts, and negotiations; and changing the names of their broker, they
still exercise the same traffic; not seeking food, and clothing, according
to the Apostles, but aspiring to improve their states, more then worldly men.
Heretofore this rage of sellers was repressed by those Aediles, whom the
Grecians call (...), nor was sin so unpunished then, as now it is. For now,
under the title of Religion, unjust hudling gaynes are exercised, and the
honor of the name of Christian, is rather deceiving, then deceived. And (which
is a shame to be said; but there is no remedy, that so at last we may blush at
our own shame) when we stretch our hands forth publikly, we hide the gold
within our clothes, and against the opinion of all men, we dye rich with full
bags, who lived in the estimation of being poor.

Neither must you be lead away, by the multitude of sinners, or be solicited
by the troop of such as are in the way to perdition, nor think thus within
your self. What? Shall therefore all they be damned, who dwell in Cittyes?
Behold, they enjoy their fortunes, they serve in Churches, they frequent the
Bathes, they refuse not odoriferous ointments* and yet they are celebrated in
the mouths of all men. To this I answered before, and now I answer briefly
again, that in this present work, I speak not of Priests, but I instruct a
Monk. Priest are holy, and every profession is laudable. Do you therefore so
proceed, and live in the Monastery, that you may deserve to be a Priest, that
you may not defile your youth with the least spot; that you may pass on to the
Altar of Christ, as a virgin would do from her bed, chamber; that you have a
good repututation from abroad, and that women may know you by name, but not
know you by sight. When you come to a perfect man's estate, if your life be
answearable, and either the people, or the Bishop of the City make choice of
you, into the clergy, do you those things, which belong to a Priest, and let
the best Priests be your pattern. For in all conditions and estates, the worst
are mingled with the best. Do not start forth to write suddenly, and be not
carried away with light madness. Be long in learning that, which you may teach.
Do not believe them who praise you, or rather do not lend your ear to them who
scoff at you. For when they shall have stroked you with flattery, and put you
after a sort out of your wits; if you look suddenly back over the shoulder,
you shall see them either stretch out their necks at you, like so many
storkes, or move the ears of an Ass, which they have framed with their
fingers, or thrust out their tongues at you, as if it were at some panting Dog.

Detract from no man, nor conceive your self to be therefore a Saint, for
tearing other men in pieces. We accuse others oftentym^s for that which we also
do, and we inueigh against those vices; they who are dumb, giving sentence
against us who are eloquent. Grunnius stauked on toward his speech, with the
pace of a Tortois, and by certain pauses would be hardly able to speak a few
words, so that you would rather think he swallowed, then spoke; and yet when
he had laid a heap of his books abroad upon the table, and had composed his
face to severity, and had contracted his nose, and cast his forehead into a
frown, he would snap with two of his fingers bespeaking the attention of his
Auditors by that sign, and then would be power out mere toys by heaps, and
declayme against all the world; and you would say he were Longinus of Creete,
and the Censor of the roman eloquence; he would tax whom he listed, and
expel them from the Senate of Doctors. But this man being well moneyed, gave
men more contentme^t at the dinners he made. Nor was it any marvel, that he
who was wont to inueigle many, would proceed in public with a crowd of
clamorous para^ites round about him; and indeed he was a Nero in substance, and
yet a Plato in show. He was all ambiguous, as being framed of several yea and
even contrary natures. You would say that he were some monster, or new beast,
devised according to that of the Poet. The first part has of the Lion, the
last of the Dragon, and the middle part is a very Chymera. Never visit you any
such men as these, nor apply your self to them, Nor let your heart decline to
the words of malice, nor do you hear these words: Sitting down thou
spakest against thy brother, and thou laydst a scandal before the sons of
thy Mother. And again. Sons of men, their teeth are weapons, and arrows.
And elsewhere: Their speech is more supple then oil, and yet they are darts
withal. And more clearly in Ecclesiastes* As the serpent bites secretly; so
does he, who detracts privately from his brother.

But you will say, I detract not: but if others do, how can I help it? We
pretend these things, for the excuse of our sins. Christ is not to be
ouerreached by tricks. It is no sentence of mine, but of the Apostles: Be not
deceived, God is not ^nocked. He looks into the heart; we look but upon the
face. Solomon says in the Proverbs: A Northern wind scatters the clouds; and
so does a sadd countenance, detracting tongues. For as an Arrow, if it be shot
against a hard object, does oftentimes return up on him, who sent it forth,
and wounds him that wounded it; and that is then fullfilled; They are made as
a crooked Bow to me. And elsewhere; He who throws a stone upon high, it shall
return upon his own head: So the detracter, when he sees that the face of his
hearer is sad (or rather of him who should not be his heare^, but the stopper
of his ears, least he chance to hear the judgment of blood) is presently put
to silence, his countenance grows pale, his lips will not part, his mouth is
dried. Whereupon the same Wise man says: Do not mingle thy self with
detracters, for suddenly their perdition will arrive, and who knows the ruin
of them both. That is it to say, both of the speaker, and of the hearer. Truth
seeks no corners, nor does it desire any whisperers. It is said to Timothy: Be
not easy in receiving an accusation against a Priest. But if indeed he sin,
reprove him publicly, that others also may be affrayd. You must not be light
in believing any thing of a man in years, who is also defended by the fame of
his former life, and who receaues the honor of any eminent title. But because
we are men, and sometimes we dishonor our mature years by falling into the
errors of children: therefore if thou will correct me, when I offend, reprove
me publicly, and only do not bite me behind my back. The just man will
correct, and reprove me in mercy, but let not the oil of the sinner bedaube my
head, And our Lord cries out by Isais: O my people, they who say you are happy,
seduce you, and supplant your steps. For what does it profit me, that thou
relate my faults to others, if whilst I know nothing of the matter, thou
woundest another with my sin, or rather with thine own detractions, and when
thou make have to recount it to all the world, thou speak it so to every
one, as if thou had not said it to any other. This is not to reform me, but
to humor thy self in thine own sin. Our Lord commandes that sinners should
be secretly admonished face to face, or else before witness; and if they refuse
to obey, that account should then be given of it, to the Church; and that if
they would be obstinate in doing ill, they should be held for Publicanes, and
Pagans.

I have been the more express in this, to the end I may free my young man
from the itch both of ears, and tongue, and that so being regenerate in
Christ, I may exhibit him without wrinkle or spot, like a modest virgin who is
chaste, both in body and mind. Least else, he should glory in the only name he
bears, and then his lamp being extinguished, for lack of the oil of good
works, he should be excluded by the spouse. You have there, the most holy and
learned Bishop Proculus, who will excel these letters of ours, with his
admonitions, by word of mouth; and will direct your course, by his daily
directions; and not suffer you, by declyning on either hand, to forsake the
Kings high way. Israel hastening to the land of repromision, assures him that
he will go. And I pray God, that voice of the Church may be heard, O Lord
grant us peace, for thou have given us all thinge^. God grant that our
renouncing the world, bean act of our will, and not of necessity; and that our
poverty being desired by us, may have glory; and not that being imposed, it may
give torment. But after the rate of the miseries of these times, and the swords
which are every where unsheathed, he is rich enough, who has bread to eat; he
is but too powerful, who is not constrained to be a slave. Holy Exuperiu^ the
Bishop of Tolosa, the imitatour of that widow of Sarep^a, feeds others, though
himself be hungry; and having his face pale with fasting, he is tormented with
the hunger of others; and has bestowed his whole substance upon the bowels of
Christ. There is nothing richer then this man, who carries the body of our
Lord, in a basket made of little twigs; and his blood in a glass; who has
cast avarice out of the Temple; and without any whip or reproof, has
overthrown the chaires of them, that sold doves (that is to say, the gifts of
the holy Ghost) and the tables of riches; and has dispersed the money of the
changers, That the house of God may be called the house of prayer* and not a
den of Thieves. Follow the steps of this man close at hand, and of the rest
who are in virtue like him, whom Priesthood makes humbler, and poorer, then he
was before. If you desire to be perfect, go with Abraham out of your own
country, and from your kindred, and go forward, without so much as knowing
whither. If you have an estate sell it, and give it to the poor; if you have
none, you are already rid of a great deal of trouble. Be naked in following
Christ, who is nacked. It is heavy, it is high, it is hard, but the rewards
are great.

S. Hierome against Vigilantius the Heretic.
THERE are many Monsters brought forth in the world. Centaures and Sirens,
Harpyies, and other prodigious birds are mentioned in Esaias* Leuiathan and
Behemoth are described by Job, in a mystical kind of language. The Poets in
their fables speak of Cerberus, and the Stymphalides, the Boar of Erymanthus,
the Nemaean Lion, the Ch^maera, and the Hydra of many heads* Virgil describes
Cacus; and the countries of Spain, have showed us, that three formed Geryon.
France alone has brought no Monsters, but has ever abounded with most
valiant, and most eloquent men. Only Vigilantius is suddenly start up, who more
truly may be called Dormitantius, since he fights with his impur spirit,
against the spirit of Christ; and, Denies that veneration is to be exhibited to
the tombs of Martyrs. He says also; That Vigills are to be condemned; that
Allelluia is never to be sung but at Easter; That Continency is heresy; and
chastity but a seminary of lust. And as Euphorbus is said to have been revived
in Pythagoras; so is the wicked mind of Iouinian risen up again in this man:
so that we are constrained to answer to the sleights and subtilties of the
Devil, in the person both of that man, and this, to whom it may be justly
said, O thou wicked seed prepare thy children to be slain, by the sins of
thy Father. The former man being condemned by the authority of the Church of
Rome, is not so properly to be said to have given up his Ghost, as to have cast
it out in the midst Pheasants, and Swines flesh; but this Tavern* keeper of
Callagura, who by nickename, in respect of the town where he was borne, was
called the dumb Qui^tilian, sophisticates his wine with water; and out of the
stock of that ancient fraud, he stri^es to mingle the poison of his perfidious
doctrine with the Catholic faith, to impugn virginity, to hate chastity; and
at the full table of secular persons, to declaime against the fasting of
Saints, whilst himself is playing the Philosopher, among his cups; and
feeding licorishly upon (...) cakes, he will needs be stroked with the sweet
finging of Psalms. In such sort as that, in the midst of his bankets, he
voutchsafes not to hear any other songs then of David, Idithus, Asaph* and
the son of Chorah. These things do I utter with a sad and gri^ued mind. not
being able to contain my self, nor to pass by the i^iuries, which are done
to the Apostles and Martyrs, with a dea^ ^eare. O unspeakable abuse^ he is said
to have found Bishops, who are partakers with him of his crime; if they may be
called Bishops, who ordain no Deacons, but such as first have married wives;
not believing that any unmarried man can be ch^st; and showing thereby how
holily themselves live, who suspectiall men of ill; and unless they see that
Priests have wives with great bellyes, and that their children be crying in
their Mothers arms, they give the^ not the sacraments of Christ.

But what shall then become of the Oriental Churches? What of the Churches of
Egypt, and of the Sea Apostolic? which receive men to Priesthood, either
before they are married, or when then are widows; or if still they have wives,
yet they leave to do the part of husbands. But this has Dormitantius taught,
releasing the raynes to lust, and doubling by his exhortations, that ardour of
flesh and blood, which usually boyles up in youth, or rather quenching it, by
the the carnal knowledge of women. That so now, there may be nothing, wherein
we differ from horses, and swine, and such brute beasts, of whom it is written.
They run toward women as horses, which are mad with lust do to their kind;
and every man goes even neying after his neighbors wife. This is that which
the Holy Ghost says by David, Do not grow like the horse and mule, in whom
there is no understanding. And again he says of Dormitantius, and his
companions, Keep in, with the bridle and bit, the jaws of them who draw not
near to thee. But now it is time, that setting down his own words, we
procure to make them a particular answer. For it is possible, otherwise, that
some malign interpreter, or other, will again allege, that my self have
devised matter to which I may answer with a Rhetorical kind of declamation,
like that which I wrote into France to the Mother and Daughter, who were in
discord. The holy Priests Riparius, and Desiderius are the occasions of this
Epistle, for they write that their Parishes were infected by the neighborhood
of this man; and by our brother Sesinnius, they have sent us those books,
which snorting upon a surfeit, he has vomited out. And these men affirm, that
many are found, who favoring the vices of his life, are content to hear the
blasphemies of his doctrine. The man is ignorant both in knowledge and words,
he is of ungrateful speech, and who cannot so much as defend a truth: but yet
in regard of worldly men, and poor women who go laden with their sins, and
who are ever learning, and never arrive ^o the knowledge of the truth, I will
make answer to his trash, in this one single sitting up at night, least
otherwise I might seem to despise the letrers of those holy men, who have
entreated me to do thus much.

But this man follows the kind of which he comes, as being descended from
murdering thieves, and from a people made up of many nations; Whom Cneius
Pompeius (having conquered Spain, and hastening to celebrate his triumph)
thrust down from the top of the Pyrenean hills, and gathered them together
into one town, whereupon the City was called by no other name, but of
Conuenae, that is to say of People gathered together. Thus far does he reach
now, in exercising murdering thefts upon the Church of God, and descending from
the Vectonians, the Arabatians, and Cel^iberians he ouerrunnes the Churches of
France; not carrying in his hand the ensign of Christ, but the standard of the
Devil. Pompey did the same in the Eastern parts also. And the Cilician, and
Isaurian Pirates, and murdering thieves, being overcome, he built a City for
them between Cilicia, and Isauria, bearing his own name. But that City does
still live under the laws of their forefathers, and no Dormitantius is sprung
up there. The Countries of France have a domestical enemy, and now they see
a man of a troubled brain, and fit to be bound up, as Hipocrates directed that
mad men should be, having a seat in the Church, and among other words of
blasphemy delivering also these; To what purpose is it for thee, with so great
respect, not only to honor, but to adore also, that (I know not what I should
call it) which thou worshippest in that little portable violl. And again in
the same book; Why do thou adoringly kiss that dust, wrapped up in a
little cloth. And afterward; We see that almost after the manner of the
Gentiles, it is introduced into our Churches, under the pretense of Religion, to
light huge heaps of waxen tapers; and every where they kiss, and adore I know
not what little dust in a little violl, wrapped about in some precious linen
cloth Such men as these do doubtless impart great honor to the most blessed
Martyrs in thinking that they may be illustrated by those most base wax
lights, whom the Lamb, who is in the midst of the Throne does illuminate,
with the whole brightness of his Majesty.

But who, O you mad headed man. Did ever adore the Martyrs? Who thought that a
man was God? Did not Paul and Barnabas, when they were thought by the
Lycaonians to be Jupiter, and Mercury, and had a mind to offer them sacrifice,
tear their garments, and declare that they were but men? Not but that they
were better then Jupiter or Mercury, who were dead long before; but because,
under the error of Paganism, the honor which was due to God, was deferred to
them. This we also read of Peter, who when Cornelius desired to adore him,
raised him up by the hand, and said; Rise up, for I am also a man. And dare you
say, That same, I know not what, which you worship in that little violl to be
carried up and down? What is that thing which you call by the name of I know
not what? I would feign understand what you mean by it. Speak plainly that
you may with perfect liberty blaspheme, That same I know not what kind of
little dust, in that little violl, wrapped about with a precious linen cloth.

He is grieved that the Relikes of Martyrs are preciously covered, and wrapped
up, and that they are not foulded in cloutes, or course hair clouths, or cast
in fine into some dunghill, that so Vigilantius alone, being drunk a sleep,
might be adored. So that belike we commit sacrilege when we go into the temple
of the Apostles. Constantine the Emperor was also sacrilegious, who
transferred the holy Relikes of Andrew, Luke and Timothy to Constantinople; at
the presence of which Relikes, the Devils roar, and the Inhabiters of
Vigilantius confess, that they feel the presence thereof. Yea and Augustus
Arcadius, is not only to be accounted sacrilegious, but a so^ also, who has
carried a thing most base, and even loose ashes in silk, and in a case of
gold. The people of all Churches must be also fools, who went to meet those
holy Relickes, and entertained them with so much joy, as if they had beheld the
Prophet present, and living with them, in such sort, as that the swarms of
people, did even reach from Palestine to Chalcedon, and did sound forth the
praise of Christ with one voice. Belike they adored Samuel, and not Christ
whose, Priest and Prophet Samuel was. You think he is dead, and therefore you
blaspheme. But read the Ghospel. The God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, the God
of Jacob, is not the God of the dead but of the living. If therefore they be
alive, they are shut up, belike according to your opinion, in some honest
prison. For you say, that the souls of the Apostles, and Martyrs, are in ^he
besome of Abraham, or in a place of reposc, and ease, or under the Altar of
God, and that they cannot be present at their tombs, and where else they will.
So that belike they are endewed with the dignity of Senators, who are not
condemned to be kept in some abominable prison; but shut up in some honest and
free custody, in the fortunate Islands, and Elisian fields.

But will you prescribe a law for God? Will you tie up the Apostles in chains,
in such sort as that they shall be kept in prison, till the day of judgment,
and not be with their Lord; they of whom it is written, They follow the Lamb
wheresoever he goes? If therefore the Lamb be every where, they also who are
with the Lamb, are to be believed to be every where. And if Lucifer, and the
rest of the Devils wa^der over the whole world, and by their too excessive
swiftnes, be every where at hand, shall Martyrs after the effusion of their
blood, be shut up in a chest, and not be able to go forth?

You say further in your book, that whilst we live, we may pray mutually for
one another; but after we shall be dead the prayer of noe one is to be heard
(...) another, especially since Martyrs, desiring the revenge of their blood
were not able to obtain it.

But if the Apostles and Martyrs, being yet living in these mortal* bodies,
might pray for others, when still they ought to be solicitous for themselves;
how much more can they do it after they have obtained their crowns, their
victories, and triumphs? That one man Moses, obtained pardon of God for six
hundred thousand armed men: and Steven the imitatour of our Lord, and the first
Martyr of Christ, begges favor for his persecuters; and shall they be of less
power when they have begun to be with Christ? Paul the Apostle affirms, that
two hundred seventy six men's lives were saved in the ship at his suit, and when
being dissolved, he shall be with Christ, shall his mouth be stopped, and shall
he not dare to speak a word for them, who throught the whole world did
believe, upon his preaching the Gospel? And shall Vigilantius this living
dog, be better then that dead Lion? I might rightly allege this out of
Ecclesiastes, if I should confess that Paul were dead in spirit, but Saints in
fine are not said to be dead, but to be sleeping. Whereupon Lazarus, who was to
rise again, was said to sleep; and the Apostle forbiddes the Thessalonians to
be afflicted for such a^ sleep. But you sleep even when you wake, and you write
when you sleep; and you propound to me an Apocriphall book, which is read by
you, and such as you are, under the name of Esdras, where it is written that
after death, no one must dare to pray for any other, which book I never read.
For to what purpose should I take that book in hand, which the Church does not
receive? Unless perhaps you will produce Balsamus to me, and Barbelus, and the
treasure of Manich^us, and the ridiculous name of Leusibora; and because you
dwell at the foot of the Pirenean mountains, and are a neighbor to Spain,
you advance those incredible monsters of opinion which were vented by
Basilides, that most ancient, but ignorant, unskillful Heretic; and you
propound, that which was condemned, by the authority of the whole world. For in
your little Commentary, you take a testimony out of Solomon, as if it made for
you; which, Solomon indeed never wrote: to the end that, as you had then
another Esdras, so now you may have another Solomon. And if you will, go read
those feigned Revelations of all the Patriarchs and Prophets; and when you
shall have learnt them, you may sing them in the weauing houses of women; or
rather propound them to be read in your tauernes: that so by means of these
bables, you may the more easily provoke the unlearned vulgar to drink hard.

But as for tapers of wax, we light them not in clear day, as you idly
slander us; but to the end, that by this comfort, we may temper the darkness of
the night, and that we may watch by light, least otherwise being blind, we
should sleep in darkness like you. And if any either through the vnskillfullnes,
of simplicity of secular men, or yet of devout women (of whom we may truly
say, I confess they have the zeal of God, but not according to knowledge) do
this for the honor of Martyrs, what are you the worse for that? The Apostles
did also, long ago, complain that a precious ointment was cast away, but they
were reproved by the voice of our Lord. For neither did Christ need that
ointment, nor the Martyrs this light of tapers; and yet that woman did that in
honor of Christ, and the de^otion of her mind was accepted. And whosoever
light tapers, have their reward according to their faith, as the Apostle says
Every one aboundes in his own sense. But do you call such persons as these,
Idolaters? I deny not, but that all we, who believe in Christ, came from the
error of Idolatry: for we are not Christians by generation, but by
regeneration. And belike, because we once worshipped Idols, we should not now
worship God, least we may seem to exhibit the same honor to him: which
formerly we exhibited to Idols. That was done to Idols and therefore it was to
be detested; but this is done to Martyrs, and therefore it is to be received.
But abstracting from Martyrs Relickes, there are tapers lighted, through all
the Churches of the East, when the Gospel is to be read; how brightly soever
the Sun then shine. Not forsooth to drive away darkness, but to declare our
joy by that testimony. Whereupon those Evangelical Virgins have their lamps
ever lighted. And it is said to the Apostles: Let your loins be girt, and your
lamps burning in your hands. And of John Baptist it was said; that He was a
lamp which did both burn and shine, that under the tipe of visible light, the
other light might be showed, whereof we read in the Psalm, Thy word, O Lord, is
a lantern to my feet, and a light to my steps.

So that the Bishop of Rome does ill, who over the bones of the dead men, Peter
and Paul (which according to our belief are venerable, and according to you
are vile poor ^usi) does offer sacrifices to our Lord, and holds their tombs
to be the Altars of Christ. And not only he of one City, but the Bishops of
the whole world err, who contemning this Tauerne-keeper Vigilantius, enter
into the Churches of these dead men, wherein this most base dust, and I know
not what kind of ashes, lies wrapped up in linen, that it self being
defiled, may defile all things else; and which are like those Pharisaicall
sepulchers, exteriourly adorned, when within, the ashes being impure according
to you, all other things may be also unsavory and impure. And then casting up
that base uncleanness out of the profound hell of your stomach, you dare say
thus, Therefore belike the souls of Martyrs love their ashes, and houer about
them, and are ever present with them; least perhaps if some petitioner might
come thither, they should not be able to hear them, if themselves were absent.

O prodigious Monster, fit to be posted away into the ^urdest root of the whole
earth! you scoff at the Relickes of Martyrs, and together with Eunomius the
author of this heresy, you procure to cast a scandal upon the Churches of
Christ* Nor are you frighted by finding your self in such company as that; and
you speak those very things against us, which he spoke against the Church. For
none of his followers will go the Churches of the Apostles, and Martyrs; that
forsooth they may adore the dead Eunomius, whose books they esteem to be of
more authority then the Ghospells; and in him they hold the light of truth to
be* as other heresies affirmed, that the holy Ghost came into Montanus, yea and
they say, that Manichaeus is that very holy Ghost. That most learned man
Tertullian (that you may not vaunt your self to be the first finder out of
this wickedness) writes against this heresy of yours, which broke out long ago
against the Church, an excellent book, which he termed Scorpiacum, upon a most
just reason; because by a circling kind of wound, that Heretic spread his
poison upon the body of the Church, by that heresy, which anciently was called
of Cain, and which sleeping, or rather lying buried a long time, is now by
Dormitantius raised to life. It is a marvel, you say not, that Martyrdomes
are not to be endured, because God does not seek the blood of so much as
goats, or bulls, and much less will he require that of men. Which when you
shall have said, yea although you shall not say it, you shall be so accounted
of, as if you said it. For he who affirms, that the Relics of Martyrs are to
be trodden on; forbids that blood to be shed, which is vnwor^hy of any honor.

Concerning Vigils, and sitting up at night, which are often to be celebrated
in Martyrs Churches, I have given a brief answer in another Epistle, which I
wrote almost two years since, to Riparius the holy Priest If therefore you
think that they are to rejected, least otherwise we may seem to celebrate many
several Easters; and that we keep not solemn Vigils at the end of every
year: by the same reason no sacrifices should be offered to Christ upon the
Sundaies, least we should seem to celebrate the Easter of the Resurrection of
our Lord often; and so we should not have one Easter, but many. Now that abuse
and fault, which is many times committed in the night, between young men, and
the basest sort of women, is not to be imputed to devout persons; because
some such thing is many times found to be committed, even in the Vigil the
Easter; but now the fault of few, must not prejudice this Act of Religion; For
even without Vigils, men may commit that sin, either in their own or others
houses. The treason of Judas, destroyed not the faith of the Apostles, and so
the ill Vigills of others, must not destroy our Vigils; but rather let them be
constrained to watch to chastity, who sleep to lust. For that which was good
being done once, cannot be evil, if it be done often. And if it be culpable
through any fault, it is not culpable because it was done often, but because it
was done at all. Let us not therefore, belike, watch at Easter, least the long
entertained desire of some adulterer, may chance to be fullfilled then, least
the wife find occasion of committing sin; least she exempt her self, from
being shut up by her husbands keye. Whatsoever is rare, is so much the more
ardently desired.

I cannot run over all those particulers, which are mentioned in the letters
of those holy Priests; but some I will produce out of his own books. He
frames arguments against those wonders, and miracles, which are wrought in
Martyrs Churches, and he says, they are good for unbelievers, but not ^or
belieuers. As if now the question were, for whose sake, and not by what power
they are wrought. But well, let Miracles be wrought for Infidells, who because
they would not believe speech, and doctrine may be brought by Miracles to the
faith. Our Lord wrought Miracles for such as were yet incredulous; and yet the
Miracles of our Lord are not be taxed, because they were for Infidels, but they
were to be admired so much the more, because they were of so great power, as to
tame even the stifest minds, and oblige them to embrace the faith. Therefore I
will not have you tell me, that miracles are for Infidels: but answer me how
there comes to be so great a presence of wonders and miracles, in most base
dust, and I know not what kind of ashes? I find, I find, O you the most unhappy
of all mortal men, what grieves you, and what frights you? The impure spirit
which compels you to write those things, is often tormented with this most
base dust, yea and is tormented this very day; and he, who dissembles the
wounds, which he gives to you, confesses those which he gives to others. Unless
perhaps, after the manner of Gentiles, and profane persons (such as P^rphyrius
and Euuomius were) you will pretend that these are but tricks of the Devils;
and that indeed the Devils cry not out, but only that they feign themselves to
be in torment. Take my counsel, go to the Martyrs Churches, and you shall be
one day dispossessed. There shall you find many of your fellows, and you shall
be burnt, not by the tapers of Martyrs, which displease you, but by invisible
flames: and then you will confess what you now deny; and you will freely
publish your own name, though now you speak in the name of Vigilantius; and
say, that either you are Mercury, for your desire of money, or Nocturnus
according to the Amphitryo of Plautus, who sleeping in adultery with Al^mena*
Jupiter made two nights of one, that Hercules might be borne full of strength.
Or else that you are Father Bacchus for your drunken head, and you tankard
hanging at your back, and your face ever red, your lips foming, and your
unbridled tongue railing* Whereupon there being a sudden earthquake in this
Province, which raised all men from their sleep, you being the most discreet,
and wise of mortal men, were praying naked, and represented to us an Adam and
an Eve, as they were in Paradise. Saving that they having their eyes open, and
seeing themselves naked, did blush and cover their secret parts with leaves of
trees, but you being as naked of clothes as void of virtue, and frighted with
a sudden fear, having somewhat in you of the surfeit of the former night, did
expose the obscene parts of your body, to the eyes of the Saints, that you
might show how discreet a man you were.

Such enemies as these has the Church. These are the Captains who fight
against the blood of Martyrs; such Orators as these, thunder out against the
Apostles, or rather such madd Dogs as these bark against the disciples of
Christ. I confess my fear, least perhaps in your opinion it might seem* to
grow from superstition. When I have been angry, when I have had any ill thought
in my mind, and have been deluded by any imagination in the night, I dare not
go into the Martyrs Churches; I do all so tremble both in body and mind.
Perhaps you will scoff at me for this, as if it were the dotage of some old
woman. But I blush not to hold fast the faith of those women, who were the
first in seeing our Lord after his resurrection, who were sent to his Apostles,
and who in the person of the Mother of our Lord and savior, were recomended to
the same holy Apostles. Go you belching on, with the men who lead a worldy
life. I will fast with those women, yea and also with those Religious men, who
carry chastity even in their countenance; and having their faces pale, through
continual abstinence, declare the modesty of Christ.

Me thinks you also seem to be troubled at another thing and that is; least if
chastity, sobriety, and fasting should continue to take deep footing in France,
your Tauernes would make little gain; and so you should not be able to
continue those Vigills of the Devil, and those drunken feasts, all night long.

It is related to me besides, in the same letters, that you forbid* men to be
at any charge, for the use and comfort of those holy men, who live at
Jerusalem, against the authority of the Apostle Paul, yea and of Peter also,
and of James and John, who gave hands to Paul and Barnabas, in testimony of
their consent with them, and required them to be mindful of the poor. But
now if I should answer these things, you would presently bark out and say,
that I am pleading mine own cause; you who have been so liberal to all the
world, as that if you had not come to Iesuralem, and had not powered forth your
own money, or that of your Patrons, we should all forsooth have been in danger
to starve. For my part, I will but say that which the blessed Apostle Paul
delivers almost in all his Epistles, and enioyneth the Churches, which had been
converted among the Gentiles, namely that upon the first day after the Sabbath,
(that is to say, upon the Sunday) men were all to confer about that alms,
which should be sent to Jerusalem either by their disciples, or by others,
whom they should appoint; and that if it proved to be of moment, himself might
either carry or send it. In the Acts of the Apostles, speaking to Foel^x the
Governor, he says thus; After many years, being to give much alms to the
men of my nation, and to make oblations and vows, I came to Jerusalem, where
they found me purifyed in the Temple. But had he not also power, to dispose of
some part of that, which he had received of others, upon the Churches in other
parts of the world, which growing to be Christian, he had instructed by his
preaching? But yet he desired to impart the alms to the poor of those holy
places, who leaving their fortunes for Christ, had devoted themselves wholly to
the service of our Lord. It were a long business, if I would reflect upon all
the testimonies which might be brought out of every one of those Epistles,
wherein the Apostle endeauours, and with his whole affection makes have to
ordain, that money should be addressed to the faithful at Jerusalem, and to
the holy places; not to satisfy covetousness, but for their necessary comfort;
not for the gathering together of riches, but for the vphoulding of their weak
bodies, and for the avoiding of hunger and cold; this custom continuing in
Jury even to this day, not only among us Christians, but among the Jews also,
that they who meditate upon the laws of our Lords day and night, and who have
no Father upon earth, but only God, should be cherished by the charities of the
Synagogues of the whole world, with a fit equality; not that some should be at
ease, and some in misery, but that the abundance of some might serve to supply
the want of others: But you will answer, that every man may do this in his
own country, and that poor people will not be wanting to be mainteyned upon
the charity of the Church. And so also neither do we deny, but that alms is
to be given to all kind of poor people, yea though they be even Samaritans,
and Jews, if there be enough for all. But the Apostle directs indeed* that
we should give alms to all, but especially to them of the household of faith,
in respect of whom our Lord said in the Gospel: Make your selves friends by
the Mammon of iniquity, who may receive you in the eternal Tabernacles. Now I
pray you, can those poor people, who among their rags and corporal mi^eries
have burning lust ruling over them, can they, I say, have any eternal
Tabernacles, who possess neith^r present, nor future things? For not
absolutely such as are poor, but such as are poor (...) spirit, are called
happy; of whom it is written: Blessed is the man, who understandingly
considers the poor and needy, our Lord will deliver him in the evil day. Now
for the relief of the generality of poor people, there is no such need of
Understanding, but of the alms it self. In the case of such poor as are
holy, there is a kind of beatitude of Intelligence, that a man may give to him,
who will blush to receive, and even be sorry when he is on the taking hand,
reaping carnal things, and sowing such as are spiritual.

But in that you affirm them to do better who still make use of their own
goods and distribute the revenues of their estates by little and little, then
they who by selling their lands, give all at once, no answer shall be given
you to this by me, but thus by our Lord, If thou (...) be perfect go and sell
all that thou have and give it to the poor, and come thou and follon me. He
speaks to him who will be perfect, and who in company of the Apostles will
dismiss himself of his father, of his ship, and of his net. This other man
whom you commend, is of the second and third rank, whereof we also allow; so
as yet we may know withal, that the first is to be preferred before the second
and the third.

No^ are Monks to be frighted from their course by your viperous and most
cruel biting tongue, against whom you argue thus, and say, If all men should
shut themselves up, and betake themselves to the desert, who shall do Offices
in Churches, who shall gain secular men to God, who shall exhort sinners to a
course of ver tue? And so also if every body should be a sot with you, what
wise man would there be in the world? And by this reason also virginity must
not be approved. For if every body shall be chaste, there will then be no
marriages, and then mankind will perish; noe infanrs will be crying in their
cradles, Midwiues must go beg without means to live; and Dormitantius must
ly awake in his bed in the coldest wether which can come, al alone, and shrunk
up together.

But virtue is a rare thing, and not sought by many. And I would to God all men
were that, which few are; of whom^ (...) is said, Many are called but few are
chose^. The prisons then would be empty. But as for the Monk it is not his
Office to teach, but to lament and bewail, either himself, o^ the world, and
to expect the coming of our Lord with profound fear: who knowing his own
weakness, and how brickle the pott is which he bears about him, is affrayd to
offend, least first he stumble, and then fall, and so it be broken. And for
this reason, he declines the sight of women, and especially of the younger
sort^, and is so far a chastiser of himself, that he shrinkes even at those
things, wherein there is no danger.

But you ask me, why I go to the Desert? Even to the end that I may neither
hear, nor see you; that I may not be offended by your madness, nor endure the
troubles which you put me to; that the harlots eye may not take hold of me, nor
that great beauty of hers bring me to unlawful embracements. But you will say;
This is not to fight, but to fly. Stand fast in the battle, be in armor, and
resist your ennemy, to the end that you be crowned when you have conquered. I
confess my weakness, I will not sight through a hope of victory, least at some
time or other, I may chance to loose it. If I fly, I avoid the sword; if I
stay, I must either conquer, or be killed. But what need have I to let go that
which is certain, and to seek after that which is uncertain? Death must be
avoided, either by the targuet, or by flight. You who fight, may both overcome,
and be overcome. I, when I fly away, shall even therefore not be overcome. There
is no safety in sleeping near a serpent. It may be, he will not bite; but so
perhaps, there may be a time, when he will. We call them our Mothers, our
Sisters, and our Daughters, and we are not ashamed to cloak our vices by such
names of* piety as those. But what does the Monk in woemens chambers? What
mean these single and private conferences, and these countenances which are
afraid of witnesses? A holy love, is not subject to impatience; and that which
we have said of lust, may be applied to covetousness, or any other vice which is
avoided in the desert. And therefore do not we decline the frequent resort of
Cities, least we should be obliged to do those things, to which nature does
not compel us so much as our own will.

These words (as I was saying) I have dictated in the ^itting up of one night,
at the request of those holy Priests; our brother (...) making much have, and
going toward Egypt with all speed* to carry alms to the Saints there. For
otherwise, the matter it sol^e is full of express blasphemy, which rather
would require indignation, in the writer, then any mustering up of proofs
against him. But i^ Dormitantius keep himself awake to rail at me, and with
the same blasphemous mouth, wherewith he tears the Apostles and Martyrs, shall
think also fit to detract from me; I will not keep my self waking in some
short sitting up, but all night long, both for him and his companions; or
rather for his, either disciples, or Masters; who unless they may see the wo^men
with great b^llies, think their husbands to be unworthy of the Ministry (...)
Christ

The Epitaphe of S. Paula the Mother, directed to Eustochium by S. Hierome.
IF all the parts of my body were converted into tongu^s, and all my limbs
were able to express themselves by the voice of man, I should not yet be able
to say any thing, which might be worthy of the virtues of the venerable and
holy Paula. She was noble by extraction, and much more noble by her sanctity;
powerful she had once been in riches, but now more illustrious by the poverty
of Christ. She who was of the stock of the Gracch^, of the race of Scipio's,
the heir of Paulus (whose name she bore,) the true undoubted progeny of
Martia, Papyria, and the mother of Africanus, preferred Bethleem before Rome,
and made an excha^ge of her houses brightly bunr^ished with gold, for the
basen^s of ill favored dirt. We grieve not for having lost such a one; but we
give God thanks, in that we had her, or rather in that we have her still. For
all things live to God, and whatsoever returns to our Lord, is still reputed
as a part of his Family. For our loss of her, is the peopling of that
celestial house; of her I say, who when she was in her body, was in pilgrimage
from our Lord; and would still be saying with a lamenting voice; VVo be to me
because my Pilgrimage is prolonged, I have dwelt with the Inhabitants of Cedar,
my soul has been far off in pilgrimage. Nor is it marvel if she bewailed
her self, as being in darkness (for so is the word Cedar interpreted) since
the world is placed in malignity, and the very light of it is like darkness;
but true light shines in that darkness, and darkness comprehend^ it not.
Whereupon she would very often infer these words; A stranger I am, and a
pilgrim as all my Fathers were. And again; I desire to be dissolved and to be
with Christ. But then, as often as she was vexed by any infirmity of her body,
which she brought down by incredible abstinence and doubled fasting, she would
take this saying into her mouth; I subject my body, and I bring it into
servitude, least whilst I preach to others, my self may become a reprobate.
And; It is good not to drink wine, nor to eat flesh; and I have humbled my
soul in fasting. And; Thou have made my whole bed in my sickness; and I have
been converted in my misery, whilst the thorn stuck in my sides. And in the
midst of those sharp pangs of pain, which she endured with admirable
patience, she would be saying, as if she had seen heaven open, Who will give
me the wings as of a Dove, that I might fly up, and rest? I take Jesus and his
Saints so witness; and that particular Angel who was the keeper, and companion
of this admirable woman, that I will say nothing of her for favor, nothing
after the custom of flatterers; but whatsoever I am to say, shall be as if it
were upon mine oath; and yet still it will fall short of her merits, whom the
whole world celebrates, whom Priests admire, whom the quiers of Virgins want,
and the troops of Monks, and poor people, lament.

Do you, O Reader, desire to know her virtues in few words? She left all her
friends poor, her self being more poor, then any of them all. Neither will
it be strange, that we should say thus much of them, who were next her, as
namely her family (the slaves and hand-maydes whereof, in both sexes, she had
exchanged into the name of brothers and sisters) since she left the virgin
Eustochium, her daughter devoted to Christ (^or whose comfort this book is
made) far off from her illustrious friends, and only rich in faith and
grace. But let us speak of things in order. Let others fetch them higher; and
from her cradle, and even in her swaddling cloutes (as I may say) produce her
morher Blesilla, and Rogatus her father, whereof the Mother was the of spring of
the Scipio's, and the Gracchi; and the Father is said to have drawn down his
blood, through the best nobility of all Greece, by descending from the stem
of that Agamemnon, who destroyed the City of Troy, in that ten years siege.
As for us we will praise nothing in her, which was not her own, and which is
not to be der^ed out of that purest fountain of her holy mind.

Although our Lord and Savior taught his Apostles in the Ghospel, when they
ask him, what he would re^iore to them, who should part with their fortunes
for his sake in this world ^hey should receive a hundred fold, and eternal
life in the next: wh^ by we come to understand, that it is no praise ^o
possess riches, but to conte^ne them for Christ; not to swell up with honor
but for the faith of God to despise it. What our Savior promised to his
servants, he has truly performed in the present case. For she, who contemned
the glory of one City, is celebrated by the fame of the whole world; she whom
as long as she dwelt in Rome* none knew but they who were at Rome, lying now
h^d in Be^hleem, both the Barbaria^ and the Roman world has admired. For of
what nation are there any men, who come not to visit the holy places? And who
finds any thing in these holy places, which he may admire more then Paula? For
as the most precious Gemme does outshine other little gemmes, and as the Sun
beams do ouerwhelme and obscure the brightness of the little stars, so does
she with her humility, overcome the excellencies and virtues of all the rest,
and she is grown the greatest, because she would needs be the least of them
all, and so much more as she dejected her self, so much more was she elevated
by Christ our Lord. She lay hid, and she lay not hid. By flying from glory she
deserved glory, which follows virtue like a shadow; and forsaking such as
honored her, she sought after such as might contemn her. But what am I doing,
now that I omit to speak of things in order; for whilst I take hold of so
maany particulers, I observe not the rules of good discourse.

Paula being thus descended, was married to Toxotius her husband, who was
extracted from that high blood of Aeneas and the Iulio's; whereupon also her
daughter, the virgin of Christ, Eustochium, is called Iulia; and that Julius
had his name derived from the great Iulu^. Now we speak of these things, not
because they are great in them who have them; but because they may be wondered
at, in such as despise them. The men of this world admire such persons, as are
adorned with these privileges; but we praise such others as contemn them, for
the love of our Savior; but we who esteem little of those who have them, do
after a strange fashion proclaim those others, who contemn, and care not for
them. She being borne, I say, of those parents, was approved both in fecundity,
and modesty, first by her husband, then by her friends, and by the restimony
of the whole City; and when she had brought forth five children, Blesilla
(upon whose death I comforted her at Rome,) Paulina (who left behind her that
holy and admirable man Pammachius, the heir both of her holy purpose and her
estate, to whom we addressed a little book upon the occasion of her death,)
Eustochium (who is now in the holy places, even the very precious lewell of
virginity, and of the Church,) Ruffina (who by her untimely death did even
astonish the tender heart of the mother) and Toxotius, after whom she had no
more children, that we might know she had no mind to attend to the office of a
wife for any long time; but only to bring children, till the husbands longing
were satisfied, in his desire of a son. When her husband dyed, she bewailed
him so as that it had almost cost her her life; and yet withal she did so
give her self away to the service of our Lord, that she might seem to have
desired her husbands death.

What shall I stand to tell of her ample and noble house, which formerly was
most abundantly rich, and whereof now all the wealth was spent upon the poor?
What, of her mind, which was so mercifully inclined to all? and of her goodness
which would be wandering, even to the help of them, whom she had never seen?
What poor man dying, was not shrouded in clothes of her giving? What cripples
were not maintained by her purse? whom causing to be sought for with extreme
curiosity, over the whole city she would hold it to be her own loss in
particular, if any weak or hungry person were sustained by any food, but hers.
She even stripped her own children; and to her friends, who would be chiding her
for this excess; she would say, she meant to leave them a greater inheritance,
then she found, namely the mercy of Christ. Nor could she long endure the
visits, and courting which was due to her most noble house, and to that high
stock of hers, according to the account of the would. She grieved at the honor
which was done her, and made have to decline, and fly from the face of such as
gave her praise. And when the Imperial letters h^d brought the Bishops both of
the East, and West to Rome for composing the dissentions of some Churches, she
saw those admirable men, and Bishops of Christ, Paulinus, the Bishop of the
City of Antioch, and Epiphanius of Salamina in Cyprus, of whom she had
Epiphanius for her own guest, and Paulinus though lodging in an other house
she possessed as her own, by the care she had of him.

Being inflamed by the virtues of these men, she devised, from one minute to
another, how to forsake her country. And not being mindful of her house, not
of her children, not of her family, not of her estate, not of any thing which
belonges to this world, she had an earnest desire to be going on, even alone,
and vnaccompanyed (as a man may say) to the desert of those Anthonies and
Paul's. At length the winter being spent, and the sea being open; the Bishops
returning to their Churches, she also, in her desire, and with the vows of her
heart, went sailing with them. Why shall I defer it longer? She went down to
the Sea port, her brother, her kindred, her allies and (which is more then this)
her children following her, and striving with their earnest suits, to overcome
that most tender mother.

The sails were by that time spread, and by stretching of the Oars, the ship
was drawn into the deep. Little Toxotius cast forth his begging hands, upon
the shore. Ruffina, who then was marriageable, did in silence crave with
tears, that she would expect to see her bestowed. But Paula the while, cast up
her dry eyes toward heaven, surmounting her dear affection toward her
children by her devotion toward God. She knew not her self to be a mother,
that she might approve her self, for a hand-mayd of Christ. Her very bowels
were racked within her, and as if she had been torn from the very parts of her
own body, so did she fight with grief, in this so much the more admirable to
all, as she carried a great love to them which was to be conquered. When people
are in the hands of enemies, and in the sad condition of captivity, there is no
one thing more cruel, then for parents to be separated from their children.
And yet even this, did her full faith endure, against the rights of nature; nay
her joyful heart did desire it, and contemning the love of her children through
her superior love toward God, she contented her self with only Eustochium,
who was the companion, both in her holy purpose, and navigations. In the mean
time the ship plowed up the Seas, and all the passingers who were embarked
with her, looking back upon the shore, she only turned her eyes from thence;
that so she might not see the^, whom she could not behold without torment. I
confess that no woman could more love her children, to whom, before she went,
she gave away whatsoever she had best.

Being arrived at the Island of Pontia which au^ciently had been ennobled by the
banishment of that most excellent of women Flauta Domitilla, under the
Emperor Domitian, for confession of the name of Christ, and beholding those
Coals wherein she had suffered a long martyrdom she then took up the wings of
faith and desired to visit Jerusalem and the holy places. The winds were
thought sluggish, and all speed was slow. Committing her self to the
Adriaticke Sea, between Scylla and Carybbis, she came, as by a lake, to
Methona; and there refreshing her self a little, and laying her seasicke
limbs upon the shore, by Malea, and Cythera, and the Cyclads (which are
sprinkled over that Sea) and those waves being the more furious by the often
indenting of the land and having also passed by Rhodes, and Lycia, at length
she came to Cyprus, Where casting her self at the feet of the holy and
venerable Epiphanius, she was deteyned by him ten days, not for her regalo as
he meant it, but for the work of God, as indeed it proved. For vewing all the
Monasteries of that quarter, she left to the uttermost of her power, certain
alms to bear the charge of those brothers, whom the love of that holy man had
drawn thither from the several parts of the whole world From thence she made
a short cut over to Seleucia* and then going up to Antioche, and being deteyned
a while by the charity of the holy Confessor Paulinus, in the heart of winter,
(her own heart being most hot with a lively faith) the noble creature who
auntiently used to be carried by Eunuchs hands, did put her self now to
travail, upon an ass. I omit to speak of Caeles, the way to Syria and
Phenices (for I mean not to writ her Iournall) but will only name those
places, whereof mention is made in holy Scripture. And leaving Berytus, the
Colony of Rome, as also the ancient City of Sidon* she went into the little
tower of Elias upon the shore of Sarepta; wherein having adored our Lord our
Savior, she came to Coph, which now is called Ptolemais, by those sands of
^yrus, where Paul prayed upon his knees. And passing by the fields of Mageddo,
which were privy to the death of Josias, she entered into the land of Philistim,
and wondered at the ruins of Do, which was once a most powerful City, and on
the contrary side she saw the tower of Strato, which was called Cesarea by
Herod, King of Jury, in honor of Augustus Caesar, wherein she beheld the houses
of Cornelius, which grew to be a Church of Christ; and the little houses of
Phillip, and four chambers of the prophetising virgins; and then Antipatris, a
town half ouerthrouen, which Herod had called by the name of his father, and
Lidda, changed into Diospolis, made famous by the resurrection of Dorcas to
life, and of Aeneas to health. Not far from thence was Arimathea^ the little
town of Joseph, who buried our Lord, and Nobe which au^tiently was the City
of Priests, now a sepulture of the dead, and Ioppe also the haven of Jonas,
when he fled, and (to the end that I may give some little touch of the
invention of Po^ts) which was the spectatrix of Andromade when she was tied to
the rock. And then renewing her Journey, she went on to Nicopolis, which
formerly had been called Emaus, where our Lord being known in the breaking of
bread; did consecrat the house of Cleophas a Church.

Departing from thence, she ascended both into the vper and lower Bethoron,
which were Cities built by Solomon; but were afterward destroyed, through the
tempest which was drawn upon them, by several wars; beholding upon her
right hand, both Haialon, and Gabaon where Jesus the son of Naue, fighting
against five Kings, commanded both the sun and moon; and condemned the
Gabaonites to be water carryers, and wood-cutters, for their treachery, and
falsehood in breaking the league, which themselves had obtained. In Gabaon
(which had been a City, but was then destroyed eue^ to the very ground) she
paused a while; remembering the sin it committed, and the concubine cut in
pieces, and the three hundred men of the tribe of Benjamin, who were reserved
for Paul the Apostles sake.

Why make I any longer stay? Having left the tomb of Helena, on the left hand
(who being the Queen of the Adeabenians, had relieved the people with corn in
a time of famine, she entered into Jerusalem that city of a treble name;
Iebus, Salem, and Jerusalem, which afterward out of the ruins, and ashes of
the City, was raised by Helius Adrianus, and called Helia. And when the
Proconsul of Palestine (who excelle^tly well knew her Family) had sent her
Officers before, and commanded the Palace to be prepared, she rather chose an
humble Cell; and went round about to all those places with so great ardour, and
affection of mind, that unless she had hastened to have seen the rest, she
would never have been drawn from the former. And lying prostrate before the
Cross, she adored our Lord, as if she had seen him hanging on it. Being
entered into the Sepulcher, she kissed the stone of the Resurrection, which the
Angel had removed from the door thereof. And that very place, where our Lord
had lain, she licked with a faithful mouth, as any thirsty creature would do,
the most desired waters. What tears, what groans, what grief she there
powered forth, all Jerusalem is a witness; and indeed our Lord himself is the
best witness* to whom she prayed. Going out from thence, she went up to Syon,
which now is turned into a watchtower, or lantern. This City, David did
anciently, both destroy, and build again. Of this, when it was destroyed, it
is written thus; VVoe be to thee, O City Ariel, that is, thou Lion of God, and
once of excessive strength, which David took. And of that City being
reedifyed, it is said; Her foundations are in the holy hills* our Lord loves
the gates of Sion, above all the Tabernacles of Jacob: not those gates which
now we see dissolved into dust, and ashes; but the gates, against which hell
cannot prevail, and by which the multitude of belieuers go into Christ. There
was showed to her, a pillar of the Church houlding up the porch, which was
spotted by the blood of our Lord, to which he was said to have been bound, and
whipped, and that place also showed where the holy Ghost descended upon the
souls of more then a hundred and twenty belieuers, that the prophecy of Iod
might be fullfilled.

After this having disposed of her little means to the poor who by that time
were grown to be her fellow-seruants, she went on toward Bethlem, and stayed
on the right hand of her way, at the sepulcher of Rachel, wherein the mother of
Benjamin brought him forth, not Benoni as she called him when she was dying,
that is, the Son of my grief, but as the Father p^ophecyed of him in spirit,
which is, the son of my right hand. And from thence going to Bethleem, and
entering into that hollow place of our Savior, as soon as she saw the sacred
lodging of the Blessed Virgin, and that stable wherein the Ox knew his owner,
and the Ass the manger of his Lord (that it might be fullfilled which was
written by the same Prophet; Blessed is he who sows upon the water, where the
Ox and Ass do tread) She swore in my hearing, that she saw with the eyes of
Faith* the child wrapped in his cloutes, and our Lord crying in the manger, the
Magi adoring, the Star shining from above, the Virgin Mother, the diligent
Foster-father, the Pastors coming by night; that they might see the Word
which was made (and so dedicated even then* the beginning of John the
Evangelist; In the beginning was the word, and the word was made flesh,) Herod
raging, the young Infants slain, Joseph and Mary flying into Egypt* And then
with tears mixed with joy she said; All hail, O Bethleem, the house of bread,
wherein that bread was borne, which descended from heaven; All hail, O
Ephrata, thou most abundant, and fruitful Region, whose fertility* God is. Of
thee Micheas prophesied of old. And thou Bethlem the house of Ephrata, art not
the least amongst those thousand of Judah; out of thee shall he come forth to
me, who is ^he Prince in Israel; and his going forth is from the beginning,
from the days of eternity. Therefore shall thou give them* till the time of
bringing them forth arrive. She shall bring them forth, and the relik^s of her
brethren* shall be converted to the sons of Israel. For of thee is borne a
Prince, who was begotten before Lucifer, and whose birth on the Fathers side,
does exceed all ages. And so long did the beginning of David's stock remain in
thee, till a Virgin did bring forth, and till the relickes of the people
believing in Christ, were converted to the sons of Israel, and did freely
preach in this manner. To you first it was fit to preach the word of God* but
because you have rejected it, and judged your selves unworthy of eternal life,
behold we are converted to ^he Gentiles. For God had said, I came not but to the
lost sheep of the house of Israel. And at that time, the words of Jacob were
fullfilled: A prince shall not be wanting out of the house of Judah, nor a
Captain out of his loins, till he come, for whom it is laid up; and he shall
be the expectation of the Gentiles. David swore truly, and made his vows well,
saying: If I enter into the tabernacle of my house, if I ascend into the bed of
my couch, if I grant sleep to mine eyes* and slumbring to mine eyelids* till
I find a place for our Lord, and a tabernacle for the God of Jacob. And
instantly he declared what he desired, and with his prophetical eyes discerned
that he was to come, whom now we see to be come already: Behold we have heard
him in Ephrata, we found him in the fields of the wood. For Vau the Hebrew
word (as I have learned by your teaching) does not signify Mary the mother of
our Lord, that is (...), but him, that is (...). Whereupon she confidently
said; We will go into his Tabernacles; we will adore in the place where his
feet have stood. And, I miserable and sinful creature, am I held worthy to
kiss the manger wherein my Lord* being an infant cried; to pray in that
stable, where the Virgin Mother was delivered of our Lord, being made a child?
This is my rest, because it is in the country of my Lord; here will I dwell
because my Sau^our made choice thereof. I have prepared a lamp for my Christ,
my soul shall live to him* and my seed shall serve him.

Not far from thence, she went to the tower Ader, that is to say, Of the
flock, near which Jacob fed his flocks, and the shepheardes, who watched by
night, deserved to hear; Glory be to God on high, and peace on earth, to men
of a good will. And whilst they kept their sheep, they found the Lamb of God,
with that clean and most pure fleece, which when the whole earth was dry, was
filled with celestial dew, and whose blood took away the sins of the world,
and drove away that exteminatour of Egypt, being sprinkled upon the posts of
the house. And then presently with a swift pace she began to go forward, by
that old way which leads to Gaza, to the power of the riches of God; and
silently to reuolue within her self, how the Ethiopian Eunuch (prefiguring the
Gentiles) did change his skin, and whilst he was reflecting upon his old way
found the fountain of the Ghospel. From thence she pasled toward the right
hand. From Bethsur she came to Escoll, which signifyes a Bunch of grapes, and
from whence (in testimony of the extreme fertility of that soil, and as a type
of him who said: I have trod the wine press alone, and not one of the Gentiles
was with me) those discouerers, or spies carried home a bunch of Grapes of a
wonderful bigness. Not far from thence, she entered into the little houses of
Sarah, and viewed the antiquities of the infancy of Isaac, and the relikes of
Abraham's Oak, under which he saw the day of Christ, and rejoiced. Rising up
from thence, she ascended up to Chebron, which is Cariath Arbe, that is to say,
the town of the four men, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and the great Adam, whom
according to the book of Jesus Naue, the Jews conceive to be buried there,
although many think that the fourth man was Caleb, whose memory they continue
by showing there a part of his side. Having viewed these places, she would not
proceed to Chariath Cephor, that is to say, the little town of letters,
because contemning the killing letter, she had found the quickening spirit. And
she wondered more at those superior and inferior waters, which Othoniel the
son of Iephone Kenaz, had gotten, instead of that Southern Land, and dry
possession; and by Aquiducts had moistened those fields of the old testament,
that he might find the redemption of old sins, in the water of Baptism. The
next day, the Sun being risen, she stood upon the brow of Chaphar Barucha,
that is, the Town of benediction, to which place Abraham followed our Lord,
looking down from thence upon a large desert, and that Land, which of old was
belonging to Sodomah, and Gomorrah, Adamah, and Seboin^. She then contemplated
those Vines of Balsamum in Engaddi, and the Calfe of Segor; and Zoara, which in
the Syrian language signifyes, The little one. She remembered the little hollow
cave of Lot; and being all bathed in tears, she admonished the Virgins who
accompanied her, to take heed of Wine, wherein Luxury is; and whose fruits are
the Moabites, and Ammonites.

I make too long stay in the South, where the spouse found out her
fellow-spouse, as he was laid; and where Joseph was inebriated with his
brethren. But I will now return to Jerusalem* and between Thecua and Amos, I
will behold the b^ightly shining light of Mount Oliuet, from whence our Savior
ascended up to his Father; and upon which mountain, a red Cow was yearly
burnt by way of Holocaust to our Lord; the ashes whereof did expiat the people
of Israel: whereupon also the Cherubin passing away from the Temple; according
to Ezechiel, there was founded a Church to our Lord. After this, going into the
Sepulcher of Lazarus, she saw the house of Mary, and Martha, and Bethphage, the
town of sacerdotall jaws; and that place, where the wanton asses coult of the
Gentiles accepted the bridle of God; and being ouerspred with the Apostles
garments, gave an easy seat to the rider. Then did she descend by a straight
way toward Jericho reuoluing in her mind, that wounded man of the Gospel;
and withal, the clemency of the Samaritan, which signifyes a Guardian, who
laid the man being half dead, upon his beast, and brought him to the stable of
the Church, whilst the Priests and Levites, with unmerciful hearts passed by.
She also saw the place called Adonim, which is by interpretation, of blood;
because much blood was wont to be shed there, by the frequent incursion of
murdering thieves. She saw the Sicomore tree of Zach^us; that is to say the
good works of penance, whereby he trod under foot his former sins, which
were full of extortion and cruelty; and beheld that high Lord of ours, from the
height of virtue. And near that way, she saw those places of the blind men,
where receiving their fight, they prefigured the mysteries of both those
people, which were to beliue in our Lord.

Being entered into Jericho, she saw that City, which Hiell founded in Abiram,
for his eldest son; and whose gates were placed in Segub, for his youngest.
She beheld the tents of Galgala, and the whole heap of foreskinnes and the
mystery of the Circumcision, and the twelve stones which being transferred
thither out of the bottom or bed of Jordan, did strengthen the twelve
fomdations of the Apostles; and that fountain of the law, which auntiently
was most bitter and barren of waters, but now the true Elizeus had seasoned it
with his wisdom, and endued it both with suauity, and plenty. The night was
scarce passed when she came with extreme fervor of devotion to Jordan. She
stood upon the bancke of the river; and as soon as the Sun was up, she
remembered the Sun of Justice; and how the Priests had formerly set their dry
feet in the midst of the river, when the stream made a fair way, by the
staying of the water half or the one side, and half on the other, upon the
commandment of Elias and Elizeus; and how our Lord, by his baptism cleansed
those waters, which had been infected in the time of the flood, by the death of
all mankind. It will be a long business, if I shall take upon me to speak of
the valley of Achor, that is to say, Of troubles and tumult, wherein covetousness
and th^ft were cond^mned; and of Bethel, the house of God, wherein the poor and
naked Jacob slept upon the bare ground, and (laying that stone under his head,
which in Zachary is described to have seven eyes, and in Esaias is called the
corner stone) saw a ladder reaching up to heaven, toward which our Lord
inclined from above, reaching forth his hand to such as were laboring to get
up; and precipitating from on high, such as were negligent. She also exhibited
veneration, to the Sepulchers of Jesus the son of Naue upon mount Ephraim, and
of Eleazarus the son of Aaron, which was there hard by, whereof the one was
built by Tannathsare on the northside of the Mount Goas, the other in Gabaah
belonging to Phinees his son: she much wondered, that he who had the
distribution of those possessions in his hands, had chosen the mountaynous and
barreyne parts for himself. What shall I say of Silo whereof the altar was
pulled down, and is showed to this day, where the tribe of Benjamin did
forerunne the rapt of the Sabines, which was made by Romulus She passed by
Scihem which now is called Neapolis (for it is not Sichar, as some erroneously
affirm) and she entered into that Church, which is built neet the well of
Jacob, upon the side of the mountain of Garizim, and upon which well our Lord
sitting down, and being hungry, and thirsty, was satisfied with the faith of
the Samaritan woman; who leaving both her five husbands under the law of
Moses, and the fixed whom then she auowed her self to have, and giving over
that error, to which Dositheus was subject, found the true Mes^, and the true
Savior. And turning aside from thence, she saw the tombs of the twelve
Patriarchs, and Sebastes that is Sameria, which in honor of Augustus was
called Augusta in the Grecian language. There are the Prophets Helizeus, and
Abdias, John the Baptist, then whom there was none greater among the sons of
men. There did she even tremble, and was astonished with many wonderful things.
For she found the devils roar through feuerall torments; and that, before the
Sepulchers of the Saints, men howled after the manner of wolves, and barked
like dogs, and foamed like Lions, hissed like serpents, and roared like Bulls:
Others did shake, and wheeled their heads about, and bent their crowns behind
their backs to the ground; and women would be hanging up by their feet, with
their clothes flying down about their faces. She had pity on them, and
powered forth her tears, she begged mercy at the hands of Christ, for them all.

Now though she were but weak, yet she went up the hill on foot; in two
concauities whereof. Abdias the Prophet fed a hundred Prophets, with bread and
water, in a time of famine and persecution. From thence, she went with a speedy
pace to Nazareth, that nursery of our Lord, and to Canaan and Caphernaum, where
his Miracles were so familiarly wrought. And she saw the lake of Tyberiadis,
which was sanctified by our Lordr sailing on it, and the wilderness wherein many
thousands of people were satisfied with bread; and where the twelve baskets of
the twelve tribes of Israel were filled with the reliqu^ (...) them who were
fed. She climed up to Mount Thabor wherein our Lord was transfigured. She saw a
far off, the hills of Hermon and Hermonym, and those large wild fields of
Galilee; wherein Sisara and all his Army, was overcome under the conduct of
Barach; the torre^t of Cison which divided that plain by the middle; and the
town near Naim, where the widows son revived, was showed to her.

The day will sooner fail me then discourse, if I shall speak of all those
places, which the venerable Paula visited with an incredible faith. I will
pass on to Egypt, and I will stay a while in Soceth, and at the fountain of
S^mpson. which he produced out of a great iaw tooth; and I will wash my dry
mouth, and being so refreshed, will look upon Morastis, which an^tiently was
the Sepulcher of the Prophet Micheas, and is ^ow a Church. And I will leave, on
the one side, the Chorreans, the G^heans. Maresa, Idumea, and Lachis; and by
those deep sands which even draw the feet of trauailers from under them, and
by that huge vastity of the desert, I will come to S^or that river of Egypt
which by interpretation is, Troubled; and I will pass by the five Cities of
Egypt, which speak the Cananean tongue, and the land of Guess, and the fields
of Tanais, wherein God wrought wonderful things; and the City of No, with grew
afterward to be Alexandria; and N^tria, that town of our Lord, where the
filthiness of many is daily washed away with the most pure Niter of virtue.
Which when she saw, the holy and venerable Bishop and Confessor Isidorus
coming to meet her, together with innumerable troops of Monckes (amongst whom
there were many, who were sublimed so far, as to be Levites and Priests) she
rejoiced indeed at the glory of our Lord, but confessed her self to be unworthy
of so great honor. How shall ^be able to relate, of those Machario's,
Arsenio's, Serapions, and the rest of the names of those pillars of Christ.
Into whose cell did she note^ter? Before whose feet did she not fall? In every
one of the Saints she conceived her self to see Christour Lord: and whatsoever
she gave the^ she rejoiced in that she gave it to our Lord. She expressed a
strange ardour of mind, and a courage which was scarce credible to be in a
woman. Being forgetful of her sex. and of her corporal indispositions, she ^d
that she might dwell with her virgins, among so many thousands of Moncks. And
perhaps she had obtained it, through the great respect^ which they carried to
her, unless a more earnest desire to reuiew the holy places had drawn her
back And by reason of those most excessive heats she put her self to Sea,
from Pellusium, to Maioma; and returned with so great speed, that she might be
thought to fly Soon after resolving to remain for ever in the holy Bethlem.
she entertained herself for three years in that straight lodging, till she
had built Cells, and Monasteries, and diverse habitations for pilgrims, near
that way, where Mary and Joseph could find no place of entertainment. And this
shall suffice for the description of her Journey, which she performed with many
virgins one of the^ being her daughter.

But now let her virtue, which is properly her own, be described more at
large: in the declararation whereof, I profess before God, who is both my
witness, and my judge, that I will add nothing to the truth; nor amplify, after
the manner of men who praise others; but rather say less, then I might, least
else I may seem to speak incredible things; and be conceived to deliver
untruths, and to adorn Esopes crow with colors belonging to other birds, in
the conceit of my detracters, who are ever gnawing upon me with a sharp tooth.
She abased her self with so great humility (which is the chief virtue of
Christians) that whosoever had not seen her before, and had desired to see her
then, for the fame of her person, would never have believed that she was her
self* but the very poorest of her maids. And when she was hemmed in with
quiers of virgins* she would be the meanest of them all, both in clothing, and
speech, and behavior, and rank. From the death of her husband to the time of
her own death, she did never eat with any man, how holy soever he were; no not
although he were placed in Episcopal dignity. She went not to any bathes, in
but cases of danger of her life. Even when she was oppressed with the most sharp
feauers she lay upon no soft beds; but she rested upon the hard ground being
only ouerspred with certain little poor clothes of hair, if that indeed may
be accou^ rest, which coupled the days and nights, with almost continual
prayers* full filling that of the Psalm; I will wash my bed every night, and I
will water my couch with tears. And even in that time of rest, you would take
her eyes to be as some sluices of water; and so would she lament her least
sins, as that you would esteem her thereby to be guilty of most grievous
crimes. And when we would be often warning her, that she should take care of
her eyes, and preserve them for the reading of holy scripture* she would use to
say, That face is to be made ugly, which against ^he precept of God I have so
often daubed; That body is to be afflicted, which has been treated with so
much delicacy. A long laughter is to be recompensed with a constant
lamentation. Soft limen, and precious stuffes of silk must be changed into
ragged hair clothes. I who have pleased a husband and a world, desire now to
please Christ.

If, in the company of her so many and so great virtues, I shall praise
chastity in her, I may well seem superfluous. For in this virtue, even when she
was a secular woman, she was the example of all the Matrons in Rome. Where she
behaved her self so, as that the report even of wicked tongues, did never
presume to devise any thing against her. There was nothing more pitiful then
her mind, nothing more benign toward mean people. She courted not such as
were mighty, neither yet did she fastidiously despise such as were proud* and
affected the vanity of glory. If she saw a poor body, she re^ieued him; if a
rich man, she exhorted him to use charity. Only in liberality, she exceeded
measure; and whilst she was paying interest, she would often borrow of one to
discharge another, that so she might still have some means, not to deny an
alms to him who asked it. I confess my error: When I found her too open
handed, I reprehended her with that saying of the Apostle, Let not others be so
comforted, ac that your selves be aflicted thereby; but do it with d^scretion
and weighing of circumstances; that your abundance may be the relief of others
wantes and their abundance of yours. And that of our Savior in the Gospel,
Let him who has two coats, give one to him who has none; and I would tell
her that we must procure, not to do that willingly, which we may not always
do; and many things of this kind. Which she with an admirable modesty, and
most sparing speech, would yet discharge, calling God to witness, that she did
all things for his sake, and that she had this earnest desire, that she might
dy^ begging; and that she might not have one penny to leave her daughter; and
that at her death, she might be shrouded in the sheet of another gift. For
conclusion, she said, If I shall ask alms, I may find many who will give it
me, but if this beggar have not that of me, which I may affoard him, even out
of another store, and so shall chance to die for want thereof, at whose hands
shall his life be required? For my part I desired her to be more cautious in
the distribution of her temporal estat; but she being more ardent in her
faith, flew close to her Savior, with her whole heart, and being poor in
spirit, did follow her poor Lord; repaying him what she had received, since he
had been made poor for her. In fine, she obtained what she desired* and left
her daughter in great debt, which hitherto she is owing* and confides not in
her own strength, but in the mercy of Christ, that she shall be able to pay it.

It is usual with many of our Matrons, to bestow their gifts at the sound of
the trumpet, and carrying a profuse hand toward some few, to withdraw their
bounty from the rest; from which vice she was wholly free. For so did she deuid
her Charity among them all, as was necessary for every one, not toward
excess, but for necessity. No poor man could go empty from her, which yet
she was not able to compass by the greatness of her estate, but by her prudence
in dispensing; and this she would ever be repeating, Blessed be the merciful;
for they shall obtain mercy. And; As water quenches fire, so does alms
extinguish sin. And again; Make your selves friends of the unjust Mammon,
that they may receive you into eternal Fabernacles. And: Give alms, and
behold all things are clean to you. And the words of Daniel admonishing
Nabuchodonozor the King, that he was to redeem his sins with alms. She
would not cast away her money upon these stones, which are to pass away with
this world, but upon those living stones which roll up and down the earth; and
whereof, in the Ap^calips of John, the City of the great King is built; and
which, as the Scripture says, must be converted into Saphires and Emmerolds,
and Iaspers, and other gemmes.

But these things may be common to many: and the Devil knows, that the top
of virtue is not placed in this Whereupon he said to our Lord (after Job had
lost his substance, after his house was overthrown, after his children were
slain.) A man would give a skin for a shinne; and whatsoever he has, for the
s^uing of his life; but stretch forth thy hand, and touch his flesh and bones,
and see if he will not curse thee to thy face. We know that very many have
given alms, who gave nothing of their own body; who have stretched forth
their hands to the poor, but yet have been overcome by the pleasures of the
flesh; to have painted the outside, whilst that within has been all full of
dead bones. But Paula* was no such person but was of so great abstinence, that
almost she exceeded measure, and contracted weakness of body, by excessive
fasting and labor. For except upon holy days, she did scarce use oil in her
meat; that by this one instance, it may be known what judgment she made of
wine, of sewet, or larde, and fish, and honey, and eggs, and other things which
are delightful to the taste. For the very eating whereof, some take themselves
to be extremely abstinent; and if they stuff their belly with these things,
they think their honesty is in safety.

But envy ever follows virtue; and lightning strikes the highest hills. Neither
is it any wonder, if I say this of men, since eue^ our Lord was crucified,
through the zeal of the Pharis^es; and since all Saints have had Emulators,
and since there was a serpent even in Paradise, by whose envy, death entered
into the world. Our Lord had raised up Adad the Idumean, who might give her now
and then a knock, least she should extol her self; and he admonished her
often, and as it were with a kind of goad of the flesh, least the greatness of
her virtue might snatch her up too high, and considering the vices of other
women, she might think her self to be placed out of all reach. I would be
saying to her, that she must yield to that bitter envy and give place to
madness, which Jacob had done in the case of his brother Esaw; and David, in
that of Saull who was the most implacable of all enemies; whereof the one flede
into Mesopotamia, the other delivered himself up to strange people; choosing
rather to be subject to enemies, then to enuyous persons. But she would be
answering me thus. You might justly say these things, if the devil fought not
every where against the servants and handmayds of God; and if he got not the
start of them, in being the first at all those places whithersoeuer Christians
went to fly. Though I were not deteyned here, by the love of these holy places,
and if I were able to find my Bethle^ in any other part of the world but this,
yet whh should not I overcome the bitterness of envy with patience? Why should I
not break the neck of pride by humility? and to him who strikes one of my
cheeks, offer him the other? Paul the Apostle, saying; Overcome you evil with
good. Did not the Apostles glory, when they suffered contumely for our Lord?
Did not our Savior humble himself, taking the form of a servant and being
made obedient to his father, even to the death, and that the death of the
cross, that he might save us by his Passion? If Job had not fought and
overcome in the battle, he had not received the crown of justice, nor heard
this word of our Lord, Do thou think I had any other mind in proving thee,
then that thou might appear just? They are said to be blessed in the
Gospel, who suffer persecution for justice* Let our conscience be secure,
that we suffer not for our ^innes; and then our afliction in this wor^ does but
serve us for matter of reward.

If at any time any enemy of hers had been malepert, and had proceeded so
far, as to offer her any injury of words, she would resort to that of the
Psalm, When the sinner set himself before me, I held my peace, and was
silent even from good things. And again; I was like to a deaf person who
heard not; and like one who being dumb did not open his mouth; and I became as
a man, who does not hear, and has not in his mouth, any word of reproof.

In temptations she would frequent those words of Deutronomy, Your Lord God
tempts you, that he may know whether you love the Lord your God with your
whole heart, and with your whole soul. In aflictions and troubles she would
repeat the words of Esaias. You who are weaned from milk; and taken from the
tet, must expect tribulation upon tribulation* and hope upon hope. Yet expect a
little, for the malice of lips, and for the wicked tongue. And she would bring
this testimony of scripture for her comfort, because it belongs to such as are
weaned, and come to an estat of strength, to endure tribulation upon
tribulation, that they may deserve to have hope upon hope. As knowing that
tribulation works patience, patience probation, probation hope, and hope makes
not ashamed; and that i^ the outward man grow into decay, yet the inward man
may be renewed And that this light and momentary tribulation of yours at the
present, may work an eternal weight of glory in you, who care not for the
visible but for invisible things; for those things which are visible are
te^porall, but those which are invisible are eternal. And that the time will
not be long (though out impatience may think it so) but quickle they shall see
the help of God, saying to them. I have heard you in a fit time and I have
succored you in the day of salvation* and that crafty lips and wicked tongues
were not to be feared, but that we must rejoice in our Lord and helper; and
that we must hear him admonishing us thus by his Prophet: Fear not the
slanders of men, and be not troubled at their blasphemies; for the worm shall
consume them* as it would do^ a garment, and the ^oath shall devour them, as
if they were wool. And by your patience you shall possess your souls; And
The sufferinges of this life, are not worthy of that future glory which shall
be revealed in us. And in an other place; We must suffer tribulation upon
tribulation, that we may proceed with patience, in all thos^ things which
happen to us. For the patient man is full of wisdom; but he who is pufill
animous, is extremely a fool withal.

In her frequent infitmities, and sickenesses, she would say: When I am weak*
then am I strongest, and we keep a treasure in brickle vessels, till this
mortality of ours put on immortality, and this corruption be apparelled with
incorruption. And again: As the sufferinges of Christ have superabounded in
us* so also has consolation abou^ded in us, through Christ. And then again:
As you are companions in suffering, so shall you also be in receiving comfort.

In her sorrows she would say thus: Why, O my soul, (...) thou sad* and why
art thou troubled within me? Put thy trust in God, for still I will confess to
him, who is the health of my countenanc^, and my God. In her dangers she would
say: He that will come after me, must deny himself* and take up his Cross and
follow me. And again: He that will save his life shall loose it; and he that
for my ^ake, will be content to loose his life, shall save it. When she
suffered losses in her fortunes, and when the overthrow of all her patrimony
was declared to her, she said: But what does it profit a man, if he gain the
whole world* and hurt his own soul withal? What excha^ge shall a man give
for his soul? And; Naked I came out of my Mothers womb, and naked I shall
return; As it pleased our Lord so is it done, blessed be the name of our Lord.
And that other: Do not love the world, nor those things which are in the world,
for whatsoever is the world is the desire of the flesh the con^upiscence of the
eyes, and the pride of this life, which is not of the father* but of the world;
and the world passes with the co^cupiscenc^ thereof. For I know when her friends
wrote to her of the dangerous in^irmities of her children, and especially of
her Toxotius, whom she did most dearly love, and when she had effectually
fullfilled that saying, I am troubled, and have not spoken, she broke forth
with these words: He who loves his son, or his daughter more then me, is not
worthy of me. And praying to our Lord she said: Possess thou, O Lord, the
children of them who are mortifyed, and who mortify themselves daily for thy
sake.

I know a certain Whisperer (and this is a most pestilent race of people) who
told her under the color of good will* and care of her, that through the
excessive fervor of her virtue, she seemed mad to some; and that she were best
look to her head: to whom she answered thus; We are made a spectacle to the
world, to Angels, and to men; and we are fools for Christ, but the folly of
God, is wiser then men. Whereupon our Savior says to his Father: Thou know
my simplicity. And again: I am made like a kind of Monster to many, but thou
art my strong helper, I am made as a beast before thee, and I am ever with
thee. He, whom in the Gospel even his near friends sought to bind, like a
mad Man, and his adversaries did bitterly tax him, and say: He has a Devil,
and is a Samaritan; He casts out Devils in Beelzebub who is the prince of
Devils. But let us hear how the Apostle exhorts us, saying: This is our
glory, the testimony of our conscience, because we have conuersed in the world
with sanctity and sincerity, and in the grace of God. And let us hear our Lord
saying to the Apostles: Therefore does the world hate you, because you are not
of the world, for if you were, the world would love that which is his own. And
to our Lord himself she would be turning her words, and saying: Thou know
the hidden thoughts of the heart. And: All these things are come upon us,
neither yet have we forgott^n thee, nor have we done wickedly against thy will,
nor is our heart turned back from thee. And: For thee are we mortifyed all the
day long, and we are reputed as sheep, fit for slaughter. But Our Lord is my
helper, and I will not fear what man can do to me. For I have read, My son
honor thou our Lord, and thou shall be comforted, and besides our Lord, thou
shall fear none.

By these and the like testimonies of Scripture (as if it had been with some
armor of God) did she defend her self against all ill opposition; but
especially against cruel envy; and by suffering injuries, she would mitigate
the fury of their enraged minds. In a word, her patience did appear in all
things even to the day of her death: and so did the envy of others, which ever
gnawes upon the harbourer thereof; and whilst it strives to hurt the contrary
party it grows mad and most furious upon himself.

I will now speak of the order of her Monastery, and how she converted the
poverty of the Saints, into her own gain; She sowed carnal things, that
she might reap spiritual. She gave earthly things, that she might obtain
heavenly; she gave temporal things, that she might exchange them for
eternal. Besides a Monastery of men, which she assigned to be governed by men,
she gathered many Virgins together out of diverse Provinces; such as were very
noble, such as were of middle rank; and such as were of the meanest condition;
and these, she divided into three troops of Monasteries; but yet so, as that
being separated in their work, and in their food, yet in their Psalms and
prayers they were joined. As soon as the Alleluia was sung, which was the
sign whereby they were called together, it was lawful for none to forbear
coming. But Paula being either the very first, or at least one of the first,
would expect the arrival of the rest; provoking them so by her example to be
diligent; and working upon them, rather by the way of shame, then terror. In
the morning early, at the third hour, at the sixth* at the nynth, and at
midnight, they sung the Psaltery in order. Neither was it lawful for any of the
Sisters, to be ignorant of the Psalms, and not to learn somewhat daily of the
holy Scriptures. upon the Sundaies only, they went forth to Church, at the side
whereof they dwelt. And every troop followed their peculiar Mother, and from
thence returning together, they attended to the work which was appointed, and
made clothes either for themselves, or others. Such a one as were of the
nobler fort, was not permitted to have any companion of her own family, least
being mindful of former things they might refresh the ancient errors of
their idle youth, and renew them by often speech.

They went all in one habit or attire. They used no linne^ at all, but only
for the wiping of their hands. They were so perfectly separated from men* as
that she severed them even from Eunuchs also, least otherwise occasion might
have been given to ill tongued men, who are apt to carpe at Saints, for their
own greater privilege to sin. If any of them came later to the Quier, or
were more slack in working the^ the rest, she would set upon her several
ways. If she were choleric, by fair language; if she were patient, by
reprehension, imitating that of the Apostle, what will you have me do, shall I
come to you with the r^d, or in the spirit of ^enity and meekenes? Excepting
food and clothes, she suffered no one of them to have any thing, according to
S. Paul; Having food and clothes, be contented therewith, least by the custom
of having more, she should minister occasion to avarice, which is satisfied
with no wealth; and how much the more it has, so much the more does it
require; and it is not lessened either by plenty, or poverty Such as were
fallen out amongst themselves, she would unite, by her most mild manner of
speech.

As for the vnbridlednes of the younger sort, she would ^ame their flesh, with
frequent and double fasts, choosing rather to let their stomachs ache, then
their minds. If she saw some one of them any thing curious or choice, she would
reprove that error, by a contracted brow, and sad face, saying, That the
affected cleanlines of the body and of clothing, is uncleanness to the soul,
and that an indecent or immodest word, was never to proceed out of a virgins
mouth; for by those signs, a lustful mind is showed, and by the outward man,
the vices of the inward are declared. Whomsoever she observed to be tatling,
full of tongue, or forward, and delighted with brawles, and that being often
admonished, she did not mend, she would make her pray in the hindermost rank
and sometimes out of the community of the Sisters; and again at the doors of
the Refectory; and to eat alone: To the end that whom chiding could not mend,
shame might. She detested theft, like sacrilege. And whatsoever was accounted
either little, or nothing amongst secular people, that did she esteem to be a
most grievous crime in Monasteries*

What shall I say of her pity, and diligence about sick persons, whom she
cherished with strange obsequiousnes and service. And she who liberally
affoarded all things to sick folks, and would also give them flesh to eat;
whenever her self wa^sicke, she gave her self no such liberties; and in
that, seemed unjust, that being so full of pity to others, she exercised so
much severity upon her self* There was none of the younger sort healthful and
strong, who gave her self to so much abstinence, as Paula did with that broken
and aged and weak body of hers. I confess that in this point, she was
somewhat too peremptory; for she would not spare her self, nor hearken to any
admonition. I will tell you what I know by experience. In July, when the heates
were at the highest, she fell into a burning fever, and when by the mercy of
God she was recovering, after she had been despaired of; and the Physicians
were persuading her, that for the getting of some strength, she would use a
little wine, which was very small, least continuing to drink water, she might
grow hydropicke; and when I had privately desired the blessed Pope Epiphanius
to advise, or rather to compel her to drink wine, she as she was discret, and
of a quick piercing wit, did presently find that she was as it were betrayed;
and smiling, declared that that was my doing, which was his saying. To be
short, when the blessed Bishop, after having used much persuasion, was gone
forth, and I was asking her, what he had done, she answered, I have gone so
far as that almost I have persuaded the old man, that I might drink no wine.
I have related this particular, not that I allow of those burdens which are
undertaken inconsideratly, and above ones strength; for the scripture faith,
Take not a burdem upon thee; but only to the end that I may prove even hereby,
the ardour of her mind, and the desires of her faithful soul. And she said,
My soul thirst toward thee; and how plentifully does my flesh also thirst A
hard thing it is, to keep the mean in all things. And indeed, according to
that sentence of the Philosopher, virtue is in the mean, and excess is
reputed vicious; which we express by one short little sentence* Take not too
much of any thing.

She, who was so peremptory, and strict in the contempt of food; was tender in
the occasions of her grief; and was even defeated by the death of her friends,
and especially of her children For in the death both of her husband, and of her
daugters, she was ever in danger of her own life. And though she would Sign
both her mouth, and her breast, and procure to mollify a mothers grief by the
impression of the Cross, yet she was overcome by her affection; and those
bowels of a mother did even astonish her tender heart: and though she were a
conqueror in her mind; yet she was conquered, by the frailty of her body* And
once, upon such an occasion, a sickness taking hold of her, did possess her
for so long a time, that it gave care to us, and danger to her. But she
rejoiced, and said, Miserable creature that I am, who shall free me from the
body of this death?

But here the discreet Reader will say, that I writ matter of reproof, rather
then praise. I take Jesus to witness, whom she served in deed, and whom I serve
in desire, that I feign nothing on either side; but that I deliver truths, as
one Christian should do of another; and that I writ no panegyricke, but a story
of her, and that those things which go for vices in her, would be virtues in
an other. I call them vices according to the mind whereof I was, and to the
desire of all the sisters, and brothers who loved her, and are looking for her
now she is gone. But she has fulfilled her course, she has kept the faith*
and now enioyes the crown of justice* and follows the lamb wheresoever he
goes. She is now satisfied to the full, because she was hungry; and she sings
thus with joy; As we have heard, so have we seen it, in the City of the Lord
of power, in the City of our God.

O ble^ed change of things! she wept that she might for ever rejoice; she
despised these leaking cesternes, that she might find the fountain which is
our Lord. She wore a haircloath, that now she might be apparelled in white
roabes, and say, Thou have torn my sackloath, and have apparelled me with joy.
She fed upon ashes like bread, and she mingled her drink with tears, saying,
My tears were bread to me, day and night, that she might feed for ever upon
the bread of Angels, and sing, Taste and see how sweet our Lord i^. And My heart
has earnestly uttered a good word; I consecrat my works to the King. And she
saw those words of Esaias, or rather the words of our Lord by Esaias, fulfilled in
her self, Behold they who serve me* shall eat; but you shall be hungry: Behold
they who serve me, shall drink; but you shall be thirsty: Behold they who
serve me shall rejoice; but you shall be shamefully aflicted: Behold they who
serve me shall exult; but you shall cry out in the sorrow of your hearts, and
shall howl through the contrition of your spirit.

I was saying that she ever fled from those leaking Cesternes, that she might
find the fountain which is our Lord, and might sing with joy, As the heart
desires the fountaynes of water, so does mysoule aspire to thee, O my God: when
shall I come and appear before th^face of God? I will therefore briefly touch,
how she avoided those durty lakes of the heretics; and esteemed them to be no
better, there Pagans. A certain crafty old companion, and who in his own
opinion was a shrewd kind of scholar, began, without my knowledge, to propound
certain questions to her, and say, What sin has an Infant committed, that
he should be possessed by a Devil? It what age shall we be when we are to rise
from the dead? If in the age when we dye some of us will need nurses after the
resurrection: If otherwise, it will not be a resurrection of the dead, but a
transformation of them, into others. Besides, there will either be a diversity
of the Sexes of man and woman, or there will be none. If there be, it will
follow that there will be marriage, and carnal knowledge, yea and generation.
If there be not, then, taking away the difference of Sex, they will not be the
same bodies, which rise again: for an earthly habitation does aggrauate and
oppress the understanding, which has many things to think of; but they
shall be spiritual, and subtle, according to the Apostle, The body is sowed
carnal, and it shall rise spiritual. By all which he desired to prove that
reasonable souls, for certain vices and ancient sins, were slipped down
into bodies, and according to the diversity, and demerit of the same sins
were to be subject to such, or such a condition; so that either he should enjoy
health of body, or riches, and nobility of parents, or else should fall into
sick flesh; or ^ls by coming into poor^ houses, might pay the punishment of
those ancient sins, and be shut up in this present life, and in their bodies
as in a prison.

Which as soon as she had heard, and related to me, letting me know who the man
was, and that a necessity lay upon me, of resisting this most wicked viper, and
destroying the beast, who^ the Psalmist mentions saying, Do not deliver up to
beasts, the souls of such as confess to the; And Re^uke O Lord, these beasts
of the reed, who writing iniquity, do speak a ly against our Lord; and exalt
their mouths against the most high. I met with the man (and by his own
discourse, whereby he procured to deceive her, I shut him up, by asking him
this short question. Whether or no he believed the future resurrection of the
dead. When he had answered that he did, I pursued him thus; Shall the same
bodies rise? or shall they be other? When he had said the same; I asked him,
whether in the self same sex, or in another? Upon which question holding his
peace (and tossing his head too and fro, like some snake least he should be
hurt) because said I, you hold your peace, I will answer my self for you, and
infer the consequences. If a woman shall not rise as a woman, nor a man as a
man, there will be no resurrection of the dead. For the sex implies distinct
parts, and the parts make up a whole body; but if there be no sex, and parts;
what will become of the resurrection of bodies, which consist not without
parts, and sex? And then, if there be no resurrection of bodies, there can be
no resurrection of the dead. But as for that also, which you object towching
marriage, If they shall be the same parts, it must follow that there will be
marriage, it is answered by our Savior saying, You err, not knowing the
Scripture, not the virtue of God. For in the Resurrection of the dead, they
shall neither marry, nor be married but shall be like the Angels of God. In
that he says, they shall neither marry nor be married, the diversity of sex is
showed; for no man says of wood, or stone, that they shall neither marry, nor
be married; which are not capable of marriage; but of them who may marry, and
yet for bear to do it by the power and grace of Christ. If you reply and ask,
How then shall we be like to Angels, since among the Angels there is no
difference of male and female? I will answer you in few words. Our Lord does
not repromise to us the substance, but the conversation and felicity of
Angels. As John Baptist, even before he was beheaded, was called an Angel;
and all the Saints and Virgins of God, do express in themselves, the life of
Angels, even in this world. For when it is said: You shall be like to Angels,
a resemblance is promised, but the nature is not changed. And answer me
besides, how you interpret, that Thomas touched the hands of our Lord, after
the Resurrection, and saw his side boared through with a Lance? And* That Peter
saw our Lord, standing upon the shore, and eating part of a broyled fish and a
honey comb? Certainly, he who stood, had feet; he who showed a wounded side,
had doubtless a belly, and breast, without which he could not have sides, which
must be contiguous to them both. He who spoke, did speak with a tongue a
pall^, and with teeth. For as the quill has relation to the stringes, so the
tongue presses toward the teeth, and makes a vocal sound. He whose hands
were felt, must by consequence, have arms. Since therefore he was said to have
all the parts, he must necessarily have had the whole body* which is framed of
the parts, and that no feminine, but masculine, that is, of the sex wherein
he dyed. If now you shall reply, that by the same reason we must eat after the
Resurrection; and that our Lord entered in, when the doors were shut, against
the nature of true, and solid bodies: give ear a while. Do not draw our Faith
into reproach, by speaking of meat after the Resurrection. For our Lord bad
them give meat to the Daughter of the Archi^ynagogue, when she was raised again
to life. And Lazarus, who had been dead four days, is written to have fed
with him at the same table, least his Resurrection should be thought to be but
a conceit. But if because he entered in while the doors were shut, you would
therefore strive to prove, that his body was but aeriall and spiritual; by the
same reason it must also have been but spiritual, before he suffered, because
he walked then upon the Sea, which is contrary to the nature of weighty bodies.
And the Apostle Peter, who also walked upon the waters with a wavering pace,
must be believed to have had but a spiritual body, whereas the strength and
power of God, is showed more, when any thing is done against nature. And to the
end that you may know, that by the greatness of wonders, not the change of
nature, but the omnipotency of God is showed; he who walked by faith, began by
in fidelity to sink down, unless the hand of our Lord had kept him up, when he
said: Why do thou doubt, O thou of little faith? But I marvel that you
will have so obstinate a mind when our Lord himself did say: Bring in thy
finger hither* and touch my hands; and reach forth thy hand, and put it into
my side, and be not incredulous, but believe. And else where: See my hands and
my feet, for it is I. Feel and see, for a spirit has no flesh and bones* as
you see I have. And when he had said so, he showed them his hands and his feet.
I tell you of bones, and flesh, and hands, and feet; and you come talking to
me of Globes of the Stoickes, and certain doting fancies of the air. But if
now you ask me, Why an infant who never sinned, is possessed by a Devil? or of
what age we shall be, wh^ we rise again, since we dye of several ages? I
shall answer you good cheap with this; The judgments of God are a great
abyss* And O the altitude of the riches of the wisdom, and knowledge of God
how inscrutable are his judgments, and how unsearchable his ways? For who has
known the sense of our Lord, or who has been called by him to counselle.

But the diversity of ages, does not change the truth of bodies. For since our
bodies do continually change, and either increase, or decrease, we shoud, by
that reason, be every one of us, many men, as we daily undergo changes; and I
was an other being ten years old, an other at thirty, an other at fifty, an
other now that I have my whole head full of hoary hairs. Therefore according to
the traditions of the Churches, and of the Apostle Paul, we must answer thus.
That we shall rise in perfe^t man, in the measure of the age of the fulness of
Christ; in which age the Jews conceive Adam was created, and when we read that
our Lord and Savior rose again; besides many other proofs, which I brought
out of both Testame^ts, wherewith to stra^gle the heretic. And from that time
Paula did so begin to detest the man, and all them, who were of his doctrine,
that she proclaimed them with a loud voice, to be the enemies of our Lord Now
these things I have mentioned, not that I would briefly confute the heresy,
which is to be answered in many volumes, but to the end I might show the faith
of so great a woman, as she was, who chose rather to undergo the continual
emnities of men, then to provoke the wrath of God, by entertayning such
friendships as were faulty.

I will therefore say as I began, there was nothing more docile then her wit.
She was slow to speak, and swift to hear, as being mindful of this precept,
Hearken, O Israel, and hold thy peace. She had the holy Scriptures without
book. And though she loved the historical part thereof, and said that it was
the foundation, and the ground of truth; yet she did much more affect the
spiritual meaning of it and by that high sense she secured the edificatio^ of
her soul. In fine she compelled me, that together with her daughter, she might
read over both the old Testament, and the new, whilst I expounded it. Which I
denying at the first for modesties sake, yet at last, in regard of her frequent
desires, I was content to teach that, which I had learnt of my self; that is
to say I learnt it not of presumption, which is the worst Master of all others,
but of the most illustrious men of the Church. If at any time I were at a
stand, and did ingenuously confess mine own ignorance, she would never leave
me in peace, but by a perpetual kind of demand, compel me to declare, out of
many various opinions which seemed the most probable to me.

I will also speak of another particular which in the eye of envious persons
will seem to have somewhat of the incredible. She had a mind to learn the
Hebrew tongue, which I had gotten in some measure with much labor and sweat,
from my very youth; and even yet I do not forsake the study, with a kind of
indefatigable meditation thereof, least I should grow to be forsaken by it. And
she also has so obtained this tongue, as that she can read the psalms in
Hebrew, and pronounce the language, without any accent of the Latin tongue,
which we also see even to this day in her holy daughter Eustochium, who ever so
adhered to her mother, and so lived under her coma^dments, that she never
lodged, nor fed, nor went without her, nor had one penny in her power, but did
rejoice to see that little fortune which was left of her Fathers and Mothers
patrimony, to be bestowed by her Mother, upon poor folks; and she esteemed
the duty she ought her parent, to be her greatest inheritance and riches.

I must not pass over in silence with how great joy she did eue^ exult, when
she heard that her gra^dchild the young Paula, who was begotten and borne of
Leta, and Toxotius* yea and conceived with a desire, and promise from them
both, of future chastity, did sing forth Allelluia with her stammering tongue,
in her cradle, in the midst of other childish toys; and did break forth the
names of her grandmother, and her aunt, by half words. In this alone, she had
still a desire concerning her country, to know that her son, her daughter in
law, and her grandchild, had renounced the world, and served Christ our Lord:
which in part she has obtained; for her grandchild is reserved to wear the
veil of Christ. Her daughter in law, delivered her self over to eternal
chastity; her son in law follows on in faith, alms, and other good works;
and endeavors to express that at Rome, which she has accomplished at
Jerusalem.

But what do we* O my soul? why fear thou to come so far as her end?
Already the book is grown big, whilst we fear to come to this last cast; as
if whilst we conceal it, and employ our selves upon her praises, we were able
to put off her death. Hitherto we have sailed with a fore-wind, and our sliding
ship has plowed up the crisping waves of the Sea at ease. But now my discourse
is falling upon rocks, and I am in such danger of present ship wrack, as
makes me say, Save us, Master, for we perish; And again, Rise up O Lord, why
do thou sleep. For who can with dry eyes speak of Paula dying? She fell into
extreme indispositio^; or rather she found what she sought in leaving us, and
in being more fully joined to our Lord. In which sickness, the approved dear
affection of the daughter Eustochium to her mother, was more confirmed in the
eyes of al She would be sitting upon the beds side, she would hold the fan,
to move the air; she would bear up her head, apply the pillow, rub her
feet, cherish her stomach with her hand, compose her bed, warm water for her,
bring the basin, and prevent all the maids in those services; and whatsoever
any other had done, to hold that she her self had lost so much of her own
reward. With what kind of prayers, with what kind of ^tations and groans,
would she be shooting her self swiftly up and down, between that cave where
our Lord had been laid, and her mother lying in her bed? that she might not be
deprived of such an inestimable conversation, that she might not live an hour
after her; and that the same Bier might deliver them both up to one burial.
But O frail and caduke nature of mortal men! for unless the faith of Christ
raised up to heaven, and that the eternity of the soul were promised, our
bodies would be subject to as mean condition, as beasts, and they of the
basest kind. The same death seises upon the just, and wicked man; upon the good
and bad; the clean and the unclean; him who sacrifices, and him who
sacrifices not: as the good man, so him who sins; as him who swears, so him
who fears to swear an oath. Both men and beasts are dissolved into dust* and
ashes, after the same manner.

Why do I make any further pause, and increase my sorrow by prolonging it? This
most wise of women found, that death was at hand* and that some part of her
body, and of her limbs being already cold, there was only a little warmth of
life, which weakly breathed in her holy breast; and yet nevertheless, as if she
had been but going to visit her friends. and take her leave of strangers, ^he
would be whispering out those verses; O Lord, I have loved the (...) order of
thy house, and the place of the habitation of thy glory. And; How belou^d are
thy tabernacles, O God of power; my soul has even saynted, with an amorous
kind of desire of entering into the Court of thy house. An^ I have chosen ^o be
an abject in the house of my God, rather then to dwell in the tabernacles of
si^. And when, upon occasion, I would be asking her why she was silent, and
would not answer? and whither she were in any pain or no? she answered me in
Greek, That she had no trouble, but that she saw all things before her, in
tranquillity and peace. After this, she was silent and shutting her eyes, as one
who, by this time, despised mortal things, she repeated those verses
aforesaid, but yet so, that it was as much as we could do to hear her: and
then applying her finger to her mouth, she made the sign of a Cross, upon her
lips. Her spirit fainted* and panted apace toward death; and her soul even
earnest to break out, she converted the very rattling of her throat* wherewith
mortal creatures use to end their life, into the praises of our Lord. There
were present* the Bishops of Jerusalem, and of other Cities, and an
innumerable multitude of Priests, and Levites of inferior rank. All the
Monastery was filled with whole Quiers of virgins* and Monks. And as soon as
she heard the Spouse calling thus, Rise up and come, O the my neighbor, my
beautiful creature, and my dove; for behold the winter is spent, and past and
the ray^e (...) go^, ^he answered thu^ with joy* (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
i^ our land, the time of pruning (...) land of the li^ing*

From that time forward, there was n^ lamentation, nor doleful cry, as is
wont to be upon the death of men of this world; but there (...) who^ swarms of
people, who ch^ed out the Psalme^ in different tongues. And Paula* body, being
translated by the hands of Bishops, (...) they bending the^ necks under the
Bier, whilst some other Bishops carried lamps, and tapers before the body*
and others led on the Quiers of them who sung, she was laid in the middle of her
Church of the Nativity of our B. Savior. The whole troop of the Cities of
Palaestine came in, to her funeral. Which of the most hidden Moncks of the
wilderness, was kept in by his Cell? which of the virgins, was then hidden up by
the most secret room she had? He thought himself to oomi^ sacrilege, who
performed not that last Office, to such a creature. The widows and the poor*
after the example of D^cas, showed the clothes which she had given them. The
whole multitude of needy people cried out, that they had lost their mother and
their nurse. And which is strange, the palenes of death had not ^anged her face
at all; but a certain dignity and dece^ did so possess her countenance, that
you would not have thought her dead, but sleeping. The Psalms were sounded
forth in order, in the Hebrew, and Greek, and Latin* and in the Syrian tongue;
not only for those three days, till her body was interred, under the Church*
and near the cave of our Lord; but during the whole week all they who came in,
did the like believing best in those funerals which themselves made, and in
their own tears. The venerable virgin, her daughter Eustochium, like an
infant weaned from her nurse, could scarce be drawn from her mother. She
kissed her eyes* and even adhered to her face, and embraced her whole body, and
even would (...) been buried with her mother. I take Jesus to witne^, that
there* remained not one penny to her daughter; but as I said before, she left
her deeply in debt; and (which yet is matter of more difficulty) an immense
multitude of brothers and sisters, whom it was hard to feed, and impious to put
away*

What is more (...) of a most noble family* d^d (...) with a h^ge (...)* should
have given away all she had, with so great faith* (...) ^o be come almost to
the very extremity of poverty* (...) others brag of their moneys, and of alme*
^ast into the poor man box* and of the Presents which they (...) ^ung* ^in
^pes of gold. No one has given more to the poor* then she (...) (...) nothing
to her self. Now, ^he (...) riches, and those good things, which neither the
^ye has see^* nor the care has heard, nor has it ascended into the heart of
man* We lament our own c^e, and we shall seem but to envy her glory, if we
lament her longer, who is reigning. Be you secure, O Bustochium, that you are
enriched with a great inheritance. Our Lord is your part; and to the end that
your joy may be the more complet, your mother is crowned with a long
martyrdom. For not only is the effusion of blood reputed for such a
confession, but the unspotted service of a devout mind, is a daily martyrdom.
The former crown is wreathed, and made of roses, and violets, the later of
lillies. Whereupon it is written in the, Canticle of Canticles, My beloved is
whit and red; bestowing the some rewards upon such as overcome, whether it be
in peace, or war. Your mother heard these words with Abraham; Go forth of thy
country; and of thy kindred, and come into the land, which I will show the; and
she heard our Lord commanding thus by Jeremy* Fly you out of the middle of
Babylon and save your souls. And till the very day of her death, she returned
not into Chaldea, nor did she cover the pots of Egypt, nor that stinking
flesh; but being acco^panyed with quier^ of Virgins, is made a fellow-Citizen
of our Savior; and ascending up to those heau^ly kingdoms from the little
Bethleem, she says to that true N^mi, Thy People is my people, and thy God my
God.

I have dictated this book for you, at two sittings up* with the same grief
which you self susteynes. For as often as I put my self to writ, and to
perform the work which I had promised, so often did my fingars grow numme,
my hand faynted, my wit failed, and even my unpolished speech, so far from
any elegancy or conceit of words, does witness well in what case the writer was*
Farewell O Paula, and help thou by thy prayers, this last part of his old age,
who bears thee a religious reu^. Thy faith and work^; ha^ joined thee in
society to Christ; and now being present, thou will more easily obtain what
thou desire. I have finished thy monnment, which no age will be able to
destroy. I have cut thy Elogium upon thy sepulcher: and I have placed it at the
foot of this volume, that wheresoever our work shall arrive, the Reader may
understand, that thou were praised, and that thou art buried in Bethleem.

The Title written on the Tomb*
She, whom the Paul^'s got, the Scipio's (...),
The Graccho's, and great (...) race,
Lies here inter^'d, called Paula heretofore,
Eustochiums mother, Court of Romes chief grace.
Seeks for Christ poor, and Bethlems rural face.
Written upon the Front of the Grot.
See thou cut out of rock, this narrow (...)?
T*is Paulas house, who now in heaven ra^nes;
And leaving brother, kindred, country, Rome,
Children, and wealth, in Bethlems gr^t remaynes.
Here i^ thy crib, O Christ, (...) (...)
The Mag^ Presents brought, to God (...).
The holy and blessed Paul^, departed this life upon the seventh of the
Kalends of February, on the Tuesday after Sunset. She was buried on the fifth
of the Kalends, of the same month, Ho^rius Augustus being the sixth time
Consul, and fellow Consul with Arist^ius. She lined in her holy purpose five
years at Rome, and twenty years at Bethleem. She had in all, fifty (...)
years of age, eight months, and one and twenty days.

S. Hierome to Nepotianus of the life which a Priest ought to lead. Whereof I
have omitted the former part or rather Preface, which is both very long, and
but personal, and not belonging at all to the chief matter in hand, which is;
what li^es Priests a^ to le^d.
HEARKEN, as the Blessed Cyprian aduises, not to such things as are eloquently
delivered; but to such as have strength and truth in them: Hearken to him, who
in function is your brother, in age your father, who brings you from the
swathing clou^es of faith, to a perfect age, and who setting down rules
throughout all the steps of your life, may instruct others also, by your
means. I well know, that both already you have learned such things as are
holy, and that you are daily learning them, of the Blessed man Heliodorus, your
uncle, who is now a Bishop of Christ; and the example of whose virtue, may be
the very rule of a man's life. But yet accept of these our endeauours how poor
soever they may be, and join you this book to his; that as he instructed you
how you might be a Monk, this may teach you how to be a perfect Priest.

A Priest therefore, who serves the Church of Christ, let him first interpret
that word; and when he has defined the same, let him strive to be that very
thing, which the word signifyes For if the word (...) in greek, do signify
portion in Latin, then it will follow, that Priests are called so, either
because they are of the portion of our Lord, or else because our Lord is the
portion or part of Priests. But he who either is the part of our Lord, or who
has our Lord for his p^rt, ought to show himself to be such an one, as that
he possesses our Lord, and is possessed of our Lord. He who possesses our Lord,
and says with the Prophet, Our Lord is my part, can possess nothing but our
Lord; and if he will have any thing besides him, our Lord will not be his part.
As for example, if he will have gold, silver, or choice of costly household
stuff, our Lord with these Parts, will not voutchafe to be his Part. And if
I be the part of our Lord, and the bounder whereby his inheritance is measured
and do not take a Part amongst the rest of the Tribes, but as a Leuit and
Priest, do live of the Tenthes, and s^ruing the Altar do live upon the
oblations of the Altar, if I may have food, and clothing, I will be content
therewith, and being naked I will follow the naked Cross, I beseech you
therefore, and repeating my suit to you again and again, I will admonish you,
that you think not the O (...) of Priesthood, to be a kind of warefare, after
the old fashion; that is to say that you seek not the commodities of the world
in the warfare of Christ, and that you procure not to be richer, then when you
began to be a Priest, and that it be not said of you, Their Priests have not
(...) of profit to them. For many have been richer being Monks, then when they
were secular persons and Priests. There are some who possess more riches now
in the service of Christ being poor, then formerly they possessed by their
service under the rich and false devil: and the Church does even groan with
their being rich, whom before, the world knew for beggars.

Let your table be frequented by poor people, and Pilgrims; and let Christ be
a guest with them. See you fly as you would do the plague, any Priest who is a
negociator of affairs, and who grows rich of poor, and glorious instead of
base. Ill speech corrupts good manners. You contemn gold, an other man loves
it; you tread riches under your feet, an other man hunts after it; you
cordially love silence, meekenes, recollection, but another likes prating, and
bouldnes, and takes no pleasure but in streates, marketplaces, fayres, and to
be sitting in Apothecaryes shoppes. In such a difference of manners, what
agreement can there be?

Let your house either seldom or never be trodden upon by woemens feet; and be
you either equally ignorant, or do you equally like, all the maids and
virgins of Christ. Do not dwell with them under the same roof, and presume
not upon your former chastity. You are not holyer then David, no^ can you be
wiser then Solomon. Be ever remembering, how a woman cast the inhabitant of
Paradise out of his possession. When you are sick, let some devout brother of
yours assist you and some sister, or your mother, or some other woman, who is
of untouched ^ame, with the world. If you have not perhapes of your
consaguinity, who are withal of piety, the Church entertaines many old widows,
who may perform that duty, and receive some benefit by their service; that so
your sickness may also enable you to gather their fruit of alms. I know of
some, who have recovered in body, and begun to fall sick in mind. She
affoardes you a dangerous kind of service, upon whose countenance, you are
often looking with attention. If in regard you are a Priest* some Virgin or
widow must needs be visited by you, yet never go into their house alone. Take
such company with you, as may not defame you by their society. If some ^ector,
or some Acolytus or some other who has the Office of singing in the Church
follow you* let them not be adorned with clothes, but good conditions; no^
have they hair curled with irons, but promise virtue by the very appearance of
their persons. Sit never with any woman alone in secret, and without some
witness or looker on. If you be to say any thing in familiar manner, the woman
has some aun^ent person belonging to the house, or some Virgin, or wi^e, or
widow, she is not so inhumane, as that she has none besides you with whom she
dares trust her self. See you be careful of giving no ground to suspicions,
and procure to prevent whatsoever may probably be devised against you. A holy
affection does no^ admit the use of frequent Presents and handkerchi^es* and
scar^es, and garments which have been kissed, and meat which has been ^sted
to your hand, nor ^he changing of certain dear delightful letters. These
words, My light, my h^ny, my desire, and all those delicacies, and conceits
and certain ciuilities, which deserve to be derided, and the rest of those
^oyes of lovers we blush at even in Comedies, we detest even in secular men*
and therefore how much more are we to do it in the case of Monks, and
Priests, whose Priesthood is adorned by their Chastity, and their Chas^y by
their Priesthood. Neither do I say thus much, as fearing these things in you,
or in holy men, but because there are found good, and bad, in every course, in
every degree, and sex, and the condemnation of ^he wicked serves for the
comendation of the good. I am ashamed to speak of these men, who might better
be the Priests of Idols.

I esters, carters, and queanes may inherit lands; only Priests, and Monks
may not: and this is prohibited, not by persecutours, but by Christian Princes.
Nor do I complain against the law, but I am sorry we have deserved, that such
a law should be made. A caute^y is a good remedy, but why should I have a
wound, which must stand in need of such a cure. The caution of the law is not
only provident but severe; yet covetousness is not bridled even thereby. We
ouerreach the laws by certain deeds made in trust; and as if the Ordinations
of Emperors were of more authority then they of Christ: we fear their laws,
and we contemn his Ghospels. Let there be an heir, but withal let there be
the mother of the children; that is to say, the Church of the flock, which
has br^d, nourished, and ^ed them. Why do we interpose our selves between the
mother and the children? It is the glory of a Bishop, to prouid for the
commodities of poor people, and it is the ignominy of Priests to atte^d to
acquire riches. I who was borne in a poor house, or rather in a country
cottage, who scarce had means to fill my windy stomach with the basest
grain, and ry^ bread, can now scarce think of the finest flower, and honey,
with contentment. I am also come to know the names, and kinds of fishes; yea
and upon what part of the coast, such a shell fish was taken; and in the taste
of foul I decerne the difference of countries; and the rarity of those meats.
yea and even the very hurt they do men by dearly buying the^. delights me.

I understand besides, that some Priests, perform certain base services to old
men and women, who have no children. They hold the spitting basin, they
beseige ^he bed round about, and they take sometimes, the fleame of the lungs.
and the rotten filth of the stomach, in their very hands. They tremble when
the Physician comes to make his visit, and their lip^ shake with fear, when
they ask him, if the sick man be mended; and if the old man, chance to be
grown better or stronger, themselves are ind^ngered by it* For taking a face of
joy upon them, their covetous mind is rackt within; as fearing least they may
loose their hope of gain, but then again they will needs compare the lively
old man, to Mathusalem, O how great would their reward be, at the hand of God,
if they expected no reward in this life! What sweating does the getting of such
a poor inheritance cost! the pearl of Christ, might be sought at an easyer
rate.

Be diligent in reading the holy Scriptures, or rather, let that divine book
be never laid out of your hands. Learn^ that which you ar^ to teach. Procure
to be able to use that faithful speech, which is according to knowledge, that
you may be able to exhort men, with sound doctrine, and so confute such as
contradict you. Stand fast in those things which you have learned, and which
are committed to you in trust, a^ knowing of whom you learned them; and be
ever ready to give satisfaction to all such as demand a reason at your hands,
of that faith and hope which is in you. Let not your ill deeds put your words
out of countenance; least some body who hears you speak at Church, make this
answer to you within himself; Why do you not practice what you say? He is a
delicate instructor, who discourses of fasting, when his belly is full. Even a
murdering thief may be able to cry out against covetousness. Let the mind and
the hands of the Priest of Christ keep correspondence with his mouth.

Be subject to your Bishop, and reuere him as the Father of your soul. It is
for a son to love, and for a slave to fear. If I be thy Father, says he,
where is mine honor; if I be thy Lord, where is that fear which is due to me?
In his person which is but one, there are many several titles to be considered
by you: a Monk, a Bishop, an Uncle of your own, who already has instructed
you, concerning all good things. You shall also know, that Bishops must
understand themselves to be Priests, and not Lords; let them honor Priests,
as Priests* that Priests may defer all due honor to them, as to Bishops*
That of the Orator Domitius is vulgarly known; Why should I carry my self
toward you, as toward a Prince, when you regard not me as a Senator? That
which Aaron and his sons were, in relation to one an other, that must the
Bishop, and the Priests be. There is one Lord, and one Temple, and the mystery
also must be one. Let us ever remember what the Apostle Peter enioyneth
Priests; Feed that flock of our Lord, which is among you, providing for it
according to God, not after a compuls^ne, but free and cheerful manner, not
for filthy lucres sake, but willingly; nor as exercising dominion over the
Clergy, but after the form of a shepherd over his flock, to the end that
when the Prince of Pastors shall appear, you may receive an immarcessible
crown of glory.

It is an extreme ill custom in some Churches, that Priests are silent, and
refuse to speak in the presence of Bishops, as if Bishops enuyed them so much
honor, or would not voutchsafe to hear them. But S. Paul says, If a thing be
revealed to any man who sits by, let the former hold his peace. For you may
prophecy by turns, that all may learn, and all may be comforted, and the
spirit of Prophets, is subject to Prophets; for God is not a God of dissension,
but of peace. It is a glory to the Father, when he has a wise son, and let a
Bishop take comfort in his own judgment, when he has chosen such Priests,
for the service of Christ. When you are preaching in the Church, let not the
people make a noise, but let them profoundly sigh. Let the tears of yours
Auditors, be your praise. Let the discourse of a Priest, be seasoned by
reading holy Scripture. I will not have you a declamer, nor a iangler, nor to
be full of talk without reason; but skillfull in the mysteries, and most
excellently instructed in the Sacraments of your God. It is the use of
unlearned men, to toss words up and down, and by a swift kind of speech, in
the ears of an unskillful Auditory, to hunt after admiration* A bold man will
interpret many times he knows not what, and in the persuasion which he uses to
others, he arrogates the reputation of knowledge to himself. Gregory Nazianzen
mine old Master, being desired by me to expound what that Sabbath, called
(...), meant in Luke, he did elegantly allude thus; I will instruct you about
this business when we are at Church; where the whole people applauding me, you
shall be forced whether you will or no, to know that, whereof you are ignoran^
now. There is nothing so easy, as to deceive a poor base people, and an
unlearned assembly, by volubility of speech, which admires whatsoever it
understands not. Marcus Tullius (of whom this excellent Elogium was used,
Demosthenes deprived you of being the first Orator, and you him of being the
only Orator) says that in his Oration for Quintus Gallus, concerning the
favor of the people, and such as speak absurdly before them, which I would
feign have you mark, least you should be abused by these errors. I speak of
that, whereof my self have lately had experience. A certain (...), a man of
name and learned (who made certain Dialogues of Poets and Philosophers) when
in one and the same place, he bringes in Euripides, and Menander, and Socrates,
and Epicurus, discoursing altogether one with another, whom yet we know to have
lived, not only at different times, but in different ages, what applauses and
acclamations did he move? For in the Theater, he had many condisciples who
performed not their studies together.

Be as careful to avoid black course clothes as white. Fly from affected
ornaments, at as full speed, as you would do from affected uncleanness; for the
one of them savors of delicacy, the other has a taste of vain glory. It is a
commendable thing, I say not, to use no linen, but not be worth any: for
otherwise it is a ridiculous thing, and full of infamy to have the purse well
filled, and then to brag, that you are not worth so much as a handkerchiue.
There are some who give some little thing to the poor, to the end that they
may receive more, and some man seeks after wealth, under the pretense of using
Charity; which is rather to be accounted a kind of hu^ting then almes-giuing.
So are beasts and birds, and so are fishes taken. Some little bayte is laid
upon the hook, that the money bag of the Matrons, may be brought forth upon
that hook.

Let the Bishop, to whom the care of the Church is committed, consider whom
he appointes to ouersee the dispensation of goods, to the poor. For it is
better for a man not to have any thing to give away, then impudently to beg
somewhat, for himself to hide. Nay it is a kind of arrogance, for one to seem
more meek, and merciful then the Priest of Christ is. We cannot all do all
things; some one is an eye in the Church, an other is a tongue, an other a
hand, an other is a foot, an ear, or a belly* and so forth. Read the Epistle
of Paul to the Corinthians, How diverse members serve to constitute on^ body.
But yet let not the rusticke, and simple man, think himself to be holy,
because he knows nothing; nor if a man be eloquent and skillfull, must he
esteem that he has as much sanctity, as he has tongue; and of the two
defects, it is much better that he have a holy rudenes, then a sinful
eloquence.

Many build up walls, and raise pillars in Churches, the marbles shine, the
roofes glister with gold, the Altar is set with precious stones; and the while,
no care is taken, to chose fit Ministers for Christ. Let no man object to me,
that rich temple of the Jews, the Table, the Lamps, the Incensories, the
Basins, the Cups, the Morters, and other things* made of gold. Then were
these things approved by our Lord, when the Priest did immolat sacrifices, and
when the blood of beasts was the redemption of sins. Though all these things
did go before in figure, yet they were written for our instruction, upon wh^
the ends of the world are come. But now, when our Lord, by being poor, has
dedicated the poverty of his house, let us think upon his Cross, and esteem
of riches, as of dirt. What marvel is it, that Christ called riches by the
name of unjust Mammon? Why should we admire and love that, which Peter does
even after a kind of glorious manner profess himself not to have? For other
wise, if we only follow the letter, and that yet the appearance of the history,
speaking of gold and riches, delight us; then together with the gold let us
take up other things too; and let the Bishop of Christ, marry virgins, and
make them their wives. If that argument, I say, be to hold, then let him who
has any skarre, or other corporal deformity be deprived of his Priesthood,
though he have a virtuous mind, and let the leprosy of the body be accounted a
worse thing then the vices of the soul Let us increase, and multiply, and fill
the earth, and let us not sacrifice the lamb* nor celebrat the mystical
Pascha, because these things are forbidden by the law, to be done any other
where, then in the Temple. Let us fasten the tabernacle in the seventh month,
and let us chant out the solemn fast, with the sound of the cornet. But now if
comparing all these to spiritual things and knowing with Paul; that the law
is spiritual; and that the words of David are true, who sings thus; Open thou
mine eyes, and I will consider the wonderful things of thy law; we understand
them as our Lord also understood them, and as he interpreted the Sabbath;
either let us despise gold with the rest of the superstitions of the Jews; or
else if we shall like gold, let us also like the Jews, whom of necessity we
must either like, or dislike; together with the gold.

The Feasting of secular persons, and especially of such as swell up in high
place of honor, must be avoided by you. It is an ugly thing, that before the
doors of a Priest of Christ crucified, (who was so poor, and had no meat of
his own) the Officers of Co^suls, and bands of soldiers should stand waiting;
and that the governor of the Province should dine better at your house, then
at the Court. And if you shall pretend, ^at you do such things as these, to
the end that you may obtain favor for inferior and miserable people; know
that a temporal Judge will defer more to a mortifyed Priest, then to a rich
one; and will carry more veneratio^ to your virtue, the^ to your wealth. Or if
he be such a one, as that he will not favor Priests speaking for afflicted
persons, but when he is in the midst of his cups, I shall be well content to
want the obtaining of such a suit; and will pray to Christ in steed of the
Judge, who can help me better, and sooner then he. It is better to confide in
our Lord, then to confide in man. It is better to hope in our Lord, then to
hope in Princes. Se that your breath do not so much as smell of wine, least you
deserve to hear that saying of the Philosopher, This is not to give me a
kiss, but to drink to me in wine. As for Priests, who are winebibbers, both
the Apostle condemns them, and the old Law forbids them, saying, They who
serve at the Altar, must drink no wine, or Sicera; by which word Sicera; in
the hebrew tongue, al such drinks are meant, whereby any man may be inebriated;
whether they be made of wheat, or of the joyce of fruit, or when together with
fruit they take honey, and make a sweet and barbarous potion thereof, or else
strain the fruit of palms till they yield liquore; or by the boiling up of
corn, give a different color and strength to water. Whatsoever may inebriat,
and overthrow the state of the mind, you must avoid, with as much care, as you
would do wine. Neither yet do I say this, as condemning the creature of God,
since our Lord himself was called a drinker of wine; and the taking of a
little wine was permitted to the weak stomach of Timothy; but we require a
moderation in the use thereof, according to the quality of constitutions, and
to the proportion of age, and health. But yet, if without wine I burn with
youth, and am inflamed by the heat of my blood, and am endued with a young and
a strong body, I will gladly spare that cup, wherein there is suspicion of
poison. It sounds elegantly in Greek, but I know not whether it will carry the
same grace with us, A fat full belly, does not beget a slender and well
proportioned mind.

Impose as great a measure of fasting upon your self; as you are able to
bear. Let you Fasts be pure, chaste, simple, moderat, and not superstitious. To
what purpose is it, that a man will needs forbear the use of Oil; and then
undergo certain vexations, and difficulties, how to get and make meat, which
he may eat; as dried figs, pepper, nuts, the fruit of palms, honey, and
pistacho's? The whole husbandry of the kitchen gardens is vexed from one end to
the other, that forsooth we may be able to absteyne from so much as rye bread;
and whilst we hunt after delicacies, we are drawn back from the kingdom of
heaven. I hear besides, that there are certain persons, who contrary to the
nature of men and other creatures, will drink no water, and eat no bread; but
they must have certain delicat little drinks, and shred herbs, and the joyce
of beetes; and that forfooth, they will not drink in a cup, but needs in the
shell of some fish. Fie upon this shameful absurdity, and that we blush not at
these follies; and are not weary with scorn of these superstitions, besides
that we seek for a fame of abstinence, even in the use of delicacy. The most
strong fast of all others, is of bread and water. But because it carries not
such honor with it, because we all live with the use of water and bread, it is
scarce thought to be a fast, in regard that it is so usual and common. Take
heed you hunt not after certain little estimations of men, least you make
purchase of the people praise with the offense of God. If yet (says the
Apostle) I should please men, I should not be the servant of Christ. He ceased
from pleasing men, and became the servant of Christ. The soldier of Christ
marches on, both through good fame and bad, both by the right hand and by the
left; and is nether extolled by praise, nor is he beaten down by dispraise. He
does not swell up with riches, nor is he extenuated by poverty; and he
contemnes both those things, which might gain him joy, and those also which
may afflict. The son burns him not by day, nor the Moon by night.

I will not have you pray in the co^nes of streets, least the air of a
popular fame should divert you prayers, from the right way to their Iournyes
end. I will not have you enlarge the borders, nor make ostentatio^ of the
skirtes of you garments, and against your conscience to be environed by a
Pharisaicall kind of ambition. How much better were it, not to carry these
things in the exterior, but at the heart* and to obtain favor in the sight of
God, rather then in the eyes of men? Hereupon hang the Gospel, hereupon the
law and the Prophets, and the holy and Apostolical doctrine; for it is better
to carry all these things in the mind, then in the body. You who read this
faithfully with me according to a faithful and right intention, do understand
even that which I conceal; and which I speak so much the louder, even because
I am silent. You must have an eye to as many rules, as you may be tempted with
kinds of glory.

Will you know what kind of ornaments our Lord desires to se in you? Procure to
have Prudence, Justice, Temperance, and Fortitude. Be you enclosed by these
coasts of the sky. Let this chariot of four horses carry you on with speed,
to the end of the race, (...) the chariot driuenes by Christ. There is nothing
more precious then this Jewel, nothing more beautiful then the variety of
these precious stones. You shall be beautifyed on every side; you shall be
compassed in, and protected; they will both defend you, and adorn you, and
these gemmes will become bucklers to you.

Take you also heed, that you neither have an itching tongue, nor eats; that is
to say, that neither your self detract from others, nor that you endure to
hear detracters. Sitting (says he) thou spakest against thy brother, and thou
laydst scandal before the son of thy mother; these things did thou. and
I held my peace. Thou did wickedly think, that I would be like thee: but I
will reprove the before thy face. Take care that you have not a detracting
tongue, and be watchful over your words; and know that you are judged by your
own conscience, in all those things which you speak of others, and of those
things, which you condemned in other folks, your self is found guilty. Nor is
that a just excuse, when you say that you do no wrong, when you do but hear
the report of others* No man reports things to an other, who hears them
unwillingly. An arrow enters not into a stone; but starting back, sometimes it
hurts him who shot it. Let the detracter learn, that he is not to detract in
your hearing, whom he finds to hear him so unwillingly. Do not mingle your
self, says Solomon, with detractours, because his destruction shall come
suddenly, and who knows how soon they shall both be ruined, that is to say,
he who ^tracts, and he who gives audience to detracters. It is your duty to
visit the sick, to be well acquainted with the houses of Matrons and their
children, and to keep safe the secret of great persons. It is your duty not
only to have chaste eyes, but a chaste tongue also.

You must never dispute nor argue of the beauties of women; nor ever let any
house understand by you, what has passed in any other house. Hippocrates
adjured his disciple before he taught them, and made them swear to follow his
directions* and commanded them religiously to promise silence; and prescribed
the speech, the gate, the habit, and the conversation, which they were to use.
How much more must we, to whom the charge of souls is committed; love the
houses of all Christians, as our own. Let them know us to b^ rather comforters
of them in their aflictions, then companions and feasters with them in their
prosperity. That Priest is ordinarily contemned, who being often invited to
dinner, does not refuse to go. Let us never desire to be invited, and even when
we are invited, let us go seldom, It is a more blessed thing to give, them to
receive. And it is strange, but so it is, that even he who desires you to
receive a curtesy at his hands, thinks the meanlier of you, when you have
accepted thereof; and does strangely honor you afterward if you chance to lay
aside that request of his.

You who are a preacher of chastity, must not meddle with making of marriages.
He who reads the Apostle saying thus, It remayne^ that they who have wives, b^
so as if they had them not, Why should he compel a virgin to marry? He who is
a Priest after having been married but once, why should he exhort a widow to
marry again? The stewards and overseers of other men's houses, and possessions,
how can they be Priests, who are commanded to contemn their own fortunes? To
take any thing violently from a man's friend, is theft; to deceive the Church,
is sacrilege. To take away that which were to be distributed upon the poor,
and when there are many hungry people, to be reserved or wary, or (which is a
most abominable crime) to take their due from them, does exceed the cruelty of
any robber by the high way. I am tormented with hunger, and you will be
measuring out, how much I may have an appetite to eat. Either distribut that
presently, which you have received; or else if you be a timorous dispencer,
turn it back upon the proprietary, that he may bestow his own. I will not
have your purse to be filled, by occasion of dispensing my goods. No man can
better dispose of my things, then my self. He is the best dispencer, who
reserues nothing for his own use.

You have compelled me, most dear Nepotianus (after thee book which I wrote
to holy Eustichium at Rome concerning the custody of virginity, which has been
stoned to death) that now again I have unsealed my mouth in Bethleem, and have
laid my self open, to be stabbed by the tongues of al men. For either I must
writ nothing, least I should become subject to men's censure (which you forbad
me to regard;) or else I must know when I wrote that the darts of all ill
speaking tongues would be turned against me. But I beseech them to be quiet,
and that they will give over to backbite. For we have not written this, as to
adversaries, but as to friends; nor have we made any inuectiue against them
who sin; but only advised them not to do so. Nor have we only been severe
judges against such as do ill, but against our selves also: and being desirous
to pick the moat out of another eye, I have first cast the beam out of mine
own. I have done no man wrong, nor poynted at any man's name in my writing. My
speech has not applied it self to particulars, but has discoursed only in
general against vice. He who shall be angry with me, will thereby confess
himself to be in fault.

Saint Hierome to Laeta about the instruction of her daughter.
THE Apostle Paul, writing to the Corinthians, and instructing the Church of
Christ, which was then but young or rude, with holy directions, did propound
this commaundment amongst the rest, If any woeman have an unbelieving husband,
and if he consent to live with her, let her not separate her self from him* for
the unbelieving husband is sanctified by the believing wife, and the
unbelieving wife is sanctified by the believing hubands; for otherwise yo^
children would be unclean, but now they are clean, If perhaps it may have
seemed to any hitherto, that the bonds of discipline were too much relaxed, and
that the indulge^ce of the Master was too forward, let him consider the house
of you father, (a man, I confess, most illustrious, and most learned; but yet
walking hitherto in darkness), and he will perceive that the counselle of the
Apostle has produced this effect; that the sweetness of the fruit might make a
recompense for the bitterness of the roo^; and that base twigs, might sweat
forth precious balsamu^. You are borne of an unequal marriage, and Paula is
begotten and brought forth, by my Toxotius, and you. Who would ever believe
that the grandchild of Albinus the pagan high Priest, should be borne upon the
fore promise of a Martyr; that the sta^mering tongue of the little one, should
sound forth the Alleluia of Christ; that the old man should cherish the virgin
of God, in his bosom. And we have well and happily expected, that the holy, and
believing house may sanctify the unbelieving husband. He is now, in a kind of
ambition, and expectation to become a Christian, whom a troop of believing
sons, and grand children does already enuiron. For my part, I think that
Jupiter himself might have come to believe in Christ, if he had had such a
kindred. Let him derid and spit at my Epistle* and and cry out that I am either
fond, or mad. His son in law did also this, before he believed. Men are not
born Christians, but they are made so. The golden Capitol is out of
cou^tena^ce now, for lack of looking to and all the heathen Temples of Rome,
are over grown with cobwebs. The very city is now fleeting from it self, and
the people runs down, like a flood toward the Martyrs Tombs, whilst the
Heathen Temples are not yet half pulled down. If wisdom will not oblige
them to embrace the faith, me thinks they should do it now even for shame.
This (O (...) my most devout daughter in Christ) is said to you, to the end
that you despair not of the conversation of your Father; and that by the same
faith, whereby you have deserved to obtain you daughter, you may also gain
your father; and so the whole house may be happy, by knowing this which was
promised by our Lord, Those things which are impossible with men, are possible
with God. A man's conversion never comes too late. The thief passed on from the
Cross to Paradise. Nabuchodonozor the King of Babylon, after he had grown
wild both in body and disposition, and had fed in the wilderness like a beast,
was restored to the reason of a man. And (that I may pass over au^tient
stories least they might seem fabulous to incredulous persons) did not your
kinsman Gracch^, (whose name does sufficiently show the antiquity of his
nobility, some few years since (when he had the prefecture of the City)
overthrow, break down, burn that den of Mithra, and all those prodigious
Idols whereby C^rax, Niph^, Nilon, Leo, Perses, Helios, and father Bromius or
Bacchus are dedicated to those uses? and having sent these hostages before him,
did he not obtain the Baptism of Christ? Gentility suffers a kind of
desolation of a wilderness even in the City. The Gods which heretofore we
adored by the Nations of the world, are now only remaining in the tops of
houses, with skrich Owls. The Ensigns of the Cross, are now become the
standa^s of the camp. The healthful picture of the same Cross, serves to
beautify the Purple Robes of Kings, and the bright burning gemmes of their
diademes. Now the Egyptian Serapis is turned Christian; Marnas who is shut up
in Gaza, mournes, and perpetually trembles for fear of the euersion of that
Temple. Out of India, Persia, and Ethiopia, we daily ^nterteyne whole troops
of Monckes. The Armenian has laid his quiuers aside; the ^uns learn the
Psalter; the frozen Scythia does even boil up through the heat of faith The
red and yellow Army of the Getes carry Churches like Tents round about; and
therefore is it perhaps, that they make their part good against v^ by way of
Arms, because they embrace our Religion.

I am almost fallen away into an other matter, and the wheel running round,
whilst I was thinking upon a little pitcher* my hand has made a great
tankerd. For my purpose was, to direct my speech (upon the request of holy
Marcella, and you) to a Mother, that is to your self; and to teach you how you
are to instruct our Paula, who was consecrated to Christ before she was borne;
and whom you conceived in your vows, before you did it in your womb.
Somewhat we have seen in our time, of the prophetical Books. Ann^ exchanged
barrennes for fruitfullnes; and you have now changed your said fruitfullnes,
for hopeful children. I speak it confidently, you shall have more children,
you who have paid the first borne to God. These are those first borne, which
were offered in the law. So was Samuel borne, and so was Sampson; and so did
John Baptist rejoice and exult, upon the arrival of Mary. For he heard the
words of our Lord thu^dering in his ears, by the mouth of the virgin, and he
strove to break forth of his Mothers womb, that he might have met him. So
that she who was borne by repromission, must obtain such instruction from her
parents, as may be worthy of her birth. Samuel was brought up in the Temple.
John was prepared in the desert. The former was venerable by his sacred hair,
and druncke neither wine, nor any other thing which could inebriate; and
whilst he was yet but a little one, he had conversation with our Lord. The
later flies from Cities, he was bound in by a girdle of hair, he was fed with
locusts and wild honey; and (in type of the penance which he was to preach) he
was apparelled with the spoil, or skine, of the Camel, that most crooked
beast. So must that soul be instructed, which is to become the Temple of God.
Let her learn to hear, and speak nothing, but that which belongs to the
fear of God. Let her not understand a foul word, and let her be ignorant of
the songs which the world is wont to sing. Let her tongue be enured to sweet
Psalms, whilst it is young.

Away with the usual wantonness of children, and let the girls, and waiting
maids be removed from secular conversation, least what they have learned ill,
they teach worse. Let some Alphabet of letters be made for her, either of Box
or Iuory; and let them be called by their names. Let her play with them, that
so her very playing, may be learning; and let her not only learn the order of
the letters, that the memory of names may pass into the tune of some song;
but let even that very order he inuerted, and let the last letters be mingled
with them of the midst, and they of the midst with the foremost that she
may not only know them by roat, but by use. But when she begins with a weak
shaking hand, to draw her style upon wax, let either the tender joints of her
fingers be ruled by the casting of some hand over hers, or else let the letters
be graven upon some little table; that the lines may be drawn and still shut
up in margens by the same hollowes, and so they may not wander abroad. Let some
reward be propounded to her, when she begins to join the sillables; and let
her be animated, by such kind of Presents, as are wont to take the most
flattering hold, upon that tender age, Let her also have companious in
learning, whom she may envy, and by whose praises she may be stung. If she be
at all slow of wit, let her not be chidden; but you must raise it with
comendation of her, that she may be glad when she has conquered, and be sorry
when she is overcome. You must chiefly take care, that she be not brought to
mislike learning, and that the bitter way of teaching her, in her infancy, may
not be remembered by her, when she shall have passed beyond those tender years.
Those names whereby she shall accustom her self by little and little to knit
words together, must not be casual, but appointed, and industriously compiled;
namely of the Prophets, and the Apostles; and let the whole series of the
Patriarchs from Adam, be brought down, as it is delivered in Matthew, and
Luke. That so whilst she is about this other business, a preparation of
matter may be made for her memory, to be laid up thereby for after times. Some
Master must be chosen of fit years for her, and of good life and knowledge.
And I hope a learned man will not think much, to do that in the behalf of a
noble virgin, which Aristotle did for the son of Phillip, who took the
office of clarckes or book wrighters away, by teaching him first to read.
Those things are not to be contemned as little, without which great things
cannot stand. The very air or manner of the letters, and the first teaching of
Rules, does sound after one fashion out of a learned mouth, and after another,
if the man be ignorant and rude. And therefore you must provide, that through
the foolish dandlings of women, your daughter get not a custom of pronouncing
certain half words. Nor to play with gold, or gay clothes, though it be but
in jest; for the former of these two things hurts the tongue, and the latter
hurts the mind; and she may chance learn that, when she is young, which
afterward she must be feign to unlearn. The manner of Hortensius his speech
was gotten by him in his fathers arms. That is hardly scraped out, which young
unfashioned minds have drunk in. Who shall be able to reduce purple wool, to
the former whitenes? A new vessel long retaynes both that odor and taste,
whereof it received the first impression. The Grecian history relates, how
Alexander, that most powerful King and conqueror of the world, had not power
to want the defect of his Tutour Leonides, both in his gate, and behavior
otherwise, wherewith he was infected being a little one. For it is a matter of
much ease, to grow like an other in any thing which is ill; and you may readily
imitate their vices, to whose virtues you cannot ariue. Let not even her nurse
be given to wine, nor be wanton or tatling. Let her be carried by some modest
creature, and let the man who ouerlookes her, be a grave person. When she sees
her grandfather, make her skippe into his bosom, and hang about his neck; and
sing Alleluia to him, whether he will or no. Let her grand mother snatch her to
her self, and acknowledge that she smyles like her father. Let her be amiable
to all, and let the whole kindred rejoice, that such a rose is sprung from
thence. Let her quickly be told, what her other grand mother, and aunt she
has; and for the service of what Emperor, and for what Army she is brought
up, though yet she be but a green soldier. Let her desire to be with them; and
let her threaten you, that she will be gone to them from you.

Her very habit, and clothing, must tell her to whom she is promised. Take
heed you bore not through her ears, and that you paynt not that face, which is
consecrated to Christ, either with white or red, nor oppress her neck with
gold, and pearl, nor load her head with gemmes; nor make her hair yellow, and
bespeake not by that means, a part of hell-fyer for her. Let her have an other
kind of pearls, by the selling whereof afterward, she may purchase that one
great Pearl, which is the most precious of all. A certain noble woman of the
highest rank, upon the comaundment of Hymetius her husband, who was uncle to
the virgin Eustochium did once change the manner of her habit, and dressing;
and knit up her neglected hair after a secular fashion, desiring thereby to
overcome both the purpose of the virgin her self, and the desire of her
mother. But behold the very self same night, she sees (when she was at rest)
that an angel was already come toward her, threating punishment with a
terrible voice, and storming out these words, Have thou presumed to prefer
the comaundment of thy husband, before Christ? Have thou presumed to tou^ the
head of the virgin of God, with thy sacrilegious hands? which even at this
instant, shall wither up; that thou may feel with torments, what thou have
done; and at the end of the fifth month from hence, thou shall be lead down
to hell. All these things were fulfilled in the self same order as they were
foretold; and the swift destruction of that miserable creature, declared the
latenes of her penance. So does Christ revenge himself upon the violater of
his temples; and so does he defend his own jewels, and most precious ornaments.

I have related this particular, not that I would insult upon the calamities of
unfortunate creatures, but that I may admonish you, with how great fear and
caution you must preserve that which you have promised to God. H^ls the Priest
offended God by the sins of his sons. He must not be made a Bishop, who
has luxurious and disobedient children. But on the other side, it is written
of woman, that she shall be saved by the bringing forth of children; if they
remain in faith, and charity, and sanctification, with chastity. But now if a
son of perfect age, and who has discretion to guide himself be put upon the
account of his parents when he does il; how much more shall it be so* in the
case of sucking and weak children; who, according to the judgment of our Lord,
know not their right hand from the left; that is to say, the difference between
good and ill. If you will provide with extraordinary care that you daughter be
not bitten by a viper; why will you not provide with the like care, that she
may not be stricken by that beetle, which beats upon the whole earth; that she
may not drink of the golden cup of Babylon; that she go not forth with Dina,
to se the daughter of a straung nation; that she dance not, and wear not
curious clothes? Poison is not offered, unless it be ouerspred with honey; and
vice deceiues not, but under the shadow and show of virtue. But how, will you
say; The sins of fathers are not punished upon the children, nor of the
children upon the parents; but that soul which sins shall dye.

This is said of them who have discretion, and of whom it is written in the
Gospel, He is of age, let him speak for himself; But he who is a little one,
and who judges of things like a little one, till he come to the years of
discretion, and till the letter of Pythagoras, the Y bring him to the parting
of the two ways, both the good, and ill; of such a one is imputed to the
parents. Unless you will perhaps conceive, that the children of Christians, if
they receive not Baptism, are only guilty of that sin; and that the
wickedness has no relation to them, who would not give the Baptism; especially
if it be at such time, as when they who are to receive Baptism, have no power
to refuse it. But so on the other side, the good of those Infants, is also the
gain of their parents. It was in your power, whether or no you would offer up
your daughter, though yet your case be different, who made a vow of her, before
you conceived; but that now you should neglect her breeding, when you have
offered her, will touch you self in point of danger. He who makes oblation of
a Sacrifice, which is lame or maimed or defiled with any spot, is guilty of
sacrilege; and how much more will she be punished, who is negligent in
preparing a part of her own body, and the purity of an untouched mind, for the
embracements of the King?

When she begins to be a little grown, and to increase in wisdom, age, and
grace, both with God and man, after the example of her spowse, let her go to
the Temple of her true father, with her parents; but let her not depart with
them out of the Temple. Let the^ seek her in the journey of this world, and
amongst the troops of her kindred, but let them find her no where else, but in
the secret retiring place of holy scriptures* asking questions of the Prophets,
and Apostles, covering her spirituell marriage. Let her imitatat Mary, whom
Gabriel found above in her chamber; and who was therefore stricken with fear,
because she saw a man, as she was not wont to do. Let her imitate her, of whom
it is said, All the glory of that daughter of the King, i^ from within Let her
also say to her elect, being wounded by the dart of his charity, The King has
led me into his chamber. Let her never go forth, least they meet with her, who
walk round about the city, and least they strike and wound her, and take the
pure v^ile of chastity from her, and lea^e her stark naked in her own blood;
but rather when any body knockes at the door, let her say: I am a wall, and my
breasts are a tower, I have washed my feet, and I cannot find in my h^rt to
foul them.

Let her not feed in public, that is to say, at her parents table, that so she
may see no meat which she may affect* And though some think, that it is an act
of higher virtue to contemn pleasure, when it is at hand; yet for my part, I
hold it to be the safer way toward abstinence, to be ignorant of that, which
you must not seek. I read this of old, when I was a boy at school; You have
no good title to reprehend that, which you suffer to take root by custom. Let
her begin to learn, even already, not to drink wine, wherein is Luxury.
Before one come to be of strong age, abstinence is both grievous and dangerous.
Till that time she may (if need require) both bath, and use a little wine, for
the help of her stomach, and be sustained by the eating of some flesh, least
her feet ^ayle her, beo^fe she can begin to run. And thi^ I say, according to
indulgence, but not according to commaundment; fearing weakness, but not
teaching the way to lust. For otherwise, that which is partly done by the
superstition of the Jews, in rejecting some beasts, and other food; and which
the Brachman^i of the Indians, and the Gymn^sophists of the Egyptians do also
use, even in excluding the vs^ of so much, as flower, or barley, and only to
feed upon roots; Why should not the Virgin of Christ observe wholly? If glass
be so much worth, why should not pearl be worth more? She who is borne upon a
fore-promise, let her live so, as they lived who were borne upon such a kind of
fore-promise. A like grace ought to be obtained by a like labor.

Let her be deaf to musical instruments, and not know why the Pipe, the Lyra,
and the Harp were made. Let her daily give account of the task of those
flowers, which she daily is to gather out of Scripture. Let her learn from
thence a certain number of Greek verses. Then presently let the teaching of
the Latin tongue follow after; which if it cast not her young mouth into a
frame from the beginning, her tongue will be perverted toward some strange
accent; and her natural language will be abased with foreign errors. Let her
have you for her Mistres, and let her tender youth admire you. Let her see
nothing in you, or in her Father, which if she do, she may sin. Remember you
who are the parents of a Virgin, that you are to teach her more by your deeds,
then by your words. Flowers quickly fad, and an unwholesome air does soon
corrupt the Saff^an, the violet, and the lilly. Let her never go into public,
but with you. Let her not go even to the tombs of Martyrs, or to Churches,
without her mother. Let no youth, let no dapper fellow smile upon her. Let our
young virgin so celebrate the days of Vigills, and solemn pernoctations, that
she may not depart from her mother, even for one hairs breadth.

I will not have her love any one of her maids, more then another; no^ that
she be ever whispering in her care. Whatsoever she says to one of them, let
them all know. Let that companion please her, who is not tricked up, nor fayer,
and wanto^, and who singes not a sweet song with a clear voice; but who is
grave, pale, neglecting her self, and inclining to sadness. Let her gouernesse
be some ancient virgin of approved trust, modesty and conversation; who may
instruct her, and accustom her by her own example, to rise by night to
prayers and Psalms to sing hymns in the morning, and at the third, the sixth,
and ninth hour; to stand in the skirmish, and like a warryer of Christ to
offer the evening sacrifice with her lamp lighted. Let the day pass in this
manner, and so let the night find her laboring. Let reading come after prayer,
and then prayer after reading. That time will seem short, which is employed
upon such variety of works. Let her learn also to make yarne, to hold the
distaffe, to lay the basket in her lap, to turn the spindle, and to draw down
the thread with her fingars. Let her despise silk, and the wool of the
S^reans, and gold which is wrought into fine thread. Let her get such garments,
as whereby the cold may be driven away, and not whereby the body which is
pretended to be clad, may be discovered. Let her food be some little pot of
herbs, and flower, and little fishes for some seldom times. And (that I may
not draw on these rules against gluttony into length, whereof I have also
spoken more at large elsewhere) let her so eat, that she may be ever hungry,
and may be able to read, and sing psalms presently after meat. Those long and
immoderate fasts are not allowed by me (especially when the party is very
young) wherein they go empty from one week to another, and when it is forbidden
to eat fruits* and to use oil in the dressing of meat. I have learned by
experience, that an ass when he is weary, seeks places into which he may
divert. This do those worshippers of Isis, and Cybeles, who with a gluttonous
kind of abstinence, devour pheasants and turtles, when they are brought
smoking in, least otherwise forsooth, they should de^ile the gifts of Ceres.
This is the precept, which I give for that kind of fast, which is to be
continual, that our strength may last for a long journey, least being able to
run in the first part of therace, when we come to the second we fall down.
But (as I have written h^rtofore) in L^nt the sails of abstinence are to be
hoised up, and all the raines of the charriot-driuer, are to be laid in the
horses necks, as when they are in great have. Though yet, there be still a
difference between the condition of secular persons, and that of Virgins and
Monks. A secular man conco^tes the former rauin of his appetite, and living
upon his own juice (after the manner of snailes) he prepares his panch for
future food, and fat provision: but a Virgin, and a Monk, must so loose the
raines to their horses, as to remember that they must ever run. That labor
which ends not, must be moderate; but that which is to have an end, may for
the time ^e more intense. For there we are ever going, and here we pawse
sometimes. If ever you go to the houses of recreation near the City, do not
leave your daughter at home. Let her not know how, nor let her be able to live
without you; and when she is alone, let her be afraid, let her not have
conversation with secular persons, nor cohabit^ with ill bred Virgins. Let her
not be present at the marriage of your servants, nor mingle her self with the
sports of the unquiet family.

I know some who have advised, that the virgin of Christ may not bath her
self, with so much as Eunches, nor with married women; for the former lay not
down the minds of me^; and the later, by their great bellyes show about what
business they have been. For my part, I am utterly against liking, that a virgin
of ripe years should use bathes at all; who ought to be ashamed, and even not
to see her self naked. For if she macerate her body, and reduce it to
servitude by watching, and fasting, if she desire to extinguish the incentiues*
and flame of lust of her boiling youth by the coolenes of abstinance, if by the
desire of neglecting her self she make have to put her natural beauty in
disorder; why should she on the other side stir up covered fire, by the
entertainment and encouragement of Bathes?

Instead of silk and gemmes, let her love the divine books; wherein not the
picture which is limmed with gold upon Babylonian parchment, but an exact and
learned edition or copy may give delight. Let her first learn the Psalter,
let her divert her self from vanity, by those songs; and let her life be
instructed by the Proverbs of Solomon. In Ecclesiastes, let her learn to
despise worldly things. In Job let her follow the examples of virtue and
patience. Let her pass from thence to the Ghospels, and never lay them out of
her hands. Let her suck in; the Acts of the Apostles, and the Epistles, with
the whole affection of her heart. And when she has enriched the storehouse of
her breast with those goods, let her commit the Prophets to memory, the five
books of Moses, the books of Kings the Cronicles, and the volumes also of
Esdras, and Hester. At the last, she may without danger, learn the Canticle of
Canticles; which if she had red in the beginning, she might perhaps have been
wounded; through want of understanding that nuptial song of spiritual
Marriage, which is expressed under corporal words. Let her take heed of all
Apocriphall books. And if at any time she will read them, not for the truth of
doctrine, but for the reverence which is due to Miracles; let her know that
they are not theirs, under whose names they go^; and that many vicious things
be mingled, there with; and that the man had need of much prudence, who is to
seek gold in dirt. Let her ever have the works of Cyprian in her hand, and
she may with a secure foot run over the Epistles of Athanasius, and the
books of Hilarious. Let her be delighted with their tracts and wits, in whose
books the piety of faith wauers not. And as for other Authors, let her read
them so, as that she may ra there judge of them, then be ruled by them.

But you will say, how can I, being a secular woman, observe all these things
at Rome, in such a great crowd of people? Do not undergo that burden, which you
are not able to bear; but when you shall have wenaed her, with Isaac, and
shall have clad her with Samuel; send her to her grandmother, and her aunt.
Restore that most precious gemme to the chamber of Mary; and let it be set upon
the cradle of Jesus, who is crying out there, like an infant. Let her be
brought up in the Monastery, let her life be spent among those quiers of
virgins; let her not learn to swear; let her hold a lie to be a sacrilege;
let her be ignorant of the world; let her live angelically; let her converse in
flesh without flesh; and let her ^ld all others to be like her self. And that
I may pass over the rest with silence, let her free you from the difficulty,
and danger of co^seruing her. It is better for you to wish for her, when she is
absent; then to be frighted concerning her upon al occasions, when she is
present, about what she is saying, with whom she is speaking, toward whom
she makes a sign, and upon whom she looks with a good will. Deliver this
little one over to Eustochium; the childs very crying, now like an infant is a
kind of prayer for you. Deliver to Eustochium this companion of sanctity, whom
hereafter she may leave her heir thereof, Let her look upon her Aunt, love
her, and admire her even from her infancy, whose speech, whose gate, and whose
conversation, is the very doctrine it self of virtue. Let her be in the lap
of her grandmother, who may hereafter reap in her grandchild, whatsoever she
sowed in her daughter; who has learned by long experience to bring up, to
conserve, to instruct virgins; whose crown is wouen with chastity, and it has
the increase of a hundred fould.

O happy virgin! O happy Paula, the daughter of Toxotius, who through the
virtue of her grandmother, and of her au^t, is more honorable by sanctity,
then by nobility of stock! O that you might happen to see that mother and
sister in law of yours, and behold those great minds in little bodies! I doubt
not but according to that modesty, wherewith you are naturaly endued, you would
outstrip your daughter, and change that first sentence of God, for that second
law of the Ghospel; nor would you only contemn the desire of having more
posterity, but would rather offer your self to God. But because there is a
time for embracing, and a time for abstayning; and the wife has not power over
her body. And; Let every one who is called, continue in the same vocation, in
our Lord. And since he, who is under the yoke with another, must so run, as
not to leave his companion in the dirt; do you restore that wholly in your
offspring, which you defer in the mean time* concerning your self. Anna did
never receive her son again, whom she vowed to God, when once she had
offered him in the Tabernacle; esteeming it to be an indecent thing* that he
who was to be a Prophet, should grow up in her house, who had still a desire of
more children. In fine after she had conceived, and brought him forth, she
durst not approach to the Temple, nor appear empty handed before our Lord,
till first she had paid what she ought; and having made an immolation of that
sacrifice, and returning home, she brought five children for her self: for her
first borne was brought forth by her for our Lord. Admire you the fidelity of
this holy woman? Imitate also her faith. If you will send Paula hither, my
self make you a promise, that I will be both her teacher, and her
foster-father. I will carry her upon my shoulders; and though I be an old man,
I will by imitation of stammering frame words fit for her, and will esteem my
self much more glorious, then that Philosopher of the world; I, who shall not
be instructing that Macedonian King, who was to be destroyed by poison; but a
handmaid and spouse of Christ our Lord, to be prepared for his celestial
kingdom.

Saint Hierome to Furia; about keeping her self in state of widdowhood.
YOU desire me by your letters, and you entreat me in a lowly kind of manner to
answer you: and I will write* how you ought to live, and conserve the crown
of widowhood, without touch to the reputation of your chastity. My mind
reioyces, my heart exults, and the affection of my soul does even earne with
gladness, to see you desire that, after your husbands life, which your mother
Titiana of holy memory did mainteyne and perform a long time, whilst her
husband lived. Her petition, and prayers are heard. She obtained that her only
daughter should arrive to that, which her self when she was alive, did
possess. You have besides a great privilege, from the house whereof you came,
in that, since Camillus his days, it is hardly written, that any woman of your
family was ever married a second time. So that you are not so prayse-worthy if
you continue a widow, as you will deserve, to be detested if you keep not that
being a Christian, which Paga^ women have kept for so many ages. I say nothing
of Paula and Eustochium, who are the flowers of your stock; least by occasion
of exhorting you, I may seem to praise them. I also pass by Blesilla, who
following your husband, and your brother, ran through much time (after the
account of virtue) in a short space of her life. And I wish that men would
imitate that, for which women may be praised, and that wrinkled old age, would
restore, what youth does offer of his own accord.

I do wittingly, and willingly thrust my hand into the fire. The brows will be
knit, the arm will be stretched out and angry Chremes rage, till his face
swell. The great Lords will stand up against this letter, the nobility of lower
rank will thunder, crying out, that I am a witch; I, a seducer, and fit to be
carried away into the furthest part of the world. Let them add if they will*
that I am also a Samaritan, to the end that I may acknowledge the title of my
Lord. But the truth is, I divide not the daughter from the mother, nor do I
bring that of the Gospel, let the dead bury the dead. For he lives whosoever
he be, that belieues in Christ But he that belieues in him, must also walk as
he walked. A way with that envy, and malignitity, which the sharp tooth of
(...) tongued men would ever be fasting upon Christians; that whilst they
fear reproach, they may be urged to forsake the love of virtue. Except it be
by letters, we know not one another; and then piety is the only cause, where
there is no notice of flesh and blood. Honor you father, if he separate you
not from the true Father. So long you must acknowledge the tie of blood, as he
shall know his Creator. For otherwise, David will speak thus to you in plain
terms; Hearken, O daughter, and see, and incline thine ear, and forget thy
people, and thy fathers house and the King will earnestly desire thy beauty*
for he is thy Lord. A great reward, for having forgoten a father, The King will
earnestly desire thy beauty. Because you saw, because you inclined your ear*
and have forgotten your people, and your fathers house, therefore the King will
earnestly desire your beauty, and will say to you; Thou art all fair, my
friend, and there is no spot in thee. What is more beautiful then a soul,
which is called the daughter of God, and ears for noe exterior ornaments? She
belieues in Christ, and being advanced to this high honor, she passes on to
her spouse, having him for her Lord, who is her husband.

What troubles are found in these other marriages, you have found in the
marriages themselves; and being satisfied even to a glut with the flesh of
quails, your jaws have been filled with extreme bitterness. You have cast up
those sharp and vnwholosome meats, you have rendered that boiling and unquiet
stomach. Why will you cramme you self again with that, which did yea hurt,
like a Dog returning to his vo^it, and a S^w made clean in a wallowing place
of dirt? Even bruit beasts, and wild birds, are not apt to fall again, into
the same ginnes and nets. Are you perhaps affrayd, that the family of your
Furia's should fail; and that your father should not have some little child
sprunge from your body, who may craule up and down his breast, and bedaube his
neck with filth? As if all they who were married had borne children; or they
who have had children, had them ever answerable to the stock whereof they
came. Belike Cicero'es son, did resemble his father in eloquence; and your
auncestour Cornelia who was indeed the example both of chastity and fecundity,
was glad belike, that she brought the Gracchi into the world. It is a
ridiculous thing to hope for that, as a thing certain, which you see, that
many have not, and others have lost when they had it. But to whom shall you
resign so great riches? to Christ, who cannot dye. Whom shall you have for
your heir? him, who is also your Lord. Your father will be troubled at it; but
Christ will be glad your family will mourn, but the angels will rejoice. Let
your father do what he will with his estate; you belong not ^o him of whom you
were borne; but to him by whom you were regenerated, and who redeemed you with
that great price of his own blood. Take heed of those nurses, and those women
who are wont to carry the children in their arms; and such venomous creatures
as they, who desire to seed their bellyes* even out of your very skin. They
persuade you not to that which is good for you* but for themselves* And they
are often giving out those verses:

VVilt thou alone consume thy youth in vain,
And children sweet, and loves rewards disdain?
But men will say, that where the sanctity of chastity is, there is frugality*
where frugality is* there are the servants put to loss. They think themselves
robbed, of whatsoever they carry not away; and they consider but how much, and
not of how much, they receive it. Wheresoever they see a Christian, they
encounter him with that common scorn of being an Impostor. Th^se people sow
most shameful rumors; and that which came first from themselves, they give
out* to have had from others; being both the authors, and exaggerators of the
report. A public ^ame grows out of a mere lie which being once come to the
Matrons ears, and having been canuased by their tongues* passes on, and
penetrates even through whole Provinces. You shall see many of them, fall into
the very rage of mad people, and with a spotted face, and vipers eyes, and
woorm-eaten teeth* rail at Christians.

Hee^ one, who in some stately purple mantle goes*
And mumbling out some filthy thing, through her foul nose,
Trippes up her words, and does her toothles mouth disclose*
And then forsooth all the company, makes a buz on her side; and the audience
barks out against us* yea and some of our own institute join with the^,
being both the detractors and the detracted* Against us they have tongue
enough* but they are dumb in finding fault with themselves, as if eue^ they,
were also any other thing, then Monks; and that whatsoever is spoken against
Monks* did not redound upon Priests, who are the fathers of Monks. The loss
of the sheep, is a reproach to the shepherd; as on the other side; the life of
that Monk deserves praise, who reuerences the Priests of Christ; and detracts
not from that order, whereby he is made a Christian.

I have said thus much to you, O daughter in Christ, not doubting of your
purpose, for you wolud never have desired my letters of exhortation, if you had
made any question of the good of single marriage; but to the end, that you
might understand the wickedness of servants, who set a price upon you; and the
sleights of kinsmen, and the pious error of your father, to who^ though I will
easily allow that he loves you, yet I cannot grant, that it is a love according
to knowledge. But I say with the Apostle, I confess they have zeal, but not
according to knowledge. Do you rather imitate (for this I must often repeat)
that holy mother of yours; whom as often as I remember, it occurres to me to
think of her ardent love toward Christ, her palenes through fasting, her
alms to the poor, her obsequiousnes to the servants of God; the humility both
of her exterior, and of her heart; and her speech which was so moderate upon
all occasions. Let your father (whom I name with honor and all due respect;
not because he is of Consular authority and a Seuator, but because he is a
Christian) fulfill the effect of his name. Let him rejoice that he begat a
daughter, not for the world, but for Christ; or rather let him grieve that you
have lost your virginity in vain; and with all, have not gathered the fruit of
marriage. Where is the husband which he gave you? Though he had been amiable;
though he had been good, death would have snatched all away; and his departure
would have untied the knot of flesh and blood. I beseech you take speedy hold
of the occasion, and make a virtue of necessity. The beginning of Christians,
does not so much import, as* the end. Paul began ill, but ended well; and the
beginnings of Judas are praised, but his end was made damnable by his treachery.
Read B^chiel. Who^soeuer the just man shall sin, his iustic^ shall not
deliver him; and the impiety of the wicked, shall not hurt him whenever he
shall be converted from his impiety. This is Jacobs ladder, by which the Angels
ascend, and descend; from the top whereof our Lord leaning do w^e ward reaches
out his hand, ^o such as are weary* suf^eyning the weak steps of them who
climb, by the contemplati^ of himself. But as he desires not the death of a
sinner, but that he may be converted and live; so he hates such as are tepid,
and they quickly make him ready even to cast the gorge. She to whom^ more i^
forgiven, loves more. That unclean woman, who was baptized in the Gospel in
her tears; and she who had formerly deceived many with the hair of her head,
was saved by wiping the feet of our Lord. She brought not frizled dressings
with her* nor crackling shoes, nor eyes which were smoaked over with Antimony.
So much the fowler she was* so much was she the fayrer. What should painting
white or red; do upon the face of* a Christian? whereof the one tells a lie in
making red the lips and cheeks; the other does as much, in making white the
forehead and necks; They are fire to inflame young people; they are the
entertainments and encouragements of lust; and they are testimonies of an
unchaste mind. How will such a one weep for her sins, whose tears show her
skine, and do even make furrows in the face? This is not an ornament according
to our Lord, but it is a covering of Antichrist. W^h what confidence can a
woman lift up that face to heaven, which the Creator of all things, knows
not? It is impertinent for any to allege her youth, or tender years. The
widow who has left to please her husband, and who (according to the Apostle)
is a widow indeed, has need of nothing but perseverance. It is true. that she
remembers ^her former pleasure; she knows what she has lost; and wherein she
took delight; but these burning arrows of the devil, are to be quenched by
the rigor of watching, and fasting. Either let us frame our discourse
according to that kind of life which we seem to lead otherwise, or else let us
seem to live according to the discourse we hold* Why do we profess one thing
and practice another? The tongue talks of chastity, and the exterior of the
whole body just the contrary. And this I have thought good to say, of the
dressing and habit of the body.

But the widow who lives in delights, is dead, even whilst she is alive; and
this is not my saying, but the Apostles. What is the meaning of this, She is
dead, even whilst she is alive? She seems indeed to live* in the eyes of
ignorant people, and not to be dead in Christ, from whom no secret is
concealed: The soul which sins, the same shall dye. Some men's sins are
manifest, and precede their judgment; but some other ^ena sins follow it. And
so also good deeds are manifest, and such as are not good cannot lie hid. He
speaks therefore to this effect. There are some who sin publicly, and so
freely, that so soon as you see them, you presently understand them to be
sinners; but others who hide the^ sins with (...), are known afterward by
their conversation: and in like manner, the good deeds of some are very
public, and they of others are not known to us, but only by long experience
afterward. To what purpose is it therefore, that we stand bragging of chastity,
which is not able to wine credit for it self, without her companions, and
acc^ssaries, which are* A l^st (...) and Thirst* The Apostle mac^rares his
body* (...) bringes it under the subjection of his soul, for fear leas^
otherwise he should not find that to be in himself which he had enjoined to
others. And shall a young woman, whose blood is boiling up with meat, be secure
concerning her chastity ^ Neither yet whilst I am saying this, do I condemn
those meats which God has created to be used by us, with thanksgiving; but I
take from young people and maids, the motives and intertainments of pleasure?
They are not the fir^ of Aetn^, nor that land of Vulcan, nor either (...), or
O^, which boil up in so huge ^heat, as do the most inward ^ines of young
people, when they are full of v^ine, and inflamed with curious fare.

There are many, who tread upon covetousness; and it is laid aside by them as
easily as their purse. A reproachful tongue, is mended by imposing silence
upon it. To reform the habit and order of our clothing, does but cost an
hours work. All other sins ar^ without the man* and that which is without,
is soon cast away. Only lust, to which we are enable ^ by God, for the
procreation of children, if i^ pass beyond the due bounds, proves vicious,
and by a kind of course of nature, it strives to break out into copulation. It
is therefore a point of great virtue, and requires a careful diligence to
overcome that, to which you are borne* and not to live in flesh, after a ^shly
manner; to fight daily with your self, and to have the hundred eyes of Argus
(which the Poets ^aigne) upon that enemy who is shut up within our selves. This
is that which the Apostle delivers to us in other words: All sin which a man
commits is without the body, but he who commits fornication* sins against his
own body. The Physicians, who writ of the nature of man's body, and especially
Galen says in those books which are entitled Of preserving bodily health,
that the bodies of youths, and young men, and of men and women of perfect
age, boil up through their inuate heat, and that such food is hurtful to
them, at those years, as does increase their heat; and that on the other side
it conduces to their health, to take such other meat and drink, as cooles the
blood. And so also old wine, and warmer food, is good for old men who are
subject to crudities and fleame. Whereupon our Savior also says; Look to
your selves, that your har^s be not oppressed, through gluttony and drunkenness,
and with the cares of this life. And the Apostle speaks of wine, wherein there
is luxury. Neither is it any maru^ile, that the Potter framed this judgment of
the poor little pot which himself had made, when the Comedian, whose end was
no more then to describe the condition of mankind, said, that Venus grew could
without Ceres and Bacchus.

First therefore (if yet the strength of your stomach will endure it) let
water be your drink, till you shall have passed over the heat of your youth.
Or if your weakness will not admit of this, hearken to Timothy; Use a little
wine for your stomach, and for your frequent infirmities. In the next place,
you must in your food, avoid all kind of things which are hot. And here I
speak not only of flesh, upon which the vessel of election pronounces this
sentence; It is good for a man not to drink wine, nor to eat flesh; but also
even in Pulse, to avoid all those things, which are windy, and heavy; and know
you that nothing is so good for Christians, as the feeding upon kitchen herbs.
Whereupon he says also in another place? He that is infirm, let him eat
herbs; and so the heat of our bodies, is to be tempered with this cooler kind
of cates.

Daniel, and the three children were fed with Pulse. They were but young, and
were not yet come to the fiery pain wherein that Babylonian King fried those
old judges. By us, that good and fair state of body which (even besides the
privilege of Gods grace) appeared in them, by their feeding upon such meats,
is not esteemed; but the strength of the soul is sought by us; which is so
much the stronger, by how much the flesh is weaker. From hence it is, that many
who desire to lead a chaste life, fall groueling down in the midest of their
journey, whilst they attend only to abstain from flesh; and load the stomach
with pulse, which being taken moderately and sparingly, is not hurtful. But if
I shall say what I think, there is nothing which does so much inflame a body,
and provoke the parts of generation, as meat when it is not well digested, but
makes a kind of conuulsion in the body through windynes.

I had rather O daughter, speak a little too plainly, then that the matter we
speak of, should be in danger. You must think all that to be poison, which
makes a seminary of pleasure. A sparing diet, and a stomach which is ever in
appetite, I prefer before a fast of three days; and it is much better to
take some little thing every day, then to feed full, at some few times. That
rain is the most profitable, which descends into the earth, by little and
little. A sudden and excessive shower, which falls impetuously* turns the field
up side down. When you eat, consider that instantly after, you must pray and
read. Rate your self to a certain number of verses of holy Scripture, and
perform this task to our Lord; and allow not your body to take rest, till you
shall have filled the basket of your breast with that kind of work. Next after
holy scriptures, read the writings of learned men; of the^ I mean whose faith
is known. There is no cause, why you should seek gold in dirt, but you must
sell pearls, to buy that one. Stand according to the advice of Jeremy, near
many ways, that you may meet with that one which leads to our country
Transfer your love of jewels, and gemmes, and silken clothes, to the
knowledge of holy scripture. Enter into that land of promise flowing with milk
and honey. Eat flower, and oil, and apparayle your self with the variously
colored garments of Joseph. Let your ears be boared through with Jerusalem,
that is to say, by the word of God, that the precious grain of new corn, may
bow down from thence. You have holy Exuperius, a man of fit age and approved
faith, who will often instruct you with his good advice. Make friends for your
self of the unjust Mammon, who may receive you into those eternal Tabernacles:
bestow your riches upon them, who eat not pheasants, but brown bread, who
drive hunger away, and who do not call lust home. Have understanding of the
poor, and needy; give to every one that asks of you, but especially to the
household of faith. Cloth the naked, and the hungry, and visit the sick. As
often as you stretch forth your hand, think of Christ. Take heed, that when
your Lord God is begging of you* you increase not the riches of other folks.

Fly from the conversation of young men, and let not any roof in your house be
able to see these dapper, curious, and loose fellows there. Let the musician
be sent away like a ma^efactour, and thrust you rudely out of your house, all
Fiddlers, and minstrells, and such quiers of the Devil, as you would anoyd
those Siren songs, which bring destruction. Go not ^orth in public, and be
not carried up and down (according to the liberty which widows takes) with
that army of Eunuchs going before you. It is a most wicked custom, that a
frail sex, and a weak age should abuse power, and should think that all is
lawful, which they list. Though all things were lawful, al things are not
expedient. Let not any sollicitour who is curled up, nor any fine
foster-brother, nor any dainty fairefaced page, be near you. Sometimes the
Ladies mind, is understood by the habit of her maids. Procure the society of
holy Virgins, and widows; and if there be necessity that you must speak with
men, do not avoid bystanders; and let your confidence in speech be such, as
that you neither tremble, nor blush, when any other body comes in. Let your
face be the glass, wherein your mind may be seen; and let your silent eyes
confess the inward thoughts of your heart. We find, that lately, a certain
ignominious rumor did flutter throughout all these Esterne parts. Both the
age, the fashion, the habit, the pace, the indiscreet conversation, the
exquisite Feasts, the princely provision of Nero, and Sarda^apalus spoke of
nothing but marriage. By the correction of the wicked, the wise man will grow
so much the wiser. A love which is holy, is not subject to impatience. A false
report is soon represt, the the later part of a man's days, is made the judge
of the former. I confess indeed, that no man can pass the course of this
life, without being bitten by ill report; and wicked men make it their comfort,
to cast reproach upon the good, as conceuing that their sins are made less
faulty by it. But yet a fire made of straw goes out quickly, and the raging
flame is content to die by little and little, if it be noe longer fed. If fame
belyed you the last year, yea or even if it said true, let the fault cease
now, and the rumor will also be at an end. I say not this, as if I doubted any
ill of you; but because I love you so much, that I fear even such things as
are safe* O that you might but see your sister, and that you might chance to
hear the wise discourse of that holy mouth; you would discern strange power
in that little body. You would perceive that wholesuite of stuff, both of the
old and new Testament, even boil out of her holy mouth. She makes a pastime of
fasting, and her delight is her prayer. She holds the Timbrell in her hand,
after the example of M^ria; and Phara^ being drowned, she inuites the quier of
virgins by saying thus, Let us sing unto our Lord, for he is magnifyed, after a
glorious manner; he has cast down^ both horse, and Rider into the sea. She
addresses this kind of singers to Christ, and she instructes this kind of
music for our Savior. So passes the day, and so the night, and the oil
being prepared for (...) lam^es, the coming of the spouse is expected. Do you
therefore imitate her. Let Rome have such a one in it, as B^thleem possesses
which is les^e then Rome. You are rich, and it is easy for you to minister the
help of food to such as are poor. Let virtue spend that which was provided by
you as the matter of luxe, and let no woman fear poverty, who despises
matrimony. Help to make such virgins, as you may bring into the Kings chamber.
Relieve widows whom you may mingle as so many violets, between Virgins
lillyes, and Martyrs roses; and make your self a coronet, of such flowers as
th^se, instead of that crown of thorns in which Christ carried the sins of the
world.

Let your most noble Father, both be glad, and be assisted by this example. Now
let him learn that of his daughter which he learned before of his wife. Now
the hair is grown white, the knees tremble, the teeth fall, and the forehead
being plowed with wrinkles by his great years, death must needs be even at the
gates, and the funeral fire is there at hand. We grow old whether we will or
no. Let him make that provision for himself, which is necessary for a long
journey. Would he carry that with him, from which he must part against his
will? Nay rather let him send it to heaven before him; which if he refuse to
do, the earth will take it.

These younger widows, whereof many going back after Satan, when they have
been luxurious against Christ, are wont to say when they are about to marry a
second time: My little fortune is daily perishing; the inheritance of my
ancestors is destroyed, My servant has spoken saucily to me; my maid
neglects my commandment; who shall show himself against these things? Who
shall answer the charges which are laid upon my lands? Who shall instruct my
children? who shall bring up my young she slaves? And, O unspeakable wickedness,
they bring that as a cause of marriage, which even alone were a sufficient
reason to have hindered it. The Mother bringes not a foster-father, but an enemy
upon her children; not a Father, I say, but a tyrant. Being inflamed by lust,
she forgets the children of her own womb; and, in the midst of her little
ones, who are not capable yet to understand their misery, she, who hereafter
will lament it, is now tricking her self up, like a new bride. Why do you
pretend the care of your patrimony? Why the unruly pride of your servants?
Confess your filthiness. No woman marryes a husband, to the end that she may
not lie with a man. Or yet if it be true, that you are not urged by lust, what
kind of madness is it, that you should prostitute your chastity, after the
manner of harlots, to the end of augmenting your estate; and that for the
obtaining of a base and transitory end, your chastity which is precious, and
eternal, should be defiled.

If you have children already; why desire you a second marriage? If you have
none; why fear you not that (...), whereof already you have some proof? And
why prefer you a thing uncertain, before purity which is certain? The
contractes of marriage are now written out for you to sign, that shortly you
may be compelled to make your will. Your husband will counterfeit himself to
be sick; and that which he desires you should do, when you are about to die, he
will do now, when he means to live. Or if it happen, that you have children
by the second husband, there is already a quarrel, and a civil war within
doors. It shall be no longer lawful for you, to love your former children,
nor so much as to look up on them with indifferent eyes. If you feed them by
stealth, he will envy the dead man, and unless you hate your children, you
will seem to be still in love with their Father. But then, if he having
children by a former wife, shall lead you home to his house, all the Comedians,
and Versifyers, and the commo^plea-bookes of the town, will declame against
you, as a most cruel stepmother, though indeed you should be most benign
toward them. If your son in-law be sick, or if he have but even an aching
head, you shall be defamed for a Witch. If your self give him not meat, you
will be accounted cruel; if you feed him, you will be said to poison him. I
beseech you tell me, what good do these second marriages produce, which may
serve to counteruaile so great miseryes.

Would we know what kind of things widows ought to be? Let us read the
Gospel according to Luke. And Ann^ the Prophetess (says he) was the
daughter of Phanuel of the tribe of Asser. Phanuel, in our tongue signifyes the
face of God; Aser, is translated to signify, both riches and felicity. Because
therefore she had endured the burden of widowhood, from her youth til she came
to be fourscore and four years old, and departed not from the Temple of God,
insisting day and night by fasting and prayer, therefore did she deserve
spiritual grace, and to be styled, the daughter of the face of God, and to be
endowed with the riches, and felicity of her ancestors. Let us remember the
widow of Sarepta, who preferred the hunger of Elias before her own, or her
childrens health. So that she being to dye with her son that night, resolved
to leave her guest safe behind her; and choosing rather to loose her life,
then her giving of alms, did in that handful of flower, prepare for her self
the seminary of a harvest, from our Lord. The flower is sowed, and the vessels
of oil springes out. In Jury there was scarcity of wheat, for the grain of
corn was dead there; and there flowed great fountains from the widows oil*
We read in Judith (if men be yet disposed to receive that book) of a widow,
who was defeated by fasting, and defaced by mourning weeds, who lamented not
her dead husband, but sought the coming of a new spouse, by the extreme neglect
of her own person* I see that she appears with a warlike sword, and with a
bloody right hand. I perceive she has the head of Holophernes, which she has
brought, even from the midst of her enemies. A woman ouercomes men, and
chastity cuts off the head of lust; and changing suddenly her habit, she comes
back to that conquering neglect of her self, more glorious then all the
ornaments of this world could give her. Some there are, who ignorantly reckon
Deborah among the widows, and think that Barach the Captain, was the son
of Deborah, though the scripture speak otherwise. By us, she shall be named in
regard that she was a Prophetess, and is reckened among the number of the
Judges. And because she could say, How sweet are thy words to my throat, more
then honey or the honycombe to my mouth; she took the name of a Be, being fed
by the flowers of holy Scripture, and being imbrued by the odor of the Holy
Ghost, and composing the sweet juice of Ambrosia, with her Prophetical mouth.
Noemi (which signifyes (...), and which we may interpret The comforted) her
husband and children being dead in foraigne parts brought bake her chastity
into her country, and being sustained by that provision, she had a Moabite for
her sons wife, that this prophecy of Isay might be fulfilled: Send forth, O
Lord, the Lamb, the subduer of the earth, from the rock of the desert, to the
mountain of the daughter of Sion. I com now to the widow of the Gospel (that
poor widow, more rich then all the people of Israel) who taking a grain of
Mustard Seed, and putting leven into three cakes of flower, did by the grace of
the holy Ghost, temper a confession of the Father, and the Son, and did cast
two mytes into the Treasury. Whatsoever she could be worth in all the world,
and all her riches without exception, she offered, in both the Testaments of
her faith. These are the two Seraphims, who thrice did glorify the Trinity, and
are laid up for a treasure to the Church, whereupon a burning coal being by
the ^onges of both those Testaments, does purify the lips of a sinner.

Why should I repeat these ancient particulars, and produce the virtues of
women out of books, when you may propose many to your self in the City,
where you live, whose example you ought to imitate. And that I may not seem to
speak of them in particular by the way of flattery; the holy Marsella will
serve your turn, who corresponding with the stock whereof she came, has
presented us with some what out of the Ghospel. Anna lived seven years with
her husband, from the time of her virginity; Marsella seven months. The
former expected the coming of Christ; this later holds him fast, whom that
other received. The former, saw him crying, the later preaches him triumphing.
The former spoke of him, to all such as expected the redemption of Israel, the
later cries out thus with the nations, which are now redeemed: A brother does
not redeem, a man shall redeem. And out of another Psalm: A man is borne in
her, and the most high has founded her. I remember that almost two years
since, I wrote some books against Iouinian, wherein by the authority of
Scriptures I fully satisfied the questions, which came against me; where the
Apostle grants liberty of second marriages. And there is no necessity to repete
them here at full length, since you may have what I have written there. And now
that I may not exceed the measure of an Epistle, I will only give you this
lesson: Remember daily that you must dye, for then you will not be thinking of
a second marriage.

Saint Hierome to Paulinus, about the institution of a Monk.
A Good man brings forth good things, out of the good treasure of his heart;
and the Tree is known by his fruit-You measure us by your own virtue, and
being great, you extol us who are little; and you fill the lowest room ar the
banquet, that you may be advanced. by his direction who makes the Feast. For
what is there in us, or how little is there that we should deserve to be
praised, by learned words? that we, who are poor and mean, should be
commended by that mouth, whereby that most religious Prince is defended? But do
not, my dear brother, esteem of me according to the number of my years, and
value not my wise dome by my age; but my age by my wisdom, according to that
of Solomon: A man's wisdom is his gray hairs. For Moses was commanded to
choose seventy six such Priests, as he knew to be Priests, that is to say,
such as were to be esteemed according to their wisdom, not according to their
age. And Daniel, whilst he was yet a youth, gave judgment upon aged men; and
their lasciuiousnes condemned them of unchastity. I say, you must not judge of
a man's sufficiency, after the rate of his age, nor must you therefore think me
to be more virtuous, because I began to serve in the camp of Christ before
you. Paul the Apostle. was changed from being a persecuter, to be a vessel of
election, and being last in order, he became first in merits; because though he
were the last, he labored more then they all. Judas (of whom it was said, But
thou O man, who did eat fainlliarly with me, and wast my captain, and we
walked together in the house of God) was the betrayer of his friend, and of
his Master* and was reproved by our Saviors words, and tied the knot of his
own ugly death, upon a high tr^c. On the other side the thief exchanged the
Cross for Paradise, and made that punishment of his murders, to stand for
Martyrdom.

How many do at this day, even by living long carry themselves (as it were)
dead to Church, and being whited sepulchers without, are full of dead men's
bones within. A sudden lusty heat is better then along tepidity. In fine you
hearing those words of our Savior ( If thou will be perfect go, and sell all
though have, and give it to the poor, and follow me) do turn those words
into deeds; and being naked do follow the naked Cross; and so do more lightly
and nimbly clime up Jacobs ladder you have changed you mind with your habit,
and do not, with a full purse, affect any glorious kind of filth, but with
clean hand and a pure heart, you prize your self to be poor in deed, and in
spirit. For there is no great matter, in countersetting or making ostentation
of fasting, by carrying a pale and wanne face about; and for a man to brag of
carrying a poor cloak upon his back, when he is rich in revenues. That
Crates of Thebes, who formerly had been extremely rich, when he came to be a
Philosopher at Athens, cast away a great sum of gold, nor did he think that
a man could possess virtue and riches, both together. But we, being all
stuffed with gold, will needs follow Christ, who was so poor; and attending to
our former rich estates, under the pretense of enabling our felues to give
alms, how shall we distribut the goods of other men faithfully to others, when
we do so fearfully reserve our own? It is an easy matter for a full belly to
dispute of fasting.

It deserves no comendation to have lived at Jerusalem; but to have lived there
well. That City is to be desired, that to be praised, not which kills the
Prophets, and which has spilt the blood of Christ; but which the impetuousnes
of the river does make glad; which placed upon the hill, cannot be concealed;
which the Apostle calls the mother of Saints; of which City he reioyces, that
he is made a free-denison. Neither yet by saying this, do I tax my self of
inconstancy, or condemn that, which I do; that so I should in vain seem to
have left my friends, and country, after the example of Abraham: but I dare not
circumscribe the omnipotency of God to so narrow as compass; and to confine
him to a small place of the earth, whom heaven is not able to contain. The
faithful are not waighed by the diversity of places, but by the merit of their
faith. And they who are true adorers, adore not the father either in Jerusalem,
or in Mount Gasarim: for God is a spirit, and they must do it in spirit, and
truth. The spirit breaths where it will. The earth and the fulness thereof, is
our Lords. Since the whole world was bathed with that celestial dew, the fleece
of Jury being dry, and many coming from the East and West, have reposed in the
bosom of Abraham, God has given over to be only known in Jury, and to have
his name great in Israel; but the sound of the Apostles, is now gone over the
whole earth, and their words even to the ends of the world. Our Savior
speaking to his Disciples when he was in the Temple, said thus; Rise up, let*
us go hence. And to the Jews; Tour house shall be left desert to you. If
heaven and earth shall pass, certainly all things which are earthly, shall
pass: And therefore the places of the Cross, and Resurrection, shall profit
the^, who carry their Cross; who rise daily with Christ, and who make
themselves worthy of such an excellent habitation. But they who say, The temple
of the Lord, the temple of the Lord; Let them hear the Apostle say, You are
the temple of our Lord, and the holy Ghost dwells in you. And that heavenly
Court is open alike, both toward Jerusalem, and toward Britanny. For the
kingdom of God is within you. Anthony, and all those swarms of Monks of
Egypt, and Mesopotamia, Pontus, Capad^cis, and Armenia never saw Jerusalem,
and heaven is open to them without any relation to this City. Blessed
Hilarion, who was of Palestine, and lived there, did never spend but one day in
the seeing of Jerusalem, to the end, that being so near hand, he might
neither seem to contemn those holy places, nor yet on the other side, might
seem to shut up our Lord in any one place. From the times of Adrian, to the
empire of Constantine (which imported about the time of a hundred and four
score years) in the place of the Resurrection, there was an Idol of Jupiter.
In the rock of the Cross, there was placed a marble statue of Venus to be
worshipped. The persecutours who were authors thereof, conceiving that they
might abolish our Faith of the Resurrection, and of the Cross, when they had
polluted the holy places by their Idols. That wood which is called Thamus, that
is to say, of Adonis, did ouershaddow the most imperial place of the whole
world, namely this Bethleem of ours, whereof the Psalmist says: Truth is
sprung out of the earth, and in that hollow place where Christ being an Infant
did once cry, the paramour of Venus was lamented. But you will ask me to what
end I am so large in this particular? To the end that you may not think, that
any thing is wanting to your faith, because you have not been at Jerusalem;
and that you may not esteem us to be the better men, because we enjoy this
habitation. But whether you live here or there, you shall obtain of our Lord,
a reward which shall be equal to your works.

But yet that I may plainly confess what the pulse of my heart is in this
business, considering both your purpose, and that ardour of mind wherewith you
have disclaimed the world, I do really believe, that you will then find
difference in places, if forsaking Cittyes and the concourse of people which is
found therein, you will dwell in some little retired corner, and feeke Christ
in the desert, and pray alone in the mountain with Jesus, and enjoy the
neighborhood of these holy places. That is to say, that both you may estrange
your self from the City, and not loose the purpose of being a Monk. I speak
not this for Bishops, or Priests, who have other employments; but I speak of
it for a Monk, and such a one as formerly was noble in the world, who laid the
price of his possessions at the feet of the Apostles; thereby teaching, that
money was to* be trodden under foot, that so living in humility and secrecy, he
might continue to despise that, which he had once despised. If the places of
the Cross, and of the Resurrection were not exceedingly frequented in this
City, where there is a Court, where there is a guarde of soldiers, where
there are lascivious people iesters, mimickes, and all other things which were
wont to be in other Cities; or if it were only frequented by troops of
Monks; all Monks indeed might well desire such an habitation as this. But now
it is extreme folly, for a man to renounce the world, to forgo his country, to
forsake his Cittyes, to profess Monastical life; and then to live in greater
concourse of men abroad, then he was to have lived in his own country. Men
flock hither from all the parts of the world; the City is full of all kind
of people, and there is such a crowding here of folks of both sexes, that here
you are to endure that whole incouenience, whereof you avoided but a part, by
going from any other place.

Since therefore you do so confidently ask me by what way you are to go. I
will unmask my self, and tell you clearly what I think. If you will
exercise the office of a Priest, if you be delighted in the employment of
Episcopal dignity, live in Cities and Towns; and procure that the salvation
of others souls may be profitable to yours. But if you desire to be that which
now you are called, that is to say, a Monk, which signifyes to be a solitary
person; what make you in Cities, which are not the habitations of several
single persons, but of many who live together? Every profession has his
chiefes. Let Captains of Roman armies, imitate the Camillo's, the Fabricio's,
the Regulo's, and the Scipio's. Let Philosophers propound to themselves
Pythagoras, Socrates, Plato, Aristotle. Let Poets imitate Homer, Virgil,
Menander, and Terence. Historians, Thucydides, Salust, Her^tus, Liuy; Orators,
Lysias the Gracchi, Demosthenes, and Tully. And (that we may come nearer to our
selves.) let Bishops and Priests have the Apostles and Apostolical persons for
their patterns, and let them endeavor to have their merit, since they have
their honor. But let us have for the prime men of our institute, the Paulo's,
the Autho^ies, the Iulians, Hilarions, and the Macario's* And (that I may
return to the authority of scriptures) our General is Elias, and Elizeus; and
our Captains are the sons of the Prophets, who dwelt in solitary places and
deserts, and who made Tabernacles for themselves, near the waters of Jordan.
The children of Rechab, are of this kind, who drunk no wine, nor other thing
that could inebriat; who dwelt in Tents, who were praised in Jeremy, by the
voice of God; and it was promised to them, that some one of their stock,
should not be wanting, who might stand before our Lord. This I think is
signified by the title of the 70. Psalm, speaking of the sons of Ionadab,
and of them, who were led into captivity. This is Ionadab the son of Rechab,
who is affirmed in the book of Kings, to have mounted the chariot of Hi^u,
and his sons they are, who (ever dwelling in Tents, and being at last
compelled upon the breaking in of the Army of Chaldea; to enter into
Jerusalem) are said to have been the first, who were led into captivity;
because after having enjoyed the large liberty of a desert, they were shut up
in that City, as if it had been a prison. I beseech you therefore, because
that holy Sister of yours has a kind of tie upon you, and for that you pass
not on as yet, with a pace which is wholly free, yet whether you be here or
there, fly from complements, and visits, and feasts, as from certain chains
which will tie you to pleasure. Let your food be mean, as herbs, and pulse;
and take it not till night; and little fishes sometimes, which you must hold
for a great delicacy. He who desires Christ, and feeds upon that bread, must
not greatly care of how precious meats his excrement be made: whatsoever
delicate thing you eat is all one with bread and pulse, when once it is passed
down below the throat. You have two books of mine against Iouinian, of the
contempt of delight in eating. Let your hand ever have in it some holy book.
You must often pray with your knees bent, and your mind must be raised up to
our Lord. You must watch often, and often sleep with an empty stomach. These
carryers o tales and these pretty little vanities, and smoothing flatterers, you
must fly like so many enemies. Dispense your alms with your own hand, for the
ease of the charge of poor and virtuous people. Honesty is grown rare amongst
men. Do you not believe what I say? Think of Judas his purse.

Do not affect poor clothes, with a proud mind. What need have you to see
those things often, for the contempt whereof you became a Monk. Especially
let your sister decline the conversation of these Matrons, and let her have no
cause, either to be sorry for her self, or to admire her self, when she sees
her self all neglected and ill clad, amongst the silks and jewels of other
women, who ^it about her. For one of these two will bring you to repent your
good purpose, and the other is a Seminary of vainglory. Take heed that you, who
have formerly been a faithful and excellent dispencer of your own goods, take
not upon you to distribute the money of other folks. You conceive well what I
say: for our Lord has given you a very universal understanding* Carry the
simplicity of a dove, that you procure not to deceive any man; and the
subtility of a serpent, that you be not supplanted by the sleights of others.
It is not much less vicious for a Christian, to be deceived then to deceive.
Whom you shall find to be ever, or often speaking of money (except it be in the
way of alms, which must be open to all) hold him rather to be, a merchaunt,
then a Monk. Besides that which must serve for food, and clothing, and other
manifest necessities, do not give to any, least the dogs, eat up the
childrens* bread. The believing soul is a true temple of Christ. Apparel that,
adorn that, offer* presents to that, and receive Christ in that. For what
serves it, that the walls should glister with pr^tious stones, and that Christ
should be in danger to die of hunger, in the person of a poor man? They are no
goods of yours, which you possess, but you are only trusted with dispensing
them. Remember Ananias, and Saphira. They did too miserably keep their own;
and take you heed, that imprudently you scatter not the substance of Christ;
that is to say, that by indiscretion or affection, you bestow not the goods of
the poor, upon such as are not poor; and that (according to the laying of
that most wise man) Liberality ^e not destroyed by liberality. Do not look
back upon the martial ornaments, and the vain title of the Cato'^. I know
you within, even to the very roots. It is a high point, to be indeed and not
only to seem a Christian; And I know not how, but so it is, that they, who
please the world, displease Christ.

I speak not these things, as if according to the Proverb, The sow were
reading a lesson to Minerua, but now that you are s^tting to Sea, I have
admonished you as one friend should do another: choosing, that you should
rather observe my skill to be little, then my good will; and desiryng that
wherein I have slipped, you may pass on with a firm pace.

I have gladly read that book, which you composed for the Emperor Theodosius,
with much prudence and eloquence; and especially I liked the subdiuision
thereof. And as in the first parts, you overcome others, so in the later you
outstrip your self. The very manner of discourse is close, and clean, and
together with the purity of Tully it is full of sentences. For that kind of
eloquence (as one says) is but cold and weak, when only the words deserve
praise. Besides, you make your consequences of things very well, and one thing
^angs handsomely upon another. Whatsoever you assume, i^ either an end of that
which goes before, or a beginning of that which follows. Theodosius is happy,
in being defended by such an Orator of Christ. You have given luster to his
princely roabes, and you have consecrated the profitablenes of his laws, to
succeeding ages* Proceed on in virtue you, who have laid so good foundations.
What kind of soldier will you prove when you have experience? O that I were so
happy, as to have the leading of such a wit as yours, not through the Aonian
mountains and those tops of the hill of Helicon, (whereof the Poets speak)
but by the tops of Sion, and Itabirium, and Sina. If I might but teach you,
what I have learned, and deliver the mysteries of Scriptures, as it were into
your hands, some such thing would grow up to us, as the learned Greece never
had. Hearken therefore my fellow servant, my freiend, my brother* observe a
little, by what path you are to walk, in the holy Scripture. All that which we
read in those divine books, does shine indeed, and that brightly, even in the
bark, but it is much sweeter in the substance and depth thereof. He who will
eat the kernel, must break the nut: Reueal mine eyes (says David) and I will
consider the wonderful things of thy law. If so great a Prophet confess so
great darkness of ignorance; with what a night of stupidity may we conceive our
selves to be environed, who are but little ones, and as it were but sucking
babes? But this veyle was not only put upon the face of Moses, but upon that
also of the Evangelists and Apostles. Our Savior spoke to the people in
parables; and auowing that that which he delivered had somewhat in it of the
Mystical, he said, He who has ears to hear, let him hear. Unless all things
which are written of him be opened by him, who has the keye of David, which
shuts and no man opens, and which opens and no man shuts, they will never be
disclosed by any other. If you had this ground, and if your work were
perfected by this last hand, we should have nothing more graceful, nothing
more learned, nothing more delightful, nothing more Latin then your books.
Tertullian is frequent in sentences, but of no very delightful speech. Blessed
Cyprian walks on, all sweet and smooth, like a most pure fountain, but
(employing himself wholly upon the exercise of virtue, and taken up by the
troubles of persecution) he discoursed not at all of holy Scriptures.
Victorinus, who was after crowned with an illustrious marytrdome, is not able
to express what he understands. Lactantius, who was a very flood of Ciceronian
eloquence, I would to God he could as well have confirmed our doctrine, as he
did easily confute that of others. A^nobius was unequal, and subject to
excess, and with all confused, without dividing his work. Saint Hilary is
aloft in his french style, and having the ornament of those flowers of Gr^cian
eloquence, he is inuolued sometimes in long periods; and is far out of the
reach of ordinary men. I pass over the rest in silence, whether they be dead,
or still alive, of whom others may iudg^ either way, after our time.

And now I come to you, who are my fellow in profession, my companion, and my
friend, (I say my friend, though you be not yet of my acquaintance) and I will
pray you, not to suspect my friendship of flattery, but rather conceive, that I
am in error, or that I slip through the love I bear you; then that I would
deceive a friend, by speaking hlm fair. You have a great wit, and an
unspeakable store and copy of speech; and you express your self purely, and
with ease, and the same facility and purity is seasoned with prudence; for the
head being sound, all the senses are in vigor. If labor and the understanding
of Scripture were added to this prudence, and eloquence, we should see you in a
short time to hold the very highest place amongst our men; and (ascending up to
the house of Sion, with Jacob) to sing upon the house tops, that which you had
learned and known in the private rooms of the house. Gird your self up, I
beseech you, gird yourselfe up. Nothing of this world is given to mortal men,
but upon the price of great labor. Let the Church have you noble, as the
Senate had you in former time; and now prepare riches for your self, which you
may daily bestow, and yet will never fail, as long as the world lasts. Do it
whilst yet your head is not sprinkled with gray hairs; before you be
ouergrowne with diseases, and melancholy, and old age, and pain, and before
sad death carries us unmercifully away. I cannot be content with any mediocrity
in you; but I desire that all may be eminent, all excellent. With what greedy
gladness I have received the holy Bishop Vigilantius, it is fitter that you
learn by his words, then by my letters. Upon what ground he went hence, and
left us so soon, I must not say, least I may seem to offend some. I have
entertained him a while as he was passing by in have; and I have given him a
taste of our friendship* to the end that you may learn by him, that which you
desire to know of me. I entreat that by your means, I may salute your fellow
servant, who labors with you in our Lord.

FINIS.
THE LIVES OF SAINT PAVL THE FIRST HERMIT, OF SAINT HILARION THE FIRST MONK
OF SYRIA, AND OF SAINT MALCHVS,

Written by Saint Hierome.

THE LIFE OF SAINT PAVL THE HERMIT, WRITTEN BY S. HIEROME.
THE ARGUMENT.
PAVL of Thebais having about the age of 15 years, being instructed in the
literature as well of the Graecians, as of the Egyptians, both his Parents
being dead, and he accused by his Sisters husband, for being a Christian, and
flying from Decius and Valerianus the persecutors, betook himself to the
wilderness. There did he lead his life, by the space of ninety four years, in
admirable abstinence and sanctity till such time as being visited by that great
Anthony (who was directed so to do by a divine revelation) he slept in our
Lord. The life of this Paul, is elegantly described by Saint Hierome.

THE LIFE.
IT has been often doubted among many, by what Monk the Desert was first
inhabited. Some have reached at it so high, as to ascribe the first beginning
to B. Elias, and then to John. But Elias seems to us, to have rather been a
Prophet, then a Monk; and John to have begun to be a kind of a Prophet, before
he was borne. But some others affirm (and they have brought the whole vulgar
to be of their opinion) that Anthony was the first in undertaking this kind of
life, which yet is but partly true. For it is not so properly to be said, that
he was the first of all the Eremites, as that he gave spirit to the endeauours,
and designs of them all. But Amathas and Macharius, who were the disciples of
this Anthony (and whereof the former buried the body of his Master) affirm
even to this day, that a certain Paul of Thebais, was the chief, and prime
man of this Institute, which opinion we also approve, though not so much,
because he carries the name of it, as upon other reasons. Many there are who
spread abroad both these, and other things at their pleasure, as namely that
there was a certain man all hairy to his very feet, who hid himself in a
hoale under ground, and they devise many incredible things, not worth the
relating; and since their affirmation is so void of shame, their opinion seems
not worthy of confutation. But now for as much as a diligent account has been
given us of this Anthony, both in the Greek and Latin tongue, I have disposed
my self to write some few things of the beginning, and end of Paul; rather
because it has been omitted by others, then that I presume upon my self. For
as for the manner of his life, in the middle part of his age, and what subtle
sly temptations of Satan he sustained, there is no mortal man, who can tell
us any news thereof.

Under Decius and Valerian us the persecutors, at such time as Cornelius at
Rome, and Cyprian at Carthage, were condemned to the felicity of shedding their
blood, many Churches in Aegipt and Thebais, were blasted by a bitter storm of
persecution. The Christians of that time, desired no better then to give their
lives for the name of Christ, by the compendious stroke of the sword; but the
crafty adversary going in search after slower punishments, for the delivery of
men over to death, did more desire to cut the throats of souls, then of
bodies; and (as was said by Cyprian, who himself suffered Martyrdom) he would
not permit them to be killed, who were even desirous to dye. And now to the end
that his cruelty may be the more notorious, we have here committed two
examples to memory.

When a certain Martyr was perseuering in his faith, and continued to be
conquerors in the midst both of rackes, and burning plates, the persecutor
commanded that he should be anointed all over with honey and so (with his hands
bound behind him) be extended under a scorching Sun with his face upward; to
the end that he might yield himself, upon the sting of flies, who before, had
been victorious over the torments of fire. He commanded another Martyr, who was
flourishing in the very prime of his youth to be led aside into a most
delicious garden and there in the midst of pure lyllies, and blushing roses,
(where also a stream of water was creeping on with a soft bubling noise, and
the wind gently whisling checked the leaves of the trees) to be spread with his
face upward upon a bed stuffed with down, and to be left tied there with
silken bands, to the end that so he might not be able to deliver himself from
thence. Now upon the retiring of all them who were present, a beautiful
Curtisan came to make her approach, and began with her delicate arms, to
embrace his neck; and (which cannot be modestly related) did also impurely
touch him otherwise, to the end that his body being altered, and inflamed by
lust the lascivious conquerors might ouerspred him. This soldier of the band
of Christ, knew not what to do, nor which way to turn himself, whom torments
had not subdued, delight was beginning to overcome, when at length (inspired
from heaven) he bit of his own tongue, and spitting it into the face of her,
who kissed him, the sense of lust, was subdued, by the sharpenes of that pain
which succeeded.

At that time therefore, when such things as these were acted, in the
inferior T^ebau, (when the Sister of Paul was then already bestowed by him in
marriage, (himself having a rich inheritance descended to him by the death of
both his Parents; whilst then he was of the age of about fifteen years) and
having been eminently instructed in the literature both of the Graecians and
Egyptians, and endued with a meek spirit, and which greatly loved God, and
finding that the storm of persecutions brought such thunder with it), he took
a resolution of retiring into a remote, and private villa of his own.

But, O thou vast desire of gould;
How hugely do thou make men bold?
His Sisters husband grew to betray him, whom he ought to have concealed; nor
could the tears of the wife nor the respects of common blood, nor the
consideration of God behoulding all things from on high, dissuade him from
that wickedness. But cruelty urged him to do those things, though the pretext
which it took was from piety. Now as soon as this most discreet young man
grew to understand thus much, he fled toward the desert Mountains, where he
might expect the end of this persecution, and so voluntarily he made a virtue
of necessity. And proceeding on by little and little, and then pawsing, and
often doing the same thing; at last he met with a great rocky hill, near the
bottom whereof there was a large kind of cave shut up by a stone. Upon the
removing of which stone he being more earnest in making new discoueries
(according to the nature of man which loves the knowledge of hidden things) he
perceived a great entry there within, which being open to the sky above, was
ouerspred by the wide branches of an old Palm tree, poynting out a most
clear fountain, the stream where of breaking only out of the ground, the
same earth which had brougbt it forth did instantly suck it up again, through
a little hole. There were moreover, throughout that worn mountain not a few
old rooms, wherein there might be seen certain anuiles, and hammers, which
by that time were grown rough with rust, and formerly had been employed upon
stamping coin. And it is related by the Egyptians, that this place had been
used as a secret mint-house of money, at such time as Cleopatra kept that close
intelligence with Antonius. But Paul growing now to carry a particular kind of
love to this Cave, as if it had been expressly designed to him by Almighty
God, did there employ his whole life in solitude and prayer. The Palm Tree
served his turn, both to affoard him food, and clothes. Which, that no man
may think impossible, I take Jesus, and his holy Angels to witness, how, in
that part of the desert, which ioynes Syria and Sarazens together, I have
seen certain Monks, whereof one being a recluse, had lived during thirty
years, upon barley bread, and puddle water; and another who continuing in an
old Cesterne, which the Syrians in their language call Caba, was sustained by
the only eating of five dried Figs every day. These things will seem
incredible to them who are of unbelieving minds, for to others, all things are
possible.

But to return to that from which I had digressed, when now the B. Paul had
lead a celestial life on earth, being by that time, a hundred and thirteen
years old, and when Anthony having ninety years of age, had remained alone
in another Desert, as himself was wont to relate; a thought slipped once into
the said Anthonyes mind, as if no perfect Monk remained in that wilderness,
besides himself. But whilst he was at rest by night, it was revealed to him,
that there was another much more excellent then he, whom he was appointed to
find out, and visit. Therefore instantly upon break of day, the venerable old
man, vphoulding his weak limbs by the support of a staff disposed himself to
be going, though he knew not directly whether. But shortly then the high noone
began to inflame the world un der a scorching Sun, and yet he was not
discouraged from his new journey, but said: I confide that my God will show me
that servant of his, whom he has promised. Not a word more then this, when
behold he sees a creature made of horse and man, such as Poets are wont to
call Hippocentaures. Upon which fight, he arms his forehead with the
impression of that salutiferous sign, and says: Tell me, O thou, where dwells
that servant of God? But he gnashing out I know not what kind of barbarous
sound, and rather breaking then pronouncing his words, did yet by means of
that horrid speech, desire to entertain some pleasing discourse, with the old
man; and by extending his right hand, made discovery of the way which was
sought, and so striking through those open plains, with a swift flight, he
vanished out of the wo^dring eyes of the behoulder. Now whether the Devil did
contriue these things to fright the man, or else whether the wilderness, which
is wont to be fruitful of monstrous creaturs, did also bring forth this beast,
or no, is uncertain to us. But Anthony the while, being all amazed, and
reuoluing within himself what he had seen, proceeded on. And behold he
perceaues in a certain stony descent, which lay between two hills, a kind of
little man, with a crooked nose, and a rugged brow with horns, the lower part
of whose body was made up into the feet of a Goat. And Anthony being also
stricken by this spectacle, took instantly to himself the buckler of faith,
and the breast plate of hope, like a good warryer, but yet the aforesaid Animal,
brought him the fruit of Palms, for his provision, as pledges of peace. Upon
the understanding of this, Anthony made a pause, and demanding of the other who
he was, received this answer: A mortal creature I am, and one of the
inhabitants of the desert, whom the Pagans, being deluded with variety of
error are wont to worship, by the name of Fawnes, Satyrs, and Incubo's, I
perform the office of an Ambassador for the rest of the flock whereof I am.
And our suit is, that thou will pray for us to our common God, whom we know to
be come for the salvation of the world, and the sound of him is extended over
all the earth. Whilst he was delivering these words, our aged trauayler did
abundantly bedew his face with tears which the greatness of his joy sent forth,
as the interpretors of his heart; for he rejoiced in the glory of Christ, and
the destruction of Satan. And wondering withal, that he was able to understand
the others speech, and stricking upon the ground with his staff, he said: We
be to thee, O Alexandria, who worshipest Monsters instead of God. VVoe be to
thee, O thou adulterous City, to which the Devils of the whole world resort.
What remains for thee now to say? Beasts publish Christ, and thou worshipest
Monsters, instead of God. Nor had he yet ended speaking, when behold the
cloven footed creature flead away, as if it had been borne by wings. That
this may not move sctuple, through the mind, which men have, not to believe; it
was made good under King Constantine, by the testimony of all the world, that
such a kind of man as this being brought alive to Alexandria, became a
spectacle to the whole people, and when the body was once without life, it was
salted for fear of corrupting through the heat of the season, and brought to
Antioch, that the Emperor might also see it.

But, to proceed in my purpose. Anthony went on in his way, as he had begun,
discerning no other thing, then the footsteps of Bufaloes, and wiid beasts,
and the unlimited vastity of a desert. He knew not what to do, nor which way to
direct his course. Already the second day was spent, and there remained now but
one, wherein he hoped that he should not be forsaken by Christ. He spent that
whole second night in prayer, and while yet it was no more then twylight, he
discerned a she Wolf far off, who panting through the heat of thirst, crept
near to the foot of a mountain. He followed her with his eyes, and drawing
near (when the beast was gone) to a certain cave thereby, he was beginning to
look in; his curiosity not serving his turn, because the darkness drove back
his sight. But as the scripture says, Perfect love dispatches fear away; and
so moderating his pace, and houlding his breath, the cuning spy went in; and
sometimes going on, and then often staying again, he sucked up every little
noise into his ear. At last, through the horror of that deep darkness, he
discerned light far off, and going on with a kind of greedy have, his foot
gave against a stone, and made a noise. Upon the sound whereof, the blessed
Paul shut, and locked the door, which had been open before. But Anthony then
cast himself outright before the gates, and was begging entrance, till it had
grown to be the sixth hour of the day and more, saying: You know who I am;
from whence, and for what cause I come, I confess that I deserve not to
appear in your presence; but yet unless I see you, I will not retire. You who
receive beasts, how can you reject a man? I have sought now, and I have found
now; and now I knock, that it may be opened to me. If I obtain not thus much,
I will dye here at your gates; at least you will not refuse to bury me, when I
shall be dead.

Such things as this he spoke; and fixed stayed;
To whom the Hero, this short answer made.
No man does so desire, as that he will threaten withal. No man accompanies his
tears with injury or reproach. And can you marvel if I receive you not, when
your errand is but to dye at the gate. Then did Paul smile, and open the door;
which was no sooner done, but they did even incorporate themselves by mutual
embracements, and saluting one another by their proper names, did join in
giving thanks to our Lord. Now Paul sitting down with Anthony, after he had
given him a holy kiss, began thus to speak; Behold how he, whom you have
sought with so great labor, is all covered with rude gray hairs, and has his
body even rotten already with old age. Behold you see a man, who is shortly
to become dust. But yet because charity endures all things, tell me, I beseech
you, how fares it with the race of mankind? Are new houses erected, in those
o^ld Cities. To what Empire is the world subject now; whether yet remain
there any who are transported by the sin of worshipping devils* As they were
in speech of these things, they looked up, and saw a Crow sitting upon the
branch of a tree, who flying gently down laid a whole loaf of bread before
their wondering (...). When the Crow was gone, Behold (says Paul) our Lord who
is truly full of pity and mercy, has sent us our dinner. They are already
threescore years, since I have daily received half a loaf; but now upon your
arrival, Christ has doubled the provision of his soldiers. When therefore
they had performed the action of thanks giving to our Lord, they both sat
down upon the brimme of a clear fountain. But here the question growing
between them upon the point of who should break the bread, did almost draw
down the day to Evening* Paul urged Anthony to do it, upon the right of
hospitality which Paul was to pay; but Antony excused himself, upon the
respects which he ought to the antiquity of the other. At length this
resolution was taken that both of them should take hold of the bread, which
each of them, pulling by contrary ways toward himself, might find his part
in his own hands. After this, they stooped to the fountain, and took a taste
of the water, and offering up the Sacrifice of praise to God, they passed
through that night in watching. And as soon as the world saw day again, the
B. Paul spoke to Anthony after this manner. It is long O brother, since I knew
you were an Inhabitant of these parts, it is long since God made me a promise,
that I should have you as a fellow servant of mine. But now because the time of
my long repose is at hand, and for (that according to my desire of being
dissolved and being with Christ,) there remaynes a crown of Justice for me,
upon the finishing of my course; you are sent by our Lord, to cover this poor
body with earth, or rather to restore one earth to another. Upon the hearing of
these words, Anthony (all in tears and sighs,) besought him not to forsake
him so, but to accept him for a companion in that Journey. But then Paul
replied thus: You must not desire things for your self, but condescend to the
conueniencies of others. It were good indeed for you, if laying down the
burden of flesh and blood, you might follow the lamb; but it is also expedient
for the rest of your brethren, that they may be more instructed by your
example. I beseeeh you therefore return, (unless my suit be of too much trouble
to you) and bring that Cloak for the wrapping up of this poor body, which
Athanasius the Bishop bestowed upon you. This request was made by the blessed
Paul, not because he greatly cared, whether his corpse were to putrify naked, or
coured (he who had lived so many years, without any other garment then of the
woeuen leaves of palms,) but to the end that the grief for his death, might be
assuaged in the mind of Anthony, by his departing away. But Anthony being
amazed at that which had been said to him, concerning Athanasius and his cloak,
as if he had seen Christ in Paul, did worship God in his person, and presumed
not to make him any answer, but shedding tears in silence, and kissing both
his hands and eyes, he returned to his Monastery, which was afterward taken by
the Saracens. Neither did his feet suffer his heart to out strippe them; for
though his body, being extenuated by fasting, were then also defeated by his
many years, yet with his mind he overcame his age. At length, all weary and
panting, he ended his journey, and got home. And when two of his disciples, who
had been wont to serve him a long time before, came running toward him with
these words, Where, O Father, have you been, and stayed so long? He answered:
Woe (...) to me sinful man, who carry but the false name of a Monk, I have
seen Elias, I have seen a John in the desert, and I have truly seen Paul in a
paradise. And so holding his peace, and beating his breast with his hand, he
fetch the cloak out of his little Cell. And his disciples beseeching him that
he would declare more fully what the matter was, he answered thus: There is a
time for silence, and a time for speech. Then going forth, and taking not so
much as a bit of food, he returned by the same way he came, thirsting after
him, desiring to behold him, and contemplating him, both with eyes, and heart.
For he was full of fear least (as indeed it came to pass) the other should in
his absence, render up that spirit of his, which was due to Christ. And when
the next day was come, and he had iornyed some three hours, he saw Paul,
brightly shyning* in pure whitenes, and ascending up on high, in the midst of
troops of Angels, and of the quiers of Prophets, and Apostles. Then Anthony
casting himself headlong down upon his face, drew his hood over his head, and
weeping, yea and even roaring out, he said: Why, O Paul, do thou forsake me?
Why art thou gone without letting me so much as take my leave? Thou, whom I
came to know so late, why art thou departed so soon* it was afterward related
by Anthony, that he dispatched that rest of the way, with so great speed, as
that he flew like a very bird. And he had reason to make have, for being
entered into the cave, he saw the body without life, his knees doubled under
him, his neck erected, and his hands extended abroad on high. And conceauing
at the first that he had been yet alive, he joined with him in prayer; but
afterward, when he heard him not send forth any such sighs, as he was wont to
use in prayer, he rushed upon him, with a doleful kiss; and then grew to
understand, that even the dead corpse of the Saint, did pray after a sort* to
God (to whom all things live) by that posture of reverence. Anthony therefore
having shrouded the body, and brought it forth; and singing hymns and psalms,
according to the tradition of the Christian Church, was troubled that he had
not there some spade, wherewith he might dig, and make a grave. And wauing
between the variety of several passions, and casting with his thoughts many
ways, he said thus within himself: If I return to the Monastery, it is a
journey of no less then three days; if I stay here, I shall loose my time
and labor; my best way would be even to dye, and by casting my self headlong
against this warryer of thine, O Christ, to deliver up my last breath. Whilst
he was reuoluing these things in his mind* behold, from the more inward part
of the desert, two Lions bore themselves with speed toward him, their manes
al wauing about their necks. At the first, upon this sight, he was much
frighted; yet then instantly casting up his mind to God, he remained as void of
fear, as if he had but seen some pair of Doves. But the Lions, having
directed their course to the corpse of that other blessed old man, made a
stand, and fawning with their tails, they lay down at his feet, roaring out
with a huge noise, so as a man might plainly understand, that they bewailed
the death of Paul after the best manner they could. Soon after, they also
began to scrape the ground with their paws, casting out sand (as if it had
been with a kind of strife who should do it fastest) they dug a place,
which might be able to contain a man; and then instantly casting down their
necks, and wagging their ears, they went toward Anthony; and as if they had
demanded some wages for their pains, they licked both his hands* and feet.
But he understood it, as if they had desired a blessing from him, and therefore
instantly enlarging his heart toward the praise of Christ, for that even these
dumme Beasts, did also understand that there was a God, he expressed himself
thus, O Lord, without whose beck, neither does any leaf fall from a Tree, nor
any Sparrow light upon the ground, be good to these creatures, as thou know.
And so making a sign with his hand, he gave them a commandment to be gone. As
soon as they were departed, he submitted his old shoulders to the weight of
that holy corpse; and laying it down in the grave, and then casting earth upon
it, he made a kind of tomb, according to the manner. But then, upon the next
day (least this pious heir should not become the owner of some of the
intestates goods) he took the coat, which Paul had wouen for himself after
the manner of Baskets, of Palm leaves. And so returning to his Monastery, he
made relation of al to his Disciples, in order as it had passed; and upon the
solemnities of Easter, and Pentecost, he ever used to wear the coat of Paul.

And now upon the end of this little work, I will take the liberty, to ask
those men, who have such store of Lands, as that they hardly know the names
thereof; they who apparel their houses in marble, and thread the price of whole
Ma^nours, upon roapes of pearl; what thing was ever wanting to this half
naked man? You drink in cupps made of precious stone; this man satisfied
Nature, by the use of a pair of hollow hands. You imbroder your garments with
gold, but he had not so much as the meanest cloth, which belonged to any
drudge of yours. But then, Heaven on the other side will be open to that poor
man; and you with your guilt, will go down to Hell. He was still clothed with
Christ, though he were naked; you, being clad with silk, have lost the garment
of Christ. Paul lies covered under poor light dust, and he shall rise up
again into glory; whereas you are pressed down by those weighty and costly
Tombs of stone, and are to burn in hell fire with your wealth. I beseech you
be good to your selves, or else at least, be good to your riches, which you love
so well. Why wrappe you up the bodies of your dead friends, in goulden
clothes? Why do you not permit, that Ambition and Pride may cease at least in
the midest of your sorrows and tears? Are not perhaps the Carkases of rich
men able to rot, unless they be laid up in filke? I beseech you, whosoever you
be, that read this, be mindful of Hierome, that sinful man; to whom yet,
if our Lord should grant his wish, he would much rather choose the coat of
Paul with his merits, then the purple of Kings with their pains.

FINIS.
THE LIFE OF S. HILARION THE HERMIT, WRITTEN BY S. HIEROME.
THE ARGUMENT.
HILARION was a Monk, borne at Thabatha a little town of Palestine, a
disciple of that great Anthony; with how singular abstinence and sanctity he
lead his life, and with how great Miracles it was continually illustrated, even
when he procured tolye most concealed S. Hierome does largely and learnedly
express; and so, as that a man may clearly see, the true pattern of a
perfect Monk in his person.

THE LIFE.
BEING to write the life of S. Hilarion, I inuoke the holy Ghost, who inhabited
his soul; that so he, who gave power to him, may give speech to me, wherewith
to manifest the same; and so my words, may grow to equal his deeds. For (as
Crispus says) their merits who have wrought wonders, have been held just as
great by men, as the more excellent kind of wits have been able to magnify
them by words. Alexander the Great, the Macedonian (whom Daniel calls the
Ram, or Leopard, or Goat,) when he came to Achilles his tomb, Happy (says
the young man) art thou, who enioyest such a mighty publisher of thy merits;
reflecting thereby upon Homer. But as for me, I am to relate the conversation,
and life of a person so great, and so qualifyed, as that Homer himself, if he
were present, would either envy the excellency of the subject, or else would
sink under the burden. For though S. Epiphanius the Bishop of Salamin^ in
Cyprus, who conuersed much with Hilarion, wrote his praises in a short Epistle,
which is usually read, yet one thing is to praise a dead man, according to the
nature of a common place; and another, to relate the virtues, which were proper
to that dead man. Whereupon we also, rather under his favor, then with meaning
to show him any disrespect, will set upon the work, which was begun by him;
resolving to contemn the exceptions of ill tongued men, who formerly
detracting from the life, which I wrote of Paul, will now perhaps do as much,
for this of Hilarion; taxing the former of excess in solitude, and chalenging
the later, for exposing himself overmuch to public view; that so he, who say
ever hid, might be thought as good, as not to have been at al; and this other,
who was seen by so many, might be held thereby in less high account. Their
Predecessors the Pharisees did the self same thing heretofore, when neither
the desert, and fasts of John, nor the couersation or society, in eating and
drinking, which was used by our Lord and Savior, knew how to please. But I
will begin the work which I have in hand, and pass by those barking Dogs,
with a deaf ear.

Hilarion was borne in a little town called Thabatha, which is situated
toward the South, about five miles from Gaza, a City of Palestine; and he
sprung (as men are wont to say) like a Rose out of thorns, for he had
Idolaters to his Parents. He was sent by them to Alexandria, and applied to the
study of Grammar; and there (for as much as might be expected from one of his
tender years,) he gave great testimony in a short time, both of his wit, and
good conversation. He was dear to all them who knew him, and he was a Master
of speech; and (which passes these praises) he was a belieuer in our Lord
Jesus, and did not delight in those mad sportes, which were exhibited in the
Circus, nor in the luxurious entertainements of the Theater, where so great
essusio^ of blood was made. His whole comfort was to be at Church, when
Christians were assembled there. Being then grown to hear the famous name of
Anthony, which was celebrated through all the parts of Egypt, he went on
toward the desert, through a desire he had to see him. This he no sooner did,
but instantly he changed his former habit, and remained with him, upon the
point of two Months, contemplating the order of his life, and the gravity of
his conversation, how frequent he was in prayer, how humble in receiving b^
brethren, how severe in reprehending them, how cheerful in exhorting them;
and how no corporal indisposition did at any time interrupt the abstinent and
rigid diet, which he kept. But then Hilarion being no longer able to endure the
frequent concourse of them who resorted to Antony, by occasion either of being
possessed by Devils, or of several other infirmityes; and not houlding it to
be convenient for him to endure such troops of inhabitants of Cities, in such
a wilderness as that, and conceauing that he was rather to begin as Anthony had
done; and that Anthony was then enjoying the fruits of his victory, like an
old soldier, but that himself had scarce begun to carry arms; he returned
with some Monks into his own country. And his Parents, by that time being
dead, he distributed part of his substance to his Brothers, and part to the
poor, reserving nothing at all to himself, as fearing both the example, and
punishment of Ananias and Saphyra in the Acts of the Apostles, and remembering
this saying of our Lord; He, who renounces not all that which he possesses, can
be no disciple of mine. He was then about fifteen years of age, and thus
being naked, but yet armed with Christ, he entered into that Desert, which is
distant seven mile from Matoma, the staple of Gaza, which lies upon the Sea
coast, on the left hand of them, who go toward Egypt. And although those
places were all stained with the blood of many murders, and his friends and
kindred did declare the imminent danger to which he exposed himself; yet he
despised one kind of death, that he might escape another. All men wondered at
his courage, and they wondered also at his tender years, saving that the flame
of his heart, and certain sparks of faith, did even shine out by his eyes. His
face was but thin, his body was delicate and lean, and sensible of any
injury of weather, and of the trouble of any little either heat or could.
Having therefore all covered himself with sacke-cloath, and besides wearing a
shirt of hair, which the B. Anthony had given him, together with a country
Cassocke at his departure, he betook himself to a vast and terrible kind of
wilderness, between the Sea shore on the one side, and certain fenns on the
other, eating only fifteen dried Figs every day after Sun set. And because
those parts were grown infamous by the multitude of cruel robberies which
were committed there abouts, he never used to stay long in the self same
place. What had the Devil now to do? Which way should he turn himself? He
who once had vaunted and said: I will pl^nt my throne upon the stars of
Heaven, and I will be like the most High, perceived himself now to be overcome
by a child, and to be sooner trodden upon by him, then he was able in effect,
through his tender years, to tread at all. The Devil did therefore then begin
to move the sense of Hilarion, and to suggest such motives of lust, as be
vsuale when bodies are budding first, in the spring of youth. This young
soldier of Christ was even constrained to think upon objects, whereof he was
ignorant; and to look with the eye of his phansy, upon the whole story of that
business, whereof he had never taken any experience. Upon this, being angry
with himself, and beating his breast with his fist, (as if he had been able
to destroy his thoughts, with his hands: I will take order (says he) thou
little Ass, that thou shall not kick, nor will I feed thee with corn, but
with straw; I will starve thee, and I will lay heavy load upon thee, I will
exercise, and tire thee out, both by heates and coldes, that so thou may have
more care, how to get a bit of meat, then how to satisfy thy lust. So that when
his very life would be failing, after the fast of three or four days, he
would sustain it with the juice of herbs, and a few dried Figs; praying and
singing often, and he would also be breaking the ground with a rake; that so
the labor of his working, might ad to the trouble of his fasting. And weauing
small twigs together with great rushes, he imitated the discipline of the
Aegiptian Moncks, and remembered the sentence of the Apostle, saying: He, who
does not work, must not eat. Being thus extenuated, and having his body so
far exhausted, as that it would scarce hang together, he began one night, to
hear the crying of Infants, the bleating of Sheep, the bellowing of Oxen, the
lamentation as if it had been of Woeme^, the roaring of Lions, the clashing
noise of an Army; and such a confusion of prodigious sounds, that being
frighted with the noise of them; before he perceived any sight, his heart began
to faint. But he soon found them to be scorns and plots of the Devil; and so
casting himself then upon his knees, he signed his forhead with the Cross of
Christ. Being defended with such a helmet as that, and compassed in by the coat
armor of faith, he fought more valiantly, as he was laid down, then before;
already then desiring to see them, whom formerly he had even trembled to hear;
and looking for the^ round about, with earnest eyes. When behold, upon the
sudden, he perceived by the shining of the Moon, that a chariot drawn by
burning horses came rushing on toward him, and as soon as he had called upon
Jesus, all that business was swallowed up before his eyes, by a sudden gaping
of the earth* Upon this, he said; He has cast the horse and the horseman into
the sea; and some trust in their chariots, and some in their horses, but we
will be magnifyed in the name of the Lord our God. Many were his temptations,
and many snares were set by the Devils for him, day and night; all which if I
would undertake to relate, I should exceed the measure of one volume. How often
would naked Women appear to him, as he was resting? How often would most
sumptuous diet be set before him, when he was fasting? Sometimes the yelling
wolf, and the grinning fox, would be leaping over him, when he was praying;
and when he was singing, some fight of Gladiators, would present it self; and
one, as if he had been killed, did once fall down before his feet, desiring
burial at his hands. He was praying, with his head bowed down to the ground,
and his mind being once distracted (according to humane fraylty) he had I know
not what other thought; when instantly a nimble rider, got upon his back,
beating his sides with his heels, and his neck with his whippe, and said; why
sleep thou? and scornfully laughing at him as he sat, did ask him, when he
was faynting, whether he would eat any prouender, or no?

Now from the sixteenth years of his age, til the twentyth, he declyned the
heates, and raynes, in a poor short little Houel, which he had woeuen of
reeds, and boughs. Afterward he built a little poor Cell for himself, which
is extant to this day. It had but the breadth of four foot, and the height of
five; so that it was lower then he; in length it was a little longer then the
extent of his body; so that you would rather have esteemed it to be a grave,
then a house. He cut his hair once every year, and it was at Easter. He lay
perpetually till his death, upon the bare ground, with a matte. He never washed
that sacke-cloath, which he had o^ce put on; affirming that it was idle, to
look for neatnes in ^aircloathes; nor did he ever change any coat, till it
were utterly worn out. The holy scriptures, he had without book; and after
his prayers, and the psalms, he would recite them, as in the presence of God.
And because it would be a long business to discover, step by step, how he rose
up toward perfection in the several ages of his life, I will brieflly first
comprehend the history thereof in gross, and so lay it before the eyes of the
Reader; and then I will in order, deliver a more particular Relation.

Between the one and twentyth, and the seven and twentyth year of his age, he
daily took for three years, a little more then half a pint of pulse, steeped
in cold water; and during the other three, he took dry bread with water, and
salt. From the seven and twentyth, to the thirtyth, he was sustained by wild
herbs, and by the roots of certain plants taken raw. From the one and
thirtyth to the sieve and thirtyth, he took for his daily food, six ounces of
barley bread, and some kitchen herbs, but half boiled, and without oil. But
observing that his eyes began already to dazzle, and that his whole body grew to
have a kind of itch upon it, and to be subject to an unnatural kind of
roughnes; he added oil to his former diet; and till the sixtyth year of his
age he ran on in this degree of abstinence, not once so much as tasting,
either pulse, or fruit*or any other thing: At last, when he found his body to
be even all ouerwrought, and conceived that his death was very near at hand;
from the sixty fourth, till the eightyth year of his age, he abstayned even
from bread also with incredible fervor of mind; proceeding as if he were but
then newly entering into the service of God; whereas others at that time, are
wont to be more remiss in their manner of life. But having fourscore years of
age there were made for him, certain little poor broths of flower and herbs,
which were broken or cut; the whole proportion both of meat, and drink, scarce
arriving to the weight of four ounces; and thus he went through the whole
order of his life; and never broke his fast till Sun set, though it were upon
the highest feasts, or in his greatest sickness. But now it is time that I
return to speak particularly of things in order.

When he was yet dwelling in his houel, having eighteen years of age, there
came upon him, certain murdering thieves, either as thinking, that he had
somewhat, which was worth the carrying away; or else, as houlding that it
amounted to be a kind of contempt of them, that a solitary youth should presume
not to be affrayd of their force. So as, scouring that quarter, between the sea
and the Fens, from the evening to Su^ne rising, and never being able to meet
with his lodging; but once having found him in broad day light, what would
thou do (said they) if now the murdering thieves should come? To whom he
answered. That the naked man fears no thieves. Whereupon they said, yet there
is no doubt but thou may be killed. I may (says he) and therefore do I
fear no murdering thieves, because I am ready to die. But they, admiring his
constancy, and strong faith, and confessing how they had been wandering by
night; and that their eyes had been blinded from finding him, did make him a
promise to lead a better life from that time forward.

By this time, he had been two and twenty years in that desert, and was
generally known by fame, and published over all the cittyes of Palestine; when
in the mean while a certain woman of Eleutheropolis, who perceived her self
to be neglected by her husband by reason of her barrennes (for already she had
passed fifteen years without yielding any fruit of marriage) was the first,
who presumed to break in, upon the Blessed Hilarion. And he suspecting no such
matter, she cast her self suddenly down at his knees, and said: Pardon this
bouldnes, pardon this necessity of mine. Why do you turn away your eyes?
Why fly you from your suitor? Look not on me as a woman, but as a miserable
creature. Yet, this sex brought forth the Savior of the world: not the whole,
but the sick, need the Physician. At length he stayed, and looking after so
long time upon her, he demanded the reason, both of her coming and of her
weeping, which as soon as he had understood, he cast up his eyes to heaven,
bidding her have faith; and following her with tears, he saw her with a son
at the years end. This first miracle of his, was illustrated by another, and
greater.

Aristaene (the wife of Elpidius who afterward was Captain of the Guarde) a
woman of great nobility in her Country, and yet more noble among Christians,
returning from Blessed Anthony with her husband and three children, made stay
at Gaza, by reason of her sickness. For there, whether it were by corruption of
the air, or as it appeared afterward, for the glory of Hilarion the servant of
God, they were surprised all together, with a dangerous double Tertian, and
the Physicians despayred of them all. The mother lay lame^ting loudly, and
still was running to and fro between her three children, as if already, they
had been three coarses; not knowing which of them she was to bewail first.
But understanding that there was a certain Moncke in the wilderness near at
hand, she forgot the train fit for a Matrone, and only knew her self to be a
Mother, and went attended but by her maids and Eunuchs, and would scarce be
persuaded by her husband, to ease her self by ryding thither upon a poor
little Ass. When she arrived with him, she said; I beseech you for the love of
Jesus, our most merciful God, and by his Cross, and blood, that you will
restore me my three sons; and that the name of our Lord, and Savior may be
glorified in this City of the Gentiles. But he refusing, and saying that he
would never go out of his cell, and being wont not only not to pass into any
City, but not so much as into any little house, she cast her self prostrate
upon the ground, crying often after this manner: Hilarion thou servant of
Christ, restore me my children, let them, who were cherished by Anthony in
Egypt, be preserved in Syria by thee. All they who were present wept, yea and
even he wept who denied her suite. Why should I use many worcester des? The woman
would not away, till first he had promised her, that he would go to Gaza after
Sun set. As soon as he came thither, and had considered how they lay, and
seen the dried limbs of all the sick, he inuoked Jesus. And (o admirable
power) the sweat broke out from them all, as if it had been out of three
fountains. At the same time they took meat, and recovering the knowledge of
their sad Mother, and blessing God, they kissed the hands of the Saint. When
this was known, and had been spread far and wide, men came crowding in upon
him, both out o^ Syria and Egypt, so that many by occasion thereof, grew to
believe in Christ, and professed that they would be Monckes, for as yet there
were no Monasteries in Palestine; neither did men know of any Moncks in Syria,
before S. Hilarion: he was the founder, he the instructor of men in this kind
of life, and Institute in this Province. Our Lord Jesus had the old Anthony in
Egypt and Hilarion a younger man in Palestine.

Facidia is a little town of Rinocorura a City of Egypt, and some ten years
since, a blind woman was brought from thence to the Blessed Hilarion, and being
presented to him, by some of his brethren (for by that time he had there many
Moncks) she related how she had spent her whole fortune upon Physicians. To
whom he spoke thus: If you had given that to the poor, which you have cast
away upon Physicians, Jesus, the true Physician would have cured you. But she
crying out, and begging mercy, he spit into her eyes, and instantly according
to the example of our Savior, the like miracle was wrought.

Moreover a certain Carter of Gaza, being possessed by a Devil, as he was in
his Carte, grew all so stiff, as that he could neither stir a hand, nor
turn his head. Being therefore brought in his bed, and being only able to move
his tongue for help; he was told, that he could not be cured, till he would
believe in Jesus, and renounce his old courses. He believed, he promised, he
was cured, and did more exult for the recovery of the health of his soul, then
of his body.

There was besides, a mighty strong young man called Marsitas, of the territory
of Jerusalem, who did so glory in his corporal force, as that he would carry
about seven bushells of corn a great way, and a long time, and he vaunted
himself to exceed even big Asses in strength. This man was afflicted by a most
wicked Devil, nor did he permit, that chains, or fetters, or even the bars
of doors, should remain whole. He had bitten off the noses, and ears of
many, he had broken the feet of some, and the necks of others; and had
strocken all men with such terror, that being laden with chains, and roapes,
he was drawn like some fierce Bull, toward the Monastery, by men who kept
him in fit distance, by strayning several way. When the Brothers of the
Monastery saw him, they being all in a fright (for the man was of a wonderful
huge bulk) made it known to their Father. Now he, as he was sitting, required
that the man should be brought before him, and let loose; which being done, he
said: Bow down thy head, and come hither. He trembled, and turned his neck,
nor presumed he to look him in the face, but laying down all his fiercenes,
he began to lick the feet of Hilario^ as he was sitting. And so the Devil, who
had possessed the young man, being ad^ured and tormented, departed out of his
body, on the seventh day.

Neither is it to be concealed, how Orionus, a principal and very rich man of
the City of Aila, which lies close upon the red sea, was possessed by a legion
of Devils, and brought to Hilario^. His hands, his neck, his wast, his feet,
were al loade^ with iron; and his fierce gloomy eyes, did threaten men with
extreme cruelty. Now when the Saint was walking with those Brothers, and was
declaring somewhat to them of holy scriptures, the possessed man broke forth of
their hands, who had held him; and clasping-in the Saint behind his back, and
lifting him up on high, they all cried out who were present; for they feared,
least he should even break that body in pieces, which was so defeated
otherwise with fasting. But the Saint smiling, said; Never trouble your selves,
but let me alone with my wrastler. And so casting back his hand over the
others shoulder, he touched his head, and laying hold upon his hair, he
brought the man before him, and held fast both his hands; and treading with his
feet upon the feet of the possessed person, he often repeated theses words: Be
tormented, o you troop of Devils, be tormented. And when the party roaring
out, and wreathing back his neck, did even touch the ground with the crown
of his head. Hilario^ said: O Lord Jesus, free this captive, free this
miserable creature; it is in thy power, as easily to conquer many, as one. I
shall tell you a strange thing. There were heard diverse voices, yea the
confused clamor of whole people, proceeding out of the mouth of that one man
at once. This man being cured, came also, not long after, with his wife and
children to the Monastery, bringing many presents with him in the way of
gratitude. Of whom the Saint asked this question: Have you not read, what
Giesi, and what Simon Magus suffered, whereof the one took a reward that he
might sell, and the other offered one, that he might buy the gift of the holy
Ghost? And when Orionus had said with tears, Receive my present, and do you
bestow it upon the poor. He answered: Your self can best tell, how to
distribute your own goods, you who walk up and down the world, and know the
persons of poor people: but I, who have given away, that which is mine own,
why should I meddle with that of others? The name of distributing to the poor
gives occasion of coueteousnes to many; but true mercy has no tricks. No man
bestows goods better then he, who reserues nothing to himself. But the
party being still in grief, and lying upon the ground, Hilarion said: Be not
afflicted, o my son, at this which I do, both for my good and for thine own;
for if I take thy present, both I shall offend God, and the legion of Devils,
will return to thee.

But who can pass over in silence, how one of Maioma, the Staple of Gaza, who
squared stones for building, upon the Sea cost, not far from his Monastery,
being all defeated by a Palsy, and brought by his fellow laborers to the
Saint, did instantly return again to his work. For that coast, which
spreades is self both before Palestine and Egypt, being soft by nature,
becomes rough, by reason that the sand grows by degrees into the nature of
stone; and so gravel sticking to it by little and little, it becomes other to
the hand, though it become not other to the eye. There was also another called
Italicus, a free man of the same town, and a Christian, who kept horses for
the Circus, which used to run against other horses of an Officer of Gaza who
was a worshipper of the Idol Marnas. For it has been maintained in the
Cities subject to the Roman Empire, ever since Romulus his time, that in
memory of that fortunate rape of the Sabines, and in honor of Consus the God
of Counsel, certain charriots should run seven times round about the
place, and the victory should be his, whose horses could outstrip and overcome
the rest. This Italicus therefore, finding that his concurrent used the help of
a Witch, who by the means of certain diabolical imprecations, did give
impediment to his horses, and add speed to his own, came to the Blessed
Hilarion and begged of him, not so much that his adversary might be
disaduantaged, as that himself might be assisted. It seemed an improper thing
to the venerable old man, to employ his prayers upon such toys. And when he
smiled, and said: Why rather do you not bestow the price of your horses, upon
the poor, for the salvation of your soul? He answered, Thar the profession,
which he followed, was allowed, and that the thing which he then desired, was
rather upon constraint, then choice; That a Christian man might not indeed have
recourse to Magick-Arts, but rather desire help from a servant of Christ,
especially against them of Gaza, who were the adversaries of God, and insulted,
not so much over him, as over the Church of Christ. The Saint being therefore
entreated by the Monckes, who were present, required that a cup of earth,
wherein he used to drink, should be filled with water, and delivered to
Italicus, which as soon as he had received, he sprinkled the stable with that
water, and the horses, and their riders, and the chariot, and the bars of the
race. The people was in a wonderful expectation of the event: for the
adversaries of Italicus had published all this business with scorn; and his
favorers did exult out of the certain promise of victory, which they made to
themselves. But the sign being given, the horses of Italicus fly away, and
those others were able to make no have; the wheels of Italicus charriots grew
hot with speed, but those others were scarce able to keep sight of the former.
There was an excessive noise made by the people, in so much as that even the
Pagans themselves cried out, that, Marnas was overcome by Christ. But then the
adversaries being mad with rage, made instance that Hilarion might have had his
process framed, as being a Witch in favor of Christians. But in the mean time,
that undoubted victory, both in those present sports of the Circus, and in many
others afterward, was the occasion that very many were converted to the Faith
of Christ.

There was a Virgin consecrated to God, belonging to the same staple town of
Gaza, to whom a young man dwelling near her did make love. Not prevailing in
his enterprise, though he had been frequent in touching, in jesting, in making
signs, and whisling, with the like, (which are wont to be a kind of preface,
to the destruction of virginity) he made a journey to Memphis, that upon
manifestation of the wound, which he had received, he might by means of
Magic arts, return strong enough to subdue the Virgin. So that after a
year, being instructed how to proceed by the Priests of Aesculapius, who was
not wont to cure, but to destroy men's souls, he came with a mind full of
presumption, that he should prevail in his wickedness, and he caused certain
coniuring words, and prodigious figures, to be graven in a plate of Cyprian
brass, and to be conveyed by digging, under the threshold of the virgins
house. Instantly upon this she began even to run mad with love, and casting
away the dressing of her head, she fell to shake and toss her hair, to gnash
with her teeth, and to cry out after the name of the young man. For the excess
of love, had exalted it self even into a mere rage. She therefore, being
brought by her Parents to the Monastery, was delivered to the old man; the
Devil beginning to howl and confessing himself in this manner: I was removed
by force* I was brought from thence against my will; with what ease did I
delude men with dreams when I was at Memphis! o the torments that I endure!
Thou compellest me to go forth; but I am tied fast under the threshold. I
depart not therefore, unless the young man dismiss me, who detaines me. To
this, our old man said: Doubtless thy strength is great, who art held so fast
by a little thread, and a plate of brass. Declare how thou could presume to
possess the virgin of God. That I might keep her (said he) a virgin. Thou keep
her so, o thou traitor of chastity? Why did thou not rather enter into him
who sent thee? To what end (said the Devil) should I enter into him, who
already was possessed by a colleague of mine, the Devil of love? But the Saint
resolved not to require, that either the young man, or those signs of
Witchcraft should be produced, till first the virgin were free, least either
the Devil might seem to have departed upon any other usual enchantments, or
else least he should be thought to have given credit to the Devils speech. And
upon this occasion he told them, how crafty and deceitful these Devils are
in their devises. But he rather resolved, as soon as the Virgin was restored
to health, to reprove her for doing these other things, whereby the Devil
entered to take possession of her.

His fame grew not only over Palestine, and in the neighboring Cittyes of
Egypt and Syria, but throughout other Provinces most remote. For a near
servant of the Emperor Constantius, showing well of what country he was by the
whitenes of his kin and the brightness of his hair (whose nation lying
between the Saxons and the Allmans, was not so largely spread as stout, and
among historians has been called Germany, but now enioies the name of
Franconia) was possessed anciently, that is to say, from his very infancy by a
Devil, who constrained him mightly to roar out, to fetch deep groans, and to
gnash with his teeth. This man did secretly desire comodity of passage from the
Emperor, but declaring ingenuously the true cause to him. He carried also
letters of favor to the persons, who had Co^sular authority in Palestine, and
so he was conducted to Gaza with mighty honor, and attendance. And demanding
of the Officers of that place, where Hilarion the Moncke remained; they of Gaza
being frighted, and withal conceauing, that he was sent by the Emperor,
thought good to attend him to the Monastery, both that they might exhibit due
honor to the person recomme^ded, as also, that if there should be any memory
of former wrongs done to Hilarion, it might be defaced by this new act of
observance. The old man was then walking in the deep sand, and was softly
repeating somewhat to himself of the Psalms; but seeing such a troop
approaching, he stayed him self; and resaluting all the company, and giving
them a benediction with his hand, he required the rest to depart from thence
within an hour; but that the party indisposed, with his servants and officers
should remain there; for he knew by his eyes and countenance, why he was come
thither. The man therefore who was possessed being in suspense upon the
question, which was asked him, and scarce touching the ground with his feet,
and roaring after a most hideous manner, made his answer in the Syrian
language, wherein Hilarion spoke. And there you might have seen the mouth of a
Barbarian, which was only acquainted with the Franconian and Latin tongue,
speak so perfect Syrian, as that neither the hissing part, nor the aspiration,
nor any Ideome of the speech of Palestine was wanting to him. He confessed
therefore, after what sort he had entered into that body. And to the end that
his Interpreters might also know what passed (who understood no other tongues
but Greek and Latin) Hilarion asked him some questions in Greek. Who
answering him also in the same language, and discoursing about many occasions
of inchantme^ts, and the great force of Magic arts: I care not (says
Hilarion) how thou entredst in; but I command thee, in the name of our Lord
Jesus Christ, that thou go out. And when the party was cured, and was
presenting him with ten pound weight in gould, he on the other side was content
to accept a barley loaf, which the old man offered him, with a plain country
kind of simplicity, and he was made to understand thereby; that they, who live
upon such food as that, value gold no more then dirt.

But it is no great matter to tell of strange things concerning men; for brut
beasts were daily brought to him starcke mad, among which there was a Bactrean
Camel of hideous bigness, who had even ground many men to death, like dust; and
there were above thirty persons, who brought him thither at that time, with
great noise, and all fettered with extreme strong ropes. His eyes looked red
like blood, his mouth foamed, his rolling tongue swelled; but the noise of his
hideous roaring went beyond all the other terror that he strok. The old man
therefore, commanded him to be let loose; and instantly, both they who brought
him, and they who were with the old man, did every one of them fly away. Only
he went on alone to meet him, and said thus in the Syrian language: Thou do
not fright me, o Devil, by that so great bulk of thy body; for whether thou
be in the little Fox, or in the large Camel, thou art still the same. In the
mean time, he stood still with one of his hands extended forth. And as soon
as the Beast was coming, all furious toward him, he suddenly fell down and
laid his head low and level with the ground; all they, who were present, being
in a wonder, that so great benignity could so instantly follow upon so great
fury. But the old man taught them, how the Devil is wont to enter into
Cattle, for their sakes who are the owners; and that he hates men so highly,
that he desires not only the destruction of themselves, but of whatsoever is
theirs. Of this he propounded an example, how the Devil before he was
permitted to tempt the B. Job, killed all the goods he had. And how it ought
not to make any man wonder, that upon the commandment of our Lord, two
thousand swine were cast away by Devils; for that was done, because they who
saw it, would never have believed that so great a multitude of Devils was
departed out of one man, unless a mighty heard of swyne had perished
altogether; and so, as if it had been driven by a multitude of Devils.

The time will fail me, if I shall pretend to speak of all the wonderful
things which were wrought by Hilarion. For he was raised by our Lord to so
great glory* as that the Blessed Anthony understanding of his manner of life,
did willingly write to him, and receive letters from him. And if at any time
there came sick persons toward Anthony out of Syria, he would say thus to
them: Why would you needs vex your selves by undertaking so long a journey,
when you have my son Hilarion at hand? By his example therefore, there grew
to be innumerable Monasteryes over all Palestine; and all those Monks would
come flocking towordes him with a kind of strife. When he saw this, he praised
our Lord for his grace, and exhorted every one of them to profit in the way of
spirit, saying: That the figure of the world passes, and that the other future
life is the true life, which is obtained by suffering incommodities in this
present life.

Being desirous to show them an example both of humility, and curtesy, he used
upon certain days, before the times of vintage, to visit the Cells of the
Monckes. As soon as this was known by those Brothers* they all flocked to
him, and being accompanied by such a guide as that, they went in circuit to the
Monasteries, carrying their provision with them; for sometimes they would
arrive to the number of two thousand persons. But in process of time, every
little Town growing glad of the intertainement which was to be given to the
Saint, would bring in some of their commodityes, to their next neighboring
Monckes. Now how great care he had, not to pass over any one brother unvisited
how mean soever or poor he were, this one thing may serve to demonstrate,
that he went into the desert of Cades, to visit one single disciple of his with
a huge troop of Monckes. He came then to Elusa, and it was by accident, upon
that day, when by reason of an Anniuersary solemnity, the whole people of the
Town was assembled in the Temple of Venus; for they worship her as Lucifer, to
whose veneration the Nation of the Saracens is addicted. Moreover the Town it
self, for the most part is half barbarous, by reason of the situation of the
place. They having therefore understood, that S. Hilarion passed by that way
(for he had often cured many of the Saracens, who had been possessed by the
Devil) they came forth to meet him, by whole troops, with their wives and
children, bowing down their heads, and crying out to him in that Syrian word,
Barac, that is, Give us thy blessing. These men did he receive with all
humility and benignity, and besought them to worship God rather then stocks
and stones; and withal he would abundantly weep, looking up to heaven, and
promising them, that if they would believe in Christ, he would come often to
them. And a wonderful grace of our Lord it was, that they suffered him not to
depart, ti^l he should make a design, and draw the first lines of that Church,
which futurely was to be built in that place; and till their Priest, as he was
then already crowned for the offering of some idolatrous Sacrifice, might be
marked with the sign of Christ.

In another year also, when he was going forth to visit the Monasteries, and
did set down in a list by whom he would only pass, and with which others he
would stay, the Monckes observing, that one of the company was somewhat near
and sparing, and being desirous to cure that fault of his, they wished the
Saint to stay some time with him. But why, says Hilarion, will you wrong your
selves, and vex him? Which as soon as that sparing Brother understood, he was
out of countenance, and they all drawing one way, had yet much a do to obtain
of him who was unwilling, that his Monastery might be in the number of them,
where the Saint should lodge. Yet at length after ten days, they went to him;
but in the mean time certain Guards or Keepers were placed by him in the
vinyard, where the Moncks were to paste, and f^ighting such as came toward
them, by throwing stones and clo^s of earth, and by using also the sling, all
those guests departed the next day, without eating so much as one grape; the
old man laughing at it, but yet not taking knowledge of what had passed.

But being received by another Moncke, called Sabas (for it is fit that we name
this liberall-hearted man as we concealed that other, who was a m^ser) they
were all invited by him into his vinyard, to the end that by eating grapes
before dinner (for it was on Sunday) they might be refreshed from their labor.
The Saint then said: Cursed be he who preferres the re^ection of his body
before that of his soul: let us pray, let us sing, let us perform our duty to
God; and then you may make have to the vinyard. Having performed this Office,
and being ascended up to a higher place, he blessed the vinyard, and so gave
his sheep leave to feed upon it. Now they were not fewer then three thousand
eaters. And whereas the vinyard when it was yet untouched, was esteemed likely
to bring forth, but a hundred vessels of Wine, within twenty days after the
owner made three hundred. And that other sparing Brother, making less wine
then he was wont, did lament too late, that even what he had, was turned into
veriuyce; which the old man had foretold to many of the Brethren. He did in
particular manner detest those Monckes, who through a kind of infidelity, did
hord up any thing for the future, and did use either diligence, or cost about
their clothing; or any other of these things, which were transitory. And
observing that one of the Brothers, who dwelt almost five miles from him, was
too careful and curious in keeping his garden, and withal had laid up a
little money, he drove him out of his sight. And the party desiring to be
reconciled, came to some of the Brothers, and particulerly to Hesychius, in
whom the old man took very much contentment. When therefore upon a certain
day, the same party had brought a bundell of green pease, as they were in the
cod, and Hesychius had served it that evening upon the table, the old man cried
out and said: That he was not able to endure the stincke thereof; and withal
demanded whence it came? Hesychius answering that a certain Brother had
presented it, as the first fruits of his field: Do thou not seele (says he)
a most abominable all savor, and that coueteousnes stinkes in the very pease;
cast them out to the Oxen, and such brute beasts as those, and see if they
will ea^e thereof? Now he having laid them in the manger (as he was bidden) the
Oxen fell into a fright, and lowing after an extraordinary manner, brake their
teathers, and ran every one by a several way. For the old man had this gift,
that by the smell of bodies, or garments, or other things which any man had
touched, he would know to what vice, or Devil he was subject.

But in the threescore and third year of his age, observing how great the
Monastery was then grown to be, as also the multitude of the Brothers who
lived with him, and the troops of other men who brought such persons thither,
as were taken by several diseases, and possessed by unclean spirits, in such
sort as that the wilderness was stuffed round about him with all kind of people;
he daily wept, and remembered his former kind of life, with an incredible desire
to recontinue it. And being demanded by those Brothers what he ayled, and why
he afflicted himself, he said: I am returned again to the world, and have
received my reward in this life. Behold the men of Palestine, and the
neighbor Provinces, esteem me to be some body; and under the pretext of
governing a Monastery for the use and conueniency of the brothers, I find my
self possessed of some poor little stuff of my own. This was kept by the
Brothers, and especially by Hesychius, who with an admirable kind of love, was
addicted to the veneration of the old man. But when he had lamented in this
sort, for the space of two years, that same Aristaene (of whom we spoke
before) being the wife of the Captain of the Guard, but having no part of his
aspiring condition, came to Hilarion with intention also afterward to go on
toward Anthony. To her he said weeping: And I also would be glad to go, if I
were not kept prisonner in this Monastery, and if indeed it were to any
purpose; now it is two days, since the whole world is deprived of such a
Father. She believed it, and forbore her journey: and within few days after,
a messenger came, by whom she heard the news, that Anthony was dead.

Let others wonder at the Miracles, which Hilarion wrought, let them wonder at
his incredible abstinence, his knowledge, and his poverty. For my part I am not
so much amazed at any thing in him, as that he could so tread honor and glory
under his feet. There came to him Bishops, Priests, whole flocks of Religious
persons, and Moncks, and Matrones also, which is a great temptation; and from
all sides, both out of the Cities, and Fields, there came multitudes of
common people, yea and Judges also, and great persons, that they might be able
to get some bread or oil, which had been blessed by him. But he on the other
side, had his mind fixed upon nothing but some wilderness: so that one day, he
resolved to be gone, and having procured a little Ass (for he was then so
consumed with fasting, that he was scarce able to go) he meant to undertake his
journey with all speed. Now as soon as this was known, it wrought upon the
world there about, as if some desolation had been at hand, and as if the Courts
of Justice were to have been shut up in Palestine for some extreme calamity
which had happened. And there grew to be assembled, above ten thousand persons,
of both sexes, and several ages, for the staying of him. Whereas he inflexible
to their prayers, and scattering the sand with the end of his staff said thus
to them: I will not make my Lord a liar, nor can I endure to see Churches
ouerturned, nor the Altars of Christ trodden upon, nor the blood of my children
spilt. All they who were present, understood that some secret had been
revealed to him, which he would not confess; but yet howseuer, they watched
him, that he might not get away. He therefore resolved, and he took them all
to witness, that he would not taste either meat or drink, till he were
dismissed; and so after seven days of his rigorous fasting, he was at length
released. And bidding very many of them farewell, there came yet to Betilium, a
huge troop of followers; but yet persuading those multitudes, to return, he
chose out forty Monckes, who might make and take provision, and were able to
go fasting, that is to say, not to eat till Sunset. The fifth day therefore he
came to Pelusium, and having visited those brothers, who were in the desert
near at hand, and who remained in that place which is called Lychnos, he went
forward after three days, to the fort of the Theubatians, to visit Dracontius
the Bishop and Confessor, who lived there in banishment. The Bishop being
incredibly comforted by the presence of so great a person, after three days
more, and with much a do, our old man went to Babylon, that he might visit
Philo the Bishop, who was also a Confessor. For Constantius the King, who
favored the heresy of the Arrians, had sent them both out of the way into
those several places. But Hilarion going from thence, after three other days,
came to the town called Aphroditos, where meeting with Baysanes the Deacon,
(who by reason of the usual great want of water in that desert was wont to
hire out Camels and dromedaries, to such as went to visit Anthony, and so
conduct them to him) he confessed to those Brothers, that the Anniuersary of
Anthonyes death was at hand, and that he was then to celebrate the same to him
by watching all that night, in that very place where he dyed. After three days
therefore of travail, through that vast and horrible desert, at length they
came to a huge high mountain, where they found two Monckes, Isaac and
Pelusianus; which Isaac had been Anthonyes interpreter. And because occasion
is here so fairly offered, and that already we are upon the place, I will in
few words describe the habitation of so great a person, as Anthony was.

There is a high and stony mountain, of a mile in circuit, which has
abundance of springing water at the root thereof. The sand drinks up part,
and the rest sliding downward grows by little and little to make a brook;
upon the banks whereof, on both sides, the innumerable Palme-trees, which grow
there, give both great commodity and beauty to the place. There you might have
seen our old man pass nimbly up and down with the disciples of Blessed
Anthony; here they said he sung; here he prayed; here he wrought; here when
he was weary he used to rest. These vincs, and these little trees did he plant
himself: this little bed of earth did he compose with his own hands: this
poole did he contriue with much labor, for the watering of his garden: with
this Rake, did he use to break up the earth many years. He lay in the lodging
of Anthony, and kissed that place of his repose, which as a man may say, was
yet warm; his Cell was of no larger measure, then such a square wherein a
sleeping man might extend himself. Besides this, in the very highest top of
the mountain, which was very steep, and could not be ascended but by circling,
there were two other Cells of the same proportion, wherein he would stay
sometimes, when he had a mind to fly from the frequent recourse of comers, and
the conversation of his Disciples. Now these two were hewn out of free stone,
and had no addition but of doors. But when they were come to his garden; do
you see said Isaac, that part thereof, which is the orchard, set with young
trees, and so green with herbs? Almost three years since, when a heard of
wild Asses came to destroy it, he willed one of the leading Asses to stay, and
beating the sides of it with his staff: How chances (says he) that you eat
of that which you did not sow? And from thence forth, when they had druncke
their water, for which they came, they would never touch tree, or fruit any
more. Our old man desired besides, that they would show him the place of
Anthonyes tomb: but they leading him apart, we are yet uncertain, whether
they showed it or not. They say, that the reason why Anthony commanded it to be
concealed, was for fear least one Pergamus, who was a very rich man in those
parts, should carry the Saints body to his village, and so there erect a
shryne.

But now Hilarion returning to Aphroditos, (and adjoining only two of his
Brothers to himself) remained in the desert, which is next that place, in the
practice of so great abstinence and silence, as that he said, he began to serve
Christ but then. Now then it had been about three years, when the heavens
seemed to be shut, and had dried up the earth; so that they used to say, that
even the Elements did lament the death of Anthony. Neither did the same of
Hilarion ly hidden from the inhabitants also of that place; but the men and
women there, having their faces all grown wanne and worn with hunger, came
crowding to desire some showers of rain of the servant of Christ, that is, of
the successor of the Blessed Anthony. As soon as he beheld them, he was
stricken with strange grief, and casting his eyes up to heaven, and raising
both his hands on high, he instantly obtained what they desired. But behold
that dry and sandy country, as soon as it was well watered with rain, budded
forth upon the sudden such a multitude of Serpents, and other venomous
creatures, that innumerable persons had instantly perished, if they had not
made recourse to Hilarion. But all those Sheepheards, and Country people,
applying certain Oil which he had blessed, did assuredly recover their
health. Yet perceauing himself to be also observed there with strange kinds
of honor, he went on to Alexandria, and resolved to proceed from thence to
that desert of the more remote Oasa: and because from the first time that he
had been a Moncke, he had never remained in any City, he turned a while to
certain Brothers well known to him in Brutium not far from Alexandria, who
when they had received the old man with an admirable kind of joy, they suddenly
heard (the night being then at hand) that his disciples were making ready his
Ass, and that he was providing to be gone. And therefore casting themselves at
his feet they desired him to change his mind, and then lying also prostrate
before the threshold of the door, they professed that they would rather die,
then loose such a guest. He answered them after this manner: I make have to be
gone, for the preventing of your trouble; and you shall be sure to know
hereafter, that I went not hence so suddenly without cause. The next day
therefore they of Gaza went forth with their officers (for they knew that
Hilarion was come thither the day before) and they entered into the Monastery;
and when they found him not there, they said thus to one another: Are not those
things true, which we have said of this man? A Magitian he is, and knows
future things. But the City of Gaza (when once Hilarion was gone out of
Palestine, and Iulianus had succeeded in the Empire, (having already destroyed
the Monastery) made a petition to the Emperor for the death of Hilarion and
Hesychius, and they obtained it, and warrants were sent out through the whole
world, that they should be sought. Hilarion therefore being gone from Brutium,
entered into Oasa by an impenetrable kind of desert, and there having spent
little more or less then a year, he could only think of sailing over to some
Islands; that whom the earth had published, at least the Sea might conceal:
for the fame of him had also arrived, as far as that place, where the^ he
was, and now he could no longer hide himself in the Eastern parts of the
world, where he was known to so many both by reputation, and person. About
that very time Adrianus a disciple of his, came suddenly to him out of
Palestine, bringing news that Julian was slain, and that a Christian Emperor
began to reign, and that it became him to return to the Relickes of his
Monastery. He heard, but detested that motion, and having procured a Camel, he
came through a vast solitude to Paretonium, a Sea-towne of Libya: but the
unfortunate Adrian, being willing to return to Palestine, and seeking to enjoy
his former glory under the title of his Master, did him many wrongs, and at
last having trussed up those things together, which had been sent to Hilarion
by certain Brothers, he went away without his priuity. Upon this occasion
(because we are not likely to have any other) I will only tell you, for the
terror of such as despise their Masters and teachers, that shortly after,
this man did rot of the Kings evil.

The old man therefore, having one of Gaza with him, did embarke himself upon
a ship, which was bound for Sicily, and when by the sale of a book containing
the Gospel (which himself being young had written with his own hands) he
meant to have paid for his passage; the Masters son was suddenly possessed by
a Devil, about the midst of the Adriatike sea, and began to cry out, and
say: Hilarion, thou servant of God, why do thou not permit us to be in
safety, even at Sea? Give me day till I may come to land, least being cast out
here, I be precipitated into the Abyss. He made answer to him thus: Stay, if
my God will let thee stay; but if he will cast thee out, why do thou lay it
to my charge, who am a sinful man, and a beggar? This he said, least the
Mariners, and Merchants, who were in the ship should publish him, when they
came to land. But soon after this, the boy was freed; both his father and the
rest, who were present giving their words, that they would not name him at
all. Being entered within Pachinum, which is a Promo^tory of Sicily, he offered
the Master his book of the Ghospels for the passage of himself and the man
of Gaza, which Master even from the first had no mind to receive it,
especially when he saw that they had nothing but that book, and their clothes,
and so at last he swore he would not take it. But the old man being inflammed
through the experimental comfort he had in being poor, did rejoice so much
the more, both because in very deed he had nothing of this world, and for that
he was also esteemed a beggar by the Inhabitants of that place. And yet
doubting least some Merchants, who used to come out of the Eastern parts,
might detect him, he fled toward the Inland, that is, some twenty miles from
the Sea, and there in a kind of wild little Country, making daily up some faggot
of wood, he would lay it upon the back of his disciple; and that being sold in
the next Town did help them to some very little bread, which might serve by
way of relief, both to themselves, and such others as by chance used to pass
that way.

But indeed according to that which is written, The City placed upon a hill
cannot be concealed. For when a certain Buckler-maker was tormented in S.
Peter's Church at Rome, the unclean spirit cried out in him after this manner:
Some few days since Hilarion the servant of Christ came into Sicily, and no
man knows him, and he thinks he lies secret there, but I will go, and reveal
him. Soon after this, the same man shipping himself at Porto with his
servants, arrived at Pachinum, and the Devil conducting him, till he might
prostrate himself before the little poor cottage of the old man, he was
immediately cured. This first miracle of his in Sicily, drew an innumerable
multitude of sick men, as also of devout persons to him; so far forth, that
a certain man of much quality being sick of a Dropsy, was cured by him the
same day he came thither: who afterward being willing to make him many
presents, heard the Saint use this saying of our Savior to his Disciples,
Freely you have received, freely give.

Whilst these things were doing in Sicily, Hesychius his disciple went
looking the old man over the whole world, making discovery upon the Sea-costs,
and penetrating even into the deserts, and having in fine this only confidence,
that whersoeuer he should be, it was not possible for him to be long concealed.
When therefore three years were spent, he understood at Methona by a certain
Jew (who was selling certain trash to the people) that a Christian Prophet had
appeared in Sicily, working so many miracles and wonderful things, that he
might be held for one of the ancient Saints. Being asked concerning his habit,
his gate, his language, and especially his age, he could make no answer; for
he affirmed that he knew not the man, but by report. Entering therefore into the
Adriaticke, he came with a prosperous wind to Pachinum, and enquiring after the
fame of our old man, in a certain little town which was seated upon that
crooked shore, he found by the uniform relation of them all, where he was,
and what he he did: all they wondering at nothing so much in him as that, after
so many signs, and miracles, he had not taken so much as a bit of bread, of
any man in those parts. And to make short, the holy man Hesychius, coming at
length to cast himself at his Masters feet, and to water them with his tears,
was raised up by him, and after the discourse of two or three days, he
understood by him of Gaza, that the old man would now no longer remain in
those parts, bur that he would go on, to certain Barbarous nations, where his
name and language might be unknown. He lead him therefore to Epidaurus, a
Town of Dalmatia, and remaining a few days in certain parts near by, he
yet could not ly concealed. For a Dragon of wonderful bigness, whom in their
tongue they call Boas, in regard they are so great as to swallow up whole Oxen,
wasted all that Province far and near, and drawing to himself with the
force of his breath, not only herds of Cattle, and flocks of sheep, but
Country people also and Shepherds, he would suck and swallow them up. When
therefore he had first sent up his prayer to Christ, and had appointed a great
pile of wode to be prepared, he called the monster, and commanded him to clime
up that mass of wood, and he put fire to it underneath: and so (the whole
people looking on) he burnt up that vast and most cruel beast. But he being in
great difficulty, what he were then best to do, and which way to turn
himself, was preparing to make another flight. And reuoluing the most solitary
countries in his mind, he grieved, that whilst his tongue was silent, his
Miracles would not hold their peace.

At that time, the Seas transgressed their bounds, upon that earthquake of the
whole world, which happened after the death of Julian. And as if God would
threaten men with some new deluge, or else that all things were to return into
their first Chaos, so hung the ships, being hoysed* up to the steepy tops of
those mountains. Which as soon as they of Epidaurus saw, namely those roaring
and raging waves, and that mass of waters; and that whole mountains were
brought in upon the shoares, by those rapid floods, (being in fear of that
which already in effect they found to be come to pass, that he Town would
utterly be overwhelmed) they went on ^o the old man, and as if they had been
going to a battle, they placed him for their Captain upon the shore. But as
soon as he had made three signs of the Cross upon the sand, and held up his
hands against the Sea, it is incredible to be told into what a huge height it
swelled, and stood up before him, and raging so, a long time, and being as it
were in a kind of indignation, at the impediment which it found; it did yet by
little and little slide back again into it self. And this does Epidaurus,
and all that Region proclaim even to this day, and mothers teach it to their
children, that so the memory thereof may be delivered over to posterity. That
which was said to the Apostles, If you have faith, and shall say to this
mountain, transport thy self into the sea, and it shall be done, may truly
and even literally be fullfilled now, if any man have the faith of an Apostle,
or such faith as our Lord commanded them to have. For wherein does it differ,
whether a mountain descend into the Sea, or else whether huge mountains of
water, grow suddenly hard, being as if they were of stone, just before the feet
of the old man, and that yet on the other side, they should run fluid and
soft. The whole City was in a wonder, and the greatness of the miracle was
publicly known as far as Salon. But as soon as the old man understood
thereof, he stole away by night in a little boat, and within two days after,
finding a Merchants ship, he went on toward Cyprus. But the Pirates then,
between Malea and Cyth^ra, having left their fleet upon the shore (which was
not governed by way of masts, and sails, but by longes pooles) were coming
toward our Passingers, in two large Brigantines, with the waves beating upon
them on every side. All the Mariners who were in his ship, began to quake, to
weep, to run up and down, to make their long poles ready; and (as if one
messenger were not sufficient) to crowd in upon the old man, and to tell him
that the Pirates were at hand. Whom behoulding, before they were yet come
necre, he smiled, and turning toward his disciples said: Why are you
frighted, O ye of little faith? (...) these men more in number, then Pharaos
army? yet all that was ^ned by the will of God. Whilst he was yet speaking,
that multitude of enemies came on with the stem of their boats all in a
foame, and were then close upon him, within a stones cast. He therefore went to
stand in the prow of his ship, and stretching forth his hand against the
assaila^ts, he said: Let it suffice that you are come so far. O wondrous
strange thing to be believed! The Boats did instantly fly of, and the men were
still striving the contrary way with their oars, but yet the boats still gave
back toward their Pup. The Pirates were amazed at it, still resolving not to
retire: but yet though they labored with the imploiment of their whole
strength, that they might reach the ship, they were (...) bo^ne away toward
the shore, with far greater speed, then they came from thence.

I forbear to speak of the rest, least I should seem to extend my self too
far in the relation of this miracles. This only I will say, that whilst he
was sailing among thy Cyclads the noise of impure spirits was heard to be
crying out from the Cities and Towns there abouts, as if they were
approaching toward the shore. He therefore being come to Papho^, that City
of Cyprus (which has been so ennobled by the invention of Poets, and which
being fallen by frequent earthquaks, does now by the only appearance of the
ruins, show what formerly it had been) lived obscurely within two miles of
that place, and was glad that he might spend those few days in peace. But
twenty days more were not fully passed, when throughout that whole Island, all
those persons who were possessed with unclean spirits, began to cry out, that
Hilarion the servant of Christ was come, and they must hasten toward him. This
did Salamina, this did Curium and Lapetha, and this did all those other Cittyes
proclaim, most of them affirming, that indeed they knew Hilarion, and that he
was the true servant of God, but that they knew not where he kept. So that
within thirty or few days more, there came to him two hundred possessed
persons, as well men, as women. As soon as he saw them, he did so grieve,
that they would not give him leave to be quiet; and (being cruel after a sort,
in the way of revenge upon himself) he did so whip up those spirits by the
extreme instance of his prayers, that some of the possessed were presently
delivered, others after two or three days, and all within the compass of a
week. Staying therefore there two years, and ever being in thought how to fly
away, he sent Hesychius into Palestine to salute his Brethren, and to visit the
ashes or ruins of his Monastery, with order, that he should return the next
spring after. Now though upon the former return of Hesychius thither, Hilarion
resolved to have gone again into Egypt, and namely to certain places which
are called Bucolia, because no Christians were there; but it was a fierce and
barbarous nation: Hesychius did yet persuade him that he should rather procure
to find out some more retired place in that very Island where he was. And when
after long search in all those parts, Hesychius had found one, he conducted
him twelve miles of from the Sea into the middle of certain secret and craggy
mountains, to which a man was hardly able to ascend, even by creeping upon his
hands and knees. He entered then, and contemplated that so retired and terrible
place, environed on all sides with trees, and having store of water descending
from the brow of the hill, and a little kind of very delightful garden, and
great store of fruittrees, the fruit whereof he yet did never taste. There were
also the ruins of a most ancient Temple, from whence (as himself related, and
his disciples testify to this present day) there was heard the noise of such an
innumerable multitude of Devils, as that a man would even conceive it to have
been some Army. He was much delighted with this, as finding that he had
Antagonists at hand; and there he dwelt fifteen years, and in that last part
of his life, he was much comforted by the often visits of Hesychius. For
otherwise by reason of the great difficulty and craggines of the place, and the
multitude of Ghosts which were vulgarly said to be walking there, either very
few or none, had both the power and the courage to go up thither. But yet upon
a certain day, going out of his little garden, he saw a man, who had the Palsy
in all his limes, lying before his door, and he asked Hesychius, who that was,
and how he had been brought thither? The sick man answered and said that
formerly he had been the Steward of a little vilage, to the confines whereof
that very garden belonged, wherein they were. But the old man weeping, and
stretching forth his hand to the sick person, who lay before him, said: I
require thee in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that thou rise and walk. An
admirable have was made, for the words were yet but tumbling out of the
speakers mouth, and even very then, his limbs being grown strong, were able
to support him. Now as soon as this was heard, the difficulty of the place and
of the way, which was even almost impenetrable, was yet overcome by the
necessityes of men; the people round about having no care more at heart then to
watch, that by no means he might get away. For already there was a rumor
spread of him, that he could not stay long in a place; which yet he was not
subject to, as being obnoxious to any leuity, or childish humor; but to the
end that he might fly from honor, and importunity by that means: for the
thing to which he ever aspired, was a remote and poor private life. But in the
eightyth year of his age, whilst Hesychius was absent, he wrote him a short
letter with his own hand, in the nature of a kind of Will, bequeathing al his
riches to him; that is to say, his book of the Ghospels, his coat of
sacke-cloath, his hood, and his little cloak; for his servant dyed some few
days before. Now whilst himself was sick, there came many devout persons to
him from Paphos, and especially, because they had heard, he said, that he was
to depart to our Lord, and to be freed from the chains of this body. With
them, there came a certain Constantia a holy woman, whose son in law and
daughter, he had freed from death by anointing the^ with oil. He adjured them
all, that they would not reserve his body any one minut of an hour, after he
should be dead, but that instantly, they should cover him with earth in the
same garden, all apparelled as he was, in a haire-cloath, a hood, and a country
cassocke. By that time, he had but a very little heat, which kept his breast
lukewarm, nor did any thing seem to remain in him of a living man, besides
his understanding; only his eyes, being still open, he spoke thus: Go forth,
what do thou fear? Go forth, O my soul: what do thou doubt? It is now
upon the point of threescore and ten years since thou seruest Christ, and do
thou now fear death? As he was speaking these words, he rendered up his
spirit, and instantly being al covered with earth, the news of his burial was
more speedily carried to the City, then of his death. But as soon as the holy
man Hesychius had understood thus much in Palestine, he went toward Cyprus
and (pretending that he had a mind to take up his dwelling in the same garden
(that so he might free the Inhabitants of the Country from the opinion, that
they had need to keep some strict guard upon the body) he grew able to steal
it away, after the end of ten months, with extreme hazard of his life. He
brought it to Maioma, whole troops of Monckes, and even whole Towns attending
it; and he buried it in his ancient Monastery; his hairecloath, his hood, and
his little cloak, being untouched, and his whole body was also as entire as if
he had been the^ alive, and it yielded and odor so very fragrant, as if he
had been pretiously imbalmed.

And now me thinks, that in the last period of this book I may not conceal
the devotion of that most holy woman Constantia, who upon receiving the news,
that the dear body of Hilarion was now carried away into Palestine, did
instantly give up the ghost, approving even by death her true love to that
servant of God. For she had been wont to spend whole nights in watching at his
sepulcher; and for her better help in prayer, to speak to him as with one who
were still present with her. To this very day you may discern a wonderful
contention between them of Palestine, and them of Cyprus; the former
challenging his body, and the later his scirit, and yet in both these places,
great wonders are daily wrought; though more in the garden of Cyprus, perhaps
because his heart was more set upon that place.

FINIS.
THE LIFE OF S. MALCHVS WRITTEN BY S. HIEROME.
THE ARGUMENT.
THE life and captivity of MALCHVS, who was borne in Maronia a town of Syria,
is described by S. Hierome; and in the person of MALCHVS he exposes first to
the Readers eye a solitary and famous Moncke; and then the same, as he was
vexed and afflicted with temptations.

THE LIFE.
THEY who are to fight some sea battle, dispose themselves first to stir
their ships in the haven, or at least in a still Sea; they stretch their Oars;
they prepare their iron hands and hooks, and they frame the soldiers, who
are ranged out upon the deckes, to stand fast with use, though at the first
their paces were unequal, and their steps sliding: that so what they have
learned in this picture of fight, may make them fear the less, when they come
to a true Sea battle. After this very sort I, who have long held my peace (for
he has made me silent, to whom my speech is a torment) desire first to
exercise my self in some little work, and as it were to rub off a kind of rust
from my tongue, that I may come afterward to write a more ample history. For
I have resolved if our Lord give me life, and if my calumniators will leave
persecuting me (at least now that I am fled and shut up from them) to write
from the coming of our Savior till this age; that is to say, from the
Apostles, till the dregs of these our present days; in what manner, and by
the means of what men the Church of Christ was instituted; and how it came to
growth; how it increased by persecution, and was crowned by Martyrdomes; and
how afterward when the Empire was put into the hand of Christian Princes, it
grew greater in wealth, and power, but less in virtue. But of these things at
some other time: now let us declare what we have in hand.

There is a little Town lying toward the East of Maronia, a City of Syria,
upon the point of thirty miles from Antioch. This town after having been in
the hands of many, either absolute Lords or Possessours of it otherwise, came
at last (when I being a young man remained in Syria) into the hands of Pope
Euagrius a near friend of mine; whom therefore I have named now, to show by
what means I might come to know that, whereof I am about to write. In that
Town therefore there was a certain old man called Malchus, whom we in Latin
may call King. A Syrian he was by nation, and by language, and indeed
Autochthon. There was also in his society a very aged decrepit woman, who
seemed to be come to the very doors of death. They were both so diligently
devout, and so did they wear the very threshold of the Church away, that you
might have taken them for the Zachary and Elizaheth of the Gospel, save only
that they had no John between them. Concerning these two, I made diligent
inquiry of the dwellers there about, by what tie of conjunction they were knit?
of marriage? of consanguinity? or of spirit? Al men made but this one answer,
that they were Saints, and persons very pleasing to God; and they told I know
not what strange things of them: and so being drawn on with this delight, my
self did set upon the man, and curiously asking him the truth of things, he
made me this account of himself. I am (says he,) my son, a husbandman of
that tract which belonges to Maronia, and I was the only child of my Parents,
who being willing to make me marry, as being the only spring of their stock,
and the heir of their family; I answered that I rather chose to be a Moncke.
By how great threats of my Father, and by how fair allurements of my Mother,
I was persecuted, to the end that I might be content to loose my chastity; this
only consideration may serve to show, that I forsook my home, and fled from my
Parents. And because I could not go Eastward (for that Persia was so near at
hand, where there was a guard of Roman soldiers) I turned my course toward the
West, carrying I know not what little thing with me, by way of provision, which
might only secure me from the extremity of want. Why should I use many words?
At length I came to the desert of Chal^is, which lies somewhat Southward of
Imma, and Essa, and meeting there with certain Monckes, I delivered my self
over to their discipline; getting my living by the labor of my hands, and
restraining the lustfullnes of flesh and blood, by fasting. After many years,
a desire came into my mind of returning into my country; and whilst my Mother
was yet alive (for by that time I had heard of my Fathers death) to become a
comfort of her widdowhood, and that then after this, having sold the little
possession which I was to enjoy, I might bestow a part upon the poor, a part
upon erecting a Monastery, and a part (for why should I blush to confess my
little confidence in the providence of God?) upon the supply of mine own
expense and charge. My Abbot began to tell me alowd, that it was but a
temptation of the Devil, and that the subtle snare of the old enemy, did but
lurk under a specious pretext. That this was but to return, as a dog would
do to his vomit: that many Monckes had been thus deceived: that the Devil is
never wont to show his face without a mask. He propounded many examples to me
out of Scripture, and that among the rest, how in the beginning of the world
Adam and Eve were supplanted by a hope of divinity. And when he could not
persuade with me, he besought me even upon his knees, that I would not forsake
him, nor destroy my self, nor look back over the shoulder, when I had the
plowgh in my hand. But woe be to me wretched man. I overcame this Counselor
of mine by a most wicked kind of victory conceauing indeed that he sought not
my good, but his own comfort. He went following me therefore out of the
Monastery, as if he had been carrying me to a grave, and giving me at last a
long farewell: I shall see thee (says he) o my son, marked out by the
burning iron of Satan; I inquire not after thy reasons, nor do I admit of thy
excuses; the Sheep which goes out of the fould, does instantly lie open to the
wolves mouth.

Upon the passage from Beria to Essa, there is a desert near the high way,
where the Saracens are ever wandering up and down in their inconstant kind of
habitations, the fear whereof make trauaillers resolve not to pass that way
but in great troops; that so their eminent danger may be avoided by the
mutual help of one another. There were in my company me^ and women, old men,
young men, and children to the number of seauenty in the whole; and behold
those Ismaeliticall riders of their horses and Camels, rushed in upon us with
their heads full of hair tied up with ribandes, their bodies half naked,
wearing but mantles, and large hose: at their shoulders hung their quiuers, and
shaking their unbent bows, they carried also long darts; for they came not
with a mind to fight but to drive a prey. We were taken, we were scattered, and
all distracted into several ways. As for me, who had been the natural owner
of my self for a long time before, by lot I fell under the servitude of the
same Master with a certain woman. We were lead, or rather we were carried
loftily away upon Camels, and being always in fear of ruin through out all
that vast desert, we did rather hang, then sit. Flesh half raw was our meat,
and the blood of Camels our drink. At length having passed over a large river,
we came to a more inward desert, where being commanded (according to the manner
of that nation) to adore the Lady, and her children whose slaves we were, we
bowed down our necks. But here being as good as shut in prison, and having
our attyte changed, I begun to learn to go naked; for the intemperatenes of
that air permits not any thing to be covered, but the secret parts. The care
of feeding the sheep was turned over to me; and in comparison of a greater
misery, I might account my self to enjoy a kind of comfort, in that by this
means I seldom saw either my Lords, or my fellow-serua^ts: me thought I had
somewhat in my condition, like that of holy Jacob; I also remembered Moses: for
both they had sometimes been shepheardes in the desert. I fed upon green
cheese and milk; I prayed continually, and sung those psalms which I had
learned in the Monastery. I took delight in my captivity, I gave thanks to
the judgments of God for my having found that Moncke in the wilderness, whom I
had lost in mine own country. But, o how far is any thing from being safe
from the Devil! O how manifould, and unspeakable are his snares! For even
when I so lay hid, his envy made a shift to find me out. My Lord therefore
observing, that his flock prospered in my hand, and not finding any falshoud
in me (for I knew the Apostle to have commanded, that we should faithfully
serve our Lords, as we would do God) and he being willing to reward me, that
thereby he might oblige me to be yet more faithful to him, gave me that
she-fellow-slaue, who had formerly been taken captive with me. And when I
refused to accept her, affirming that I was a Christian, and that it was not
lawful for me to take her for a wife, who had a husband yet alive (for that
husband of hers had also been taken together with us, and carried away as the
slave of another Lord) he grew all fierce and implacable toward me, and even
like a mad man began to run at me with his naked sword, and if instantly I
had not stretched forth mine arms, and taken hold of the woman, he had not
failed to take my life. And now, that night arrived, which came too soon for
me, and was the darkest that ever I saw. I lead this new half defiled wife,
into a cave; having taken bitter sorrow for the usher, who was to lead us home
from the wedding; and both of us abhorred one another, though neither of us
confessed so much. Then had I indeed a lively feeling of my bondage, and laying
my self prostrate upon the ground, I began to bewail the Moncke whom I had
lost, saying: Wretched creature that I am, have I been kept all this while
alive for this? Have my grievous sins been able to bring me to so great
misery, as that hither to being a Virgin, yet when now I find my head full of
hoary hairs, I should become a married man? What auayles it me to have
contemned my Parents, my Country, and my goods for the love of our Lord, if
now I do that thing, for the avoiding whereof, I contemned all the rest?
unless perhaps all these miseries are come justly upon me, because I would
needs return to my Country? But tell me, o my soul, what are we doing? Shall
I perish, or shall I ouercom? Shall I expect the hand of God, or shall I run
my self upon the point of my own sword? Turn thy sword upon thy self: the
death of thy soul is more to be feared; then that of thy body. It is a kind of
Martyrdom for a man rather to have suffered death, then to have lost his
virginity. Let this witness of Christ remain unburied in the wilderness; my
self will be both the persecutour and the martyr. Having spoken thus, I
unsheathed my shining sword, in that dark place, and turning the point against
my self, I said: Farewell unfortunate woman, and take me rather as a Martyr,
then as a married man. But she casting her self down at my feet, spoke to me
in these words: I beseech you for the love of Jesus Christ, and I adjure you
by the straightes, wherein we find our selves in this sad hour, do not cast
the guilt of shedding your blood upon me; or if there be no remedy, but that
you will needs dye, turn first your sword upon me, and let us rather be
married thus in death, then otherwise. Although mine own husband should
return to me, I would observe chastity, which I have been taught by my
captivity; yea I would keep it so, as that I would rather wish that I might
perish, then it. Why should you die, rather then be married to me, who would
resolve to die, if you should resolve to marry? Take me to you, as the wife of
chastity, and esteem more the conjunction of the soul, then of the body. Let
our Lords conceive us to be man and wife; but let Christ know us to be as
Brother and Sister. We shall easily persuade men that we are married, when
they see that we do so entirely love one another.

I confess I was amazed, and admiring the virtue of the woman, I loved her the
better for that kind of wife: but yet did I never so much as behold her naked
body; I never touched her flesh, for fear least I might loose that in peace,
which I had preserved in war. Many days passed on between us in this kind
of matrimony; this marriage making us more acceptable to our Lords and Masters,
as freeing them from all suspicion of our running away: yea sometimes it would
fall out, that I might be absent in that desert for a whole month together,
like a Shepherd well trusted with his flock. After a long space of time,
whilst I was sitting alone in the wilderness, seeing nothing but heaven and
earth before me, I began to consider with my self in silence, and to reuolue
many things in my heart, which I had known, when I conuersed with the Moncks;
and especially I called to mind the countenance of that Father of mine, who had
instructed, who had cherished, and who had lost me. And whilst I was beating
upon these thoughts, I behold a flock of Antes, to swarm in a certain
straight passage, who carried burdens even greater the^ their own bodies; some
of them had taken up certain seeds of herbs with their mouths, as if it had
been with pincers; others were carrying earth out of ditches, and would make
certain fences against the entry in of water; some, remembering that there was
a winter to come, took of grains of corn, and brought the^ in, least the
earth when it should grow wet, might convert the corn already gathered into
new corn for the next year; others carried the bodies of their dead with a
sad kind of solemnity; and (which yet is more to be wondered at) there was none
going forth, of all that troop, who would hinder any one that entered in, but
rather if they discovered any, who were in danger of falling under their weight
or burden, they would lend him their shoulders to keep him up. What shall I say
more? That day showed me a pleasant object. Whereupon, remembering Solomon, who
sendes us to imitate the sharp sighted providence of Antes, and stirring up our
sloathfull minds by their example; I began to be weary of my captivity, and to
aspire toward the Cells of Monks again, and to love the resemblance of those
Antes, in that they labor in common, where nothing is proper to any one, but
all things belong to all. When I went back to my lodging, I see the woman
coming toward me, nor was I able to dissemble the sorrow of my heart. She
asked me, why I was so troubled? I tell her my reasons, and she exhorted that
we might take our flight. I conjure her to promise silence; she gives me
assurance, and so continually whispering about this business, we were laid and
tossed between hope and fear.

I had in that heard two Goats of a huge bigness; which being killed, I make
vessels of their skins, and I prepare their flesh, for our provision. And
the first evening when our Lords might conceive that we were laid to rest, we
set upon our journey, carrying the skins and the meat. When we were come to a
river, which was some ten miles of, we commit our selves to the waters, having
first laid our selves upon these skines, which were stuffed out; and we help
our selves with our feet, as it might have been with oars, that so the river
carrying us downward, and landing us much lower on the other side of the
bancke, then where we put our selves into the water, they who followed us might
loose the trace of our feet. But in the mean time our flesh being wet, and
part of it also being lost, it did hardly promise us food for three days. We
drunk even to satiety, by way of provision against the thirst which we were to
have afterward. We ran, and yet ever looking behind our backs; and made more
way by night then by day, partly by reason of the danger, which might have
grown to us by the Saracens, and partly through the excessive heat of the
Sun. Wretch that I am; I tremble even whilst I am but telling it: and though
indeed I be wholly now secure, yet all my body quakes to think thereof. For
after the third day, we saw a far of in a doubtful kind of sight, two men
sitting upon Camells, who were coming toward us at full speed: and presently
our mind, which was apt to foretell mischief to us, began to think that our
Lord and Master had resolved our death, and that we even saw the Sun grow
black toward us. Whilst we were thus in fear, and conceived our selves to
be betrayed by our footesteps printed upon the sand; we found a Cave upon our
right hand, which pierced far under ground. But fearing least we might fall
upon some venomous beasts (for Vipers and Basiliskes and Scorpions, and such
other creaturs, declining that great heat of the Sun, are wont to betake
themselves to the shad) we entered indeed into the Cave; but instantly at that
very entrance, we committed our selves to a hollow, which was within upon the
right hand, not daring to proceed any further on, least by flying one kind of
death, we might have fallen upon another: conceauing this within our selves,
that if God will help us as being miserable, we shall be safe; but if he
despise us, as being sinful, we shall fall into the hands of death. What
kind of heart do you think we had? What kind of fright were we in, when our
Lord, and a fellow slave of ours were standing near the Cave, and by the print
of our feet were already arrived as far, as that darkness would give them
leave? O death how much more grievous art thou in expectation, then in effect!
Even again my tongue grows to falter with fear and care, and as if my Lord
were but now crying out upon me, I have not the heart to whisper out a word. He
sent his slave to fetch us out of the Cave; himself houldes the Camells, and
having drawn his sword, he expects our coming forth. In the mean time, that
servant being gone three or four cubits on, we seeing him with his back
toward us, (for the nature of our sight is such, as that all things are dark
to those who enter into any obscure place, after they have been in the Sun)
we heard his voice sound through the den: Come forth you villains* out, you
who are designed for death. What do you expect? Why do you stay? get you out
our Lord calls you, he expects you with patience. Whilst he was yet speaking,
behold we saw, even in that darkness, that a Lioness already rushed upon that
man, and having strangled him, drew him all bloody in. Dear Jesus, how full
were we of terror, and of joy withal! We perceived our enemy destroyed,
though our Lord and Master knew it not. For when he saw the delay, he
suspected that we two had resisted one, and so not being able to differ his
wrath, he came forward to the Cave with his sword in his hand, and reproaching
his slave of cowardice, with a furious kind of rage, he was first seized upon
by the Beast, before he came to our retreat. Who are they, which can believe,
that the Beast should fight for us, in our own presence? But being freed from
that fear, the like destruction presented it self before our imaginations;
saving that it was safer to endure the rage of a Lioness, then the wrath of a
man. We were afflicted with fear, even to the very hearts, and not venturing
so much as once to stir, we expected the event of the business, in the midst
of so many dangers, being only defended, as with a wall, by the conscience which
we had of our chastity. The Lioness being wary, least she might chance to fall
into some snare; and finding that she was seen, takes fast hold of her
whelps, and carries them forth, and leaves the lodging to our use. Neither yet
were we so credulous as to break out in have; but expecting long, and
sometimes thinking to go out, we never had a fancy, as if we were to fall upon
wild beasts. But at length, after the end of the next day, the horror in which
we were being removed, out we went in the evening, and we saw some kind of
Camels, whom for the excessiuenes of their speed they call Dromedaries,
ruminating upon those meats which they had eaten before, and then drawing them
down again into their stomachs. And we mounting on them, and being refreshed
with new provision, arrived by that desert to the Roman Garrisons, upon the
tenth day after, and there being presented to the Tribune, we gave him an
orderly account of what had passed. From thence we were sent over to Sabinus
the Governor of Mesopotamia, where we received a just price for our Camels.
And because that Abbot of mine, did now rest in our Lord, when I was brought to
that place, I restored my self to the Monckes, and I delivered her over to the
Virgins; loving her as my Sister, but not trusting my self with her, as with
my Sister. This story did Malchus being old relate to me, when I was young:
and now my self being old, I have delivered it to you, and I present a
history of Chastity to chaste persons, aduising such as are virgins to keep
their chastity with care. Tell you it over to posterity, to the end tha^ they
may know, that in the midest of swords, deserts and wild beasts, Chastity* can
never be captiued; and that a man who is consecrated to Christ, may well be
killed, but not conquered.

FINIS

