The Jesuits Downfall, THREATENED AGAINST THEM BY THE SECVLAR Priests for their
wicked lives, accursed manners, Heretical doctrine, and more then
Matchiavillian Policy.

TOGETHER WITH THE LIFE OF FATHER PARSONS AN ENGLISH IESVITE.

Good God, that such a Society of men, after so many scandals, and foul
deserts of theirs in France, and elsswhere, for Prince-killing, Sedition, etc.
can thus be of credit in England? A. C. to his disiesuited kinsman, Page, 72.

AT OXFORD, Printed by Joseph Barnes, and are to be sold by John Barnes
dwelling near Holborne Conduit. 1612.

TO THE RIGHT WORTHY OF ALL HONOR FOR RELIGIon, Piety and Justice, the
Reverend Judges, and Justices of Peace for the County of Oxon.
TRue Religion the only badg of a Christian, has two marks whereby it is
certainly known; to wit, Zeal, and Constancy. Zeal, for it must not be
cold, nor luke warm; but fervent and hot: Constancy, because it endures not
for a season, and continues but a while, but abides unto the end, unto the
death, for ever. This zeal which is so necessarily required in all men, but
more properly in Magistrates and Governors* has appeared Right Honorable and
Right Worshipful most evidently, in your late proceedings against Popish
Recusants, at, and before the last Sessions, holden for this County, at an
Aug. 19.
unusual time, and with very extraordinary care and provision, for the
searching, finding, fining, and restraining of the most dangerous persons of
either sex.

Of your Constancy likewise and perseverance in prosecuting so good
beginnings, small cause have we to doubt, considering the goodness of the cause,
and the greatness of authority, wherewith both your hands and hearts are
strengthened from above, to the great joy of all his Majesty's loyal subjects,
Gods faithful servants. What remains now, but that we of the Clergy for
our parts, should second these happy beginnings with our uttermost endeavors?
by adding the word unto the sword, persuasions and co^ferences, unto those
sharper means and corrosiues which are applied, showing our selves ready to
offer up, not only our labors, but our selves also for the good of such as have
bin seduced by the Priests, and Jesuits, but rather by the Jesuits then by the
Priests, for which cause knowing the danger, and being most willing (if it be
possible) to prevent it. I have taken pains to compile this small Treatise,
that if God shall be pleased in mercy to open their eyes, they may see the
wicked lives, accursed manners, heretical doctrine, and more then
Matchiavillian policy of that Society, which they do so devoutly follow, with
peril both of soul and body.

This work I hope will find the better entertainment with them, because it
is taken wholly and soly from the writings of sundry learned Priests, who
spoke as they were moved, upon consideration of their wicked lives and manners,
so that theirs are the proofs, mine the collection and method only, as the
Quotations in the Margent will sufficiently declare. I admit, that both Priests
and Jesuits are to be feared more and less, as dangerous enemies unto his
Majesty, and the State: but chiefly the Jesuits, who hold their disciples in
such servitude, or rather slavery, that whatsoever they say is a law, and that
law must be obayed, though God and man, reason or authority, King or Kaisar
say to the contrary. From such followers, as are once wholly devoted to their
company, it will be a hard matter for the Magistrate (you find it by too
lamentable experience) to draw either the Oath of Allegiance, or obedience to
the Magistrate in things Temporal, much less conference and conformity in
matters spiritual. Mat. 8.9.
For the Jesuits like the Centurion in the Gospel, have that command and
Jurisdiction over their inferiors, that if they bid them go, they go, if they
bid them do this, they do it, without asking any question whether it be right
or wrong, just or unjust which is commanded: and the reason is plain, because
they rely altogether upon the Jesuit, and the Jesuit upon the Pope, who is the
only unerring person upon earth.

A most absurd doctrine, as any is in all Popery, wherewith notwithstanding,
they have bewitched the souls of I know not how many men and women, otherwise
very virtuously and religiously inclined, and what pity is it, for us to
consider, what Cimmerian and more then Egyptian darkness they do live in,
that are thus taught by their ignorant teachers, that do vow themselves blind
obedience? When the blind lead the blind, Mat. 15.14.
how can it be but that both of the^ should fall into the ditch.

Now this which is spoken against the Jesuits does not acquit the Secular
Priests, nor their followers. For as long as they go about, to reco^cile men
from their true and natural Prince unto the Pope, and to withdraw their
minds, from religion, unto superstition, from Gods word, unto fables, from God
himself unto Mammon: causing them that are reconciled, not only to profess
all Popish points, according to the doctrine of the Council of Trent, as
unwritten Traditions, Transubstantiation, Purgatory Indulgences, worshipping of
Images, and Relics, Justification by works, the truth of seven Sacraments,
obedience to one only Pope, etc. but to make them Articles of the Creed, and to
take a solemn This true Catholic faith, without which no man can be saved
which now I do willingly profess, and hold, I the same N. do promise, vow,
and swear, to hold and confess most consta^tly, by Gods help entire and
uncorrupted, even to the last end of my life: and to procure as much as shall
lie in me, that my subjects, or those of who^ I shall have care in my office,
shall hold, teach, and preach the same. So God help me and these holy Gospels
of God. A Profession of the Catholic faith set out, according to the Decree of
the Council of Trent. Or, A manifest confession of the Christian Belief,
which all upright Catholic people at al times, being demanded to give a reason
thereof, are bound to confess.
Oath, that they will continue in the profession of all and every of them unto
the death, and farthermore, persuade as much as in them lies, all others that
are under the^ to do the like, we have just cause to suspect both their
dealings, and to oppose our selves against their proceedings. The which thing
you have begun to do, Right Honorable and Right Worshipful, to your eternal
praise and commendation, and to the example and encouragement of others You
have begun well, who shall be able to hinder you, if God be on your side?

Go forward then, I beseech you, in Gods name, both cheerfully and
courageously, you have our earnest prayers, and shall be sure to have our best
endeavors (if need require.) I know the readiness of many learned and grave
Divines, to further this religious service, amongst which, my self being one
of the meanest in Gods Church, scarce worthy to be called a Divine, do most
earnestly desire, to contribute my pains and service, and to make known unto
the world, the great affection which I bear unto all sorts of people, thus by
the Jesuits miserably seduced: whose conversion as I have always sought by
good and fair means, such as the most wayward and peevishest adversaries
cannot justly except against: so is it my purpose, God willing, so to continue
unto my lives end, both by speech and writing, propagating that faith, whereof
his Majesty of al Princes Christian may truly be said to be the Defendor: and
because the Jesuits are his and our chiefest enemies, accept, I beseech you,
these few lines, concerning their lives and manners in general, and one of the
chiefest of them in particular; the matter was ministered unto me by certain
Secular Priests, the method in disposing and digesting of it was mine, to God
be ascribed the glory and benefit thereof, if any shall arise. And thus
beseeching him to bless you all with continuance of your care, and increase of
zeal, for the utter suppressing of all Popery and superstition, and rooting
out of all Priests and Jesuits. I humbly take my leave*

From the Public Library in Oxford, Sept. 16. 1612. Yours in all religious
services to command. THO. JAMES.

THE PROPOSITIONS.
1. That the Jesuits are not indeed of Jesus but of the Devil. 2. They are
forerunners of Antichrist. 3. Right Puritans in all things. 4. Worse then the
Turk. 5. Dangerous men both to Church and Common weal. 6. Vicious both in
life and manners. 7. Noted of these vices following, as of Ambition, 8.
Vainglory. 9. Envy. 10. Malice. 11. Vncharitie. 12. Cruelty. 13. Murders and
Massacres 14. To be saucie fellows. 15. Impudent. 16. Injurious. 17.
Vnhospitall. 18. Pillars and Pollers of the people. 19. Causers of dissentions.
20. Accusers and diffamers of others. 21. High conceited of themselves. 22. For
Learning. 23. For Religion. 24. Commended by others. 25. By themselves. 26. Not
to be spoken, nor written against. 27. Generally proud. 28. Especially in
apparel. 29. Flat Cooseners. 30. Hypocrites. 31. Making a vain show of
Religion and good works. 32. Doing evil upon good pretenses. 33. Dissemblers.
34. Aequivocators. 35. Temporizers. 36. Falsaries. 37. Politicians and
Statists. 38. Enterdealing in state business too far. 39. Having and
maintaining Intelligences. 40. Working by great men. 41. By bribes and
promises. 42. By intercepting of Letters. 43. Injurious to Priests first, by
debasing and vilifying them in words. 44. Suspending them from their faculties.
45. From the Altar. 46. From preaching. 47. From their residencies. 48. From
all company. 49. From Christian burial* 50. From all Alms. 51. Getting all the
Alms to themselves. 52. Starving the poor Priests. 53. Domineering over them.
54. Making them to yield to them. 55, Disgraceful both in word and deed to
Popes. 56. To Cardinals. 57. To Kings. 58. Plotting foreign invasions. 59.
Disposing of kingdoms. 60. Traitors. 61. King-killers. 62. In doctrine turning
all topsie turvie. 63. By heretical positions. 64. Extravagant opinions. 65.
Approving of the stews. 66. Abuse of Confession. 67. Use of fond Revelations
and Prophecies. 68. Becoming Atheists. 69. At strife with others. 70. Amongst
themselves, 71. Against School divinity. 72. Men that cannot err as they
affirm. 73. Full of Novelties. 74. Intemperate writings. 75. Libellers. 76.
That write much themselves. 77. Forbidding others. 78. Seducers of youth. 79.
Admitting none but rich men into their society 80. Teaching gratis. 81. To be
irreverent to Parents. 82. Making their scholars worse and worse. 83. Are well
followed and favored. 84. Especially by women. 85. Do all for gain. 86. Get
great sums of money into their hands. 87. Resort only to rich men. 88.
Domineere in their houses. 89. Build Seminaries. 90. Take all into their hands.
91. Enterdealing with the civil Magistrate. 92. Betraying some unto the
Enemy. 93. Bringing others unto their ends, and afterward slaundering them.
94. Laying a foul imputation on those that leave them. 95. All for a
Monarchy. 96. Hated of all orders. 97. Their spiritual exercise. 98.
Discipline in their College. 99. Fear a visitation. 100. Lastly their fall
fore-prophecied and wished for
THE DOWNFALL of the Jesuits.
The 1. Proposition. That the Jesuits are not indeed of Jesus but of the Devil.
THIS is See the letters of A. C. page 23.
that Society of Fathers in Gods Church, they being no whit Gods sons, of
Ib. p. 23.
which it must be said, that by Gods especial providence it came up with Luther
as a curb to his, and from him to all the ensuing heresies of this age: Ib. p.
57.
but this Order is the refuse of Religion, and therefore worthily the least
Religious Order in holy church. Ib. page 24.
A most impostural corporation, that Ib. page 20.
have clean forsaken and forfeited the spirit of the Catholic Church. Io.
Colletons defense, p. 14.
Well may they be Dij Titulares, as being so termed after Jesus; but surely,
no way Dij Tutelares in their gospel, and for to conclude this point, A
relation of the faction begun at W^^bich* page 67.
the whole Society is not indeed of Jesus, but of the Devil.

The 2. Proposition. That the Jesuits are forerunners of Antichrist.
Watsons Quodlibe^s. Page 82.
Antichrist doubted to be come by reason of them* for they are Ib 56.
foreru^ners of Antichrist, and Archinventers of new Puritanisme, worse than
ever was yet heard of, and all this is A Dialogue betwixt a secular Priest and
a lay gentleman in the Preface.
done under pretense of Pharisaicall zeal.

The 3. Proposition. That the Jesuits are right Puritans in all things.
Watsons Quod lib. page 34.
A Jesuit is nothing else but a Reformed Priest, right Puritan in all things. Ib
page 27.
In matters and doctrine, pertaining to manners, government, and order of life,
in this respect all wholly Puritans: for distinctions sake, we may call the^
Puritan Papists, to distinguish them from the Puritan Protestants. Ib. page 142.
They are just like to the Puritanian, or the Cartwritian, or the Brownistian,
or the Genevian, or the Gehennian platform. And there are Ib page 169.
at the least a hundred principles, and odd tricks concerning government,
authority, tyranny, popularitie, treason, conspiracy, etc. which they iumpe
as just together in, as if both were made of one mould. Ib page 154.
Very dangerous, unless some order be taken for the^ both in time: Ib. page
26.
but of the twain, the Jesuits are more dangerous than the Puritans.

The 4. Proposition. The Jesuits are worse than the Turk, etc.
Watson in his Quodlib. p 138.
THey are blasphemous wretches, an Ib. page 18.
impious brood, Progeny of vipers, to use our Saviors words against them, the
offals of the old Scribes and Pharisees, who has taught them to eschew iram
venturam? Ib page 169.
they use to turkize over men in a shameful manner, nay, it Ib. page 4
were better to live under the Turk for the security of their souls, than
under the Jesuits government, or rather captivity.

The 5. Proposition. They are dangerous fellows.
I Ib. in the pref.
must be forced to open to the world, what gross errors they do maintain, how
marveilously the people are blinded and seduced by them, and how dangerous a
race they run, to their own and all others destruction. Ib. page 294.
Doubtless, there will come much danger unto the Catholic Church, if these
violent spirits be not in time suppressed, and therefore Ib. page 47.
these fellows must be looked unto in time; yea, Ib page 102.
it is high time for all Christendom to look unto them, for, if let go any
longer, hardly reclaimed.

The 6. Proposition. Vicious both in life and manners.
Letter of A. C. page 29.
Heretofore the Lay did debauch the Religious, now the Religious do debauch
the Lay and that as bad, as bad may be. I know Quodlibet. p. 240.
they can endure nothing worse, then to hear of their own lewdness: yet, Ib.
page 82.
because they pervert all both God and man's laws, and run against the course
of nature and kind, I will discover these Ib. page 359.
Jesuitical spirits, whose Luciferian pride is such, as it delights to be
counted famous in mischeife, and to have none to equal them in impiety; but
all base, and meanly esteemed of, compared with themselves in villainy: as A
Dialogue betwixt a secular Priest* and a Lay Cath. in the Preface.
dishonest, uncharitable, irreligious, vnpriestly practices, unspeakable pride
ambition, envy, malice, extortion, cruelty, and above all their intolerable
backbiting tongues, for invectiues against them they hate. A let. of A. C. page
29.
What shall we say, when a religious society, and that of Jesus, can beget
such brats? Ib page 78.
Fie on such Fatherhood, so rooted, so fruited. Quodl. page 7
Are they not rocks of scandal, to all Priesthood, and is it A let. of A. C.
page 34.
not a shame that so religious a corporation, should so join hands with the
Devil against the virtuous? Surely Ib. page 38.
I see no reason, why to the Wickelevist vpbraiding us with the enormous
manners of the religious heretofore in Gods Church, we should be so straight
laced, as not to acknowledge him as much: seeing that even at this day in
England, we have Jesuits such manner of Religious.

The 7. Proposition. The Jesuits are noted of Ambition.
THe Watsons Quodlib. p. 200
wicked Jesuits are of Luciferian ambition, Declaratio motuum ac turbationis in
Anglia. page 36.
most ambitious and cunning, in seeking to bear rule over the Clergy, and
being once A. C. let. p. 20.
fired in the ambitious mounts of Phaetons chariot, they trouble all Europe, by
this their ambitioning above all Religious orders in holy Church, in ordine ad
daemonem, aemulantes still charismata pessima.

The 8. Proposition. Vainglory.
Declaratio motuum etc. in Anglia page 5^.
THese good Fathers, are so desirous of their own credit and glory, as if they
were Quodl. p. 156
a company of Swaggerers, Ruffians, or bragging braggates of Toledo.

The 9. Proposition. Envy.
A Dialogue betwixt a secular Priest and a Lay Catholic in the Pref.
There is Envy in them, to see any do well that follows not them, Quodl. p.
74.
proving themselves right Momists, Zoilists, and Aristarchists; and I A
Dialogue etc. in the Pref.
verily think, nether Zoilus, Aristarchus, Timon, or other Misanthropos, ever
equald, or else was to be compared with a Jesuit in the damnable art of
detraction, or Envy.

The 10. Proposition. Malice.
WHat should I speak of the Quodl. p. 84.
inhumane parts of these cruel men, their dogged natures and Jewish hearts,
where once they conceive a dislike? rightly following that Atheall principle of
Machiavell never to pardon, unless for disadvantage where once thou have taken
a displeasure: so that A Relation of the faction at Wesbich page 74
revenge with them, has never an end, but with the death of their adversaries,
and their reproach after death. whereby it is evidently proved, that there is A
dialogue betwixt a secul. Priest and a lay gentleman in the Preface.
more like Divelish, then humane malice in them.

The 11. Proposition. The Jesuits are noted of Vncharitie.
THe Colletons defense of the slau^dered Priest page 32.
Jesuits pretend Fatherly Charity, exhibited toward all Priests: an
affirmance so far from truth, as to doubt, concerning this matter in question,
whether it be true or no, were to doubt, whether there be a Sun in the
Firmament, or no. For what is more common with them, then by their A. C. let.
p. 80.
Jesuitical vncharitie, to leave a man [not to Gods mercy] but to his
judgment?

The 12. Proposition. Of Cruelty.
THey Quodl. p. 315.
are merciless, hard, and cruel hearted to their afflicted brethren; for Ib.
page 22.
instead of meekness, mercy and compassion, they have put on a steme, harth
and cruel hardness, void of all pity, mildness or remorse. And A relation of
the faction as Wisbich. p. 78.
in the Low Countries, they have been so cruel, as that they have not only
brought many excellent men to a miserable end, but have reproched the^ after
death.

The 13. Proposition. Famous for murders and Massacres.
Quodl. p. 317.
THe only thing they long for, is to bring al a flore in fire and sword,
according to their A relation of the faction at Wisbich page 67
proud, Machiavillian, and cruel designements, committing many Quodl. p. 18.
secret murders, and open Massacres. And verily some breath of bloody garboyles
and cruelties is threatened to all nations, by these Assassinists. For what are
they all, say some that know them, but massacring, butcherly, buyers and
sellers of their dear country men's blood? Ib. page 83.
The very Canibals, and Anthropophagies, shall rise up at the last day, and
condemn this barbarous and savage generation of Belials blood for this crime.

The 14. Proposition. Saucie fellows.
Quodl. p. 15.
THese malapert Jesuits, become saucy every where, where they once get but
never so little advantage.

The 15. Proposition. Impudent.
Quodl. p. 249
WHo would think, that any strumpet were she never so impudent, could put
upon her such a brazen forhead? They are all Ib. page 9.
like common strumpets. For Ib. page 320.
they will stand to nothing, though there be a thousand witnesses.

The 16. Proposition. Injurious.
THe Colletons just desenee, page 32
Jesuits abettours of most grievous wrongs and infamy, Ib. page 267.
especially to the Priests.

The 17. Proposition. Vnhospitall.
A man may H. Elyes notes upon the Apol. page 208.
as soon break their necks, as their fasts at a Jesuits College.

The 18. Proposition. Pillars and polers of the People.
THere Quodl. p. 75.
is much polling and pilling of Catholics in England under the color of
holy uses. Ib. page 69.
Verres not more odious for pilling than the Jesuits.

The 19. Proposition. Causers of dissension.
Quodl. page 2.
THe Jesuits beginners of contention, A relation of the faction as Wisbich. p.
74.
firebrands of all seditions. All the Clergy and sociall dissension in our
Realm, proceeded from the Fathers of the Society; and these are the very
Quodl. page 4.
first brokers, breathers and brochers of contention abroad. Whose A relation
of the faction at Wisbich. p. 68.
delight is in nothing but in factions and novelties, and why? because Let. of.
A. C. 61.
with their Zizaniaes of faction, they make boot and havocke of Catholics
estates; Declaratio motuum etc. p. 62.
getting more by discord than otherwise, and therefore it is no marvel if A
relation of the fact. at Wisb page 76.
in private families, they separate brethren one from an other, and the husband
from the wife, inflaming them with rancour and envy, one against an other. For
this Ib. page 78.
is a known position amongst the Jesuits, Divide and impera;; and therefore,
they do both stir up, and maintain dissentions.

The 20. Proposition. Accusers and diffamers of their brethren.
A dialogue betwixt a Secul Priest and a Lay Gentl. page 56.
THeir Adversaries have always found them to use as sharp teeth, and as
hurtful tongues, to the renting asunder their good names, and wounding them
other wise (yet all in secret manner) as any other men they had occasions to
deal with. For why, Quodl. p 122
they pass all that ever yet were for detraction; yea, even when they have
tormented a man to death, yet have they most sly and cunning slights, to make
it seem apparent they never did such a thing, and withal to make the party
crucified by them, yet still to be condemned of the world, as maledictus, and
an injurious slanderer of them. And that you may know, that A. C. let. p. 9.
of defamations their Society has the exactest school under heaven, they
observe certain Quodl. p. 123
Atheall orders, and Machiavillian maxims, for their own advantage: as,
detrahe audacter, aliquid adhaerebit: but Ib. page 124.
the chief points to be kept are these two: the one, that the matter have some
show of probability in it self, the second point is, that having a ground to
build upon what kind of detraction he pleases, he must always apply the
infamy, in just opposition to the true fame and report. Thus, Declaratio
motuum, etc. p. 18.
by accusing others, they make way for their own hawtines. But Quodl. p. 133.
is it not a most unchristian, Turkish, heretical, and traitorous ground they
stand upon, and a Promontorie far beyond all the capes and points of piety,
lying out into the dead Sea, Persian gulf, or Stygian lake of perdition, to
affirm, that all must be defamed, detracted, backbitten, despised, and borne
down that are opposite to them and their designs? yea, Ib. page 96.
whatsoever parson is directly bent against them, they must never leave him;
but calumniat, sclander and invent new matter against him, so that be Ib. page
99.
he Pope, or Prince, or other Monarch that does not favor their Jesuitical
Allobrogicks, (although he do no ways stir against them,) yet for that he runs
not with them, he shall be sure to have heart, head and pen, yea and hands to
be laid upon him, until both ears and cheeks, do burn with infamies. For
they that are not with them, are against them. And they A relat. of the fact.
at Wisbich.
that oppose themselves against them, cannot be judged virtuous, or of any
estimation. A. C. let. p. 21.
Whereas on the contrary side, bearing the print of their praise, it skils not
how very a fool or knave, or both a man be. Thus we may perceive, Ib. page
27.
Detraction to be the most Jesuitical vice of all others, And the Quodl. p. 99.
Jesuits, to be the most malicious, traitorous, and irreligious calumniators
that ever lived on earth, unworthy that ever the earth should bear them, and an
intolerable indignity to the whole Church of God, that ever such wicked
members should live unpunished in her, as they do.

The 21. Proposition. High conceited of themselves.
HOw meanly they think of others; yet they have Quodl. p 45.
Divelish spirits, of a Luciferian spirit and Conceit of their own proper
excellency, and a H. Elyes notes upon the Apol.
fond opinion, to think that nothing can be well done without them. Relation of
the faction at Wisb. page 69.
All must depend on them. Nothing holy, Catholic, sound, not the Mass rightly
celebrated, unless it be by them. Quodl. p. 73.
Every one of them must be Rector chori, and dominus fac totum, and an absolute
superlatiue in all things. Ib page 16.
All superlatiues, all Analogists, all Metaphysitians, all entia
transcendentia. And they Ib. page 244.
will be called new Apostles, Illuminats, and extraordinary Rabbis, that have
more near familiarity and acquaintance with God, then any other, Ib page 64.
to obtain al suits: and hence it is, that a A. C. let. p. 25
Gentlewoman said; that she was brought by a Secular Priest on her way to
heaven, by a Iesuited Priest to heaven gate, by a professed Jesuit beholding
to him for heaven: so that you may hence collect, that every Quodl. p. 72.
Jesuit is a rare man, A. C. let. p. 26.
all his crows white, and Quodl. p. 112.
finally, that their many Atheall principles, are all reduced to two monstrous
heads, to wit; exaltation of themselus, and downecast of all that side not with
them.

The 22. Proposition. For learning.
A true relation of the faction at Wisbich.
THe most unlearned Jesuit (if we believe them) does far excel the most
learned Secular Priest. H Elyes notes on the Apol. page 203.
No learning in the world before the Jesuits appeared, no learned man now, if
he has not been brought up under them.

The 23. Proposition. For Religion.
Quodl. p. 73.
REligion had been utterly quailed, if they had not been.

The 24. Proposition. Commended by others
Ib. page 72.
THe Jesuits have learned one special trick of Machiavell, to be at
composition with certain Nobles, Gentlemen, and others in Princes Courts, to
spread abroad their works, with report, every thing to be very rare. These
cease not to Ib. page 5.
extol them unto the sky.

The 25. Proposition. By themselves.
THere is another Ib. page 335.
trick of Machiavell, to make all other men's writings odious, and to commend
their own by themselves, or their Neutrals. Yea, Ib. page 113.
it is as common a practice with the Jesuits, to seek to advance themselves,
as to say their Breviarie.

The 26. Proposition. The Jesuits not to be spoken, nor written against.
Quodl. p. 44.
THe Jesuits must not be spoken against. For Ib page 108.
if a man speak directly against them, out upon it, it is not to be heard
spoken of, or once looked upon. As if there were Ib. page 95.
an Act to bar others from speaking against them, or that it were Ib page 332.
high blasphemy, to co^tradict these Demigods in any thing. And generally the
Ib page 122.
people are so enchanted by the Jesuits, that they will not believe any thing
against the^, that Ib page 69.
all are accounted heretics that cross their proceedings; they Ib. page 337.
must not be disgraced, yet their brokers can revile others: and in like sort,
the Jesuits have this Ib. page 195.
coggery, to make the books written against them, to be infamous libels and
satyricall invectiues, neither to be read, nor answered.

The 27. Proposition. That they are generally proud.
A. C. let. p. 23.
THeir kingdom is wholly of this world, which may be seen Quodlibet. p. 145.
by their capers of ambition and arrogance, and Ib. page 157.
Luciferian pride, in all which they Ib. page 336.
imitate Lucifer. For their Ib. page 42.
pride and disdain has already past gradum ad octo, and pass it any farther,
it is twenty to one, it will pass extra sphaeram activitatis.

The 28. Proposition. In Apparel.
Quodl. p. 70
THe Fathers bestow much on themselves, like Ib. page 46.
gallants or courtly Rabbis, and A let. of A. C. page 23.
their pride in apparel amongst Lords and Ladies is such, that like Quodl. p.
70.
vainglorious Pharisees, they ride to and fro in their coaches, like
Surleboies, Mou^tseignors, or other me^ of State, being in this Ib. page 70.
their great galla^try richly attended on, with a great train of servants, as
if they were Barons, or Earls; and A Dialogue betwixt a secular Priest and a
Lay Gentleman. p 90
there has been found a Jesuit, that has worn a girdle with hangers and
rapier above ten pounds, a Ierken also that cost no less, that made three
suits of apparel in one year, whose horse and furniture, and his own
apparel on him, was valued to an 100. pounds, who for his part dispendeth
yearly 400. pounds, and yet has no patrimony.

The 29. Proposition. Cooseners.
Quodl. p. 352.
THese Jesuits are cogging mates, and Ib. page 315.
use cony-catching devises to get money, A let. of A. C. page 9.
with all manner of falsehood and coggerie, that may be imagined. Besides this,
they have sundry other Quodl. p. 36.
dogtricks of cousenage, to cut purses, pick-locks, commit burglaries,
extortion, simonie, and all kind of Lombardinian devises to make gain of, and
these Ib. page 96.
finefingred boys, are very nimble about Ladies and gentlewomens jewels, and
thus by their Ib. page 70.
pretty sly cousenage, and such points, rules, and principles of learning and
knowledge, as pertain to conycatching, and other Machiavilian devises,
(wherein there is none that goes beyond them) they have here in A relation of
the faction at Wisbich. page 75
England gotten into their hands all authority, good estimation, and all the
stock or treasury of money, doing what they list, both at home and abroad; but
for these and the like Quodl. p. 96.
cousenages to enrich themselves, they have been banished both out of the
city of Perugio, and Ib. page 137.
Milan.

The 30. Proposition. Hypocrites.
A Dialogue betwixt a Secular Priest and a Lay Gentl. in the pref
THese men make an hypocritical show and vain vaunt of Religion, Quodl. p. 37
a chief means of drawing others to them. For A dialogue betwixt a Secular
Priest and a Lay Gentleman in the Preface.
under pretense of their Pharisaicall zeal and Quodl. p. 197.
lives, these Ib. page 336.
mocke-religious persons, Ib. page 197.
have deluded many virtuous men and women; because Ib. page 83.
every Jesuit takes upon him to be an illuminate, an inculpate guider of souls,
and a man come to the highest step of the scale or ladder of perfection, Ib.
page 22.
void of all pity, mildness or remorse, save only Cateolinian carrying his
countenance in his hands, to sob and smile in a trice.

The 31. Proposition. Making a vain show of Religion and good works.
THese Quodl. p. 140.
proud Pharisees by Ib. page 314.
pretended piety allure multitudes: for Ib. page 137.
they pretend themselves to be more holy than the rest, and that therefore in
respect of the sins that reigned amongst others, they would neither eat nor
drink with them, and such a Ib. page 13.
blind conceit, have these Ib. page 139.
illuminates of high aspires, of their Puritanian holiness, that they make
arrogant vaunts thereof, Ib. page 60.
by ostentation of mortification, obedience, perfection of state, that one of
the^ brake out into these words. A let. of A. C. page 25.
O my good God? how much have thou honored me, above thousands of my brethren
in thy service, how may I not hope, for my long sufferances for thy sake, my
watchings, prayers, fastings, to be thine for ever! Thus you Ib. page 26.
see what virtue these Quodl. p. 140
proud Pharisees have, and how boldly it may bespeake Gods justice: but in fine,
it will Ib. page 60.
prove nothing, but avarice, extortion, cousening, treachery and treason.

The 32. Proposition. Use to do evil upon good pretenses.
A letter of A C. page 26.
THey use to do all their evils, especially upon pretext of Religion and
holiness Ib page 39*
as ordo ad Deum, and bonu^ societatis, or, propter Quodl. p 68.
obedientiam, or A dialogue betwixt a secular Priest and a Lay gentleman, page
59.
maiorem Dei gloriam. By these principles they may Quodlib. page 103.
not only detract and calumniate, and take away men's good names, but even also
their lives if need require; by Ib. page 244.
any treachery, cruelty, treason, or what mischief soever it skils not, so
it be propter bonum societatis, or ordine ad Deum, they are to omit no
opportunity or villainy, that may further such their intents. And is not this
Ib. page 68.
a seditious, odious, blasphemous and sacrilegious abuse of Gods divine graces,
virtues, and benefits bestowed, to make them dogbolts in every bow, and shafts
in every quiver, to draw out for the managing of any impious fact whatsoever?
For they Letter of A. C. page 27.
may say ordo, any thing, so the rule and standart in their consciences be,
ordo ad deum, or bonum Societatis: but nevertheless, this Ib. page 39.
same ordo ad deum, or bonum societatis, is such a matter with a Jesuit, that
it makes him all manner of ways disordered, and not so bonus socius, as Robin
good fellow. For here hence are al his Equivocations, wherein his tongue runs
one way, and his meaning an other, that ye know not where to find him; a
shame that bonum Societatis, should subsist upon so vile support, as such an
ordo ad Deum. Ib. page 51.
Whereby all a Jesuits evils, must be reputed from the holy Ghost, and the
very name of a Jesuit, to import infallibility in faith and charity, and so
far forth, that what he believes, says, or does, (be it never so much to
the blemish of any parson, yea to the prejudice of a whole common wealth) must
not be thought to need any collateral credit: for by one of their Quodl. p.
68.
two Principles, ordo ad Deum, or obedientia, (by which as by a common
medicine, they will salve all they do) there is nothing ca^ go, or be done
amiss, by any Jesuit: for that always, it is either in ordine ad Deum, if an
act of a Superior; or propter obedientiam, if done by an Inferior.

The 33. Proposition. They are dissemblers.
Quodl. p. 33.
THe Jesuits never mean truly, sincerely, and directly, there is D. Bagshaws
answer page ^8.
scarce a true word in any of them, and many notorious untruths: but a Quodl.
p. 345.
false heart, in all, or most of them. Their A let. of A. C. page 9.
ground where they take, be it even against the holy Sea, is dolus not virtus,
their Quodl p 296.
speech indefinite, peremptory, and dissembling, and therefore Ib. page 13.
it is hard to convince them of any errors in faith, by reason of their sly
dissembling, Ib. page 35.
equivocation, sophistication, winding and doubling; they can A. C. let. p. 18.
collogue with any course, by either oath, or other external sign whatsoever
should be required at their hands, according to the laws of their mental
evasions and equivocations, grounded upon their ordo ad Deum, which permits
them any dissimulation: and therefore Quodl. p. 187.
senseless be that man or woman holden for ever, that shall judge any
sincerity, fidelity, natural and humane affection or other good meaning, to
be in them.

The 34. Proposition. Equivocators.
Quodl. p. 32.
NO one thing breeds greater danger and hatred to all Catholics in England,
then the Jesuits abuse of Equivocating, making it indeed nothing else but an
art of lying, cogging, foisting and forging, and that without al respect of
matter, time, place, person, (so it be not to a superior Jesuit) or other
circumstance, whatsoever: all is one, vti scientia, Iura, periura, secretum
prodere noli. Ib. page 67.
For they hold it dogmatizando, that they may not only to our adversaries: but
even also to any Catholic Magistrate, yea to the Pope himself, answer one
way and mean another. And this Ib. page 304.
doctrine of the Jesuits, touching equivocation, has already bewitched so many
of the Lay Catholics, that Ib page 67.
impossible it is, for any (that is not a Jesuit) to know a Jesuits heart, and A
relation of the faction at Wisbich. p. 46.
no man is able to bind upon any words of theirs, they have so many shifts, and
so little conscience in speaking truly, except it be one of themselves to
another: otherwise, their manner is, to frame their speeches according to their
company, always applying themselves to the times, and occasions as they fall
out, and Ib. page 73.
they are so delighted with this Equivocation, or a subtle and dissembling
kind of speech, as that to the scandal of others (as before has been
declared) they are not ashamed to defend it in their public writings, Quodl.
p. 33.
in abusing the words of St Paul, with factus sum omnia omnibus, vt omnes
lucrifaciam; to this end and purpose, D. Bagshawes answer, p. 36.
absurdly alleging diverse places of Scripture, Quodl. p. 300.
by which doctrine of theirs, there is laid forth an open way to Atheism, so
to expound the Apostles as they may be thought to temporize, which is a plain
kind of dissimulation. But let these Ib. page 61.
men of the Bernard high Law, such like as live by their wits and principles of
Machiavell, taught by their Arch Rabbis how to maintain this their Ib. p. 31.
absurd Paradoxe of Equivocation, Ib. 354.
that have so great facility to coin lies, thereby to make any thing liked or
disliked as they list, and to give out by Newters what they please, A let. of A
C. page 61.
cease their quirkes and quiddities, as mental evasions, Equivocations,
tergiversations, and the like: for else, A Relation of the faction at Wisbich.
page 73.
they are commonly now adays held so great liars, that I doubt whether any, or
all of the Jesuits words, yea or others that are in England this day will be
accepted of, for the value of a straw, by any that knows them, they are so full
of Equivocations and doubtings.

The 35. Proposition. Temporizers.
Quodl. p. 214
THey hold it lawful to temporize with the Civil Magistrate, Ib. p 21.
making Religion a matter of state, and policy, to draw people unto them, by
plausible hypocrisy, and show of zeal: not a matter of conscience, to direct
them aright. And thus, by Ib. page 330. and page 21,
their temporizing platformes, casting omnia pro tempore, nihil pro veritate,
they hold the Ib. page 21.
making of close Catholics in policy, Ib. page 21.
which by their flat Atheall doctrine, secretly taught in Scotland, Ib.
are freely permitted, to eat flesh as company occasioneth, to read all kind
of books indifferently, and to go to a Mass in the forenoone, and to a
Puritan Sermon in the afternoon, and lastly A Dialogue betwixt a secular
Priest and a Jesuit. page 100.
licensed to marry with Catholics.

The 36. Proposition. Falsaries.
H. Elyes notes upon the Apol. page 124.
IT is no news with them, to allege Auctors corruptly, by Ib. page 18. and
page 188.
nipping of words and cutting of that, which confuteth the thing for which they
are alleged: which Ib. page 188.
false play of theirs, in taking that which serves their turn (as they think)
and leaving out the substance of the matter, is often practiced; but above all
other things, most shameful is the corrupting of the Cardinals letter Relatio
turbarum exhibita sacrosanctae Inquisitionis officio p. 27.
urged by the Priests against the Jesuits.

The 37. Proposition. Politicians.
Quodlibets in the Pref.
THe Jesuits religious piety, is turned into mere Secular, or rather
temporal and Laicall policy: and they are A Dialogue betwixt a secular Priest
and a Lay Catholic p. 86.
Priests indeed, but exceeding cunning Politics withal, and these D.
Bagshawes answer, page 10
Politic canvasers or Quodl. p. 15
Matchiavilian Politicians, Ib. page 147.
have so many Matchiavilian devises, as every plot and drift, seems to be an
infallible rule of falsehood, and a principle in chief, whereby the Jesuits
do square their actions, as never a Prince in Christendom, nor any man
living, can tell where to find, or how to trace or trust them. Quodl. p. 17.
and 21.
For in all sacrilegious and temporizing platformes, Ib. page 18.
Atheall plots of perdition,h Matchiavilian or rather Mahumetan-like faction,
Ib. page 62.
Heathenish, tyrannical, Sathanicall and Turkish government, Ib. page 64.
none goes beyond the Jesuits at this day; Ib page 62.
and they are able to set Aretin, Lucian, Matchiauel, yea and Don Lucifer in a
sort to school, as impossible for him by all the Art he has, to besot men as
they do.

The 38. Proposition. Entermedling in state-affaires too far.
A dialogue betwixt a secular Priest and a Lay gentleman, page 84.
ALthough there be an express clause in the Jesuits mission into England, that
they should not deal in matters of state: Let. of A. C. 14.
yet, the Jesuits themselves stick not to vaunt, that they have a finger, not
only in the Catholic commons of this Realm, but also in the State, and A
dialogue betwixt a Secular Priest and a Lay Gentleman in page 86.
they are become officious sticklers in Princes affairs Ecclesiastical or
Te^porall, Ib. page 92.
both in England and Scotland, as is proved very sufficiently: and according to
Quodl p. 227.
their doctrine of statizing, they A dialogue betwixt a secular Priest and a
Lay Gentleman p 73
must be stirring, Quodlib. in the Preface.
tamporing, temporizing, and statizing like martial men, or common soldiers
in the field of war, in all temporal, mundane and stratagematicall affairs; A
Dialogue betwixt a secular Priest and a Lay gentleman p. 96
this is their delight, but ever they do rather harm, than good thereby, and
therefore it was well done of the Secular Priests, Colletons just defense, p
271.
earnestly to request, that all proceedings of State-busines by the Jesuits,
should be utterly and presently forbidden.

The 39. Proposition. They have and mainetaine Intelligencers and spies.
Quodlib. page 191.
IT is an honorable policy in Princes, to entertain spies, counterfeits, and
traitors, Ib. page 315.
by whom they know presently what is intended against them: semblably, the
Jesuits Ib. page 65.
have their intelligence in all the kings courts in Europe, by some principal
man or woman of mark of their placing, Ib. page 65.
and their chief Agent to discover the secrets of Princes, is always a Jesuit
in re, or in spe. These Ib. page 315.
Agents in all Princes Courts, give information to their General once a month,
so that Ib. page 65.
nothing is done in England, but it is known in Rome with in a month after at
the least. And say now, is it a fit thing that H Elyes notes on the Apol. page
264.
Religious men, that should spend their time in study and conte^plation, should
take their greatest pleasure, delight, and contentment in writing and receiving
packets of news, from all coasts and countries, making that their whole study
and travail?

The 40. Proposition. Work by great men.
Quodl. p. 72.
The Jesuits have learned one trick of Machiavell, thoroughly practiced by
Erasmus, to be at composition with certain noble men gentlemen and others in
Princes Courts, to spread abroad their works, with report every thing to be
rare, and Ib. page 73. See 24. Prop.
there is no Prince in the world, but has some great Lord or other about him,
that will be ready to speak a good word for the Jesuits, in hope of a better
time at their hands, at one time or other when kingdoms are at stake.

The 41. Proposition. They effect all by Bribes and promises.
Quodl. p. 153.
THe no less consciencelesse than merciless Jesuits, collect great sums of
money over all the Realm, and wherefore is all this done? Because Ib. page 131.
the greatest enterprises taken in hand by the^, are done more by bribes given
to brokers, and c great promises made to them, that are sticklers for them: A
dialogue betwixt a secul. Priest and a lay gentleman page 65.
for the later it has been long the faction of the Religious Fathers so to
do, to put men to great expectation of favor and advancement when their day
shall come, and to ring every year fresh Alarums of foreign preparation, and I
know not what: and as touching the former, it was an Quodl. p. 351
old stale principle of Machiavell, to pack and sack up sackes of money to
bring and bind men's tongues therewith, to preach and prate in court, country,
and Pulper, what they will have, to keep themselves in.

The 42. Proposition. Intercept Letters.
The hope of peace, page 12.
Who knows not that the Jesuits, H. Elyes notes upon the Apol. page 216.
such as should have made a conscience to open other men's letters, do
intercept letters and lie so in wait to intercept what passes to and fro, that
a small letter can hardly and that very seldom escape them? For they, and
especially the A relation of the faction at Wisbich page 77
Jesuits of Rome, do intercept all manner of letters, of al men whosoever, Ib.
page 75.
as they please themselves, not forbearing the packets, neither of the
Cardinals, nor of Princes.

The 43. Proposition. Injurious to Priests by debasing them.
Quodl p. 198
THe Jesuits tongue-torments, more cruel and heavy to the Priests, tha^ their
adversaries, racks, ropes or Tiburne Tippets, A Dialogue betwixt a Secular
Priest and a Lay Gentl. in the pref
calling anointed Priests knaves, villains, spies, south-saiers, Idolaters,
Libertins, Atheists, with other the most odious terms that the Devil or
malice is able to invent; Quodl. p. 16.
shaking their heads, and using diverse very disdainful exclamations, as, ah,
hah, hah, a Seminary, an old Queen Marie Priest, a Secular, ah, ah, ah, alas
poor men, you shall see the^ all leap at a crust, ere it be long; and A
dialogue betwixt a Secul. Priest and a Lay Gentl. page 67.
where these Fathers have had most conversation and dealing, many of modest and
temperate constitution, are become impious, brazenfaced, and furious men
against Priests, whereupon Quodl. p. 17.
the Catholics have not been afraid to lay violent hands, with offer to
strike, or to run with drawn swords at Priests, and Ib. page 161.
reported that it were no more offense to kill one of them, than to kill a
notorious persecutour and heretic: so that, Ib. page 174.
if the Jesuits should prevail, the poor Seculars were as good to be all
hanged up together, as live to endure the insults, triumphs and vpbraidings
that shall be laid against them, Relation of the faction at Wisb. page 33.
as though no Secular Priest were worthy to be named the same day that mention
is made of a holy Jesuit, Ib. page 38.
and that it might be sufficient for them, if they might have some curat-ships
to say Masses, and so much favor, as to attend upon them to know their
Masterships pleasure, what they would command them; and Declaratio motuum etc.
in Anglia page 86.
this debasing and abasing all Priests, the A relation of the faction at
Wisbich. p. 74.
Jesuits will not cease, until they have cast out the Priests, and that by
wicked means, not only of themselves, but A Dialogue betwixt a Sec. Priest and
a Lay Gentleman.
even of Schismatickes and common enemies.

The 44. Proposition. By suspending them from their faculties.
Colletons defense of the slau^dred Priests page 32.
HOw many of the Secular Priests were suspended from the use of their
faculties, because they would not confirm Blackwels authority under their
hand?

The 45. Proposition. From the Altar.
AS you may plainly see in a just defense of the scla^dered Priests by Ib. page
185.
Io. Colleton.

The.46 Proposition. From Preaching.
Declaratio motuum, etc. p. ^.
THey were forbidden to preach and teach the lay people, during the contention
between the Priests and Jesuits.

The 47. Proposition. From their Residences.
Ioh Colleton^ defense page 63.
AVctority was given, Ib. page 49.
when it pleased the Jesuits, to change and remove the Priests from one
residence to an other, they being endowed with no Church living, nor the
Lay-catholicke bound, by as much as the least show of charity, to mainetaine
any one in their houses, but such as themselves shall choose or cast affection
unto.

The 48. Proposition. From all Company.
Colletons defense, page 159.
ALL Catholics warned to shun their companies, and Ib. page 201.
all meetings of Priests forbidden.

The 49. Proposition. From Christian burial.
Ib. page 20^.
THey were not to be buried after a Christian manner.

The 50. Proposition. From all Alms.
Quodl. p. 18
Relief was taken away from the Priests by the Jesuits, so that they
Colletons defense, p. 158.
were exempted from part of the common dividents, being prisoners, and feign to
sell their very clothes of their backs, their Breviaries and other
Service-books, being else Quodli. p. 83.
not able to hold out in prison, for want of mainetenance: and whiles the
poor Seculars Ib. page 82.
were in this extremity, it was a world to see the superfluity of the Jesuits.

The 51. Proposition. Getting all the Alms to themselves.
A Dialogue betwixt a secular Priest and a Lay-gentleman, Page 112.
NEver larger alms given then of late years (for the Declaratio motuum etc.
p. 27.
Catholics bestow their alms plentifully throughout the land, for relief of
prisoners, and other godly uses:) but Quodl. p. 70.
the Jesuits, pretending to be Religious collectors for prisoners, and other
distressed catholics, and Ib. page 38.
having gotten Judas his office, scilicet, to carry the money bag, into
their substitutes hands, dispose all the wealth and charity of Catholics,
(consisting of many thousand pounds) most sinfully, irreligiously, and
abusiuely; they convert these pios vsus, intended by the benefactors where need
is, into their own purses: or into their purses from whom they may conjure it
at their pleasures: so that A relation of the faction at Wisbich. p. 70.
the expenses of one Jesuit, is able to mainetaine twenty Priests plentifully
and richly; and if it so chance they do bestow out of their Almes-purse any
thing, it is not bestowed Relatio turbarum, etc. p. 99.
upon the needy; but E^ no^es upon the Apology Page 213.
partially as they please themselves. A Dialogue betwixt a secular Priest and a
Lay Ge^tlema^. p 11^
Thus where the Jesuits have abundance, the poor Priests and Catholics never
suffered such great want of relief, and therefore A let. of A. C. page 20.
it is to be wished, that they would spend their alms better, in hospitality
and good edification.

The 52. Proposition. Starving the Priests.
Quodl. p. 18.
MAny Priests are pined away with grief and want of food, and Ib. page 178.
like to die of famine, by reason of the Jesuits, Ib. page 198.
and in Framingham castle all of them were ready to starve, as receiving no
maintenance, nor relief of the common benevolence.

The 53. Proposition. Domineering over them.
Elies notes on the Apol. pa. 34.
THe Jesuits seek to rule the roast, to have all men at their beck and
commandment, to have nothing done without their advise and appointment, and
that they will have all Priests their prentises.

The 54. Proposition. Forcing them to yield the place unto them.
A Dialogue betwixt a secular Priest and a Lay gentleman. Page 118.
IT was thought a disorderly thing, that the Jesuits being no Priests, and some
say brethren, should take place before the Priests: maintained by the Jesuits,
as a point of good nature: and albeit H. Elyes notes upon the Apol. in the
Pref. p, 8
in procession the Jesuits march in the lowest rank, and therefore almost
Quodl. p. 52.
never come to procession, because they must take the lowest place; yet if a A
letter of A C. page 22.
Secular Priest meet them abroad, he must veil bonnet unto them: for it is a
good argument, Quodl. p. 16.
he is a Jesuit, ergo silence, ergo yield the stoop in his presence.

The 55. Proposition. Disgraceful both in word and deed to Popes.
Quodl. p. 57.
They have preached openly in Spain against Pope Sixtus the last of al holy
memory, and railing against him as against a most wicked man, and monster on
earth. They have called him a Lutheran, Heretic, they have termed him a
Woolfe, they have said he had undone all Christendom if he had lived: and in
few, Cardinal Bellarmine himself, as Judge Paramont, being asked what he
thought of his death, answered. Qui sine poenirentia vivit, and sine
poenitentia moritur, proculdubio ad Infornum tendit: and an English Doctor of
our nation said, conceptis verbis; quantum capio, quantum sapio, quantum
intelligo, descendit ad infernum.

The 56. Proposition. To Cardinals.
A Dialogue betwixt a Secular Priest and a Lay Gentl. page, 8^.
THey report many disgraceful things of Cardinal Toledoes death, contraried
by one, in whose arms he died, who said he made a virtuous end.

The 57. Proposition. To Kings.
IT A relation of the fact. at Wish page 77.
is to be feared least they will bring in bondage, not only Prelates, but the
very Princes and Monarchs themselves. For there is a Quodlibet. p. 496.
marveilous contempt of Princes, Ib. page 283.
whose proceedings they slander, which they ought not to do. The French Ib.
page 59.
King for railing against him, might have put them to death for Traitors: for
Ib. page 312.
they reviled him, as often as they thought on their expulsion, and to let pass
this, Ib. page 173.
they have bolstred, banded, bearded, and borne out many foul matters, against
the greatest and chiefest Princes on earth.

The 58. Proposition. Plotting foreign invasions.
Declaratio motuum ac turbationis in Anglia. page 17.
THe Jesuits have plotted diverse foreign invasions: yea, Ib page 83.
they set kingdoms to sale, and talk and write of nothing, but of foreign
enemies that shall invade this land. So that Quodl. p. 186.
this land, by their mischievous drifts and devises, lies open to the spoil,
of who that first can catch it. But Ib page 178.
J hold him worse then mad, that would take part with these Jesuits, or
invaders in truth, notwithstanding any Excommunication.

The 59. Proposition. Disposing of kingdoms.
Quodl. p. 223
ALthough they should not meddle directly or indirectly with disposing of
Crowns, yet the Ib. page 62.
Jesuits are jolly fellows to cap crowns, to canton kingdoms and to crown
Kings with ambitious Pamphlets in their hearts, A. C. let. p. 20.
and, in ordine ad daemonem, aemulantes still charismata pessima, they busy
themselves in disposing and deposing of Crowns and Scepters, betraying one
Nation over unto the hands of another, and all this in Jesus name.

The 60. Proposition. Traitors.
THere is A. C. let. p. 11.
an express charge of Christ to all subjects, reddere quae sunt Caesaris, etc.
as also the ingenerate law of all men to be loyal to their Country: and yet
the Ib. page 11.
Jesuits proved no less infest foes against the late Princess and Country,
then Spain it self was at that time, and such as labored nothing more, then
to betray that sweet portion, this sweet plot, our Country to Spain, a mere
foreign and Morisco nation. To this end Quodl. page 1.
there was casting of Plots for their purpose and most advantage, as well by
plausible persuasions, in passages of speech, as also by countermined
platformes in practical conspiracies, for else whereto tended A. C. let. p. 64.
a Blanke importing treason, whereunto many were requested to subscribe Ib.
page 69.
their new Spanish Doleman, to which day for the delay of it, they give the
daily pox, A Dialogue betwixt a secular Priest and a Lay Jesuit. page 93.
their treasonable plots, for surprising the Lady Arbella, for soliciting
Earl Ferdinando to rise against her Majesty, for entertaining York, and Young
in the plot for firing her Majesty's storehouses, and to fly with ships and
all into Spain? etc. And the like in Scotland. For by A let. of A. C. page 8.
their doctrine of Prince-killing, Quodl. p. 85.
have they not enioined one for penance to murder his Sovereign, and do they
not hold it for sound doctrine, that Quodl. p. 111.
if one of them be commanded to murder an anointed Prince he must do his
endeavor, and none has been wanting, as Letter of A. C. page 92.
lately enough in the murder of the last French king, and latelier might have
been seen in the now H. the 4. afterward murdered also.
regnant, and in our own dear Sovereign, sundry times by the Jesuitical
hand, had not Gods hand been the stronger, Ib. page 26.
Three or four of them were esteemed Martyrs in England; but they died rather
to their shames, for their sins, than to Gods glory, and A dialogue betwixt a
secul. Priest and a lay gentleman in the Preface.
if her Majesty and the State would take them at the worst, they might all be
justly condemned for erroneous and traitorous persons. Quodl. p. 321
For out of the Jesuits docttrine, certainly there is nothing else but
treacheries, treason, and conspiracies, and hence Quodl. p. 121
it must needs follow, that there is not a Jesuit in all England, but has a
smacke of impiety, irreligiositie, treachery, treason, and Machiavillian
Atheism: and Ib. page 112.
it cannot be, but as long as there is one Jesuit left in England, there will be
mutinies, treason, conspiracies and factions, do what Pope, or Prince, or any
other is able to do, or say to the contrary. Ib. page 153.
All their plots and conspiracies (whereof I am fully persuaded there are a
great many yet lie hidden and unknown) tend hereunto: this is it that Ib. page
11.
makes their books so full of plots, exasperations and conspiracies against
the Church and common weal, Ib page 38.
that causes their money to fly so fast over the Ocean, ( A dialogue betwixt a
Secul. Priest and a Lay Gentl. page 112.
two thousand pounds intercepted in one year going over) to prepare for an
invasion, for an exploit in time to come. But how has God favored these A let.
of A. C. page 70.
prevaricators, Quodl. p. 196
Pharisees, and Conspirators against God and their country, Ib. page 47.
these massacring butcherly buyers and sellers of their dear countrymens
blood? Ib. page 145.
Their hopes of the English Nation were vain, Ib. page 264.
and their Catilinian coniurations and conspiracies were not sanctified, nor
blessed by the hand of God; A let. of A C. page 29.
Gods hand was ever the stronger, and to conclude Quodl. p. 263
their evil success shows, that God was not pleased with them.

The 61. Proposition. Murderers of Kings, Popes, Cardinals, etc.
Quodl. p. 295.
THe Jesuits and their seditious faction, do broach and publish such a kind of
doctrine, that subjects are no longer bound to obey wicked Princes in their
temporal Laws and commandments, but till they be able by force of arms to
resist them. A most dangerous doctrine, and most unfit to be published in this
age. Ib. page 262.
By this doctrine the Jesuits murdered Henry the third, and writ a discourse
against him de iusta abdicatione, H 3. as if it had been hatched in hell, Ib.
page 311.
practiced against diverse kings in France, Ib. 311.
defeated the Polonian of his kingdom, and Ib.
here in England have sought to compass their wicked purposes by Norfolk,
Stukely and Saunders. Ib. page 262.
For all which and many mo traitorous practices, the Jesuits are at this day an
odious and detestable Generation. But though they seek to murder wicked
Princes and Ib. page 228.
propose rewards to such as kill tyrants: yet it may be they will spare Popes,
Cardinals, and Bishops: surely no; A. C. let. p. 26
they grow as bad as bad may be, namely to the outraging of that which is most
holy, Quodl. p. 246.
and if there be (as there are) shrewd suspicions in Rome concerning the death
of two Popes, two Cardinals, and one Bishop already, I make no question at all,
but that if hereafter, any Pope shall cross their plots and purposes, the
Jesuits will have such a fig in store for his Holiness, that shall do so, as no
Rubarbe, Angelica, Mithridate, or other medicine or Antidote shall expel the
venim, poison, and infection from his heart; nor any bezar, perle, gold or
unicorns horn, long preserve his life after it.

The 62. Proposition. In Doctrine they turn all topsie turuie.
Elies notes upon the Apology. Page 9. in the Pref.
THey plunge themselves over head and ears into Ecclesiastical affairs, with
such audacity and obstinacy, as they have turned all topsie turvy.

The 63. Proposition. By heretical Positions.
Quodl. p. 321
OVt of the Jesuits doctrine, certainly therein is nothing else but fallacy
upon fallacy, error upon error, one contradiction encountering an other, all
nothing. Ib. page 100. and Declaratio motunm etc. page 29.
A Jesuit mainetained this most vile, Atheall, and heathenish assertion, that
one that is not a Christian may be Pope of Rome, and an A. C. let. p. 67.
other Jesuit openly and for sound doctrine maintained it, first to his
Auditors in the School, and at this instant openly in the Inquisition does:
viz: non est de fide credere hunc Romanum Pontificem esse Christi vicarium,
that it is no matter of faith to believe that this or that Pope of Rome is
Christ's Vicar. Quodl. p. 31.
To let pass their erroneous doctrine, concerning their Generals infallibility
of truth, for deciding of matters, their absurd Paradoxes of Equivocation, Ib.
p. 29.
The Jesuits every way in printed Books, in written copies or Manuscripts, and
most of all in private conference have taught contrary to the belief of the
Roman Church, and therefore, A letter of A. C. p. 40.
it is no marvel, if in material points of catholic faith, they oppose
against the Angelical Doctor, and be therefore at this present in dighted
before his Holiness, by the Dominicans in Spain, for Pelagians, and sundry
other kinds of Heretics; as also for impostors, by the Sorbonists of Paris,
and all other French clergy, as we credibly hear.

The 64. Proposition. By extravagant opinions.
Quodl. p. 138.
NEver was there any religious order that took their course, that held such
fantastical, extravagant, exorbitant, irregular opinions, as they do.

The 65. Proposition. Approving of the Stews.
D. Bag shaws answer, page 20.
Fa: Weston and Archer, charged by Doctor Norden for defending the Stews
Declaratio matuum, etc. Page 29.
to be lawful, and very necessary; to be as lawful, as the Pope himself, as
if they had made (as it seems) a very league with Hell, against truth.

The 66. Proposition. Abuse of Confession.
Quodl. p. 69.
THEY abuse this sacred seal for the managing of worldly businesses, and
hereupon it is reported, that A dialogue betwixt a secular Priest and a Lay
gentleman, page 35.
the Pope sent a precept or a decree to the Religious houses in Rome, thereby
prohibiting under great penalties, that any should use the knowledge of a man's
estate in the Sacrament of confession, to any Politic end or matter in any
external affair whatsoever; but the Jesuits delayed their obedience hereunto,
and so they Quodl. p. 85.
make confession a cony-catching or cousening trick or slight, to pick a man,
or woman's purse; nay to get all their lands by it; and yet (which is more
shameful, Ib. page 8^.
though it seem never so strange to hear) they do ordinarily reveile
confessions per tertiam vel quartam personam, vel sub incerto nomine.

The 67. Proposition. Using fond Revelations and Prophecies.
Quodl. p 123
THe Jesuits, and those of the Family of love alike, save only that the Ib.
Jesuits have a more plausible and deceitful means to deceive poor souls,
then any one of the Family of love or others. Ib. page 244.
These new Apostles, Illuminats, and extraordinary Rabbis, have more near
familiarity and acquaintance with God, than any other. Hereupon, they take
upon them to Let. of A. C. 24.
Prophecy of the changes and deaths of States and Statists, (though for the
most part most foolish and false) whereby you may see, from whence their
Illuminations come, and with what holy Ghost their familiarity and
correspondencie is, whereof they so much boast.

The 68. Proposition. Turn Atheists.
Quodl. p. 300
THe doctrine of the Jesuits, an open way to Atheism, and Ib. page 113.
there is not a Jesuit, nor a Jesuits fautour any where to be found, but has a
foul taste of Atheism, either directly perse, or indirectly, virtute primi and
principalis agentis.

The 69. Proposition. Are at strife with others.
A dialogue betwixt a Secul. Priest and a Lay Gentl. page 83.
THere is continual, bitter strife, between them, and the Dominicans in
Spain.

The 70. Proposition. Among themselves.
Quodl p. 236.
THe Jesuits often at open wars by brawlings, wranglings, contentions and
chidings amongst themselves, defaming, backbiting slaundering, and supplanting
one another, Ellies notes upon the Apol. Page 2.
what do I say write? Nay, do so calumniate one another, and as it were tear
in pieces the fame, name, and good renown one of the other, and A. C. let. p.
45*
both at Framingham and elsewhere, agree like cat and dog within it self.

The 71. Proposition. Against School Divinity.
A Dialogue betwixt a secular Priest and a Lay gentleman. p. 119
ALL our Students, by Parsons and Creswels means set to Positive Divinity, and
not suffered to be Philosophers, or Scholasticall Divines, Quodl. p. 278
because scientia inflat.

The 72. Proposition. Men that cannot err.
THey say Quodl. p 320
themselves that their Society cannot err, Ib. page 331.
in any act, word, or thought, such Lords, lawless Sirs, and Legifers they
take themselves to be; thinking A let. of A. C. page 24.
their Society more perfect than a General Council, and talking much Quodl.
p. 31.
concerning their Generals infallibility of truth for deciding of matters;
whereby A let. of A. C. page 46.
you may see, how erroneous a Society these Loyolians are, and how no
assurance it has at all of the holy Ghost, wherein it vaunts it self equal
with the Pope and a general Council.

The 73. Proposition. Full of Noveltie.
Quodl. p. 147
THe Jesuits are wholly sick of the fashions, Ib. page 144.147
and must needs smell, or have one trick of innovation or singularity in
every thing: for like Ib. page ^2.
new vpstart squibs, and strange men, all must consist of innovations,
novelties, and new names amongst them.

The 74. Proposition. Intemperate writings
A let. of A. C. page 4.
THe Jesuits writings are foul, and full both of intemperance and untruth. A
shame that ink and paper, and the press, should be so abused; for they do A
dialogue betwixt a Secular Priest and a Lay Gentleman in the Preface.
use, the most odious terms, that the Devil or malice is able to invent.

The 75. Proposition. Libellers.
H^ Elyes notes on the Apol. page 219. and 225.
THey blame others for Libells and very D. Bagshawes* answer, p. 24.
vnpriestly Pasquils, and yet write themselves, H. Elyes notes upon the Apol.
page 220.
giving Heretics occasion of laughter and mocking.

The 76. Proposition. Write much.
Quodl. p. 71.
THe Secular Priests write not so many books as the Jesuits do: the reason may
be, money makes the press go, and thereof Ib. page 38.
it cannot be but they have infinite treasure in their hands.

The 77. Proposition. Forbidding others.
Colletons defense of the slau^dred Priests page 197.
PRiests Books accounted heretical, as in Bulla Coenae Domini, bereft of all
manner of helping themselves, and Quodl. p. 337.
it stands upon the Jesuits to suppress all writings.

The 78. Proposition. Seducers of youth.
Declaratio motuum etc. in Anglia page 84. and 132.
THey draw the best wits into their Societies, by undue and wicked means, so
as Quodl. p. 279.
the case now standing, no Catholic is to send their children or friends
thither, for fear A. C. let. p. 40.
of banker upting them both in spiritual and temporal patrimonies. For
Quodlib. page 141.
they that go or send their children, do either by consequent cast themselves
into a voluntary slaverie, as bad as if under the great Turk; or else they
must change the true nature of an English heart, and become traitors or fautors
of conspiracies, against their Prince, country, and dearest friends; and I Ib.
page 141.
conclude by a probable conjecture, there is not one amongst a 100. that goes
to be a Jesuit, that has any true Religious intent in him.

The 79. Proposition. Admit none but rich men into their society.
A relation of the faction begun at Wi^bich. page 72.
THey fawn upon men of noble birth, especially if they be rich, and inveigle
them to sell all that they have, and enter into their Society and likewise
women are induced by them to become Nuns: but Elies notes on the Apol. p. 212.
none are welcome without money, or commendations: as for example, A dialogue
betwixt a secular Priest and a Lay Gentleman p. 121
at the college of S. Omers only for children, none can have place there,
unless he bring with him forty pound, or fifty pound, or more; or have some
good annuitie to maintain him. So that you may observe Quodl. p. 137.
three sorts of men admitted in their Society, men of wit wealthy or
worshipful, Ib. page 137.
such as may bring some gain help and means to their further preferment, and
advancement here on earth.

The 80. Proposition. Teaching gratis.
Quodl. p. 69.
THeir teaching gratis is dangerous: Letter of A.C. page 68
For I have heard of a certain familiar Jesuit, who erected a kind of family
of love by his night Lectures to his fair femal-auditors, thus in truth Quodl.
p. 137
they do not all things gratis, and of pure devotion.

The 81. Proposition. Irreverence to Parents.
A. C. let. p. 15.
THe Catholic children of either sex after their beco^ming Iesuited, do very
scandalously neglect their filial duty and reverence to their Parents, and
which is worse, clean set them at naught: such swollen and Puritan spirits
these Fathers have put into them.

The 82. Proposition. Make them worse and worse.
Declaratio motuum etc. p. 129.
MEn send their children unto them holy, godly, peaceable, simple, and
abounding with the spirit of God; but within a short time, they are, God
knows, clean changed and altered from what they were.

The 83. Proposition. They are well followed and favored.
Declaratio motuum, etc. Page 12.
THe Jesuits have many, both of the Clergy and Laity secretly devoted unto
them, and Quodl. p. 123
they are brought into such a fools Paradise, that Ib. page 122.
the people enchanted by them, will not believe any thing against them. Thus
Ib. page 78.
do they carry poison in their tongues unseen, and infect all unknown that
gaze and admire at them: sed haec est potestas tenebrarum, but the best is, Ib.
page 17.
all their fautors are either foolish, ambitious, or needy.

The 84. Proposition. Especially by women.
Quodl. p. 17.
AS all Heresies began with talkatiue women, ( Ib. 65.
these of nature being as flexible to yield, as credulous to believe) Ib. in
the Preface.
so Silly women more devout than discreet, (as always in extremes, either
Saints or Devils,) Ib. page 39.
poor souls do mightily dote and run riot after them, Ib. page 16.
among these they title tatle, and lull babies a sleep, and Ib. in the Pref.
the ignorant multitudes of the Jesuits do use most women gospellers,
trumpetters of their praise, and Ib. page 40.
with these wome^-tatlers and women-Gospellers, the Secular Priests are much
troubled: but in the end, their fraud will appear, Ib. page 65.
when these hot Ladies shall lay their hands a little heavier on their hearts,
with mea maxima culpa.

The 85. Proposition. Do all for gain.
Declaratio motuum, etc. page 10.
IT was a grave censure of Cardinal Allen concerning the Jesuits: that they
sought more their own commodity, than the students weal, or Gods glory. A
dialogue betwixt a secul. Priest and a lay gentleman Page 115.
For they are much moved with temporal commodity, Declaratio motuum, etc. page
23.
seek their own good; and A let. of A.C* page 20*
their kingdom is wholly of this world. e In their worldly wealth they settle
like bees in soil, Ib.
and by reason of such their riches, they neglect Gods honor, by preferring
their own before it. Quodl. p. 73.
Thus do they dispose of last wills of the sick, thus love they to intermeddle
with the marriages of many, with their temporal goods, and indeed with all
things. Always taking that course with all men, that something happen unto
their share; having minds indeed of nothing* but of their own gain; and
accordingly, A Dialogue betwixt a secular Priest and a Lay gentleman, in the
Preface.
all men's fortunes graces favors, and actions whatsoever, shall be evil thought
of, which are beneficial to any, with out a commodity to their Society: and
yet nevertheless, Quodl. p. 94.
there is no enquiring after their lands, if they do, this shall be their
answer, mirantur superiores.

The 86. Proposition. They get great sums of money into their hands.
NOw let us consider Quodl. p. 315.
what huge masses of money, and infinite treasures the Jesuits have every where,
in England, and Ib. page 187.186
other Countries, Let. A. C. page 20.
even from the Indies. Ib page 315.
Some one of them has received many thousand pounds. Ib. page 38.
A french Jesuit reported, that the King of France gained three millions of
gold at their expulsion thence; so that it cannot be, but Ib. page 91.
they daily and nightly increasing their riches, and enriching their Cofers,
have infinite treasure in store, for an exploit in time to come; expecting a
time no doubt, when to draw it forth, to their most advantage. Thus, whiles
Declaratio motuum ac turbationis in Anglia. page 47.
other Orders want, the Jesuits abound: Ib. page 85.
they vow, and others feel poverty. A letter of A C. page 21.
They may truly say, Domine quinque talenta dedisti mihi, ecce alia quinque
suffuratus sum. Now Ib. page 20.
if it appear to all men, that by means of such their wealth they trouble all
Europe, by setting kingdoms at odds, by sowing of factions wheresoever they
come, by ambitioning above all Religious Orders in holy Church, questionless
this will in the end be their destruction.

The 87.88. Propositions. Resort only to rich men's houses, and there domineere
Quodl. p. 36.
NO man Master of his house where they may bear swaie and be admitted of: but
Declaratio motuum, etc. p. 28.
they neglect the poor, and hant only rich men's houses. For A relation of the
faction at Wisbich. page 73
they skorne to come to any, but where they may be daintily and costly
entertained, they look not after the Cottages of the poor, nor minister their
help to them, be there never so much need; Quodl. p. 68
but all their resort (as I have said) is to Noblemen and Gentlemen's houses,
where they domineere over Tenants, children, servants, and all.

The 89. Proposition. Build and govern Seminaries.
The hope of peace, page 21.
THere are certain Seminaries in Spain built by the Jesuits, which would be
better employed in the relief of the poor. And H. Elyes notes upon the Apol.
p. 213.
the king of Spain has ever since the year 1583 given the^ 2000 crowns by the
year; the payment procured by Father Parsons, so Quodl. p. 76.
that all the Colleges beyond sea, are now under the Jesuits tyranny, as may
be seen by Ib. page 300.
the most egregious, tyrannical, vsurpate, intrusiue authority of the
Jesuits, gotten over all the Seminaries at Rome, at S. Omers in Spain, and at
Doway.

The 90. Proposition. Take all into their hands
Elyes notes on the Apol. Page 34.
THe Jesuits seek to rule the roast, to have all men at their beck and
commandment, and so A relation of the faction at Wisbich. page 69
miserais the state of Catholics in England, that all must depend on them.
Quodl. p. 9.
As though the fee simple of all men's acts, words, and thoughts were in their
gift, to raise and let fall the price of all at their devotion. And therefore
of all Orders Quodl. p. 24.
the Capuchins live best with the Jesuits, because the Jesuits would willingly
have all, and the Capuchins would willingly have nothing, but even to keep
soul and life together.

The 91. Proposition. Enterdeale with the Civil Magistrate.
Quodl. p. 188
THe Jesuits have continual enterdeale with the Civil Magistrates, Relation
of the faction at Wisb. page 75.
with Heretics, and men of a suspected Religion.

The 92. Proposition. Betraying some unto the Enemy.
Ib. page 79.
IT is feared they do indirectly betray some unto the enemies.

The 93. Proposition. Bring others unto their ends and afterward slander them.
Ib. page 78.
THe Jesuits are so cruel, as that they have not only brought many excellent
men to a miserable end, by Ib. page 75.
driving them into desperation, and to take some miserable course, but have
reproched them after death.

The 94. Proposition. Laying a foul imputation on those that leave them
WHen any one leaves their Religion for the better, Quodl. p. 44.
they blaze abroad, that the party was once long ago rejected, and never
accounted of amongst them, but let alone, for that they knew what end he would
make before hand.

The 95. Proposition. All for a Monarchy.
Quodl. p. 182.
THe Jesuits fish for a Monarchy, Ib page 324.
and have at all Christendom for both states Ecclesiastical and Temporal: but
A relation of the faction at Wisbich. p. 71.
especially they challenge a spiritual Monarchy over all England, by Ib. page
74.
right or wrong seeking it, so that Quodl. p 234.
all the Jesuits aim at one mark, and one course, and conceive one and the
same general hope, to have England a Iaponian Monarchy (as once one termed
it) or an Apish Island of Jesuits.

The 96. Proposition. Hated of all Orders.
Quodl. p. 75.
THeir Order is mightily impugned, Ib.
al Orders being against them.

The 97. Proposition. Their spiritual exercise.
A Dialogue betwixt a Sec. Priest and a Lay Gentleman, page 116.
THey use their exercise as a chief means to catch the Scholars: some of
their own Society much condemning them for it, and A let. of A. C. page 61.
by the abuse of this Quodl. p. 83.
false kind of spiritual Exercise, they make boot and havocke of Catholic
Estates, (for therefore was it devised by the Jesuits thereby to fleece
charitable people.) A Dialogue betwixt a secular Priest and a Lay Ge^tlema^. p.
116
Father Parsons and Father Creswell, are most zealous in this point, these are
noted for Fishers, Piscatores Patris Generalis, that employed their wits and
labors, to draw unto them the best they could find every where.

The 98. Proposition. Their Discipline in their Colleges.
Relatio motuum, etc. p* 135.
THeir Discipline is with great severity, many are discouraged therewith.
Colletons just defense p. 5.259
Two cannot speak together without a third, nor the students of one chamber
recreat their fellows of an other, A Dialogue betwixt a secular Priest and a
Lay-gentleman, Page 121, 112.
For they must recreat with none, but such as they are appointed unto. Ib. page
122.
And in every company of Scholars, the Jesuits have their Spies, which they
call Angeli Custodes, which lie in wait what they ca^ hear said, or see done
by any Scholar, and forthwith carry it to the Superior. Ib. page 121.
No Scholar can write letters abroad, or receive any without license and
surview of the Jesuits their governors; no not to the fellows of the same
College. Quodl. p. 55.
There are many like Turkish cruelties, especially in enioyning there Scholars
penances; some for breaking their fasts in a cooks house, others for eating a
little milk, others for washing themselves: some put to penna^ce of bread and
water, for not asking penances, some for slipping with their tongues; one
violently pulled by the ears for calling a lay-Iesuit Hermanno that is brother,
for Father.

The 99. Proposition. Fear a visitation.
A Relation of the faction at Wisbich. page 79.
THey fear nothing more than to render an account of their dealings, or to
hear of their lewdnes.

The 100. and last Proposition. Their fall prophesied and wished for.
Quodl. p. 19.
IT is observed by men, how Religious Orders have their periods and times, and
again, Ib. p 74.
that at the rising of every new Order, some are raised up to be a curb to
that Order: this being so, ( D. Bagshawes answer, page 8.
as some of the Te^porall Magistrates have told the Jesuits) that Iesuitisme
from a Serpigo, is become a Gangraena, it must therefore be cut of. Quodl. p.
175.
For we are persuaded they will be drawn to such matters, as, a visum est
spiritui sancto and nobis, must iudicially pass in definitive sentence against
them, and the A relation of the faction at Wisbich. p. 7.7
Pope is to be entreated to lay the axe to the root of the tree, and cut of
this pride of the Society spreading it self far and near. Ib page 77.
Quodl. p. 188.
For unless a damme be set against the stream thereof, the raging course
will burst asunder all bands of honesty and modesty, and carry away headlong
many with the force thereof. It is high time to look to them, Quodl p. 128.
for they are become already incorrigible of any Prince, Prelate, or People, Ib
page 45.
and therefore a heavy destruction, ruin and downfall is likely to come unto
their Society: and surely, The Copies of certain discourses, page 118.
their fall without some special miracle is incurable. Quodl. p. 58*
And they are like enough to be expelled by force, these contentions cannot end
but with blood. Ib. page 50.
For as they live just Templarlike in all things, so Ib. page 46.
there will be a right Templarian downfall. Ib page 19.
And all ought to assist to the pulling down of these seditious, Templarian,
Jesuitical, Sectaries, and Ib. page 316.
banishing them out of all the Christian world. In the mean time, I conclude
with this prayer of the Secular Priests. Ib. page 141.
Cursed be that hour, that ever they got entrance into the College, and cursed
be the time that ever they set foot on English ground, and a triple curse unto
them all, that to maintain their ambition, pride, and seditious factions, have
scandalized the whole Christian world. Amen faxit Deus.

Hitherto, by Gods especial providence, we have made a general description of
the Jesuits, comprising their doctrine, discipline, policy, fashion and manner
of life; now it remains, that by way of Appendix, or for a small conclusion,
(because it is a true saying, that generalia non probant,) we desce^d unto some
particulars, and come from the Thesis, unto the Hypothesis, exemplifying their
villainies and impieties by some particular instances to be given, and for
brevities sake, we will present unto your judicious eye, the lively picture of
an absolute Jesuit, one shall answer for all; a man of An other equal nay far
above that worthy pillar of the Church S. Aug. the Doctor Angelical S. Thomas
Aquinas, the most subtle disputer Doctor Sco^us is the top of wit. Quodlib. p.
72.
incomparable learning, Chapter Pagets answer, p. 22.
superlatiue knowledge, transcendent zeal, for devotion piety and other good
qualities, generally reputed amongst the vulgar sort of people, beyond the
degrees of comparison; to wit, Father Robert Parsons, our cou^tryman, a Jesuit,
who is Most esteemed amongst the Jesuits for his wisdom and other good parts.

A Dialogue betwixt a Secular Priest and a Lay Gentl. page 85.


thought to have few persons like, none before him, in the Practical, or
Speculatiue part, in Positive, or School Divinity, in State businesses, or
Church affairs in what kind soever. Now if this man, a Jesuit, and one of the
chiefest amongst the Fathers of that Society, shall be found in the particulars
of his life and conversatio^, to have bin no A dialogue betwixt a Secular
Priest and a La Gentleman pa^ 109.
Saint nor sincere honest man; but a A. C. let. p. 38.
man of the only scandal, and turbulence, both to our church and country, Ib.
the vnfaithfullest, prowdest, busiest, and vnderminingst man that lived,
Quodl. p. 217
a lewder person than whom is not: D. Bagshaws answer, page 3.
most exorbitant, and discomposed, Quodl. p 109
a sacrilegious bastard, Ib. page 128.
bastardly runnagate, filius populi, filius peccati, filius terrae; Ib. page
108.
a dangerous Polypragmo^, Ib. page 187.
Archstatist, I Colletons defense, p. 255.
Archdeviser, Quodl. p. 156.
Summus Pontifex, or iudg-paramont on Earth, Ib. page 97.
impious caitife, Ib. page 160.
Atheall Stratagemitor, Ib* p. 237.
busie-headed; a Ib.
most diabolical, unnatural, and barbarous butcherly fellow, A dialogue
betwixt a secular Priest and a Lay gentleman, page 106.
exceeding bold, and of great undertaking, Quodlib. p. 284.
an impudent calumniator, Ib.
a most scurrilous traitor, Ib. p 298.
like a right Puritan, a Ib. page 286.
new Anabaptist, or king John of Leyden, Ib. page 237.
violator of al laws contemner of all authority, Ib. page 288.
naked of all honesty, wisdom or judgment, Ib. page 237.
monopoly of all mischief, Ib.
a stain of humanity, an impostume of al corruption, a corrupter of al
honesty, Ib. page 330.
exlegal legifer, Ib. 295.
very peremptory, sly, and saucie, impudent, Ib. page 242.
falsehearted Cataline, a Ib. page 129.
zoilus, a Timon, an hispanized Cameleon, like Ib. p. 130.
Proteus, wretched seed of Cain, and son of Beliall, Ib. p. 242.
monster of mankind, Ib p. 237.
worthy the name of a beast or a Devil, Ib. p. 242.
fitter for hell then for earth, Ib. p. 325.
an Antesignan or immediate forerunner of Antichrist; and in few, a Ib. p. 121.
most unworthy, dishonorable Prelate: if I say al these, and sundry other bad
qualities be to be found compiled together in one English Jesuit, what lewdnes,
villainies, mischiefs and impieties, may we expect to come from that viperous
brood, dispersed over all the world, and divided into so many hundreds of
Colleges and thousands of persons? Surely, either this will be sufficient to make
al sorts of men to loath their lives, detest their ma^ners, and quite abandon
their wicked Society; or else nothing will be sufficient: and it is not to be
doubted, but that Almighty God, who has a just eye, and a sure hand, will in
the end (when the measure of their iniquities shall be fulfilled) pour out his
heavy wrath and indignation upon them, and recompense them their own unto the
full: such height of pride, must needs have a fall, and such a fall must of force
be very grievous, which is occasioned by so many foul, enormous, and
grievous sins: which that we may learn to shun and avoid, as the
Lacedaemonians were wont to set drunken men before their children, to make them
see, and seeing to detest the beastlines of that vice: so we will propose and
set before your eyes, the picture of Father Parsons a man dru^k with the cup of
spiritual fornications, and long exercised in all kind of villainies, that the
child of God may learn to detest him, and in him all such blasphemous
wretches, impious brood, and progeny of vipers, if he will eschew iram
venturam. Doctor Bagshaws answer, p. 39.
It is reported that diverse Papists heretofore have gone about to set out
Parsons life, but we see it is not done, wherefore, seeing they have surceased,
whether discouraged with the weight or the length of the business, I know not,
it shall not, I hope, prove distastful unto any, if the same be described by a
Protestant, duly collecting the same, like so many broken pieces out of
diverse works of learned Papists, whose auctorities cannot justly be excepted
against, as being either eye or ear witnesses to all that shall be spoken, and
thus having showed you the cause, we come now to speak of the person Father
Robert Parsons.

The life of Father ROB. PARSONS an English Jesuit.
THis famous Father Rob. Parsons, was Declaratio motuum, etc. Page 58
borne of mean parentage, infamous from the time that he was first borne,
Quodl. p. 109
unhonestly begot, and basely borne upon the body of a very base queen; A
letter of A. C. p. 38.
his supposed father of gentry no better then a Blacksmith, his right father
indeed the Parish Priest, by means whereof he was Ib. page 31.
binominous; some times called Quodl. p. 109.
Rob. Parsons, sometimes Rob. Cowbucke, and should Letter of A.C. page 38
not being base borne, have been a Priest, as altogether Quodl. p. 236.
illegitimate and irregular; the place where he was borne was Ib. page 236.
called Stockersey in Somersetshire whereupon he was called the Bastard of
Stockersey, A.C. let. p. 23.
a known bastard (for the Ib.
disparages of his birth, not his baptism could wash away;) his parents were
so Ib. page 35.
poor, that his mother and sister had an annual alms bestowed on them,
toward their sustenance, who else had gone a begging, after his supposed
fathers death. But how mean soever his Fathers estate was, sure it is that he
was brought up in his tender years unto the study of learning and the Arts,
and in process of time (his towardly inclination being more generally known)
he was preferred unto Oxford, and there chosen fellow of Baliol College, where
he spent his time, partly well, partly ill. Well, D. Bagshawes answer, p. 33.
for he professed himself a Protestant, and that with such affectation, as he
dealt with Mr Squire for direction in the study of Divinity, and conferred
ordinarily in the reading of Calvin, with Now a religious and Reverend Doctor
of Divinity.
Mr Hide, a fellow in the house, a known Calvinist; but otherwise learned, and
a very moral gentleman; and he was so eagar in promoting the Religion then Ib.
page 34.
professed, that being Bursar he disfurnished the College Library, of many
ancient books and rare Manuscripts, and in their steed, brought in a number of
Protestant Books, the first that were ever there* and lastly his Quodl. p. 21^
resolution was such for his constancy in this Religion, that he protested to
one James Clarke, his old schoolefellow then abiding in the Inner Temple, who
doubted his Religion, that he neither then was, neither ever meant to be a
Papist, and offered to take an oath for assurance of the same. Furthermore, his
Moral conversation and discipline was such, and so strict, that he would have
D. Bagshawes answer, page 33.
punished one of his own Pupils and Scholars ( A brief Apol. page 144.
whereof being the ancientest fellow of the College save one, of Noblemen and
Gentlemen's Sons and kinsmen he had above 20 at one time) to this day both
very virtuous and learned, for going to a play. In like sort, D. Bagshawes
answer, p. 36.
he went about to bring seven or eight in danger, for taking, after the fashion
of scholars, certain puddings from a Pupil of his.

Hitherto he behaved himself very well, but mark what followed. This his too
great severitie was remitted, and his dealing in Oxford in the end Quodl. p. 217
proved lewd, seditious, and wanton, and Ib.
so infamous was he there being then Master of Arts, that he was hissed out
the College with whouts and hobubs, and ringing with bells, and D. Bagshawes
answer, p. 34.
the resolutenesse of the fellows was such to he rid of him, that they had
provided the toling of the Bell for him, as the manner is for one which is to
depart the world. Declaratio matuum etc. p. 58.
Thus was he banished Oxford with the great joy of all men, not for Religions
sake: but for libelling, siding, and other lewdnes D. Bagshawes answer, page 34.
True it is he had the favor to resign being first lawfully expelled; tendering
his submission with tears, and promise, that he would ever after carry
himself in good sort.

Now is Mr Parsons put to his shifts, and the grief of this expulsion did so
far prevail with him, that he notwithstanding his solemn protestation unto
the fellows of the College and his old friend of the Temple, packs the A
brief Apol. p. 183.
next year after, over the Sea, to study in Padua, and the year after that,
to wit, in the year of our Lord 1575. he hies him to Rome, and there enters
the Society of Jesus: but A.C. let. p. 23.
now see what a thing it is to be a Jesuit, he stays not long there, but like
a forward child putting himself out, he A brief Apol page 183.
obtaines of Pope Gregory the 13. to be sent together with F. Campian into
England, at the suit of D. Allen (as was said) in name of all English
Cartholiks who desired greatly the assistance of the Jesuits in that mission,
where for the furtherance of the Popish cause, he was appointed Superior;
this happened in the H. Elyes notes upon the Apol. page 13.
year 1580. These two holy Fathers being safely and secretly arrived here in
England cease not to do that for which they came, to withdraw men from their
allegiance to their true and lawful Prince, to side with the Pope, and the
king of Spain: but their employments were diverse, according to their several
gifts. Campian excelled in speech, Parsons best was in writing* the one
therefore traveled up and down the Country, making his chief abode in and
about London: the other kept more about the Sea coasts, and especially about
the parts of The brief Apol. p. 183.
Sussex, from whence being discovered, he might the more easily get into France
and save one. For he had well learned our Saviors words when you are
persecuted in one City* fly unto another. This precept of our B. Savior he
quickly put in practice; for as secret as he lay, and as cunning as he was, in
casting his plots by letters written, and books printed, to exasperate the
State yet the Fox was uncased, his Letters intercepted, and the Print and
Printers which he had procured for divulging of his Popish books: so that the
next year after his first arrival, he was constrained to fly into France
leaving his fellow labourer to the mercy of the Magistrates, into whose hands
shortly after he fell, and by the hands of justice was as he well deserved
soon cut of.

Thus has our cunning Politician, that learned cou^seller, Colletons just
defense p. 207
forsaken our Camp, and rescued himself from our Country perils, and now he
begins to cry quit with the State, as well as he could, minding nothing but
revenge. His first approaches are verbal by Quodl p 286.
seditious books, or rather A let. of A.C. page 49.
enormous Libels: for example Greencoate, Philopater, his Books of
Reformation, Admonition, and of Titles. His second attempts Real, by plotting
secret Treasons, open invasions, and lastly by Quodl. p. 258.
urging both Pius 5. and Sixtus 5. to excommunicate the Late Queen, whom not
long before as is to be seen in a certain D. Bagshawes answer, page 11.
Supplication made to the Queen by one Jesuit for all the rest, he terms
most mighty, most merciful, most feared, best beloved Princess, the
shot-anchor of all their just hopes, perfect in all Princely duty, Sacred
Majesty, and what not? with protestation made unto her, that he will yield
and persuade in conscience, all Temporal obedience, and take her part even
against the Popes Army. Thus we see our Quodl^ p. 244.
Jesuitical, or rather Ignatian Apostle A let. of A. C. page 4.
Father Cowbuc beginning to play his prises, and bathing his hands in blood,
sitting at the Colletons defense, page 45.
stern and unmasking his violent nature, of whom Quodl. p. 237
Cardinal Allen held this opinion, that he was a man very violent, and of an
unquiet spirit, and said, that his turbulent head and lewd life, would be a
discredit to the Catholic cause: and no marvel, if we observe either his
words, or Actions, how they have always since his interdealings in State
affairs, tended to most cruel, barbarous, and butcherly designements, as by
the sequel of his life shall more plainly appear. And first for orders sake, I
intend to note unto you his discomposed writings, and afterward his exorbitant
or extravagant and lewd Actions, not comprising al, (for that were impossible,
and would ask a wider volume;) but comprehending some of the chiefest in each
kind.

The Books which he composed were partly of Religion, partly of State: of
Religion, as his Resolution, etc. of State, as his Green-coat, Philopator, etc.
the former sort were very commendable, and worthy works indeed, not only in
the judgments of Papists but of a very learned and judicious Protestant, who
has published some of them in print, with open profession of some small
additions, where the Auctor or Translatour rather was found to go amiss: but
the later sort, are condemned by diverse learned writers in sundry passages of
their books and nether Protestants nor Papists have allowed them. The best and
first Book which he writ, and A Dialogue etc. p. 107.
which won him all the praise, was his Book of Resolution, which he premised
and divulged respectively, as an exordium to all the rest of his seditious
Pamphlets, and lying Libels, to breed in men's minds an assured opinion of his
Religion, piety, and devotion: and yet not to heap more praises upon him, then
he justly deserves, he was but A let. of A. C. page 71.
a Collector, or a Translator at the most: Quodl. p. 327
the Book not of his own absolute invention, but taken out of other Auctors,
his praise was for well translating of it, close coutching and packing it up
together in a very smooth style, and singular good Method; and Quodl. p. ^1.
alack, alack, (as all men know) it is easy to lay fine threads together,
when they are gathered to a man's hand; and as easy to translate a work almost
verbatim, out of peece-meale Copies into his mother language. A Dialogue
betwixt a secular Priest and a Lay Ge^tlema^. p. 107
The true praise, to say the truth of this work* was due to Granada, that laid
the platform to Fa. Parsons hand, and gave him the principal grounds and
matter thereof and which also was deserved by Mr Brinckley for the penning, as
diverse report.

When he Ib. page 108.
had made an end of this Book, he made an end also therewith of devotion,
sincerity, and honest dealing. For after the publication of this worthy work,
A Dialogue betwixt a Sec. Priest and a Lay Gentleman, page 95.
he more beat his brains about State matters, then about the exercise of a
Religious life, and I^h. Colletons defense p 256,
happy had he been (as one wisely observes) if his pen had stayed here and gone
no farther: but when Religion was once wordlefied in him, and that State
matters and the designing of kingdoms had so great a part in his studies,
Colletons defense page 39.
then he shook hands with all shamefastness, and bid all truth and modesty
farewell, and began to furnish the world with sundry books of State, touching
Succession, after the death of the Queen, and Reformation upon the Conquest of
this Land, and such like: and see the wiliness of this Fox, his turnings and
windings here and there: these Libels, A let. of A. C. page 49.
the contents whereof were wholly infamatory came not forth with his name, or
any known liverie, he Quodl. p. 286.
either concealed his name, or gave the^ such names as it pleased him to
devise: for which cause some Papists have little cause to thank Mas Parson,
and namely Mr Doleman, in whose name he set out the Book of Titles,
(notwithanding that he detested the contents of it,) which might have brought
him in great danger. Quodl. p. 71.
This Book was set forth against the whole State, Ib. page 107.
entituling most traitorously the Spanish Infanta, to the English Crown; and
the Ib. page 315.
king Catholic (as some think) and spare not to say) was privy to the
setting forth of this lucklesse labor: now this was Parsons policy and
forecast; if the Book had been commended (as it neither was, nor deserved it)
then who but Fa. Parsons should have been the Father thereof: Ib. page 226.
but now that many exceptions are taken unto it, he good man is not the Auctor
of it his name is not Doleman, and gladly he would shift and wash his hands of
it: but all the water betwixt this and Rome, will not serve his turn so to do,
and thus much be spoken of his Doleman.

There follows, or rather as some think goes before a An answer to certain
articles objected against D Bishop, p. 16.
railing Book of one Andrew Philopater, alias Robert Parsons, Quodl. p. 271.
written in accusing, or reprooving some one, or many of all her Highness
Nobles, and civil Magistrates. What opinion trow we, have the best learned
Papists of this Book? Some hold it, to be Ib. page 11.
a most seditious, treacherous and infamous Libell, and worthy of Father
Parsons, Ib. page 284.
fraught til it almost burst again with all Jesuitical pride and poison; An
answer to articles objected against D. Bishop p. 16.
some to be a most vnpure and loathsome book against the State, take one
example for all: in this Philopater, the Quodl. p 295.
Auctour very peremptory, sly, and saucie (as his manner is,) very bold lie
affirms, that when kings do deflect from the Catholic Religion, and draw
others with them, Liberos esse subditos etc: posseque and debere (si vires
habuerint) huiuscemodi hominem dominatu eijcere. I will not English the words,
for very shame.

Let us go on forward to the examination of some of his other Books. Was not
his Quodl. p. 11
Greencoate, alias his Leycesters Common wealth a famous book? Yes verily, as
Books in the Law are called, famosi Libelli. For it was an A. C. let. p. 49.
inormous Libell, written against one of the Peers of this Land? Wherein the
Malapert or Resolute Jesuit keeps his old wont, to resolve us peremptorily,
that a Quodl. p. 316
different Religion, is a bar to inheritance. Ib. page 266.
He might have left such scoggerie, as he has set out in this Book, to
Tarleton, Nash, or else to some Puritan Mar-prelate, or other like companions.

Next follows his Book of Reformation, which under reformation, was Colletons
def. p. 294.
Father Parsons Babell, that is, his castle in the air, wherein he prescribes
Rules to al Estats: here you see, he is no changeling, the same man that he was
before; or rather grown more audacious and impudent, and well he might,
considering that these orders Quodl. p. 92
were begun in their deep Jesuitical Court of Parliament at Stix in
Phlegeton, and suggested thence into Father Parsons sconce, being ended and
compiled into a full and complete volume, by him and his General, entitled,
The High Court of Reformation for England. Wherein are sundry wise Acts
contained. Amongst the rest, that the Jesuits and Capuchins only should live
there, that Ib. page 289.
Bishops must be Pensioners, Ib. page 92.
Abbey-lands thus and thus disposed: he also has his Legem Agrariam, limiting
the Nobility and Gentry how much they should spend, with a number of the like
senseless fooleries, al which I willingly let pass, and come to the rest of
his seditious Books, as his Admonition and Appendix.

For the former of these, Quodl. p. 247
Don Lucifer the wittiest Fiend in Hell, could not have written more spitefully,
and Ib. page 284.
so that all posterity, cannot choose but condemn him for a most scurrilous
Traitor, and had he been brought up amongst all the Ruffians, and Curtizans
in Christendom, he could not have learned to have writ more vilely,
profanely, and heathenishly: for the later, to wit, his Appendix, the Ib. page
107.
book was impudentlie fathered on Cardinal Allen after his death, being
hatched by the unnatural heat of his ambitious heart, wherein Ib. page 218.
the Arch-Statist, presumes to call his learned Majesty that now is king of
great Britain, and then was of Scotland, obstinate Heretic. Who so bold
they say as blind Bayard, he fears no colors, has no shame, or conscience
what he writes, so he write with an invectiue humor, as has been largely
proved already.

Wherefore, having viewed, examined, and reexamined his Books and Writings, we
will now enquire farther after his life and conversation; for as the Poet said,
a man may chance to write a lewd Book, which is a sober honest man. But was he
so! so was Don Lucifer, and all the Fiends in Hell, from whom this man seemed to
be descended in the right line, giving occasion to diverse, by Quodl. p. 239.
his soul, enormous, and divelish life, to think that he was not a mere man;
but some Fairies brat, or begotten by an Incubus, or aerish spirit, upon the
body of a base woman. Show me that Treason, treachery or noted villainy,
wherein Parsons had not a hand, a heart, and a head? name that vice, whatsoever
it be, lying, coosening, forgerie, perjury, craft, hypocrisy, dissimulation
envy, pride, covetousnes, vainglory, backebiting, self-love, cruelty,
murders and oppressions, ambition, heresy. Atheism, whereof he was not guilty
in the highest degree? Speak you holy Priests of a sacred function, that knew
him best, and lived longest with him, speak boldly and shame not, to tell him
roundly of his faults. We will descend unto some few particulars, in order as
they shall lie, most convenient for our purpose, and first of his foul
conspiracies, treasonable plots, and plottings of Treason. You will say, perhaps
it is not good rubbing that sore any more, it has been touched already to
the quick, I confess it has been so, but in a different kind; For, it is
one thing to write, an other to act treasons; Parsons is guilty of both; of the
former, there is little doubt, by that which is spoken: and of the later less,
by that which now follows, by way of evident demonstration.

To prove that Father Parsons; was no less a traitor in action, then in
writing, first we show (and can prove that we say, with a wet finger) that he
gave his Colletons des. p. 240.
concurrence, and furtherance to a foreign invasio^ here in England, Quodlib.
p. 257.
sought to endanger his Majesty's person by the Scots, A Dialogue etc. p. 129.
set his rest upon the hopes of Spain, A relation of the faction at Wisbich.
p. 75.
procured himself to be the kings servant, practiced with the Quodl. p. 306.
students there, and diverse others to give their names to a Charter of
subscription; first Ib. p. 209.210
prophesied, and promised unto himself good success, and then took upon him
with his Jesuitical Plotcasters, to be an Actor, an orator or a broker, in
laboring to bring that prophecy to an effect, and rather then it should
fail, to be the bloody instrument to work it of his own head. Again, who
is A Dialogue etc. page 110.
it that caused the Seminaries in Spain, and S. Omers to be erected, and that
The brief Apol. p. 24.
alone, procured 2000 crowns a year pension more, for the College at Doway,
though he deserved small thanks for his labor, considering the decay of
Students at Rhemes, and Lovaine? Father Parsons. Who was it, that A brief Apol
page 183.
procured, that the first form of oath now used* was brought into the Roman
Seminary, and after that example, by himself, into the Seminaries of Spain,
whereby al promised, to take holy orders, and return into England, when they
should be appointed by their Superiors? Father Parsons. Who was it, that The
Copies of certain discourses, page 123. and the Answer of D. Bagshawe, p. 13.
used persuasion at Rome to the Students there, that they should have at State
and al: for which State-medling, they could but die, and die they should if they
were taken without State-medling? Father Parsons. Quodl. p. 218
Who is it, that upon a Luciferian pride, durst presume to call the king of
Scots an obstinate heretic, and the French king a reprobate, of God forsaken?
Father Parsons. Who is it that Copies of certain discourses p. 114.
chopped and changed the crown of England 8. or 9. several times, as it
pleased him, playing with it, as little boys sport themselves with king by
your leave, the great ones every hand while crying, a New King, a new, and in
the end set it to sale: whereupon, A let. of A.C. page 43.
a certain Romish gentleman, affixed a brief Libell upon Pasquines buttock,
in dirision and scorn of him. If Colletons just defense p. 241.
there be any man, that will buy the kingdom of England, let him repair to a
Merchant in a black square cap, in the City, and he shall have a very good
pennyworth thereof? Was not this F. Parsons? so then, the premises duly
considered, we may safely conclude, that Quodl. p. 237
this is that same Parsons, Ib. page 211.
whom all the Realm, Ib. p. 237.
Prince and Peers, with all true English hearts, have cause to curse, hate,
and spit at, and so an end of that matter.

Now as his predominant, and most exorbitant quality was Treason, so was he
deeply learned, and in a short time a great proficient, in sundry other
qualities, belonging to the Devils craft: as first, for truth, in him there was
none, An answer unto the particulars against D Bish^p p. 3.
Qui posuit mendacium spem suam, professing the Art of lying, and using Ib page
17.
tricks, as in adding, diminishing, equivocating and subintelligiturs, to serve
his turn, for you must note by the way, that Quodl. p. 286.
Equivocation is the Devils Sophistry, and the common principle of the
Jesuits, and Quodl. p. 257.
he is not scarsely to be accounted a Jesuit, that cannot lie* dissemble, and
equivocate at every word; these be the Ib. page 239.
Aphricanian Phalanges, and Jesuitical forces. Hence it is, that Ib. p. 150.
Cameleon like, he has banded of, and on with time, like Protheus, and in
truth Ib. p. 330.
neither Protheus in his complements, nor the Sea Euripus in his Cross tide
Ebbes and flows, for his inconstancy of old, has been held more infamous,
then E. Parsons.

Yet he had a worse fault then all these, and that is* he incurred the hateful
crime of forgerie taking upon him Copies of Certain discourses p. 124.
to thrust in and out for his purpose, as if he had had Colletons def. page 39.
a dispensation granted, to forge at his pleasure. Ib. page 77.
He was shrewdly mistrusted, to have added or altered somewhat in Bellarmines
Letter, he did alter the sentence of the two Cardinals, Caietan and Burghesio.
Copies of certain discourses page 124.
Corrupted the Registers, and Records at Rome, and he D. Bagshawes answer,
page 34.
was charged in Oxon amongst very many things, with forgerie by one Stancliff
his fellow Bursar: these we thought good to note by the way, for a taste of
some of his forgeries in lesser matters, Quodl. p. 31.
but he might have come in danger, to have been degraded, and set on the
pillarie, for forgerie, not in small matters, or private actions; but in points
of as high importance, as are Crowns and kingdoms, or Jurisdiction
Apostolical and supreme.

From forgerie he fell to flat cousenage, and Collet. def. p. 151.
being invred with the trade of devising shifts, he proved in the end an
Quodl. p. 149
Arch-cousener, a Ib. page 244.
false-hearted Catelin, the A.C. let. p. 38.
vnfaithfullest man that lived, the time will not permit me to produce many
examples: Ib. page 64.
He detained in his hands a legacy, which Sir Fr. Inglefield gave, and Quodl.
p. 306.
cousened Mr Middleton Priest, of 300. pounds at least in Spain, and handled
him roughly when he had done; and lastly, A relation of the faction begun at
Wi^bich. page 52.
being come to Rome, in the midst of all his Machiavillian plots, under
pretense of compounding the stirs in that Seminary, he so dealt, as in a very
short time, by cousening the Rector, he got the place for himself.

Thus cousening diverse, in the end, he grew famous for all kind of cunning and
Policies, and he Quodl. p. 107
was generally reputed to be so politic, that who was in request with Popes,
Cardinals, and other States, but Fa. Parsons I Colletons defense, p. 39.
had the office of Informership in the English affairs, as well in Spain as at
Rome, Chapter Pagets answer. p. 22.
had and did place diverse of his Agents in Honorable houses, and elsewhere, as
his spies; to make secret relation unto him, of all that passed in their houses*
nay rather then fail, he Quodl. p. 21^
offered himself like an impudent base fellow, to be a spy; so that it Ib.
page 9^.
is doubted, whether Mr Nicholas Machiavell, or Fa. Rob. Parsons excelled one
the other in Policy; for he is now become that Ib. page 237.
learned counselor, that must rule, ruff, and range through every estate, but
with all it Colletons defense, page 64.
was wished, that his policy would redound more, to the good of Church and
Commonwealth. Now is Father Robert where he would be, Collet. def. page 45. and
54.
sitting at the stern, and governing all, or the chiefest Colleges in Rome,
and (an Ib. page 64.
overruling humor reigning in him) he seeks to be our great Ib page 31.
Master and to rule all both at home and abroad, Quodl. p 236
exempts himself from controlement of any Superior, and as a Collet. def page
152.
Vicepope, or rather, as Su^mus Pontifex, or Quodl. p. 156.
Judge Paramount on earth, under the Devil in Hell, Ib. page 236.
commands all others, as Actor independent of any, to act all his actions, Cop.
of certain discourses, p. 77.
without whom, no English Jesuit dares do any thing, for he Quodl. p. 304.
reigns, and has the whole direction for all the Missions that are in
England Collet. def p. 130.
vaunting himself of the command he holds there (it is spoken from report of
an eye and ear witness) as well over many of the Laity, as of the Clergy;
and surely A letter of A. C. p. 23.
he was a very proper person, to carry so great a tail after him, as he did at
that time in England: but let this which has been spoken, (...) to note unto
the world, Chapter Paget^ answer, p. 23.
his ambitious desire of directing and commanding both private persons,
Prelates, and Princes, and unless he could obtain it, there was nothing but
war with him.

This great auctority, which this Quodl. p. 318.
presumant Scribe took upon him, made him no little proud and vainglorious
with all: it was observed by wise men, that he A.C. let. p. 38.
was the prowdest man that lived, and his Quodl. p. 341.
strength did so much consist in vain glory, that he writ Collet. def. pa.
297.
no Book, Discourse, nor scarce any letter against the Priests, wherein he
does not make mention of the Colleges he erected, or recount some other good
act of his own. Amongst many the man is thought to be ill neighboured, in that
he is thus driven to praise himself and few do think it religious modesty, to
farce books with their own commendations, but Quodl. p. 218.
a shame of the Devil and al Hypocrites, and Pharisees, he had Panegyries of his
praises and pieces shot of, to make report of his learning, his virtue, his
prudence, his government, his piety, his charity, his constancy and I know not
what. Some of his claw-backes have made Quodl. p. 72.
him equal, nay far above that worthy Pillar of the Church S. Augustine, the
Doctor Angelical S. Thomas of Aquine, the most subtle disputer Doctor Scotus,
being not worthy to hold the candle before the meanest of any of all these, or
sundry other far their inferiors. But, to give the Devil his due, he was at
the first, before he grew to be Quodl. p. 336.
an absolute Statesman, Paramont, Paregal, peremptory, sundry ways well
qualified, both for writing and speaking; but partly, A Dialogue etc p. 132.
his policies in Temporal matters, blinded his judgment (...) ^piritual,
partly, he Quodl. p. 237.
lost his good spirit by ambitious ^^rts aspires, and grew afterward so unable
a man, to speak or write of any Priestlie, or religious matter, as a very
Reverend Priest reported, that he never heard a meaner Sermon made beyond the
Seas, than he heard of Father Parsons, and that his words and writings, for
edifying, or giving any good instruction, and ghostly counsel, were as barren,
bare, and far from his former abilities on that behalf, as if he had been
before Robert Parsons the Jesuit, and now poor George Parsons the wayward
fool his brother.

This might have served to Quodl. p 218.
pull down his Peacocks plumie-heart, and to slake Ib. page 241.
the unnatural heat of his ambitious hearts aspires; but Parsons must be
Parsons still, who like a true Ib. page 108.
Wolsey in ambition, never left, til he had purchased his own discredit, and
as Woolsey being once a Cardinal, would feign have been a Pope: so Father
Robert, of a Jesuit would willingly have contented him self to have been made
a Quodl. p. 150
King Cardinal. Whereupon, when it was known to his friends that he Letter of
A.C. page 23
ambitioned the Cardinalate, Worthington and Father Holt, caused a petition to
be made to the king of Spain, by boys and girls at S. Omers: effectual Cop
of certain discourses. p. 127
letters are written to the Pope, Parsons himself goes to Quodl. p. 141
Rome on pilgrimage in the year of our Lord 1597. being come, is visited
presently with two Cardinals at his lodging, Baronius, and a Spaniard, speech
in the city that he should be Cardinal, so rife, that being sick, and in
his sickness willed to wear scarlet, he sent to his Brother for a stomacher,
who dreaming of nothing but of his Brothers advancement, procured two Mercha^ts
to carry in a whole wagon, laden with diverse re^^^^eces of scarlet, for his
red robes: but as God would have it he escaped the Cardinalship, and got the
canvase; and yet like a crafty Fox, gave it out, Cop. of certain discourse,
p. 127
that both he, and the General of the Jesuits, yea, and all the friends that
they could make, in the Court of Rome, were little enough to keep him from
being a Cardinal.

Thus we have seen pride have a fall, and our second Wolsey begin to waine,
whereupon Quodl. p. 129
he grew a zoilous Timon, of an envious emulatio^, at the reverend esteem of
others, and Ib. page 280.
what the malice of the Devil or wit of his foul instrument could possibly
bring to pass, is effected; his Chapter Pagets answer, p. 75.
turbulent, seditious, and irreligious head and heart are a working. For he was
ever Colletons just defense p. 176
accounted contentious, and Declaratio motuum etc. page 58
given to stirs, factions, and seditions, even whiles he was an heretic.
Ib. page 58.
what banglings had he with Creswell, Scot, Gibbons, Holt English, Alphonso an
Italian, and a number more of his Society? What conte^tions had he with
Reverend Bishop of Cassana, with Doctor Barret President of the College at
Doway, with Gifford with the Reverend Priest Mr Middleton, with many others of
quality and due respect.

And as he had a special gift An answer to articles objected against D. Bishop
p. 18.
in canvasing and wrangling; so Declaratio motuum, etc. Page 73*
in detractions and calumniations (which are neighbor vices,) he was
exceedingly well versed. We need say no more, Quodl. p. 130
he was the most impious detractor on Earth, that ever lived, Chapter Pagets
answer, p. 23.
from whom nothing came but detractions, calumnies, and sclaunders, the Quodl.
p. 341
best weapons the Jesuits have to defend themselves, and wound their opposits
Colletons def. p. 168.
in the speedingst place they can. Lastly to draw to an end, because I have
dwelt too long upon this unfortunate subject, Quodl. p. 237.
the general conceit of all that have ever thoroughly conversed with him is
this, that he is of a furious, passionate, hot, chollerick, exorbitant, working
humor, busie-headed, and full of ambition, envy, pride, rancour, malice and
revenge, whereunto through his latter Machiavillian practices, may be added,
that he is a most Diabolical, unnatural, and barbarous butcherly fellow,
unworthy the name; nay cursed be the hour wherein he had the name of a
Priest, nay of a Religious person, nay of a Temporal Layman Iesuited, nay of
a Catholic, nay of a Christian, nay of a human creature: but of a beast, or a
Devil, a violatour of al Laws, a conte^ner of al authority, a stain of
humanity, an impostume of all corruption, a corrupter of all honesty, and a
Monopoly of all Mischief. Thus have you briefly the life of Father Robert
Parsons, the Jesuit, faithfully collected out of the Relations of sundry
Reverend Priests, who (as I trust) make a conscience of lying, and detest from
the bottom of their hearts that absurd, and hitherto unheard of doctrine of
dissimulation, Equivocation and hypocrisy: if their report be true (as I am
in conscience persuaded it is for the most part) then woe worth the Jesuits, and
principally Father Parsons, whom they have arrained of so many treasons, petty
Treasons, Felonies, villainies and I know not what: if false, they which are so
fowly mistaken, in matters of fact, how may they safely be trusted in a matter
of faith which concerns the loss or gain of a man's soul? For my part,
though I do rather incline unto the Priests, tha^ unto the Jesuits, as ever
taking them to be the far honester men: yet seeing Will W^^son Priest,
executed for high treason at Winchester.
one of the chiefest of them, which was accounted whiles he was living A let.
of A. C. page 35.
a very Ecclesiastical Macchabe against the Spaniard, Ib page 39.
a blessed confessor toward God, and a good Patriot for his Country, whose Ib.
page 35.
integrity and confidence of his heart was such (as was reported) that it was
never but with the right; who made this Quodl. p. 350.
solemn protestation in his Books, that not all the Art that either the
Devil, or the Puritans, or Jesuits have, should bring him within the compass
of a treasonable or treacherous thought, against God, his Sovereign, or the
Commonwealth of this land: but in life and in death he would by Gods grace be
as loyal a subject, as any the English soil affords, then the which none more
loyal to their Prince in any nation to be found: who to manifest his farther
hatred of Treason, and his loyalty to his Prince and Country, writ an
Antiperistasis to Parsons Doleman, and conceaved the form of an Oath I W.W.
do from the bottom of my heart, plainly and sincerely, without all
Equivocation or doubling, profess and swear, that I will never give ear to
that bloody doctrine of deposing kings, or disposing of kingdoms for heresies
sake, and that were our number and strength much more and greater then her
Majesty's, I will never be persuaded or drawn, either by threatenings or
promises of any (be it the Pope himself) to bear arms against her Highness,
to the destruction of her Royal person and State: but I will be ready to
adventure my goods and ^ife in her Majesty's defense, against him or any other,
that shall assail, or invade by hostile hand her State and kingdom, under
pretense of restoring the Catholic faith, or whatsoever; and farthermore I do
protest for my self, that I do loathe and detest this point of doctrine, that
Princes heretics may be deposed or put from their kingdoms, with patience and
sufferance expecting, and in the mean time obaying in things Temporal her
Majesty, as my lawful Sovereign* evermore retaining an English resolution
for my native Prince, State, and Country, and resolutely intending (God
assisting me with his Grace, so to remain constant, loyal, serviceable, and
faithful unto the death, so help me God, etc. Quodlib. page 304.305.346. and
351.
in effect the same with the Oath of Allegiance which was afterward enacted in
Parliament, to distinguish the loyal from the disloyal Papists: seeing I say,
this Reverend and loyal Priest, was within few years after, indicted,
convicted, and executed for high Treason against his Sovereign, I could wish
that all such as religiously fear God, and honor their Prince, from the
bottom of their hearts would consent to believe nether another. For questionles
as long as both Priests and Jesuits do constantly maintain this absurd Paradox
and blasphemous doctrine, as a solid and certain Article of their faith, that
the Pope is the only Prelat, that cannot err, in deciding a controversy or
doubt in faith and Religion, and that all the world else may err in deciding
of such doubts: Princes cannot rest secure of their subjects, nor the subjects
certain of performing their obedience either to God or their Sovereigns. For
example; the king commands his subjects to take the Oath of Allegiance, God
forbids his servants the Worshipping of Images: there are many honest
Papists in this land, I nothing doubt, that of themselves are in conscience so
fully persuaded of the truth of both these precepts, as well the affirmative as
the negative, as that they will profess to live and die in this belief: yet
let the Popes definitive be brought unto them, viz: you shall not take the Oath
of Allegiance, you shall worship Images; they will wax pale, turn color, and
be ready to swear and abjure their former opinions, though never so well
grounded on Fathers, and Councels, reason, and auctorities. For why? Councels
may err, and Fathers may be deceived, all the Prelates and Superiors in the
world may fail, none upon Earth is warranted from erring, but one, and that
one is the Pope, and this Pope is Christ's Vicar and Peter's Successor, and he
has decided it thus: ergo so it is, his authority is an infallible rule of
truth. This is the Popish doctrine, and this is the Papists belief, the
foundation stone of all Popery, a most absurd doctrine, which has not it
proof either from testimonies of Scripture, or consent of Fathers. but not to
dispute the case being from our purpose, nor to detain you any longer, my
exhortation shall be unto all the Popish Recusants of this land, that as they
fear God and have a care of their salvations, they will not be too credulous to
trust their Priests or Jesuits, but rather suspect the Jesuits for Parsons, and
the Priests for Watsons sake; for the wicked life of the one, and the miserable
death of the other, may give us pregnant cause of suspicion, that al is not
true that either of them both shall say, though it be spoken tanquam ex
tripode, vel in cathedra, that is, resolutely and definitiuely. Our Lord Jesus
preserve us all unto his saving Grace.

Deo soli sit gloria.

