SEVEN Helps to Heaven. Showing 1. How to avoid the Curse. 2. How to bear
the Cross. 3. How to build the Conscience. 4. How with Moses to see Canaan. 5.
Simeons dying Song, directing to live holily and dye happily. 6. Comforts for
Christians against distresses in Life, and fear of Death. 7. Fervent Prayers,
to bear sickness patiently, and dye preparedly.


The second EDITION: much enlarged by Steven Jerome, late Preacher at S. Brides.

Seen and allowed.

JOB 14.14. All the days of my appointed time will I wait till my change
come. Nascentes morimur, finisque ab origin pendet. LONDON: Printed for Roger
Iackson, and are to be sold at his Shop, near to the Conduit in Fleetsheete.
1614.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, MY Honorable good Lord, RALPHE, Lord Eure, Baron of
Malton and Wytton, and Lord President of his Majesty's Honorable Council,
within the Principality of Wales, and the Marches of the same: all Blessings
be multiplied temporal, and Graces spiritual.
MY Honorable good Lord, it was once an Axiom in the Ethnicke Schools To a
hominis vita mortis meditatio.
, that the whole life of a wise man should be a continual meditation of Death;
which, as it was a Principle amongst them, so it was the practice, not only of
the Saints and Servants of GOD, the ancient Patriarchs, Primitive Christians,
retired Hermites, mortified Anchorites, and zealous professors of Religion: but
even of the wisest and worthiest of the Heathens themselves. The evidence of
which will easily appear to those that are studious in the Word divine, or
conversant in Authors Ecclesiastical or humane. Let us reflect upon Genesis chapter
1. chapter 2. chapter 3.
Adam, the first man, as his name signifying Red earth; the Command given him,
mixed with the curse of tilling the earth; his Sin, the cause of the
dissolution of that part which was earth; his Garments, made of the skins of
dead Beasts, clothing his members which were (like the rest of the Creatures)
naught but earth; his Sickness, and Distempers, the fruits of his sin, and
preambles of his death; Gods Statute Law, that he should return to his earth,
told him truly (contrary to the S^rpent and the Woman) that he was a sinful
man, and therefore mortal: so, it seems these remembrancers not only
occasioned, but caused his meditation of his death. For, though he called his
eldest Son Caine Genesis 4.1.2
, or Possession, yet he called his younger Son Abel, or Vanity; as being now
experienced and schooled in that misery in life, and mortality in death, which
was incident to him and all his originally and actually sinning seed Genesis 3.19
.

In this Meditation to omit Noah the worlds restorer; Sem, or Methusha^em, that
Prince of peace; Enoch, that walked with GOD, with the rest; Abraham, the
Father of faithful men, imitated Adam the Father of men, who in his suite for
Sodom, confessed himself to be but dust and ashes Genesis 18.17.
; Isaac, who after the death of his Mother Sarah, went out to meditate, no
doubt, as of her death, so of his own Genesis 24 63
; Jacob, that in his greatest cross and humiliation, thinks how his gray head
should be brought to his grave Genesis 37.35
; and in the height of his earthly joy and contentation, speaks from the
abundance of his heart, of the few and evil days of his Pilgrimage Genesis 47 9.
; Joseph, tha^ amongst all his honors in Egypt, thinks and tells Genesis 50 25
of the carrying his dead bones into Canaan; so, the rest had their thoughts
mortified from the world, and fixed on their mortality: which appears as by
other proofs, so by two demonstrations in their Buildings in their Buyings.
The first being not seiled houses or gorgeous Palaces, (like Nabuchadnezzars
Babell. Nim^ods Tower, or Cyrus his House) but silly Tents Genesis 18 9
, like Shepherds Cottages, or Boothes in a Fair, or Lodges in the Camps such
as the Zwitzards use, ready every instant for remouall. The second being only
limited in a burying place for their dead: for, that is the greatest purchase
that ever we read any of the Patriarchs made Genesis 23.4 5.
, and the possessions which they most frequently mention.

What should I mention these Fathers that lived under the Law; Ioshuah the
son of Nun, the Servant of the LORD; faithful Caleb; Aaron the Lords high
Priest; or Moses himself, the greatest of Legal Prophets, who mindful of
his mortality, even before the Lord told him (as he did Ezekias) that he
should dye, made that Prayer, which the Fathers say the people of GOD used
daily as a form of Prayer, pathetically inserting this Petition Psalm. 90.12
, that God would so teach them to number their days, that they might apply
their hearts to wisdom: the rest succeeding sympathizing in the like
thoughts? Job waiting till his changing should come Job 10.14
; David making no more reckoning of himself then of a Pilgrim, and stranger
here amongst men, summoning others also to the consideration of their
uncertain condition, and certain end Psalm. 120.3. Psalm. 49.1.2.3.
.

I might extend the line of this unlimited practice from the Patriarchs to the
Prophets, from the Prophets to the Apostles. Paul as often desires, as he
deliberates of his dissolution Phil. 2.23
: Peter counts his continuance here but as an abode in a Tabernacle 2 Pet. 1.3
. Reflect back to Christ's Disciples: he no sooner speaks of the death of
Lazarus, but their thoughts work upon dying with him John 11.15.16.
; nay, CHRIST himself as most frequently he talks and discourses of his
death in the Gospel, so in that Transfiguration of his Mat. 17. v. 4. v. 9.
, the reflection and Idea of his Glorification, to strengthen his Disciples in
their dying meditations, he not only tells of his own death when he comes
from the Mount, but even in the Mount there appears two dead men with him,
Moses and Elias. And, with the rest, here old Simeon, the subject which in all
obsequious duty, submisly I present to your Honor, as desiring your
Honorable patronizing, and deserving your holy practice, even when he had in
his arms the Lord of Life, seeing Canaan with Moses Deuteronomy. 32.49.
, and the Heavens open, with Steven Act. 7.56
, to receive his flitting soul, as Abraham's bosom did Lazarus Luke. 16.22.
, thinking of his death and dissolution to his dust, he sings that truly
Cygnean and Swan-like song recorded Luke 2.29. Which Song I have divided into
his parts, and according to those talents and parts which Grace and Nature has
lent me, have descanted upon, by Illustration, Explication, and Application,
to our secure, sensual, and sinful times: wherein I have revealed to the
world, what GOD has revealed unto me by all means used, speculatiue, and
practical, from Reading, Study, Meditation, Conference with the Learned, and
Reference of the Labors of approved Authors, both testimonially and
exemplarily, to the sacred Cannon of the Orthodoxe Truth; but principally from
that young, yet true experience, which GOD has taught me by observing (as a
Physician his Patients) the several carriages and conditions of diverse men, in
their healths, sicknesses, lives and deaths, occasioned by those frequent
visitations of the sick; which, by reason of my place, I used these last
years, in a great and populous Parish: in which particulars the searcher of
the heart and reins, and the intelligencer of all Spirits, even the Father of
Spirits, knows that I have not aimed at any base, servile or sinister ends, as
gain, profit, praise, neither am fed with any such ayerie and froathy
conceits, being so conscious to mine own imperfections, that I have been by
the importunities of others, rather passive then active in this kind, as is
well known to some who are acquainted with my, more then Fabritius-like,
lingering, even to the prejudice of the Printer, who expected and prepared the
Press for me much sooner: but my only end and aim is Gods glory, his
Churches good, conviction of the World of Sin, conversion of the Wicked from
sin, confirmation of the Weak in grace, discharge of my Duty in my general
and special Calling, furthering mine own Account in my particular and
general Judgment, desiring, and with all the powers and parts of soul and
body endeavoring (as I purposed and proposed betwixt GOD and my own soul, in
my first ingresse into this sacred Function) to employ my Talents to my Masters
best advantage, painfully and gainefully as I could, so far as a wearyed (if
not weakened body,) would hold any proportion with a willing soul. Further
good, further gain then these, in these I desire not, I require not, besides
satisfaction to mine own soul, and comfort in my conscience, in delivering in
this Tractate, the very Image and Idea of mine own thoughts, which as
constantly as vehemently work upon this sad and sable subject of Death, every
day more and more occasioned by the preparatiues to it, and summons of it, the
crosses of life, chiefly from the discouragements and discomforts of an
ungrateful and ungracious world, in that part of my life, which is either
Morrall or Ministerial, concerning my Person or Profession. 2. In respect of
others, from the obligation of love, I desire to lend the best light that is in
me (being originally fetched from the word) to lead them through the dark
wilderness of the world, even in the very shadow of death, to their Canaan,
showing all along in this Passage and Pilgrimage, to the weak and willing
Christian, the Amalekites, and the Amorites, etc. the World, with her wars,
weapons, horrors, terrors, brevity, misery, vanity; fitting them to fight,
and encouraging them to their desired rest, by meditating of death, and
preparation for death.

Which points and parts, with their several adjuncts, as they are penned and
published for the behoof and benefit of all in general, so more specially (as
in my first designs and desires I did both pretend and intend) in all dutious
and devoted affection, I humbly recommend them unto your Lordships perusal,
protection, and practice, and that for sundry and weighty Motives.

First, in respect of the subject here entreated of, which is not light and
triuiall, such as Virgils Gnat, Erasmus his Mori^, or commendation of Folly,
Sir Thomas Moors Eutopia, or the generous Sidney's Arcadia, or such as Lucians
Fly, Apuleius his Golden Ass, Plutarkes Gryllus, etc. nor such frivolous and
licentious stuff as our Poets and Poetasters, Comedians, and Pamphleters,
stain so much Paper withal, and adulterate and defile the minds of so many:
but the subject is grave, sad, weighty, ponderous, even that which is the
suburbs either of heaven or hell, the Prologue to everlasting sollace or
sorrow, as it is good or evil, even Death, worthy your Honors Gravity,
Graces, Years, Place and Judgment; beseeming your most retired Meditations,
sincerest Thoughts, greatest Priuacies, and deuoutest Soliloquies; yea, even in
the confluence of these earthly Honors, and Blessings, which you have received
from your King, your Country, your late happy Espousals, etc. even as Joseph of
Arimathia made his Sepulcher in his Garden; as the Heathen Emperors were wont
to be crowned amongst the sepulchers of the dead, as the Nobles of Egypt were
wont to banquet, beholding the Anatomy of Death: as King Agathocles was wont
to drink wine out of a Cruize of earth: as Philip of Macedons ears were every
morning saluted that he was mortal: as S. Ieromes thoughts were every hour
possessed with that imaginary sound; Arise you dead and come to Judgment; that
so with these thinking of Death, amidst your earthly Honors you should so
moderate or mortify all earthly desires and delights, that living holily,
dying happily, you shall be rightly Noble in life and death, with God and man.

Secondly, in respect of the sympathy and proportion betwixt your Honor, and
those Heroes, Moses, and old Simeon; the one a Magistrate, the other a
Minister, both Prophets, both great, both good, both truly Noble, (like those
Beraeans x,) in the best and new birth: the one walking with God, and coming
in as near priuacie and familiarity with GOD, as ever did mere mortal man
Acts 17.11. Heb. 3.2.5.
; the second a man venerable amongst the Jews, called Simeon the righteous
Luke 2.25
, fearing God, replenished with the Spirit of God, fellow-Disciple with that
great Jonathan, to that famous Hillel Zanc. de sacr. Scrip.
, of whom even their own Rabbis have writ, and they believed See the Jews
Talmud in the Treatise Iomach, cap. Tereph B^calphi.
, that the Disciples of Hillel should never fail, till Christ were come: in
which Simeon the spirit of the great Synagogue utterly failing and ceasing, as
is urged against them See Morneyes trueness of Religion. Page 500.
, it is an evident sign both that our and their Messiah is come, which they
deny; as also that God does utterly abhor that Synagogue and Sanctuary which
they condole. Now, both these holy parallels (as propounded, and in some
measure expounded, in their persons, in their practice) I by these Presents
propose as Patterns worthy your Lordships Imitation and virtuous Aemulation,
living and dying; as your Honor is a shining President to others (even of your
place,) of Wisdom, Justice, Clemency, Sincerity, Moderation, Affability,
and other Virtues both Morrall and Christian.

Thirdly, this poor Orphan of my Intellectual powers, and first mental
Child as it were of my Understanding part, wrapped in these shedules and sheets
(which Travel and Time, as the Mother and the Midwife have brought to light)
in a dumb and silent Oratorie, seems to call your Lordship Patron, both in
Duty and Desire, of Right and of Necessity: for having (as its inchoation in
the City) so continuation and perfection in that place of the Country, M^lton
in Yorkshire.
where I my self had my first breathing, beginning, production and education,
even within the confines of your own territories: to whom does it owe as due,
his first duty of Homage and Fealty, but to your Lordship? Besides, it being
strayed from me (whither and to whom GOD knows) being as Wafe and Straife, to
whom belongs it but to the Lord of the soil? Neither does it less incline to
your Honor in necessity, least it be abased and abused of the injurious
world, in the nonage and minority; least it be torn and rent with Doegs, or
Dogs like Euripides; least it be poisoned and enuenomed with the black and
Theonine teeth of Envy, Dente Thae^ino.
Ignorance, Aemulation, or their Daughter Detraction, Monsters that I have
always fought withal in humane shapes, as Paul did with Beasts at Ephesus:
therefore least some Flies buzze, some Snakes sting, some Crittiques carpe, and
Cynickes scoff; least it find his Hieronomastix (as Homer found his
Homer^mastix, and Virgil his ^ ^neidomastix) it appeals not only to your
Honorable, but Learned and judicious p^otection.

Fourthly, and especially, that I might at last accomplish not the least of my
earthly desires, to show my self in some measure grateful to your Lordship,
for so many and manifold a^cumulated favors, even to my desires, exceeding my
deserts: from whom, and from whose Honorable House, as primarily from God, so
instrumentally (next unto my King, from whom I draw the common air; my
Parents, from whom I had my being; the University, my Mother, and Tutors, from
whom I had my education and well-being; besides those that are my self and
from my self in my Family,) as I know I have received most good, so I
acknowledge my self to be most obliged for that good: not only participating
in those general and common favors with my friends and blood, but in special
reflecting upon those by whose means I was first furnished with means in the
Ministry, competent and certain, under the shadows of whose wings I have
been protected, by whose Graces I have been countenanced; by whose countenance
encouraged; nay, by whose very counsels I have been directed in my best
courses in my calling: and lastly, by whose largess I have been provided for,
not only for the present, but with a free donatiue for the future. For all
which favors, if I should not think my self as much indeared and indebted as
Virgil to his Augustus, Horace to his M^c^nas, Varro to his Asinius Pollio,
Cicero to his Pomponius Atticus, Oppian to his Anthome, Euripides to his
Archilaus: or (to leave Heathenish Parallels) as a Preacher can be to his
Patron; I should show my self as Viperously ungrateful as the continuation
of these favors is submisly desired. Accept therefore, Right Honorable, and
in my heart, truly honored Mecaenas, this Rapsodicall poor Paper present,
this Persian gift, as an argument of my undoubted and redoubled Love and Duty
to you and yours, my much respected Lady, your Honorable Conjugal
Yoake-fellow; my Honorable Favorites, Sr. William Eurie, together with his no
less wise then religious Lady, with my unfeigned Prayers to the God of Heaven,
for the continuation and augmentation of all Blessings temporal and
spiritual, with accumulation of all Graces external, internal and eternal,
upon your Honors, and upon those pleasant and fruitful Olive branches, the
hopeful Honors of the House of the Euries, in all humility I take my leave,
submisly resting in all duties to be commanded,

Old Malton. March 10. Your Lordships truly devoted Chapleine, STEVEN JEROME,

To the Readers: chiefly, his late Auditors at S. Brides in London.
CHristian Friends, whom I love unfeignedly, in truth, and for the Truth, as I
have published this myrrhour of dying Moses, and Song of holy Simeon, for the
good of Gods Church in general (to whom I have devoted my self, my life, my
labors) so in my reserved thoughts, more peculiarly, I tender and present it
unto you, my late Auditors, above the rest. First, as your due by right, being
some few Gleanings after the Harvest, and some few Grapes of the Vintage of my
Ministry amongst you, or more plainly and properly the flowers of some
Funeral Sermons, occasionedly preached, now printed for you. Secondly, that
you might receive by this single and simple labor a double benefit, by a
redoubled reflection upon your understandings, memories and affections; as
through the organ of the ear, by hearing, so of the eye, by reading: both
which, Philosophy calls Sensus doctrinae, the senses of learning. For which
respect I have turned my tongue into a pen, and the gesture of a living man
into a dead letter, writing the same things with Peter, as Paul spoke twice the
same words. Which penning, though in respect of preaching, it be but as a
painted fire, to the powerful Element; as the dead portraiture, to the living
person; like the dead corpse, to fighting Hector, yet the same things red to
those that before heard them, have the place of the Moon, at least to
enlighten the brain, though Hearing, the power of the Sun to heat the heart.
Besides that, you may act the noble Beraeans part the better, in trying the
spirits; more retentiuely, and deliberately examining the Truth, then infirm
and weak memories could conveniently from a voluble tongue. Thirdly, they are
as desiredly so deservedly yours, even as my self was, with my labors, by
mutual consent: and therefore I send you only back those Exercises which you
have paid for: and withal (in my occasioned corporeal absence) the presence
of my spirit, the pledge of my heart, the argument of my well-wishes, and
constant desires toward you, an Epistle of that zealous affection which I
justly bear you, a testimony of my grateful remembrance of all those true
effects of your Christian love toward me: the answering of which love is not
the least of my earthly desires. As a true seal whereof, I send you this poor
Paper-present, desiring your acceptance, as of the gift, so chiefly of the
heart of the giver. Good it may do you, if God concur with his grace and his
spirit; weak means may work Mortification, even the Cocks crowing may
awaken Peter: hurt it can do none, unless accidentally the fault be in your
selves; even as to some the Word it self and the Sacraments, with all holy
things, are the savor of death; even as meats and medicines to a weak
stomach and distempered body, turn to diseases and Anguors, by reason of
vicious humors.

To give you a fore-taste and relish of what you shall further find in these
united Treatises, the chief mark that I aim at, is (after the pattern of
two myrrours of men; the one, the Pronouncer of the Law, the other a Trumpe of
the Gospel,) to teach you how to dye as well as willingly. A Lesson which the
wisest amongst the Heathens, even their Sages, Philosophers, and Gymnosophists;
nay, many learned Scribes, Disputants, and great Rabbis amongst Christians,
either never knew preecptorily, or forgot to pr^ctise, as their Tragical ends
(some whereof I have exemplified) do demonstrate. A point taught only in the
Theorie, in the School of Christ to his Disciples, his docible Simeons;
wrought in the practicke part by his spirit* in the hearts of the Saints of
Sion.

Further, I have let you see your own faces in two examplary Glasses, what you
ought to be, even Gods Servants, righteous with m^n, religious with your God,
that so your work may receive the reward, even true beatitude, the sovereign
good. Laboring moreover so to wash the foul spots and ^sp^^sions of your
sinne-soyled souls, that you may appear beautiful and gracious, as Hester to
A^^ne^^s, when Death Gods Purseuant fetches you to stand before the King of
Kings: being not defective, (at least in desire and endeavor) to lay before
you the true exemplary form and perfect model^ how to live holily, so to die
happily.

What I have done further thousands will judge, I neither praise nor disprayse
mine own doings, a Heathenish Master tells me, Aristotle apud Val. Max. lib.
7. c. 2.
the one were vanity, the other folly: only I may testify thus much truly,
that I have not been penurious in pains. For, since I undertook this task,
in as many weeks as Virgils Poems years, I have polished it, as I could, (as
the Bear her Whelps by licking) pervsing some Authors for this purpose,
drinking deeply at their Wels, where I thought the waters sweet, decking this
for Gods Israel, with Aegiptian Jewels, even some Heathenish Illustrations, as
is lawful and laudible in this kind.

For the manner of penning, you have my good will, if not skill in cooking what
is catered; if I add sometimes sour Sauce, let it relish the better with you,
what is untoothsome to a fleshly palate, will prove wholesome to a sound soul.
For my words, I have not been very curious though cautelous, God and Nature
have administered them to my Pen, as to my Tongue, without martyring my self
about them: if I have erred, it is rather on the right hand then the left, in
the excess then defect, (as some have taxed the one in Osorius; others, the
other in Lipsius) rather choosing to flow and ouerflow (as Tully once did,
before Athens brought him within his banckes) that I may be intelligible in
expressing the notions of my soul, then with an affected concise Lipsian and
Laconian brevity to be obscure, as is said of Aristotle, Theophrastus and
others, who for their styles are said to write to torment their Readers; I have
labored to give a good garment, to a good body; to clothe a good subject in
words fitted, not affected.

For the matter; you have here not what Satan showed Christ, the World with
her glory and her pomp: but a Map of man's Misery, a Model of his Mortality,
of the Worlds Vanity, Life's Brevity, so brittle, so brief, so short, so
certainly uncertain in his flitting, in its fading, that the Word intitles
our life in this world, a Pilgrimage, Genesis 47.9. a Flower, Esa. 40.7. a Smoke,
Psalm. 102.3. a Weauers shittle, Job 7.6. a House of clay, a Shepherds Tent,
Job 4.19. Esaias 38.12. a Shadow Job. 8.9. a Dream, Job 20.8. Vanity, nay,
Nothing, Psalm. 39.5. All which points, with sundry more, I have according to my
Talent, laid open at the full, with sundry encouragements, every where inserted
against such fears as the thoughts of these things naturally possess men
withal.

It was my purpose also to have added some comforts, as against the fear of
death natural, so of death spiritual and eternal, in the corroberation of
the weak Christian against Satan, the wounds of Conscience, and terrors of
his own Soul: but the length of these Lines, already extended beyond their
propounded limits, joined with weakness of body, cause me to omit or pretermit
this, till some other occasion; where I shall, if it be requisite, reveal what
I know in this practical part of Divinity, in the mean space I refer you
to draw cooling waters from those Springs of Israel, to whom the Lord has
given the tongue of the Learned, to speak a word to him that is weary, in due
season; in perusing the Works of the worthy Perkins, D. Sparks, Espmes, good
old Linakers Comforts for afflicted Consciences, Hughes Troubled man's Medicine,
The Pensiues Practice, the Consolatory Letters of that zealous Greenham, D.
Hill, Wilcox etc. Ferrarius upon 51. Psalm; Mr. Knox upon the 6. Psalm, Mr.
Downams Christian Warfare, Luthers Consolations, The sick man's Salve;
chiefly, that best sixe-penny Manuel that I know in English Mr. Fremans
Comforters, Wolcomb his Sinners salve; with all those that have strengthened
the soul directly against desperation. Besides, if you desire further
satisfaction in any point, either positive or controuersall, concerning death
naturally; in which these my poor pains do not content you, the zealous and
learned Lucubrations of men of good parts and pains, offer themselves, as Mr.
Perkins and Lupset, Mr. Sutton, with D. Hill, by their printed Works, as their
titles are, will teach you how to die well; Mr. Draxe lends the sick man a
Guide, another a Salve; Sr. Thomas Eliot lends a preservative against Death,
Also see Mr. Vauhams and Mr. Tukes Books of the same subject.
Mr. Bradford writes against the fear of Death, Mr. Cave out of French shows
how to remove that fear; Wolcombe lends Armor against Deaths assaults,
Erasmus shows Deaths chances, Mr. Fox exhorts the sick: Deaths general
Proclamation is extant in Print, with his Trophies and Conquests. Couerdaile
out of Dutch has translated a Book of Death. Ars moriendi, the Art of dying
has bin long extant Printed Anno 1506
. Also, the learned know what not only the Fathers, but Papists have writ of
this Argument, as Pontanus, Inclinus, etc. as also some Germane Protestants* as
Bibembachius, and Brandmillerus in their Funeral Sermons, with others, both in
Latin and English; all which I have seen, most of which, before, and upon
this occasion, read: and in many of them (omitting the principals) found small
satisfaction, so that none by comparing me with them shall find me seruilely
tied to any of them, or taking any thing so verbally or by sentences from them,
as it is not mine own by method, digestion, and application. Neither, I hope,
will it be more blameworthy in me, to write after these, then it was in
Curtius to write the life of Alexander; in Baptista Egnatius to write the lives
of Emperors; in Platina to write the lives of the Popes; after that seauenteen
approved Authors had writ of the same subject before the first; thirteen,
before the second; and fifteen before the third, as a warrantable Writer
reckons them Text^r in Epistola ante suam Officinam.
.

And now having acquainted you what I have done, how, and why, I send all unto
you* as Abraham sent his Servant away with a blessing, even such a one as I
desire and intend. With which thought now the custom of all Epistlers cry it
is time to conclude, least it be too tedious; yet bear I pray you with mine
error of love, which still extends my lines (being uncertain when or whether
ever to see all your faces again in earth, by reason of that mortality we
speak of, or to speak to you by audible voice) to commend unto you (as a
departing father would, some things to his children, as dying David did to
suruiuing Solomon) only these two things: first, that you would spend well the
time of your short life* secondly, that you would prepare your selves for
death. The first makes way to the second, (as the Needle for the Thread) the
second for a third: even a dignity amongst living Angels, as Grace sits for
Glory. First therefore, because the days of your pilgrimage are as few as
evil Genesis 47.9.
, as short as sinful, that even for that cause, as the Apostle counsels Ephesians.
5.16
, you would redeem the time: account of it (as not only Christians, but even
the Heathens, Theophrastus, Seneca De vitae breuitate, sic Epistola 1. ad Lucil.
, with others, have prized it) as the greatest treasure yea, above your
patrimonies and inheritances, from which you will not suffer your selves to be
disinherited. Beware the loss of it (as Lodouicke Blosius, and that mystical
Thaulerus counsel amongst the rest of their documents) as of the most
pestiferous poison that is, knowing that one of the offenses whereof those
Remembrancers and Checquer Officers, your guilty consciences shall accuse you
at the day of Judgment shall be abuse of time. Nay, says Bernard Sermon ad
Schol.
, as a hair of our heads shall not perish Luke 21.18.
, so not a moment or minute of time, whereof we are Stewards, without an
account rendered. Do not therefore spend and misspend your short days that
are allotted you for Gods service, and the working out your own salvation,
either in idleness, doing nothing Nihil agendo, aliter agendo, male agendo.
Seneca.
, or doing other things, or evil things: not in the pursuit of profit, the
prosecution of pleasures; not in the service of the sinners Trinity, the
flesh, the world, the devil; not in chambering and wantonness, not in
surfeiting and drunkenness Romans 12.13.
, etc. not in heathenish lusts, cardings, dicings, and the like; not in
frequenting soule-soyling Enterludes, Paganish Plays; not in the practice of
gaming and prohibited playing Prou. 21.17.
; nay, says Chrysostom, not in prittle prattle, not it idle talking Mat.
12.36.
, scurrulous ieasting, Satyricall gibing, vain discoursing, witty quipping,
foolish tales-telling, unchristian backbiting, carnal gossipping, sensual
company-keeping, profane taunting, counterfeiting gestures, Apish actings,
light and lascivious dauncings, making mowes, and such antique toys, to make
men merry: but in holy actions, proceeding from such mortified affections as
shall declare you to be crucified to the world, and the world to you, that
first happily you may dye to the world, that so hopefully you may dye out of
the world. I urge not these to take from you the use of all recreations: I know
(what Job felt Job 6.12
) that your flesh is not brass nor steel, but brittle and flexible: I know,
that the spirit is willing, the flesh as weak Mat. 26.41.
: I know, that as Birds and Beasts require rest, so man, without which no flesh
is durable Quod caret alterna requies durabile non est.
: I know, that rest is not sufficient without recreation, which caused all
Nations to use those Feriae, which we turn into Feasts; which recreations,
not only the best of Heathens, as Amasis, Socrates, Scaeuola, etc. Nay, the
strict Lacedaemonians, but even the strictest Christians have approuedly used: I
know, the Apostle approues of that Eutrapelia, or vrbanitie, which Philosophy
makes a Arist. in Eth.
virtue; nay, Christ himself who often wept John 11.35 Luke 19.41
, yet even often lead his disciples with him into the fields, as though he
should say, you are men, rest and refresh you: neither was I ever persuaded in
judgment or practice, but that the birds flying, dogs smelling, etc. is not
only for man's profitable use, but honest delight: those limits being observed,
which iudicous Divines See Mr. Perkins in Cases of Conscience. Dearing in
Hebraeos, in initio. Aquinas. 22^. q 168.
have from the word prescribed. Yet for all this you must not abuse what you
may lawfully use; you must not turn Christian liberty into licentious
carnalitie; you must not make of Recreations, occupations; you must not pass
away the time in pastime, as is the foolish speech and wicked practice of
fleshly minded men. To which men I say, with Bernardine, De Sena, that if they
once come to lodge in Hell, the place for impenitent profaneness Psalm. 9.17
, if the traffic of time should be carried thither to be sold, they would
give if they had a thousand worlds, for one half hour to repent in. Prevent
you therefore the time, lest afterward you fruitlesly repent your neglected
opportunities, like Dives in the Parable Luke 16.24.
. Whilst you have time do good Gal. 6.10
to others, to your own souls; labor in the Vineyard, in that calling
wherein you are planted and placed Mat. 20.1.2.
; think that day lost (with the heathenish Cato Plutarke.
, and Titus Vespasian) in which you do not some good; employ your Talents
gainefully, at least painefully Lu. 19.13
; work out your salvation in this day of salvation; do works acceptable in
this acceptable time 2 Cor. 6.2
; work whilst it is day, before the night come Ioh. 9.4.
; traffic in the Mart-time, buy in the Fair; hoist sail in the Tide-time;
prepare corn in the plentious time; prepare with the Emmet Pro. 6.6
, against a rainy day, hord up in life's summer what may bestead you in deaths
winter; if with Bernard, Basil, and that holy Arsenius Dion. Carthus. in
opusculo.
, you be not so strict to redeem time, from sleep and repast, and the
ordinary works of Nature, yet at least, like Christians, from words and works
which are vain and vicious, knowing that only that time is yours, which is
spent righteously, and religiously, all the rest you are coosened of by Satan,
that is spent in the service of sin, even as Saul's reygne is only reckoned
two years, because in those he only reigned well 1 Samuel 13.
, as Simile, and that noble Dion. Carthus.
Convert accounted in his death, that he had lived only seven years; and
Barlaam in Damascene Sustur^a de Barl c. 18.
, that he had lived only forty years, though they both dyed old; because all
their life before in sin, was a death and no life, and so they prize it, so
the Saints have thought it Hier. in Aggeum. cap. 1.
.

Now a word or two to prepare you for death, as Moses did the Israelites for
their Passover: in which, for the first part of your preparation, I commend
unto you the frequent and serious meditation of Death, after the practice of
Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Christians and Pagans, whom you shall find
further exemplified in this Treatise, this thought will further your
Repentance, strike at the root of sin, makes you with the Pylot that sits at
the stearne, bear off from the shelues and rocks of many dangerous occasions;
will cause you to use your talents well, like that Servant that feared his
Masters coming Luke 12.38.
. The Ninevites fast, and repent John 3.8.
; the Publicanes fear and quake Luke 3 9.10.
, when Jonas cries to the one, and John to the other of their imminent end;
Ahab is humbled 1 Kin 21 v. 19. v. 27.28.
, Felix trembles Acts 24.26.
, the Captain over fifty falls down and supplicates 2 Kin. 1.13.
, when from Elias and Paul they hear and see the sentence of death and
judgment; this or nothing will draw your hearts out of the earth, if with
Moales and Antes they be there wrooting: this will pull down the lofty and
Giantly looks of Pride, quench the fire of Lust, curb the ranckour of Malice,
bridle the fierceness of Wrath, (even as dust cast amongst angry Bees, makes
them quiet,) mortifies many more sins, kindles and keeps devotion, as ashes
keeps in fire. Therefore I counsel you to number your days Psalm. 90.12
, to remember your ends Eccl. 1.40.
, to make your Sepulchers in your Gardens John 19.41
, to think of death in life, to strew Ashes with Daniel In Apocryph. Dan. c.
14.
, to discern the steps of death, least it steal away your time, and the
pleasure of life inueigle your hearts, as Absolon did the hearts of his Fathers
Subjects, least the evil day take you* as the snare the Bird, and the net the
fish; least that be objected to you which God once to Israel, that you
remembered not your ends Lam. 1.9.
.

Other Rules I might prescribe, but that I may not make the gate too great for
the City, for some Cynicke to scoff at: I refer you to the Conclusion of
the Tractaite it self See the last Sermon in Simeon his desired Pacification.
. I will not give Coleworts twice sod Cramba bis cocta.
.

Now, the last thing that I desire of you is, that you will read without
partiality and prejudice. If there be any circumstantiall errors in Printing,
as transposition, addition, or defects of some Letters, Syllables, or Words;
not right placing of the Comma's, Colons, or full Points, or seeming defect, in
not always quoting the Chapter and Verse, to which I have reference
testimonially, or exemplarily, (which perhaps would have stuffed the Book too
full) or in any such circumstances, which my far absence from the Press
might occasion: I pray you let your loves make the best construction: if any
thing be amiss that is mine own; if ought here be good, that is the Lords,
and his Grace in me: to which good Grace commending you, and these my poor
labors for you, I rest, as now, so ever,

Yours in the best bond STEVEN JEROME.

MOSES His sight of Canaan: With SIMEON his Dying-Song. Directing How to live
holily and dye happily. BY Steven Jerome, late Preacher at St. BRIDES.

Seen and allowed.

Nascentes morimur, finisque ab origin pendet. LONDON: Printed for Roger
Iackson, and are to be sold at his Shop, near to the Conduit in Fleetstreete.
1614.

The chief Contents of the two subsequent TREATISES.
In Moses his sight of Sion, these things are obseruable.
1 THE Case of the Inheritance of Daughters propounded. page 1 2 How Cases are
wisely to be carried before the Magistrate. page 3 3 The true Rule of judging
Cases, Consultation with God. page 4 4 The Case adjudged, and spiritually
applied. page 6 5 Moses is forewarned to dye, and how God forewarnes us. page 9
6 All must dye. 13 7 God prepares his Children to dye, as he did Moses, by
showing them Canaan. 14 8 Moses his obedience to Gods summons a pattern to us.
15 9 Fifteen Resemblances of Death to Sleep. 16 10 Five Considerations to
embrace Death as willingly, as we sleep naturally. 23 11 Sixteen Comforts
against the fear of Death, in these ensuing particulars. 35 1 GOD who infused
the Soul, calls for it again. 36 2 Sin the sting of Death is taken away by
Christ's death. 37 3 God as a Father, is present at the death of his Children.
39 4 Death is no death but a dissolution to the godly. 41 5 The Saints shall
know, and enjoy their friends in glory. 43 6 Death frees the soul from her
spiritual enemies. 44 7 It delivers from evils present and to come. 47 8 It
ends Sins Conflicts with Heavens Tryumphs. 48 9 It frees us from conuersing
with the wicked. 51 10 It secures us from corrupting by the wicked. 55 11 It
secures from the malice of the mighty. 56 12 Our good name is cleared in Death,
which calumny ecclypsed in life. 57 13 Death tryes and declares the sincerity
and measure of grace. 63 14 It is the inheritance of the Saints as it is the
terror of the wicked. 64 15 The Christian should in death desire Christ who by
death desired him. 71 16 Death is the common Inn of all flesh, where the
Saints are refreshed. 75

In Simeons dying Song these are the chief Notes, both from the Doctrines and
the Uses.
THE force of Examples either for imitation of Virtue, or detestation of Vice.
77 The vain Songs and Sonnets of our age justly reproved. 79 Our singing as
corrected, so directed. 80 The ground of all our rejoicing must be in and for
Christ. 81 The sensual and sinful joys of worldlings justly taxed. 83.84.
etc. We must be truly thankful for Christ. 8^ Ten Reasons to incite us to
the duty of gratulation, with the uses. 88.89 The great mystery and greater
mercy of Christ incarnate. 92.93. etc. We must be borne again to CHRIST, and
and he borne in us, as he was borne for us, 95 The glorious Name of the Lord
must not be used upon every triuiall occasion. 97 How bootlesse it is for the
wicked in death to cry Lord, Lord. 99 The godly have diverse raptures and secret
joys in life and death. 101 These Joys demonstrated in six particulars. 103
Three Reasons of these extraordinary Rauishments. 105 Worldlings far wide
that think Christians Melancholicques and comfortless. 106 Four Comforts of
the Christian which the world neither knows nor feels. 107 All the Patriarchs
and Prophets, since the promise, have expected the Messiah. 110 We see Christ
more clearly then the primitive Saints. 111 How Christ came to them, how to
us. 112 How we should entertain Christ, with Redargution and Commination of
the Jews and our ingratitude. 113 Our desire of long life must be simply to
glorify God. 116 Reproof of the worlds practice in Ministers Magistrates,
Masters, and all sorts, aiming at themselves, not God. 120 The better Christian
the more willing to dye. 126 Twelve Reasons which cause this willingness. 127
The point applied by examination. 133 Christ most willing to dye of all the
Sons of men. 135 Seven Reasons why Death is unwelcome to the wicked. 136
Wicked men may die willingly for sinister respects as Heretics have done. 143
Five means to be used to make us willing to our dissolution. 144 God manifests
his presence at the death of his, three ways. 148 How God works in sin
permissiuely, disposingly, etc. but never works sin. 151 Every death, for
Time, Place, Matter, Manner, is determined by God, 153 Just inuectiues against
Heathenish Fortune. 157 The rash censures of men concerning diverse deaths
condemned. 160 Comforts in that God sees the cause and effect of every man's
malady. 161 Patience persuaded, in that it is Gods rod which strikes. 162 No
means can protract or detract from our days, besides their limits. 164 Four
maine Objections answered. 165 Means must be used both for life temporal and
spiritual, notwithstanding Gods decree. 168 Unlawful for any private man to
take away life from himself or others. 170 Twelve disswasiue arguments against
Selfe-murther. 171 The sin reproved, and the frequencie of it deplored. 174
Twelve things from experience and Heathenish examples occasioning
selfe-killing. 179 How to prevent this sin. 188 Every obstinate sinner from
causes natural and supernatural accused of selfe-murther. 189 * The chief
delight and desire of every man must be to be Gods Servant, with four reasons
why. 196 Multitudes that live under the means, are ignorant how God should be
served. 201 Multitudes reproved that have as little will as skill to serve God.
202 How few aim at Gods service in all their ways, expostulated in
particulars. 210 Civil honest men most enemies to Gods true Servants and
sincere service. 216 Many in the rank of Christians serve the Devil and
their own lusts. 218 All the members that have served sin directed to serve
God. 221
Six Motives persuading to serve God. 1 From the end of our Creation, 227 2
From our Preservation. 231 3 From our Vocation. 233 4 From our Redemption. 235
5 From our Profession. 237 6 From the Reward. ibid.
First Reward of Gods service Wealth and Riches. 238 Second, Honor and
Dignity. 239 Sin brings shame and all other judgments. 240 Gods hand upon
his enemies in many judgments. 243 Holiness is the way to Honor. 245 God is
most liberal of all Masters. 246 Gods servants best rewarded and regarded in
eight particulars. 248 God grants the suites of his servants. 252 The godly
have a taste of Heaven here, enjoyed hereafter. 253 God blesses the wicked often
for his servants sakes. 255 God delivers his servants from general judgments,
six ways. 257 God and Satan cannot be served together. 258 The case of
Satan's captives opened. 259 Seven Reasons why the godly must dye as well as
the wicked. 263 Ten sins that have provoked the Lord to sweep away the
wicked. 268 That all must dye, exemplified, and amplified, by many instances.
269 The deaths of the worlds Worthies of all sorts, epitomized. 274 Five
natural causes of death. 282 Death is as inexorable as irresistable, with his
Trophies over all. 283 We must not too much love this life, which we must
shortly leave. 287 Those that love life, must hate Sin, the cause of death.
289 Death only makes the Prince and the poor man equal. 291 Deaths effect in
equalizing all, illustrated by fit similies. 296 Six Reasons, further showing
the necessity of dying. 299 How even in living we dye, and are dead in part.
301 By how many means we dye. 304 Diverse examples of several sorts of deaths,
violent and natural. 305 Some cut off in the midst of their lawless lusts.
309 Our days abbreuiated, in respect of the long lives of the Patriarchs. 316
Four causes of the long continuation of things. 318 Because our life is short
we must spend it well. 319 Our many sins to be mourned for, and why. 320 The
practice of Epicures and profane men reproved and threatened. 321 How we must
sow in tears in this short seed-time. 323 Further use to be made of our short
time. 325 Our life is laborious and miserable: every calling having his cross.
328 No place privileged from four things: 1. Satan tempting: 2. The hearts
wandering: 3. Ill tongues biting: 4. The world crossing. 330 Examples of humane
calamities. 331 Twelve means to get that peace with God which the world wants.
334 The vanity of life, with all the things in life, truly discovered. 336
The world truly described by eleauen similies. 340 How Christ in his practice
crossed all the worlds proceedings. 342 The benefits of death to a Christian
under the Cross. 343 God often cats away the best soonest. 345 How death is
fearful and not fearful. 347 Death is only a departure out of life, not a
final destroyer. 348 Eight Arguments, proving the Resurrection of our bodies.
351 Illustrations from Nature that our bodies shall rise. 352 Four Reasons
besides from the Word. 354 The Christians comfort in the consideration of our
Resurrection. 355.356 That we may rise joyfully we must live holily, in ten
particulars. 359 Ten Arguments to prove the souls immortality. 362 Seven
more, from the Word. 364 Death unmasked, what it is to the godly. 365 Reproof
of those that respect the body more then the soul. 367 The servants of God
always dye in peace. 369 The godly often have their desires at, before, and in
their deaths. 372 The very last words recorded, which the Saints uttered in
their death beds. 374 How great men have lived and dyed good men. 377 Reasons
why the godly depart in peace. 379 Nine Objections answered, that seem to
contradict the peaceable departure of the Saints. 380 Nine Reasons that his
death may be good that dies of the Plague. 384 How selfe-murther does not
always imply a wretched death. 387 He that would dye well must live well. 389
The fearful ends of wicked persecutors in every age. 391 An ill life the
usual Prologue to a Tragical death. 395 None can repent when he will. 397 The
Word lays down a way to a blessed death. 402 Death is certain, yet
uncertain. 403 The pains of Hell without remission or redemption. 405
Repentance is not to be deferred till death. 406 The danger of deferring
discovered. 408 The Theefes Repentance upon the Cross examined. 412 Six
effects of Deaths meditation. 417 The life of Faith brings dying Peace. 429
Repentance the means of peace with God. 430 How to dye daily three ways. 433
How to leave the damnable custom of Swearing. 434 Eighteen things to be
prayed for that death may be prosperous. 437 A good conscience in life brings
peace in death. 442 Six causes of sickness, besides sin. 445 With five
duties to be done in sickness. 446 The sick man must send for a Minister
before the Physician and carnal friends. 451 The necessity and lawful use of
Physic proved and urged. 455 Rules obseruable in the use of Physic. 457
Against seeking to Witches and Charmers in sickness. 459 Reconciliation and
Restitution urged. 461 Five Reasons why a sick man must make his Will. 465
Four Rules in making all Wills. 466 A Christian carriage prescribed in the
hour of death. 468 Twenty several Comforts in the death of friends. 1 Because
God takes them away. 470 2 The Saints have been patient spectators of the
deaths of their dear friends. 471 3 If he dyed in the faith of Christ he is
translated from this life to a better. 472 4 He is blessed being dead in the
Lord. ibid. 5 He is returned home to his Fathers house. ibid. 6 He is
inseperably united unto God the chiefest good. 473 7 He is married unto his
Bridegroom Christ. ibid. 8 His warfare is now at an end. ibid. 9 Being here a
pilgrim, he is returned into his own Country. 474 10 Thou have not lost, but
left him. ibid. 11 He shall be restored unto thee again at the Resurrection.
ibid. 12 Ere long thou shall go unto him. 475 13 His better part is yet
living. ibid. 14 His estate is bettered by death. ibid. 15 Thou sorrowest for
that could not be prevented. 476 16 Thou have many companions in thy sorrow.
ibid. 17 Thy impatient sorrow hurts thy self. 477 18 Thy extreme sorrow is as
fruitles as faithless. ibid. 19 The Lord, thy best friend, is still living.
ibid. 20 They are insensible of thy sorrow. 479
Twenty Cordials against the cross of sickness. 482 And Meditations how to
bear the intolerable burden thereof. 499 Eight several Consolations against
the unkindness of merciless Friends. 500 1 Thy case is not singular but
ordinary. ibid. 2 The Saints have had the same measure. 501 3 Christ himself
was maliced of his own brethren. ibid. 4 There has been hatred amongst the
nearest friends by nature. ibid. 5 Though thy friends forsake thee, yet God
cares for thee. 502 6 As thy friends are unkind to thee, so thou have been
unthankful to God. ibid. 7 God has elected thee, though man reject thee. 503
8 Though thou can not see thy friends here with comfort, yet ere long thou
shall see God as he is. ibid.
Thirteen Preparatiues against Poverty. 504 1 It is the providence of God
that thou should be poor. 504 2 Thy cross is not singular. 505 3 Poverty
is no token of Gods displeasure. ibid. 4 A little with the fear of God is
better then great riches of the ungodly. 507 5 As well Poverty as Riches falls
out to the best to them that fear God. ibid. 6 The Lord knows what is best
for thee. ibid. 7 Poverty hinders not the acceptance of thy Prayers. 508 8 If
thou be poor in spirit, thou art rich in Christ. 509 9 Poverty is no
hinderance to thy salvation. 510 10 The less thou receiuest, the less shall
thine accounts be. 511 11 The Lord has a care of thee even for the things of
this life. 512 12 And can bless a small portion unto thee. 514 13 Christ
himself, and the most excellent Saints have been poor on earth. 516

MOSES His sight of Sion: applied to encourage and direct every Christian to
his heavenly CANAAN.
NVMB. 27.1.2.3.4. And Zelophehad the Son of Hepher, had no Sons but
Daughters.
CHAP. I. The case of the inheritance of Daughters propounded.
Sect. 1.
BEcause this case of the Daughters of Zelophehad is extraordinary, and not
obuious in the Scriptures besides, in any the like example; it will not be
amiss, lying in the forefront of the Chapter, bordering upon that of Moses his
warning to dye: since it concerns a subject not usual, the title of the
Woman's Inheritance, to touch it in some perticulars, and the rather, because it
was the last case that Moses adjudged, immediately before that the Lord
himself sentenced and adjudged him to dye. In which, though there be many
things worthy our exact dilating and urging, both pleasing and profitable, as
would appear in the opening and applying of this Scripture: yet I choose
rather, from the warrant and writings of an excellent Light in our Church, B. B.
according to his Method, to commend unto you, these Notes and Observations.

Expostulat.
Ought not all we to be as careful for that Heavenly? yes, and more careful:
so no doubt are Gods Children, when their eyes be opened: and by name, Women;
for although many are busied about attyres and vain shows, to make them
pleasing unto men, yet others do seek by all means for that eternal rest,
and how to be pleasing unto God; which is the only good and perfect way:
Favor is deceitful and beauty is vanity, but a woman that fears the Lord
she shall be praised. Prou. 3.30.

Sect. 2. How cases are wisely to be carried before the Magistrate.
Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, and so perished. No, (say they) our Father dyed in
the Wilderness, and he was not among the assembly of them that were assembled
against the Lord in the Company of Corah, but dyed in his sin: that is, as
all sinners must, for death is the reward of sin, etc. Romans 6.21.
Where you may see what a comfort, what a credit and glory honest Parents be to
their Children: they leave a good name behind them, which makes their children
bold to speak of them, when others must hang their heads and blush, either to
mention them themselves, or to hear them spoken of by others. A great motive
to all Parents, even for this cause, to be careful of their carriage.

Sect. 3. The true rule of judging cases, Consultation with God.
FOr the judgment and resolution of this request, it is said in the 5. verse.
Then Moses brought their cause before the Lord. And the Lord spoke unto Moses,
saying: The daughters of Zelophehad speak right, etc. Before, you see that the
cause was brought before Moses and Eliazer, and all the Princes, such a
conjunction there was of the civil Magistrates and Ecclesiastical Ministers
together in hearing of causes: which continues ever since, as appears in
good records of Antiquity. But neither Moses nor Aaron spoke till they had
received resolution from God, and understood his will. Moses, yet by his Spirit
of wisdom and understanding, of counsel and knowledge, men using the means
as they ought of learning and prayer; Be wise ye Kings, Psalm. 2.10
and be learned ye that are Judges of the earth: James 1.5.
For Prayer; if any lack wisdom, let him ask it of God (as Solomon did)
which gives to all men liberally and reprocheth no man, 1 King. 3.6.7.
and it shall be given him, etc.

Zelophehad: but alack, should the most of our suites and controversies in
these days, be brought to this touch and trial, how impious, how hateful,
how vile would they appear. The all-holy God is offended with our braules:
much more with our wicked pains, costs, and charges, to effect the madness
and malice of our Hell-heated hearts, in bringing to pass our devilish
designs, and pestilent plots against our Brethren: that I may say nothing of
them that plead them to the uttermost of their wit and cunning, daubing them
over with humane Eloquence, and painting them out with filed and flowing words,
against their own consciences, and that knowledge which they have both in the
Laws of God and man. Is it not a grievous fault to justify a wicked man, or
to condemn an Innocent man; and is it not so in causes? Does God pronounce a
woe against the one, and is he not wroth with the other? Well, for this cause
(if it were nothing else) there must needs be a general Judgment, that those
things may be pleaded and judged before the Lord, which are wrongfully pleaded
and adjudged here. Well, God give eyes and feeling, I say no more.

Sect. 4. The case adjudged, and spiritually applied.
GOds answer you see now following: first, particular, in regard of these
women, The Daughters of Zelophe had spoke right, Verse 7.
thou shall give them a possession to inherit amongst their Fathers Brethren,
and shall turn the inheritance of their Father unto them. Then generally, for
a Law to others; Ver. 8. etc.
If any man dye and have no Son, then ye shall turn his inheritance unto
his Daughter; and if be have no Daughter, ye shall give his Inheritance unto
his Brethren; and if he have no Brethren, ye shall give his Inheritance unto
his Fathers Brethren; And if his Father have no Brethren, ye shall give his
Inheritance unto his next Kinsman of his Family, and he shall possess it: and
this shall be unto the Children of Israel a Law of Judgment, (or an Ordinance
to judge by) as the Lord has commanded MOSES. In which gracious Answer these
things may serve for our use.

Canaan, because so earnestly they sought and desired it: and thereby we may
gather comfort assured and infallible, that out of his Heavenly Canaan he
never rejects any that are desirous to have a place in it: for He that
comes to me (says he) I cast not away. God would not the death of a sinner,
Ezech. 18.23.32. Esa. 55.6.7
but rather that he would turn from his sin, and be saved. God would have
all men to be saved, and to come to the knowledge of his truth, 1 Tit. 2.1.1
And in this, God is no excepter of persons, Act. 10.34.35.
but in every Nation, he that fears him, and works righteously, is
accepted of him. There is neither Jew nor Grecian, bond nor free, male nor
female in this, but we are all one in Christ Jesus. Exclude not then your
selves out of Canaan, and the Lord of mercy and goodness will not exclude you.

the Earth is his, and all that is in it: with his own to do his will who
will control and check him? Now if he do this by a woman, why may he not?
May he raise a name by women inheritors, and may he not change the name
again when he sees good, by giving a daughter and no Son? Let us often
think of the Psalm, in a religious feeling, and humbly desire to receive
instruction from the Lord, They think their houses and their habitations shall
continue for ever, even from generation to generation, and call their lands by
their names: but man shall not continue in honor, he is like the beasts that
dye. This their way utters their foolishness, yet their posterity delight
in their talk, etc.

Here we may note how grossly and grievously they err, that condemn the
government of Women, when Crown and Kingdoms, by lawful descent, in the
all-guiding providence of God, fall unto them: for, be they not within this Law
of God, that he says should be a Law of Judgment that is, a Law to judge by
of this matter for ever; If a man have no Son, his Inheritance shall descend
unto his Daughter?

CHAP. II. Moses is forewarned to die, and how God fore-warnes us.
Sect. 1.
THE second part of this Chapter now follows in the 12. Verse, to wit, the
showing of the Land of Promise to Moses and the telling him of his death, in
these words: Again, the Lord said unto Moses, go up into this Mount of
Abarim, and behold the Land which I have given to the Children of Israel. And
when thou have seen it, thou shall be gathered unto thy people, as Aaron thy
Brother was gathered, etc. These points that are natural from this place will
come again to be spoken of in the last Chapter of Deutronomie, to which I
refer you. Let us therefore I pray you, even seriously and zealously pitch
our minds upon these points: Moses is not here taken away suddenly, but is
premonished before that he must away, and a time given him to prepare himself
for it: a great and sweet mercy of God to his Children. Wherefore David prays
heartily, Lord, Psalm. 90.12
let me know my end, and the measure of my days: Let me know how long I have
to live. And again in another Psalm, Teach me to number my days that I may
apply my heart unto Wisdom. The Lord does not this by express words, as here
to Moses: Mat. 26.41 1 Pet. 4.7.
saying, Watch, watch, for you know not at what hour, the Bridegroom will
come, etc. Sweet is the Lord, and most gracious is his course. Let us not be
wanting in ours, and all shall be well: the time never sudden, the thing never
fearful, but as welcome as quiet sleep to a wearied, and ouer-wearied body.
A sudden death to any one prepared, is no hurt: for the word of God is firm
and immutable: John 3.15.1 18.36. John 10.29. Romans 8.1.
he that believes shall be saved: No man takes my Sheep out of my hands:
There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, which walk not
after the flesh but after the Spirit. Ver. 35.
Again, Who shall separate us from the love of Christ, shall tribulation, or
anguish, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or perils, or sword. No, no,
Ver. 38.
for I am persuaded that neither death, nor life, (no not sudden death) nor
Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers, nor things present, nor things to come,
nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature shall be able to separate us from
the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. Now if none of these,
certainly not sudden death as I said before, and therefore well says the
Book of Wisdom, concerning the godly, that though he be prevented by death,
yet shall he be in rest: he was taken away least wickedness should alter his
understanding, or deceit beguile his mind: though he was soon dead, yet
fulfilled he much time, Esa. 57.1.2 2 Chronicles. 34.28.
for his soul pleased God, therefore hasted he to take him away from
wickedness, etc.

It is said that S. John dyed of an Apoplexy, and Policarpu^ wished he might
do the like, yet Why we are to pray against sudden death.
we usually pray against sudden death, first, in regard of the rash judgment
of the world: secondly, many men's negligence in preparing themselves for all
hours; the want of which has made the godly sometimes timorous, as we see in
David, Psalm. 39.15. thirdly, as their souls are not always set in order, so
neither their houses, as in Ezekia, 2 Kings 20.1. But I say again, to one that
has laid his groundwork well, it is no hurt blessed be God: and for the
judgment of men in taking Gods office upon them in judging weakly or wickedly
of their Brethren, Mat. 7.1.2. it is too rash usually both in this and other
things. The life before, and the profession and confession of a true Faith,
ought to give all men satisfaction; if not, let them remember that saying well,
Romans 14.4.
Who art thou that iudgest another man's Servant? he stands or falls to his
own Master and Lord. To the The fearful estate of the wicked, by sudden death.
wicked indeed that have wallowed in sin without feeling, sudden death is
fearful, either in war when the bullet takes him, or at Sea when he is
drowned, or any other way whatsoever: when Ammon is nailed to the wall by his
Brother Absolon, 2 Samuel 13.28.29. when Pharaoh and his Company be suddenly
drowned in the Seas, Ezod. 14.27.28. Corah, Dathan, and Abiram suddenly
swallowed up of the earth, Numb. 16.32. When Zimry and Cosbee, the Israelitish
and Moabitish wantons be suddenly destroyed by Phineas Spear, or Gods
plagues, in their filth or after, Numb. 25.4.8. The old Gen 7.21.
Worldlings, and Genesis 19.24.
Sodomites suddenly consumed by fire or water; Dan 4.30
Baltazar, 2 Match. 9 5.6.7.
Antiochus, Act. 12.23.
Herod, the rich Luke 12.
Churl, with others, suddenly swept away like dung from the face of the
earth, with the besome of Gods wrath, and struck with Gods revenging hand in
the midst of their drunkenness, cruelty, pride, covetousness, and such sins,
their case is fearful.

Sect. 2. That all must die.
But though Moses be not suddenly taken away, yet away he goes: it is very
true, and so must all flesh, therefore let us reckon of it, The reward of sin
is death, Romans 6.21. And since all flesh is sinful, to all is appointed once
to die, Heb 9.27 hodie an cras, etc. whether it be to day or to morrow, it must
be, it will be, a debt it is, and must be paid, says S. Augustine; Hodie mihi,
cras tibi; I to day, you to morrow, till we be all gone: nothing more
uncertain then the time, nothing more certain then the thing. They that lived
so many hundred years, as Adam, Methusalem, Noah, Sem, and the other
Patriarchs, of every one it is said Et mortuus est, and he dyed, the longest
time had an end: and at the last death knocked for him, he must away. And as
no time so no virtue can avoid death, but even Moses himself, as worthy a man
as the earth has carried, as the Word testifies of him, Josh. 1.2.13. Heb.
3.2.5. yet this Moses must die.

But if a man marvel at this, why such men should dye, Romans 5.12.
since sin which is the cause of death, is pardoned and forgiven them,
through faith in Christ: let him know that this is done for two causes.



Sect. 3. God prepares his children to dye, as he did Moses, by showing them
Canaan.
But before he dye, and pass this way of all flesh, God will have him go
into the Mountain, and see the Land of Promise, this was done in sweet
goodness, that with more ready will he might make an end. And assuredly thus
deals God with his loving children at their latter ends, Obser.
even give them a glympse, a sight and taste of the true Land of Promise, that
heavenly Canaan: which he has prepared for them after death. But as Moses to
see this pleasant sight, must ascend up into the Mountain; so must we raise
up, and lift up our hearts, our souls, our thoughts, and the eyes of our
minds, as it were aloft to an high Mountain, that so we may see what will
make us most willing to depart, that our joy may be full and endless, as in
Peter. Mat. 17.14


That Moses entered not into Canaan, but only saw it, it had two ends: first,
the punishment of his Incredulity, when he struck the Rock spoken of here
in the 14. Numb. 20.12.
Verse of this Chapter: and secondly, for mystery, Vt significet nos per
Legem, cuius Minister, etc. that it might signify that by the Law, whereof
Moses was Minister, we may see as it were afar off eternal life and
salvation, but never enter into it that way, because through corruption of our
natures, we are not able to perform it, which being not performed, Gal. 3.10.
James 2.10. Mat. 5.19.
shuts us out, and subiecteth us to a curse.

Sect. 4. Moses obedience to Gods summons, a pattern to us.
THat Moses went up into the Mountain to dye, Deuteronomy. 34.1. is an example before
our eyes of most singular obedience, for he grudged not, he grieved not, he
shrunk not back, but yielded to Gods blessed pleasure, and was most willing
and ready to dye. O that we may find grace and mercy with God, so to do when
time comes, saying with tongue, and saying with heart, behold here am I thy
servant, be it unto me as thou my blessed God wilt: Is my time come* and must
I away? Lord then I come, and desire to be loosed, and to be with thee* Again,
that Moses endured so patiently the denial of him to enter into the Land,
which no doubt he much desired, let it ever teach us and strengthen us to do
the like when God denies us our desires: for assuredly God will do better for
us, as here he did for Moses, if we rest on his good pleasure. It is a true
saying, it is a good saying, let it never go out of our minds; Semper Deus
suos exaudit, etc. God always hears his Children, if not unto their will,
yet unto their salvation and good.

CHAP. III. The nature of death sweetened to the Saints, with fifteen
resemblances of death to sleep.
Observe it again carefully, that death is not mentioned unto Moses in any
terrible words, but in sweet words, Ver. 13.
Ibis ad Patres, Thou shall go to thy Fathers, and so still is the death of
Believers spoken of in the Scriptures, that we might draw sweet comfort from
it, against any fear that frail flesh may conceive of death. For there is a
death which most men fear, and that is the separation of body and soul, our
natural death: and there is a death which too few fear, and that is the
separation of the soul from God. Vita carporis anima, vita animae Deus, the
life of the body is the soul, and the life of the soul is God: Against this
natural fear oppose this and the like phrases in Scriptures, Genesis 15.15
You go to your father, therefore fear not. Socrates a Heathen was much
comforted at his death, that he should go and meet with those learned Poets,
Orpheus, Homer, Hesiod, and such like, how much more may we joy to meet with
God the Father, and God the Son, and God the holy Ghost, with Angels,
Archangels, Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, and all the holy company of
Heaven; our fathers, our mothers, our sisters, and brothers, our friends and
dear ones, that are gone before us? O glorious sight, O inestimable comfort,
worthy to make us cry with the Apostle; Phil. 1.21. John 11.1^
I desire to be loosed, and to be there: Come Lord Jesus, come quickly. Death
is an end of all misery, and the beginning of all bliss, an eternal dwelling
with God again, and an advantage as the Apostle names it, a sweet sleep, a
comfortable rest, Vitae via, the way of life, says Ambrose: Nomen tantum
fidelibus, death is only a bare name and no death indeed to the faithful,
says Chrysostom: Nemo timet mortem, nisi qui non sperat viuere post mortem;
No man fears death, but he that hops not to live after death: the Lord
gave, and the Lord takes away life as well as goods, and shall not we say
with Job? Job 1.21.
Blessed be the Name of the Lord. If we hold for terms of years, or at the
will of the Lord, must not we be content to relinquish it when our term is
expired. We our selves do look for it at the hands of our Tenants, and would
be much offended if they should be disobedient: shall we not perform to God
what we look for at men? Grudge not at the loss, but be thankful for the
Ioane: we are Gods Tenants, and we ought to give him his own when it is due
to him. Would you keep a pledge from the true owner, that committed it to you
for a time. Our life is Gods pledge, he has left it with us now so long, he
ever intended to call for it again, and will you not restore it gladly and
willingly without murmuring and repining? think how you would like that at
man's hands to keep your pledge? Heathens have been strong, and shall
Christians be weak?

The Swan is said to sing most sweetly when she must die, and shall Gods
Children weep? Blessed, blessed are the dead that die in the Lord, says the
holy Ghost, Reu. 14.13. and will we not believe him? O ignaros malorum suoru^,
etc. O ignorant men of the miseries of this life, that do not esteem and
praise death, as the best invention of nature: yea, let us say rather it is the
great mercy and goodness of God toward man: for first, it expels
calamity; secondly, it includes felic^tie; thirdly, it preuenteth the perils
of youth; fourthly, it finisheth the toils of age: Omnibus finis, multis
remedium, nonnullis votum; to all an end, to many a remedy, to some a wish;
deserving better of none then of them to whom he comes before he be called
for. As children fear their friends when they are disguised, but when their
vizards are plucked off, are glad of them: so of death, Ignorance makes fear,
and Knowledge joy.

Cleambrotus, says Cicero, after he had read Platoes Book of the happy
estate of the dead, cast himself headlong off from a wall, into the Sea, that
he might come to that happiness: the same Author speaks of another
Philosopher that so disputed of the contempt of death, that many willingly
killed themselves, whereupon Ptolomy the King forbad him any more to speak of
that matter in his School: Now alack, what comparisons be betwixt
Philosophical Comforts and Divine, out of the Treasure of Gods own Wisdom,
taken from his written Word? Shall we then with our light fear that, which
they in their darkness so little regarded? God forbid. The day of our birth
we never fear; and The day of death (says God, that is ever true) is better
then the day that one is borne, Eccles. 7.3. That resemblance of death to
sleep in Scriptures, 1 Cor. 15.51. is most fit if you mark it, and full of
pleasure: for,

1 As no man can ever wake, but of necessity must sometimes sleep: so no man
can ever live, but must needs have a time to die.

2 Be a man never so strong, sleep will tame him, and so will death, as it did
Goliath, Sampson, Milo, and others.

3 As sleep makes us put off our clothes and Jewels, and that willingly, that
we may take our rest: so deals death with us, it takes away all our pomp
and port, and lays us down in our beds, till the waking time to arise.

4 As sleep comes of eating: so came death also to our first Parents by
intemperancie in eating the forbidden fruit, Genesis 2.17.

5 As our days doings be our nights troubles, by the working of the fantasy:
so are our life's sins our deaths griefs, by the gnawing of the Conscience,
as appears in Judas, Antiochus, and Francis Spira.

6 Sleepers have no storms, nor dead men know the worlds woes, for Abraham is
ignorant of, and Israel knows not the Jews woes, the first things being past
etc. Reu. 21.4.

7 Some fall suddenly or quickly into sleep, and some are long, according to
the moistness or dryness of their brains: even so, some dye sooner as young
Josias, and some later, as old Methusalem, according to the temper of their
radical moisture, as it pleases God.

8 Some sleep in their own houses, and some in other men's, as did Sisera in
Iaels, some in the fields, some at Sea, some here, some there, in sundry
places: so do we dye, some at home, and some abroad; some by land, and some
by Sea as God appoints.

9 No man can tell the very time that he falls asleep, but only feels it
coming, and his body disposed to it: so no man can tell the very moment of his
death, but only feels his body faint, and his spirits drawing to an end.

10 Suanius dormiunt qui relinquunt, etc. They sleep much better (says one)
that leave all their cares in their shoes which they put off, and go to rest
with a quiet mind: even so do they dye better, that have disposed of all
their worldly matters, by Will or otherwise; whereby they are not troubled or
distracted by them.

11 They sleep well again, that have labored, and taken pains all the day
time: and so they die well, that in their vocation have not been idle, but
employed both body and mind to do good.

Ester 6.1.
12 As Assuerus when he could not sleep, called for the Chronicles of his
kingdom, to be read unto him: so assuredly, whilst we wake in this world, and
the sleep of death comes not upon us, it shall be a most profitable thing to
read, or cause to be read unto us, the chronicle of GOD, the sacred and holy
Scriptures, the treasures of all Comfort and good instructions.

13 When the body sleeps the soul sleeps not: no more dies the soul when
the body dies.

14 No man goes to bed to sleep but with a certain hope and purpose to wake
and rise again: so must we dye in assurance of that great and general
Resurrection.

15 And as our voice and calling upon men awake them: so shall that sounding
Trumpet do in that day. Our Bed (says another) is the Image of our Grave; the
clothes that cover us, of the dust and earth cast upon us; the little Flea that
biteth, of the Worms that shall consume us; the Cock that croweth, of the
last Trumpet: and as (says he) I rise up lustily, when sluggish sleep is
past, so hope I to rise up joyfully to Judgment at the last: How fitly then
Death and Sleep be resembled together, you see.

CHAP. IIII. Considerations to move us to embrace death as willingly as we go
to sleep in our beds naturally.
BUT you may happily wish to know what may make you dye willingly and gladly
when Gods time comes, flesh being frail, and an enemy still to the Spirit,
till God subdue it* your desire herein is good, and hearken a little to these
things: if death be a sleep as you hear the Scriptures still call it for our
Comfort, then look what makes men go to sleep gladly without any fear, and
the same shall help us greatly to dye contentedly and chearefully: the sleep
of him that trauelleth is sweet, Eccless. 5.11. Apply it to death, if you
either be weary of the toils and troubles of this wretched life, of the
dishonest courses that are in it, and of the infinite tricks, sinful and
vile, before God and good men: or if you be in any pain of the whole, or any
part of the body, not to be cased and helped by the Art of man: how in such a
case is death welcome, and of right so should be, much more then sleep? For
first, sleep eases but for a time, but death for ever, both these causes:
secondly, sleep takes not away the Malady, but the feeling; Death takes
both away, and as I say, for ever. The diseases of the body? how many? how
strange? how fearful? who can number them; when daily happen new, that the
Physician knows not? sweet Death is a Supersedeas for all, curing what we
have, and preventing what we might have, should God so be pleased to lay them
upon us. Think therefore seriously of this one means, to make death welcome,
and assuredly you shall be the better.

Sect. 3. The second Consideration.
private wrongs, in goods, in name, and many other ways, they are more bitter
then Gall and Wormwood, more burning and biting then tongue can express: now
scalding, now cooling, the oppressed heart groaning and sighing, panting and
pincing away in the view and sight of all beholders; the number is so great
that no man can comprehend them: every day begetting new griefs of mind, as
well as new pains and diseases of body. Think with your selves, whether ever
you escaped day in your life without some discontent, greater or lesser, that
according to his measure has not bit you, and grieved you. It is Vallis
Lachrimarum, the Vale of misery that we live in: and from one misery or other
we shall never be free while we live in it.

S. Augustine said upon some feeling, Diu viuere est diu torqueri, Long to
live, is long to be vexed and tormented. The holy Prophet Elias went a days
journey in the Wilderness, and sat down under a Juniper tree, desiring that
he might dye, and saying, It is enough, 1 King. 19.4
O Lord, take my Soul, for I am no better then my Fathers. See how grief of
mind made this holy man willing to dye, and most welcome should that good will
of God have been to him, if so it had pleased the giver and taker away of life
to do with him: add unto these words the like words of Tobiah, Deal with me
O Lord, as seems best unto thee, and command my spirit to be taken from me,
that I may be dissolved and become earth: for it is better for me to die then
to live, because I have heard false reproaches, and am sorrowful; command
therefore that I may be dissolved out of this distress, and go into the
everlasting place, turn not away thy face from me. See the effect of sorrow
and grief of mind in this good man: again, it makes him most willing and
desirous to dye.

It is written of Babylis, Bishop of Antioch, slain by Decius that persecuting
Emperor, that going to his death, he said the words in the Psalm; Return
unto thy rest, O my Soul, for the Lord has been beneficial unto thee: (an
excellent place for such a time:) as if he should have said, Now my griefs
farewell, and all my woes and wrongs in this wicked world; and now my Soul be
cheerful and glad, for now comes thy rest, thy sure rest, thy sweet rest,
thy never failing rest, but eternal, for ever: therefore return unto it, O
weary soul, and give thanks and praise to God, for he has been beneficial
unto thee in this most gracious change and happy release. Conclude with the
words of wise Sirach, and remember them often: O Death, how bitter is the
remembrance of thee to a man that lives at rest, in his possessions, unto the
man that has nothing to vex him, and that has prosperity in all things?
etc. But again, O Death, how acceptable is thy judgment unto the needful!
and unto him whose strength fails, and that is now in the last age, and is
vexed with all things, etc. Fear not the Judgment of death: remember them
that have been before thee, and that come after thee: it is the ordinance of
the Lord over all flesh, and why would thou be against the pleasure of the
most Highest? whether it be ten, or an hundred, or a thousand years, there
is no defense for life against the grave.

Sect. 3. The third consideration.
Finis omnium malorum, the end of all evils: and it has no sting, as you are
taught when you read those words; O Death, where is thy sting? O Grave, where
is thy victories? 1 Cor. 15.55.56.57.
the sting of death is sin, and the strength of sin is the Law: But thanks
be unto God, which has given us victory through our Lord Jesus Christ. Mors
Christ's, mors mortis meae, The death of Christ is the death of my death, Osee
13.14.
says Bernard. O Death! I will be thy Death, says he by the Prophet. And
Hierome upon it; Illius morte t^ mortua es, etc. By his death thou art dead, by
his death we live, thou have devoured, and art devoured thy self, oh Death.
Death makes dust return to the earth as it was, and the Spirit to return to
God that gave it, says the word of God, and shall not we be glad of this?
Shall it grieve us to return to God? to have the Spirit go from whence it
came? to walk with God? to enter into life? to go to the Marriage of the
Lamb? Is the brute Ox grieved to be vnyoaked? Were Abraham, Isacc, and Jacob;
holy men, or holy women, ever unwilling? Wherefore if men desire natural
sleep, in regard of the good that comes by it, so do you death: and
cherefully from your heart say with old Simeon; Lord, now let thou thy
Servant depart in peace, according to thy Word, etc. Luke 2.29.

Sect. 4. The fourth Consideration.
If the dead be not raised, then is Christ not risen, etc. as you read in that
singular Chapter, 1 Cor. 15.20. The Sun rises and sets again, the Moon
waineth and grows again. Of the ashes of the old Phoenix comes another:
the leaf falls, and the sap descends, yet both sap and leaf return
again. Sarahs womb, though dead, yet bears a Son, when the Lord will: so
shall the resurrection be of dead bodies. The hand of the Lord was upon me,
Ezech. 37.1
(says the Prophet) and carried me out in the Spirit of the Lord, and set me
down in the midst of the field, which was full of bones. 2
And he led me round about by them, and behold, there were very many in the
open field, and lo, they were very dry. And he said unto me, 3
Son of man, can these bones live? And I answered, O Lord God, thou know.
Again, 4
he said unto me, Prophecy upon these bones, and say unto them, O ye dry
bones, hear the word of the Lord. Thus says the Lord God unto these bones, 5
behold, I will cause breath to enter into you, 6
and ye shall live. And I will lay sinews upon you, and make flesh grow upon
you, and cover you with skin, and put breath into you, that ye may live, 7
and ye shall know that I am the Lord. So I prophesied, as I was commanded, and
as I prophesied there was a noise, and behold there was a shaking, and the
bones came together, bone to his bone. 8
And when I beheld, lo, the sinews, and the flesh grew upon them, and above
the skin covered them, but there was no breath in them. Then said he unto
me, Prophecy unto the wind: prophecy son of man, 9
and say to the wind, Thus says the Lord God, Come from the four winds, O
breath, and breathe upon these slain, that they may live. 10
So I prophesied as he had commanded me: and the breath came into them, and
they lived, and stood up upon their feet, an exceeding great army.

Such another excellent place is that in the Apocalypse, Reave. 20.11
And I saw a great white throne, and one that sat on it, from whose face fled
away both the earth, and the heaven, and their place was no more found. 12
And I saw the dead, both great and small stand before God: and the Books were
opened, and another book was opened, which is the Book of life, and the dead
were judged of those things, which were written in the Books, according to
their works. 13
And the Sea gave up her dead, which were in her, and Death and Hell delivered
up the dead which were in them: and they were judged every man according to
their works.

Thus you see, that as from our natural sleep, so from death, we shall awake
again, and therefore no cause to fear the one more then the other,
Resurrectio mortuorum, spes Christianorum, The Resurrection of the dead, is the
hope of the Christians Faith. So Tertullian, meaning their joyful hope, that
wipeth away all tears and unwillingness to dye. Credo Resurrectionem carnis,
I believe the resurrection of the body, and life everlasting: Therefore care
away; Though I dye yet I dye not, but only sleep in my Grave, as in my
Chamber, till my GOD send his Angels to awake me with his Trumpet, that I may
enter into joy that n^uer shall have an end; till which time I rest free from
all sorrow and pain, not troubled with any of the worlds woes, but as a man in
his bed fast asleep, most free from all offenses and vexations. Yea, even the
self same body shall arise, to our unspeakable comforts, teach the Scriptures,
Job 19.25. John 5.29. 1 Cor. 15.42.43. and many other places, even as Christ's
body arose the same that it was before, the same eyes, mouth, feet, hands, etc.
Luke 34.32
Dixe^^nt, tactis corproibus, etc. They said, (says Tertullian of ancient
Christians,) touching, or laying their hands upon the bodies, we believe the
resurrection of this body, this body that I touch and lay my hands upon, for
the goodness of God will give glory to that body that has given glory to him,
the selfsame eye, the selfsame mouth, the selfsame ear, feet, hands*
etc. What an encouragement is this to do well, if you mark it? and what an
argument to make us willing to dye, being assured of this as wear?

Sect. 5. The last Consideration. The bodies freedom, and the souls
Glorification.
able to subdue all things unto himself, when this corruptible has put on
incorruption, and this mortal has put on immortality. If that small glimpse
which the Disciples saw made them wish for three Tabernacles, and an eternal
being there, Mat. 17.4. O how shall the whole glory of heaven and heavens
bliss ravish us, and make us glad, that we have attained to it! O no such
refreshing can come from our earthly beds and natural sleep here. Wherefore
with joy let us welcome the hour of death, and bless God for it ten
thousand times, following the footsteps of worthy Fathers and Saints in the
Church, whose feeling of this point God has directed them to leave behind
them in their writings, O tu vita, quam praeparauit Dexs ijs, qui diligunt eum:
vita vitalis, vita beata, vita secura, vita tranquilla, etc. O thou life (says
Augustine) prepared of God, for them that love him, thou living life, thou
blessed life, thou secure life, thou quiet life, thou beautiful life, thou
life that know no death, thou life that know no sadness, thou life
without blot, without sorrow, without care, without corruption, without
perturbation, without any variety or change. Would God that laying aside this
burden of my flesh, I might enter into thy joys, O quam fortunatus ero si
audiuero, etc. O how happy shall I be, if I might hear those sweet Songs of
thy Citizens, and those honey sweet verses; but O more happy if I my self may
find grace and favor to sing a song unto the Lord Jesus Christ, of the sweet
Songs of Sion! O vere foelices, qui de Pilago, etc. O truly happy they that
come out of the Sea of the World, to the Haven of Heaven, out of Banishment to
their own Country, and out of a foul Prison to a glorious Palace! O Coelestis
domus luminosa, ad te suspirat, etc. O Heavenly House, full of glorious light,
to thee tends my pilgrimage, that he may possess me in thee, that made both
me and thee! Inter Brachia Seruatoris mei and viuere volo, and mori cupio; In
the Arms of my Savior I wish to live, and desire to dye. Many such feeling
speeches I could repeat from the ancient militant warriors in this
mortality, whom we call Fathers, when they went to the Father of Spirits;
showing how far they were from any unwillingness to die, which if we make
use of as we ought, assuredly they will work in us through the blessing of
God, the same effect. To shut up this, the godly cry, come Lord Jesus, come
quickly: Now they are in the world, then they shall come to their own: now
they are in the skirmish, then shall they be in their victory: now in the
tempestuous Sea, then in the quiet Haven: now in the heat of the day, then in
rest and cool evening: now in place absent from Christ, then with him
following wheresoever he goes. Now their life is hid with Christ, but then
shall they appear with him in glory, and that glory for ever and ever, without
change or end. 1 John 4.2.

Comforts against the fear of Death: by which the Christian Soul may be made
willing to her Diss^lution. CHAP. V.
THE fear of death is not one of the least temptations to a weak Christian:
for, Death is not only fearful to a natural man, whose hope is in this
world, being in it own nature the most terrible of all terribles; as Heathen
men have termed it: for which cause wicked men are aghast at the apprehension
of it, as appears in the example of B^ltazar, of Hamon, and others being as
unwilling to dye as the Bear unto the Stake, and the Swine unto the Shambles:
but even the godly themselves have some combats and conflicts in this kind, as
had our Savior Christ himself, Ezekias, and David, etc. by reason that Nature
abhorres her own abolishion, and fears the dissolution of the soul and body,
which are naturally as unwilling to be severed and sundered as two friends,
that have been borne, and bred, and brought up together, are loath to depart,
and to take their long leave either of other: therefore to make that easy and
facile unto thee, which of it self is harsh and difficult, that thou may
submit thy self willingly to that which all flesh have undergone and must
undergo of necessity. Arm Grace against Nature, and the Spirit against the
Flesh, with these comfortable considerations.

1 God calls for thy soul.
1 Consider that by corporal death, God only calls again for that soul which
at the first he created and infused into the body, to inform and animate it,
and that this Soul of thine flits not out of her terrestrial tabernacle by
chance or hap-hazard, or casualtie, or fortune, or by the Climactericall year,
the revolution of seauens and nines, or by the position of the Heavens, or
course of the Stars, or by thy disease, or sickness, occasioned by bad diet,
superfluities of meats or drinks, ouer-great heates or taking of cold, or the
like accidents, which are but mere instruments of thy mortality; but look at
the superior Agent, GOD himself, who has now determined and disposed thy
death: Hab. 9.27. who has numbered thy days and appointed thy limits: who
turns thy dust into his dust, Genesis 3.19. thou being a Son of Adam, and calls
for thy Spirit to return to him that gave it, Psalm. 90.3. Eccles. 12.7. And
therefore seeing it is the Lord that calls, be thou as willing to sleep with
thy Fathers, as Samuel was to awake out of his natural sleep at Gods call, 1 Samuel 3.10. Think that thy Soul is given unto thee as a precious pledge to be
safely kept, and therefore grudge not to return thy holy pawn to God the
chief owner, when he requires it, but commit it to him, as into the hands of
a faithful Creator and loving Redeemer. Why should the Tenant at will, stand
out with his Landlord for an old rotten Cottage, when he would remove him to a
better Mansion? why should the Soldier be refractorie to leave his station and
place, to be otherways disposed of by his General and Commander? Now thou art
here but a Tenant at will, thou have no fee-simple of thy life: thou art a
war-faring Soldier, professed in Baptism, therefore like the Centurions
Soldiers, be willing to go when thy Captain bids thee go, Mat. 8.9.

2 Let this comfort thee, that thy sins, 2 The sting of death is taken away.
the cause of thy death, is taken away by the Messiah, Christ; in whom thou
beleeuest, by whom thy sins being pardoned, thou art blessed, Psalm. 32.1. his
death being the death of Sin, and the conquest of Hell. Hos. 13. 1 Cor. 15. And
therefore comfort thy self with David's holy Meditations, encouraging thy soul
to return unto her rest, because the Lord has been bountiful unto thee,
since he has delivered thy Soul from death (even the second death) thine eyes
from tears, and thy feet from falling: and since thou shall walk before the
Lord, even with the four and twenty Elders, in long white roabes, in the Land
of the living, Psalm. 116.7.8.9. For all thy bitter grief in corporal death,
(which yet is sweetened to the Elect) the Lord will deliver thy soul from the
pit of corruption: for he has cast all thy sins behind his back, as he
did Ezekiahs, Esaias 38.17. And therefore as there is no danger in handling an
Adder or Viper, or any other Serpent, when her sting is taken away, so there is
no peril in Death, since Sin, which is the sting of Death, is to thee, not
imputed, but in the mercies of God, pardoned, and in the merits of Christ
covered. 1 Cor. 15. Romans 8.1.

3 Jonas 4.2. Exodus 34. God is present at thy death.
Remember, that God is the same God unto thee in thy death, that he was in
life; good, gracious, propitious, merciful, and mindful of thee in thy last
and greatest exigent. Enoch found it so, who walking with God in his life,
was taken away by the same God, in his death, that he was no more seen. Genesis
5.24. Therefore it was Jobs dying comfort, that his Redeemer lived, whom as he
desired, so he hoped to see with the eyes of his body, as he had beheld him,
with the rest of the Patriarchs, with the eyes of Faith, Job 19.25. This
consideration made him confident in the midst of his combats, that though the
Lord should kill him, yet he would trust in him. Job 13. This made prophesying
Jacob, joyful in his last farewell out of the few and evil expired days of
his Pilgrimage, in the inioying that Shilo, the blessed Messiah, and his
salvation, which so long he had waited for, Genesis 49.18.33. This made old
Simeon so comfortably caroll out his Swan-like song a little before his death:
every particular of which dittie expresses his delight to dye, and his desire
to depart, when he had the worlds Savior in his arms, and his Spirit in his
heart, Luke 2.25.26.27 28.29. And sure if thou have the same grace, and feel
God in so many particulars now gracious unto thee in thy life, as did Enoch,
Job, Jacob, and Simeon; thou ought upon the same grounds, to se^tle thy
heart in the sweet assurance of Gods special presence in thy last dissolution,
that he will make thy bed in thy sickness, and send thee that very
Comforter, his own Spirit, which according to his promise he sent his
Disciples, even when all external comforts fail; if thou now worship him in
spirit and in truth. John 4.24. For Solomon the wisest of men, from the wisdom
of God, taught, what David his Father blessedly felt, 1 Kings chapter 1. v. 48. chapter
2. v. 1.2.3. v. 10.11. that the righteous has hope in death: Pro. 14.32
even then when the wicked is cast off by reason of his malice, as was
Antiochus Epiphanes, Herod, and others. And therefore you of the Israel of God,
you the Seed of Abraham, the friends of God, fear not, for the Lord is with
his Servants, with those whom he has chosen, and he will be with you, and not
cast you away; but will strengthen, help, and sustain you: yea again I say,
Fear not thou worm Jacob, and ye men of Israel, I will help thee says the
Lord, and thy Redeemer, the holy One of Israel, Esaias 41. v. 8.9.10. and v. 14.
If the Lord be thy friend (as he was a friend to Abraham, to Lazarus, James
2.23
and to his Disciples, and is still to all that seek him and his grace,) then
sure he will play a sure friends part, he will stick fast to thee in thy
last conflict, in this thy vvarrefare, remembering thee even in death, as he
did his friend Lazarus, John 11.11. Therefore apply David's meditation, as balm
to thine own sore, in thy fears: and say to thy soul, Why art thou sad oh my
Soul? and why art thou so disquieted within me? still trust in God, and give
him thanks for the comfortable help of his presence. Though I walk through
the shadow of death, yet will I fear none evil, for thou art with me, thy
Rod and thy Staff shall comfort me, Psalm. 23.4. God is my God, even the God
of whom comes my salvation. God is the Lord, by whom I escape death: by whom
indeed death is no death. Psalm. 68.20.

4 Remember what death is properly to the godly: not a dying, but a departing:
4 Death is no death to the godly.
Luke 2.29. not an abolishion, but a dissolution: Phil. 1. a loosing out of
Prison, a Goale-deliuery to the soul; not a curse, but a blessing; a freedom
and a liberty out of captivity; not pernicious, but precious in the sight of
God is the death of his Saints, Psalm. 116. A walking with God. Genesis 5. A going
to our Fathers in peace. A gathering to our people, and A yeeldding of the
spirit, Genesis 25.8. Genesis 49.33. A sweet sleep, Deuteronomy. 31. A rest of our flesh in
hope, Psalm. 16. and 116. A resting from our labors, Reu. 14. with diverse such
Epithites that the Scripture gives, speaking of the death of Abraham, Jacob,
Moses, David, Josias, etc. and the rest of the Saints of God. Oh then, why
should thou fear thy freedom? Does any Jewish, Turkish, Romish, or
Athenian Bondman, take it ill to be infranchized? Does any Apprentise distaste
to be made a Freeman? Is any Prisoner daunted with the news of his delivery
out of cold Irons? Is any Captive discomforted when he perceiues the means
of his ransom? oh then why should thou be daunted with that messenger that
is sent from the King of heaven, to deliver thee from all the maladies and
miseries of this life? from all the distresses, crosses, and cares that are
incident to this mortality, in bonds, sickness, diseases, pains of body,
burden of mind, incurable sores, with an hundred such like afflictions, which
make life to be loathedly unpleasant and unprofitable besides? Vita vix vitalis.
Is any man afraid of his bed? is not rest comfortable to a iournying footman;
to a traveling pilgrim, or a drudging labourer? Oh how glad is he to repose
his wearyed limbs in his wished couch! Oh how acceptable is sleep to
refocillaite and recover the ouer-spent spirits, and to revive the decayed
powers! Now thy death is but a sleep, as the Word testifies: there being such
a proportion betwixt death and sleep, that the Heathen could term sleep the
Image of Death, Somnus Imago mortis. Frater mortis. Homer.
and the elder Brother of Death: and our graves are our beds, in which our
bodies resting and sleeping, the holy Ghost, whose living Temples they were,
watching over them when they are dead, shall rouse them up at the last day in
beauty, glory, and splendour, like the Sun; refreshed, like a Giant ready to
run his Race.

5 Further, 5 We shall know and enjoy our friends in glory.
(to enlarge and diffuse this meditation a little further) does any man dislike
to accept of these opportunities, where he shall not only see and visit, but
enjoy the company and conference of his friends; his longed for, his loving and
beloved absent friends? their sight is gracious, the communion and conversation
with them is more gracious: now by death we come to enjoy Genesis 1.15 Numb. 27.
Deuteronomy. 32.
, and to joy in the presence of our friends, who have broke the Ice before us,
and have led the way to this common Inn of death: we shall see the face of
CHRIST, we shall look upon him, whom our sins have pierced, behold his
wounds in his glorified body, as the Angels now behold them; we shall
inseperably be united unto him, and so joy in him, that our joy shall be full,
in those blessed mansions which he has gone before to prepare; we shall live
and converse with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and the ancient Patriarchs; with
David, Josias, Ezekias, etc. and all religious Kings; with Samuel, Esaias,
Jeremy, John Baptist, and all the holy Prophets; with Peter, Andrew, Phillip,
and all the blessed Apostles; with Matthew, Mark, Luke and John, the sincere
Evangelists; with Paul, Steven, Peter and James, and all the constant Martyrs,
zealous Confessors, and Professers of the Truth; yea, and all the rest of the
faithful, whom we shall know to the increase of our joy, especially those whom
we have here known and seen, even as Adam knew Eve in the Creation, Genesis
2.23. Mat. 17.4.
and Peter knew Moses and Elias in Christ's Transfiguration (a type of our
Glorification) whom before they had never seen. To conclude therefore, now is
the time, when in the Church triumphant, all that have been within the
Covenant of Grace, and under the Gospel in the Church militant, shall come to
the Mount Sion, and to the City of the living God, the celestial Jerusalem,
and to the company of innumerable Angels, and to the Assembly and congregation
of the first borne, which are written in heaven, and to God the Judge of all,
and to the Spirits of just and perfect men, and to Jesus the Mediator of the
new Testament, Heb. 12.22.23.24. Now, what great harm is there in going to our
friends? especially, such friends as these be, who in knowledge and wisdom,
in glory and excellency, in love and amity, do far surpass all friends
upon earth. 6 Death frees from sin, and from thy souls enemies.


6 Consider the fruit and happy effect of Death, in freeing thee from sin,
and all miseries the punishments of sin: that stroke that kills thee will kill
also a monstrous Mother and a wretched Daughter, Sin and Sorrow: for, as
Death is the death of the body, so it is the disseuering of sin from the
body; Sin that brought forth Death is destroyed by Death, even as the Viper
kills the damme that bred him, and as Nero murdered Agrippina that bore him:
that which pulls down the house of the body, destroys Sin the troublesome
and unruly Tenant that dwelt in this house. Now, is it not a joy to thee, to be
rid by any means of such an unworthy and unwelcome guest, as Sin, which is
always quarrelling with thy best friends, as the Spirit and the Grace of GOD
within thee? Art thou not glad to be freed from such a Make-baite, as this body
of sin, this old Adam, which is always stirring up civil broils and
combats within this little world of thy self? always plotting and contriuing
the ruin and destruction of thy better part, thy Soul? Art thou not glad to
have such a fire quenched, as thy burning lusts, and rebelling concupiscences,
the worst burning Fever that ever came to man? Art thou not glad to be rid of a
sloathfull, luxurious, riotous, vain, wanton, vicious, rebellious Servant,
which is always grieuing and offending thee, provoking thee to evil,
hindering thee from good, sluggish to do well, forward to all evil? such a
guest, such a quarreller, such a fire, such a rebel, such a servant is thy
Flesh; dull and dead, and lumpish, slow and sluggish to every good duty,
private and public; prone and propense to every sin; always soliciting,
importuning, trying, and tempting thee, with as great importunity as Potiphars
Wife did Joseph, to abase and abuse thy soul and body, in every filthy
pollution, to commit spiritual whoredom with the world, and the flesh; still
grieuing thy God, and offending his majesty, abusing his mercy, crucifying
Christ, turning his grace into wantonness, vexing his Spirit, quenching the
motions, and hindering the operations of his Grace; taking part with Satan thy
foreign enemy, like an inmate traitor, and domestical conspirator. Now,
Death dislodgeth this guest; quels this quarreller, hangs up this Achitophel,
quenches this lustful fire, executes this rebel, cashiers this servant: for
even as the Iuie dies that twines about the Oak, when the Oak is cut down;
so the cutting down of the body is the curbing and curing the sin in the
body, which sin lives and dies, has his birth and death, with the subject
wherein it is resident: for he that is dead is freed from sin, Romans 6.7.
Therefore, Mors metuenda non est, quia est finis peccatorum. Ambrose.

Now, as it frees thee from sin, so the cause ceasing, the effect cease
also: it frees thee from all the miseries that grow, as fruits, from this
cursed Tree: even all the pains and labors of body, and vexations of spirit
that are incident to this mortal condition. This made the Wiseman praise
those that were dead, before those that are living. Eccle. 4. and to prefer
the day of death before the day of life, Eccles. 7. And made some of the
Philosophers in their Heathenish Paradoxes affirm, that it was best for a man
never to be borne, the next best, to dye soon; because in respect of the many
miseries of this life, which they saw into with their natural eyes, they
thought Nature was a Mother unto all other Creatures, and a Step-dame unto man;
Theophrastus.
therefore Job that drunk as deep in this cup of common afflictions incident
to humane nature, as ever any mere man, in this respect desired death; Even as
the Servant desired the shadow, and as the Hireling looked for the end of his
work, Job 7.2.

7 Consider that God does not only deliver thee from the evil of sin and
the evil of punishment present, 7 It delivers from the evils present and to
come.
but by taking thee now away he has a purpose to free thee from future
temporal evils, which perhaps he purposes to bring upon that place and
people amongst whom thou art: for indeed this is the Lords ordinary
proceeding, to deliver his Servants from the evils to come, whilst the wicked
are chained in earth, and reserved for further plagues. Thus he took away
good Augustine ere the Goths and Vandals ouer-ranne Hippo, where he was
Bishop: this the Lord promised, as a special mercy to good Josias, that before
he would accomplish his threat against Judah, he should be put into his grave
in peace, and that his eyes should not behold the evil, 2 Kin. 22.20. And thus
he says of the merciful men and righteous, that they are taken away from the
evils to come, that Peace shall be upon them, and they shall rest in their
beds, when the Witches Children, the seed of Adulterers and Whores, a
rebellious people, shall perish and consume, Esaias 57.1.2.3. Apply this favor
of God to thine own particulars, for the strengthening of thy faith, as also
enlarge it, by the meditation of these evils, which are foretold in these last
times, Mat. 24.4. v. 24. etc. Luke 21.25. 1 Timothy 4.1.2. 2 Pet. 2.1.2.3.

8 It secures thee from the fight with Sin, to triumph with God.
8. Remember, this corporal death thou art to undergo, puts a period to a most
perilous and dangerous fight, with which in this life thou wast continually
exercised, in which fight thou did often faint, was often soyled, often
wounded, more often put to fight, (even to fly to Heaven for help, succor,
and refuge) then ever the Israelites were occasioned to fly and cry unto GOD,
against the Deu. 44.45
Amorites, Judge. 10.10 Judge. 3.8.
Amonites, Amalekites, Exodus 14.
Aegiptians, Philistines, or any of their mortal enemies. Thou can tell well
what these enemies were, the deceitful World, deluding Flesh, and deceiving
Devil, 1 Timothy 6.4.18. Ephe. 6.12. 1 Pet. 5.8. 1 John 2.13. The lust of the
flesh, the lusts of the eyes, and the pride of life, 1 John 1.16. How often have
they soiled, how often have they foiled thee? What burnings have thou had from
thine own boiling concupiscence within, and from Satan's fiery darts without?
What bloody bickerings have thou had with thine own rebellious heart? What
civil broils betwixt Grace and Nature, two armed Champions, struggling within
thee, like Jacob and Esau in Rebeccahs womb? What combats have thou had with
thine own corruptions, thine own flesh rising against thee, as Absolon
against David; encouraged and counseled by that Serpentinely politic
Achi^phel, the Devil, how to dispossess thee of a better kingdom then any
earthly Monarch ever gave, even the Kingdom of Heaven; driving thee from the
Castle of Grace, and preventing thee from the Throne of Glory? What troops of
lusts out of thine own bosom, and breeding, like the black guard of
Ruffians, and Swash-bucklers, have joined issue with the Flesh against thee,
the Devil being the grand General of those slavish and sinful Legions? What
vvounds and wrackes have thou received from Pride, Luxury, Worldliness,
Carnalitie, Ambition, Anger, Aemulation, Malice, Covetousness, sensual
Delights, carnal Desires, etc. the skars whereof are yet remaining, though
their rancour be cured by repentance? how have these successively, and often
successefully, set upon thee, one after another, like the Lion after the Bear,
and Goliath after the Lion, against David; oft-times all together? What
oppositions have thou had with Luxury, when Covetousness has been
conquered? how has Ambition lift up his head, when Lust has been bet down
with the Hammer of Mortification? If Ambition has been quenched, how has
Anger boiled? how has Pride puffed up, Wrath inflamed, Envy gnawed thy
distracted and distempered heart? how have pestilent Passions (like Hydra's
heads cut off) risen up one after another: nay (like the heads of the Serpent
Amphisbena) one against another, all against thy peace? Now, when Death comes
it is the death of all these thy deadly enemies; thy rest in the grave is a
rest from all these perturbations: the bearers of thy Hearse carry thee (like
the Roman Worthies) in a triumphant Chariot; then thou have the Conquest after
these tumultuous and various conflicts: therefore lift up thy head, and rejoice
in thy deathbed, for now thy warre-fare is at an end, and thy reward which
thou shall now possess amongst the blessed conquering Spirits in glory, shall
never have end. Now thy soul like the Aeagle, shall mount aloft, singing
upward with the little Lark, taking the wings of a Dove, it shall fly out of
this enclosing house of the body, and be at rest, safe and secure from the
snares of the hellish Fowler: free from the snares of the world, never to be
besmeared nor entangled again with the lime-twigs of the catching and
intrapping flesh. Sugar and sweeten the bitter cup of thy death with this
Meditation; and if thou truly hate sin, love the Lord, detest thy
corruptions, and fight against thy spiritual temptations: this triple peace
which thou shall enjoy; first, from thine enemies; secondly, in thy Soul;
thirdly, with thy GOD, the God of peace, amongst, the Angels of peace, in the
Kingdom of peace, will be thy dying peace.

9 Thou may enlarge this Meditation, 9 It frees thee from conuersing with the
wicked.
by pondering the griefs and vexations that thy soul has been pinched with
here, not only for thine own personal sins, Original and Actual, of
Omission and Commission, but for the sins of others, of this wicked world in
which thou live, and of wicked and ungodly men amongst whom thou live,
which now thou shall be freed from: for, alas, what man, has any fear of God,
any spark of Grace, living, trading, trafficking amongst ungodly, ungracious,
and profane men, as Noah lived amongst the Worldlings, Lot amongst the
Sodomites, Joseph and Daniel amongst Idolaters, as Esaias, Jeremy, and Ezekiel
amongst a sinful, beastly, hard-hearted, and rebellious people: seeing their
abominations, hearing their fearful and horrid blasphemies, when like Dogs
they set their mouths to bark against heaven that hurts them not; like Toades
and Serpents spitting daily and deadly poison, in their deuillish oaths, even
in the very face of God, upon no occasion, without any temptation, but only of
custom, gracelesnesse, madness and malice against the Lord himself; besides
other harsh sounds coming from their worldly, luxurious, and carnal hearts,
with a thousand such like impieties, and horrid villainies, amongst professed
Christians, more enormious then have been, or now are, amongst the very
Turks, Jews, and Pagans, nay, amongst the Beasts themselves: who, I say,
hearing and seeing these things, can have any joy or comfort in this life, in
the few and evil days of his Pilgrimage? Who could be contented to live in a
Palace in pomp, where he should every day hear his dear Parents, his
Father and Mother, railed upon and reviled; his Brethren traduced; his own
Country and countrymen vilified? this were a rack and torture: Oh what joy
have we then to live in this worlds Prison, where daily and hourly we hear
God our Father, the Father of Spirits, Jesus Christ, our elder Brother,
blasphemed; his Name abused, his glory eclipsed, and his children calumniated;
our Brethren, Saints by calling, Citizens of the Celestial Jerusalem, used
as the off-scourings of the world; mocked at by the mocking Michols, and rayled
upon by the Satanicall Shemeis of our age: being mere subjects of sport, (as
CHRIST was to the Jews, and Sampson to the Philistines,) to the Devils Apes,
profane men in their Pest-house-Play-houses, and in their deuillish and
drunken merriments, in Tauernes, Alehouses, Tobacco-shops, and
Brothell-houses: who, unless he have an heart of flint, hardened like the
nether-Milstone, can be freed from remorse, division, diuulsion? who unless a
Myrmidon, or hewn out of Caucasus (as was once fained) can temper from tears?
who can be otherwise (if he be Gods) then a mourning Dove, an howling
Ostrich, and a solitary Pelican, in this worlds wilderness and Desert of
sin, for all the sins of the sons of men? who can but mourn with the
holy Saints in former times, for all the abominations of the City? Ezekiel. 9 4.
Whose heart is not vexed with Lots, for the unclean conversation of millions
amongst us, whose works of darkness, in these days of light, shall
justify the Sodomites in judgment, 2 Pet. 2.7.8. who cries not, Woe is me
(with David) that is constrained to live here in Meseck, and to dwell in the
tents of Kedar? Who prays not with Samuel, for a sinful people? 1 Samuel 12.23.
Whose soul is not wounded with the sins of the times, that break out in
such abundance? Who could not be content to be free from the smell, stinckes,
and infection of them? What comfort is there to have any converse or commerse
with such, more then with bruit Beasts and wicked Spirits, that commit such
sins, (as Intemperance, and Luxury and Drunkenness) which beasts and Devils
commit not? Now ponder well Deaths lenity in this corasiue: Psalm. 31.15
Death stops thine ears from hearing the Blasphemies of the multitude
wherewith they blaspheme. Death hoodwinckes thine eyes from beholding such
vain and filthy objects, as made the Heathen Democritus pluck out his eyes
that he might not behold; Death chains thy tongue from talking, with, or
talking of such obsceane subjects; Death, Gods Messenger, pluckes thee away,
Genesis 19.16 22.23.
as the Angel did Lot, out of the Sodom of this world, and carries thee to
Zoar, a City of refuge, the new and true Jerusalem; from whence thou shall
come again with thy Savior in the clouds, to see these wicked ones cast into
burnings, Mat. 25.41. but never to hear them more blaspheming: from which
Judgment thy soul shall return to heaven again, with her old companion the
body, now awakened out of the dust, and glorified, where thou shall always
after to eternity hear the Quires and Melodies of Angels and heavenly
Spirits, carrolling out their new Songs, and Haleluiahs, to the glory of the
Lamb, Apoc. 5.9.

10 As Death frees thee from the conversation, so from the corruptions of
wicked men, 10 It frees thee from corrupting by the wicked.
which as it is not the least safety, so it should not be the least joy and
tranquillity to a Christian; and the rather, because the danger of infection
by them is here so imminent as fearful. If any think himself safe and
sound, and on a sure ground in this kind, as too many are too bold; let him
know that it is as safe for sound Apples to lie amongst the rotten, for sound
Sheep to feed amongst the scabbed, for clear eyes to look earnestly on
those that have sore eyes, for a healthful body to converse with the infected
in the Pesthouse; as for thee to live and converse with the wicked, and not to
learn wickedness, with the froward without frowardness: nay, it is as easy
to touch pitch and not be defiled: the experience of Gods Saints leave it
recorded: that when the Saints are amongst sinners; first, either by Imitation
of them; secondly, or compulsion by them; thirdly, being brought into straites
by their wiles; fourthly, by their temptations and seductions; fifthly, in
extremities amongst them; sixthly, by the ouer-swaying of their own humane
passions; or by some such means they are infected with them: these things
occasioned Joseph to swear by the life of Pharaoh, Genesis 42.15
amongst the Egyptians; Abraham twice to use simulation, Genesis 12. Genesis 20.
dissimulation, or aequiuocation, in two profane Courts; David to feign
madness, in the Court of Achish, 1 Samuel 21.13. Peter to deny his Master
amongst the high Priests Servants, Mat. 26.74. the true Prophet to eat bread
with the false Prophet, 1 Kings 13.15.16. the Children of Israel to commit
Adultery and Idolatry with the Daughters of Moab. Numb. 25. All these have
failed, or fallen for company (as one breach brings down another) amongst
wicked men, which is thy case now, and has been. Now Death delivers thee from
ever conuersing, much more from corrupting by wicked men.

11 It secures thee from the malice of the mighty.
11 Let another of Deaths commodities comfort thee, in that it very much does
privilege thee from the madness and malice of the maleuolent Monsters of the
world: thou art now secure from the pushing horns of the Bulls of Bashan, from
the sword of injustice, from the arm of tyranny. Though mad Saul send for
devout David, to kill him in his sickness, 1 Samuel 14.15. yet none can harm
the body of a dead man: first, it may by kept unburied, for a time, as great
Alexanders was; secondly, arrested for debt, into which a good Christian may
fall in life, 2 Kin. 4.1. thirdly, be wounded and mangled, as Hectors was by
the Grecians (living Hares may leap over a dead Lion;) fourthly, dug up
again, as Pope Formosus body was by Stephanus his successor, and as Bucers was
by the Papists (an act more befitting Swine then men:) yet it cannot be hurt or
harmed, because it is insensible of pain; and therefore need not fear
Phalaris his Bull, nor the Persecutors wild beasts; nor the Papists fire and
Faggot, and burning chamber, nor the most exquisite tortures of the greatest
Tyrants: for thy spirit, it returns to the Father of spirits, thy soul to God
that gave it, even as the beams of the Sun reflect upward again, toward
the Sun, from whence they came.

12 Besides, thy good name, 13 It cleares thy good name.
that especially is cleared by death: for, we oftentimes see that by the
aemulation of aequals, the envy of inferiors, the hatred of superiors, and
the wickedness that is in the hearts of all, good men in their life time, by
Gods permission, for causes best known, some secret, some revealed, James 3.6.
have been vvondrously abased and abused, censured, calumniated and scorched
by the malicious and maleuolent tongues of such as have been set on fire by
Hell, oftentimes to the very eclipsing of their good name for a time: Psalm.
31.20
being poisoned and besmeared with their Aspish venom; whose good names it
pleases God to restore again unto them, Esaias 58.8.
at, or after, the hour of death, making the luster and splendour of their
graces then to break out like the light at the noonday, dispersing all the
clouds of scandal, which have in their vapors ascended from the foggie and
filthy Quagmires and Marrish of ignorance and Malice. Who either denies or
doubts of this, may see it in the Glass of the Word* and observe it in the
experience of other ages and our own. What oppositions had Moses the meekest
man on earth, Josh. 1.2. Heb. 3.2. Deuteronomy. 34.10 11
the faithful Servant of GOD, in his life time, in the place of his
Magistracy, amongst a rebellious people, though he discharged the greatest
function that ever was committed to any mere man, the best that ever any did,
that was but flesh and blood? Number. 11.1. Psalm. 78. Number. 16.3
yet how was he vpbrayded, scandalized and slandered, his Commission from God
contradicted? he was thought to take too much upon him, accused as a
destroyer, and 41.42
or at least a deluder of the Lords people, concerning the promised Canaan: yet
the same Moses had been worshipped as a God of these ancient Idolaters after
his death, if the Devil could have had his purpose, in exposing his dead body
unto them, being resisted by the Angel, Jude 1. v. 9. So was David not a
little disgraced by the mockings of his wife Michol, 2 Samuel 6.20. the raylings
of Shemei, 2 Samuel 16.5. the calumnies of his tyrannous enemies, by whom he was
esteemed as a fool, reviled as a murderer, verse 6. accounted as an Hypocrite
and vile man, ver. 7. yea, even the drunkards made songs of him in his life
time: now David is esteemed as the sweet Singer of Israel, as the man after
Gods own heart, after his death. So, in our times, what broils and turmoyles
had that worthy Calvin, zealous Luther, reverent Beza, judicious Zanchy,
moderate Melancthon, learned Peter Martyr, Oecolampadius, and others in
foreign Countries; Cranmer, Latimer, Ridley, etc. amongst our selves at home:
what filthy blots and aspersions were cast upon their good names? how were
their doctrine and doings misconceiued? their lives and learnings questioned
and censured? their works and writings wrested and misseinterpreted? all that
they said or did, preuerted or corrupted, by the malicious enemies of the
truth, both within, and amongst themselves, and abroad amongst the Papists:
insomuch that it was one of Melancthons dying Comforts, that by death he
should be freed (as his words are) from the barkings and bitings of some dogs,
in the form of Divines: which was the measure that the rest found, (as indeed
in the whole course of Scriptures, the greatest enemies that ever the Church
and zealous Teachers in the Church had, were of their own rank and
profession, false Priests, false Prophets, Scribes and Pharisees, and false
Apostles,) in which respect as the same Melancthon once hoped and in a manner
prophesied, that the after-Ages would judge more heartily and sincerely of him
and his Works after his death: even so he, and others, now find it: for,
(notwithstanding the Blasphemies which Romish Rabshakeh's, Feuerdentius,
Coc^leus, Bolserus, and others, belch out against these German and Belgicke
Lights, and the rest of the Host of God, whose tongues are no slanders) how
has the Lord honored and famoused those worthy laborers in his Vineyard,
even in their good names, since their dissolution? all of them being accounted
pillars (notwithstanding the detraction of these Romish Caterpillars) in the
house God: all of them in their zealous and learned Labors, (like
Oecolampadius, as his name imports) shining as precious Lights in the Church,
which never shall be wholly obscured til he that is the light of the world come
again to Judgment. This we daily see verified, that (to the comfort of the
suruiuing) though zealous Pastors, men of exquisite parts and pains, have
been in the day of their Ministry torn and reviled amongst these Swine and
Dogs, to whom they have given holy things: counted as fools and deceivers (as
the Jews, and Christ's Countrymen, accounted Christ) mad men* Acts 26.28
(as Festus thought Paul) and rauers and ragers in the Pulpit (as the Jews
held Jeremy) yet after the setting of their Sun, they have been longed for,
Ier. 18.18. Ier. 20.7.8.10.
their loss lamented* (chiefly of the household of Faith) and their names
honored, in the hearts, and minds, and mouths of multitudes, when the wicked
in all their power and pomp being magnified of their fawning Parasites for a
time, in the sudden dampe of death, have had the glimmering of their glory put
out, their honor laid in the dust, and their names (like their rotten
carcasses) rotting and smelling and stinking in the nostrils of God and good
men: as may beseene in the life and death of Herod, Antiochus, Nero, and
others. For, I pray you, Acts 12.23
who is now more famous after death, Nero or the persecuted Christians? Julian,
or the poor Saints which he butchered? Herod, or John whom he beheaded:
Pashur, or Jeremy whom he imprisoned: Gardener, Bonner, and such bloody
Butchers, or our English Martyrs whom they burned? Surely the candle of the
wickeds glory is put out, and there remains the impure filthy stinking snuff
of an evil name, their glory is their shame, Prou. 10.
Phil. 2.19. but the memorial of the righteous is precious, smelling like
Balm and Spikenard diffused; Psalm. 112.9
yea, their name shines like the Stars in the shady night of death, or rather
like the Sun, the cloud being removed, flourishing in the storm of death,
like the Laurel, which is green when the Winter is foul. Though CHRIST
himself be counted a Samaritan, an imposter, one that was Belzebubs friend, a
poor Carpenters poor Son in his life, yet in and at his death, he is
justified, approved and famoused as a righteous man as an innocent, as a just
man, as the Son of GOD, by the testimony that was given of him, first, by
Mat. 27.24
Pilate; secondly, ver. 19.
Pilates Wife; thirdly, the Luke 23.48
Passengers that smote their breasts; fourthly, the Mat. 27.54
tears of the Daughters of Jerusalem; fifthly, the Mat. 25 4
Centurion; sixthly, and ver. 51.53
Judas himself; seauenthly, yea, 1. the veil of the Temple; 2. the stones; 3.
the Sun; 4. the Elements; 5. the raised bodies of the dead Saints, give a
real and an honorable testimony of him; 6. thus shall it be with thee if
thou be a member of Christ, though thou be misse-reported, and sinisterly
censured, as Job. 15. chapter 22.33.34.
Job was of his friends; 7. yet in thy dissolution principally, thy name shall
be raised, like the fire from under the ashes of ignominy. It was the Heathens
Comfort that he should leave a good name behind him: so let it be thine; it
being one of the greatest earthly blessings, above Gold and Silver, Prou. 22.1.
yea, as a precious Ointment, Eccl. 7.3. this Ointment smells the sweetest when
the box of thy body is broken: thou carryest this Ointment (as dead bodies are
anointed) even to the grave with thee* and it lives, when all other earthly
things dye to thee and thou to them. Therefore be thou cheared with the
thought which comforted the Pagan, Nemo me, etc.

Let none be-moist my Hearse with helpless tears.
From Learnings mouth Fame flies to vulgar ears.
14 In death thou shall have an excellent and notable both trial and
demonstration, 14 It tries and declares thy graces.
as also exercise of thy graces, as first, of thy Faith; secondly, thy
Patience; thirdly, thy Constancy; fourthly, thy Christian Courage; fifthly,
Fortitude; sixthly, and the Spirit of Prayer, by which, first, others shall be
strengthened; secondly, the weak shall be confirmed; thirdly, and all that are
present with thee, and amongst whom thou live, encouraged in their Christian
courses; fourthly, thy sincerity in thy profession approved; fifthly, Gods
graces in thee magnified; sixthly, and above all, his name glorified.

15 It is the good inheritance of the godly, and the horror of the wicked.
15 In thy death thou shall be distinguished from a carnal and a profane man:
for commonly the sick bed shows the sickness or the health of the soul: the
death shows the life, dividing and judging the estate of the visited, as
Gid^on divided his company by lapping of water* Judge. 7.1. and as the
Ephramites were distinguished from the Israelites by pronouncing Shib^l^th. For
look at the godly from time to time, and the last acts they did, and the last
words they spoke, were the most sacred, seasoned, and sanctified of their whole
life, (but it has been contrary in the wicked) and God is the same God to
thee that he was to them, if thou be a believer. Look into particulars:
the last speeches of dying Saints, as they have been full of grace, so they
are worthy relating, and remembering, and applying. Acts 7.60.
The last period of S. Steuens life was prayer for his enemies, and for his
own soul: 1 Kings 2. v. 1. to. 11.
the last words of David, holy exhortations to his Son Solomon, to observe
the Statutes and Ordinances of the Lord, and the disposing of some particulars,
of which he gave him cautions: the last acts of old Jacob, Genesis 48. Genesis 49.
Prayer, and prophesying, concerning his sons and posterity: the like
comfortable end made Abraham, Job, old Simeon, Moses, Gen 25.8. Job 42.17. Luke
2.
and other of the Saints in the old and new Testament. The like we read of
Ambrose, whose conclusion in his deathbed was, that he was neither ashamed to
live, nor fearful to dye, because he had a good Lord. Vide cent. Magd. sic
Grin. in Apotheg. morientiu^.
Bernards death was grounded upon the sure hope and Anchor of Gods mercy,
though he lived in corrupt times. Oecolampadius told his visitors news, in
the last speech he uttered, namely, that he should shortly be with the LORD
JESUS. Mr. Calvin with David's heart repeating David's Psalms, mourning in the
Spirit, for his sins, his soul was sent out of his body, like Noah's Dove,
out of the Arc. Melancthon, in his last farewell to life, professed he was
exceeding willing to dye because it was the Lords will, praying for a happy and
joyful departure, he had his desire presently sealed. Peter Martyr, gave a
comfortable farewell to his brethren and dear friends, acknowledging salvation
only in Christ the Redeemer, in which faith as he lived so he dyed. That half
miraculous man Luther, in his death abounded as with prayer so with praises and
thankesgiuings that the Lord had revealed Christ unto him, and made him an
instrument to discover Antichrist, and to oppose him. Annas Burgius cried in
her last cries, Lord forsake not me, least I forsake thee. Mauritius the
Emperor, in his last fainting, gave glory unto GOD, that was righteous in all
his ways, and holy in all his works. Saint Augustine wept upon his sick
couch for many days together, and so was his soul ferryed to Christ in a
flood of tears, as Peter walked to Christ on the Sea of waters. I might give
your meditations matter enough to work upon, in reflexing upon infinite
examples, related by Authors, to which every faithful Minister that uses to
perform this duty of visiting the sick, like a spiritual Physician,
discerning the estate of the soul, adds his Probatum est, in joyful
experience of many, whose dying has been suited and sorted to their living,
both gracious, both glorious.

Why then should thou fear? for to the righteous there shall be peace at
the last, Esaias 57.2. therefore live by Faith, believe the Promises, and apply
them, and be comforted in Gods mercy to others: but as for the wicked, it is
not so with them, they shall be like the chafe scattered in the wind; for,
there is no peace to the wicked says my God, Esa. 57.21. the prolong of their
wicked life ends in a fearful Tragedy in death: for, though in respect of
the body, and the outward man, Eccles. 2.16
there is the same condition to the wise and the foolish, to Nabal and
Solomon, godly Jonathan perishing in the field as well as wicked Saul, 1 Samuel
31.2.3. Ezekias struck with the plagues boil, Esaias 38.21. Asa goutie in his
feet; nay, 2 Chronicles. 35 23
even good Josias wounded in the Battle, and the rest of the godly being
afflicted in sickness as pittiously, and dying often times as painefully,
whether in a natural or a violent death, even as the wicked, (as appears in
the exquisite torments of the Martyrs in the Primitive Church, in the
crucifying of Peter and Paul with their heads downwards, Ar. in probl. de
cruce.
etc. yea, even in the very Passion of Christ himself:) yet in respect of the
inward man, and dispositions of their souls in death, there is as great
difference betwixt them, as there was in their carriage and conversation in
life. And therefore as you have heard the godly praying, or praising and
blessing GOD, speaking graciously, sending out their spirits joyfully, and
dying comfortably: so profane men dye either carelessly and blockishly, for the
most part, their hearts being frozen, and their consciences benumbed and
scared, without any touch in soul or remorse for sin; which kind of dying
though our sottish silly common people commend as the most happy and blessed
death, when they go away quietly like Lambs, as their stupiditie and
blindness think: yet indeed they dye like Beasts and Dogs, without any life
of grace, or feeling of the Spirit, in the power or comfort of it; nay,
senslesly like stocks and stones, as is said of Nabal, whose heart was like a
stone within him, 1 Samuel 25.37.38. or else desperately and ragingly,
impatiently as impenitently, belching out blasphemies against both the Majesty
and the Mercy of God. Thus Judas cries he has sinned in betraying the
innocent blood, Mat. 27.3.
but has no Faith to apply that blood to the washing away of his bloody
treason. 2 Match. 9.13.
Thus Antiochus Epiphanes dying, is tormented inwardly with the gripes and
conuulsions of conscience, as with the rage of his sickness: so Julian the
Apostate, in his last act of life, from his infected lungs sent out venom
against Christ, calling him in dirision, victorious Galilean. Thus Eccius dies
execrating his Popish on-setters in frustrating his golden hopes, when they had
clapped their hands to animate him to bark at Luther and the Protestanrs. The
like end made Latomus, Hoff-maister, Spira, and other Antichristian Champions,
being not unlike in their sin. Thus Gardener dies, confessing that he had
sinned with Peter, but could not repent with Peter. Cornelius Agrippa, cursing
his attending Spirit, that stood by him in the form of a black dog. Others
parallel in the like sins, making like proportioned ends: unless it be in
some particulers, as once in the Scripture, Luke 23.43
in the Thief upon the cross, that a theeuish and licentious life should have
the promise of Paradise in Death: which as it was, first, the conclusion of
Christ's life; secondly, the present magnifying of the power of his Passion: so
it is not to be urged, nor peremptorily pleaded; 1. in defense of ill livers;
2. nor imitated in deferring repentance; 3. nor presumed upon, no more then a
man ought to presume to be a Traitor, a Witch, a murderer, in hope for a
pardon when he is to be turned off the Ladder: because some one man in an age,
has by Gods providence this privilege, to be repriued and released from these
facts committed. For, in place of one example that has had his inueterate old
sores cured, his crying treasons pardoned at the last hour, (like Gregory's
good thief that begd heaven) we have millions that have perished, rot, and
consumed, in body and soul, in the last exigent of life: as they have not
spared GOD, living; God has not given them any tokens of his favor, but
rather of his wrath and indignation, dying: forgetting them dying, as in their
life they forgot him; turning away his ear from hearing of their prayers,
Psalm. 66.2^
though they houle upon their sicke-beds like Wolves, Ose 7.14. because in
their health and prosperity, they have like deaf Adders, stopped their ears,
in not hearing his Law and Word, and in not considering the cries of the poor,
Prou. 28.9. Prou. 21.13. Prou. 15.8. Therefore for thy present instruction and
future consolation, work thou out betimes thy salvation with fear and
trembling. Phil. 2.12.
Give all diligence to make thy Election sure. Break off all thy sins by
repentance. Dan. 4.24. Turn to the Lord with all thine heart, in fasting,
weeping and mourning, Joel 2.12. Turn from the wickedness thou have
committed, with the Ninevites, Jonah 3.7.8. Wash thee and make thee clean,
Esaias 1.16. Cleanse thy heart from evil thoughts, Ier. 4.14. Leave thy
formalitie in Religion* and worship the Lord in truth and spirit, John 4.24.
Get faith, and learn to live by faith, Hab. 2.4. and to dye by faith. John
1.47.
Be a Nathaniel in thy dealings with men; let thy heart be upright as thy hand,
Ioh. 1.47. Psalm. 41 1.
Remember the poor and needy, then the Lord will remember thee in the day of
thy sickness: Luke 16.22.
Christ will visit thee as he did Iairus Daughter, and Peter's wives Mother;
he shall be thy Physician, when the simples of Nature, and the arm of Flesh
fail; his Angels shall pitch their tents about thee, and carry thy flitting
soul, as they did Lazarus his, into the seats of the blessed. Make use of
this, and the LORD give thee understanding in all things.

16 As the examples of the Saints of God, 16 In death desire Christ, as he by
death desired thee.
that having lived conscionably, and dyed comfortably, must comfort thee in
this hour, so their willingness to dye must encourage thee willingly to
drink of that cup which the Lord offers thee, without resisting or relucting.
Look upon old Simeon, singing that Swan-like song, prophesying his death;
Lord, now le^t^st thou thy Servant depart in peace, Luke 2.29 But especially of
Saint Paul, weary of this mortality, desirou^ to be disburdened of the
burden of his corruptions, to be delivered from the body of sin, Romans 7. to
be present with the Lord; to be dissolved and to be with CHRIST, 2 Cor. 5.
Phil. 1. But the best president that we have in life and death, as the best
comfort, is the practice of Christ; who although he feared death as man,
desiring conditionally the passing of that bitter cup, yet nevertheless we
shall see in him a great alacrity, cheerfulness, propensitie, and
willingness to dye: for, Mat. 10.38 and 16.21.17* 22.23. Luke 18.31.
besides his often conference with his Disciples about his death, the frequent
nomination of it upon all occasions, which shows how vehemently he was
affected toward it, the tongue speaking from the hearts abundance, all his
words and acts declare it: for to show his desire to dye, John 4.32.
he counts it but a Baptism, or as it were, a sprinkling of cooling water,
Mat. 20.22. nay, it is meat and drink to him to do his Fathers will, which
was that he should dye* he counts it a Journey to go, which he was willing
to undergo: nay, he was even payned until it was past: when it came to the
push that his hour was come, he seeks death as it seeks him; Ioh. 18.4.7
he goes forth to meet and welcome it as his friend, Genesis 18.2. Ioh. 19.30.
Genesis 8.8.
as Abraham and Lot to meet and entertain the Angels; he offers himself to
the instruments of his death, his back to the smiters; and finally, his soul
is not taken from him compulsorie, but as he commended it, so he resigned and
gave it up, to his Father willingly; he gave up the ghost having power to lay
down his life, sending out his spirit, as Noah did the Dove out of the Arc,
which after three days returned again to quicken the body, from heaven, from
whence also Lazarus his soul returned after four days. Now apply this to
thine own particular: art not thou a Christian, so denominated of CHRIST? then
every one of Christ's actions ought to be thy instruction, chiefly in his
death, all whose dying gestures are worthy to be writ in thy heart, in letters
of Gold. Did he then undergo such an extraordinary, unnatural, painful,
shameful, cursed death, the worst that ever was; for therefore Christ dyed the
worst death that ever was, both for the ignominy of it, and the exquisite
tortures in it, that a Christian should not fear any death, since every death
is sanctified unto him in the death of Christ. Did Christ not only endure his
pangs and pains in death so patiently, Esaias 53.
as a Lamb before the shearer, but was even desirous of this bitter pill, for
the joy that was set before him, and the love he bore to redeem thy
enthralled soul? and art thou scrupulous and timorous of a natural and an
ordinary passage from life to life through this dead Sea? Will thou mutter and
murmr, and show thy self refractory to come to the Kings Court, when thou
art so gently summoned, by such a sweet messenger as a lingering sickness?
Have thou so little longing to go to him by the rupture of a weak thread of
life, who was so desirous to come to thee from heaven to earth, from the earth
to the Cross, from the Cross to the Grave, even through a red Sea of blood?
through Pikes and Spears, and nails and thorns, being dieted in this his
bloody march with the bread of affliction, and the water of tears; with gall
and vinegar? oh have thou so little delight in him, so little desire toward
him? so small liking of him, so little love to him? that thou list not step
over the narrow bridge of this life, to meet him, to greet him, and to enjoy
him? Expostulate with thy soul how it comes to be so dull, so dead, so
lumpish, so leaden: how it is that thou professest thy self to be a Spouse of
Christ Ephesians 5.21 Ose 2.19.
, a member of Christ Ephe. 5.30
, a branch of Christ Ioh. 15.5.
, (which thou must believe and profess if thou have any part in him Ioh. 15.6.
,) and yet have no desire to put off the outward mantle of this bodies
covering, to be inseparably embraced in the arms of this Bridegroom; not to
lean with John, but for ever to rest in his bosom; to be joined to thy Head?
to be fixed in this union? But if Christ's love and desire to dye, and to dye
for thee, be too high a pitch for thee to soar to, which yet ought to be aimed
at, yet imitate the desires and the patience of the Saints in this kind, so
far (as the Apostle speaks of himself) as they imitate Christ: for as the
examples of the wicked are recorded for our detestation, 1 Cor. 6.10. so the
examples of the godly are written for our comfort and consolation, Romans 15.4.
You have heard (says James) of the patience of Job, Iam. 5.11.
and what end God made with him. You have heard of the desires of Paul and
Simeon, of the graces that appeared in David, Jacob, Steven. etc. Ambrose,
Augustine, etc. Calvin, Luther, etc. and what ends they made, with God. Then,
thou using the same means that they did, even Faith and Repentance; why
should thou demurre, or be unwilling to go that Journey which they have
gone?

17 Yet if examples and presidents of others, 17 Death is the common Inn of
all flesh, where thou shall be refreshed. Esaias 38.2. Numb. 27.13
as of Christ and Christians set not an edge on thy desires to dye; yet let the
mutabilitie, brevity and uncertainty of life, with the certainty of death,
cause thee to make a virtue of necessity: as Esaias said from God, to Ez^kias,
thou must dye; and as God to Moses, thou shall dye; so he says to thee, Set
thine house, set thine heart in order, for thou can not live, thou must dye;
nay, thou can not long live, and thou must soon dye, certainly dye;
therefore it is wisdom for thee, (as in outward things) so in this, to do
that voluntarily, which thou must do necessarily, and compulsorie: thy life
thou know is but a short life, frail, and brittle as glass. As it is a
flower for the mortality of it, Esaias 40.7. A smoke, for the vanity of it,
Psalm. 102.3. so it is a house of clay, soon crushed down, Job. 4.17. A tent or
tabernacle, soon plucked up, 2 Cor. 5.1. A Shepherds Tent, soon pulled down,
Esaias 38.12. A Ship in the Sea, Wisd. 5.10. soon sliding, soon ouer-throwne
by the Rocks, ouer-blowne by the winds: nay, as a Weauers Shittle, Job 7.6.
for the volubilitie of it: as a dream Job 20.8. as a shadow, Job 8.9. for the
vanity of it; nay, vanity it self, which is nothing, it being in very deed
nothing in respect of eternity.

Learn therefore by this mirror of dying Moses, so to spend these thy days
of vanity, that for shortness of days in this world, thou may with Moses,
and all the glorious Saints of God, enjoy eternity of days in the world to
come.

SIMEON'S dying-Song. HANDLED IN six Sermons.
LVKE 2.29. Lord, now let thou thy Servant depart in peace, according to
thy Word.
IT is the Position of some, Plus exempla quam praecepta.
that Examples move more then Rules; that Practice persuades or disswades above
Precepts, either in Imitation or Aemulation of Virtue, or Detestation of Vice:
and above others we are pronest to write after the Copies of great men, and to
tread in the steps of old men. Therefore the Scripture propound unto us the
patterns of the greatest of men, even Kings who were as good as great, Regis
ad exemplar totus componitur orbis.
2 Samuel 15.31. Chapter 23. 1 Kin. 2.10
David, 2 Chro. 31.1.2.
Ezekias, Chro. 34.3.4.
Josias, Chr. 15.8
Asa, 1 King. 22.41.
Iehosaphat, etc. that we should follow their footings so far as they
followed Christ, and walked with God. Of the most aged amongst men, as of Genesis
25.8
Abraham, Genesis 9.28.29.
Noah, Genesis 5.27
Methushalem, Job 42.17
Job, etc. and here of old Simeon, whose lives and deaths are so many pleading
Orators, and preaching Sermons, to excite us to Christian courses, that like
them we may live holily and dye happily, and arrive at the common Haven of all
flesh peaceably and safely. Now amongst the rest, I have called out and
selected Simeon, as a Candle set on a hill, as a Beacon on fire, to give light
to the world (if she will open her blinded and beetle eyes) how to walk to
Sion, through this veil of life, even in the dark and Psalm. 22.4.
shadowie night of death. Simeon a fit object for us to reflect the eyes of our
intellectual powers upon, in the prosecution of this sad and sable subject of
death: in which consider, first, the Title of the Text; secondly, the Text it
self.

For the Title, Antiquity, and our Church denominates it, The Song of Simeon,
merely Swan-like and Cygnean, Canti^ Cygnea.
pious and prophetical. I might easily run Descant and Division upon it,
sorting it out into his several parts; showing. 1. the Ditty; 2. the Matter;
3. the Manner; 4 the Harmony; 5. the Time; 6 the Tune: with all such
obseruances in vocal Music, substantial and circumstantiall; even from the
ground of this Scripture. But my part now is, rather to sigh then to sing,
unless Dirges and Madrigals, fitter for Heraclitus his part then Democritus,
yet I cannot but so far condescend to this Cantion, as to commend this divine
Canticle for the excellency, and to consider in it, the ground of it, nature*
and propriety. For the excellency, it is of that purity and perfection, that
I wish it might be a rule and a square to our irrigular and unlimited
licentiousness in singing, that our hearts were rightly tuned by the Spirit of
God as was Simeons, verse 25. Redargution.
that our tongues were the Pens of this ready Writer in our Ditties, Psalm.
45.1.2
that so we might sing the praises of the King: but alas, our Songs are
commonly rather from Sod^me then from Sion; rather sensual then spiritual,
carnal then Christian, Satanicall then sacred, rather to the honor of
Bacchus, Priapus, and Venus, pleasing the Flesh* the World, and the Devil, the
worlds worshipped Trinity; th^n to the glory of the immortal and indivisible
Trinity: witness the vain, vile, wanton, vicious, loose, licentious,
venerious Songs and Sonnets of Poets and Poetasters of our times: 1. Which may
not only be seen extant: 2. but even are chaunted and carolled out, by Fools
and Fiddlers, unprofitable Moathes of the earth; which live either in no
calling, or in a sinful calling: 3. heard, received, applauded, approved,
laughed at by all the licentious Prodigals, loose gull-Gallants, Epicures, and
Carnalists, ordinarily in every Ordinary, Inn, Tavern, Alehouses, and the
like: Oh therefore whose heart smites him in this kind, let him reform this
sin, whether active or passive, in delighting or desiring to say, sing, or
hear these Organs of Satan, and those Bellows of sin and uncleanness.
Turn now the stream another way, let Jordan run backe-ward. If thou be
afflicted, pray: take out this rule, so did Moses, Manasses, David, the
Israelites, and all Gods Saints. Art thou merrily affected? James 5.13.
sing: but what? Psalms, Psalm. 119. Hymns, and Songs, and spiritual Psalms,
making melody to the Lord in your hearts: therefore as I would propound David
and Ezekias, as true patterns for all mourners; so Simeon and Zachary, as
spectacles to all singers. As in Isntrumental Music, the strings that are
out of tune, must be set up to those that are in tune: so when thou singest
vanity thy heart and tongue, which are distracted, distempered, and out of
tune, must be set in the right Key, as was Simeons; then thou shall sing at thy
departure out of this worlds Prison, as Acts. 16.21
Paul and Silas did in Prison. Thou shall sing Hosanna's in Heaven, when thy
Friends sing thy Funeral Neniae on earth.

The ground of this Song is Christ, the Messiah, Savior, and salvation of
Israel, the Redeemer of his people, as the Word calls him Luke 2.69
; as the Angel christens him from Mat. ^.21
God; which Savior, as he was promised to Gen 3 15
A^am, the promise renewed to Genesis 15.5.17.6. Genesis 12.3. Gal. 3.8.
Abraham; prefigured in the Leuiticall Law, and those Mosaicall Types and
Ceremonies, Aarons Rod, the Pot of Manna, the watery Rock, the Scapegoat, the
brazen Serpent, the blood of sacrificed Beasts and Bullockes, and the like;
prophesied of by all Prophets Act. 3.24.
, great and lesser, from Moses Deuteronomy. 1.15 and 7.37.
to Malachie: so being now revealed and exhibited, is the ground of Simeons
Song, and the matter of his inward mirth, breaking forth like a fire long kept
in, into these outward Modulations.

His practice is our precept; Use.
all our joy must be in Christ, and for Christ. In Christ rejoiced the
Patriarchs, when they did but see Christ's day a far off, through the cloud and
the veil, as did John. 6.56 Heb 11.13
Abraham. In Christ rejoiced the Prophets, Esaias 53. chapter 5^. ch 55.
Esaias, Ier ^4.5.
Ierem^, Ezekiel, etc. in the heat of their persecutions being refreshed with
the vision of that incarnate Babe, Esaias 9.6.
Prince of peace, branch of Iesse, eternal Counselor, which they did preach,
and of whom they did prophecy. In Christ rejoiced the Apostles, Peter, James
and John; yea, Paul 1 Cor. 15.
himself in the midst of stripes, whips, and imprisonment Chapter 5.41.
. In Christ rejoiced the ancient Martyrs, Policarpus, Ignatius, Cyprian, even
like the three Children in the midst of the fire Dan. 3.23.
. In Christ rejoiced the ancient Fathers, Augustine, Jerome, Bernard, etc.
witness their words, works, and writings, amongst the rest, of him that could
say, Deus meus and omnia, my Christ and all things; Wife, Child, Friend,
Father, joy sufficient, efficient, in life and death. Nay, lastly, as with
Christ, so in Christ, and for Christ, rejoiced the Luke 2.14
Angels in earth and in heaven Reu. 5.11.12
: be glad then oh ye righteous, and rejoice ye that fear the Lord, as the
Angels Luke 2.10.
to the Shepherds, as Esaias to the Church, Esaias 9.6.
For, unto us a child is borne, and a Son is given: For, to us is borne a
Savior, in the City of David, which shall deliver all his Israel from their
sins, Matthew. 1.21. Luke 19.10.

Redargution.
Many and manifold are the joys of the sons of men, as dangerous, as diverse;
few with those sons of God by Creation and Adoption, Angels and Saints,
rejoice in, or for Christ; but sinners according to the diversities of their
darling sins, solace their souls in such contents, as I may call merely
Antichristian, and against Christ, and the Lords anointed, in which they
please themselves and displease him; content their flesh, but crucify CHRIST,
and grieve his Spirit. Nabal 1 Samuel 15
, and Baltazar Daniel. 5.
, the Epicure and Drunkard, has joy enough in his feasts and festiuals: the
color of the wine delights his sight, the relish his devouring sense, like a
base Bagge-pipe, he makes such Music as the Devil daunceth at, when he is
full. The Usurer, the worldling, Sibila^ m^ ropulus, etc Horace.
and the miserable able miser has his heart ravished when his eye reflexeth
upon his glittering Idol, and golden God, the Calfe that this beast bows too.
The impure Onan Genesis 38.
, filthy Fornicator, and inexcusable Adulterer, which like to Salomons fool
Pro. 7.7.
, goes into the harlots house, and like Ieremies neighing horse Ier 5 8.
, without understanding Pro. 6.32.
, runs after his neighbors wife, like the Ox to the slaughter Pro 7.22.
, to his own destruction Pro. 6.32.
; delights himself (as the Swine in the mi^e, as the Toade in the puddle, as
the Panther with excrements Gesner. Pliny
, as the Scarabean Fly with ordure and filth, as the Devil his Father Io^.
8.44.
, amongst filthy Hogs Lu. 15.16.
,) with his unclean courses and discourses; feeding his appetite with strange
flesh Pro. 23.27
, as the lusting Israelites with loved and loathed Quayles v, as the Italian
Pselli and Mersi feed on poison: his chief joy is to touch and taste Sodomes
Apples, and the forbidden fruit; his only Paradise, the ioying in, and
inioying here (which he dreams of hereafter,) a Turkish Heaven, a Mahumetaine
portion of Wine and Women: as for Christ he having no heart at all, Hosea
4.11. can have no heart to him, neither in delighting in him, or desiring him,
no more then the very Devils themselves, who quaked and trembled, and made out
cries and exclamations, at the very sight of him, Luke 8.28.29. so all other
Libertines amongst us, have some Mar. 6.17
Herodias or other, some one beloved sin which they more love and like, and
joy in then in the worlds Savior. As some in their carnal companions and
wicked associates, with whose dispositions and conuersations, as they receive
as much infection in their soul, as their bodies from a Pesthouse; so they
have their refections, as Dan. 5.1.2
Baltazzar and Sardanapalus had with their Queens and Concubines, and so in
the rest. Well, these carnal and common Christians, which have as much zeal
to Christ, and love for Christ, as common women, plainly demonstrate that they
have the spirit of Satan, and not the Spirit of GOD, as had Simeon. And
therefore as they joy not in Christ, neither does he joy in them, no more then
a chaste Bridegroom in a whorish Spouse, as they desire not him, he desires not
them, nor their company in his Chamber, no more then he did the foolish
Virgins Mat. 25.11.12.
; as they delight not in him, he delights not in them, no more then a man
delights in his crucifier and tormenter; as they love not him, so he loves not
them, no more then he does Cain Jude v. 11
and Esau Mal. 1.2. Romans 9.13.
, whom the LORD hated. As Peter said to Simon Magus, so I say to them, They and
their money perish together Act. 8.20
, they and their lustful pleasures perish together, as did Z^mri and Cosbee
Numb. 25.14.15.
; they and their Gold perish together, as did Achan and his wedge Josh. 7.24.
; they and their Idols perish together, as did the Israelites and their Calfe
Exodus 32.20.35.
* they and their sins perish together, as did the murmuring Rebels in the
Wilderness; they and their companions perish together, as did Corah and his
accomplices Numb. 16.31.32.
: cursed be their sins, and their Societies, like Sim^on and Leui, brethren
in iniquity Genesis 46.5.7.
: So let them perish, Lord, that are thine enemies, like the untimely fruit of
a woman. If any love not the Lord Jesus, let them be accursed, Anathema,
Maranatha. If any rejoice not at the birth of a Savior here with Simeon, let
the Sun of all their carnal joys s^t, and be eclipsed in the cloud of death.

Secondly, as we must joy in Christ, so we must joy and rejoice, and be
thankful for Christ; yea, for all the blessings and the benefits that we
receive in and from Christ, temporal and spiritual, external, internal, or
eternal: so was Simeon here, his song is Eucharisticall and gratulatory, for
the revelation of Christ; he blesses God that he lives to see the conduit
and the fountain of all blessings to his Church, Christ the Messiah. And since
his Devotion is our Instruction, Christians must be thankful for Christ. Thus
all the faithful and believers when Christ was borne offered up their
tributarie praises, the sacrifices of their souls, breaking out into holy
Hymns and Songs. The Angel did caroll out, Glory be to God on high Luke 2.13
14.
, so the Eastern Magi Mat. 2.10 11.
, the zealous Shepherds Luke 2.20.
, glorify God: the blessed Virgin magnifies the Luke 1.46 47.
Lord: Elizabeth, and the prophesying Babe within her womb Ver. 41.
, leap and rejoice: Anna Luke 2.38.
, Zachary Luke 1.68
, and Simeon, are not behind with their parts, in continuing their praises;
and so must we with our best hearts and affections, make up the Quire, since
we have no less interest in, nor no fewer privileges by Christ, then they.

The Reasons to enforce this duty, are these:

First, if the Saints of God in the old Testament were so thankful for their
temporal protection, preservation, and redemption from their outward enemies,
the Egyptians, Amalekites, Canaanites, Ammonites, Moabites, Philistines, etc.
by temporal Saviors, Moses, Joshua, Gideon, Iaphte, Sampson, David, etc. as
may be seen in the spiritual Songs of Moses, and Aaron, and Miriam Exodus 15.
v. 1.2.3. v. 20.
, and Deborah, and Baruch Iud. 5.1.2
, and David 2 Samuel 22
and Judith Judith 26.1.2.3.
: how much more ought we to burst forth into praises, for our spiritual
deliverance from the Flesh, the World, the Devil, that Pharaoh, and from his
Egyptian yoke, from Hell, Death, and Damnation, by that Messiah, of whom
these earthly and terrestrial Saviors were Types and figures.

Secondly, gratulation and thankfulness is a duty commanded Psalm. 50.15. 1
These. 5.18. therefore we must not be immorigerous and disobedient to Gods
command, no more then Paul was to the heavenly vision Act. 26.19
, unless we be found fighters, and rebels, and traitors against God.

Thirdly, it is a species, and part of Prayer, and so of Gods spiritual
worship, Phil. 4 6. Ephesians. 6.

Fourthly, by this duty we glorify God which is the end of our Creation,
Psalm. 50.23.

Fifthly, 1. It is a seemly thing, and becomes the Saints to be thankful,
Psalm. 33.1. 2. It is a very good thing to praise the Lord, Psalm. 92.1. 3. It is
a pleasant thing, and praise is comely, Psalm. 147.1.

Sixthly, the very Heathens have commended it, and the beasts have performed it
in their brutish manner, to their benefactors, as appears in Androdius his
Liuie.
Lion.

Seauenthly, an unthankful man is hated of men, accounted as a Viper, and an
unprofitable burden to the earth Terrae inutile pondus.
: the very light of Nature, and common humanity cries out upon it.

Eighthly, God vpbraydes and brands his dearest Children for the omission of
this duty, 2 Chronicles. 32.25.

Ninthly, the omission of this is a sign of a proud heart, and brings down
Gods wrath. Ibidem.

Tenthly, this is the conversation which we shall have in heaven, even to
praise God, especially for the redemption of the world by Christ, Phil. 3.20.
Reu. 5.9. Reu. 19.1.3. This is the life that the Angels lead, therefore we
ought speedily to inure our selves to it.

Use.
This must excite us to be more careful in performance of this duty: It is a
blame and a blemish to be unthankful to man, as Judas was to Christ, as the
Jews and Abimelech to Gideons Children Judge 9.16 17.18.
, as Pharaohs Butler to Joseph Gen 40.23.
; much more to God. It is a sin, and an abomination to be unthankful to
God for temporal and outward blessings, as health, wealth, life, liberty,
children, etc. so for the use of the Creatures. Christ vpbraydes the nine
Lepers for this sin Luke 17.17 18. And sure those that use the Creatures
profanely, as Dogs, and Swine, and beasts, never looking to the holy and
religious use of them, as sanctified by the Word and Prayer 1 Timothy 4.5
, they are worse then the Doves and Elephants, that at least look up to heaven
when they eat their meat: but if we be unthankful for the Incarnation,
Death, and Passion of the Creator, that in his humanity was made a creature
Gal. 4.4.
, and subjected to death Phil. 2.8.
, to redeem us the slaves and vassals of sin and Satan, from the first and
second death Romans 4.25. and 5.18.19.
; our sin is in a higher die and grain of ingratitude: we are more not
only unchristian, but viperous, and inhumane then the savage Getes and
Sauromiataines. Alas then, how many are unlike to thankful Simeon? hour many
are seemingly and hypocritically thankful for outward things? they are ready
in every company to thank God often times in the Pharisaicall pride of their
hearts Luke 18.11.12.
, for full basquets and rich storehouses, abundance of Talents, fruitful
wife, for their Olive branches, their children, but the same men are neither
vocally nor really, in words or works, thankful unto God for Christ Jesus,
for the benefits we have by him, 1. of Election, 2. Vocation, 3.
Justification, 4. Redemption, 5. Sanctification, and title to 6. Glorification;
for his 7. Word, 8. Gospel, 9. Sacraments, 10. Ministers, 11. Ministry: for
these, ne verbum quidem, not a word, there is altum silentium, as mute as
fishes. All natural and moral men in this are Mutes, and not Consonants, as
it is most consonant they should be. Or if they speak a gratulatory word,
their hearts are as far from it as heaven from earth; at least their works
proclaim open war and hostililie against the Lords Christ, kissing him with
Judas in outward profession, crying Aue, and all hail with the Jews, when
(their lives being all hell) they cry Crucify him in their conversation, Psalm.
3.17.

And thus much for the Title, now to the Text, Lord now let, etc.

Every word has his weight without torturing the Text; these things are
obseruable: 1. Simeons Compellation; Lord: 2. his desires Limitation; Now: 3.
the acknowledgement of the Divine Permission; Let thou: 4. his proper
Appellation, Thy Servant: 5. his desired Dismission; Depart: 6. his hoped
Pacification; In peace: 7. his grounded Resolution; According to thy Word: of
which in order.

Simeons Compellation. In this word, Lord.
SOme take Lord, essentially for the whole Trinity, Jehovah Elohim; some
personally, for one of the Persons, for indeed the whole Trinity, and every
Person in the Trinity, is often in the Scripture termed by this word Lord.
Some appropriate it here to God the Father, some to Christ the Son, so In
locum.
Theophilact and Euthumius: some to God the holy Ghost, so In Lucam. 1 Timothy 3.16
Athanasius.

Apply it unto Christ, and then you have to consider a great Mystery, a great
Mercy, God manifested in the flesh, justified in the spirit, seen of Angels,
preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the world, and received into glory;
for that incarnate Babe, which Simeon has in his arms, in respect of his
humanity he calls him Lord, in respect of his Divinity, From whence we see
demonstratiuely, what all Orthodoxe Antiquity affirms, the testimony of
Scriptures 1 Ioh. 1.14 Ephesians. 4.10 Phil. 2.6.7.8.
, harmony of all reformed Churches Of Bohemia, Basil, France, Sweuia, see
harmony of confessions.
, General and Provincial Concels, several Creedes, both Apostolical and
Nicene, confirm, that Christ the Messiah, the Son of God Mat. 3.17 Psalm. 2.7.
, is both Ioh. 17.3. John 1 1.
God and Man Esaias 7.14
; Christus Deus de Patre, Homo de Matre, etc. God of his Father, Man of his
Mother Mat. 10.18.23. Luke 1.27.31.34.
: of his Fathers immortality, of his Mothers virginity: of his Mother without
Father, of his Father without a Mother; a Priest for ever after the order of
Melchisedech Heb. 5.10.
: without Father as he was Man, without Mother as he was GOD: of his Father
without time, of his Mother without seed: not borne without either man or
woman, as was Adam Genesis 1.27
; nor of man without a woman, as was Eve Genesis 2.22.
: nor of both man and woman, as are we the posterity of Adam and Eve; but of
a woman without a man, Patrem habuit in Coelis, Matrem quesiuit in Terris
August. de temp. hom. 9 vide hom. 13
, having a Father in Heaven he sought for a Mother in earth; yea, such a
Mother as made the Mystery so miraculous, as all things in heaven and earth
cannot parallel or pattern it: for these three things in this one are
accomplished of GOD, admirably singular, and singularly to be admired; Deus and
Homo, Matter and Virgo, Verbum and Caro; to wit, God and Man, a Mother and a
Maid, the Word and Flesh, united in one. A Mystery never sufficiently to be
admired; Vt propter nos veniret in mundum, per quem factus est mundus; a Mercy
never enough to be magnified, of men and Angels; that for our sakes he should
come into the world, which made the world; that the Creator of Mary should be
borne of Mary, that David's Lord should be David's Son; he which was long
before Abraham, the seed of Abraham; the Maker of the earth made of the earth;
that as in the nonage of of the world man was made after the Image of God, so
in the dotage of the world, God should come in the similitude of sinful man;
that God should be made man, that man should be as a God; that God should
descend down to the earth, that man should ascend up to the heaven. Oh wonder
at this you that wonder at nothing: for my part (says Cyprian Cyprian
) I do not admire the beauty of the Sun, the colors of the Rainbow, the
glory of the Moon, the motion of the Heavens, the fixed stabilitie of the
earth, the ebbing and flowing of the Sea, the variety of the Creatures, the
alteration and succession of times and seasons, nor any thing else amongst all
the Creatures, Celestial and Sublunarie; but this I admire, and for ever will,
Deum in vtero, Creatorem in creatura, etc. God made man, the Creator borne of
the Creature, and for the Creature; yea, the mighty God before whom the heavens
shake and the Mountains tremble. a little Infant in the arms of a Virgin
Mother, in the arms of old Simeon an aged Father: this is such a work, such a
wonder, that I say with S. Jerome Hierome.
, Quod natura non habuit, etc. that which Naure had not, which Use knew not,
which Reason was ignorant of, man's Mind incapable of, which the Cherubins
conceived not; the Angels, till revealed, understood not, which all the Powers
of created nature were amazed at, came to pass, when CHRIST by his
Incarnation, did unite the Humanity to the Divinity, in a true, natural,
real, and Hypostaticall Vide Zanchium de incar. verbi.
union.

Use.
Oh therefore let us reap the fruit of this Vine, since he is come from heaven
to earth, to marry us in our own nature Bern. ser. 2 in Cant.
, Nam vt Sponsus and Sponsa in Thalamo, etc. for as man and wife are one in the
Bride-chamber, so God and man one Christ in the womb of the Virgin. Oh let us
labor by faith to be united and married unto him, to be made members of this
Head, Branches of this Vine, Buildings upon this Cornerstone, parts of his
Body, Spouses of this Bridegroom, that with the wise Virgins being contracted
by faith unto him here in grace, the Marriage may be solemnized in Glory. Then
shall we truly be kissed with the kisses of his love Can^ 1.1.
: Oh foelix osculum Oh foelix osculum, in quo non os ori, sed Deus homini
vnitur.
, etc. Oh happy kiss, which is not a joining of lips, but a joining of loves
betwixt God and man.

Secondly, was this Lord borne man, for us, let us labor to be borne again to
him in that spiritual new birth and Regeneration, which the Scriptures call a
new Creation Psalm. 51.12
, a holy turning Joel 2.12.
, change Romans 12.2.
, and conversion Ier. 31.18
of the whole man, in the renouation of all the Powers and faculties of body
and soul, superior and inferior, both in the intellectual parts, as in
memory, will, understanding, etc. as also in the lower faculties, irascible and
concupiscible: this new birth which the Prophets have continually urged Esa.
31.6. Ier. 3.12.14 Ezekiel. 18.30 Ose. 14.2.
, which John Mat. 3.2.
Baptist and the Disciples have preached Lu. 24.47
, which Paul Acts 26.17.18.
and the Apostles have continually pressed in their Sermons Act. 2.38.
and writings, which our Savior Christ himself, both in his public
preaching Mar. 1.15
, and private conference with Nichodemus Ioh. 3.3.4.
, has so doctrinally explained, and by application enforced to be performed of
all, under pain of damnation Luke 13.3.5.
, it is so needful, nay, of such absolute necessity to be practiced of all
Christians chiefly, that till a man bring forth the fruits of it, worthy
repentance and amendment of life Mat. 3.8
, he is but like the barren Fig Tree Luke 23.7
, corrupt and twice dead Jude v. 12.
, without either sap of Grace, or blossom of goodness, fit to be hewn down,
and cast into the fire Mat. 3.10
; nay, a beast and no man; a fox, a Viper, a Dog, Phil. 3.2.
filthy and unclean, as were Herod Lu. 13.32.
, the Jews Luke 3.7
, and the Tit. 1.12.
Cretians: nay, a horse Ier. 5.8.
, and Ox Pro. 7.22.
; nay, worse then the Ox and Ass Esaias 1.4.
, then the Horse and Mule, without understanding, unwise, Romans 1.29 30. Psalm.
14. Romans 3.12.
disobedient, rebellious, fools Psalm. 53. Romans 1.22.
, blind men John 9 31.
, natural men, without God in Christ, aliants from God, and strangers from the
Commonwealth of Ephesians 2.12.
Israel, miserable, naked, and wretched men Reu. 3.17
: for whom is reserved Hell Psalm. 9.17
, and the second death, wrath Romans 2.8 9
and vengeance, 1 Cor 9 14
fire and Brimstone Reu. 21 8.
, storm and tempest: exclusion out of Reu. 22 15
heaven, and intrusion, and eternal inclusion in the bottomless pit, with the
Devil and his Angels Mat. 25.41.
, insomuch that as Augustine well, Nasci, and non renasci, generari and non
regenerari, for a man to be borne and not to be borne again, to have the
nobility of the first birth without the new birth; be he what he will be,
Prince or Potentate, King or Kesar: or the worlds Monarch, a second Alexander,
if he have only generation from Adam without regeneration from the Spirit of
Christ, the second Adam; if he be not borne to him by water and the Spirit,
that was borne and dyed for him, coming by water and by blood 1 Ioh. 5.6
, he had better as the Scripture says of Judas, that he had never been
borne Mark 14 21
, nay, that a Millstone had been hung about his neck* and he thrown into the
Sea the first hour he was borne, for then he should have been damned for his
original sins: but his damnation shall now be aggrauated for his actual
sins; chiefly, for this sin of Omission, in living so long within the
Church, without the life of grace, (like a rotten Bough, or wooden Leg*) No
part of the root of Iesse Esaias 53.2
, or body of Christ, without regeneration, in not believing in, or living like
that light which for that end came into the world John 3.19 20
: those which before sat in darkness, and in the shadow of death, being
illuminated Luke 2.29
, should cast off the works of darkness, and walk like the children of the
light 1 These. 5.6.
, like Disciples of this Lord, who was made man, to redeem Satan's slaves into
the liberty of his own Sons.

Secondly, in Simeons Compellation, Lord, let it rectify our practice: we use
or rather abuse this great and glorious Name in our mouths at our pleasures,
not only in rash, vain, and false swearing and forswearing, to which sins
there belongs a swift curse Mal. 3.5.
, but without reverence, respect, or regard in our ordinary and customary
talk, which at every word, and upon every triuiall and friuilous occasion, is
stuffed out with foolish and vain admiration, as oh God, oh Lord, oh Jesus, oh
Christ See Mr. Perkins his Government of the tongue
, tossing like a Tennis ball this great and fearful Name, the Lord our God,
the mighty Jehovah, which the very Jews fear and tremble to nominate at this
day.

Others again, in their Pharisaicall Orisons, Paganish Prayers, Heathenish
Bablings, use this word Lord, in their Tantologies and repetitions, as the
Papists the word Jesus, even like a Superstitious Popish charm, thinking to be
heard for their much babbling Mat. 6.7.
; nay, imagining (which is the gross and foggy ignorance of our both vulgar
and vicious common and carnal people) that if even in the hour of death, like
the Thief on the Luke 23.41
cross, or in their old age with Simeon, they cry, Lord, Lord; if they can
have time but to say Lord have mercy upon them, they are cockesure of heaven,
it is no matter how they live.

Ans. It is true indeed, if they had the Faith of Simeon and the penitent
Thief; if they had the Spirit of God, and zealous hearts, like them, they
should be heard and helped: yea, inter Pontem and Fontem, crying betwixt the
Bridge and the River, betwixt the Axe and the neck; for, Velox Spiritus sancti
gratia, the Spirit is nimble and speedy like the wind, in breathing grace:
and, Penitentia vera non sera, True Repentance is never too late, and he that
calls upon the Lord shall be Joel 2. Act. 2.21.
saved: But alas, then thou must call upon the LORD with such an heart as did
Simeon: for, the Lord reiects and abhors all prayers that come not from the
Esaey 59.13 Esaias 64.7.
heart, as he did Caines Sacrifice Gen 4.
, as execrable and abominable h. But now, thou that have lived in sin, in
health and in youth, in thy old age, and in sickness, by these sins, art
likely to be deprived of Gods Spirit, and of thine own heart. For, as Sin
quenches the Spirit, as water quenches fire: so, it takes away the heart,
Ose 4. verse 11. therefore Nabal when he dyed, he vvanted his heart: it was
dead like a stone 1 Samuel 25 37
. Now thou Nabal, thou fool, thou stony heart, what profit will thou have in
crying Lord, Lord? thou may cry so till thy tongue cleave to the roof of thy
mouth: thou may howl upon thy bed like a Wolf Ose 7.14.
, and yet the Lord stop his ears from hearing, and fold up his hands from
helping. The foolish Virgins knocked and cried, Lord open unto us, yet were
shut out, so shall thou. Mat. 25. For, not every one that says Lord, Lord,
shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, Math. 7.21. But he that does the will
of God, as Simeon did: now, the will of the Lord is, that thou should repent
betimes, call upon him, pray unto him, and praise him, but all from a touched
heart.

His desires Limitation. In this word, Now.
THE second thing obseruable here is his Desires Limitation, in this word Now:
which denotates the Time present. Which word, like all the rest in the
Scripture, has his weight; for, as S. Jerome once observed, Nulla Littera,
nulla Syllaba, etc, No Letter, no Syllable, nay, no Tittle, no Prick wants his
energie and force; or is vnsignificant in the original. Here Simeons mind may
be thus expressed; Lord it has pleased thee of thy mercy, not my merit, to
give me a revelation, that I shall not see death, until I see the Anointed
of the Lord, verse 26. now by the motion of thy Spirit, coming into the
Temple, verse 27. I perceive that this Babe that is brought in hither to be
done unto according to the custom of the Law, by his Parents, is anointed and
appointed to be the Prince, and Priest, and Prophet of his Church; therefore
Lord, now I am willing, nay, desirous to depart in peace, since I have in mine
arms the Prince of peace, in my heart the spirit of peace, in my conscience
inward peace: thou have kept touch, and performed what thou have promised: I
have my expectation satisfied, my desires accomplished, therefore I desire not
to live any longer. I am an aged man, and ready to be gathered to my Fathers; A
ripe apple, fit to fall from the tree, I cannot live long by the course of
nature, I desire not to live long by the instinct of grace: it is better for
me to remove out of this Tabernacle, then to run further in the Pilgrimage
of my few and evil days: better to depart in peace, then continue in this
worlds Prison. I know I must dye: never so well, never so willingly as now,
even now, when I have in mine arms the conqueror of death, the Lord of life.

We see in Simeon, Observe.
that the godly have oftentimes diverse raptures and sweet joys, as in life, so
chiefly in their dissolutions. So had Steven, when about to be stoned, he saw
the Heavens open, and the Son of man standing at the right hand of God, Acts
7.56. Such feelings diverse of the Martyrs have had at the Stake, nay, even in
the heat of flames and fires, so experimentally, that Mr. Glouer knew as well
when Gods Spirit came to him, as a cold body feels external heat or warmth:
so comfortably, Mr. Fo^e his Martirologie.
that good Cra^mer endured the burning of his (once guilty) hand with less
motion, then some abide the Gout or Toothache. Many such rauishments and
inward comforts diverse of the Saints have felt, (how ever at other times with
perplexed Job, and penitent David, so dejected, as though they were rejected of
God,) that they have desired the Lord a while to withdraw his presence, the
weak vessels of their frail nature not being able to contain that fullness
of the Spirit which they have felt. Such an ecstasy was Paul in, when rapt up
into the third heavens, he heard Verba ineffabilia, words not to be uttered,
himself transposed from himself; whether in the body, or without the body he
wist not: he was more then in an ordinary rauishment, in his sure Sanctuary
that he had against Principalities and Powers, life and death, etc. built upon
the sure anchor and Cornerstone of Gods love to him in Christ: so in his
annihilating and vilifying all things, as Pharisaicall learning, birth,
knowledge, riches, and the like, as dross and dongue in respect of the
excellent knowledge of Christ JESUS, and him crucified: so when he was ready
not only to go to Jerusalem to be bound, but to dye for Christ: so in his
expectation and assurance of that Crown which Christ, that righteous Judge,
would bestow upon him, having fought a good fight, and finished the Faith, his
affections were inflamed, his Spirit wondrously rejoiced, his heart ouer-ioyed,
and his desires transcendent. The like Iubilies have many of Gods Children kept
with their God, in such ecstasies of joy, as have showed themselves (like the
Sunne-beames through a cloud) through the veil of the flesh, even in outward
alterations, and Symptomies.



Aquinas, Bonauenture, Katheran of Sienna, etc. and other their Monks, Friars,
Virgins, vestall Votaries; but Surius is unsure in his reports, Lippomanus his
lips are not freed from lies, and Marrulus makes and marres many Fables. It is
more likely what is writ of Augustine and Bernard in their Soliloquies in this
kind.

Moses and Steven, whose faces so shined, when the one had been on the Mount
with God, the other disputing for God, that they seemed like the faces of
Angels, Acts 6.15.

Peter in Christ's Transfiguration, Mat. 12.

Alphonsus; others as constantly as Cyprian read Tertullian, or Alexander,
Homer: others traveling in their iourneyes, as Phillips Eunuch, Acts 8. Others
at their Tables, as duly as their meat: others praying three times a day,
with Daniel; thrice with Paul; frequently, yea at midnight, with David and
Silas; so long, so often, till their knees were grown as hard as the earth they
kneeled on, as Jerome in the Desert: others seven hours together, (yet
observing none canonically) as Father Latimer: so have they chawed their chud
on that hidden Manna which God gave them, having still a godly dropsy, (like
the Worldlings golden dropsy) vnstanched.

the inward man, as John surnamed the Divine, Revel. 1.10.17. such, Daniel,
Dan. 8.16.17. when groueling on the ground, he lay as dead; so Ezekiel by the
River Kebar, with many more.

Now, Reasons why the godly have often extraordinary rauishments.
the Reasons why God does thus delight, and often, as it were, ouer-ioy his
Children are:



Jonas and Paul tried, without ever any merry gales. The Traveler would be too
much perplexed with continual sh^wrings and tempests, without any intermission
or interposition of refreshing Sunnie beams: so were the world and worldly
woes insufferable and intolerable to a weak and wearied Christian, if the
holy Ghost the Comforter, should not wonderfully blow and breathe, and reflexe
upon us.

shall have ere long the fruition, of which these are certain Images and
Ideaes, sparks and reflections: for, even as the wicked and the reprobate, in
the rage and hell of their conscience, feel oft-times certain flashings of
hellfire, which are as it were summoners to judgment. Heralds of their
damnation, and Prologues of their Tragical execution: so God distills into the
hearts of the righteous hidden and holy heates, as it were drops of that
fountain of life with which they shall be refreshed; and glimpses from the
Sun of Righteousness, with whose beams they shall be ravished.

Of Redargution.
This then, first, reformes their minds, or refutes their madness, that think
the estate of Grace to be most comfortless. Many millions in the world think
the Professors of the Word to be deprived of all inward and outward joys; men
as retchlesse as richlesse, as forlorn in their souls as forworne in their
bodies; they appear to them as budlesse and beautilesse Trees, and withered
branches: and why? because they cannot discern any thing in them but sighing
and sobbing, and wayling and weeping, and Melancholy, and solitariness: they
will not be sociable with their neighbors in gossipping and company-keeping,
in walking abroad and talking, in prattling and prating at home, in meetings and
merriments in Tauernes and Tipling-houses, in feasts and frolickes, in sports
and pastimes, in dallyances and drinkings, in gurmundizing and gluttony; they
neither care for worldly play, as Carding or Dicing, etc. nor to see Plays,
the Baudes of loose lust: therefore they marvel how they live since they are
never merry. Hence the Lords own Simions, gracious and godly men, such as have
set their faces to Sion, framed aright their life, and fitted for death, are
censured and derided, as dastards and dotards, as silly and simple, as Monkish,
Monastical, Stoicall, and uncivil men; nay, as fantastiques and fools: hence
comes the hellish Proverb, Gods follower, Gods fools; that, Gods Sheep, Gods
Geese, Gods Gauders, and such like Blasphemies: but alas poor deluded Souls,
they must know that as our Savior Christ had meat to eat which the Jews
knew not of, and as he was to go whither his Disciples wist not of; so the
true Christian and believer has comforts here, that the world knows not of,
and is to go to endless and prizelesse comforts hereafter, such as worldlings
wot not of: here they have the testimony of a good conscience, as had Acts 24.
The description of a good conscience.
Paul, which is a continual feast, a continuated Christmas; always Iubile
year, the golden bed of Solomon, the beautiful Porch of the Temple, Fidus
acbates, a holy and a happy companion. Secondly, they have the love of God shed
abroad in their hearts by the Spirit of God. Thirdly, they have those
extraordinary joys, and sudden ecstasies, chiefly in their Soliloquies and
devotions with God, the Sun of his goodness shining upon them, in the heat
and light, in the comfort, and power of the Spirit, even after they have
rayned, powered, and showred down their tears into the Lords bosom, which
they would not exchange for Crowns and Empires. Fourthly, like Steven and
Paul, and Simeon here they are even filled with the holy Ghost, tasting of such
joys (which are but the first fruits of the Spirit, and the earnest of their
inheritance in heaven) as none know, but those which experimentally feel. For
as none knows the love of a Parent to his Child, but those that are Parents;
nor of a good Shepherd to his Sheep, a good Pastor to his people, but he
that is a good Shepherd indeed: so none knows the comfortable condition of a
good Christian, living and dying, but he that is a Christian indeed; a common
Christian, a natural man, a wicked man, a civil honest man knows it no more
then a young child does Greek and Hebrew; discernes it no more, then a blind
man does colors; feels it no more, then a stock, or a stone, or a dead man;
esteems it no more then Esau does his Birthright, or the Prodigo his
patrimony; then Aesops Cock, a Pearl: 1 Cor. 1.23*
accounts of it (as the Jews and Gentiles, and all profane men account of the
Gospel) even mere foolishness; and therefore they so blatter and blaspheme,
and like brute beasts speak evil of those things, Jude v. 10.
and those persons which they know not; but I will assure thee, how ere thou
think the poor and penitent Christian, the sincere and zealous, to rave, as
the Jews thought of Jeremy, to be distract, or mad, or besides himself, as
Festus thought Paul, Act. 26.24.
as Christ's Countrymen thought of our Savior, to be simple men, and fools,
etc. yet nevertheless they know, with David, that it is better to be a
doore-keeper in Gods house, nay, to suffer affliction, with Moses and Gods
people, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin, then to enjoy all the privileges
in Pharaohs Court, then to rejoice here for a while, with Dives, Luke 16.
Eccles. 12.
and Salomons young man, and then to quake in Judgment and be damned in hell:
yea, they even in this veil of tears have more joy in their fasting then thou
in feasting; more in praying, then thou in playing; more in sighing, then thou
in singing; for even in the midst of mirth the heart of the wicked is heavy,
when GOD strikes, and Conscience gnawes; but the godly are merry in prison,
Act. 16.25.
are comforted in persecution, rejoice after stripes, Acts 5.41.
praise God, in the deep, Jonas 2.1.2
and in the Whales belly, bless GOD after he has smit them, and exult in
Spirit in their old years, as did Simeon. Besides, thy joys are vain, vile,
carnal, sensual, like thy self (like the Horse and Ox, that delights only
in a good fat pasture, Exhortat.
though the Pinfold, and the slaughterhouse be the next dish: but theirs are
pure, chaste, sincere, heavenly, eternal, like that God that sends them, like
that Spirit that works them: therefore get thine eyes opened to see thy
misery, and join thy self to them whom now thou despisest, (as Rahab and
Ruth did to the true Church) that thou may find mercy.

Secondly, whereas Simeon is now willing to depart, having seen Christ, and so
rejoices in this expected object: it is obseruable, that the Patriarchs all of
them in their times and ages expected CHRIST, ever since the promise of this
Messiah was made unto our Protoplasts, Genesis 3.15.
our first Parents, Adam and Eve: Simeon looks for him here in his generation,
so did the Church of Jerusalem, so did the rest in their generations. Eve
thought he was then come when she bore Caine, confessing that she had
received a man from the Lord, Genesis 4.1. Abraham desired to see his day. Jacob
waited for his salvation, Genesis 48.18. Genesis 48.18.
Moses desired GOD to send him to deliver Israel out of Egypt, Exodus 4.13. Job
was comforted in this expected Redeemer, Job 19.25. Yea, Mat. 13.17
many Prophets and righteous men desired to see the things which we see, even
the Majesty of God clothed with flesh, as a man is shod with Sandals on his
feet. And sure the Ancients for this cause much extenuate the Polygamie and
multiplicitie of wives of the Patriarchs, as of Jacob, etc. as also in taking
their Maids as Concubines; which they say was done, non propter libidinem, sed
propter prolem, not for lust, but for multiplying a holy seed: every one in
their days desiring to propagate the promised Seed of the woman.

In which we see Gods great mercy to us now under the Gospel, Use. Of
Consolation.
more then to those under the Law: for, then came into the world the great
Physician of the world, to cure the great Patient, which was the world; which
so long did languish; when we stood in most need of him. The former ages had
but a glimpse of this light of the world; they saw him but darkely and
obscurely, tanquam in speculo, tanqua^ in anigmate, as it were in a cloud, in a
glass, in Leuiticall shadows; but we see him clearly, even fully, as the
Sun at noone day: perspicuously in the Gospel, Mat. 2.
even as the Wisemen saw him in the Stable, Visi^ beatifica.
as Simeon and Anna in the Temple: we have an happier vision of him then they,
even as the Angels more then we, he came indeed to the believers
comfortably, powerfully, Typically; but we receive him, as Simeon did,
personally: he came to Adam, with the promise, in the time of despair: to
Abraham, with supply, in time of Sacrifice: to Isaac, with relief, in time of
famine: in time of exile, with honor, to Joseph: in time of persecution, with
comfort, to Elias: in time of battle, with an hand on Gideons hilt: with an
eye, to the stone from David's fling: in time of invasion, with triumph, to
Ezekias: always hopefully, helpfully to his Church. For which cause, he is
called, The Star of Jacob, The Lion of Judah, The Rod of Isaac, etc.
Typically he came in Circumcision, Romans 3. in the Paschall Lamb, John 1. in
Manna, John 6. in the brazen Serpent, John 3. in the Arc, and on the Altar,
etc. He came figuratively, as our rest, in Noah; our increase, in Joseph; our
love, in David; our peace, in Solomon, our salvation, in Ioshuah, etc. But now
he is come to us personally, Vbi venit plenitudo temporis venit ille qui
liberauit nos a tempore.
in the assuming our nature, in the fullness of time, says Paul, Gal. 4.4. to
free us from all time, says Bernard. Note his mercy, he came to us
voluntarily, non compulsu Patris, sed consensu sui, not by compulsion from his
Father, but by his own consent: Non ex necessitate mandantis, Chrysostom.
sed ex voluntate venientis, says Chrysostom. Yea, Vltro venit and sponte, se
videndum att^lit, occidendum obtulit, Greg. Gregory.
Of his own accord, yielding himself to be seen of men, to be slain for
men. Yea, Basil.
Prepria benignitas inuitauit, misericordia traxit, veritas compulit; His
benignity to us invited him, his mercy drew him, his truth compelled him,
Basil. Here is his Mercy for our Consolation.

Of Instruction.
let us run after the sweetness of his odours; let us follow his footings,
since he came to lead us; let us work out our salvation with fear and
trembling, since he came to save us, 1 Timothy 4.9. Luke 19.10. Luke 19.10.
Let us return to the Bishop of our souls, since he came to find us, as
lost sheep; let us be no more the slaves of the Devil, since he came to
dissolve the works of the Devil, 1 John 3. let us entertain him, as did
Zacheus, and retain him, Luke 11. Genesis 28.
as did Jacob, when he would not let him go till he blessed him; let us feast
him, as did Matthew; wash his feet with our tears, Luke 7.
as did Mary; seek him sorrowing, as did his Mother; prepare for him an upper
lodging to eat his Passover in, as did his Disciples, 1 Cor. 6.16.
even our bodies and souls, the Temples of his Spirit; let us walk nearer to
Sion in this our light, since the Sun is come so near us, nay, even to us,
then the Patriarchs did in their darkness under the veil and cloud of the
Law.

Redargution.
and we shall be found as unworthy of Christ's revelation to us, as
unthankful for his manifestation amongst us, Luke 10.
as the very Jews themselves; nay, let us compare our selves with them, and
we shall justify them, as they did Sodom. Ever since CHRIST dwelt amongst
the sons of men, the kind of his usage has been too unkind; the course of
his entertainment has been too course; the form and manner of his welcome,
deformed and unmannerly: the world has been still so weak through ignorance,
as not to know; or so wicked through ingratitude, as not to acknowledge; or so
corrupt by nature, as not to welcome the Word incarnate, the Lord of Nature.
For, even in his birth at Bethlem, howsoever he had the hearts and admirations
of some few, some handfuls; as of Anna, Simeon, Zachary, Elizabeth, etc. As
also after, of his Disciples, of Nathaniel, Nicodemus, Joseph, Mary, Martha,
Lazarus, some healed Patients, convert sinners, penitent Publicanes, and such
like; yet the grossest and the greatest part, despised and dispited him. Look
upon him from the womb to the earth, from the Cradle to the Cross, from the
Cross to the Grave, and you shall see him still crossed by cursed instruments:
so look on him from Bethlem to Egypt, from Egypt to Nazareth, from Nazareth
to Capernaum, from Capernaum to Jerusalem, from Jerusalem to Golgotha; y^^
shall see him tossed from place to place, from post to pillar: Herod, the Devil,
the Jews, the People, the Scribes, the Pharisees, the Lawyers* the Herodians,
the Gentiles, the Romans, the Soldiers; Dogs, and Foxes, and Devils; Judas,
and Pilate, and Herod; Earth, and Hell, all opposed madly and maliciously even
against the Lords Anointed; whose rage from the first hour of his birth, till
the last of his death, could not be quenched without his blood; He came unto
his own, but his own received him not, John 1.11.20.

We surely are in the same predicament, Application.
if not worse. Compare us with the Patriarchs and we come as short of their
faith in Christ, obedience and sanctification, as they of our knowledge and
illumination; we come nearer unto the infidelity of profane Esau, flowting
Ismael, wicked Cham, cursed Canaan, and their seed, then we do to the Faith
of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, etc. to Noah's Obedience, and the holy lives of
the rest. For the Jews: wherein are we inferior in the highest measure of
ingratitude against Simeons Lord? we lodge him not at all, but cast him out of
the Inn of our hearts, with the Bethlems: we shut our gates against him with
the Samaritanes, when we reject his Word and Ministers: we bid him depart
from us, with the Gadarens* when we prefer our Swinish lusts before him: we
crucify him worse and oftener in his immortal body, then the Jews in his
mortal, when like mad dogs we fly in his face, and by swearing and
blaspheming wound his wounds, tearing and renting every part of his humanity;
and yet we will be Christians: But I know not how; unless on the contrary, as
the Cynick named his Man: as some say, Mons a mouendo, when it moves not; for
we move not after the motion of Christ. We are like the Hare, running one way
when we look another way. Appion. Christus venit ad homines, in homines, and
contra homines.
Well, let us look to it, Christ is come to us, John 1.14. but if we come not
unto him by Prayer, and into him by Faith, and he into us by his Spirit, John
14.18. he will come to us, and against us in Judgment, to our ruin and
destruction, Acts 7.31. Oh therefore Kiss the Son least he be angry, Psalm.
2.

Thirdly, in that Simeons desire of life was not simply for any love of life,
but only to see, and proclaim, and praise Christ the Messiah, to bless God
for this fountain of blessings to his Church. It is worth our animaduersion,
more worthy our Imitation, that we ought not simply to desire life for it
self, but that we might live to glorify God, and to the good of his Church
and Children. This point is plain by the Apostles precept, Romans 14.7.8. and by
his practice, Phil. 2.23.24. For, as here prescribes to others that none should
live or dye unto himself, but unto the Lord; that whether Christians live or
dye they should be the Lords: yea, that whether they live in the body, or
remove out of the body they might be the Lords, 2 Cor. 5.8.9. So, he himself
being in a strait what to do, whether to live in the flesh, or to be loosed
and be with CHRIST, is ouer-swayed with the love of his brethren, to dwell
with them still, only for the furtherance and joy of their Faith. So it must
be with thee in that rank wherein thou art.

Of Instruction.
for the gathering of the Saints, for bringing home the wandering Sheep, for
planting and watering Gods Vineyard, for feeding his people with knowledge and
understanding, for propagation of the Gospel, for conversion of souls, and
addition unto his Church such as shall be saved: and for this end, thy life and
thy livings must not be dear to thee; that by Preaching or Printing,
Disputing, Conferring, Writing, Praying and Meditating, (the things wherein
that holy Augustine and zealous Bernard were constantly and continually
employed) thou might be beneficial to the souls of thy brethren: yea, for
the accomplishment of these ends, as thou art called, A Light, Mat. 6.
and Salt, it must not be grievous unto thee to consume and melt thy self in
spending thy spirits to give light unto, and to season others. Thy ends in thy
Ministry, must neither be ambitious, ^h. v. 9.
like Diotrephes his, that loved pre-eminence, nor to be exalted on the right
hand or the left, (...). 21
with Zebidee's Sons: not to sit only in Moses his Chair, with the Scribes
and Pharisees: not covetous like Balaams and Iudass^s; Numb. 22. John 13.
but Christian and consci^nable, like Paul's and Peter's, and James, who t^^t
they might feed the flock, endured not only labors, and stripes, and
imprisonments, but even death it self.

Art thou a Magistrate? thy desire to live must be the discharge of thy duty,
the execution of thy function, the decision of Controversies, the cutting off
of strifes, in their causes, courses, and events; the judging rightly betwixt
man and man, etc. to be a nursing Father to the Church; to stand for Gods Truth
and Orthodoxe Religion; to be zealous for Gods glory, to defend the
fatherless, right the oppressed, to let the cause of the Widow come before
thee, to draw out and use the sword committed unto thee, for the defense of the
righteous and the right; for the offense of the wicked and their wrongs: these
are the ends thou must aim at in thy place, whether superior or inferior.

Art thou a governor, a Master of a Family? have thou a charge committed to
thee? thy desire to live, must be rightly to discharge it, and thy duty in it:
as namely, provision for thy Wife, and Family depending upon ^hee, walking
(like Zachary) holily, Luke 2.
in respect of God; honestly and unblameably, in respect of man; Christianly
and conscionably in thy calling and vocation: for that end, as also that God
may have glory; in thy private duties of Religion, as reading, and praying, and
instructing of thy Family within the bounds and limits of thy calling,
together with a discreet governing of them that are under thy command, by
correcting and encouraging as need shall require; that thy house, like the
houses of Abraham, Ioshuah, Crispus, Stephanus, and Cornelius, may be like unto
a little Church, wherein spiritual Sacrifices are offered unto God daily and
duly: that so thou may heat and warm those that are within thee, and that
thy light may break out to inlighten others outwardly.

So all other men, be they what they will be, from the Throne to the Plough,
from the King to the drawer of water, from the head to the foot, Physician,
Lawyer, Courtier, Student, Tradesman, Artificer, Mechanical man, Husbandman,
Soldier, Servant, must live, and desire to live, not to themselves, but that
in their places, 1. by their Life; 2. their Labors; 3. their Prouokements; 4.
their Examples: their light should so shine here, Mat. 5.
that others seeing their good works, might bring glory to him who is the
Father of lights: to him which is the light of the Gentiles, and the glory of
his people, even here Simeons LORD, whom Simeon prayseth, and to whom he
prays.

Of Redargution.
But sure the lives of most men, from the highest to the lowest, is as contrary
to this light* and as irregular from this rule, as darkness and irregularitie
it self: for, if we should make a quere, and an inquisition here, as the Lord
will make in Judgment, for such Simeon^; E^ek. 9.
if they should now be marked in the forehead like Ezekiels Mourners: where
should we be inquisitiue for them? In the Court? perhaps there might be culled
out some Joseph, as in Pharohs: some Obediah, as in Achabs: some Daniel, as in
Nabuchadnezzars. In great Houses? some Naaman, as in the house of Rimmon: some
Jacob, in Labans: some Chuza and Iohanna, as in Herod's. In the Camp? some
Cornelius. In the City? some Lot. In the Country? some Boaz. Amongst great
ones? some Nichodemus. Amongst private men? some Nathaniels, that desire to
live no longer, then God may be glorified of them, in them, and by them. But
compare them to the multitudes that swarm in every corner, of Court,
Countries, and Cities, of all sexes and sorts, (like Egyptian Locusts and
Grassehoppers) that live only to themselves, and for themselves, that limit
themselves in themselves, in effecting their own proud, covetous, vain,
ambitious, sinister ends, and carnal desires, without any reference or
relation to Gods glory, or the good of others? and they are very few: one of a
City, and two of a Tribe, Ier. 3.14. like the after-Vintage, and the Harvest
gleanings; like the few names written in Sardi, Apoc. 3.4. as for example, in
particulars, ah si fas dicere? sed fas.

In the Sons of Leui, how many there be that live of the Altar and serve not
at the Altar? that scumme away the fat, but pollute the the Sacrifice, like
Elie's Sons? that seek sua, non suos, their own gains, not the peoples
good? Qui se pascunt, non oues; that feed themselves of the flock, but not
the flock, over which the holy Ghost has made them Ouer-seers? that seek for
nothing (as was once truly said of the ancient Abbots, Monks and
Cloysterers,) but a lazy life and carnal command, Otium cum honor; against
whom these, and all such complaints as these, which Gregory and Bernard took
up in their times, might be well used and urged? I say, how many there be of
such, I rather leave to the consideration and deploration of such as have any
eyes or hearts, then to the expostulation of this place: only I say, whether
such are Simeons, or Simons, or Sinons; like Jude, or like Judas, who sees not?

Secondly, for the Magistrates: what are the aims and ends of most of them? To
discharge those duties that the Word inioynes them? which those worthy Lights,
Moses, Phineas, Ioshuah, Samuel, Nehemiah, Solomon, have by their president and
practice laid before them? No verily: for, then we should not have the
Sabbath, which above all days should be sanctified, so profaned; so much
drunkenness abounding, uncleanness ouerflowing, Oaths breaking forth, by
Gods Law capital and criminal, and by death penal, unreformed; nay,
vnreprehended, unremoved, yea, unreproved: which shows that many of them live
only to the satisfying and serving of their own covetousness and
inconsionableness, like Ahab, Festus, and that infoelix Felix; or
licentiousness, like Herod; but neither unto GOD, nor to do good, unless to
themselves.

Thirdly, as we see the motion of the head and Eye, Ecclesiastical and
Political, of Ministers and Magistrates, merely natural, (like that of the
Elements and Beasts) after which the whole bulk of the body, of the people,
moves: so in the heads Oeconomicall, we shall see little spiritual. For, what
is the aim of Masters and Mistresses in their households regiment? is it Gods
glory? the good temporal and eternal of those that are under them? do they
live, or desire to live that by their means their households might be the
households of Faith? their wives Christ's Spouses? their Children Gods Children,
and Heirs of of Grace? their Servants Gods Servants, the Lords Freemen? their
Kinsemen, of the spiritual affinity and consanguinitie of Christ? that their
strangers within their gates, with them might enter in at the Gates of Sion?
Are these their ends? Cuius contrarium verum est, the clean contrary (or at
least contradictorie) is verified in most. Let experience speak: look into
their houses, into their regiment, into their carriage and disportment; and ye
shall see their exercises such as were used in the Siege of Thebes, covetous
carding and dicing, or wanton and promiscuous dancing: you shall find more
shows of Religion in the use of the Word, in the house of a Jew; more seeming
prayers in the house of a Turk, Papist, or Pagan (who pray oftener to Saints
and Idols then they) then in their houses, which are rather dens of Devils, and
cages of unclean Birds, then Churches. What are the desires of such who sees
not? What their deserts who knows not? who fears not?

In the same rank are the rest: where is the Tradesman, (as Job of the good
Messenger) one of a thousand, let him stand forth, whose heart tells him, that
truly and sincerely in his Trade and Calling he aims aright? and so all
others, let their souls speak. Who in their traffic and commerce with men
aim at GOD, at the profit and emollument of others, and not wholly, or for the
most part, at themselves? Who in serving of man seeks directly and immediately
to serve God and not rather himself? Who seeks grace and godliness, and not
gain? such an one erit mihi magnus Apollo: I would travel far on my feet
to find such a Phoenix.

For the other sort, that live either in no calling, or in a sensual sinful
calling, such as riotous Prodigoes, profane Esau's, vain Gentlemen, gull
Gallants, retchlesse Ruffians, licentious Lechers, graceless Gamesters, filthy
Brothellers, Queanes, Curtizans, and beastly Bawdes, with all the rest of that
restless and retchlesse crew: alas, what good do they in the world? what aim
they at, but like Swine to feed? like the rich Churl, to go bravely and
fair deliciously with the Sabarites and Sardanapalus, to invent and wallow in
polluting pleasures, to feed their fancy, please their own humors, content
themselves, delight the flesh, and damn the soul? living to eat, eating to
live the life of sin; doing as much good to others, as the Moath to the
garment, the Caterpiller to the fruit, the Cantharides to the Ointment,
spoiling and infecting (like plaguey people) whom thy live amongst. Therefore
these and all these, Terrae invtile pondus.
as they are unprofitable burdens to the earth, they shall be swept away from
the earth like Iabin and Sisera, and the Sodomites, even into hell, Psalm. 9.17.
As they glorify not God, which was the end of their Creation and Redemption
(which thy forget) so God will never glorify them. Therefore let us all, both
men, with Simeon, and women, with Lidia, Dorcas and Deborah, etc. do good here
in life, that we may receive good in and after death: live, and desire to live
only to God, and for God here, that we may live with God for ever hereafter.

Fourthly, and lastly, here we are to take notice of that which we have
observed in Moses before; namely, that Simeon is willing to dye: for the whole
Text imports and carries it, that there was in him no unwillingness to dye; not
so much as in show: but a great willingness, propensitie, and disposition to
his dissolution, whether we take his words here as Optatiue, Oh that thou
would let thy Servant depart, as some do: or Indicative, Now thou do let,
etc. or Precatory, Lord, now let, etc. or plainly, as they are here; all
import perspicuously that he dyed voluntarily.

From whence note, that a good Christian is willing to dye: we may see this,
as in Simeon, so in Paul. Phil. 1.23. who desired to be dissolved, and to be
with CHRIST. The like might be instanced in the death of Moses, Deuteronomy. 34.
who at Gods command, went as voluntarily up to the Mount to dye, and to be
sacrificed himself, as Abraham went to sacrifice his Son. So, if we
consider the death of the Patriarchs, of Abraham himself, of Jacob, of David,
etc. that dyed naturally: as also of Saint Steu^n, Mat. 27. Acts 7.^
of our Savior Christ himself, in the Scripture: as also of blessed Martyrs
that were put to death violently, we shall find that they went unto their
deaths, and into the Grave, as voluntarily as Noah into the Arc; taking Gods
stroke upon themselves as patiently as Aaron did, Leuit. 10.
when God smote his two Sons, Nahab and Abihu; and as Eli did Samuels report
of his houses ruin, 1 Samuel 3, The Saints very last words, being of the same
strain and Dialect with Simeons, import so much, as we may see Moses, Deuteronomy.
32. (with this good old man here) concluding his life with a Swan-like Song. So
also David. 2 Samuel 23. So Babilas the Martyr, feared not that his soul should
return unto her rest: neither did Ignatius care when he dyed, Eusebius. lib. 3
c. 30. Vide Grin. Apotheg. morientium.
or of what kind of death he should dye; nay, though he were grinded by the
teeth of Lions, because he was the Lords Manchet, and must be made clean
bread for Christ. So Melancthon, almost in the same words with Simeon, If it be
the will of God I am willing to dye; and, I beseech him to grant me a joyful
departure. With many more.

Now, the Reasons which make the child of God so willing to die, are many, the
principal are these.

First, Si qua dies bona est, velocibus praeterit horis. Innimica tenacius
haerent.
because he finds no good in this life, no joy, no content, more then a
Prisoner in his bonds, a bird in the snare, or a beast in the ginne: his joys
being imperfect, and mixed with a thousand sorrows, having for one Sunny day a
hundred tempestuous storms: his best days being like Jacobs, few and evil;
his worst, many and miserable.

Secondly, Nil boni in vita, nil mali in morte.
because there is nothing in this life, which gives true and sollid
satisfaction to his soul, finding (with Solomon) all Sublunarie things to be
vanity and vexation of spirit, as Honors, riches, wisdom, wealth,
knowledge, Babels building, Moses and Daniels Egyptian and Caldean learning,
Cressus and Crassus his wealth, Midas his gold, Policrates good success,
Ezekias his Treasure, Nero's Music; all other things which should do good to
the nature of man, or delight the mind of man, giving him no more content,
then air and wind to an empty stomach: for, as a Quadrangle cannot fill a
Triangle, but some corner will be capable of more; so the whole circuit of this
round Orb, this Quadrangular world, cannot content, the heart of man, which
Anatomists say is Triangular in the form; God only, Christ and his Spirit,
the blessed Trinity, that made the soul, can fill it with true delights, and
fulfill the true desires. In which respect the Christian, to whom all things
else are bitter, but Christ, is not quieted till he enjoy Christ, no more then
the animate or inanimate creatures are at peace till they have their rest in
that center whitherto they move: his heart still trembling till it be with God,
like the Needle touched with an Adamant, still quiuering and shaking, till it
look directly to the North Pole: and therefore as Noah's Dove, sent out of the
Arc, found no rest to the sole of her foot, till she returned into the Arc
again; so the true Christians, the Lords mournful Doves, find no resting
place here, till their souls return to the Arc of their strength, that God,
that sent them out into their bodies, even as the Jewish Tabernacle had no
rest, but was carried from place to place till it entered into Canaan. Exodus
26.1. and 33.7.

Thirdly, because of the crosses and afflictions which are incident unto him in
this life: for, as the whole humane nature is subjected to the Cross, so
chiefly the Christian. The world which is a Paradise to the carnal, Psalm
34.19 Act. 15.21
is a Purgatory to the Christian; Many are the troubles of the righteous; all
that will live godly in Christ must suffer affliction; every Disciple must take
up one cross or other, if he will follow Christ, which crosse-way is the way
to heaven; every child of God is corrected ere he be received: the purest
Gold must be in the furnace; the Lords own Wheat is thrashed, winnowed, and
grinded: and Gods trees must be pruned: Vt vnda vndam, as wave succeedes wave,
so cross succeedes cross, as David's Lion succeedes his Bear, 1 Samuel 17.37.
and Goliath the Lion, 1 Samuel 18.27. and the Philistines Goliath, and Saul the
Philistines, 1 Samuel 21. Now the Christians death is most welcome, that changes
his M^ra to Naomi, his bitterness into beauty, which delivers him from dangers
and dolours, Genesis 19.
as the Angel did Lot from the fire, Dan. 3.
and the three Children from the flames, and Daniel from the Lions: Dan. 6
death (like Zerobabel) delivers the Lords Israel out of Babylon, Zach. 4.6.
therefore death must needs be welcomed like a day of deliverance, a year of
Jubilee which brings Joseph out of Prison, Genesis 41.
Genesis 31. Job 41.12.
Jacob out of servitude, and Job from the dunghill. Mors enim mal^r^m
remedium, and portus humanis tempesta^ibus, Plutarch. de consol. ad Apol.

Fourthly* in respect of their sins which cleave so fast on, which they
cannot shake off; Sin, with which they are at opposition and deadly feud,
dogs them at the heels, like a Serieant: waytes on them, like a Catchpole:
insinuates into them, like a claw-backe: creepes into their bosoms, as a
Serpent stings them at the heart, like an Adder: follows them, as their
shadow: sticks close to them, like their shirt upon their skin, their skin
upon their flesh, and their flesh upon their bones: insomuch that it burns and
frets them as Dianiraes poisoned shirt did Hercules, and as the Ticke vexes
the Ox: which makes them cry out in the anguish of their souls, In me duo
armati, Amor and Odium, Jacob and Esau, Caro and Spiritus, etc. Hier.
with Paul, and the faithful, Romans 7. O^ miserable man that I am! who shall
deliver me from this body of sin? They complain of the strife of the Flesh
and the Spirit, as Rebeccah of the struggling betwixt Jacob and Esau. Now death
comes and rescues, and makes thy bail, and plays the Midwife, and ends the
broyle, therefore welcome to the well disposed.

Fifthly, they are here Pilgrims and strangers, 1 Pet. 2.11. as was David, and
the rest in their ages: they are here exuls and banished men, as Children put
forth to nurse from their Mothers, as Scholars and Pupils sent to foreign
Schools, and to far Universities: and therefore their returning home to
their own Country, their restitution to their provided Kingdom, their
fetching home to their Father and friends, their retyring to their Fathers
house, though it be through the shadow of death, must needs be acceptable.

Sixthly, they know that the day of their death is better then the day of life,
Eccles. 7.3. because they dye prepared, their souls purged, their hearts by
Faith purified. As they have entered into the first degree of eternal life in
this life, when they believed, and received the gifts of the Spirit, the
earnest of their Salvation; so they enter into the second degree in death,
August. in. Job. Qui cupit dissolui, and esse cum Christo, non patienter
moritur, sed patienter viuit, and delectabiliter mo^itur.
when their souls are carried into heaven, and they dye in assurance of the
third degree, when body and soul shall be reunited to participate of
happiness, as they have lived together in holiness.

Seauenthly, they dye, as with a desire, so in an expectation to see and behold
the face of Christ; of which, with Steven, they have some glimmering in their
deaths: and therefore death to the godly, so far as regeneration rules, is no
more burdensome then the stripping off the clothes, unto a loving Spouse, to
go into the Marriage Bed of her contracted Bridegroom. Hos. 2.19.

Eighthly, they have kept a good Conscience with God and man, like Paul, Acts
24. And therefore they fear not judgment, no more then a true man fears to
look the Judge in the face.

Ninthly, wherein they have offended God, they have their sins remitted, and
therefore fear not to hold up their hand at the bar, since they are quit
before by Proclamation of all the promises in the Gospel, and have the Kings
Pardon sealed them in the Sacraments.

Iacula praeuisa minus ferunt.
Tenthly, they have often in life invred themselves to think, speak, record and
meditate of death, even as did Christ their head, and his Servants, Jacob,
Moses, and Paul, as appears in the Word, and therefore Deaths dart foreseen,
Praemoniti, Praemuniti.
wounds them less, being forewarned of it, they are fore-armed for it. Even
as the Soldier that has been long trained, and in many skirmishes* is more
courageous in the maine Battle, and as he that has long exercised himself
in foyles, is more hardy to fight with sharp: so the petty conflicts that the
godly have had in their own breasts with Deaths fear, make them more hardy
to encounter Deaths force.

Eleuenthly, they entertain it as a reward for their work, as a rest from
their labor: as willingly as the hired labourer receives his hire, and
reposeth his wearied limbs, Dan, 12. Esaias 57.2.

Twelfthly, they are persuaded, and have their Faith grounded in an happy and
blessed change, they expect a Metamorphosis, and an alteration, a comfortable
transmutation of Earth for Heaven, of the Sea for the Haven, of Grief for
Glory, of the outward Court, for the Sanctum Sanctorum, of a Mortal for an
Immortal body, of Enon for Salem, Sodom for Segor, Egypt for Canaan, the
Wilderness of Sin for the Land of Promise, of a House of day terrestrial, for
a House celestial above the Clouds, 2 Cor. 5.1. And therefore they are as
willing to make this exchange, as a poor beggar would be to exchange his poor
rags for some Princes robes, or some poor man to leave his smoaky, rainy
Cottage for a pompous Pauilion and decked Chamber in the Court.

To reap the Vintage of this discourse, Use.
the use to us, is first of examination, in that it is an argument of a good
man to be willing to dye, as here was Simeon. Lay thou thy hand on thine heart,
and search in thy soul what propensitie and disposition thou find in thy
self to dye. Many arguments there are in the Word and trials both of a holy
and a happy man, both affirmative, in showing what he does: and negative, in
showing what he auoids, David points at him in the first Psalm, as also in the
32. Psalm, verse 1.2. as also in the 15. Psalm. So does our Savior Christ,
in the first eight Verses of the fifth of Matthew. So the Apostle Paul in the 2.
of Cor. chapter 7. ver. 11. with other such places; as namely, delighting in the
Word, meekness, mourning for sin, hunger after righteousness, etc. care to
please God, Fear, Z^ale, Indignation against sin, not letting Money to Usury,
and the like: yet sure there is no greater evidence of an honest and holy
heart, then so to walk uprightly with God in life, as always to be willing to
embrace the strictest Summons of death; to be as ready to depart out of this
world, as the Israelites were to depart out of Egypt.

Again, it is most usually a note of a soul either altogether soyled in
corruption, or endued with a smaller measure of Sanctification, to be violently
possessed with a continuated fear of death: and therefore in this particular
find out thy self, and try in what case thou stand; for, the more
unwilling thou art to dye, commonly the more Nature rules in thee, the more
earthly, fleshly, and carnal thou art: the more willing, commonly the more
Grace reigns, the more thou art holy, heavenly, and spiritual: in which case
you shall observe, that the desire to live or not to live, to dye and not to
dye, has oftentimes ebbed and flowed, according to the measure of grace or
corruption, of sin or of sanctification. Every man may find this in his own
heart usually, upon the search.

Hence it was, Luke 8.33
that our Savior Christ having the greatest measure of grace, was most willing
to dye, amongst all the sons of mortal men, as appears in the Gospel, by
his often speaking of his death, as desiring it, Mat. 10.^8 So 16.21.17.22.23.
by his hastening Judas the actor in it, John 13. in calling Peter Satan, that
dissuaded him from it, Mat. 13.23. yea, in accounting it his Baptism, Luke
20.50. yea, his meat that he was to eat, John 4 32. yea, his exaltation, ver.
28. yea, a thing that he desired, Luke 22. And when he came to act the bitter
part in this dying Tragedy, how voluntarily did he send out his soul? He gave
up the Ghost, says the Evangelist: the spirit was not taken from him, (for no
power could do that) but he gave up his Spirit into the hands of GOD his
Father; Emisit, non amisit Spiritum, he sent out his Spirit (as Noah sent the
Dove out of the Arc) willingly, it was not taken from him compulsorily. Now,
that which holds in the Head, Christ, in some proportion holds in the Saints,
his Members, who are conformed into the similitude both of his life and death;
the nearer they come unto Christ, by the union of Faith, the more they
participate of the Spirit of Christ in life; the more willing they are to go
to Christ, and to have a further communion with him, in and after death.



The reasons are these:

Reasons why wicked men are unwilling to die.
First, because they have their pleasures in this world: to which they are
wedded, and with which they are intoxicated and bewitched, as Ulysses and
Diomedes companions with Circes charms, and Calipsoes Cups, till they be
turned into beasts. Now, what delight has the beast, but in fair feeding, and
carnal companying, according to his kind? neither they, being as loath to
leave these pleasures, as the child his babble, or the fool his folly.

Secondly, Death depriues them of their worldly promotions, Acts 12.
it throws Herod from his seat, and Baltazar from his Throne, Dan. ^.
it expulleth Monarchs from their Countries, and with as great a sway as that
Antichristian man of Rome kickes off their Crowns, deposing Kings, disposing
Kingdoms, laying their honors in the dust. And therefore no marvel that the
proud Impes of Lucifer fear it, as hautie Hammon did the Gallows.

Thirdly, it pluckes them from their profits; it takes Nabal from his Sheep;
Ahab from his usurped Vineyard, and Midas from his Gold, which worldlings are
as vvilling to leave, as the dog the Flesh-pot, as the hungry Kite the sauory
carrion: to live in the earth always, it is their desire, as much as the water
is desired of the fish, and the Air of the Bird, and the earth of the Moale:
they are as content to build tabernacles here, as Peter was upon the Mount,
Mat. 17. but to go into the earth, that is, d^rus sermo, a harsh word; they
are as willing to leave the world, as the Bird, the Beast, and the Fish, are,
to forsake their nourishing Elements; as the starued child is to part with the
desired dugge. Oh Death, how bitter art thou to a man whose portion is in the
world? says the Wiseman. Ob mors mordens; bitter indeed as gall and
wormwood.

Fourthly, Death depriues the wicked not only of their goods, but of their
Gods, what ever they make their Idols, and give their hearts unto; which Idols
they as unwillingly leave, Judge. 17.
as M^^hay did his, and as the Papists their Idolatrous Mass; Genesis 31.19
as Rachel did her Fathers Idols, which she concealed and covered.

Fifthly, Death takes them away from their pleasing companions, which they are
as loath to part fro, as Elisha was to leave Elias, as Ruth to leave Naomi, but
most unwilling to exchange them for the company of Devils and Hell Hounds.

Sixthly, they are unfitted and unprepared for Death: they have not made their
accounts straight; they have not Oil in their Lamps; they have abused their
Talents of gifts external and internal, and therefore they quake to be
brought by Death to render an account of their Stewardship, with the wicked
Steward: to meet the Bridegroom, with the foolish Virgins: to be called in
eoram before their great Master, with the wicked Servant that smote his
fellow-seruants, and with the other unprofitable Servant.

Seauenthly, they have no hope in death, except a vain and wanne hope, such as
perishes like the untimely fruit of a woman. Death (like Michay to Ahab) never
prophesies any good to a wicked man, and therefore he is as unwilling to dye,
as a Thief and Malefactor to be brought before the Judge; as a bad debtor
before his creditor; as a Swine to the slaughter: for, as the Swine by a
natural instinct, knows that he is good for nothing but the Shambles; so,
the wicked, by the rage of his own conscience, which is like the flash before
hell fire; and by an Historical Faith, whereby he believes there is a hell,
and everlasting fire for such as he is; Fornicators, Esaias 30.33 Mat. 25.41
Revel. 21.8. 1 Cor. 6.9.10 Jude 4.13. Mat. 7.23.
whoremongers, drunkards, wantons, thieves, covetous, impenitent, unbelievers,
and all other workers of iniquity; he knows that he is good for nothing but
to be burned, and to be stubble and fuel for that flame. And therefore as the
Swine shows his dislike of the Shambles and his slaughterer, by whining and
crying and repining; so the hoggish, Epicuri de grege p^rcus.
Epicurish, carnal man, shows his discontent and disobedience unto God, and
to his summons by death, by muttering, murmuring, barking against heaven, and
blaspheming.

If we apply this point by use unto our times, Use.
we shall find infinite millions and multitudes of carnal and wicked men,
swarming like the Egyptian Locusts and Grasshoppers amongst us; for alas, how
many are there, which bear up their heads high, and set up their crests, exalt
their horns, and prancke up their Peacockes plumes, lifting up themselves
above others in the pride of their hearts? boasting like Braggadochies, of their
birth, valor, learning, wit, wealth, parts, and prowess; showing much
drunken, and swaggering, and irefull, and reuengefull valor, in their base and
brutish passions: and yet the same at the imagination and apprehension of
death, show themselves as arrand cowards, as the Arcadians Clineas or Dametas;
altogether daunted and dismayed like Gorgon at the sight of Medusaes head: they
quiver and quake like an Aspen-leafe, shake and tremble like the Aguish sick
man: at the thought of it their heart trembles, their blood is con^ealed, and
like Baltazar in the like case, their countenance is changed, and their knees
smite together: the sound of death to them is the most harsh of all sounds, and
puts them sometimes in a deadly sown; the noise of the roaring Canon is not so
fearful to the fainting Soldier, nor the Lightning and Thunder was so
terrible to Nero, as the summons of death to such natural men, whether by the
Harbenger thereof, Sickness, or from the condemning voice of a Judge, or by
such means, for these reasons before mentioned. What does this argue, but a
guilty conscience, a secure soul, a hardened heart, a carnal mind, and a
maine measure of infidelity, incredulity, and want of faith, in the remission
of sins, the resurrection of the body, the immortality of the soul, and
hope of a better life: which considerations, as they have moved the ancient and
modern Martyrs, Ignatius, Policarpus, Laurence, Cyprian, and others in our
precedent age, French, German, and English, to subject themselves to the
mouths of Lions, flames of fire, and all other tortures and torments, which
Madness and Malice could invent, etc. So the diffidence of these, the want of
the persuasion of Gods love, and expectation of wrath and vengeance after this
mortality, makes wicked men entertain Death as Ahab did Elias, even as their
greatest enemy, as their Iaylor, their Serieant, their Butcherer, their
Executioner, as the curber of their delights, and procurer of their curse. Yet
that I be not mistaken, I do not here condemn all fear of death, and make it
such an essential note of Gods child, as though every one that feared God did
not at any time, or in any respects, fear to dye: or that wicked men might not
sometimes, and upon some servile respects, with some show of alacrity undergo
death: for, First, I know that there is in all men a natural desire to live,
which caused Ezekias to mourn when he was to dye, Esaias 38.10. And David to
pray that his soul might live, Psalm. 6.4. and Psalm. 119. As also our Savior
Christ to desire the Passage of the cup from him, Luke 22. There being a
natural desire in the best of Gods Saints to live. Nature fearing her
dissolution, and the body and soul being as loath to part as two friends that
a long time have lived and loved together. Secondly, besides, I know Gods
Children may be desirous to live, as to glorify God more: so, for some other
good ends propounded, as for the better setting their estates to their
successiue seed: for the establishing their houses, for to dispose of their
Children in some religious courses: which was the cause that Ez^k^as desired to
live, say Interpreters; because when the Prophet brought this message of death
to him, he was without issue, and left none to succeed him in his Kingdom, as
Gods promise was to his Father David, 1 King. 8.^5*3. Thirdly, a godly man is
sometimes in distress and perplexity of mind, as David was when he made
the sixth Psalm. at which time he is unwilling to depart, till GOD shine upon
him again with his favor. Fourthly, a godly man may pray sometimes against
some kind of death; as our Savior Christ did, praying not simply against
death, but against that cursed death of the Cross; fearing not death, but the
curse of the Law that went with death. Fifthly, I know that even natural men
have made light account of death, such as the Decians and the Fabritians,
Curtius and Codrus, with others amongst the Romans, and Athenians, that
exposed and spent their lives for the good of their Country, I know even of
obstinate Heretics, such as the Gnostiques, and the Circumcellions: more
lately Michael Sernetus; many modern Papists; yea, the late Arrian burnt in
Smithfield, have some of them undergone death more willingly and chearefully
then those that have had in them far more grace and sanctification: Wicked
men may dye willingly for sinister respects.
but some of these have embraced death so welcomly, out of a moral desire of
doing good to their Country, or out of vaineglory, to be spoken of, like those
Heathen; or out of obstinacy, or desperate madness, or perverseness against
the truth, or Diabolical delusions, or erroneous conceits, or Atheism, or
opinion of merit, or chiefly pride of heart, to be magnified and famoused of
their favorites, or some other sinister ends, not for Gods glory, or hope of
any better condition after this life, as these Heretics. So that my
conclusion still holds, notwithstanding these doubts and scruples, that Grace
kisseth Gods rod, though in the hand of Death* Nature barks and bites at the
hand that holds the rod: Gods Sheep going quietly to their graves, like Lambs
to be sacrificed; carnal men gruntling and complaining like Swine to be
butchered.

unwilling to her dissolution, all are to be exhorted to use the means to
help forward their spiritual part, to be more willing to curb their carnal
part, Means to make us dye willingly.
in it nilling. The means are two: first, privative, for the remouall of the
impediments which lie in the way: secondly, positive, in encouraging us to
enter the way of all flesh. What the causes are that cause the carnal man to
sing Loath to depart, you have heard; as namely, the loss of his pleasures,
profits, preferments, promotions here, with the like; in all which things we
must look to our hearts, and be watchful Centurions over our affections,
least they be carried with too violent a course and torrent, in the prosecution
and pursuit of these terrestrial and earthly things; we must not be mad upon
the world as worldlings are: let us not place our affections on things below,
but on things above, where CHRIST sits at the right hand of GOD: let us use
this World as though we used it not; as we use Physic and wines, modice,
medice, with moderation and mortification, as a Student uses recreations, for
necessity, not vanity: let us not fall down and worship the Devil, though
he would give us it all: let us not bow the knee to Baal, nor adore the
golden Calfe, nor sell our souls for the trash and the dongue, the Silver and
Gold.
white and red dust of it, as Judas did: let us touch riches tenderly, with our
hands, not with our hearts, as we do Thorns, because they are Thorns: let
us not love va^ne pleasures, least after their B^eish honey we feel their
Waspish sting: when these charmers charm to delude us, let us be as wise as
Serpents, stopping both our ears (as she does) with the tail and the earth;
remembrance of our ends (of which the tail is an embleame) and of our earth,
whither we shortly must. Thus must we first learn to practice this hardest
point of Christianity, in dying to the world, ere ever we can be willing out
of faith and feeling to dye out of the world: for alas, what causes men that
they have as little heart to go into their Mother-earth, as the Moale has to
come out of the earth; but only that they love the earth too well? being
desirous ever to live upon the earth, but never to lie in the earth. Why list
not worldlings return to their dust, but only that (as true children of the
old Serpent) the curse of the Serpent is upon them to lick the dust, minding
earthly things here, their end being damnation hereafter. Phil. 3.17.

Secondly, when this is performed, in breaking off thy desires from the world,
which is Terminus a quo, the place which thou leauest, then fix thy eye upon
another world, Terminus ad quam, the place whither thou go. Look not too
much at the grisly face of Death, which will aghast thee; but at the end of it,
where thou shall see as many comforts as Elishaes Servant saw, to encourage
thee. Even as he that is to pass over some great and deep River, must not
look downe-ward to the water, but must cast his eye to the bancke on the
further side: so look over the waves of death, and fix the eye of thy faith
upon eternal life. Look not at Death in the glass of the Law, in which it is
set out, as a curse and the downe-fall to the gulf of destruction, but in the
Crystal Glass of the Gospel, as it is changed and altered so by the death
of CHRIST that it is a sweet sleep, and resting cool harbor.

First, therefore consider, how there is a blessing accompanies and attends thy
death, pronounced by the Spirit it self, Reu. 14 13. which is alone sufficient
to stay the rage of thy affections in the ordinary fear of death: for, who
fears blessings, since even profane Esau sues for a blessing, and even the
very Heathens so much desired that blessedness which their Philosophers, of
all sorts, so much disputed, but never so soundly determined as God does here?

Secondly, the same Spirit calls it, A resting from thy labor. Now even the
Ox, Horse, and Ass, desire resting from labor, to be untied from their
taskes, vnloden from their Burdens all the creatures and the Elements, which
groan under vanity, desire cessation from motion: every thing aims at his
quiet and rest, and do not thou? Now death, I pray thee what is it, but a
buster of bonds; a destruction of toil; an arriving at the Haven; a Journey
finished; thy co^summatum est; thy q^ietus est; thy laying away of an heavy
burden; even sin it self, which (as Erasmus wittily) is heavier then Gold,
Silver, Lead, and Iron, in that the weight of it weighed and pressed down the
Angels of light into the pit of hell, and payned Christ our Savior our
substitute, on the Cross? What I say, is this death, but the shaking off of
gyues, and an end of banishment, a period of grief, an escape of dangers, a
destroyer of all evils; Natures due, Countries joy Heavens bliss. Woes Haven;
the Key to open the door to Christians, as it did to CHRIST, Luke 24 26 of
blessedness, rest, and immortality; dignifying, nay almost Deifying whom God
has elected, Nil boni in vita, nil mali in morte.
and called in grace, and called to the grave? this is the right partition of
it into his parts and passages, as Antiquity has christened it, and our age
has called it, and the godly have found it: Oh then, why should thou boggle
at it, since there is as little hurt in death to the good, as there is little
good in life to the bad, as we shall further prove in some particulars
hereafter?

Thirdly, let this cogitation animate thee to sing Simeons Song, in being at
least willing, if not desirous to depart, because God takes thy part in thy
departing, if thou be his: thou have as the Promise, so the Performance of
his comfortable presence. It has been the Lords constant and continuated
custom to be with his Children, like a friend at need, in their distress,
whose exigents and extremities have been his opportunities. Thus he was
present with Noah* in the Flood, Genesis 7. with Lot, in Sodomes flames, Genesis 19.
with Jacob, in his flight from Esau, Genesis 33. with Joseph, in Dodons pit, and
Putiphars prison: with Moses, when he went to Pharaoh, when he was with
Pharaoh, and sled from Pharaoh: with Israel, in the Red Sea, Exodus 14. with
David, in Saul's pursuit, 1 Samuel 19. with Eliah, in the Desert, 1 Kings 19.
with Elisha, when the Syrians came against him, 2 Kings 6. with Hezekiah, in
his sicke-bed, Esaias 38. with the three Children, in the fire, Dan. 3. with
Daniel, in the den of Lions, Dan. 6. with Joseph and Mary, and the wise Magi,
flying from Herod, Mat. 2. with Christ, in his combat with Satan, Mat. 4. and
he will be with thee in thy last conflict and trial: for, this is his
Promise, which he keeps more inuiolably then the Decrees of the Medes and
Persians, to be with thee when thou passest through the waters, and through the
rivers, and through the fire, that thou shall neither be overflowed nor
ouerblowne in any temptation, Esaias 43.2.3.4 5.6. etc.

Now God will manifest his presence with thee these three ways, either in
moderating or mitigating thy pains, as the words of that Prophetical promise
do import, making death no more dolorous to thee, then many ordinary crosses
and afflictions which have befallen thee in life, as some of the Saints have
tried it.

Or, by the inward and ineffable comfort of the Spirit, which occasioned Paul
to rejoice in tribulation, since even then, the love of God was shed abroad in
his heart by the holy Ghost, Romans 5.35. yea, even in his grievous sickness,
it seems when he had received the sentence of death, as the sufferings of
Christ did abound in him, so his consolations did abound through Christ, 2 Cor.
1.5. God is the chief Physician, and chief visitor, when any of his Patients
are afflicted, in his own person ministering unto them, staying them with
flagons, and comforting them with apples; with his right hand holding up their
heads, and with his left embracing them. Cant. 2.9.

Thirdly, he sends a victorious Host, a guard of Angels to be keep^rs, and
Nurses unto his Servants, to hold them up, and bear them in their arms, as
Nurses do young Children: and to be their champions and guards against the
Devil and his Angels, Psalm. 30. All these comforts with many more, going along
with thee, like the Cloud and the fiery Pillar with the Israelites, should
cause thee to march valiantly, even through the Pikes ^f death, to thy
appointed Possession. And so we pass in this passage of Simeon, to the third
Point.

His acknowledgement of the Divine Permission. In these words, Let thou.
IN which phrase observe, that what ever comes to pass, is by the letting and
permission of God, whether in life or death for, there is nothing done in the
world, but that which the Almighty will have done, either by permitting it to
be done, or by doing it himself. Or, as the same Augustine, All things are
either done by Gods help, or suffered to be done by his permitting, Domino vet
adiuuante, etc. yea, even those things which are done contra volu^tatem,
against the will of GOD, yet are not done, praeter eius voluntatem, besides his
will: by which will, with Hugo, Enchir. cap. 101.
I mean his good pleasure, his operation and permission; yea, even in Sin it
self, the cause of death, God he has a work. God works in every evil, but
he works not evil, nor euilly, Lib. de sac. c. 7. part. 4.
as the Papists slander Calvin to teach. Ag^t in malo, etc. he works in the
evil, first, by permitting; secondly, by disposing: by permitting I say, not
by provoking. For, though God offer the sinner objects (to use Augustine and
Bellarmines Similitudes) and leaves a man to himself, yet he inclines not his
will to evil, and therefore is not the cause of evil, no more then the
Shepherd by setting hay or grass before the Sheep is the cause of the
Sheep feeding: or the Huntsman by showing the Greyhound the Hare or Dear,
is the cause of his running, but only the dispositions and inclinations of
both to run, and to feed.

Secondly, by ordering and disposing sin: for this is the property of the
divine wisdom, says Clemens, Vti vtiliter, Strom. l. 1. Aug. Ench. c. 101.
etc. to use those things profitably, which are done peruersely. De malo opere,
etc. God out of every work that is evil works that which is good; even as in
the first Creation he brought light out of darkness, and as a wise Physician
out of poisoned Serpents and venomous beasts, extracts a preservative against
poison. Thus he disposed of the Treachery of Joseph's Brethren, and the Treason
of Judas against Christ, to his own glory, and the good of his Church: in the
preservation of old Jacob and his Seed, and the salvation of his own Elect
Israel. Therefore as in one act of the death of Christ, 1. God; 2. Christ; 3.
the Devil; 4. the Jews; and 5. Judas wrought, but not from one cause: Aug.
ep. ad Vincent. 38.
the Devil suggestingly, the Jews maliciously, Judas couetously, Christ
executiuely, in delivering himself; God decretorily, in decreeing; and
dispositiuely, in disposing the death of his Son to the saving of the Elect,
and condemning of the Reprobate, being the rising and falling of many in
Israel. The like is seen in other sins, wherein there are diverse agents;
some sinful but GOD always sinlesse: Aug. de Genesis ad lit. imp. c. 5. De
ciuitate Dei lib. 11. c. 17. Mors non naturae conditio, sed poena peccati, de
praed. and gratia. c. 11.
for, Peccatores in quantum peccatores, etc. God makes not sinners so far
forth as they be sinners. but only orders and disposes them: being as the
best Creator of those wills that are good, so a most righteous disposer and
orderer of those wills which are evil. But as for Death, which it the
punishment of sin, not the condition of Nature; God is not only the
permitter and provident disposer, but the just inflicter of it; yea, vitae
necisque arbitrer, the author and ordayner, as of life, so of death: for, it is
he that forms the light, and creates darkness; he makes peace, and creates
evil, Esaias 45.7. What evil? Not the evil of sin, Non mal^ culpae, sed
poenae.
but the evil of sorrow, of sickness, of troubles, banishment, famine; yea,
Death it self, Leuit. 26.

This point is worthy our further enlargement: namely, that all death, for the
Time of it, the Place of it, the Matter, the Manner, the Cause, the Occasion of
it, is immediately from God, operatiuely, penar^ly, or permissiuely.

For the Time: Every death is determined by God.
if death come in the morning, or midday, in the evening, or Cocke-crow of
life; in the Infancy, or childe-hood, or nonage, or youth, or adolescencie, or
perfect age, or decaying, declining, or decrepit old age of our years: if it
crop us in the sprout, or the Spring, or the Summer, or the Autumn, or the
Winter of our time, God that is Palmoni, a secret numberer, has numbered our
days and measured our time: for the LORD makes our days as it were an
hand-breadth. Psalm. 39.5. eclipsing our life's light as it pleases him, in the
Sunne-rising, or in the meridian of our days, as he did with good Josias,
the virtuous Prince Edward the 6. that worthy spirit Picus miramdula, our
English Josias, Prince Henry, with diverse others. Again, sometimes he adds
unto our days, as he did fifteen years to the reign of Ez^kias, Esaias 38.
extending and drawing our the thread of our life to a large extent, as he did
the years of Abraham, Genesis 25.8. Job. 22.17. 1 Chronicles. 29.28.
Job, and David, who dyed all in a good age, full of days, going to their
graves, as a Ricke of Corn comes in due season into the Barn, Job 5.26.

For the Place, whether we dye in the fields with Saul and Jonathan; or in our
beds, with old Jacob, Genesis 49.33. or on our beds, with Sisera and Ishbosheth,
2 Samuel 4.5. or in the wars, with the Amorites and Amalekites: or in time of
peace* as did Solomon, or by land, or by sea, as did the Egyptians, God has
appointed that place for us to lay down our bodies in, and no other, even as
he appointed a dying place for Moses in the land of Moab, Deuteronomy. 34.1.5.

So for the Manner of death, whether it be natural, when we fall from the
Tree of life like ripe Apples: or if it be violent, when we are by force shaken
down like green Apples: God gathers us to our Fathers. God shows himself in
this act, not only when immediately he strikes by himself, with his own
hands, Numb. 16.30.31.32.
as he did Dathan and Abiram, whom the earth received; Nadab and Abihu, whom
the fire consumed, Leuit. 10.2. with others; for which cause the Lord is said
to rain from the Lord, fire and Brimstone upon Sodom, Genesis 19. As also to
have smit Naball for his churlishness toward David; 1 Samuel 25.^8. but even
those that are cut off by an external agent, whether by Satan himself, as
were Jobs Children, or by others, Job 1.18.19
voluntarily or involuntarily, they are executed by the decree of the supreme
essence.

Thus whether we consider Children murdered by their Parents, (as was the
Son of Constantine the great, of Antoninus Caracalla, of Brutus, of Darius,
of Cambyses, and Medea, if we believe Histories.) Or Parents slain by their
Children, as was Senacherib by his Sons, Esaias 37.38, Frederick by his Son
Manfrede, Agrippina by Nero, Semiramis by Ninus, Ulysses by Thelegon, Phocas by
his Son Heraclus, etc. Or the blood of Brothers effused by Brethren, as Abels
by Caine, Ammons by Absolon, Te^cles by Polymies, Remus by Romulus, Argeus by
his Brother Ptolomie Philadelphus, etc. Or if we consider Husbands slain by
their Wives, as the Husbands of the fifty Daughters of Danaus* so the Husbands
of those thirty Sisters of Albina, slain by their wives, Agamemnon by
Clitemn^stra, King Sarematar by Circes, Antoninus the Emperor by his Wife
Luulla. Or if we ponder Wives butchered by their Husbands, as Poppea was by
Nero, Queen Glosinda by Chilpericus, Fausta the Empress by Constantine, as
also the Wife of Mithridates the King of Pontus, of Egnatius, Calphurinus,
Periander, and diverse others, who have perished by the mischief of their
Mates. Or if we reflexe upon Servants that have murdered their Masters, as
Zimri slew Elah his Lord, 1 Kings 16.9.10. Or apostate Subjects, vile Traitors,
that have effused the blood of the Lords Anointed, as Jacques Clements, and
Rauallack in their assarsinations and massacrings of the two renowned French
Henry's, etc. Or lastly, one man killing another, either suddenly, as Ehud
slew Eglon with his Dagger, Judge. 3.21. or treacherously as Ioab did Abner and
Amasa, as Rehab and Baanah did Ishbosheth, 2 Samuel 4.5.6. or combatingly in a
Duellie in the field, or any other vvayes; in all these, with all the rest of
this nature, we must say as the Apostles said of Pilate, Herod, and the Jews,
concerning the death of Christ, that these murderers have done whatsoever the
Lords hand and council had determined before to be done, Acts 4.28. For, who
is he that says it comes to pass, and the Lord commanded it not? Lamen.
3.37. For, even all things that are, and that happen, Deus disponendo
praesciuit, and praesciendo disposuit, says Tertullian, God has fore-knowne
them, foreseen them, and disposed of them. If of all things, then of the
lives and deaths of men; yea, even of murdered men: for though God prohibit
and forbid murder, Exodus 20. yet he decrees that act which in man is murder,
but in God is but an act of Justice. Again, the very material part or
subject, is of God, I say the naked act of murder, as it is an act, as it is
from the living soul, as it is from the motion of the hand, is from God,
without whom neither the hand nor any part could move in any natural motion:
but the formal part and deformity of the act, which makes it properly
murder, that is from the Devil and from corruption; yet not without Gods
permission, by the substraction of his grace (which Hugo calls the cause of all
sin,) from the Agent, and for some righteous ends in respect of the Patient.

The life of this point, Use 1. Of Redargution.
like the blood in the veins, lies in the use: if meets with the corruption
of these that refer not death unto his true cause and ground, erring, not
knowing the Scriptures: for, is any man strangely afflicted with wondrous and
woeful diseases, Death comes not by fortune.
as the Gout, Stone, Stranguillio, Sciatica? etc. Is any infected with the
plague? smit with Leprosy? wounded, or slain by his enemy? bruized by
falling from his Horse, or the like? but chiefly, is he taken away suddenly,
in his full strength, in his case and prosperity, when his breasts are full of
milk, and his bones full of marrow? Job 22.24.25. Presently, we break our
into these terms; Sure he had ill luck, he had bad chance, he had ill
Fortune: or else we shoot our fools bolts, as the Listrians against Paul,
when the Viper stuck to his hand, Acts 14. Sure this man was a great sinner,
etc. or as the Jews of those upon whom the Tower of Silo fell, and whose
blood Pilate mingled with their Sacrifices, Luke 13.2.
Sure he was a greater sinner then the rest: or as others of the blind man,
John 9. we must needs know whether he or his Parent^ have sinned, For the
first: it is a pitiful thing, that Christians living so long in the heat,
and light, and Sunshine of the Gospel, should be so darkened in their
understandings, and so vain in their imaginations, like the once unconverted
Gentiles, as to turn the glory of the immortal God into a vile and
abominable Idol; to attribute that which is proper and peculiar unto God,
unto Heathenish Fortune; a word, which as Augustine and Lactantius in their
days banished to the Pagans from whence it came; so I wonder that the light of
Preaching has no more discovered the blindness of it, and no more reformed
the error of it, that it is no more rooted out of our hearts, and unsettled our
of our heads: but that we must needs make it, as the Ephesians their Diana,
some great Goddess, as the Sorcerer Simon made himself some great man. I
wonder, that with the Romans we must build Temples, and sacrifice unto it, in
disgrace and despite of God, and disparagement of his providence, taking the
Crown from the Creators head and placing it on an Idol, which is a mere
Idaea, a fiction, and Chimera in nature: not knowing, or at least not
acknowledging with the Scripture, with Antiquity, with Jerome, Augustine,
Ierom. in Ier. c. 12. Aug. de gent. cont. Manich. c. 2.
and others (called now Fathers, as James and John were called Pillars) that
there is no evil in the City (that is evil of punishment, in which
predicament Death is,) which the Lord has not wrought: that nothing comes to
pass, fortuito casu, sed iudicio Des, by chance, but by choice; nothing
happens by hap-hazzard, but by the peculiar preuidence and providence of God;
that the will of God is the supreme cause of all things that are.

Not a hair falling from our heads, Mat. 10.29 30
not a Sparrow falling to the ground, much less a sickness or a disease
growing upon our bodies, much less a day, or an hour, or a minute falling
from our life, without the determination and permission of him, that has
numbered our days, and set down the period of our age.

Therefore let us banish all thought and opinion of Fortune unto the very Getes
and Sauromatanes. Exhortat.
Let us also suspend our thoughts and our opinions of our Brethren, when God
does sore afflict them in life, or suddenly inflict upon them some strange
death: let us not judge least we be judged, let us not enter into rash and
precipitate censures of others: we may be further deceived in Gods mercies
toward them, or his proceedings with them, then was Eliphaz, Job 2.3.4.
Bildad, and Zophar, in the case of Job: then the Disciples were in the case of
the blind man, John 9.12. For it may be that this man whom thou see lying
sick, a Lazar by the highway, begging with those blind men in the Gospel;
him whom thou see groaning in an Hospital, rauing in Bedlam, etc. nay, whom
thou see drowned in the waters, stabbed in his bowels, led to execution, to
be topt off like a fruitless Tree at Tyburne; is not a greater sinner then
thou, neither he nor his Parents have sinned more then thou and thine, but
that the glory of God might be made manifest, that he might be an example unto
thee, that thou may take warning by his harming, least thou also perish: for
Gods works (as his Word) are for thy instruction, whether they be works of
Mercy or of Justice.

God? then the consideration of this special providence of God, must be a
motive amongst others which we have used, and are to use to incheare us
against death. Oh how ought this to add life and spirit unto thy faintings,
that God considers every circumstance of thy death, as the time when, and the
place where, and the manner how; the beginning of sickness, cause, original,
continuation, and end? that every fit in thy sickness; nay, the very pangs of
death are particulerly set down in the counsel of God? Did God so (as he did
David) when thou wast an Embrio, without form, in thy mothers womb, when thou
wast made in a secret place, and fashioned beneath in the earth? Psalm.
139.15.16. and does he not now think thou behold thy trouble? Will he not
strengthen thee in the bed of languishing, and make all thy bed in thy
sickness, Psalm. 41.2.3. In the 56. Psalm, v. 8. David prays that the Lord
would put his tears into his bottle. Now consider with thy self, has God a
bottle for the tears of his Servants? much more has he bottles for their
blood: and much more does he respect their pains and miseries, with all the
circumstances of sickness and death. How did this comfort the Church of
Jerusalem in the death of Christ, in that nothing came to pass in it, but that
which the foreknowledge and eternal counsel of GOD had appointed. Acts 4.28.

Thirdly, the Meditation of this point must teach thee to possess thy soul in
patience, to kiss Gods Rod, to subject thy self like an obedient child to
his correcting hand, to couch down like Issacar under thy burden; what
misery soever in life, what manner of mortality in death does befall thee,
because it is the Lords doings: it is a message from thy King, an errand from
thy Father, a summons from thy Judge, a Loue-token from thy Bridegroom, a
warning from thy General, therefore to be received with all love and loyalty,
submission and subjection: without muttering and murmuring, belching and
barking against God, as the manner of some is. Oh consider the practice of
David, Psalm. 39.10. I held my tongue (says he) and said nothing: Why so?
because thou Lord aidst it. The same consideration sealed up the lips of Aaron,
when two of his own Sons were consumed with fire, Leuit. 10.3. So Eli, when
he considered it was the Lord that threatened him and his house, was content
that he should do what seemed him good, 1 Samuel 3.18. Joseph thus reuiues his
brethren when their hearts failed them in a great perplexity, Genesis 43. Fear
not (says he) for it was the Lord that sent me before you. Oh observe how
the very meditation of Gods permissiue providence arms him and his against
grief, impatience, and discontent: open thou the box and apply thou these
Cordials, and Mithridate to thy own particular. I warrant you who ever had a
window into Simeons Soul had seen no small Jubilee of joy in his inward man,
arising even from these very thoughts, that it was the Lord that let him depart
in peace, after he had embraced the Prince of peace: to whom that thou may
conform thy self, let this one motive move thee, besides many more. Namely,
the greatness of this sin of impatience; a sin not only condemned in the
Word, Prou. 14 29. and 19. verse. 19. if it be but against man (much more if
against God, as that of Jobs was, Job 3.1.2.3. etc.) but also punished most
severely in the Lords own people, as ye may see at leisure in every Chapter
almost of Ex^dus and Numbers, Exo. 14.11 and 15.24. and 16. v. 2.7. and 17. v.
21 Numb. 11. and 14. v. 1.26. and 21.5.
it never scaping scot-free, but bringing a greater judgment with it then that
which did occasion it? As, do the people murmr for Quails, for Water etc.
against God, against Moses, and against Aaron? they shall be plagued with
Pestilence, and Serpents, and Death, and Murraine and mortality. Oh then if
thou will be angry, be angry with thine own sins, the occasion of all crosses
and of all curses; the causer of Ter^ours and Consumptions, and Burning Agues,
and Biles, and Botches, and Plaguesores; yea, of Death it self, Leuit. 26.16
22. Wherefore is the living man sorrowful? Man suffers for his sins,
Lament. 3. Sin was the cause of Ezekias botch, of Gehesies and Miriams
Leprosy, of the Philistines Emerods, of the Egyptian plagues; and therefore
Christ bids the blind man sin no more, least a worse thing befall him, John
5.14. For, Death by Sin entered into the world, Romans 5.12. which Sin still
continues Deaths sting* we carrying that sting in our bosoms, that will
kill us: oh then pluck this sting out, drown Sin in the salt Sea of repentant
sorrow, as the Mariners cast Jonas into the Sea: and the cause being removed,
the effect will cease. The tempest shall turn to calm when thou turnest to
Christ, though thou have outward pain thou shall have inward peace, and shall
depart in peace.

Doctrine.
Secondly, in that God limits, and lets, and permits our departure, it teaches
us, that the days of man are so determined, as that no man, no means can
protract them, or detract from them, beyond and besides their limits: for God
which has appointed the seasons and times for every thing, Acts 1.7. and chapter
17. has determined also the days of every man's life, as he did Jobs, Job
14.5. which life as it is like a weauers Lombe, Esaias 38.10. so it must last
till the last thread thereof be wouen, like an Houre-glasse running till the
last minute of time be expired, before which time this thread cannot be cut by
the power of men and Angels, this Glass cannot be broken: all external
created power cannot cause the Lord to alter what he has written in the
numbering of our days, no more then Pilate would change what he had written
upon Christ's Cross.

Object. 1. Object.
But here a scruple may arise concerning Ezekias, who was told from God that
he should presently dye, Esaias 38.1. yet after there were fifteen years added
to his days, 2 Kin. 20.1.

Answ. First, Gods will is always one in it self, like God himself, how ever
in respect of us it may seem contrary or contradictory, as it is secret and
revealed. Secondly, there was no change of will or decree in God, Mutatio n^^
in Deo, sed in homine.
but in Ezekias himself, who received the sentence of death like the Ninevites
conditionally as the Thief may receive the sentence of death from the Judge,
unless he carry himself after, more carefully, or get the Kings Pardon
presently. For, all Legal Threats, as also Evangelical Promises, have their
relation and reference unto the condition of Faith or Infidelity, of
Repentance or Impenitencie, by the performance or not performance whereof we
avoid or incur the curses denounced: or are capable of, or not capable of the
promises propounded: therefore when God staid the execution, and as it were
repriued this good King, he did nothing but what he determined, for he
decreed by this threatening to bring him to the sight of his sins, and so to
repentance, that he might live.

Object. 2. Job complains that his breath is corrupt, that his days are
extinct, and that the grave is ready for him, Job 17.1. So David complained
that the Lord had weakened his strength in the way, that he had shortened his
days; yea, he feared that God would take him away in the midst of his days,
Psalm. 102. verse. 23.24. So Solomon tells us, that the fear of the Lord
prolongeth days, but the years of the wicked shall be shortened, Prou. 10.27.
then it seems a man may dye before his limited time.

Answ. There are two ages or times of man: the one a ripe age, suppose seauenty
or eighty years; the other unripe and green. Now, all men naturally aspire
and desire the first; which if they attain not to in some measure and
proportion, they are thought to dye before their time, but yet nevertheless
they accomplish their decreed date. And therefore though Job and David
complained of the shortning of their days, yet they deceived themselves, for
the one lived after that an hundred and forty years, and saw his sons
sons, even four generations, Job 42.16. the other dyed old and well stricken
in years, 1 Kings 1.1. but both of them (not seeing the Sun of Gods favor
through the cloud of the Cross) remembered not that Gods power is seen in
infirmity, 2 Cor. 12.9.

Object. 3. Yet it is said that blood thirsty men shall not live out half
their days, Psalm. 55.23.

Answ. First, that is which they desire to live; Secondly, or which in nature
they might live to, so Basil; Thirdly, In Psalm. 55
God hastens judgments upon crying sins, such as that of Murder, and
Sodomie, and uncleanness, as he did on Sodom, Onan and Ioab. For, when sin
once cries like Cains sin, or is ripe like the sins of the Amorites, God is
provoked and cuts off the workers of it, Secreta esse possunt iudicia Dei,
nunquam iniusta.
sometimes suddenly, sometimes secretly, never unjustly; Fourthly, good men as
they participate of Gods blessing, long life, Exodus 20. ver. 12. or else of
life eternal, if they be taken away with Josias, in youth, which is better: so
wicked men fearing death as a judgment which they fear, it shall fall upon
them: for whatsoever a wicked man fears, in a slavish and servile fear, that
shall come upon him, says Solomon, Prou. 10.24. A proud man fears disgrace,
he shall be disgraced; yea, proud Herod shall be eaten with Worms, and that
Ester and Mordocheus, and those Jews which Ammon feared shall bring him to the
Gallows. If Achitophel fear that his counsel shall be rejected, it shall be
rejected. If the Thief and the Seminary fears Tyburne, they shall be topt
there. The covetous man fears poverty, it shall betide him or his, he shall
vomit up his sweet morsels, his substance which he has devoured, Job 20.15.
some part of his ill gotten goods, like the coal in the Eagles nest, shall set
all the rest on fire. If Jeroboam fear death, as Abijah threatens him, the
Lord will strike him that he die, 2 Chronicles. 1*2. ver. 12. ver. 20. and so all
other wicked men.

Object. 4. But if our death be determined may carnal reason object, then we
need use no means to prolong our life, as Physic, recreation, etc.

Answ. If God have ordained thee to live long, he ordained the means also to
prolong thy life; as he sent Joseph before to provide the Land of Egypt for
old Jacob and his Sons to live and to trade in, when the Famine was in
Egypt, for their preservation, G^n. 34.10. and as he provided a Whale to
receive Jonas that he drown not: so he has ordained means, as meats,
drinks, clothes, diet, Physic, Music, exercise, careful circumspection
in the use of thy body, and the like, that thou perish not: to which means if
thou be not subordinate, thou art guilty of thine own death, because thou
with-drawes thy self from without those limits and bounds that God has
appointed thee to walk in; and so art found either a fighter against, or at
least a tempter of God, Deuteronomy. 6.16. It is worthy considering, that though God
had told Paul, Acts 27.24. that all that were in the ship with him in that
Cretian tempest, should be safe, yet nevertheless when some would have leapt
out of the ship, he tells the Centurion, v. 31. that except they abide in the
Ship, they could not be saved; they must stay still and bestirre themselves (
validis incumbendo renijs) if they will be safe; yea, they must eat meat to,
for their healths sake, verse. 34. so what God has decreed either concerning
thy body or soul, thy temporal or spiritual estate, in life or death, thou
must use means, for the well being and preservation of both.

We may out of this box, thus opened, Use.
draw out this Triacle, namely, to go on constantly and courageously in our
callings and Christian courses in the performance of good duties, belonging to
the first and second Table, to God or man, commanded in the word, commended in
the practice of the Saints, notwithstanding, all not only oppositions and
calumniations by the scoffing tongues of Ismaels, but even piercing
persecutions of the worlds Nimrods, and the bloody Bulls of Basan; what though
they menace thy massacring, determine thy death, as those cursed crew of
Ruffians did Paul's, Acts 23.14. yet they cannot hurt a hair of thy head
without Gods permission: no more then the Jews could do ought against Christ,
but what God had before determined.

Thirdly, in that Simeon here appeals unto Gods permission, in respect of his
departure: it is plain that he took not leave of himself to depart; he
asks leave you see, as a Soldier of his General, to depart out of the Camp;
as a Scholar of his Master, to go home; as an Attendant, to be dismissed of
the Court. From whose particular we may extract this general observance: that
it is unlawful for any man to let out his own life, or the life of another
man (unless the Sword of Magistracy be put in his hand) no man must lay
violent hands upon himself, or upon another: Deus vitae necisque arbiter, God
is only the disposer of life and death. And therefore for the first, how ever
the world pretend reasons and excuses, for to make this bastardbrat of
selfe-murther (which comes from Satan and our corruption) legitimate, as
proceeding from magnanimity, greatness of courage, or the like; or at least
would extenuate it, or make it tolerable, if not approueble and laudable, when
it is a curer of all other crosses, as Cato Vticensis held it; or a preuenter
of sin, as in Rasis, in the Apocripha, and Lucrece in Histories, etc. yet
nevertheless the practice is detestable, the sin damnable, and therefore
both in Reason and Religion auoidable.

First, because it is against a double commandment, Legal and Evangelical:
it breaks the sixth Commandment: for if a man must not murder others, he
must not murder himself, even as if a man must not steal from another, he
must not steal from him self, his wife, his children (which I would have all
Carders, Dicers, Drunkards, etc. and self consumers of their substance to
consider,) if he must not do the lesser sin, he must not do the greater.

Secondly, the Apostle says, A man must not destroy his own body, but nourish
and cherish it, Ephesians. 5.

Thirdly, it is against not only the light of Grace, but even of Nature; nay,
of corrupted Nature: every creature, from the Lion to the Worm, from the Eagle
to the Wrenne, (as Tully notes) seeks it own preservation, fugitque nociua,
flies the contrary. Now the more unnatural that any sin is, the greater, the
grosser it is: Incest is a greater sin then Adultery; Adultery, then
Fornication; Beastialitie, then all: wantonness with a man's own body worse
then actual pollution with a woman, because more unnatural: so in murder,
Fratricide, the murder of thine own brother is worse then Homicide,
Manslaughter; Parricide, or Patricide, King killing, or the murder of
Parents, worse then either: but Semicide, or selfe-murther worst of all,
because most abhorring and swaruing from the very spark and instinct of nature.

Fourthly, a man sins not only thus, 1. against God; 2. against Grace; 3.
against Nature; 4. against his own Body: but also he sins, 1. against the
State, 2. against the king, 3. his Country, 4. the Church, 5. the
Commonwealth, 6. his Friends, 7. his Family: for every man is pars
Reipublicae and communitatis, a part of the State both Political and
Ecclesiastical, he is a member of both bodies, and therefore has not
interest in himself, to be active in his own death, he must be merely
passive. Partem Patria, partem Parents, etc. Besides, says the Orator, his
Parents, and his Friends (as his Country) for whose good he was borne, as well
as for his own, challenge a great interest and prerogative in him: all whom
he frustrates, and so directly sins against all, by cutting off himself,
even as he sins against the head that cuts off the hand or foot in the body
natural.

Fifthly, this course is as curelesse as cursed, as fruitless as godless; for
it preuents not misery, but procures it; it redresseth it not, but a man runs
further into it, like the fish that leapes out of the Frying-panne into the
fire: like him that goes from the English pillory to the Spanish Strippado,
that they go from the hell of Conscience into a real Hell, is to be feared in
selfe-murtherers, though God only can determine it.

Sixthly, it argues Madness, Distraction, or Frenzy, and so the world censures.

Seauenthly, Impatiencie, that a man cannot attend and wait the leisure of God
to release his cross.

Eighthly, Muttering, murmuring, and Israelitish fretting against God, and so
rebellion against the Almighty.

Ninthly, Cowardlinesse, and faint-hartednesse, that a man will not endure that
which might be inflicted on him.

Tenthly, Unthankfulness, not to preserve this Jewel of life which is
bestowed upon him.

Eleuenthly, Selfe-killing is noted as a mark of Desperation, and brand of
Reprobation, as in Saul, Judas, etc.

Twelfthly, the practice of it causes not only the actors, but their actions,
profession, posterity, Country, nay, Christianity it self to be evil spoken
of: their names rot and stincke (as do oft-times their bodies.) Besides, they
are denied Christian Buryall, being (like excommunicate persons) cast out of
the Church as unsavory Salt.

Use. Of Redargution.
All which Reasons (with many more) being so plain and pregnant against this
sin, argue and demonstrate unto me, that many men are not only irreligious
but unreasonable, that dare perpetrate, and commit this horrible riot and
outrage upon their own bodies in selfe-murther. Neither can I but deplore, as
I do wonder, to see how the Devil does daily get ground and advantage on
humane nature, in this inhumane, unnatural, and belluine sin, which even the
bruit Beasts detest and abhor. How many have we read of, how many have we
heard of, how many have we seen culpable in this kind? What weeks do pass
but our souls are made sad, and compassionately send out sighs at the
Tragical falls and fearful ends of Semicidian selfe-slayers, the knowledge
whereof we receive by the intelligence of our eyes or ears? How often are our
hearts made cold, and we occasioned to smite upon our breasts at the undoubted
relation, or our own visible sight of many, not only amongst the ignorant,
profane, irreligious, and impatient common people, (that know not what belongs
to God, or themselves, to their duties in life, or their estates after death:)
but even of Scholars, learned men, great men, that make away themselves, some
by hanging, more by drowning, most of all by stabbing themselves, or by cutting
their own throats? The frequencie of which events Crowners (who by Iuries
find out the principal indicted causes of these murders) well know: whose
office Satan and man's corruption has made, as more painful, so much more
gainefull, then in former ages, wherein Christians lived and dyed more like
Christians, at least more like men, or less like Pagans and natural men, but
chiefly less like unnatural and brutish men then we do, in this and other
sins, in these our curelesse corrupted times, degenerate and declining days,
etc. For, let a man peruse all Histories, and look at the carriage of
Christians in their lowest exigents, when they were most exposed to most
miseries such as are particularized, Heb. 11. When the sword had the keenest
edge against them, in the hands of the ten first Roman Persecutors, when
some one week saw the slaughter of more thousands then there be days therein,
yet nevertheless we read of few or none that were their own slaughterers,
but in rest and patience, they ran through fires and waters, and burnings,
and boylings, and bitings of beasts, even into the mouth of tyranny it self in
passive suffering, rather then they would rid themselves of these exquisite
torments, by more easy (though more unlawful) selfe-killings: but alas, such
are the impieties, such the impatience; nay, such the Atheism of these our
desperate days, that every cross (yea, though triuiall, though but in
imagination) must be removed with some, by a real curse of Selfe-murther. If
we cannot be our selfe-caruers, we think thus to be our selfe-curers: if not
selfe-brokers to have what we will, we are selfe-butcherers against Gods
will, like toyish children we will take pet and dye. The loss of an office,
the rising of an aemulated Corriuall in the Courts, the forfeiture of a Bond,
the feeling or the fear of poverty, the turning out of service, the frown of
a great man, the brawling of a Wife, the miscarrying of some, or the charge of
many children, the ouer-throw in a suite at Law, the reiection of a suite in
Love, (to omit weightier matters, distress of mind, distraction of heart, rage
of conscience, despair of mercy, etc.) even these are arguments sufficient
(and efficient to) in the Devils Divinity, whereby he pleades and preuailes
with such whom the Lord has left to him, and to themselves, to make their own
hands their own executioners: which particular sin if there were no more in
man (though it be accompanied with Legions) as it strengthens my faith in
those first points in all Christian Catechismes, See Vrsimus and Bastingius
Catechismes, in principio.
of man's misery, whose nature being viciated and adulterate in the fall of
Adam, is now grown monstrous and outrageous, both in the quantity and
quality of sin: so it confirms my hope in Christ's second coming,
concerning the propniqiutie and nearenesse of the last expected day of the
worlds dissolution, seeing not only Iniquity does abound, and Sin (Satan's
daughter) is more fruitful then ever, even in monstrous births; but the Devil
the Father rages (Lion-like;) and (like Iehu) marches against man more
vehemently with redoubled force and fury, knowing that his time to raven in is
but short.

Saul and Judas in all outward respects, were in all probability stronger then
thou) as thy nature as wicked as theirs* (for all branches that come from Adams
stock are naturally corrupted) and as it is most likely that thou shall be
tempted by this Serpent, even to this very sin of letting out thine own
blood, which like other sins is in thine own^ power; (for what man amongst
many can say that he has not had many thoughts and motions iniected and darted
into his heart by Satan for to perpetrate this sin?) So in Gods fear let
every Christian arm himself against it, even with a constant resolution, like
good Job, by whom Saint James patterns us to trust in GOD, though he kill
him: to fall rather into the hands of God with David, 2 Samuel 24.14. then to
fall upon his own sword with Saul. 1 Samuel 31.4
Discuss David's prohibiting argument, when he was provoked to kill Saul; 1 Samuel 26.9.10.
Shall I lay mine hand (says he) upon the Lords Anointed? Surely no, The
Lords hand shall be upon him, not mine, he shall stay his day. Thou as a
Christian art the Lords Anointed, what ever Satan importune, the worlds
crosses occasionedly urge, yet lay not thine hand upon the Lords Anointed: it
is more unlawful for thee to slay thy self, then for David to kill apostate
Saul: stay thy day, wait the Lords leisure, in rest and confidence shall be
thy strength, GOD will relieve thee in the cross, Zach. 12.10
or release thee from the cross. Labor for the Spirit of Grace against the
impatiencie of Nature, and the Spirit of Prayer against Satan's Temptations,
and the Spirit of Patience against the worlds crosses: learn out of Epictetus
his School, sustinendo, abstinendo, by abstaining from the evil of sin, by
sustaining any cross, the scourge of sin, not to mutter against thy Creator,
not to mar his Image in thee his chief creature.

Lastly, that thou may prevent this sin it self, as a point of
instruction, neither unpleasing nor unprofitable, I think good to acquaint
thee with the causes (at least the occasions) of this sin, of Selfe-murther,
so far as I can gather them Historically, is matter of fact, even from the
very Heathens, from whose Candles we must borrow a little light to see into
this point: that so as is the Maxim both of Philosophy and Physic, subla^a
causa, ^ollitur effectus; the cause being removed, the effect may cease.

Of Instruction.
(besides the Devil tempting and triumphing over his conquered vassals) is
rage of conscience: for some have been so stung with Hellish furies (as was
Nero after he had murdered his Mother Agrippina, slain his Brother, his
Friends, Matricid^ Nero proprij vim pertulit ensis. Auson.
his Masters, as Suetonius reports) that they have constrainedly attempted the
quenching of this fire with the effusion of their own blood, chiefly when
there is joined with it despair of mercy, as in Pilate, whom Gregory
Turo^ensis relates to have killed himself after he had condemned Christ. The
like whereof Josephus records of Herod, after he had butchered his three
Sons, In natricia.
Alexander, Aristobulus and Antipater. The Scriptures instance in Saul after
his Apostacy from God; and in Judas, after he had betrayed CHRIST, etc.

2 Others some have been overcome by madness or Frenzies: as Lucretius that
Philosophical Poet, about the forty year of his age, Statius lib. 12.
Thebaidos.
says Politian: Hercules, that burnt himself, being madded with his enchanted
shirt, that was dipped in the blood of the Centaure: Ajax, Ovid. lib. 13. Met.
that died enraged when Achilies armor was adjudged from him to Ulysses: to
which are to be added such as being surprised with passions of love or hatred,
oppressed with Melancholy, ouer-heated in their spirits by study or the like,
have been madded and so murdered.

3 Others have killed themselves in the violencie of their diseases, Polit.
ibid.
as Silius the Poet: Festus the friend of Domitian, Martial. lib. 1.
Indignas prem^ret pestis, quum rabida fauces, etc. Messula Coruinus the
Orator, that by reason of an ulcer in his mouth, pined himself to death, as
Celius testifies.

4 Others in pride of heart, and discontent, as Homer, because he could not
resolve the riddle of the Fishermen: Aristotle, because he could not find out
the reason of the frequent ebbing and flowing of Euripus. So Brotheus that
burnt himself because he was deformed:

5 Others to prevent the luxurious desires and designs of Lechers, Ovid in
Ibin.
and to preserve their own chastity, as Sophro^ia, that Christian Lucrece, as
Eusebius calls her, that by killing her self freed her chastity from the
continual assaults of D^cius: Damocles the beautiful Boy that escaped the
Sodomie of Demetrius by Selfe-drowning.

6 Others being ashamed to live, have not been ashamed by self inflicted
death, to deprive themselves of life: as chaste Lucrece after she was defiled
by proud Tarquin, whose death not only Claudian Stroza, Sabellicus, Lib. 1. in
Eutrop. Lib. 1. Erotic.
and many of the Heathen bewail, but even some Christians speak and write of
it, with remorse. So Cornelius Gallus, that excellent Poet, Virg^ls friend,
that for shame killed himself, being accused, and it seems guilty, of
misdemeanors in his government, being President of Egypt, says Ammianus;
Lib. 17. rerum gestarum.
or as Tranquillus writes, because he was interdicted Caesar's house, because
he was too tongue-sawcy, says Ovid, that makes it his blemish: Se linguam
nimio non tenuiss^ mero.

7 Others to prevent that shame and further blame which their misdemeanors or
the prevailing of their enemies had brought them too: thus Cleopatra when
Anthony was overcome, least she should be carried captive, applied Serpents to
her breasts, Lib. 1. car.
which Plutarch and Horace say she kept for that purpose, whom her Maids,
Neaera and Charmi^, accompanied in the like death. So Dioclesian the Emperor
fearing an ignominious death from the threats of Lacinus and Constantine,
drank poison, says Aurelius. So Oppia, a vestall Virgin, defloured, kills her
self for fear of further punishment. The like did Fanius Cepio when he was
apprehended in a Conspiracy against Augustus. The like is related of Cardinal
Wolsey, to have poisoned himself in the Highway betwixt Cawwood and London,
when he was sent for to answer such Articles as were against him: neither was
Achitophels witty folly awanting in this kind, who thought by hanging
himself to be rid both of present shame, his counsel being despised, and
future blame, from the foreseen prevailing part of David: 1 Samuel 31.4
and Saul pretends this as his best argument to kill himself least the
uncircumcised Philistines should fall upon him and mock him: and Abimelech
will be guilty of his own death, rather then it be said that a woman slew him.

8 Others out of vainglory and desire of fame, as Empedocles the Scicilian
Poet, who to be accounted immortal threw himself into Aetna, Deus immortalis
haberi, Hor. in art Poaetica.
dum cupit Empedocles, etc.

9 These that have desired the immortality of the soul after death, have upon
false grounds used this unequal means of killing themselves, as did
Cleanthos, Crysippus, Zeno, and others besides Empedocles, as did Cleombrotus
also, after he had read Platoes Phedo (the Book which Cato read also before
his death) all whom Lactantius for that cause of making away themselves, in his
third Book of False Wisdom, Cap. 8. recites and refutes.

10 Some have been deceived by the Devils Delphicke Oracles, (as Codrus
amongst the Athenians) to preserve their Countries by their own voluntary
deaths.

11 Others have been so ouer-whelmed in the floods of Passions, and so
transported from themselves in the eager pursuit of their desires, that they
have sacrificed themselves to their beloved and adored Idols, suppose these be
fictions, 1. of Didoes killing her self for the love of Aeneas: 2. Sappho, for
the love of Phao: 3. Phaedra, for Hippolitus: 4. Phillis, for Demophoon: 5.
Hemon, for Antigone: though they be all testified by Authors. The first
instanced by In Aeneid.
Virgil, Lib. 3. fast.
Ovid, Lib. 2. and Lib. 8.
Siluis, In Manto
Politian, and all that have followed Virgil: the second by Lib. 5. Siluarum.
Statius: the third by Ausonius: the fourth by Lib. 3. de stellis.
Pontanus: the fifth by Lib. 7.
Prepertius, (to say nothing of those that have cast themselves into floods and
rivers, and so drowned, at the command of their Mistresses, as Pontanus
instanceth in Galeatius, Caelius in T^magoras,) we have too many pitiful
presidents even in our times, of no small number of foolish Flies, and deluded
doters, who are profuse of their blood, which inconsiderately they expose to
effusion in single combats, or madly they let out with their own hands, either
when their supposed lawful love, or lawless lust is crossed by their
corriuals, or rejected of their beloved ones.

Lastly, and most ordinarily (to omit him that killed himself, by the instinct
of Gods Spirit, who also killed his enemies, that Typical Sampson, whose fact
was particular and inimitable) most make away themselves out of impatiencie
under the Cross, joined with Infidelity and Atheism, neither greatly
believing or regarding any future estate after death. And therefore as the
crosses and miseries incident to this our mortality are diverse and manifold,
so many snares has Satan not only for the souls, but the bodies of
unbelievers.

Some, in the extremities of war have warred with themselves, and let out
their own blood with their own hands, ere they would fall into the hands of
their enemies: which was Saul's case when the Philistines pressed sore upon
him. So Cassius and Brutus, Se gladio fodit Brutus, Cato fodit and ille, qu^m
t^muit Caesar. Pamphilius Sax^s.
the murderers of Caesar, murdered themselves, sath Plutarch, with the same
weapons with which they stabbed Caesar, being overcome by Anthony and Augustus
at Philippos; for Which Io^ianus and others blame them. The like parts in the
like Tragedies, acted Cato, when Pompey was overcome of Caesar, who of the
City Vtica, where he dispatched himself, was called Vticensis, says Pliny
and Gellius. So Dolobella* one of Caesar's favorites, when he was vanquished
by Cassius in his Sirian wars. Lib. 5.
So usurping Fla. Fimbria in his conflicts with Sylla; at also Gnorban, when
he was banished by the same Sylla. So Norbanus, Lib. 13.
when he was overcome by Scipio. So Otho the Emperor, Autore Liuio.
after one battle lost in his wars with Vitellius. So Petreius, one of
Pompeis Captains foiled by Caesar: Labio, by Octauius: with many more. As
Portia, Martial. Lib. 6.
Catoes Daughters destroying diet was hot coals after the death of her Husband
Brutus: Plutarch.
and as Aria accompanied her Husband Petoes proscription, with her own death;
so diverse other Wives have voluntarily accompanied the dead ashes of their
Husbands: as also Husbands of their Wives, as Plantius of his Wife Erestilla:
Valor. de amore coniugali.
so Mark Anthony when he heard but a false rumor of the death of Cleopatra,
Eutropius Lib. 7.
aggravating his troubles with Augustus (says Oresius) killed himself. Some
have taken to heart the crosses of their Children: as Boetus that killed
himself at the Tombs of his daughters Hippo and Miletia, Lib. 26. Siluis lib.
2
who being defloured by some Spartan young men, were cast into a pit: so old
Gordianus is by Marcellinus reported to have hanged himself, when he heard
his Son was slain in the wars: so Mopsus threw himself down from a tower
when he saw his sons dead before him: Statius lib. 11. Theb.
so Iocasta the Mother affrighted with the horrible spectacle of her two Sons
Eteocles and Polinices, that had slain one another, would live no longer. So
Children have followed their Parents Funerals, Sic Lib. 5. Sylu.
as Erigone that hanged her self when her Father Icarus dyed. So Brothers and
Sisters have sympathized in sorrows, and in Selfe-murthers, one with, and one
for another; as Iuturna (Daunus his Daughter) that drowned her self after her
Brother Turnus was ouer-turned by Aeneas, Paulus sed Diaconus.
Others in a despayring repentance, for killing other, out of the horror of
conscience, and Gods remunerating vengeance, have killed themselves: as
Argobastes after he had caused Valentinian the younger to be strangled at
Vienna. So Ecelinus the Tyrant after innumerable slaughter of others, made
havoc of himself. Lesser Crosses have occasioned others self destruction,
as the loss of friends, scandal of name, miscarrying of some things, which
they ouer-weeningly loved in life: as Terence that drowned himself, because
some hundred and seven Comedies, which he had turned out of Greek into
Latin, perished by Sea: Hor. in Epod^.
so Hipponax the Poet made Bubilas the Painter hang himself by his ierking
Iambickes. In all which particulars, these desperate salues that they used,
were worse then their sores. These were Heathens that knew not God, nor the
sovereign good, nor the true being or beatitude of man; the most of them they
wanted illumination from the Sun of Righteousness, and Sanctification from
the Spirit of Grace; they were in the shadow of death both in life and death,
and were under the power and Prince of darkness, Acts 26.18
who ruled so powerfully in them and over them, that often times they have made
away themselves for little or no cause, as have also some in the rank of
Christians, (as Celius and Crinitus write of one Laurence a learned Florentine,
who threw himself into a pit in the health and strength of body: as also of
one Peter Leonius an excellent Philosopher, and a singular wise man, that did
the like, no probable cause being known or suspected in either:) Let us fear
the Fates and the untimely falls of such Cedars whom God has cut down, with
the Axe of death, put into their own hands: let us by faith in CHRIST, and
repentance from dead works, be reconciled to that God who by our provoking
sins may justly deal with us as he has done with them: in giving us over to
Satan and our selves. But above all things let us fear to commit sins, or
live in sins against conscience: for the rage of conscience (the effect of
witting, willing, unconscionable and customarie sins) is the blatrant beast
that kills so many in selfe-murthers: The spirit of a man may bear his
infirmity, but a wounded conscience who can endure? says he that was once,
Solomon.
no doubt, touched in conscience for the sins with which his soul was soiled.

Lastly, let us take heed of Cain^ sin, despair of mercy, least it work
that effect in us that it did in him and Judas; both who offended GOD more in
this sin, chiefly the last, in effusing his own blood, then in shedding the
blood of Abel or of Christ himself. Apply the promises to thy soul by faith,
fons vincit sitientem; Augustine.
there is a fountain of Grace, and a Well of the water of life, Mat. 5.6. Mat.
11.28
always open to the thirsty sinner; which Fountain is greater then the puddle
of sin, and has a stronger mundifying virtue, and abstersive power to
cleanse the soul, then Jordan to purge and purify Naamans Leprous body.

I might prosecute another use against those who by a continuated custom of
sin are indirectly and effectiuely, though not intentionally (for every man
in sin, commits it, Omnia appetunt bonum.

Immo malum sub specie boni.


sub specie boni, under the show of some deluding good, as our first Parents
did, a truth which even Philosophers saw) but I say in respect of the effect,
selfe-murtherers: for there is no sin wherein a man practically and actually
lives, but as it is damnable to the soul, so it is prejudicial and dangerous
to the body, the death of both: and that if we consider it in his causes and
effects, whether natural or supernatural. Natural, instance in some: does
not fond lust cause dry bones? does it not consume the moisture? dry up that
radical humor which is the nurse and fountain of life? does it not inflame
the blood, cause burning Feauers? etc. To speak no worse, in bringing such
diseases, that even modesty suffers me not to name, as that French (or
Neopolitan) disease, that Anthonies fire, which burns to the consumption of
the body and confusion of the soul. Does not Drunkenness cause Dropsies? does
not strong drinks ouer-heate the blood? For to whom is woe? to whom is sorrow?
to whom is strife? to whom is murmuring? to whom are wounds? and to whom is the
redness of eyes? Even to them that tarry long at the Wine, to them that seek
mixed Wine, which Wine though it be pleasant both in the color and the taste,
yet at last it bites like a Serpent, and hurts like a Cockatrice, Pro. 23. v.
29.30.31.32. The like may be said of all other intemperancies in meats: by the
immoderate excessive abuse whereof many have laid their stall-fed pampered
carcasses untimely in the dust. Insomuch that Physicians considering the
innumerable diseases that flow from that unclean sincke of Epicurisme and
gluttonizing, have set it down at an Axiom, Plures gula quam gladio: that the
insatiable belly has slain more then the Blade.

What should I speak of Avarice and Covetousness, which wastes and consumes
the spirits by a mad and eager pursuit after the world; every cross and loss
whereof goes to the heart of the wretched worldling like a dart or a dagger? Of
Envy, which frets the heart as the Moath the Garment, and eats into it, as the
rust into the Iron? with the destroying and deadly effects of other such
sins. I might be large in the causes supernatural, in confirming that
Divinity, which not only Protestants commenting, Aret. in locum. Bernardin.
de sena, art. 3. cap. 4*
but Papists alleging that place in the Apocalypse, chap. 3. verse. 3. If thou
watch not I will come on thee as a thief, etc. have taught and affirmed, that
GOD accustometh for the punishment of careless and negligent sinners, to cut
off time from them, and to shorten their lives, for their misimploying and
mispending the same, in omitting all good duties, and committing outrageous
sins: God taking from them that which they have, or at least seem to have
Mat. 25.29. Tom. vlt. ser. 13. ^.3. and 4. and Tom. vlt. ser. 18.
which is Time; a Jewel so precious, that as zealous Bernardine de sena, often
acknowledges, if the traffic and merchandise of it might be carried to hell
to be sold, for one only half hour there would be given a thousand worlds,
if the damned had them. Hence it is, that we see many murderers, riotous
persons, malefactors, swearers, swash-bucklers, cut off by the Sword of the
Magistrate, or of the enemy, in war, or private quarrels, or by Gods sword,
the devouring Plague, or such means, even in their youth and strength, when by
the course of Nature they might have lived longer: according to the threat of
the Psalmist, that bloody and deceitful men shall not live out half their
days. Psalm. 55.23. And that Prophetical threat of Job, Job 15.32.
that the sinful man shall die ere he accomplish his days, and that his hand
shall be cut off like a Vine in the bud, even when he is young and tender in
the blade, ere he come to any ripeness or maturitie. To which God himself
has reference in the fifth Commandment, which at it annexeth the promises of
long life to children that are obedient to their Parents, (how ever some are
taken away soon, as was Josias, whose short life on earth is rewarded with
life eternal in heaven) so it intimates the curse of abbreuiating and
shortening the life of those that are immorigerous and refractory to their
Parents and Fathers, whether natural, civil, spiritual, or heavenly:
illustrated in that whether fiction or true History, Pomerium de Sanctis.
Bernardin Seuensis.
which the Papists relate of a young man in the Village of Catalunna, near
Valentia; who being disobedient to his Parents, and withal a thief, being
deservedly hanged about the years of eighteen, a pretty while after his
death, he hanging on the Gallows, his beard began to sprout, his brows
waxed wrinckled, his hayres gray, like a man of nintie years: at which all
being astonished, it was revealed to the Bishop of the place, how that same
young man, after the course of Nature, might have undoubtedly lived nintie
years, and so should have done, but for his disobedience and other sins the
LORD by a violent death cut off from his life, so many years as are from
eighteen to nintie. Whereupon Saint Jerome well observes, Hier. epistola 21.
that as shortness of life is a punishment and judgment against sinners, so
from the beginning of the world a sin has increased in several ages, God
has shortened the years of sinners more and more. Which is plain, if we
compare our days with former times.

Hence it is, Haimo, sic Hector Pintus in Esaiam 38.
that (as Haimo and others note, if God had called Ezekias then when he
threatened him, it had been Sins desert, not Natures course: and when at his
tears and prayers, fifteen years were added to his days, then his sin
was pardoned, and he permitted to run even that whole natural race which
he should have run, if he had not sinned: Molle^us Wolphius in Psalm. 102
ver. 24. Vide Marlor. in expos. Eccl. in Psalmos.
for which cause David prays that the Lord would not take him away in dimidio
dierum, in the midst of his days; that is, say Expositors, he prays that
according to his demerits God would not as an inflicted punishment,
unseasonably cut him off, as he uses to do and deal with profane men: but
that he would permit him to enjoy and accomplish the residue of his years,
which in his determination he had appointed he should live, if he had
persisted obedient. All which may be a Spur and motive to stir up
impenitent and ungracious wicked men to look to themselves, and to break off
their sins by Repentance, l^ast both from causes natural and supernatural,
as the effect of their quelling and killing sins, they be found
Selfe-murtherers: being not only actually even whilst they live, dead in
their souls, like the vvanton widows Paul speaks of; 1 Timothy 5.6.
and the Bishop of Sardis: Apoc. 3.1.
but in proxima potentia, in the nearest probability of the death of their
bodies, even as he that has eaten poison is but a dead man though living,
because potentially dead: and as a condemned malefactor is dead, though living,
because Legally and Ciuilly dead: so, these are dead whilst they live, like
condemned Traitors* standing at the Kings mercy, when ever he will take away
their lives: the case standing with them as with Adam and Eve after they had
eaten the forbidden fruit. Fear and tremble ye wicked ones, least God take
away life from you, life natural and eternal: as he threatened to take away
the Kingdom of God from the Jews, Mat, 21.43. giving the abused treasure of
your life to those that know better how to estimate it, and use it to his
glory, and to the working out of their own salvation.

His proper Appellation. In these words, Thy Servant.
NOW we come to the fourth part in this Song, in Simeons Compellation,
intitling himself Gods Servant, with a special application in this Pronoune
Thy: In locum.
Piscator gives a note of the significancie of the words in the Greek, (...);
Sernum tuum: id est, Me: thy Servant, by a Senechdoche: as the Virgin Mary
uses the phrase in the same Figure, Luke 1.48. by an elegancie of speech
proper to the Hebrews; testifiing their reverence to him to whom they speak,
as in the History of Joseph's Brethren we hear them thus submissiuely speaking
to Joseph; Thy Servants came to buy food, Genesis 42.10. They might have said, We
came, in brief, but they express their reverence. So for the same cause,
Gehezi answers his Master Elizeus, 2 Kings 5.25. and the woman of Tekoa, David
in the same terms, 2 Samuel 14. when they might have used the Pronoune I, or
Me, they have expressed their reverent respect to God or man, as also their
humility; yea, and the account they made of the countenance and favor of
those they spoke to, as here Simeon did. For, if he would have given titles to
himself, he might have called himself one of the Seniors and Elders of
Israel, one of the Prophets, Verse. 30.31 32.
here prophesying; or a Rabbi amongst the Jews; a Teacher and Explaner of the
Law; a Doctor in the Schools of Jerusalem, being about the time, or succeeding
Jesus the Son of Sirack, that writ the Ecclesiasticus, Anno ante Christum. 40.
or Jonathan the Chaldean, that turned the Hebrew Bible into the Chaldean
tongue. He might have spoken of the number and excellency of his Scholars,
such as Gamaliel, Simeon Hilleles c. de sacra Script. p. 359.
under whom Paul was instituted, that was his Son, or his Auditor, as Zanchie
thinks: with other such privileges, in respect of his place, dignity, age,
profession, estimation, but he singles out, and sequestrates this Epithet
from the rest, and appropriates it to himself, Thy Servant; counting it his
chiefest dignity to perform any duty to his heavenly Master.

Doctrine. The chief delight and desire of a Christian is to be Gods servant.
This ought to be our chiefest practice: every Christian should be of Simeons
mind, striving, studying, indeauouring to deserve, ioying, delighting, and
rejoicing in his conscionable and constant desires to serve God.

First, we have not only Simeons practice here, but many presidents, Reasons
and Motives.
Esaias 9.6. both by birth natural and supernatural, yet have as desiredly as
deservedly passed by all other titles, in the exchange of this, to be accounted
and called the Servants of God. Thus Moses, as by the Lord himself, he is
dignified with the title of Gods Servant, I^sh. 1.2. yea, a faithful Servant
in Gods house, by the Spirit of God, Heb. 3.2. So he counted it greater glory
to be a poor Shepherd, and keep the Prince of Midians sheep, that so he
might in his solitary Soliloquies meet with God on Mount Horeb, Exodus 2. and
serve God with his afflicted people in the Wilderness, then to be called the
Son of Pharaohs Daughter, and enjoy the pl^asures of sin for a season in a
Heathenish Court, Heb. 11. So David that pious and potent Prince, the sweet
Singer of Israel, with greatest alacrity carrols out this in his holy Hymns;
Lord, I am thy Servant, I am thy Servant, and the Son of thine Handmaid. So
Paul, though an Hebrew of the Hebrews, a Jew by Nation, a learned Pharisie by
education, an Apostle by Profession, a pillar of the Church by his Ministerial
Function, yet with all these National and Apostolical Privileges, he ioynes
this as the chief, A Servant of Jesus Christ. Nay truly (that which the
Antichristian Saul of Rome calls himself hypocritically) a Servant of the
servants of the Lord for Christ's sake, Seruus seruorium Domini.
a Servant to the Saints, to the Church, all things to all, to win some. So
holy Jude, the Brother of James, of Christ's kindred according to the flesh,
prefixeth this as the best branch of his Pedigree, A Servant of Jesus Christ,
Jude verse 1. That which was the chief grace of Simeon, Moses, David, Paul,
Jude, ought to be our glory, to serve him, who is Lord of Heaven and Earth.

1 John 3. Mat. 12.49.50.
but Friends; yea, Sons; yea, Heirs; yea, Christ's Fellow-heyres, Romans 8. his
Brethren, his Sisters, his Father, his Mother, his Domestiques, and of his
Household; yea, Citizens with the Saints, and Burgesses of the Heavenly
Jerusalem, Ephesians. 2.19. yea, his Members, 1 Cor. 6.15. The Temples of the holy
Ghost, verse. 19. 2 Cor. 6.16. Spiritual men, 1 Cor. 2.15. New Creatures, 2
Cor. 5. Freemen, John 8. Holy men, 2 Cor. 6. The Lords anointed, 1 John 3.
True Israelites, John 1. The Lords first borne, Heb. 12.23. Gods peculiar
people, royal Priests, 1 Pet. 2.9. Elect of God, Col. 3.12. Vessels of Mercy,
Romans 9. Children of the Marriage-Chamber, and such as excel even their
neighbors, Mat. 9. yea, excellent ones, Psalm. 16.3. with such other titles of
eminency, and dignity, with which his Servants are advanced. Now, if it be a
grace to be called the Sewer, the Chamberlain, the Cup Bearer, etc. to an
earthly Monarch, as Nehemiah was to Artaxerxes, then what luster and
excellency is their in such high and honorable places, which the attendants
in Gods Courts do daily enjoy?

Thirdly, only the Servants of God are acceptable unto God here, and shall
have a glorious reward hereafter. Heb. 12.28.

Fourthly, the Church and Children of God esteem and approve of such as serve
Christ truly and sincerely, Romans 14.18. as for others that are either
strangers from the Commonwealth of Israel, without the Church; or servants to
their own lusts and sinful ends within the Church, that serve not the Lord in
spirit and truth, they esteem them as debashed and vile men, unworthy of the
common air, unclean Birds, unsavory salt, the earths burden, the Churches
bane, Satan's Impes, Natures shame, Heavens exiles, Hels Inheritance, and the
Devils due* in that case wherein they stand, till by the power of the Word and
Spirit they be brought from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan
unto God, from the service of vain Idols, to the living God, Acts 26.18

Use 1. Of Redargution.
If we, according to our use, apply this by use, we shall find Miriades and
Millions of such as have the faces of men, and the names of Christians, and go
under the common rank of Gods Servants, as far from Simeons desires and
delight in this point as the Devil himself, that never since they were borne
of their Mothers, did either know, or will, or affect or practice, or think of
the least measure of the service of God. Examine their knowledge, and you shall
find them as ignorant how God is truly to be served as the Getes and
Sauromatanes, and those Paganish people that never heard of God. Let thousands
that might be culled out, both in the City and Country, that are under the
means, and that have dexterity of wit, strength of intellectual powers,
soundness of judgment, in attaining, discerning, and judging the things of
this life, that belong to their Callings and Functions. Tell me the difference
betwixt a civil, moral, temporary, general Faith, and saving Faith,
(without which God is not served and pleased) with the marks, proprieties, and
effects of the same. Multitudes that live under the means are ignorant how God
should be served.
Let them distinguish unto me betwixt that godly and that worldly, that
Christian and that carnal sorrow mentioned 2 Cor. 7.10. Let them show me the
true qualities and conditions of such a prayer as preuailes with God, and
fetches a blessing from the Throne of Grace: the Notes and Adjuncts of that
Confession of sins to which Remission is promised 1 John 1.9. Pro. 28.13. Let
them tell me wherein the Evangelical Repentance of the child of God in his
new birth, or after his fall, differs from the Legal Penitencie of Judas,
Esau, and the Papists; with other such like Mysteries and Principles of
Divinity: the knowledge of which is a good means both for honoring of God,
and saving of their own souls: and I shall be very glad that my strong
jealousy and vehement suspicion of their blockish ignorance, is desiredly
removed. I know many like the naughty Servant, know the will of their Master,
that do it not, Luke 12.47. like the Athenians that know how to do well and
will not: that know how to speak well and to work ill, like that carnal
Cardinal that declaimed against whoredom, and practiced ere he slept, what
he inueighed against: such, like the Armenian Dragons, have hot mouths, and
cold hearts: yet an hundred times more we have in this our marvelous light,
that do no more know how to begin, prosecute, or finish any part of the
service of God: then a new admitted Colledge-Student, a fresh water Soldier,
an inexpert raw seruitor, a rude Prentise, know what belongs to their places,
functions, professions, to the customs and conditions of their place, the
first hour of their admittance: a fearful case for such as have had so good
means, and have profited nothing.

2 Part of the Use.
A second branch of this reprose extends to those who want not only the skill,
but the will to serve and worship God, unless in a will worship, such as they
themselves conceit and imagine is sufficient, though mixed with such filthy
dregs and dunghill of Ignorance, profaneness, superstition, formalitie and
hypocrisy, as makes God loathe and abhor their offerings. How many are there
in the common fold of Christianity amongst us, that in this maine duty of
hearing the Word, and the voice of the great Shepherd, in the Ministry of us
the Vnder-shepheards? for one Sermon that they here lend their ears and hearts
to, an hundred times to the voices of strangers, whether Seminaries and
Jesuits, the Popes Factors; or Stage Players, the Devils Preachers; or other
such Charmers, which infatuate and bewitch their souls, as the false Apostles
did the Galathians, Gal. 3.1. I speak not of the manner of their hearing,
without all preparation before, without all reverent attention, submission, or
faith in hearing, or meditation and examination of themselves and their
families after hearing, whereby the word is made unprofitable to them; yea, the
savor of death to death: But when do they hear at all? or whom? where is
their David's delight in the Law and Statutes of God? where is their longing
after the Congregations and Assemblies of the Saints? after Bethell? where is
their souls sickness after the house of God? to come and worship in the holy
Temple? there were such men when David, Ezekias, Josias, Anna, good Simeon, and
the Primitive Saints were living, whom Augustine called the Lords Antes, that
every day would have into the Lords Barn, to fetch corn, the bread of life,
as the Israelites gathered Manna every morning. But our age affords Drones, and
Waspes, and Grasshoppers in their stead: the neglect of Gods public worship in
the solitary seats of many unfrequented Churches, in the thronged fields, and
tippling-houses in many Parishes. In this our numerous people (wherein our Land
like a full Bee-hiue, might cast many swarms) shows that most have less will
to serve God, then the Devil, the world, or their bellies. But to leave the
Church-seruice, wherein man sees thy defects and defaults better then thou thy
self. Tell me vain men, in the truth of their souls (if there be any truth
in you) what sacrifices many of you, chiefly you the common and vulgar people
have offered unto God in private? where is the furrows and wrinckles in thy
face? thy bleared Leah-like eyes, that thy tears have made, being occasionedly
distilled from the Limbecke of a sorrowful soul for thy sins? where was thy
last Bochim, place of weeping? thy last M^spez, where like a true Israelite
thou did pour down water before the Lord? When did thou take up David's
course, in washing thy Couch with tears, and thy bed with weeping? Where did
thou mourn like Ezekias, 2 Kings 20.3. Alas thy dry eyes and stony heart,
polluted soul and guilty conscience tells thee this part of Gods Service is
yet omitted. Moreover, where did thou volly out thy broken sighs for thy
Sodomitish and crying sins? What times, morning, evening, day, or night? What
place, what Chamber, Closet, Gallery, Garden, Grove, Wood, Field, can witness
thee, smiting upon thy breast with Ephraim, Ier. 31.19. ashamed of thy sins,
with the Princes and Judges of Israel, like a Thief taken in the manner, Ier.
2.26. casting down thine eyes, and knocking upon thy breast with the penitent
Publican, Luke 18.13. mourning like a Dove in the Desert, and a Pelican in the
Wilderness, for thy transgressions and enormities? this part of Gods service
is pretermitted. Psalm. 4.
When did thou commune with thine own heart in thy private Chamber,
searching the secret sins of thy soul, with the light of the word, finding
out thy present corruptions, and recounting the bypast follies of thy youth,
in the bitterness of thy soul: confessing them unto God with the repenting
Prodigal* laying open the wounds, Leprosies, and ruptures of thy soul to
Christ thy Pihsitian? I doubt this sacrifice of a wounded soul, a broken heart,
and a contrite spirit, is either not at all, or very coursorily performed: this
service and sacrifice pleases God too well, Psalm. 51.17. for the Devil to
suffer it to pass without long delays, many interruptions, and in too many,
absolute omissions. But lastly, tell me seriously, how often have thou poured
out thy soul before the Lord in Prayer for the pardon and remission of sins,
for a new heart, a renewed soul, Psalm. 51.1. v. 12.13.14 Ier. 31.18. Mat 9.24*
for conversion, and turning to God, for increase of Faith, for the holy Ghost,
for the gifts of Grace, Wisdom* Chastity, and the like, as David, the
Apostles and Disciples of Christ, Luke 17. Psalm. 119^76.77. Luke 23.42 2 Cor 9.
1 Kings 3.
Paul; and other of the Saints have done? have thou done this? I ask thee not
whether thou have often babbled or not, like the Heathen and our ignorant
Papists, in pattring over thy Lords Prayer, as they do their Pater Nosters and
their Auees, without Faith or feeling, without heart and affection, with that
lip-labor that Christ condemned in the Gentiles, Mat. 6.5. Esaias 29.13.
and God in the Jews? Neither do I ask thee, if Parrat-like thou have said
over thy Creed, and thy ten Commandments, sometimes when thou did rise and
go to bed; which are as far from being Prayers, as the Devil is from truth,
or as ignorance is from knowledge, that tells thee they are Prayers which are
none. With these Heathenish and Idolatrous Services perhaps thou had lodened
the Lord, as the Jews once ouer-wearied him with the like vanities, Esaias
1.11.12.13. But I ask thee how often thou have indeed prayed? how often indeed
with a Sacrifice of Prayer, kindled with zeal, inflamed with the fire of the
spirit, heated with feruency, directed with knowledge, grounded on Faith in the
Promises, prosecuted with Humility and Reverence, attending with Constancy
and Perseverance, accompanied with Repentance for sin, and her hand-maides
Contrition and Confession? how often I say with such a qualified Prayer, have
thou approached the Throne of Grace? put up thy petitions to heaven? knocked at
the gate of Grace, for graces to be given, sins forgiven? how often with such
Incense have thou visited the Lords Altar? Seven times a day, with David? nay,
three times with Daniel? nay, once? nay none in many days, will thy heart
tell thee, if it continue not still hypocritical, deceiving thee as Satan
has deceived it? Well, and yet thou think to be saved: But upon what
grounds? rotten God knows. Indeed every one that calls upon the name of the
Lord shall be saved: so says the Prophet, so the Apostle, Joel 2.32. but thou
call not on the name of the Lord, says thy heart, at least not as thou
ought to do, which makes thy prayer an abominable sacrifice, therefore
thou thus continuing shall not be saved.

But let me go further with thee? Do thou pray in private? that is well: but
do thou pray for, with, and amongst thy family, in thine own house, as did
Abraham, Ioshuah; and the faithful in their days? here thou art mute: and thy
heart gives the negative. It is apparent God is as frequently and as fervently
served in the Houses, Tents, Tabernacles and Camps of many savage and Scythian
Soldiers, as in thy house. Mahomet has better service in most families of the
Turks, and the Devil of the Virginians, then God has in thy house.

For, Prayer is such an excellent part of Gods worship, that it is often used for
the whole service of God, as Genesis 4.26. and elsewhere, being a duty whereby
as man is profited, so wherewith God is wonderfully pleased, and his name
glorified, Psalm. 50.15. even in all his Attributes (both 1. in his Wisdom, in
acknowledging that he is infinitely wise in knowing our wants: 2. in his
Power, in that he is able: 3. in his Mercy, in that he is willing: 4. in his
Omnipotency, and his Omnipresence, that he is always ready and present to
hear and help his Church and children: 5. as also in his Knowledge, in that
we confess him by Prayer to be the s^archer of the heart, and the only
Intelligencer of the desires of man:) Now where this principal part of Gods
Service and Worship is omitted, or but slubbered over, (as Elies Sons did the
Sacrifices) in public or private, how can a jealous and a zealous God endure
it? When thou omittest, neglectest, despitest, or despisest this whole Service
of God, how shall the Lord be pleased with thee? thou depriving God of the
principal part of his Glory, he will frustrate thee of thy hoped glory: for,
who ever are glorified of the Lord in heaven, must glorify him in some measure
on earth.

I might also examine in this Quere, how thou performest other parts of Gods
service; namely, those which are Eucharisticall and Gratulatory, in praising
God for his blessings temporal and spiritual, as did David in his Generation,
with others, Psalm. 100. Psalm. 130. A duty though commanded by God, Psalm.
50.15. and as a part of his Service, so of his Glory, Psalm. 50.23. yet
neglected as frequently as foully, as it was of the nine cleansed Lepers, Luke
17.17. and of Ezekias, 2 Chronicles. 22.25. whereby Gods wrath is kindled against
many a man, and his seed and posterity, as it was against Judah and
Jerusalem. Secondly, they are both deprived of former blessings for their
ingratitude, and Gods hand shut from pouring out any new mercies into the riuen
dishes of such unthankful souls.

Many more parts of Gods service omitted by an ungracious and ungrateful world
might be prosecuted: whereby it plainly appears that there are great troops
and swarms of profane and godless men amongst us, that have not God in all
their thoughts, like the Hypocrites in Job 27.10. that have no delight in God,
such Atheists as David describes in the Psalmist, Psalm. 14. Psalm. 53. and as
Zephanie, Jeremy, Esaias, Ezekiel, and the rest of the Prophets have still cried
out against, that never seek unto God, that never call upon him: Nay, which
think it vain, and a thing neither behouefull for them, nor beneficial to
them, to call upon God, as the cursed Jews did in Malachie, 3. v. 14. Nay
alas, which is more, as many carnal and careless Idiots amongst us, discover
with their lewd tongues, the thoughts of their poisoned and perverse hearts,
they think it concerns not them to serve God, to hear, read, pray,
confer, meditate, and do such duties, (to which, 1. God, 2. their endangered
souls, 3. their general and special callings, 4. their usurped name of
Christians, 5. their vows in Baptism, do obliege, bind them, and inioyne
them:) but that these things are proper and peculiar to Cleargie-men,
Churchmen, learned men, Scholars, Preachers, holyday-men, (as they vnholily
call us.) They are not booke-learned they say, (though they be hell-learned
from a sophistical Devil, to dispute against their own salvation;) besides
they have other things to do, John 11.
Marthaes part to play, to look for the world, to provide for wife and
children: for such is their Atheism and Infidelity, they dare not trust God
for a ragge, or a crust of bread, without their own sinful carke and worldly
care, notwithstanding all his promises, Mat. 6.33. of giving them earthly
things, if they seek and serve him: How few aim at Gods Service in all their
ways and works.
) Hence it is, as their actions declare their affections, many think no
otherwise of their Creation, but that they were borne and brought into the
world, even to seek and serve the world and themselves, not God: and so to go
to heaven in a string (as it were) as straight as a line when they are dead. Oh
how many Husbandmen think this the end of their living, to delue, and dig,
and plow, and sow, and reap, and eat, and drink, and get his rents; and
spend his pence in his Sunday-pots: to serve his Cattle, Horse, Oxen, Kine, and
Sheep; himself serving God no more then the very Beasts and Bullockes,
amongst whom he conuerseth? These are also the thoughts, this the life of many
a daily Labourer and Hireling: thus also many unsanctified Tradesmen,
Merchants, Mercers, Haberdashers, Shooe-makers, Tailors, etc. and other
Shopkeepers, only propound gold and gain, as the end of their labors and
travels under the Sun: how to load themselves with thick clay; to bestow
their Sons and Daughters in great matches and high places; to give great
portions to their Children, Virtus post Nummo^.
rather of goods then of grace, and to leave their substance to their babes:
and to these ends the service of God, even upon his own Sabbath, must be
subordinate, his worship must be dispensed with, in whole or in part, by
themselves and those whom they have in charge, Iournymen, Servants, or
Prentises. Thus also some irreligious Seruing-man conceits no other end of his
living, moving, or being, of his years, strength, and vigor, but to serve his
Master at his Table or at his turns; or his Horse, or his Hawke, at his
appointment; besides his misspent time and means in the prosecution of his
own servile and slavish lusts: as for the Service of God, to which me thinks
he has as many leasures and opportunities in his vacancies from any needful
morrall employment, as any of the sons of Adam: he counts the thought of
that ridiculous, the practice preciseness, not worthy his generous spirit: his
time is wholly spent and misspent, either in civil attendance, according to his
place, Mole agendo. nihil agendo, alit^r agendo. Seneca.
or in idleness doing nothing, or in reading vain Books, or seeing Plays,
or frivolous discourses of Horses or Dogs, or worse subjects; in which things
the heart, it seems, is most employed in private, else could it never so
frequently, by the tongue, vent out such froath. In which remissness and
neglect in and of Gods service, joined with that loose prophanenes which
accompanies most of their professions, I think them much secured and hardened
by the exemplary irreligious courses and discourses of their Masters for the
most part, whose ordinary both words and works* in, and about, either the
world or their pleasures, and traded recreations (as their corrupt affections
bend) usually matched with a key-coldnesse, neglect, if not contempt (at least
an indifferency) in the public and private worship of GOD, (serving GOD no
oftener nor no better, either in the Church or their domestical Chapels, then
will stand with civility) reads a preceptory and practical lecture to all
the Servants; that they should not be more forward and zealous in good duties
then their Masters, neither to outstrip them in Gods service if they mean to
sleep in a warm skin, and not to expose themselves to the censure of more
precise then wise, and to continue in their Masters favor.

So the mercenary hired Servant, either for the Plough or Cart, or such like,
generally throughout the Land, what does he more think upon (besides sin
and vanity) then even to do his days taskes, like the hackney horse, his
ease and Prouender, his bed and his victuals being the very God that he
sacrifices unto? Tell him of ought else to be done in Religion, you shall
prevail as much as Lot with his Sonnes-in-law, they think you scoff. Hence
it is that this clownish rout in most places, are so forgetful of GOD, and
blockish even to admiration, that they neither know, or understand, or can
repeat the Petitions of the Lords Prayer, the ten Commandments, or the
Articles of their Creed, or can other-wayes prepare themselves (as I know
experimentally in too many Villages and Parishes) for the receiving of the
Lords Supper, which they usually do receive (as Judas did the Devil and the
sop together) then first by putting on their clean clothes about Easter time:
secondly, asking their Masters blessing: thirdly, muttering over such imaginary
Prayers as before I have spoken of: fourthly, going to Church to receive their
Maker and that day to be Gods Servants (as they sa^) and at afternoon to walk
abroad in the fields, and drink (sometimes to drunkenness) promiscuously
young men and women together, in the Alehouse, and then GOD is stoutly served
that day: in which predicament and height of sin are their ignorant and
profane Country-Masters. Nay, such a crust of Atheism and security is grown
upon the hearts of most Servants, that in most Families I have seen of
Husbandmen, Plowmen, Grasse-men, yea, and of some Gentlemen to (in the North
parts chiefly) I have seldom observed God served at the tables, either of
Masters or men, by saying Grace and Thanksgiving, when like Hogs and Dogs
they have served themselves with the usurped Creatures.

This is the cold and crooked Service that our God gets of innumerable
multitudes of Miscreants, that are as unmindful of him, as they are
unmerciful to their own Souls.

I speak not of all, I know there are a remnant in Israel that forget not God
nor bow to Baal: neither do I disgrace or disparage any of those professions
for the sin of the persons, no more then I blame the Calling of the Apostles
for that Judas was a traitor: yet I cannot but bewail the great forgetfulness
of God, and neglect of his worship amongst us, in this our outward prosperity,
beautified with the marvelous and miraculous continuated light of the Gospel.
Thus did Israel as we now, as appears by the reiterated phrases in the
Psalmist, and elsewhere, that in their prosperity they forgot God. The Lord
has labored to excite and waken us as he did them, by plague, pestilence and
other Judgments from the Heavens and all the Elements, yet our heads are still
heavy, and our hearts are asleep. Let us fear the rod of Ashur, the invasion
of foreign powers: let us not provoke him to procure out cries, and o^
service, by giving us over into the hands of Chaldeans and Assyrians. If ever
Israel be carried captive (which God forbid) and be oppressed with a Spanish
or a Romish yoke, we shall then wish that we had drawn near unto God in the
Sunnie day of peace, ere we had been humbled like Manasses, David, and
Israel, by pressures and afflictions.

A third part of this use extends it self to those, 3 Part of the Use.
that running into a further degree of sin, and measure of iniquity (as
indeed sin (like ill fame) still grows greater in his progress, Vires
acquirit eundo.
and swells more vast and poisonous, like the Dragon that has eaten the
Serpent, after once one sin be retained) do not only in their own
particulars, and with those that depend upon them, neglect, reject, and refuse
the service of God, though they wear the Livery and Cognizance of their
Master, being called Christians, but they malign, calumniate, and storm at
others that are more zealous and forward then themselves, aemulating (as it is
said of the Greyhound, that thinks much that any thing should out-runne him)
that any shoud outstrip them in the sincerity or measure of grace, or
out-runne them in the course of Christianity, accounting with politic
Gallio, Religion to be but Ceremonies and circumstances, quirkes and
quiddities, (...) the Lords true Nathaniels that serve him in truth, in whose
spirit is no guile, Psalm. 31.2. to be but foolish and froathy fellows, more
precise then wise, Gods followers, Gods fools, as Mich^l thought David, ^ Sam
6.20.
nay, mad, distracted, rauing men, as the Jews, Christ's Kinsmen, and Festus
esteemed CHRIST, Jeremy and Paul: yea, Gods faithful Servants, as they have
always been, so still are, as signs and wonders in Israel in this our
blinded age: Esaias 8.18. Yea, monsters, even to the great men of the world, as
David was, Psalm. 71.7. Yea, a scorn, reproach, and dirision to them that are
round about them, Psalm. 79.4. accounted as men of an odd fashion and carriage
from all others, Wisd. 2.15. nicknamed Precissians, singularists, humorists,
factious, hypocritical, and the like: which censures they undergo from
natural and carnal men, but chiefly from those that have in them some
morrall goodness (as Julian himself had) for our civil, honest men, and
formal hypocrites, Tripart. hist. lib 6.
Civil honest men most enemies to Gods Servants.
contenting themselves with mere external shows and shadows in the Service
of GOD, without any sincerity of heart, or life of Religion, flattering and
securing themselves in that dangerous and damnable estate wherein they feed
their souls with a vain and an ayrie hope, that they are as safe as the best,
think whatsoever is more in Gods Servants, then they find in themselves, to
be preciseness, and affected singularity, as needless, as fruitless in
their frivolous conceits.

And hence arises their Ismaelitish scoffs, and tongue-persecutions, against
those that are more aeminent and transcendent then themselves in many graces,
because the conscionable carriage and gracious deportment of the Servants of
God, does swart, censure, and condemn their outwardnesse and formalitie, at
which they are as often gauled and grieved, and fretted at the very heart, as they
compare their tinckling Cymbals with the others holiness.

4 Part of this Use of Redargution.
But leaving those whited walls and painted Sepulchers, to his Justice or Mercy,
that sees their rottenness and gilded rubbish: there are another sort of men,
if I may call them men (forgetting what the very composure of their body, and
the instinct of Nature tells them) which being void of all grace, and empty of
goodness; neither knowing, nor willing, nor working what is pleasing and
acceptable to the Almighty, deriding and detesting good men, and disliking
good duties with the former sort: as neither fearing God, nor caring for his
worship, nor furthering his service, nor favoring his servants: casting
behind their backs all thought of God, and their own salvation: they serve
themselves and their own end, their lusts, their darling sins, and
consequently the Devil, Gods and their mortal enemy. And of this sort there
are not so few, but they may brag (as the Spirits in the Gospel) of their
number, their name is Legion. Many that live amongst Christians are the devils
servants.
All places, professions, trades, callings, conditions, estates, sexes and
sorts, and ages, from youth to gray hayres, afford trained Soldiers in these
sinful services, marching to hell under the conduct of the Prince of
darkness, the God of the world and worldlings, that rules in and over those
children of disobedience. Alas, how many be there of covetous Mammonists,
churlish Nabals, that as truly as David and Simeon professed and confessed to
the Sovereign Creator, Lord, I am thy Servant; so they say to Mammon, to the
Wedge of Gold, to their Silver Shrine, their Mettall-Idoll, Lord, I am thy
Servant? How many Epicures, Drunkards, and riotous persons, whose belly is
their God, Phil. 3.17
and their end damnation, say to the devouring gulf of their insatiable guts,
I am thy Servant? How many lustful livers and lascivious lovers, offering the
sacrifice of their unclean bodies to bewitching women, say to Asmodius, the
unclean Spirit, Lord, I am thy Servant? How many proud aspiring spirit in
Court and Country, flying in their thoughts faster then Pegasus or Mercury
upon the wings of high hopes, plumed with the feathers of their selfe-conceited
worth, making greatness, not goodness, the mark of their mounting, may say to
the high climbing Lucifer, Lord, I am thy Servant? The Jews
How many such saying desperately (with that Nation which once was called
stubborn and crooked) Surely we will walk after our own imaginations, Ier.
18.12
and do every man after the stubbornness of his own wicked heart: Ier.
18.12. forsaking the Rock of the field, and the Cedar of Lebanus for the
cursed Thistle; the fountain of waters for broken pits, the living for the
dead the great Jehovah for Beelzebub, and the God of Eckron: the God of Abraham
for the Gods of Nations; the service of God for the service of Sin and
Satan; the Devil may justly claim and challenge them in death, plead and
prevail to have them in Judgment, since they have by an explicit or
implicit cou^nant (as it were) sold themselves like Ahab and Jeroboam, to
work wickedness in their life time, as wittingly and willingly dedicating and
consecrating themselves to his service, as did once desperate Raffus* who (as
is reported) upon the two sides of his Shield painted God and the Devil, ^i tu
nolis, iste rogitat.
with this Motto, If thou oh God, wilt none of me, here it one will, offering
himself to him who was not a little glad of him, the unkind kind D^uell, who
retains and gives Liueries to all comers; yea, and wages to, such as himself
has, the world in show, but fire and brimstone in substance. Esa. 30.33.

Use of Exhortation.
Oh consider this, you that forget both God and your selves, his service and
your own souls, you that make your members weapons of unrighteousness to
fight against God, wounding him with his own weapons, the strength of your
bodies, and the powers of your souls, which you have received from him: now at
last offer up your bodies a living sacrifice, Romans 12.1.
holy and acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable serving of him, Romans 12
1. Give up your members as weapons of righteousness unto God, Romans 6. verse. 12.

These eyes of yours that have been full of adultery, Iud^ 7 2 Pet. 2.14.
hautie and proud, Sins of the eyes.
Pro. 6 17. mocking and scornful, Pro. 30.7. How all the members that have
served sin must and may serve God.
wandering, Esaias 3.16. Now let them be Doves eyes chaste eyes, like David's
eyes, lowly and humble: Cast away the abomination of your eyes, Ezekiel. 20.7 Let
them not regard vanity: Job 31.1 Shut them up from seeing evil: Esaias 33.15
Make a covenant with them as Job did: Let them not look upon a woman, but let
them look up to the Holy One of Israel, even as a Servant looks to his
Master: Psalm. 123.2 Set no wicked thing before thine eyes, Psalm. 101.1. but set
the Lord always before thine eyes to do the thing that is right, Psalm. 16.8.

That Tongue of thine which has been a principal seruitor of Satan's, Twelve
Sins of the tongue
being set on fire by Hell, James 3 6 the flame breaking out, by 1. lying, 2.
swearing, 3. forswearing, 4. filthy, 5. cursed, 6. guilefull speaking, 7. vain
words, 8 idle babbling, 9. profane ieasting. 10. corrupt communication, 11.
slanders, 1^. reuilings; with such other enormities in the whole course of thy
life and conversation, to the dishonor of God and the pollution of the good
name and chastity of thy neighbor. Now let it forsake the old Masters
service, in these sins: set a watch before thy mouth, and keep the door of
thy lips, Psalm. 14.3. Lie not, James 4.11. Let thy lips speak no guile, Psalm.
34.13. but speak the truth to thy neighbor, Zach. 8.16. So thou shall show
thy self a righteous man, Prou. 13.5. Swear not, neither by Heaven, nor by
Earth, etc. James 5.15. but, Let thy communication be yea, yea; nay, nay; for
what is more comes of evil, Math. 5.17. Put away filthy speeches, Col. 3.8.
Neither name fornication, nor filthiness, nor foolish talking, nor ieasting,
which are not comely, Ephesians. 5.3. But corrupt good manners, 1 Cor. 15.33. Now
also Put away from thee a froward mouth, Pro. 4.24. and cursed speaking, Col.
3.8. Avoid also idle and vain words, for which thou must give an account, Mat.
5. Be as flow to speak as swift to hear, James 1.19. (since thou have two
cares, but one tongue) for, in many words there cannot want sin, Prou. 10.19.
Therefore avoid vain repetitions and babblings, Mat. 6.7. In speaking either
to God or man, speak no vain words, Esaias 58.13. Thus keep thy mouth
hereafter brideled, that thou sin not with thy tongue, Psalm. 39.1. Neither is
it sufficient that thou now purpose that thy mouth shall not offend in these
and such like sins, Psalm. 17.3. But as thou have been tongue-tyed
heretofore, and mute, in speaking ought which was good, to Gods glory or thy
neighbors good, now it is most consonant to that end and office, which thou
had the use of speech given thee, let thy tongue be a consonant to serve God,
to sound out his praises continually. Psalm. 34. Sing to the Lord all thy life
and praise him whilst thou live. Ps. 104.33. Yea, if thou praise him before
the morning-watch, as did that holy-hearted David, Psalm. 119.147. yea, if at
midnight thou rise to give thanks unto him, Psalm. 119.12. If seven times a
day thou praise him* v. 164. yea, if thy mouth daily rehearse his
righteousness and salvation, Psalm. 7.15. yea, if all the days of thy life
thou praise thy God, Psalm. 146.2. and make his Statutes thy Songs in the house
of thy pilgrimage, Psalm. 119.54. yea, not only praising him, but praying to
him early in the morning, Psalm. 5.3. Job 8.6. yea, at evening, and at morning,
and at noone day: so often as thou eatest: thou do but that service for which
thy tongue was created: it is Gods due and thy duty: so let thy tongue also
serve man, Gods-Image, in God and for God. Let thy words be good, and to the
use of edifying, that they may minister grace to the hearers. Let thy speech be
always gracious and pondered with Salt, Col. 4 6. Let thy tongue spread abroad
knowledge, Pro. 15.7 that it may be as the wellspring of life: Pro^. 10.11.
Utter the words of grace: Eccles. 10.12. that thy lips may feed many. Prou.
10.21. If God have enriched thee with knowledge, minister a word in season to
him that is weary, Esaias 50.4. confirming him that is ready to fall, and
strengthening the weak knees. Job 44. So thy tongue shall glorify God, thus
employed, Psalm. 50. be a testimony of the sincerity of thy heart, Mat. 16.
and it shall assuage the sorrow of the afflicted. Job 16.15.

Sins of the ears.
So for the other members of thy body, thy Ears, if thou have not served thy
God in and by them, now begin: have thou served Satan with them, either in
hearing what thou should not have heard, profane Enterludes and
Stage Plays, filthy Songs, scurrulous talk, whereby thou have opened those
two doors to let in sin into thy soul? or have thou refused to hear what
thou should have heard? have thou turned away thine ear from hearing the
Law? Prou 28. Have thou had heavy and uncircumcised ears, Ier. 6.10. Psalm.
40.8. Have thou been an Idol with ears and heard not, Ezekiel. 13.2. A deaf
Adder stopping thine ears at the voice of the Charmer, Psalm. 58.4. now serve
God with that little part of thy body: now stop thine ears at the hearing of
sin, Esaias 33.15. and open them to hear what the Spirit says, Rex. 2. Cause
thine ear to hear wisdom, Prou. 2.2. Give ear to understanding, Prou. 14.
Hear counsel, and receive instruction, that thou may be wise now in the
latter end, Prou. 19.20. Be wise, and hearken to the corrections of life, Prou.
15.3. Hear the Word of God: Sit at Christ's feet with Mary, Luke 10.39. Hear
with heed taking, Luke 8.18. Hear with an honest heart, verse. 15. Hear and
forget not. James 1.24. Hear and practice, verse. 22. so thou shall serve God
with thy hearing.

Moreover, for thine Hands: Sins of the hands.
if with them thou have not served God, working wicked works to provoke the
eye of the Lords glory, Esaias 3.8. either in committing evil, 1. stealing from
thy neighbor, 2. taking Bribes in thy place, 3. Idleness in thy calling, or
in omitting good duties, first, either of Piety to God, in stretching out thy
hands in Prayer: secondly, or of charity to man, in closing them toward the
poor. Now keep thy hands from doing evil, and consecrate them unto the Lord
in doing good, so thou shall be blessed, Esaias 56.2. Exodus 32.29. If iniquity
be in thine hand, put it far away, Job 11.14. If thou have stolen, steal no
more, but work with thine own hands, Ephesians. 4.28. Keep them innocent and
pure, Psalm. 24.41. Shake thine hands from taking any gifts, Esaias 33.15. Let no
blot or stain cleave unto them, I^b 31.7 Strengthen them to do good works,
Nehem. 2.18, Open thy hand to thy brother, to the poor, to the needy, Deuteronomy.
15.11. Stretch thy hand out, of the increase that God gives thee, Prou. 31. And
stretch out thy hands also to the Lord. Psalm. 143. yea, in every place lift up
thy heart with the hand to God in heaven, 1 Timothy 2. Lament. 3.4. So shall thy
hands serve God.

Sins of the feet.
For thy Feet: if they have declined and made haste to deceit, Job 23.11. if
they carried thee with lewd company out of the way of Gods Commandments, to
vanities or to vices, to filthiness or to follies, to Plays or to
Brothell-houses: now remove thy foot from evil, Prou. 4.26. Make straight
steps to thy feet, Heb. 12. Refrain thy feet from the paths of the wicked,
Prou. 1.15. And keep the way of the righteous, Prou. 2.20. So shall thou serve
God and keep thy soul. Prou. 16.17. Walk not in vanities, Job 31.5. nor in
the counsel of the wicked. Psalm. 1.1. but run the ways of Gods Commandments.
Employ them to carry thee to the house of God, to the holy Exercises of
Religion, where God is served: Delight to stand in the gates of Jerusalem,
Psalm. 122.2. looking narrowly to thy foot when thou enterest into the house of
God, Eccles. 4.17. Thus did those two good Anna's in Samuel and Luke, a mother
and a widow: as also good David, and here old Simeon, rightly and religiously
use their feet in Gods service, in visiting so frequently, so constantly, so
zealously the house of Prayer, where they met with God, with Christ, and with a
blessing upon their seeking and serving God. And so must thou, if thou set thy
self with thy heart and soul, and strength, and spirit, and mind, and body,
to serve the Lord as they did, consecrating these and the rest of thy members,
parts and powers, external and internal, to Gods service, which that thou
may more willingly perform, let these Motives for conclusion of this Use,
add Spurs unto thee to run along with old Simeon to the service of this
best Master, to whom I recommend thee.

First, thou wast created for Gods service: Motives persuading to Gods service.

1. From the end of our creation.


as the Apostle instanceth in one sin, so I may in all: the body was not made
for fornication, nor uncleanness, nor adultery, nor drunkenness, nor for any
other works of the flesh, which are recited Gal. 5.19. but for the Lord, 1
Cor. 6.23. and the Lord for the body. Therefore David makes this an argument,
that we should fall down and worship the Lord, because we are the Sheep of
his pasture, and the work of his hands, he has made us, not we our selves.
Does any man keep sheep but he will eat of the milk of the flock, and be
clothed with the wool? Does any man build a Palace, a Castle, or a sumptuous
house for his enemy to dwell in? Did the Lord think thou oh vain man, that
seruest thy lusts, thy pleasures, the World, the Devil, form and frame this
excellent Fabric and composure of thy body, more sumptuous, artificial,
magnificent, then the Egyptian Pyramides, then Salomons Temple, then all
splendent and glorious buildings under the Sun, that are made of Lime, Stone,
Lead, Wood; Glass, Metals, and the like, and did infuse (as it were inward
proportionable furniture) such an understanding spirit, an immortal soul,
into this external structure and building of the body, for the Devil his
mortal enemy to dwell in? to take possession and keep habitation by his
eldest Son, Sin? Will any earthly Monarch suffer a Traitor, a Tyrant, an
Usurper, to intrude upon his Territories, to dwell in his fortified Cities, to
possess his Crown, and usurp his Throne? I trow not. And will the King of
Kings suffer it? Can a mean man endure another man, which means to abuse him,
to enjoy his Table, his Bed, his Wife? chiefly that she to whom he is
betroathed and wedded, should prostitute her self to his enemy? And will the
Lord that is as a zealous, so a jealous God, suffer thy spiritual whoredoms,
and fornications, with the triple enemies of thy soul, the deceiving Flesh,
deluding World, and destroying Devil? Will he endure his Sanctuary to be
polluted; his Temple abused, the holy Vessels profaned? Thy body is the Temple
of the holy Ghost, 2 Cor. 3.16, Chapter 6. v. 19. 2 Cor. 6.16.
thy members called Vessels: now if thou suffer this great Temple-spoyler, this
Dionisius, the Devil, to abuse thy vessels, by offering them to him by
uncleanness, to pollute this Temple, this body of thine by sin: he that thus
destroys the Temple of God, him will God destroy as he threatens severally
twice together. Take heed therefore that thou suffer not any sins to take up
the best rooms in this earthly Tabernacle and Temple, least by hardening thy
heart, corrupting thy conscience, deprauing thy will, blinding thy mind,
ecclipsing thy reason, dulling thy memory, disordering thy affections, spoiling
and defiling thy whole man, giving over that body of thine which God made for
himself, to be sins Brothell-house, and the Devils Playhouse, wherein all
sins are acted, least the Lord burn thee down stick and slower, either
with fire from heaven, as he did Sodom, or with fire in hell, as he did
Dives. Prepare thy body and soul therefore betimes: dress it, and sweep and
garnish it, as a Chamber for Christ to keep his Passe-ouer in, that the
destroying Angel may pass over thee, when he comes in Judgment.

Or homini sublime dedit, etc.
I might add secondly, how fitly by Creation thou art made in every part, as an
Organ and Instrument to Gods service: with a body upwards to heaven (whereas
all other Creatures look low and groueling upon the earth) with eyes to look
up to the Hills, and to the heavens, from whence comes thy help; Et refert
quaelibet herba Deum.
and down upon the fragrant and verdant earth, fit to behold how every
creature Celestial and Sublunarie, in their kind, as it were in a dumb
Oratorie, tells thee there is a God, and a God to be served: beginning and
continuing the Quire unto thee, to sing and ring forth his praises; thy tongue
fitted to speak Magnalia Dei, the wonderful works of God: and to confess to
Gods glory, as Ioshuah tells Achan, Josh. 7. those numerous and heinous sins
of thine wherewith thou have offended God, more then all the unreasonable
creatures: how ever the ill Angel either strikes thee dumb (as the good did
Zachary) or if thou speak, Satan oils the Clock of thy tongue to strike
after his setting, and move after his motion. Thy head abounding with moisture
more then the heads of many Birds, and Beasts, ready to distill into thine
eyes, that thou might weep for thy sins more then the rest, as having more
and more monstrous sins to weep for, then all the rest of the other
Creatures: and so I might speak of all other parts of thy body, and faculties
of thy soul, superior and inferior, as Will, Reason, Memory, Understanding,
Fantasy, the Heart, with the Affections thereof, all fitted for Gods Service
in the same symetrie and proportion.

From considering thy Creation, 2. Motive from out Preservation.
think of Gods great largess and bounty toward thee, in thy Preservation:
GOD having fed, fostered, educated, nourished, clothed thee, from thy first
forming in the womb, till this present minute and moment of time, wherein thou
live a rebellious sinner against thy God: of protecting thee even in thy
Infancy, Childe-hood, Youth; in the weakness of the first, forwardness of
the second, and rashness of the third: from many eminent dangers, to which
thou wast subject; and reserving thee until this present hour, in health and
strength, from the fury and force of the Elements, Fire and Water, etc. From
the might of the Creatures; the claw of the Lion, paw of the Bear, horn of
the Bullock, tuske of the Bore, tooth of the Dog, venom of the Viper, sting
of the Serpent; all which thy sins have armed against thee, disarming thy
self: as also from the malice of the Devil, and his substitute infernal
Spirits, who (without Gods restraint) would have torn thee in pieces and
carried thy soul (as they will do the sinners in Judgment) in triumph to
hell. Now do not all these constant and continuated mercies of thy Protection,
Preservation, Reservation, so long, so loving, so large, with the addition and
multiplication of so many and manifold undeserved positive blessings? Do not
all these (I say) call for, urge, require, plead for, yea, prevail for thy
heart, thy obedience, thy service, to such, so good, so great a Master? Sure,
if thou give it not him now, franckly, freely, willingly, heartily,
desiringly, thou art a monster of men, without grace or good nature: but
especially if thou payest the Lord evil for good, sins for favors, and
seruest Satan for him, thou art an ungrateful Viper, and condemned of the
very Heathens. Neither will God be so abused. Make it thine own case: thou
take a desolate Infant (as Pharaohs Daughter did Moses) and bring him up;
or thou entertainest a Servant, give him meat, drink and cloth, wages,
countenance, house and harbor, etc. would thou take it well, if this thy
adopted fostered child, this thy so much favored Servant, should reject thee
(thou still out of thy love continuing his means and maintenance) and serve
thy mortal enemy? Now make Application: thus thou dealest with God, in
serving (notwithstanding all his favors to thee, temporal and spiritual) him
who is the professed enemy of God, of Christ, of the Gospel, of the Church, of
man, of thee, and of thy salvation, the Devil.

Thirdly, consider thy Vocation, 3. Motive, from our Vocation.
thou art called from darkness to light: The grace of God has appeared unto
thee, teaching to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live soberly,
righteously, and godlily in this present world. Tit. 2.11. Therefore, as an
obedient Child to thy Father, as a dutiful Servant to thy Master* fashion not
thy self to the former lusts of thine ignorance, but as he that has called
thee is holy, be thou holy in all manner of conversation* 1 Pet. 1.14. The
night is past and the day is come, cast away therefore the works of darkness,
and put on the armor of light: Walk honestly as in the day, not in chambering
and wantonness, not in gluttony or drunkenness, not in strife and envy, but
putting off these (as a man puts off an old garment when he puts on a new) put
on the Lord Jesus Christ, and take no thought for the flesh, to fulfill the
lusts thereof, Romans 13.12. I pray you let us ponder, that what arguments the
inspired Apostle Paul uses to the Romans, Philippians, Thessalonians,
Ephesians, to incite them to the sincere service of GOD, the same may be urged
and pressed upon us in this Land; yea, upon all the Christians in Europe, or
elsewhere: for as we now are parallel with them in the knowledge of God and
of Christ, by the preaching and revelation of the Gospel of Christ, so we
were once nuzled, and blinded with them, in the same cloud and mist of
ignorance and unbelief, sinners, of the Gentiles, without God in Christ. And
therefore since God has called us (whether by the Ministry of Paul, or of
Joseph of Aramathea, or of Simon Zelotes, or who else, it skils not) to the
knowledge of his truth, and to his service, by the voice and sound of the
Gospel, let our conversation be such as becomes the Gospel, Phil. 1.27. God
might have placed thee oh sinful secure man, amongst the Jews, Turks, or
Pagans, or thou might have continued with thy forefathers, wrapped and
enueloped in the Egyptian darkness of Popery, where the light of his Truth
should have been hid from thee: but now that his ways are revealed to Jacob,
and his salvation to Israel; since thou have heard his Word, if thou will not
fall down and worship him, and work his will, CHRIST the object of the
Gospel, as a stone which thou stumblest at, and a rock of offense, shall fall
upon thee, and dash thee to pieces: better thou had never heard of Christ,
then now with Herod to mock him, when with the Childe-murthering Herod thou
pretending to worship and serve him, thou do but serve thy self and thine
own ends, by all lewd courses, sinful and sinister means whatsoever.

Fourthly, 4. From our Redemption.
this is the end of thy Redemption from the slavery and bondage of thy
spiritual enemies, from the power of darkness, of Sin, and sins
punishment, the second death, even to serve God: so run all the streams of
the waters of the Well of life: so Zachary prophesies: Luke 1.74.75. so Paul
persuades the Corinthians, that being bought with a price, they should glorify
God in their bodies and their spirits which were Gods. So Peter presses the
same upon the dispersed Jews, commenting, as it were, upon, and enlarging
Paul's price that was paid for man's redemption, showing first negatiuely what it
was not; not any of these corruptible things, as gold and silver, the earths
redundance; not pearls and precious stones, the treasures of the Land and Sea,
the Indians store, and the Fishes hidden virtues, etc. then affirmatively, it
was a bloody booty that bought us, and not every kind of blood; not the blood
of Goats or Bullockes, of Men or of Angels, but the precious blood of Christ,
as of a Lamb undefiled and without spot: and the end of all this great
Mystery, greater Mercy, in redeeming man from his greatest misery, what other
was it, as also of our Vocation? Sure nothing else, but 1. holiness, 2. and
the fear of God (which is the ground of his service) 3. and renounciation of a
vain conversation, as appears by the Contexts, 1 Pet. 1.14.15.16.17.18. So is
Titus, a pattern of a good Preacher, taught to press and preach this point;
that the end why Christ gave himself for his Church, redeeming us from all
iniquity, was that we should be a peculiar people unto him, zealous of good
works, Tit. 1.2.14. with infinite the like places, plainly demonstrating that
as redemption by Christ is not general and universal; (for then Judas, Herod,
Pilate, Esau, and others, sons of perdition, ordained to condemnation, should
have been redeemed) but limited, proper and peculiar to his Elect, to his
Church, to his People. Such as are his Sheep hear his voice, obey, and serve
him; so those that continue still in their sins, frozen in their dregs,
incredulous and unbelieving, impious in their living, impure in their
conuersing, given over to strange lusts and vile affections, making their belly
their God, and the like, are so far from having any benefit by Christ, that
he is unto them a rock of ruin, a stumbling-blocke, and a stone of offense,
the falling of many in Israel, like the word and Sacraments, and all things
else, unto the wicked contemners of his worship, and condemners of his
servants; the savor of death unto death: they accounted enemies to his Cross,
such enemies as he will slay, as he has threatened, their end being
condemnation.

Fifthly, out Profession, me thinks, 5. From our profession.
should be a maine inducement to our practice in this point: for so reasons
both the Prophet and Apostle if we account God our Father, as we do, Mal. 1.6.
Luke 11. then where is his honor? if our Master, then where is his service? And
sure if we call him Father which without respect of persons judges every man,
then let us pass the time of our dwelling here in fear: otherwise we
borrowing the same vizards which the Pharisees long since cast off with their
lives, we should be branded with the same note of painted Sepulchers and
whited walls, and adjudged to the same woes and Anathemaes that they were, being
in the same predicament of gross and formal hypocrisy.

Sixthly, the Good procured, 6. From the reward of Gods service.
and Reward promised, the Wages expected, should not a little woo us and win
us to this service: for, all would retain to such Masters who are most able
and willing to work their welfare; where they may have the best present helps,
and future hopes of preferment and promotion. Now, who is able to promote, if
God do not? 1. Wealth, 2. Worship, 3. Honor, 4. Peace, 5. Protection in
danger, 6. Approbation, 7. Acceptance, 8. outward Blessings, 9. reward of
Inheritance, 10. Curses removed, Plagues escaped, all these are the
Pedisseques, the hand-maides, and Attendants, and Servants, that attend and
wait upon, and serve those that serve the Lord, as may be instanced and
enlarged in their particulars.

First reward, wealth and riches.
For Riches, Wealth, and outward blessings, as they are promised, so they were
given and exhibited unto Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Job, David, Solomon, etc. with
infinite others, as an encouragement to the Service of GOD, as the fruits of
their Faith, as the reward of Religion: Godliness is great gain, and has the
promises both of this life and of the life to come, and who consent and obey
must eat the good things of the Land. That this Position is no Paradoxe, that
Grace is the way to gain, and Piety the means to prosperity, as is Psalm. 1.
so let any (to stand upon no more places) read Exodus 23.25. and he will
confess that this is as true, as God himself is true. If any man be troubled
with that scruple which perplexed Job, Jeremy and David, in their time, that
the slaves of Satan are in outward peace and pomp, and seeming-prosperitie,
when Gods Servants are in the ebb, and going down the wind, the same
Scriptures salve and satisfy the sore of this Objection, where it was first
made, to which place I refer you, Psalm. 73. and Job 21.

The second meede and reward of Gods servants, is Honor, Secondly, Honour^
that continuing as inviolable, is the Decrees of the Meedes and Persians,
which God avouches to Samuel of rejected Saul, Those that honor me I will
honor them, 1 Samuel 2.30. Them whosoever, whatsoever, wheresoever they be,
Quoscunque qualescunque vbicunque
Kings and Kesars, poor and pesants, that perform homage and fealty unto
God, holding their souls, their lands, and their lives in Capite from God,
those the mighty Jehovah, who only can set up and pull down, advance and
deiect, will honor, they shall be gracious in his eyes, dreaded of their
enemies, as was Ioshuah and David; and honored of all those that are round
about them.

This is Gods Law of Paritie, Lex Talionis.
ratified in the high Court of Parliament in Heaven, and put in execution in
earth, 1. Abraham, Gods friend, 2. Joseph, 3. Moses, 4. Samuel, devoted to Gods
Service, proved the truth of this Promise, the first honored in the presence
of his friends, of his neighbors, of his enemies, Genesis 18.18. and Chapter
20.3.23.6. The second found store of Honor where ever he came: in his Masters
house, in the Prison, in the Palace, Genesis 39. and 40. and 41. The third
honored by working Miracles for deliverance of Gods people, for confusion of
Gods and his enemies, Exodus 14. Chapter 16.32. The fourth increased in honor as in
years, growing in favor with God and man.

Infinite such examples might be recited, the time would be too short to show
how Gedion, Baarack, Job, David, etc. the faithful Servants of God, were
exalted from the Threshing-floore, Judge. 6.11. Judge. 4.6. From the Sheepe-fold;
yea, from the Dunghill, Job 42.12. to sit with Princes, yea, to be Princes of
the people, Psalm. 78.70. Psalm. 113. verse. 7.8.

Sin brings shame and other judgments.
So that if it be so that all affect honor and eminency, me thinks, we
should take the right course to effect what we affect, even by serving God. Not
to seek it, as Mary sought Christ, where it is not, preposterously and
carnally: either of the world, as the ambitious Jews did, John 5.44. nor from
the vain breaths of men, as the hypocritical Pharisees did, John 12.43. Much
less at the hands of the Devil, as Balaam did. Number. 22. by Devilish courses,
and sinful impieties, and horrid villainies, Nimrodians Nabuchadnezzar.
Erostratus.
as those that built Babels Tower, and he that built Babell, and he that burnt
Dianaes Temple, did. Genes. 11.3. By Rebellions and Treasons, as Absolon did,
Rebellions and Treasons.
2 Samuel 18.18. as the Papists by King killings, and Powder-plots: as our
drunkards by their unreasonable quassing, by quarrelling, fighting and
stabbing; as our vain and vicious Gallants in their falsely supposed manhoods:
nor by any other horrid sin whatsoever; for the way of sin is the way to
shame and dishonor.

For, as wicked and ungodly men serving the Devil, whose Children they are,
Ioh. 8.44. by serving sin, I John 3.8. suffering it to reign in their
mortal bodies, Romans 6 12. are called and accounted the enemies and haters of
God, Romans 1.30. Romans 8.7. unruly and untamed Heffers, H^s. 4.16. Spurners
against God, Deuteronomy. 32.15. A rebellious and a false seed, Esaias 57.3.4.
Conspirators, and such as stretch their hands out against God, as Job and
Jeremy call them, Ier. 11.9. Job 15.25. Dispisers of the Spirit of Grace, Heb.
10.29. Stout against God in their words, Mal. 3.13. Contemners of his ways,
Job 21.14. Setting their mouths against heaven, Psalm. 73.9. Dispising both the
Word of God, with the Jews, 2 Chronicles. 24.19. Psalm. 50.17. and the Works of
God, as did the Gentiles, Romans 1.21.22. And the Ministers of God, as the Elders
of Israel, and the People, did Moses and Samuel, Exodus 16.8. 1 Samuel 8.7. And
the Jews, CHRIST and his Disciples: 1 Kings 20.28. Dan. 3.15. 2 Kings 19.
but even the person of GOD himself as did the Aramites, Nabuchadnezzar,
Senacherib, Rabsekah, and others: so the Lord has threatened to despise such
despisers, 1 Samuel 2.30. to deride such deriders, and to lay their honors in the
dust, Psalm. 2.4. Cursed are they of the Lord, like the inhabitants of Meros,
Judge. 5.23. even with all the curses pronounced from Mount Eball, Deuteronomy. 27.
Because they serve not the Lord, the Lord accounts basely and vilely of them,
even as of Oxen and Asses, Dogs and Swine, Esaias 1.3. 2 Pet. 2.22. As dross and
dung, and unsavory Salt, fit to be cast away: yea, though Coniah, the Son of
Ieho^akim, were as the signet upon the Lords right hand, yet if he despise the
Lord, he shall be plucked thence, accounted as a despised and broken Idol, or
as a filthy vessel, Ier. 22.24. and 28. Nay, though Saul be a King, if he
reject and forsake the service of God, God will reject and cast him away to, 1 Samuel 15.16. Yea, Jerusalem, if she refuse to obey her God, shall be an
habitation of Devils, Reu. 18.2. The Jews, though Ruhamah, shall be
Lo-ruhamah, though Ammi, Gods people, yet if they forsake the service of God,
they shall be Lo-ammi, none of Gods people, Hos. 1.6.9. But (as at this day it
is seen) a disgraced, despised, and contemptible Nation: and so will the LORD
deal with all other wickedly wretched contemners and despisers of his Glory,
his Word, his Works, his Ordinances: they shall be blamed and shamed, and come
to an ignominious and odious end.

Every creature shall conspire their destruction that serve not their Lord and
Master, Gods hand shall be upon his enemies in many judgments.
the Creator. The Angels shall smite them, as they did Pharaohs first borne,
Zenacharibs Host, and Herod, Acts 12.23. Men shall laugh at them, and the
righteous shall have them in derision, Psalm. 32.6 7. They shall not continue in
honor, but be like the dumb beasts that perish, Psalm. The Devil shall
triumph over them, and cry at their deserved Plagues; So, so, there goes the
game. They hiding their sins, and not confessing them to Gods glory, shall
not prosper, Prou. 28.13. Their souls shall be smit with fears like Pushur
and Cain, Genesis 4. Ier. 10.3. There shall be no peace to them, but sonitus
terroris, a sound of terror round about, Esaias 57. Job 15.20. etc. For their
good names: these shall rot and perish, Prou. 10.7. even like their wealth and
substance, upon which Gods curse shall seize, Deuteronomy. 28.16.17.18. They shall be
made a wonder, a Proverb, and a reproach amongst all people, an astonishment;
an ^issing, and continual desolation, Deuteronomy. 18.37. Ier. 25.9. And for their
seed, it shall not prosper: the sword shall destroy them, Job 27.14. for, the
Lord will root out the memorial of the wicked from the earth, Psalm. 34.16.
Therefore as David concludes to the comfort of Gods Servants after the
enumeration of many blessings, Thus shall the man be blessed that fears the
Lord: so I may say in these particulars, and many more plagues denounced from
the mouth of GOD, as in Leuit. 26.16. Psalm. 49.12. Psalm. ^07.10. Prou. 3.33.
upon the wicked in this life, besides those which they shall feel and find in
their death, Job 13.26. Psalm. 49.14. And in Judgment, Dan. 12.2. Esaias 2.11.
Reu. 1.7. Reu. 6.15. Mat. 25. and 41. and in hell, Mark 9.43.44. Luke 13.28.
Revel. 9.6. Lo thus shall the man be plagued that serves not God.

If any believe not these testimonies, let him look his own face in the
glass of the examples of Pharaoh, Herod, Nebuchadnezzar, Holofern^s, of Julian
the Apostate, Valerian, Antiochus, Nero, Domitian, Decitis, Dioclesian, Theod.
lib. 3 c. 11. Eusebius lib. 7. c. 20. Lib. 7.14.
Baiaz^t, with infinite others, from the Word. and Histories, as they are
recorded by the Machabees, Tacius. Suetonius, Dion, Orosius, etc. and they will
speak, that from the beginning of the world till now, sin always brought
shame, and that Gods dishonor brought Gods disfavor, death to the body,
damnation to the soul: which considerations may be whips and goads to drive us
to the duty urged.

It is contrary with the godly, their service is the path way to honor: the
people that hearken unto Gods voice, are a precious people unto him, high above
all Nations, in praise, in name, and honor, Deuteronomy. 26.17.18.19. Ask the verdict
and censure of all the Prophets, and Apostles, and the Servants of God, Esaias,
Micah, S. Paul, S. James, S. Peter; yea, of Christ himself: Holiness is the
way to Honor.
and according as they were inspired by the Spirit of Truth, and knew in their
own experience, they will say that the way to be great, is to be good: to
rise, is to fall; to be exalted, is to be humbled under the mighty hand of God,
1 Pet. 5.6. The way to seek glory, and honor, and immortality, is to
continue in well doing. Romans 2.7. to be fixed, established, and to endure for
ever, is to believe, and to fulfill the will of God, Esaias 7.9. 1 John 2.17. and
that the only thing that is good for man, is to walk with God, M^c. 6.8. Yea,
T^lly and Aristotle, that made Honor the subsequent and effect of Virtue and
Goodness: the Egyptians that painted it betwixt Humility and Labor: the
Romans that so composed their Temples, that a man must first pass by the
Temple of Humility and Virtue, ere he could touch the Shrine of Honor; saw
with the eyes of Nature, that the way to be great is to be good. Yea, to serve
that goodness, which the Heathens only coniectured, but Christianity defined
to be the sovereign good, and that is God himself; who is both more willing
to prefer his Servants to earthly dignities here, if it be good for them to
be exalted: yea, and infinitely more able then Assuerus was to honor
Mordocheus, Hest. 6.6. Nabuchadnezzar Daniel, Dan. 5.7. Pharaoh, Joseph; yea,
or Saul any of his Captains or followers, for all his baosts of his Fields and
Vineyards, 1 Samuel 22.7. since his alone is Greatness, and Power, and Glory,
and Victory: since all that is in heaven and Earth is his, Riches and Honor,
Power and Strength, etc. as David acknowledges, Hannah sings, and Cirus
confesses, 1 Chro. 29. 11.12. 1 Samuel 2.7.8. Ezra 1.2.

God is most ^^herall of all Masters.
For, I pray you, what was the most that any of those great Monarchs could do
for any of their Favorites and Followers in their chiefest graces, when they
set their wits a-worke, what to do for such a man whom the King will honor?
Clothing in Purple, and royal apparel, setting on their heads a Princely
Diadem putting a Chain of gold about their necks, Rings upon their fingers,
mounting them on their Steedes, or setting them in a gorgeous Chariot, with
Proclamations before them of the Kings favors toward them, was the chief
luster and eminency that earthly Kesars could dignifie their chiefest Servants
withal, Genesis 41.42.43.44. Hest. 6.9.11. etc.

But what are all these Honors that the King of Egypt, the King of the Medes,
or of the Babilonians could profer in respect of that Honor which God bestows
upon the meanest of his Saints and Servants? Surely toys and trifles: for in
stead of these fine Linnens and royal Roabes that are exposed to the
corrupting Moath and consuming Time, God will clothe his with the external and
internal Roabes of Grace, the righteousness of Christ, Esaias 49.16. Romans
13.14. they shall not have a fading but a flourishing, not a mortal but an
immortal Crown, not of Gold but of Glory; that is, they shall not have a
Chain of Gold only, Psalm. 45.13. but of golden Graces knit together by Saint
Peter, 1 Pet. 1.4.5.6. etc. In stead of a Ring they shall be placed as Signets
on the Lords right hand, Ier. 22.24. I cannot say they shall ascend up in a
chariot (though Elias were so taken up) but they shall be advanced to choice
mansions in such a Kingdom as surpasses all the Kingdoms of the earth, as
much as the Sun the Clouds, or Salomons Throne Jobs Dunghill, Ephesians. 2.6. John
14.2. Rou. 3.12. where they shall be Kings and Priests for ever, Reu. 1.6. Such
honor have all his Saints. Psalm. 149.9.

If any man object that he sees no such honor that Gods Saints have: that they
are rather made here a gazing stock to men and Angels; despised, reviled, and
evil spoken of; yea, reputed as the filth of the world, 1 Cor. 4.9.12.13. and
the offscouring of all things.

Answ. It is true indeed: But of whom? Of such, whose neither praise nor
disprayse is to be respected: of profane men, children of Beliall: of fools
and naturalists: (for so are all ungodly men termed, Psalm. 14.1. Psalm. 53.1.
Luke 12.20. Ier. 4. etc.) Of such we are reputed fools for Christ's sake, yet
are we wise in Christ; though weak, yet strong; though despised, yet
honorable; 1 Cor. 4.10. Honorable, though not with wicked men, yet we shall
be hereafter, when we must sit in joint Commission with Christ, in Judgment
upon them. In the mean space we are honored of God, and if he be with us who
can be against us? Romans 8.31.

Gods Servants best regarded and rewarded.
Besides, if this Motive will not fix upon thee, yet let the greatness of
reward, the excellency of the wages, the liberal allowance of Gods Servants
stir thee up at last to sing this best part of Simeons Song with heart and
voice, that thou will be Gods Servant: It is a blasphemous scandal that the
Jewish Atheists cast upon God, that it is a vain thing to serve God and they
had got no profit in keeping his Commandments, Mal. 3.14. For, sure there is a
reward for the righteous: doubtless there is a God that judges the earth,
Psalm. 58. 10. A reward even in this life, even before the Sons of men, Psalm.
31.19. Even at David was anointed long before he was crowned, 1 Samuel 16.13. 2 Samuel 2.4. So here the Lord annoynts us with the oil of Gladness in the Church
militant, though we have not the Crown (till Christ's appearing) tryumphant, 2 Timothy 4.8.

Yea, even here the Lord is a Sun and a Shield to his Servants, he gives
grace and glory, and no good thing will he withold from them that live
uprightly: Psalm. 84.11. For what good thing does man's heart desire which God
does not promise and perform to his league Subjects?

1 For their Wealth: he gives them wealthy wages; an hundredfold, Mark 10.30.
He builds the Hebrew Mid-wiues houses, Exodus 2. and gives his Servant David a
great portion; for, he loves the prosperity of his Servants.

2 For Health: the Lord will make their bed in their sickness Psalm. 41.3. Yea,
the voice of joy and health is in the habitations of the righteous, Psalm. 110.1.

3 For Strength: the Lord, himself is their strength, Psalm. 27.8. and they
shall be strong in the power of his might. Esaias 6.10.

4 For Fame: their memorial shall be blessed; Prou. 10.7. yea, their
righteousness shall shine as the light, and their judgment as the noonday,
Psalm. 37.6. even as Salomons did to the furthest South.

5 Yea, their Enemies, that have traduced them, shall will they nill they,
acquit them, and justify them, even as Saul twice justified David's integrity,
1 Samuel 18. and Chap. 26. and Pilate, Pilates Wife, the Centurion, nay, even
Judas himself, together with the Sun, the Earth, and the Stones, acquitted
CHRIST, (who is termed Gods righteous Servant in Esaias,) and proclaimed his
innocence.

6 Nay, rather then they should want their deserved commendations, God himself
will praise them living and dead: as he did in Moses funeral Sermon, John 1.

7 Nay, justifying them even against the accusations of the old accuser Satan,
as he did, Job, Job 1. Hence we have these Encomiums of David, Ezekias, Asa,
Josias, Moses himself, with others in the old Testament, to be men after Gods
own heart; men of upright, perfect, and relenting hearts, and of meek spirits.

Hence also Christ himself so famouseth the Centurion, the Canaanitish woman,
the good Servant, Nathaniel, Mary Magdalene, etc. Hence Paul so commends
Mnason, Gaius, Philemon, Appia; etc. Luke in the Acts, Steven, Dorcas, the
noble Baraeans, Bernabas, with others, for their Faith, their Sincerity,
Zeal, Alms deeds, Liberality, Hospitality, Love to the Word, searching the
Scriptures, Holiness, with other Graces: so much does God delight in the
flourishing fame of his Church and Children.

For Peace: True Peace.
where righteousness flourishes, there is abundance of peace. Peace keeps
her Throne amongst Gods Servants, for though they be at war with the black
Prince of Hell, and his black Guard the wicked, and with the World, and
chiefly with their own corruptions; yet they have peace with GOD, with
Christ, with the Angels, with the Church, with her Children, with their
Brethren, with the Creatures, with their own Souls and Consciences, such as
none knows, save those that enjoy it.

For Favor: GOD grants the suites of his Servants.
they are in wonderful grace with their Masters: they have freedom of access
to the throne of Grace, upon all occasions; the golden Scepter is always
stretched out unto them: they may have easier access to the God of heaven, and
more gracious welcome, with obtaining of their Suites, and Petitions, and
Prayers, then any Courtier with a temporal Prince: it being as truly verified
of God toward his Servants, (as it is recorded of Augustus Caesar and Traian,
these morrally good Emperors) that he never sent any discontented or empty
away that was a suror to him. Witness thou Solomon when thou did pray for
Wisdom; thou Paul, when for strength against Satan's buffets; thou Ezekias
and David, when you called for deliverance from enemies; you Israelites, when
you cried in bondage; thou Moses, for preservation at a dead lift; thou
Prodigo, thou Publican, thou penitent Thief, thou Manasses, thou mourning
Mary, when you prayed, and sued with tears for mercy; thou Anna, thou Isaac,
thou Zachary, with thy Wife Elizabeth, entreating for Children: nay, lastly,
let the experience of all Gods Servants for this five thousand years, speak;
and speak thou mine own Soul, in thy young yet true experience, what thou
have found and felt, and declared in the great congregation: if ever petition
were put up from a sorrowful soul, a believing and a touched heart, a zealous
spirit, that received not a gracious answer in every request concerning body
or soul, that concerned either Gods glory to give, or his servants good to
receive. For thou Lord wilt bless the righteous, thou will shine upon him with
the light of thy countenance, and with favor wilt crown and compass him as
with a shield. Psalm. 6.12.

For Mirth: the Lords Servants shall rejoice and sing for joy of heart, Esaias
65.14. they shall rejoice with joy unspeakable, 1 Pet. 1.8. and their joy
shall no man take from them. John 16.22.

For Pleasures: The godly have a taste of heaven here.
though they be not fatted with the carrion of the world, like the Devils
Crows, nor taste not of this bitter Ratsbanes, sweet-sower poison of Sin,
which at last stings like a Cockatrice, yet they have pure and perfect
pleasures, such as the worlds swine never tasted* they are fed with hidden
Manna, they keep a constant Jubilee, and a perpetual Christmas; feasting
Christ, as feasted by him, in that communion they have with him, in the Word,
the Sacraments, Prayer, etc. In which they are satisfied with the fatness of
Gods House, and drink abundantly out of the rivers of his pleasures, Psalm.
36.9.

These wages with many more, are as the earnest penny, and the Hirelings entering
penny, (with us called the Gods penny) which God gives as assurance and part of
greater and better payment hereafter; being but a little portion and pittance
of that which they shall have hereafter? but as the Prologue to the Comedy, as
a Beauer to a Banquet, as a Mite to a mountain of Gold, as the Candle light to
the Sun. For hereafter indeed is the great reward, Mat. 5.12. so great, so
shining, that as it has dazeled the Aegles eyes of the dearest of Gods
Servants, when they have set themselves to behold it* Tom. 10. ser. 1. lib.
Medit. c. 18 Dicere qua^tum volo, non valeo.
as of Augustine and others: so I can but show it you a-farre off, as Moses was
showed Canaan, a type of Heaven.

Then, for the comfort of those that have employed their bodies and their
souls in Gods service here, and to provoke others now to sacrifice their
bodies to God as is most reason, as the Apostle calls it, a reasonable service,
Romans 12.1. let them know these bodies shall then be like the Angels in heaven,
Mat. 22.30. they shall shine as Stars, Dan. 12.3. yea, at the Sun in the
Kingdom of the Father. Mat. 13.46. For their Souls, they shall be glorious,
without spot or wrinckle, Ephesians. 5.17. they shall behold the face of God in
righteousness, and have fullness of joy in Gods presence. Psalm. 16.11. For
their estate, they shall be Kings, and reign with God, and Priests to sing
Haleluiahs unto him, Reu. 1.6. (for as they have served Christ on earth, so
they shall serve him in glory, Reu. 22.3.) yea, and they shall be Judges to, to
sit upon thrones, and judge the twelve Tribes of Israel, Mat. 19.28.

I could tell you further of their joys out of the Scripture, in their
eminency, excellency, fullness, glorious greatness, and perpetuity, Psalm.
36.8. Mat. 25.11. Esaias 21.11. 1 Cor. 2.20. how incorruptible the Crown is, how
steadfast the Kingdom, how constant the joy, how everlasting the feast, how
secure the rest, how endless and infinite the pleasure is which is provided
for Gods servants after their departure out of this veil of misery, 1 Pet.
5.4. Reu. 21.6. 2 These. 3.7. John 16.22. Heb. 12.28. etc. with all the
accruments, and additions, and amplifications incident to this point: either in
respect of the place, the highest heavens; or the company, innumerable Angels,
the congregation of the first borne, God the Judge, Christ the R^deemer, Heb.
12.22. etc. but I contract my sails, and leave the rest to your search and
meditation, and to the spirit to make application; only desiring every soul
that is as yet a slave to his usurping sins, to consider, as Hell that he
gains, so the gain that he loses, that is, Heaven: think of it seriously
and betimes, least thou think of thy gaining loss thou getst by sin, when
thou must for ever stand to the bargain, as the rich Dives did in Hell, when
he saw Lazarus in Abraham's bosom, Luke 1.6. when his bad and base choice was
repented, but not redressed.

Lastly, if these blessings, here and hereafter, God blesses the wicked often
for his Servants cause.
move thee not, yet lend me thy patience a while to peruse and ponder the
curses, and plagues, and evils, that thou shall avoid, by being Gods Servant.
Many a man thou know is exempted from many common calamities, by the
countenance of some great man, to whom he retains, as from being a common
Soldier in the time of war, and the like: so in any common plague or
judgment the Lord knows how to deliver his; yea, though thousands fall on
their right hand.

And surely this is a wondrous privilege that the Saints have: first, that as
God blesses often the wicked for their sakes, as he did Laban for Jacobs cause,
and Potiphar and Pharaoh for Joseph's cause: his blessings being not only upon
the houses and families, but upon whole Nations, Countries and Cities, for the
cause of his Servants (even as heathenish Empyres, amongst the Babilonians,
prospered for Daniels cause, and so Cyrus, Artaxerxes and Darius for the cause
of Ezra, Nehemias, and other captive Jews that served the true God: and the
Heathenish Romans for the persecuted Christians causes, as Histories manifest)
and as it is a further privilege, that God often not only preserues from
dangers, but saues from destruction, sinful, Sodomitish, and profane places
and persons, for their cause to, as he did those in the endangered ship for
Paul's cause, and Noah's kindred for Noah's cause, and would have spared Sodom
for Abraham's and the righteous sake, if they could have been found: so it is a
wonderful prerogative to, that when the Lord by the provocation of the
unrighteous, is minded to bring destruction upon a Land or Country, he first
delivers his Servants; 1. either by death, as he did Josias* and good
Augustine, before the sacking of Hippo by the Vandales. 2. Or by conueying them
to some other place, as he did Lot, when Sodom was burned. 3. Or by providing
some means for their escape, as the Arc for Noah, when the World was drowned.
4. Or by saving them by his immediate Power and Mercy, as he did Moses and the
Israelites when the wicked were drowned, even Pharaoh and all the Egyptians,
5. Or when his own Servants are by men appointed to the sword, he rescues
them with their enemies whom he sets in their stead, as he rescued Ester,
Mordechai, the Jews, Daniel, and the three Children, when wicked Haman and
others their accusers, in their rooms, satisfied the Gallows, the flaming
fire, the mouths of the Lions, etc. saving the Corn and burning the Tares. 6.
Or if his Servants fall into the same temporal punishments with others, as
Jonathan that was slain with Saul, and good Zwinglius that dyed in battle,
which is usual: yet even thereby the righteous are brought nearer heaven; and
the more violent their death is, the sooner they are in joy, when the godless
shall be thrown down to Hell, even as with the same Fla^le is beaten chafe
to be burnt, and pure Corn to be preserved.

These ruling sins are damnable without repentance.
I could draw out these Motives ad infinitum, and from the Estates, and
Excellencies, and Privileges of Gods Servants, in these and other peculiars,
in which thou have no part nor portion, so I might if the point were not too
tedious and burdensome to thy memory, press thee as much on the left side,
from the consideration of thy fearful estate, in the case wherein thou
stand, being (as thine own heart tells thee) the servant to many a reigning
and ruling sin; and so consequently no servant of God (unless like the
wicked Servant, the false Steward, and traitorous Judas) thy deserts being a
Halter and Hell. For as Christ said it of Covetousness, so I say from Christ's
ground, Mat. 6.24. thou can not serve God and Mammon, God and the World, God
and the Devil, God and thy Belly, God and thy Bags, with the Usurer; God and
Herodias, God and Rimmon, God and Baal, Christ and Antichrist, God and Babels
beast, God and the Pope: no more then one man can serve two Masters; no more
then one River, by one stream, can run two ways at once; no more then one
man can move upwards and downwards at one time; no more then one woman can
love lawfully the bed of her Husband, and the bosom of a stranger; or one man
his own Wife and the body of an Harlot. For, God and Sin are opposed ex
diametro, and will no more mix then oil and water; nay, then fire and water,
then Heaven and Hell.

Now then being a Servant to sin, thou consequently art none of Gods Servant:
for his servant thou art to whom thou obeyest; yea, if it be of sin unto
death, Romans 6.16. and so by an immediate dependence and relation, thou art the
slave of him, that is the basest slave in the world* that is, the Devil, for
he that commits sin is his, 1 John 3. who was the first, and still
continues the author of sin, of lies, murders, blasphemies, and the like.

Now then see thy danger: The case of Satan's captives opened.
as he causes thee to lie as he did Ananias and Saphira, Acts 5. and to
swear, as he did Senacharib, and to commit Adultery, as he did Herod, with
other sins, as he did David and Peter, when he sifted, tempted, and rose up
against them. So, so long as thou live in sin, he is entered into thee, as
into Judas, John 13.27. and does possess thee; thou art in his power; Acts
28.18. He rules thee as the Horseman does the Horse; he has thee as a Bear
by the snout, as a Dog in a chain; thou mouest after his motion: oh thy
fearful subieiection. Thou art under the most deceitful Master, the most
deluding Laban in the world, who for delight that he pretends thee, will pay
thee damnation that be intends thee; as he has done to Laban himself,
Caine, Esau, Judas, and all that have served him. Besides thou art under the
most massecrating merciless tyrant in the world: Phalaris, Busiris, Nero,
Dionisius, Pharaoh, with all their bulls, and their burnings, and their
burdens, (of his invention, as our Papists Powder Plot was) were merciful men
in respect of him: for he lays the heauiest burden in the world upon thee,
even that which pressed himself out of Heaven into Hell, pusht Adam out of
Paradise, and pressed Christ himself upon the Cross; and that is Sin. And
after thou have laid down this brutish body of thine in the dust, he has
prepared intolerable and eternal burnings for thee in his own Territories;
whose fires the burden of thy sins must kindle and maintain, and the River
of Gods wrath increase and make more violent. Oh therefore betimes cast off
this more then Egyptian yoke; forsake the service of thy old sophisticating
Master, Satan; and serve thy new and living Master, Christ Jesus, so shall
thou not only avoid those plagues temporal and external, which are threatened
to those that disobey God, Exodus 23.33. Deuteronomy. 7.4. Deuteronomy. 28. Deuteronomy. 29.45.46.47.
etc. Esaias 1. Psalm. 7. etc. which I pray thee ponder at leisure: as also those
eternal hereafter. But thou shall be partaker of all those blessings and
bounties which God has revealed and prepared for those that serve him.

I thought to have added another use, namely, as the matter, so to have
prescribed the manner and form of Gods service, with the parts of it, with
those several carriages that those must use for their actions, their
affections, their speech and words, at home and abroad; what use to make of all
their time, with their several stints and taskes in the performance of
several and successiue sacrifices and services. But I will not dull the Reader
by this prolixe point. I refer thee unto some of my Brethren that have writ
well and worthily of it: as Mr. Rogers his Christian Directorie; Mr. D. Hill,
in his Tract how to live well, by way of Questions and Answers; Mr. Cooper his
Christian Sacrifice; which I wish not only in the hands, but writ in the
hearts of all that intend Gods service, and their own salvation.

His desired Dismission. In this word, Depart.
THE fifth part, according to our Texts first division, now comes into our
examination, and that is Simeons Departure or Dismission, the Latin compriseth
this and that which we called the Divine Permission, in one word, Nunc
dimittis, (...), Nunc est tempus vt dimittas, etc. e vinculis corporis, as
Piscator renders it; Lord, now it is time that thou unloose me from the bonds
of the body: from which reading, which I think warrantable and natural, these
Points arise. First that even the Lords Simeons, godly men, and so consequently
all men, must dye for the matter of death. Secondly, that death is only to man
a dissolution, for the nature and manner of death. Thirdly, that this life is
but a short life, out of which we are every day ready to depart, like him that
is about to take his leave of his visited friends. Fourthly, that this life is
but a miserable life, in which we are bound and fettered, death being our
unloosing. Fifthly, that our natural death is but one, and once, which is our
dismission from the earth. Sixthly, that the soul is immortal, not dying with
the body, only departing out of the body.

For the first point: it is plain that godly men dye; sanctified Simeon that
spoke this is dead: it needs no confirmation but experience, as he that will
not believe that the fire is hot, let him put his finger to it; if any believe
not that the godly dye as well as the wicked, let him look at their Sepulchers
amongst us, as Peter tells the Jews, that the Patriarch David was dead, and his
Sepulcher was amongst them.

The Reasons why the godly dye are these: Why the godly dye.
first, because they are inuolued and vvrapped in the common sincke of
original sin, with the rest of Adams posterity, and therefore they must
participate of death, the common punishment; from which no persons, orders, or
degrees are excepted or exempted, no not infants themselves, Eccles. 3.1. Psalm.
49.10. Heb. 9.27. To explain this.

It is confessed by all Divines, that GOD which is called the God of the
living, only created life, and not death: which being a privation of life, was
never in the number of those Ideaes and forms which were from all eternity in
the mind of the Creator, but was brought in by sin, for which it is now
imposed penarilie upon all flesh, Romans 5.12. so Chapter 6.23. 1 Cor. 15.21. From
whence it is consequent, that if man had not sinned, man had not dyed. I say
not man could not have dyed; for his body being compounded of the four
Elements, and so of four contrary qualities, heat, cold, moisture and
dryness, in themselves repugnant, was naturally mortal; yet he should not
have dyed, if he had not sinned: but should have been preserved and vpheld by
a special, singular, and supernatural grace. Which grace of original Justice
being lost by original sin, man also lost the privilege of immortality,
and became mortal.

Simile.
Even as (to use the Schoole-mens Similies) a Ship upon the Sea, her sail
hoist, the wind blowing, and the waves working, must needs naturally follow
the motion and working of the Sea: but if this Ship be tied to an Anchor, by
some strong Cable, she is held, fast and fixed, without any far fluctuation:
but if this Cable be cut, she goes whither the winds and the waves drive her.
Or as a man's hand is subject to be wounded by sword, dagger, or dart, but if he
have on a good Gantlet the hand is safe; which Gantlet being plucked off or
broken, the hand is exposed to danger: So, Man being naturally mortal, yet
being armed with original righteousness against the stroke of death, being
tied and chained with the golden chain of special grace, should not have
moved in the natural course of death: but as soon as ever man by the instinct
of Satan, tied himself with the cords of sin, God took away that other
chain of Grace, disarmed him of munition and armor, and exposed him to be
carried through the swift torrent of this present life, by the violence of the
contrary qualities of the Elements, even into the dead Sea, or Sea of Death.
Mare ^^^tuum.


Secondly, because of the relics and remainders of their original sins and
corruption, which are still resident and fixed in them, (howsoever pardoned by
Christ) the godly must dye, that so these remnants may be quite taken away and
abolished, and the root of old Adam absolutely stocked up.

Thirdly, flesh and blood (of which they partly consist) cannot inherit the
Kingdom of God, but must first be changed. 1 Cor. 15, verse. 50.

Fourthly, that as by other crosses and afflictions, so by dying they may in
some sort be made conformable to their head Christ, in his death and
sufferings, Romans 8.29.

Sixthly, that the godly might have experience of Gods power, in the
resuscitation and raising up of their dead bodies.

Seauenthly, that the godly may have sweet and comfortable experience of the
difference betwixt this mortal life and that immortal glory in the life to
come, which will be so much more joyous, as they shall taste their prepared
joys through the jaws of death, as Sampson did his Honey in the Lions belly:
for as it is a misery to have been happy, Miserum est fuisse foelicem.
so it sets a better edge and relish on any mercy, when it comes by an
exemption from a former experienced misery: even as deliverance was more
grateful to the Israelites after their Egyptian yoke, and as honey is more
sweet to him that has been dyeted with Aloes; so joy in glory shall be more
joyous extracted out of the pains of life, and pangs of death unto the godly.

Use of Consolation.
Hence let the Saints sing, clap their hands and rejoice; let the joyful shout
of a King be amongst them, in the sweet contemplation of the unlimited mercies
of God, toward them; that whereas in Adam as they were branches of his stock,
and so fruitful in unrighteousness, in his sin, so indammaged and
endangered, by their original corruptions, besides their actual
transgressions; that God might in justice have punished them both with the
first and second death, according to that menace in Paradise, to our
Protaplasts: In that day which you eat of the forbidden fruit, you shall dye
the death, Aug lib. 3. de ciu. Dei. Qua die me deserueritis per inobedientiam,
ego vos deseram per iustitiam, etc.
(as Augustine interprets it) in that day which you forsake me by rebellion* I
will forsake you by my just judgments execution: yet it has pleased God so
far to mitigate both the guilt and the punishment of both, that in and by
Christ they being redeemed from that second, that eternal, sempiternall death
of the soul; the temporal death which is only a change of a worse life for
one infinitely better, is so far inflicted, or rather imposed as makes for
Gods glory, and their own greater good.

Secondly, 2. Use of Commination.
let this withal terrify the wicked which are out of CHRIST, and as yet have
no more part in him then the Devil and Judas (by reason of their witting and
willing sins, by which voluntarily and frequently they crucify him again to
themselves) that if the godly must have their teeth set on edge in dying the
first death of the body, Phil. 3.17.
for these sweet fruits which proved sower Grapes, that Adam and Eve tasted in
the Garden, by reason of these remainders and relics of corruption that are
in them: how much more shall they, as they are threatened, as God has decreed
and denounced, drink the dregs of Gods wrath, even to the bottom, not only
in tasting the first death but the second; not only that which is the
separation of the soul from the body, but which separates both body and soul
eternally from God, at they are corrupt and fruitless trees, twice dead: so if
the godly which are trees of righteousness, planted by the rivers of Grace,
C^m co^ritur Cedru^ Paradisi, quid faciet Virga Des^rti?
be plucked up, that they may be transplanted in glory, much more shall they by
stockt up by the Axe of death, cut down in wrath, like the barren Fig Tree,
and thrown into Hell fire: yea, as they are called dead coals, Psalm. 17. and
God a consuming fire, Deuteronomy. 9. Hebrews the last, etc. so they are as sure to
burn (unless quenched by repentance) as they are fit to burn.

Neither does the Lord take such away ordinarily, by a natural and peaceable
death, as he did Simeon here: but oft-times in the whirlewinde of his wrath,
by some unnatural, and violent, and sudden death, as the fruit of their
provoking sins. 1. Sometimes for their abuse of his worship, as he did Nadab
and Abihu: so Judas that came from the Communion and hanged himself: as also
the Corinthians who dyed for their unworthy receiving the Sacrament. 2.
Sometimes for rebellion against Magistrates, as Corah, Dathan, and Abiram.
Numb. 16. 3. Sometimes for abusing the Servants, Prophets, and Ministers of
God, as the two and forty Children whom the two she Beeres slew: the two
Captains with their fifties, that came to lay hands on Elias, 4. So for
murdering the Saints, as Achab and Iezabel. So the ten persecutors,
infamously famous for the abundance of Christian blood which they shed, came
all to fearful ends, according to the curse threatened, Psalm. 56. Psalm. 139.
and Math. 26. that Bloody men shall not live out half their days: and, They
that smite with the Sword, shall perish by the Sword. 5. For gurmundizing,
gluttony, and drunkenness, as Jobs Children, Job 2. Baltazar, Dan. 5. and the
Israelites slain whilst the Quails were in their mouths, Numb. 11. 6. For
covetousness, as Ananias and Saphira, Acts 5. 7. For Lust and Luxury, as
Cos^ee and Zimri, and the unclean Israelites, Numb. 25. 8. For Tyranny and
oppression as Pharaoh and his Host, Exodus 14. 9. For Pride against God, as
Herod, Acts 12. 10. For the effect of pride and malice, Blasphemy against
heaven, as Senacharib and his pestilent Parasite Rabsekah, 2 Kings 19. as also
for other sins.

But now we are to hoist up sails into a Sea of matter, Doctrine. All must
dye.
which flows either necessarily from the Text, or by consequence of this last
proved point, and by argument from the greater to the lesser, from the better
to the worse; that if Simeon and the Saints must dye, then unsanctified
sinners: and so from the specials, and by inductions from all particulars the
general may be concluded, that all must dye. So much the Text gives us leave
to touch; for if we be here, as Tully intimates, Tanquam in diuerserio; as
guests lodged in an Inn: or as those that come to a Mart, a Market, or a
Fair; or as those that come to visit their friends, not to inhabit long
here, but to depart, as Simeon here imports. Then hoc commune malum, this
departure is the designed lot to all the worlds passengers: We here give no
reasons of the point, omitting or pretermitting them, till we come to distill
some comforts against death: only for explanation or further satisfaction.
Ponder the premises, that since the godly which have no sin, Psalm. 32.1.2.
Non vt non sit, sed vt non imputetur.
I mean (with David and the Augustane Confession out of Augustine) no imputed
sin, must die; since children that have no actual sin do dye, because the
stain of the root is propagated to the branches, as Augustine, De praed. c.
2. and lib. cont. ^ortunatum. cap. 2. In Lucam.
Anselme and Ambrose have in more phrases explained, if Adam himself did dye,
not so much as he was a created man but as he was a corrupted sinner. Then
sure as life was the fruit of his obedience, if he had stood; a Deo donante,
from Gods free giving; so death is inflicted upon his fall, a Deo vindicante,
from God punishing.

Moriendum est omnibus. Tullie Tus. 9. lib. 1.
And as now it is Gods Statute Law enacted, that all Adams Sons partaking of
Adams sins must die, so it must be executed: nay, we see it is executed.
Philosophers, and Poets, and the learned Heathens, who themselves, since their
works and writings have felt the smart of deaths stroke, have acknowledged it,
Christians have confessed it, Experience has ratified it in the consumption
and consummation of all ages, all sects, all sorts, persons and professions,
that all must dye: omnia peribunt, etc. I, thou, he, they, and every man
besides, that are, were, shall be, this way slides. We have Gods statutum est
for it, that as in Heaven all live, and none must or can dye; in Hell all dye
an eternal death, and none must or can live: so in earth all must dye, and
none can for ever live. This is an inevitable yoke, imposed on all flesh, Nam
rigidum ius est, etc. the Law is strict, unalterable; to strive against the
stream unavailable: Lanificas nulli tres exorare Puellas,
Contigit, etc.
The impartial Fates, to whom we all are under,
With rule imperial cut life's thread asunder.


Many means have Galenists and Physicians used for the preservation of life:
many Works and elaborate Books are extant, of the conservation of health; but
never none writ, or disputed of the exemption from death, because it were in
vain. If any Physician could administer such a simple that would perpetually
prolong life: if any Lawyer could plead the case with Death, not to enter
violently upon their body (which is his tennant-right) and prevail. If any
Divine did preach that sinners should not dye, and perform it: the first
should have more Patients; the second, more Clyents; the third, more Auditors,
then ever had any of their fellows in their functions: But to teach, or plead,
or practice this point, which the Devil guld our first Parents with in
Paradise, You shall not die, were to be a Liar like him, it were to build
Castles in the Air, Hom. lib. 2 od. 3. sic od. 12. od. 28. etc.
to sow the wind, and reap the whirlewinde: for, Omnes vna ma^et nox, etc.

Deaths tract we all must tread: our life's fair light
Must be obscured, and set in Deaths dark night.
How many glorious Lights in the world, Kings, Kefars, Emperors, Popes,
Potenta^es, Dukes, Earls, Lords, Barons, etc. Learned, wise, prudent, potent,
etc. have already perished, and vanished, like Comets and blazing Stars,
leaving no more tract behind them, then a Serpent that goes over a stone? of
whom we retain nothing but the Images corporeal of their bodies, or mental
of their minds; by the help of some Painters, or their own or others pens,
that have only showed to posterity, that such men there once were, but now
are not. What have we saving the Images of more then an hundred famous
Emperors of the East and West, Christian and Heathen?

Amongst the rest, where are the seven Henry's, the six Constantines, the
five Ottoes, the five Charleses, the five Lodouicques, the four Leo's, the
three Theodosij, the three Fredericques, the three Tiburiusses, the two
Clandij, the two Alberts, the two Anastasij, the two Martians; the two
Rodulphs, the two famous Caesar's for war and peace, Julius and Augustus, with
the rest? Is not the lamp of their life extinct? Those whose voices commanded
the Nations, are they now able to speak? (as it was said of Alexander) those
that were able once to deliver others from death, could they free themselves?

Besides, where are now more then two hundr^d of Roman Bishops, and triple
Mitred Popes: some of whose roaring Bulls made once all Christendom quake and
shake? Where are now the twelve Gregory's, the nine Bonifaces, eight nocently
Innocents, the seven Clements, the six Alexanders, six Vrbans, six Adrians,
twelve Benidicts, the five Celestines, the five Nicholasses, the four
Sixtusses, the four Sergij, the four Anasta^ij, the four Foelixes, the four
Eugenij, the three Siluesters, the three Victors, the three Lucij, the three
Iulij's, with the rest? Do they not all know now that which As Alexander 6.
John 11. Ioh. 22. etc.
some of them Atheistically in words, in writings, and in life, have denied?
that their bodies were mortal, their souls immortal? that there is a Heaven
for the godly a Hell for the wicked; but no Purgatory passage to either the
one place or other, for either sort?

The deaths of the worlds Worthies of al kinds epitomized.
Besides, where shall we se^ke but amongst the dead, for all the Roman
Caesar's, the Egyptian Ptolomies, the Latin Murrhanes, the Albane Siluies, the
Syrian Antiochusses, the Arabian Arabarcques, the Argiue Abantiades, the
Persian Achaminedes, the Theban Labdacides, the Lybian Lybiarcques: and all the
rest of those renowned Kings which had such diverse denominations from their
worthy Predecessors, and from those Countries over which they ruled?

Nay, to come nearer home: where are all our English Kings, that have awfully
swayed the Britain Scepter since the Conquest? Where are the two Conquering
courageous Williams, our three Richards, our six Edwards, our eight Henry's?
Has not Death made a Conquest of them? Have we any remnants of them saving
their Westminster Monuments; their Ensigns, their Virtues? Could their
Scepters, Crowns, Colors, Honors, Miters, Power, or pomp of these
Potentates, resist Deaths all-subduing, all-subiecting rod, which brings under
more, then Mercuries charming wand in the Poet? No verily.

Non ducis imperium, non regia Mitra, coronae
Pontificis summi, etc.
Both conquering Dukes, and Princely Crowns,
The mitred Popes, proud Cardinals,
Imperial Scepters, Prelates Gowns
Death vassalizeth and inthrals.
So, if we should continue in this Quere, and demand what is become of all
those worthy Generals, Ioshuah, Gideon, etc. Achilles, Hector, Ajax, Melciades,
the Gracchies, Camillies, Fabians, Asdrubal, Hannibal, etc. Or those tryumphing
Conquerours, Cyrus, Alexander, Scylla, Marius, Cassius, Scipio, Metellius,
Valerius, Pompey, Caesar's, Antonie, Octauian, Claudian, Aurelius? Death has
carried them in triumph, as they others. Abstulit, etc. For, Hor. lib. 2. cap.
16.
speedy Death stopped stout Achilles breath.

So, where are those huge and vast Giants, the Sons of Anack, the Nimrods of
the world, Tipheus, Anteus, Enceladus, Titius, Polypheme, Atlas, Hercules,
Cacus, Orestes, etc. as terrible in their times, as Goliath was to the
Israelites? Now it is a wonder (no terror) to see their ashes and their bones:
now fearful Hares leap over dead Lions (as the Grecians scoft at dead
Hector.)

So, if we should reflexe upon these learned Lights and Lamps, in Divinity
or Humane Learning; the Fathers of the Greek and Latin Church: grave
Tertullian, learned Origin, witty Bernard, eloquent Chrysostom, zealous
Augustine, judicious Jerome, and the rest. Or upon these wise Heathens, deep
Philosophers, Aristippus, Empedocles, Democles, Zenocrates, Anaxagoras,
Pithagoras, Diogenes, Socrates, Plato, Aristotle, the seven Grecian Sages,
etc. Or upon these famous Orators, Pericles, Isocrates, Alcibiades, Gorgias,
Pollio, Lucius, Crassus, Zenophon, Hortensius, Demosthenes, Cato, Cicero,
Quintillian. Or upon these Laureate Poets, Eschilus, Pindar, Euripides,
Aristarchus, Hesiod, Menander, Simonides, Sophocles, Anacraeon, Eunius,
Statius, Persius, Claudian, Varro, Plautus, Lucan, Homer, Terence, Ovid,
Virgil, etc. Or upon these famous Legifers, and Law-giuers, Mercury amongst
the Egyptians, Licurgus amongst the Lacedaemonians, Solon amongst the
Athenians, Numa amongst the Romans; as also upon Androdamus, Philolaus,
Beceorus, Carneades, etc. Or upon these profound and famous Lawyers, Vlpian,
Jason, Drusus, Bartolus, Baldus, Justinian, D^cius. Or upon these expert
Physicians, Hermogenes, Disippus, Celsus, Nicomachus, Eschulapius, Hippocrates,
Auicen, Galen, etc. Skillful Astronomers, Astrologers, and deep
Mathematicians, Thales, Manethes, Promethius, Eudosius, Protagoras, Berosus,
Archites, Zoroaster, Ptolomie, Anaximander, etc. Or subtle Geometricians,
Polemon, Pausanius, Marinus, Theodorus, Di^aearchus, Nicephorus, Euclides. Or
these accurate, and faithful Historiographers, Thucidides, Josephus,
Herodotus, Diodorus, Egisippus, Isodore, Eutropius, Liuie, Salust, Plutarch,
Appian, Pliny, Suetonius, ^'ossi^onius, Orosius, Eusebius, Tacitus, Justin,
etc. Or these exquisite Musicians, Zenophocles, Himenaeus, Amphion, Chiron,
Arion, Linus, Philades, Orpheus, etc. Or these famous Painters and Caruers,
Timantes, Aristarchus, Timagoras, Pirasius, Zeuxis, Apelles, Phidias, our
English Michael and Raphael, with infinite more, of worthy spirits, either
inuenters, or perfecters of Arts and Sciences, whether Liberal or Mechanical;
such as have been Eupaters, well-willers and Benefactors to humane Societies,
which Antiquity has dignified, living as more then men, accounting them as
Heroes and Semidians, and Deified as Gods; are they not all dead like men? Have
they not gone the way of all flesh, as David says of himself? 2 King. 2. Yea,
though some of them were Metaphorical and terrestiall Gods, (as David
prophesies of all Princes) they are dead like men: their honor is laid in the
dust: an Epitaph writ upon a marble stone, a Monument, or Statue erected to
them, or for them, an Enchomiasticque Verse in the numericall lines of some
Poet, or a narration what they have been, or what they have done, good or
evil, in the works of some Historian, is all which is left of them (even as a
linen shirt was that remained of that victorious Saladine:) yea, these whom
we have deservedly called worthy spirits, as Alexander, Tamberlaine, Julius
Caesar, Prince Arthur, in former times: as also the rest of those nine Worthies
amongst the Heathens, and those other nine amongst Christians in former times:
as also that Noble Sidney, that ingenious Picus Mirandula, that subtle
Scaliger in our times; have now their earthly tabernacles, (the lodges and
organs of such purified spirits, and heavenly inspired souls) dissolved; their
bodies descending as their better part ascending: and so it shall be with us,
and with all of us.

Ovid ad Liuiam.
Tendimus huc omnes ^etam properamus ad vnam, etc.
The Earth is our common Haven thither sail we,
Deaths bonds to break, alas, how small prevail we.
That which was said to Adam, A true de^cant of death.
is said to every one of us, Dust thou art, and to dust thou shall return,
Genesis 3.19. Michael Glyeas amplifies it thus, as he is alleged by
Bramami^lerus the Germane; Puluis es, ex puluere es, etc. Dust thou art, of
dust thou art, and into dust thou shall return. As if one should say of the
congealed Ice. Aqua es, ex aqua es, and in aquam redib^, water thou art, of
water thou art, and into water thou shall be resolved: (for the Ice is an
excellent emblem of our bodies, which are more brittle then Ice.) Neither is
it any otherwise with our terrestrial bodies, in some proportion, then with
the celestial. For as all the Stars, how ever glistering and glorious,
arising in the East, move to the West, some in a faster, some in a slower
motion: so we move to our earth, as naturally downward as stones and those
heavy things: for, Omne grave deorsum; the earth is our proper center, to which
we move and decline, some sooner, some later.

And as the Planets Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Mercury, Sol, Venus, Luna, move in
their proper motions; some quickly within a short space, some slowly circkling
the Heavens: as the Moon within a Month, the Sun in twelve Months, etc.
which their courses being finished, they return again to the place from
whence they had their first beginning of motion: so we being fixed in our
places and stations in this life, in our special callings, when we have
finished our course and done our task, we move directly into that place from
whence we came, even into the bowels of the earth, some in a quicker, some in a
slower motion: some in their youth, some in their age; but all of us now or
then.

Serius aut citius, metam properamus ad vnam.
We all do tend one way: and soon or late
We clapse our earth in life's expired date.
With Brutus, we kiss our mother; we. go to lodge in this common Inn: our
general mother, the earth, receives us into her bowels again, as the Fish
Scylopendra swallows her little frye, and some Bird her young ones, in some
common danger, which they safely cast forth again, as the Whale did Jonas:
with the little Silke-worme when our web is spunne we dye, which death
we can no more avoid then the tall Cedar, or green Popler can avoid the Axe
of the husbandman; or the sailing ship the blustering vvinde, or cloud
threatening waves: for of all things in the world it is most certain we shall
dye, all other things are exposed as much unto uncertainty as to vanity. A
man knows not how prosperous his journey shall be by Sea or by Land: if he
make a bargain it is casual and uncertain whether it will be thriuing and
saving or no.

If a man marry a wife it is uncertain whether he catch a Fish or a Frog, a
Shrew or a Sheep; a Rebeccha, or a Zantippe. If a man beget a child, it is
uncertain whether he prove a wise man or a fool; rich or poor, and so in
all other humane things in this life there is casualitie and incertainetie,
only that we shall end this life and dye, we are most certain. Every thing in
the world preaches and proclaims this unto us. The Sun that rises and
sets daily over our heads, tells us our life's Sun shall set: the clothes
upon our backs, that wear and waste, are memorials to us of the wearing and
wasting of our bodies: the graves under our feet tell us, that others must
tread upon us as we tread upon others: the dust that blows in our eyes tells
us, that we are but dust; yea, the bodies of Beasts, Birds, and Fishes, that we
eat for meats, in our dishes, tells us, that our bodies shall be meat for
Worms: Intentant omnia m^rtem; All tell us, death is as certain, as the hour
is uncertain.

The natural causes of death (besides these causes that Divinity gives) prove
our death. Natural causes of death.


First, the Elements striving and wrestling within our bodies in their discord,
setting out of tune the Harp of our Health, tells us, that some malignant
humor predominating, will ere long break a-sunder the strings of life.

Secondly, this Messalina, this unchaste and insatiable woman, called Materia
prima, the first matter, always burning with lustful appetites, and desires
of new forms, still plots the corruption of her old subject.

Thirdly the radical humor consumes after it be come to his height of
augmentation, like the Sea that recoyles and ebbes when she is at full: which
moisture though it be restored again by diet or Physic for the quantity,
yet it is not so pure as the spent for quality, says Fernellius.

Fourthly, the blood, as it grows old, begins by little, and little to
condensate and wax thick, and so corrupts.

Fifthly, the Spirits waste by use and labor, (which wears even Iron and
hardest metals) the body and the mind by corporeal and mental exercises,
like two unthrifty Heirs, spending them faster then the father and fosterer
of them the Heart, can digest and gather them: all these say dye we must; nay,
that dye all must: Rich Dives as well as poor Lazarus, Solomon as well as
Naball, the wise as well as the fool, fair Absolon as well as foul
Thirsites, Musical Nero as well as harsh Menius, tall Saul as well at little
Zacheus, godly Jonathan as well as his ungodly Father; high and low, rich and
poor, one with another, participate of the common condition of humane nature,
once to dye. Yea, the Princes of the earth cannot withdraw their necks from
this yoke; Psalm. 82.6.
even those that are Gods on earth shall dye like men; though mighty
Potentates, like Nabuchadnezzars Image, be high and tall in birth and blood;
though their heads be of Gold, in wearing golden Crowns; though their breasts
and arms of silver; though they were as rich as Cressus or Crassus, and had
silver, with Solomon, like the Seas sand; though their bellies were of brass,
made as it were a caldron, wherein the stomachs heat boyles so many meats
which the mouth as Caterer prouides, and the palate as Sewer tastes; though
their thighs be of Iron, in respect of potencie and power, yet their feet
that props all this are of clay, their end is earth; the stone from the
mountain, the corner stone crusheth them, sends some means or others of their
mortality: which crushing cannot be prevented; there is no writ of privilege
to exempt any from it, no persons, no place, no persuasions can procure an
immunitie from not dying. Death is as inflexible as irresistable: inflexible,
for eloquence which charmed Argus, will not charm Death. Tullies tongue could
not save Tullies life, when Antonie sends for head and tongue and all; (no
more then John's zeal could stop Her^dias malice to save his head;) Achitophels
policy, Aesops wit, Mithridates his being a good Linguist, Aristotle's
Philosophy, Philo Iudaeus his learning, Demosthenes Oratorie, Arions Harp
could not move inexorable Death for an hours sparing, when their glass was
run. Nay, beauty which is the best perswader (though a dumb and silent
Orator) can find no more favor with Death then Lais did with cold Anaxagoras.
For sure, Rebeccha, Bathsheba, Ester, Helena, Irene, Absolon, Joseph, with
others more, men and women, were goodly Creatures, yet if a man could now see
their Sepulchers, he should see (that like that fair Lady, which was found
lying besides Prince Arthur in Glastenburie, whom Mr. Speed mentions) all
beauty is but dust: and as inexorable, so irresistable: Nobleness and
Royalty are unable to encounter it; Alexander, Julius Caesar; and most
victorious Princes, have veiled their Bonnets, and done homage to it; yea, it
has preyed upon Agamemnon, and Nabuchadnezzar, as a Thief and Pirate upon
rich prizes. Old age is venerable, youth is lusty, but death reuerenceth not
the gray hayres of the one; for though Adam, Enoch, Sem, Methusalem, Malaleel,
Iaired, Noah, Heber, and others, in the primitive times; as also Arganton,
Nestor, Valerius, Coruinus, Silius lib. 3 de Argant. Ovid. lib. 14* de Syb.
Propertius lib. 2. de Nestore. Sic Iuuen. Sat. 10.
Epiminedes, Metellus, Terentia, Clodia, Hipocrates, Sybill, and infinite
others amongst Christians and Heathens, lived so long, that the Historians
write, and Poets sing, that, Tercentum Messes, etc. That they lived their one,
two and three hundreds, yet though their life's day were very long, at last came
Evening Song.

Neither respects it the green locks of the young, but like an Eagle and
Vultur seazeth on the flesh of Infants; as in the murder of Bethlems Infants,
and in the death of many Children younger then David's Child, that dyed.
Experience says, that Prima quae, etc. Seneca in Her. sur. Hor. carm. lib. 1.
od. 28 Hor. carm. lib. 3. od. 11*
The hour that gave them breath, did end that hour in death, as Seneca says
of others: Yea, Mista etc. Both young and old, Deaths cruel arms infold. Et
fugacem, etc. The man can neither fly him, nor the youth pass by him.

Hazael was as swift as a Roe, and Atlanta was too swift for a woman, yet Death
ouertooke them. Goliath was a great fellow, but Death was greater. Sampson was
strong, Judge. 15.
but Death was stronger; it killed him that killed a thousand with the iaw-bone
of an Ass; Enceladus Iaculator audax. Hor. lib. 3. od. 4. Dan. 8.
it cut down him that plucked up trees by the roots. That Enceladus that great
darter, could not shun his darts, neither can any: for it is like that Ram^ne
which Daniel saw in his Vision, that shakes his horns against the East and the
West, the North and the South, and the beasts are notable to resist him. It is
like a Haruester that with his Sickle cuts down all, Corn and Tares, good and
bad.

Mors resecat, mors omne necat, nullumque veretur.
What ere it meets with, up it sheares,
For none it favors, none it fears.
Mors a mordendo. Vel a morsu vetiti pomi.
It is a mad Dog that bites all, as it has his name (like the Usurer) of
biting, so More mordet omnes, etc. It bites all, yea, even the biting Usurers,
and grindes those that grind the faces of the poor. It is a fire insatiable,
burning the green Iuie and the cragged Oak; young and old. It is a Tyrant
over Tyrants, Iunenal. Sat. 10.
bringing them to their graves, cum eaede and vulnere, (as it did Nero and
Domitian) with bloody heads. It is like the Sea, terrible, not to be dramd, not
to be turned out of his channel; carrying all away with it, by as many ways
as there be ways to the Sea: all waters run to the Sea, and all men tend to
their earth. Me vestigia torrent, omnia te aduersum, spectantia nulla
re^rorsum. Prou. 7.
It is like the Lion in the Fable, to whose den many Beasts went, but none
returned. It accepts as many as comes, like the Harlot in the Proverbs, but
none returns, since (like those Oxe-like beastly fools that go in to a
whore) they go into the chamber of death: like a covetous Niggard, it receives
all, but parts with none. Spaires none neque moribus nec aetati: Nay, says a
Papist, nec Matri vitae, nec vitae; neither the Virgin Mary (which they say is
the Mother of life) nor CHRIST the life it self: then much less will it spare
us: for, Pallida mors equ^ pulsat pede; etc.

With aequall foot it knockes the gate
Both of the rich and poor estate.
And that so indifferently, that as one says, if he should make choice of a
Judge in the whole world, he would choose Death: it is not corrupted like a
corrupt Officer, but is as impartial as imperial. Thus much for the
necessity of dying.

Now it is time by Use and Application to bring home, what has been said,
Use.
unto the heart of every Reader.

First therefore, from the necessity of death, let it teach us not too much to
be in love with life, or with any thing in this life. What a folly is it for a
man to set his heart upon a strange woman, in a strange Country, whose face it
is likely he shall never see more? If Sampson had known how soon he should
have been taken from his Dalilah, he would never have so doated on her: if
Sichem had known how speedily his lusting love to Dinah would have occasioned
his destruction, he would rather have loathed her before his folly with her
(as Ammon did Thamar after) then have loved her. If we did but ponder how
soon we are to leave these perishing pleasures, and profits, which will be
our ruin, and irreuocable destruction, we would cast them from us, as a
menstruous cloth, we would hate them as we do a Toade, detest them as we
do the Devil, and fly from them as Moses from his rod when it turned into a
Serpent. Oh the thought of death may moderate even lawful affections, and
curbethem in their idolatrous exorbitancie, from being immeasurable, least by a
violencie of desires they be carried away after any outward thing that we do
enjoy, and may cause us (as it did the holy Patriarks, Prophets, Apostles,
primitive Christians, ancient and modern Martyrs,) to leave father and
mother, wife and child, house and land; portion and pence, for Christ's cause
voluntarily, as Moses did the pleasures of Pharaohs Court, since (as Horace
has it) Linquenda tellus, etc. We must leave them, will we nill we.
Necessarily, and sure, if we ought to leave in affection the good things that
we live by, much more we ought to leave both in Affection and Action, the
sins that we perish by, ere we leave the world; least we dye as wicked
men have dyed before us, as wretchedly as wickedly.

Secondly, since we must all dye, 2. Use of Instruction.
and that as we have heard, because we have sinned, then if we love life,
(as all do naturally) let us hate sin that depriues us of life. Those that
love life must hate sin, the cause of death.
A man that loves his Wife dearly, cannot love him that would make a breach
betwixt them, or deuorce him from her: he that loves his life, me thinks,
should not love the intentive murderer, that plots and contriues his death.
This disturber, this destroyer, is Sin: It is a right Faux, a plotter of thy
perdition, a right Cateline, a conspirator of thy calamity: it watches
opportunities, as the Fox does the Hare, as the Lion does the Dog, as Iael
did S^sera, as Judith did Holofernes, and as Delilah did Sampson, when to
deceive thee, when to destroy thee: yea, even when it fawnes upon thee, and
flatters thee, and plays with thee, then (like the Cars play with the Mouse)
it purposes to prey upon thee. Thus it fawned and flattered upon Adam and Eve,
and offered them (as Witches and poysoners offer Children) an Apple to play
withal, but by this Apple it killed them, so has it done all mankind
besides, and will thou favor it?

Zealous was his spirit that once expostulated with one, as I now with thee.
Peccatum omnes maiores tuos occidit, and tu fouis? Sin (says one) has slain
all thy Predecessors, and Ancestors, and will thou make much of it? Would
thou desire to look upon, and gloriously to sheathe that Sword or Knife that
killed thy good Father, thy kind Mother, thy special Friend, thine only
Child? This, Sin has done, or will do. Could thou find in thy heart to
bid those Varlets welcome that did kill the Kings of France? Now can thou
find in thy heart to entertain and retain that sin in thy soul, which has
killed all the Kings in Christendom? then perish thou by it with the rest: if
thou will not be warmed be harmed. But sure to love that sin that not only
has killed thy Progenitors, but that labors to imbrew his hands in thy blood
to, that sweetens his temptations to poison thee, that spreads his ginnes daily
to trap thee, that bends his bow still ready to strike thee, that lies in
ambush still to surprise thee, and yet to trust it, and follow the lusts and
commands of it, to obey it, is great folly: but to make it thy bosome-friend,
to lodge it in thine own bed, to set it at Table with thee (as David did his
treacherous Companion) to carry it about with thee, to suffer it to have free
access every day to the Castle and best Chamber of thine heart, through the
doors of thy ears* and the vvindowes of thy eyes, and the entrance of thy
mouth, to acquaint it with all thy secrets; I say it is extreme madness* For
the pleasing of sin, thou do prejudice thine own life, temporal,
spiritual, and eternal, and displeasest GOD; and wilt provoke him to cut thee
off; for whereas other Kings destroy only the foreign Castles and Cities of
their enemies, to establish their own Crowns: so GOD, for sin destroys the
City and Castle which himself has built and made, the body and soul of
sinful man.

Thirdly, 3. Use of Mitigation
this consideration of Deaths command over every created nature consisting of
body and soul, whereby all humane flesh is designed to the grave, serve
notably to comfort and erect the poor dejected and rejected worms of the
world; and to deiect and cast down the high looks and elevated thoughts of
the proud and potent: for, if both the one and the other consider well, that as
they had both one original and beginning from the earth, their foundation
being from the dust and clay, and that both of them ere long shall be paraleld
and equalized in the grave, where they shall see corruption. Neither shall the
mean man too much distaste his own estate, and emulate the mighty; neither
shall the proud Potentate exalt his Crest, and insult over the poorest Peasant.

Alphonsus in one word resolves what it is that equalizeth the poor man with
the Prince, the Mechanical with the Monarch, and that is the grave; some say,
sleep (in which the poor man participates half his life time with the rich;
nay, oft-times in the better share; the poor Labourer soundly sleeping when
Agamemnon and Assuerus are watching, when Jeroboam and Nabuchadnezzar are
troubled in their thoughts about golden Calfes, and such things, as they dream
and doat upon; which made Caesar vvilling to buy the bed of the indebted poor
man of Rome, who slept better then he:) but whether that Deaths younger
brother Sleep, Death only makes the Prince and the Peasant equal.
work always this effect or no, it is as little material as it is
uncertain. I am sure Death the elder Brother, brings all states and conditions
to this paritie.

Hence the vvitty Painters pictured it (like Loves Cupid) blind, and without
eyes, hitting and hurting at random, Kings, Princes, Popes, Prelates, Lords,
Lownes, etc. without difference and distinction of degrees, Crowns, Diadems,
Scepters, Miters, Pals, Roabes, Rotchets, Rags, Purples, and Leathren Pelts,
being all Ensigns of his Trophies.

Subtua Purpurei veniunt vestigia Reges,
Deposito luxu, turba cum paupere mix^^.
The rabbling rout and purpled Kings
Are all alike Deaths underlings.
Yea, Mors Sceptra Ligonibus aequat.

There Scepters and the sheep-hookes sympathize;
The Carter does the Courtier aequalize.
This thought much possessed Augustine and Bernard in their Meditations, and
therefore they send us to the graves and sepulchers of the deceased, Aspice
diuitum tumulos, etc.
to see if we can find any difference in their bones, and munmiamized earth,
save only in the external pomp, and superficial vernish of their Monuments:
nay, sure there is no difference at all, unless (as once it was said wittily)
that the corrupted bones and putrified bodies of the rich, being more crammed
and fatted with surfeiting and drunkenness, do smell and savor more strongly
then the withered karkasse of the frugall and abstenious poor man.

This Consideration caused the witty Cynicke, when he was vpbraided by
Alexander, Diogenes.
what he could find him to do amongst the sepulchers of the dead (for
indeed there was his choice study,) Oh (quoth he) I am here searching for the
bones of thy Father Phillip of Macedon, and I cannot discern them from others.
An answer as sound as Satyricall, as Dogmaticall as it was dogged: for, Seneca
in Agamemnon.
Victor ad Herculeas, etc. For, though a man could conquer more then either
Philip or Alexander in their times, and could extend his conquest beyond
Hercules his Pillars, yet his portion of earth shall be but a few feet, no
greater then the meanest of his vassals, when he shall mete it out with his
own dead body, as Alexander himself was forced to confess, when by an
occasioned fall he was constrained to imprint his body in the dust.

And sure if Alexander had rightly applied to himself either Diogenes his
girds at his ambition, or his inclining dying condition, he would neither have
so soared over all the world besides, living; neither should he have subjected
himself to the quipping censures of the wisest in the world, dying: for as it
is recorded after he was dead, and his bones were put in a vessel of Gold,
diverse Philosophers meeting to see this dead and unexpected dumb show. One
quipt at him thus; Yesterday he that treasured up Gold, now Gold him. Another
thus; Yesterday the world would not content him, now a Sepulcher of six feet
must contain him. Another thus; Yesterday he pressed the earth, now the earth
presses him. Another thus; Yesterday he ruled the world, now Death ouer-rules
him. Another thus; Yesterday all the living followed him, now he follows all
the dead: and every one had the like diversity of Descant; the last knits up
all their censures thus, Heri multos habebat subditos, etc. Yesterday he had
many subjects, now all are his equals. Thus did these living Hares insult over
this dead Lion: so will the meanest insult over thee in the like case, though
thy lofty looks now ouer-toppe thine equals; though thy pride trample upon
thine inferiors, as Pope Alexander did on the neck of Frederick* and dare
contest and contend with thy superiors: therefore leave thy hautinesse, and
learn humility; do not magnify thy self against those that are mightier,
or above those that are meaner then thy self; scorn not to sit at table with
him that must lie in the same bed with thee, I mean, in the earth: look not
at thy white feathers and proud plumes with the Swanne and the Peacocke, but at
thy black feet, the earth, thy original. Quid superbis puluis and cinis? Why
art thou proud, dust and ashes? what art thou but dust? If Honorable, Noble,
Worshipful, Witty, Wealthy, Learned, Beautiful; thou art but honorable dust,
noble dust, worshipful dust, witty dust, learned dust, beautiful dust. This
is the proper adiunct to all the best and the rest of thy Epithites. What is
one piece of dust, of sand, of slime, better then another? Why boasts thou of
thy Babell, of any thing within thee, or without thee, thy best things being
none of thine but Gods, thy worst the Devils and thine own, not worth a proud
thought, thou thy self being the earths, and none of thine own.

Neither let the holy, humble, pious, poor man-be too-too much dejected,
either at his own meannesse, or at the greatness of the insol^nt insulting
debashed men of this world, who ouer-toppe them, and ouer-droppe them to, as
the high Oaks do the lowly shrubs: but let them have patience awhile, and
they shall every way parallel them.

As men in the Scripture are compared to Trees, so the Comparison holds well.
Go into a Wood and Forest, thou shall see as great difference of Trees in
their kind, as of the Stars in their kind; some Ash, some Oak, some Cedar;
some tall, some small, some straight, some crooked, some young, some old: but
now, mark these Trees cut down and burnt in the Furnace, in the Iron-workes,
or the like, and tell me if thou can distinguish betwixt the ashes of one
tree and another. Look at the accounts of the Merchant, one Compter stands for
an hundred pound, another for twenty pound, another for tweluepence, another
for a Cipher, this for more, this for less, but when the account is done
shuffle them all together, and who can tell the difference betwixt this Compter
and that, they are all but base metal. So in this life there is difference
betwixt man and man, in respect of inferioritie or Superiority, Magistracy or
Ministry, Prince and Subject, Master and Servant, one man is of more value,
(as David's Soldiers said of him) then a thousand others: one spreads out his
boughs like Nabuchadnezzar, (as Daniel interprets his Vision) far and near:
one is high in place, like a tall Cedar, another like a lowly shrub: one is a
Figure, another a Cipher. But now when the Axe of Death cuts all down, when
like Compters we be all shuffled together, and put in the common box, the
Grave, then who can say, here are the ashes of Alexander, here of poor Irus?

Besides, Similes, illustrating Deaths effect in aequalizing all.
thou see a Stage Play (as it is to be doubted thou see too many) there
thou obseruest one acts the part of a King, another of a Captain, another of a
Reueller, another of a Gentlemen, another of a Gourtier, another of a Pander, a
Knave, a Clown, a Fool; thou would think some vain fellow in his
borrowed bravery to be a King, or in his acted knavery and folly (as is most
likely) to be a very Knave and a Fool: but when the Play is done, they are all
alike, Rogues by Statute, if they wander; or silken Beggars howsoever.

In this our life we act diverse parts, some Comicall, some Tragical; some in
this kind, some in that, upon the Stage of this world: in the time of acting,
one is by his place and office a King, another a Baron, a third a Knight, a
fourth a Squire, another a Physician, Lawyer, etc. one a great man, another a
poor Mechanical Artificer, according to our several ranckes and callings.
But now when the Stage shall be dissolved; the world burned, our parts acted,
we shall be all alike in respect of our interred bodies: and we shall be
judged all alike in our particular or general judgment, according to the
works which we have done in the body, therefore since we are all earth, as
like as one Egg to another, since all of one metal, and like Leaden pellets,
cast in one mould; since all of one cloth, differing a little in the shape;
since all must go alike to the earth, and all be alike in the earth: let us
not be too much exalted with greatness, like the Horse which is proud of his
trappings, which must be pulled off us when we are stabled in our Graves: nor
let us be too much dejected with our meannesse of place and condition, since
Death will bring the two unequal lines of the high and low estate to be
parallel in the center of our earth: at which time Se^a^s Epitaph will fit the
Tombs of both rich and poor: Seneca in Agam.
Hic seruus, dum vixit erat, nunc mortuus idem,
Non quam tu dari magn^ minora potest, etc.
This poor man whilst he lived, a servant was;
Now dead: the rich, in nothing does surpass.


Thirdly, since we must all dye, 3. Use of Direction.
it behooues all of us, and every one of us, to meditate of Death, and to
prepare our selves for Death, even as he that is to take a journey, or to
depart into some foreign coasts, thinks of it, contriues it, and fits and
furnishes himself for it: especially if he be upon going, and that his
voyage must presently be undertaken. Thus the case stands with us, our long
Voyage (called here our departing) must be undergone; it is unavoidable,
vndisspensable, for the matter; unlimited, uncertain, where, when, and how,
for the manner; yet hastening and approaching, for the time: therefore it stands
us in hand to provide, we must bestirre our selves to prepare our viaticum.

The fatal and imposed necessity of this departing we have manifested, and
might further manifest the necessity of dying, 1. From Gods Decree, which is
immutable, Heb. 9.27. Esaias 14.24. Mal. 3.6. 2. From man's sins deserving, Romans
5.12. 3. From the change that GOD by Death will make in our bodies, Phil.
3.21. 1 Cor. 15.35. Job 14.14. 4. That the godly may be rewarded, Esaias 23.18.
and Chapter 26. v. 19. and vengeance rendered on the wicked, Esaias 24.8. 26.21. 5.
Because we are formed only of dust and clay, which cannot last, Genesis 3.19.
Job. 4.19. 6. From the nature of all flesh (yea, even of the long keeping
Peacocke) which will not keep for any long time from rotting and corrupting.
7. From the defect of radical moisture, Job 8.11 Esaias 7.10. All which are so
strong inducements to warrant that we shall dye, that in respect of the
premises, man above all other creatures is said to be mortal, as both the
Psalmist calls him, and Philosophy defines him. Homo est animal rationale,
mortale.
An Epithet appropriated to him, above the rest of the creatures (though they
dye as well as he) to put him in mind of death, more then them, of which it
seems he is forgetful. But a great many more Motives we have of our settled
and serious preparation for this unwelcome guest, Death, from the consideration
as of his forcible, so of his speedy entrance: which will not, nor cannot long
be deferred nor delayed: for, as ravening Time, this old devouring Saturn,
has already swallowed down all former ages; so he comes with as swift a foot
to devour us, and all the earths children in his gurmundizing jaws. Swiftly
indeed, for as an Arrow out of a Bow, as a ship on the Sea, as a Bird in the
Air; nay, as our thoughts, so swift is our time: and how ever we run on in
sin, yet every day runs on with us to our graves, marching vehemently with
Iehu; our life sliding away, whether we eat, drink, walk, or talk, like
the Ship that sails, how ever the Passengers perceive not: nay, Sen. Epist. 24.
Tune quoque cum crescimus, vita decrescit; even when we grow and increase,
then our life does decrease. Yea, so mortal are we, and so momentanie our
life, that even whilst we live we may be said to be dead, not only
potentially dead, (as he that is poisoned, or the thief condemned, is said to
be but a dead man) though the one be yet wrestling for life, and the other
unexecuted; because the one is potentially, the other ciuilly dead in Law, even
so we are dead in Law, as Adam and Eve were, because we have sinned like
them, but we are for the greatest part even actually dead.

For, let us take the life of man as it is divided into seven parts, Infancy,
Childe-hood, Adolescencie, Youth, Manhood, Old age, and the Decrepit old age.
Now in these successiue ages, what is the latter always save the death of the
former, De 4. Nouissimis. page 90.
as both Inchinus and Seneca have wittily noted? What is Childe-hood but the
abolition and death of Infancy? what Adolescencie but the death of Child
hood? How inliuing we dye

Nay are dead in part.


Youth of Adolescencie; Manhood of Youth; Old age of Manhood; and Decrepit
age of Old age, and of Decrepit age Death it self is the Death. Which truth
though our eyes be blind to see, and our hearts dead to ponder, yet our
tongues (like Caiaphas his prophesying against our wills) confess it. For I
pray you, when an old man, or a man of middle years finds an unaptness and
unableness in himself to perform that which in his youth he did and
delighted to do, what is his phrase? Oh, says he, that whorld is past with
me; intimating that he is dead and departed from the world, in respect of that
age.

Oh then how had even the very Child need to prepare for his final
departure, since one part of his life is dead already, his Infancy? how the
youthful Ephebus, that has two parts dead, and but five at furthest to live?
how the youth, that has three parts dead in him, and but four to live? how
the lusty man that has four parts of time spent certainly, and has but
three parts to live and those uncertain: how the old man chiefly, that has
acted five parts of his life already, and has but two to act, uncertain, by
reason of his faultring tongue, and dried brain, whether he can act these or
no, before Death strike him non plus? But chiefly the Decrepit gray headed
man, who is dead six times, and now has but one age upon his weak and
wearyed back, about to rest him in his grave? How should these premeditations
excite our preparations? that as we are compared to fruit in the Scripture,
being called the fruit of the womb, the fruit of the loins, etc. so betimes
to bring forth fruit worthy of repentance, ere we fall, like mellow fruit, from
the tree of life: If we have past some ages we are dead to those, even as in
fruit, the flower is the death of the bud, and the fruit is the death of the
flower. Therefore let us be fruitful in doing good, ere we be plucked away,
and be no more.

Oh how soon fruit perishes? How soon does it ripen, how soon rot? How do
the Worms that breed of it, and in it, consume it? The North and East wind
blasts it: the Mill dew infects it, Caterpillars spoil it: now by violence it
is plucked from the tree; now rotten-ripe it falls and so festers. So it is with
all the seed of man, the fruit of woman, we have all one manner of grafting,
and of growing, but a thousand different ways of decreasing and decaying:
Omnibus est eadem laethi via, no^ tamen vnus
Est vitae cunctis, exitijque modus.
All have one way to life, one way to death;
Yet many ways does stint our vital breath.


More ways lead to the Sepulcher then to any Princely Palace, Molle patent
adi^us, etc. Meanders Labyrinth had not so many windings as Death has ways.

Hos Bell^, hos aequora poscunt, etc.
Wars, waters, fancies, frenzies, love, mad lust,
Besides diseases do dissolve our dust.
As Seneca and Silius once sung, as pithily as Poetically. By how many means
we dye.
Histories of all times, places, and persons, Sacred and Humane, consort and
confirm this experienced truth. The old World we know was drowned; so was
Pharaoh with his Egyptians. Sodom and Gomorrah, Ziglah, the two Captains and
Companies of fifties, that came against Elias; Nadab and Abihu, Achan, and his
family, burned. Herod eaten with worms: Daniels accusers devoured with Lions:
the mocking children, with she Bears: the Philistines smit with Emerods: the
Israelites cut off many thousands in the days of Moses and David by Plague and
Pestilence. Bethlems Children and the Sichemites, butchered by the Sword:
Jerusalem and Samaria, by the sword and Famine: Er and Onan, killed by the
Divine power: Ananias and Saphira thrown down dead by an Apostolical Spirit:
Simon Magus his neck broke by Peter's Prayers: Julian killed with a Dart by the
Prayers of the Church.

If we would wade into Heathenish Stories, we might add to the Catalogue
without number, such as have perished by water, as Hylas in his Colchos
voyage, Orontes, Lucaspis, Palinurus, Iearus, Laeander, Sappho, Menander, etc.
whom Virgil and Ovid so often mention. by fire, as Sardanapalus, Empedocles, in
Aetna: Phaeton, Dido, in the Poet. Some destroyed by wild beasts, as many
Martyrs in the Primitive persecution; as Satur^einus by a Bull, Ignarius,
Policarpus, by a Lion; Felicitas, by Leopards; Milo the wrastler, by a Wolf;
Ba^il^ns slain by a Heart; Hatto the Bishop of Mentz; eaten with Mice; lovely
Adonis, cunning Dedalur, prophesying Idmon, torn in pieces by Bores. Some by
Dogs as Euripides the Poet, dogged Diogenes, weeping Heraclitus, Philosophers;
apostate Lucian, etc.

How many have been strangled upon the Cross, not only Martyrs, as Andrew,
Peter, Diverse examples of several sorts of deaths.
Gorgonius, Simeon the Son of Cleophas, Peter, Aulanus, etc. following their
head Christ: but even many Kings as Policrates, the Spartan Leonides,
Sindualdus, Arnulphus, Hanno of Carthage, etc. Besides Malefactors, such as
Helen the Grecian Whore, Daphitas, the Grammarian, etc. and such as have
hanged themselves, as Judas, Achitophell, Phillis, Erigone, Biblis. Some have
been stoned to death by others, or shot with arrows, as Achillis by Paris,
Procris by Cephalus, Acron by Romulus, Hyrene by Sisinnius; yea, a stone from a
wall, as upon Abemelech, out of a sling, as David's against Goliath, or thrown
with the hand, as that which Patroclus threw upon C^brion in the Troyan war
(besides the fall of walls, such as that of the Tower of Shilo) has been the
death of many. I cannot reckon all the means of our mortality, Hoc opus, hic
labor. So many Creatures as I contemplate; nay, so many things inanimate as I
see, me thinks I see so many Actors in the Tragic fall of man. The Thunder
in the heavens has slain many in earth; if that which Virgil writes in the
first, third, and sixth of his Aeneidos of Enceladus, and other Giants, slain
by Jupiter, Ajax by Pallas, Ovid of Typheus, Propertius of Semele, be a
fiction: yet the report received of the death of Anastatius the Emperor,
Zoroastres the Magitian, Pliny.
Tullius Hostilius, by Thunder, and that which we have heard and seen in this
kind, is Authenticke: What heaps and havoc the Sword has made in war,
let these millions speak, that have perished not only in the vvarres, betwixt
the Kings of Israel and Judah, in which in one battle there sell fifty
thousand betwixt Ahas and Jeroboam, Josephus lib. S. ant.
says Josephus: as also betwixt the Judges and Kings of Israel, with their
enemies, when Achab slew an hundred thousand Syrians, Gideon an hundred and
twenty thousand Midianites. But even in th^se amongst Christians, when Charles
Martill in one battle slew three hundred and fifty thousand Goths. In those
amongst Pagans, Caesar bragging of an eleauen hundred and nintie thousand that
had fallen under his conduct: besides those in civil wars betwixt him and
Pompey, Scylla and Marius, etc. besides those that fell in Tamberlaines
Trophies over the Medes, Albanes, Mesapotamians, Persians, Parthians,
Armenians, Turks, etc. In Sicinius Conquests in forty five set battles: of
Hannibals over Cornelius Scipio, Sempronius, Flamminius, Aemillius, and
Terentius, where there were slain at once forty Senators: of Alexander over
Darius, slaughtering an eleauen hundred: of Crassus, killing twelve hundred of
Spartacus Army: Lucullus two thousand of Mithridates Troops: Ptolomie fifty
thousand of Demetrius host. Others more in many maine battles recorded by
Sabellicus, Liuie, Plutarch, Volateran, testify, how much humane blood the
sword has effused; how many Tragedies poison has acted, not only the sudden
and frequent falls of so many Mitred Popes out of Peter's supposed usurped Seat,
does declare, but the dismal deaths of famous Emperors and Kings, as of
Constantine the Son of Heraclius, Zimisces after one years reign, of
Carolus Caluns, of Henry of Lucelburge, Lothar of France, Lodouicus Balbus,
Dioclesian of Dalmatia, Lucullus, of whom Pliny: nay, of Alexander himself,
Lib. 23. c. 3
with infinite others, who were as certainly poisoned as Socrates and Pope
Victor.

Nay, so easily is the thread of our life cut, so soon our web untwisted like
Penelope's, or rather swept away with the Spiders, that even in our meats and
drinks we may suspect, that Mors in ^lla, Death is in the pot: have we not
the testimony of Sextus Aurelius, that ingurgitation of meat, and too much
repletion not being concocted in the stomach, occasioned the deaths of
Septimius, Se^erus, and Valentinian Emperors? Does not Ignatius ascribe the
fall of Iouinian to the same cause, as also G^egory Turonensis imputes the
sudden death of Childericus the Saxon, being found dead in his bed, to the
same crudities and suffocations by intemperancie. The like censure gives
Eusebius of Domitius Apher, that overcome of his meat, dyed at Supper. Neither
does Hermippus indite any thing for the death of Archisilaus but his excessive
ingurgitating of Wine. As I my self once in Cambridge, saw a drunken dog in
form of a man, vent out his soul, with disgorging his exonerated stomach.

Neither are we only subjected to our dissolution by too much repletion,
occasion of so many diseases; yea, of death it self, that plures gula quam
gladio; the panch destroys more then the sword: but the defect of meat and
drink has contracted the lives of many in all parts, and those no less
mighty. Millions have tried woefully the massacres of famine in the siege of
Jerusalem and Samaria, Narriners by Sea, Cities in siege, Soldiers in the
Camp, and the poor in dearth: yea, this has been the cruellest death that
Tyranny and Jealousy could invent. Thus was Richard the second dispatched of his
Countrymen: thus was Boniface the eight plagued by Phillip: Boniface the sixth
by one Cincius a Roman Citizen, Aristo the Poet by the Athenians: Earl
Vgoline by his ungrateful Countrymen: thus were Orator, Fortunatus, Foelix,
and Silinus Martyrs, pinched at Alexandria, and perished.

Nay, so soon we are and are not, that God does not only sometimes with his
own stroke immediately from himself, cut us short; sometimes mediately by
man, for, and in the midst of our lawless lusts, as Cosbie and Zimbri were
slain of Phinees, Arcibiade^ of Lysander, says Plutarch, John the twelfth, by
the Husband of a Whore, in the midst of their filth: (as it is reported by
Tertullian, that Spensippus the Platonist: by Pontanus, that Beltrand
Herrerius: by Paulus Diaconus, that Rodoald King of the Longobards: by
Cornelius Tacitus, that Tigillinus the Ruler of the Watch: by Celius* that
fair Phaon: by Pliny, lib. 7. that Cornelius Gallus, and Heterius, Roman
Gentlemen: and by other Authors, that others have perished in their pollutions
in the very venerious act:) but we perish sometimes even in, and by our lawful
affections, even the overmuch opening and dilating of the heart in ouer-ioying,
and the too much contracting of the same again by ouer-sorrowing, has brought
thousands to their graves without gray hayres.

How many Authors have we to testify that which seems more incredible, that
an ouerioying may presently deprive us for ever after inioying any of the joys
of life. What was the reason that Sophocles and Dionisius, both of them being
victorious in the censure of the Critticques, for their exquisite Tragedies,
dyed suddenly, says Pliny, lib. 7. c. 37. even of an ouer-ioy, as Valerius
and Volateran also think, how ever Lucian and Sotades alleged by Crinitus,
think contrary? The like is reported of Chilo embracing his Son, crowned at
the Olympicke games: of a Roman woman at the safe return of her son, which
she thought was slain in the wars at Canna: of Philippides, when his Laureat
Poems were preferred: of Diagoras of Rhodes, when his three sons, says
Gellius, lib. 3. not. at. or his two sons, says Tullie, lib. 1. Tusc. were
victorious in the public Wrastlings: of Philemon, when he saw an Ass eat
Figs prepared for the table: all who tell us, that even this affection of
Joy, with a sweet tickling (like that stinging of the Serpent Dipsas) may kill:
much more may sorrow (as Jacob confesses, and Judah intimates in Genesis,
hasten our heads to the grave, ere our hairs be very gray: Grief being to the
heart (unless it be godly grief for sin, which never hurts but heales, 2
Cor. 7.10.) that the Moath is to the garment, the Catterpiller to the fruit,
eating the heart (like Promethius his Vultur) bringing death as the Apostle
also says, 2 Cor. 7.10. But if these things be able to overcome this
Microcosme, this little world of Man: if Fire, and Water, and Famine, and
Fulness, and Thunder, and Stones, be able to sunder us from half our selves
(our bodies) as the furnace can the Metals; if all the Creatures, the Lions
paw, Bores tuske, Bulls horn; nay, the least of the Lords host, the Gnat, the
Fly, the Louse, the Mouse be armed against us, as against Pharaoh and Hatto,
be able to give us our parting-blow, to set us packing hence; nay, if our own
affections be sufficient to infect us: how much more are we indammaged and
endangered by diseases and sicknesses? to which as man is more subjected then
any other Creature, as Galen and Hipocrates have observed, because he has
sinned more then they, which sin of his is the cause of all maladies in the
outward man, Leuit. 26. Deuteronomy. 28. John 5.14. So there is not the least
sickness or disease, but it has conquered where it has assailed. How many
has the Fever extinguished, men of fame, Emperors and Kings, as Antonius,
Autipater, Vespasian, Leo, Go^fred, Tacitus, etc. Antonie and Columbanus
Monks, were forced by it, the one sort to leave their Crowns, the other their
Cells. As others by other diseases, some by the Flux, as innumerable common
Soldiers in several Camps; yea, Traian the Emperor, says Platina: some by
the Gout, as Septimius Seuerus, and Justin the younger, etc. Some by unknown
diseases running betwixt the flesh and the skin, as Heraclius, Michael
Paphlago, etc. Some by Apoplexies, as Paul the second, Pope; Valentinian the
Emperor, says Diaconus; Lucius Ami. us verus, says Aurelius; as also Francis
Petrarke: Some by aches in their bones and sides, as Crassus the Orator,
Boniface the ninth, as Gregory the cleauenth, by a pain in the belly: nay,
what member is there in man* wherein Death rules not by the help of diseases*
in the head, by Apoplexies; in the ears, by Worms; in the eyes by
Inflammations; in the nose, by Flux of blood; in the mouth, by Cankers and
Putrefaction; in the tongue, by Ulcers and Tumors; in the brain, by Frenzies;
in the temples, by Contusions; in the breast by Stoppings, and Impostumes; in
the hands and feet, by the Gout; in the legs, by Swellings; in the belly, by
Collickes; in the reins, by stony and grauelly matter; in the arms, by dolor
of the Arteries; nay, in the heart it self, by Fears, Palpitations,
Convulsions, Dilatations, and Contractions, by variety of Passions. What shall
I say more?

Mill modis lethimiseros mors vna fatigat.
This Tyrant Death by many a fatal dart,
Does wound and wreake each living mortal part.
A Fly is able to choke us, as it did Pope Adrian; a Pin, or a Needle, or a
prick with a Knife to destroy v^, the fall from an horse to crush us, as it
did Selenchus the Syrian, Lego the Frenchman, Earl Fulke, Nipheus, Leucagus,
Remulus, Thymetes, Amicus in Virgil, Aeneid. 10. Agenor in Ovid. The sting of a
Serpent is sufficient to kill us, as it did Laocoon the Troyan, mad Orestes,
desperate Cleopatra, Demetrius Ptolomies Library keeper, with others. Yea, as
our life is but a breath and a vapor, so the very smoke and vapor is
sufficient to choke us, as it did Minos of Creet, Luctatius the Orator, Zoe
the wife of Nicostratus, yea, Thurinus that sold smoke, says Erasmus in his
Adage, perished by smoke.

If I should recite all the casualties incident unto this dying life of ours,
and amplify out of Histories, how one has been killed with the fall of a
stone upon his pate, out of the claws of an Eagle, as Eschilus the Poet: some
by the fall of the house; others by the fall of their beds, as Eupolis the
Poet: some by dust blown into their throats, as Iohanna wife to Andrew,
Brother to the Sicilian King, and the like accidents. If I should but recite
the multitudes that Gods has swept away by the devouring Plague and destroying
Pestilence, which I think since the beginning of the world, has killed more
then there be now in the world, or relate the late devastations that it has
made in Belgia, Italy, France, England and other places. Or if I should set
down how many have dyed suddenly, even in their seeming health, as Fabius
Maximus, Volcacius the Senator, Alaricus the Emperor; some in their journey,
as Alphonsus of Spain; some doing the work of nature, as Arrius the
Heretic* and Carbo the Roman; some in their superstitious Orizons and
Devotions, as A. Pompey, and M. Iunencius, when they were sacrificing; some in
sacking the Temples, as Gaudericus the Vandall; some in writing Letters, as
Cardinal Orescence from the Council of Trent, and Terentius Corax; some in
the first day of their inuesting to Honor, as Caninius the Consul; some in
their mirths; some in their meats, as Manlius Torquatus, and Osilius the
Actor; others in their Bathes, as Sauseius the Scribe; besides these that daily
experience adds in this kind, it would make the securest Soul meditate of
his inevitable dying, and prepare his soul for her speedy departing;
especially considering that Quid cuiquam contigit, id c^iuis, that which
happens to any one, may happen to every one. All these recited examples of
abbreuiated life and approaching death, being glasses for us now suruiuing,
wherein to see the face of our mortality; every man's grave showing us this
Motto; Hodie mihi, cra^ tibi; To day to me; to morrow to thee: Death being
pictured on every Tomb to be seen with an understanding eye, in form of an
Archer, now shooting over us, at our enemies; now short of us, at our
acquaintance; now on the right hand, at our friends and blood; now on the left
hand, on our Servants and attendants, with his bow bent, and his arrows
drawn, and his aim taken at our own hearts; only staying till GOD bid him
shoot; which how soon it will be GOD knows, Quis scit an adijciant, etc.
Who of us all the sons of sorrow,
Knows that his life shall last to morrow.
Nonne fragiliores sumus, quam si v^trei essem^s? Are we not more brittle then
glass, says Seneca? nay, Vitrum etsi fragile, tamen seruatum diu durat,
Epist. ^3. Glass if it be safely kept continues long; but all the diet and
keeping in the world, though we should eat Pearls with Cleopatra, bathe
daily in new milk with Poppea, fare daily deliciously with the rich Churl;
consult with a Physician in every act we did; yet we could not long continue.
All the means we can use will hardly draw out our life to that length that
Birds and Beasts live; for Ousels, Eagles, Hearts, etc. that fulfill their
hundreds, occasioned Theophrastus to complain of Nature as a step-dam to man,
whose limits as David notes, are threescore years and ten (for the rest of
his life is either a death or disease, Ipse senectu^ morbus
in his decrepit days.) The Patriarchs lived their nine hundreds and above,
The long lives of the Patriackes.
as Adam and so Eve, their nine hundred and thirty, Seth nine hundred and
twelve, Enos nine hundred and five, Caynan his son nine hundred and ten,
Malalehel nine hundred sixty and two, Iayred nine hundred sixty and five,
Methusalem nine hundred sixty and nine, Noah nine hundred and five, etc. but
we hardly attain to our nintie: but if a man live past nintie, to nintie and
seven, or nintie and eight, with Liuia and Perpenna; or to nintie and nine,
with Statilia; if he pass his Climactericall of sixty and three, we count
him an old man; but if he attain to his hundred (as did Valerius Coruinus,
and Metellus, Abbot Paconius, and Titus Paul's Scholar) we account him very
aged: but if he exceed his hundred, as Heroditus writes of some of the
Egyptians, and some of Masinissa the Numedian King, to an hundred and four,
as did Hipocrates; or an hundred and five, with Xen^philus; or an hundred and
seven, with Terentia; or an hundred and eight with Homer; or an hundred and
ten, with Guarinus, and Helias the Abbot; or an hundred and twelve, with
Cyrus a Bishop; but chiefly to an hundred and twenty, with Romualdus the
Hermit, we admire and wonder at him, as much as former times wondered at their
Hermites. The shortness of our present days demonstrated.
And well we may, since our life seems to be but the Epitome and Comp^ndium
of former years: so short, so momentanie, that as the Scripture compares it,
to a flower, to grass, to smoke, to clay, to dust and chafe which the vvinde
scatters, to a bubble, a blast, a breath, a vapor, a dream, a shadow, a
Weauers shittle, and such fading things: so Antiquity has called it a winged
woman, fruitful of sins, yet swift. Ambrose says it is like the glory of
the world, In Lucam.
which the Tempter showed CHRIST in the twinkling of an eye; like the Vision
which Esdras saw, vanishing in a moment, Esdras 1.8. like Ierusalems Temple,
that was soon destroyed: for as one stone was not left upon another in that
material Temple: so shortly, one bone will not be left upon another, in the
temple of the best compacted body living, which (says Inchinus) is nothing
else but Carne^-glacies, fleshie Ice, or Icie flesh, soon thawed and
dissolved; a clayie frame (says Pontanus) standing on the pillars of a little
breath, ready every day, it is so ruinous, to fall in manus Domini, into the
Lords hands, of whom we have it as tennants at will. The largest limits of our
Lease being but a day, for so David and Moses, when they play the holy
Geometricians and Arithmetitians, in measuring and numbering their time, go not
by years and months, but by days: yea, and to some it is but a short Winters
day; to the longest that lived, Aristot. de hist. animalium.
a Summers day; in which he that has the most prosperous Sunshine may be
compared to those Flies that breed in the Sun near the River Hipanis, which
appear in the Morn, are in their full strength at Noone, Homo Ephimeron.
and dye at Night. Whence came the Proverb, Hominem esse Ephimeron, that man
is a continuer for a day, beyond which determined day he cannot here abide.
Four causes of the long continuation of things.


Other things are continued long by extrinsecall means, or intrinsecall
qualities within themselves: some by their extreme cold, as all sorts of
Metals; some by their exceeding heat, as Pepper, Ginger, and the like; some
by motion, as Water and Wine, that by motion are kept from putrefaction; some
by continuation of the parts with the whole, as the Sea that corrupts not in
the whole but in the parts, as may be seen and felt in the creekes in Essex
that come from the Sea; but man being made mortal, and so having that Epithet
more fitly appropriated to him then any other creature, neither by his natural
composition can, nor in the wise Gods disposition must continue long upon the
earth, neither can any Physical means preserve him unless a Metaphysicall
power do uphold him, and cause him* to hold out to his old years as Simeon
here did.

Is Death so certain, and Life so short? Use. 4. Of Instruction.
then let us learn to bestow it well, so long as God lends it. Absolon after a
long time knew not how to pacify and appease his Father, we have but a short
time allotted to pacify and appease our displeased GOD, therefore let us
speedily labor our reconciliation; let us work out our salvation with fear
and trembling. As Abigall speedily met David and appeased his wrath, 1 Samuel 25.
and as David speedily met the Lord by repentance after his numbering the people,
2 Samuel 24.10. and as Peter went out presently, and wept bitterly, after the
denying his Master, Mat. 26. So let us who in the whole course of our life have
as much displeased as we have dishonored our GOD, instantly have recourse to
the throne of grace, that the Lord may smell the sweet sacrifice of our broken
hearts, ere wrath go from the Almighty to our destruction* Oh our days are
few, and our sins many, we have been barren in good, fruitful in evil,
plentiful in sinning, Our many sins are to be mourned for, and why.
penurious in sorrowing. If David's sins were more then the hayres of his head,
ours are more then the sands in the Sea* and if he washed his couch with
tears, we had need wash our souls with floods of waters, turning (like
Niobe) into fountains, and like that old convert Pelagia, be Pelagus
lachrymarum, a Sea of sorrow, as we have been unclean sinckes of sin; nay,
if we should now for ever shake hands with sin, and have no more commerce
with the flesh and the world, but live retyredly, mortifiedly, piously, and
penitently, as the old Hermites pretended; and if we should live Noah's and
N^stors years, and every day weep as much as Mary Magdalene did at her
spiritual marriage with Christ, as much for our selves as the Daughters of
Jerusalem did for Christ: nay, if we should weep out our eyes, like some
penitents that Cassianus mentions, remembering with Ezekias our former vanities
in the bitterness of our souls, it were not a sufficient recompense for our
fore-past rebellions, nor a satisfactorie sacrifice for our former sins.

But what shall we say to those that in this short life make a long and a
continuated custom of sin, never redeeming the time, Use 5. Of Redargution.
or thinking of their few and evil days, or of the reckoning they must make
when they are expired but passing their time in iollitie, singing to the Tabret
and the Harp; letting the reins loose to all licentiousnes, making their
bellies their God, planting here their Turkish Heaven of Wine and Women,
wallowing like Swine in all lusts, like Sardanapalus amongst his wantons,
serving no other God then Mammon, or Goddesses then Venus; making Dogs and
Horses, or such base Creatures, their beloved Idols? They think no more of
death then the stiff-necked Jews, that made a league with the grave, and a
Covenant with Hell (such as some lazy Pastors make with their people,) that
if these will never trouble them, they would never think of these.

What is the estate of these that live merrily as they say, like Pope John, in
corporeal and spiritual pollutions, like Pope Ioahn: these must try
experimentally, what that cursed Pope once ieasted at Atheistically, that
there are long pains in another life for these that misspend their golden
days in graceless impurities and impieties in this short life: The profane
man's practice.
these they both make this their short life shorter by their sins: both as
every sin wastes the body as it wounds the soul, as also in that they
provoke God to cut them off short, either by his own hand, as he did Absolon,
Er, Onan, and the Sons of Heli, or else by the sword of the Magistrate. And
they hasten and prolong their plagues and pains perpetual; They lead their
lives in joy (says Job, Chapter 20.) and suddenly they go down to Hell: Oh they
go like thieves laughing to the Gallows, and like traitors dancing to
execution. Oh how suddenly is their candle put out!

Exhortat*
Let me speak to such in the conclusion of this Use: in Gods fear let them
consider that this life is called a valley of tears; here therefore they must
sow in tears, if they will reap in joy; they must have a wet Seede-time, if
they expect a blessed Harvest. Let them ponder what Christ says, Blessed are
they that mourn, Mat. 5. As also, Woe be to you that laugh: let them think
what Christ did; wept often, laughed never, his Prophets and Apostles seldom or
never. Let them know further, that God calls to weeping and mourning, and
baldness, and sackcloth, Esaias 22. which call they have not yet answered: for
behold, Joy and exultation, vpbrayding God, and brauing his command, even to
his face, with their hellish Proverbs, as, Hang sorrow; Cast away care; As
long lives the merry man as the sorry; Let us be merry, we know not how long
we have to live; like the scoffing Atheists amongst the Jews, Let us eat and
drink, to morrow we shall dye: Oh thou know not how long thou have to
live; therefore retort that temptation back again to Satan thus: How we
must sovve in tears in this short seede-^^me of life.
Therefore I will be sorry for my former sins; I will be (if at all) soberly
and mortifiedly merry; therefore I will set my soul in order, and the house of
my heart in order, like Ezekias, otherwise I shall be worse then Achitophel
that set his house in order ere hoe hanged himself; To morrow it may be I
shall dye, therefore I will not eat and drink inordinately, least I be taken
away to hell, as was the rich Churl and Baltasser* in the midst of my cursed
cates and drunken cups; I will not any more serve the Devil and my belly in
chambering and wantonness, in surfeiting and drunkenness, but I will put on
the Lord Jesus Christ. It is now time that I should awake from the sleep of
sin, ere I sleep in death; I will arise up that Christ may give me light.
Oh alas, what fruit have I had in the unfruitful works of darkness, whereof
I am now ashamed.

Lastly, think with thy self how small cause thou have of this thy
irreligious profanenes, and carnal security, and besotting sensuality. Has
a Traveler any cause to be merry when he is far out of his way, has few
friends, nothing to spend, stormy weather above his head, Pirates lying in
wait to rob him, night approaching, and uncertain whether ever he get to his
iournyes end? Thou art in this world a pilgrim and a stranger: Heaven is thy
country, (from thence came thy soul) thou art out of the way that leads
thither, thou art in the broad way to hell; thou have few friends, God, Angels,
Devils, Man, and the Creatures are against thee: thou have little to spend, thy
good Tallents* and stock of Grace is already gone and spent, like the
Prodigoes, on thy lusts, Luk^ 15. thou have no more means to help thy self,
then the wounded man that traveled to Ierico, that had not twopence: there is
a storm over thy head, Gods wrath hangs over thee in a cloud of vengeance:
Pirates, the infernal Spirits, lie in wait for thy soul: the night of thy
death is near: and thou art uncertain of salvation; nay, the word excludes
thee and such as thou from apprehension of any comfort from that, since thou
walk in the shadow of death, in the way to damnation.

Consider again what occasion of sports and merriments and sensual sollaces a
man can have in prison, in cold irons. Did Manlius and R^gulus, and Musius
Scae^ol^ take delight in their, prisons and pressures? Now here thou art as it
were in prison, like Joseph in the stocks, like Manasses in fetters, and in
tribulation: the world it self is but a prison in respect of Heavens palace,
and thou in this prison living in security, like the old Worldlings, art
enthralled to thine own lusts, and so a slave to Satan who plots thy
destruction, as Achitophel did David's. What use we are to make of our short
time.
Therefore hear counsel and receive instruction, since thou art here in a
strange Land, like Israel in Babel, sit down by the Rivers of water and weep,
hang up thy Harpes and Instruments; use not carnal company that cause thy
careless security and thy forgetfulness of God and thine own soul:
remember whence thou art, where thou art, and whither thou art going; make that
use of thy time that Joseph did of the seven years of plenty; provide
against famine; agree with thine adversary whilst thou art in the way* ere thou
come before the Judge, as Cat^ counsels to do something in youth worth thy
relation and remembrance in age: and as travelers use to perform some exploit
in their travels worthy their thoughts and discourse when they come at home, so
treasure up those graces in life which may stand thee in stead after life;
provide against a rainy day; gather now honey from the flowers of virtuous
actions, into the Hiue of grace; work whilst it is day, ere the night come;
do good to all whilst thou have time, Gal. 6. wait at all times with Job,
until thy changing come, even as thou waitest for the times and seasons, in
Winter for the Spring, in the Spring for Summer, in Summer for Autumn: thou
can not enjoy thy sins long, thou must leave them, or they thee violently;
therefore break them off (as Daniel counseled Nabuchadnezzar) voluntarily by
Repentance and Almes-deedes; get a certainty to thy soul; conclude something,
like Ambassadors that go to foreign Courts, and have but a short abode
allotted, that may make for thy eternal peace hereafter, when thou come
before thy Prince; make something certain here ere thou go hence; in every
thing thou undertake thou love a certainty; if thou journey, thou would
rather go by Land then Sea, because more certain; do thou purchase, thou
would make sure work of Lands or Tenements? do thou walk on Ice, thou
poysest every foot-step ere thou set thy foot, ere thou venture thy body? so in
every thing thou would be sure. Oh make sure work for thy soul, that as
Ezekias prayed for peace and righteousness all his days, so there may be
peace to thy soul after thy days. Oh make use of that precious time that is
allotted thee; take it by the fore-top, it is bald behind.

Go to the Pismire thou sluggard: learn of the Beasts; the Ant sees it will
not always be Summer, the Crane and Storke think it will be another season, the
Birds take the Spring prime to build their nests; store thou up faith, with her
fruits, chiefly Repentance from dead works. Now begin, Ars longa, vita
breuis, Life is short, but the Art of well living and well dying, which is the
Art of Arts (even that which the best Master taught in the best Chair, Christ
upon the Cross,) that is long: therefore Nulla dies sine linea, Every day
learn some line; take out some lesson in this Art: sing not out thy time here
with the foolish Grasshopper; loyter not with the idle men of Belial, least thou
incur Christ's check; play not the fat bellyed Monk; and Epicurish
Abbey-lubber, least thou smart for it (as the When the Abbeys were visited in
king Henry the 8. time.
Cloysterers once did in this Land) in the day of the Lords visitation. Learn
to live the life of grace, that thy death may be gracious and precious in the
sight of GOD, as one of his Saints, that so thou may dye not only naturally,
like a man, as thou must, but Christianly, like a Christian man, as thou
ought: which that thou may the better do, as in other things thou
contriuest how to do well, that which thou purposest to do; (as thou
forecasts thy building, ere thou build; thy journey, ere thou travel,) So, often
remember how thou may dye well, since thou must die; and that is by living
well, whilst thou here runnest the short race of thy life.

A good man like a good Tree, brings forth fruit tempore suo, in his due time
and season: this Life time is, tempus tuum, thy time; Death is tempus suum,
Gods time: therefore begin to mend the ship of thy soul in the haven, in thy
health, not in the tempest of sickness, not in the Sea of death. I end my
counsel as I begun; this life is as short as sinful, therefore spend it well.

Simeon here desires his departing the nature of the word signifying a loosing,
Life is laborious and Miserable.
or an vnyoaking, being a Metaphor taken from Oxen loosed out of the yoke,
after labor; or from Prisoners set at liberty; may well and warrantably
administer unto us the consideration of the nature of that life which we
lead, to be as miserable as mortal, as laborious to the body as dolorous to
the mind; as also it may open our eyes to see something more clearly into the
nature of death, with his bounties and benefits, in that it is not only a
curber of Sin, but a curer of Crosses, an vnlooser from labors.

For the first, that whether you call it a curse or a command, which was
imposed on the first man, that in the sweat of his brows he should eat his
bread, till he returned to his earth, from whence he came, Genesis 3.19. all
man's seed since, in their several generations, have been exposed to. Do we
not feel yet the smart of the forbidden fruit? Are not our teeth set on edge
by it? Are not all things under the Sun full of labor? Are not the works of
Grace, the works of Nature painful? the actions of the body, the actions of
the mind, the operations of the soul and spirit laborious? Is it not a pain
to pray, a pain to repent, a pain to study, to contemplate, to discuss, to
discourse, to number, to divide? Is it not painful to write, to indite, to
preach, to counsel, to exhort, to persuade, dissuade, urge, move? Let every
knowing man and experienced spirit speak.

Are not works manual and mechanical painful? (even as the Arts liberal
are?) Is it not pain to plow, delue, dig, sow, mow, to work in Goal works,
and Mettall-mines, in brick and clay, is an Egyptian bondage? Nay, is there
not onus; as well as hono^; a labor, as well as an honor in every Calling?
Are not Princes, and superior Magistrates, Governors in houses, Colleges,
and Corporations, (like the heavenly Bodies) as much in motion and labor, as
in veneration? Virtues, vices, pleasures, profits, riches, poverty, vvanton
youth, covetous old age, all have their burdens? What callings without their
crosses, from the Scepter to the Sheepe-hooke? what sex without his sorrow?

No place is privileged from four things.
Whither shall a man fly, 1. from Satan tempting; 2. from the vanity of his
own heart; 3. from the bitings of venomous tongues; 4. and from the crosses of
the world? I have often thought, if there were any place in the four parts of
the world, to avoid these four, thither to fly: but there it no Asilum, or
Sanctuary from them, or any of them, under the Cope of Heaven. These always
follow, as the shadow the body; and (like proud T^rquin in Rome) challenge a
perpetual Dictatorship in the whole life of man. What day sets over our head
without his evil, either of Sin or Punishment? Adam must eat his bread in
his brows sweat; Cunctis diebus, all his days, in heat and sweat, toyling
and moyling; man must weary his body and weaken his spirits, till he keep
his eternal Sabbath in Heaven.

Bring me the man that has not yet drunk of the common cup of humane
calamities incident to life, and I shall more admire him, then the Graecians
did Achilles that could not be wounded. I never read of any but Policrates, who
was thought to be without the Gunshotte of Fortune, by the deluded Heathens;
yet his death was as dolorous as his life prosperous. I am sure, mitred Popes,
crowned Kings, invested Emperors, tryumphant Conquerours have seen the
turning of Sesostris wheel, and have experienced so many miseries that they
have cried out, some of them, Miserum est fuisse foelicem, it is a misery to
have been happy: others, solus viues, Vacia; that the private life of Vacia
the Roman was far safer then their public, gilded, guilefull pomp:
others, with Cyrus and Augustus, have thought the Regal Crown not vvorth
stooping for: others, have left voluntarily their Courts and Palaces for secure
and penitent Cells.

If we had no more examples of the miseries of greatness, either by birth,
blood, Examples of humane calamities.
command, or desert, then in Nabuchadnezzers deiection amongst Beasts, being
one of the greatest of men; in Manasses his imprisonment; in Sampsons grinding
in the Mill; in Agag hewed in pieces; in Adonizebecks eating crummes, like a
Dog, under his enemies Table; in Alexander poisoned, and left unburied; in
Caesar stabbed by his pretended friends; in Bellizarius, a blind Beggar, after
his Conquests; in Baiazets Iron Cage; in Socrates and Seneca's poisoning; in
Cleopatra's, Iezabel's, Agrippina's, and other infamously famous Queens and
Queanes, perishing, to omit all the rest in this kind, it might verify the
Paradoxe, that Humana vita non est vita, sed calamitas, Man's life is no life:
Vita vix vitalis, an imaginary life, and a real calamity; in which ann^
paues, aeru^^nae multae, the years are few, the griefs many: yea, so many, so
manifold, so constant, so continuated by successiue crosses, which follow one
another (like the waves of the sea) like the Messengers that came one after
another, to Job and David, to bring ill news of the death of their Children,
every day having suam and malitiam, and militiam, his wrath and his warre-fare;
that even the very child entering the lists into this military world, as soon
as it comes from the mother, cries and weeps: the first note it sings is
Lachrymae, taught only by provident Nature. The Males (says a witty Popish
Postiller) from Adam cry a; and the Females from Eve cry e, e; which put
together make a Note of sorrow. Nondum loquitur, at tamen prophetat,
(Augustine) Before it speaks, it prophesies, as though at the birth it had
that prognosticating spirit, which Carden says some men have at their death,
as though it did see some evil present, foresee and fear more to come.

I might go along (with Innocentius) in this subject, and show the several
maladies and miseries incident to every several age, from Infancy to Decrepit
old age: how like several Beasts we carry our selves, till Death bring us to
the Shambles: how pitifully Childe-hood wallowes like a little Pigge, in
dirtie places; and like Duckes and Geese, swattles and dabbles in wet and
filth? How Youth is a lascivious Goat; Adolescencie, an vntaimed Heiffer;
Manhood, a stern Lion; Old age a sluggish Ass, that only bears a more
precious thing then Isis, even that which bears it, an immortal soul.

I might anatomize man further in all his parts and weakened powers, showing
the several diseases that cease upon every member, where they challenge their
seats and thrones. I might enlarge the crosses incident to every Function and
Vocation: but referring you to the Fathers, chiefly Bernard and Fulgentius, De
condition vitae humanae. De contemptu mundi.
and to zealous Papists, chiefly Innocentius and Stella, besides him that in
English has writ the miseries of man's life, leaving you to their vintage, I
only rest with the taste of these Clusters, which we now further press forth
by use.

Is it so that this life which we live is so laborious (as the world wherein
we live is wicked? Use 1. Of Instruction.
) then the less good that we find in the life natural, we must labor to
counterpoyse it, by purchasing the life spiritual: the more discontent we
find in the life of Nature, the more comfort and content we must seek and
search for, in the life of Grace, which like Elishaes salt cast into Jordan,
seasons all the maladies of life. Now, if thou would live the life of Grace,
and have peace and joy, even by a dry passage as it were in the red Sea of
this World, then do those things that concern thy peace.

Twelve means of true peace.
First, abstain from sin: for where it reigns there is no life of Grace. Sin
quenches Grace, as water fire: Sin will kindle a fire within thy soul, to
burn with secret flames; for, the wicked are like the raging Sea.

Secondly, as one of Christ's true Disciples, subject thy will and soul to
Christ: it is his promise, thou shall have peace in him, and he will send thee
the Comforter.

Thirdly, frequently confess thy sins to God, more balm of inward joy, thou
shall have from the chief Physician, the more thou do lay open the ulcers of
thy sick and wounded soul.

Fourthly, use frequent and fervent prayer, shut thy Chamber-dore, play not the
Pharisaicall hypocrite, and Christ shall enter in and say Peace be to thee, as
he did to the Disciples.

Fifthly, keep the Lords day strictly, neither doing thine own works and will,
nor Satan's, nor speaking thine own words nor his, but Gods word and will in
public and private duties: this brings much familiarity with God, and has
the answer of many hidden joys from his Spirit: It is a spiritual rest to
every Christian, as it was promised a rest to the Israelites.

Sixthly, read and meditate in ^he Word of GOD: They shall have much peace that
delight in thy Law, says the Psalmist.

Seauenthly, suffer injuries patiently; sustain and abstain, and thou shall
feel within thine own heart God taking thy part: for, Qui patitur est victor,
etc. He that suffers ouercomes himself, the world, his enemies, and is Christ's
friend.

Eighthly, contemn earthly vanities, they divide and distract the heart.

Ninthly, be employed in a Calling: the idle are tossed with a multitude of
foolish fancies and fond desires.

Tenthly, be meek, so shall thou enjoy the earth with joy. Mat. 5.

Eleauenthly, get an humbled and a contrite heart, that is the seat of Grace,
and throne of God. Esaias 57.15.

Twelfthly, do righteousness, the fruit whereof is peace and joy. These
things belong to thy peace, which if thou practice, thy light shall shine to
the dark world, and thou shall have a lightsome Goshen in the life of Grace,
even in the darkesome Egypt of this wretched world.

Use 2. Of Redargution.
Secondly, is life so laborious? are our days so dolorous? Then these come
within the compass of a just Redargution, that are so drenched and drowned in
the things of this life, so besotted and bewitched with the painted beauties of
this earthly Iezabel, the World, that they can neither spirare nor sp^nare
coelestia, that they have as small hopes as they use small helps for Heaven in
a better life, but setting up here their rests, and stinting their aims at
earth, they desire (as Peter upon the Mount) to build tabernacles here in this
veil below, never caring for that building not made with hands, eternal in
the Heavens 2 Cor. 5.1. Alas, let such know that in their aerie hopes they
feed but on the wind, with the Camelion: they embrace but a cloud, with
Ixion, in stead of Juno: they touch Sodomes Apples, and are deluded with
beautifull-dust: they embrace shadows for substances, and place their desires
upon such obiects^ as are unworthy of an immortal soul and a heavenly
inspired spirit.

The vanity of life with all the things in life truly discovered.
For, I pray you; what is life it self, yea, long life, which they so doat
upon and long after, but a most irksome and tedious pilgrimage, environed with
infinite perils, and upon most light occasions lost? or what is any thing in
life worthy our liking and affections? What is the body it self which we so
pamper, but coagulated dust, gilded over in the out covering with colors, and
set up with the props of proportion; the slave of the mind, and prison of the
soul: sperma fetidum, cibus vermium, man's excrement, worms nutriment? What is
the Beauty of the body but a well colored skin, far inferior to the
beauties of the Sun and Moon, these heavenly bodies? Besides, if we could
see within, we should see a filthy Golgotha, and rotten dunghill.

What is Strength when Sampson is bound by a woman; since the greatest things
and most worthy of a man are effected by the sinews of wit, not by the
strength of sinews? are not both Strength and Beauty the flowers of the body,
which one blast of a Fever will deface and shake all to fitters? What are the
Pleasures of the body but (like the body it self) sensual, sinful, pecudine
and vile; Diseases being the Usury that Pleasures pay, and perpetual Sorrow
the bond; as the Poets feign of Jupiter, that he joined Pleasure and Sorrow
together in an Adamantine Chain, when he could not agree them in a difference
that they brought before him. Besides, are not these corporal Pleasures
inioyed of the Beasts more then of man, more strongly, vehemently and longer?
Are they not the works of darkness, and used in the dark? is any man so
impudent that dare use them publicly for shame? Are not distempers, diseases,
distractions discredit to our good name, loss of substance to our estate (when
they devour their Idolatrous users of them, as Acte^n^ Dogs did their Master)
fruitless repentance to the mind, dullness of wit, corrupting of the heart,
darkning the understanding, decaying the Souls Intellectual powers;
Impatiencie of a man's self, hatred of all virtues, inclination to all vices,
their bad fruits and base effects? Are not nominie, ignobilitie, imprisonment,
deformity, sickness, imbecillitie, blockishnesse, and Stupiditie, their Pages
and Attendants?

For Riches (the vulgars God) what are they but the long expenses and
provisions for a short journey, oppressing the bearers* heavy burdens to
sincke the Ship of the Soul? For, Gold and Silver* the Helena that the world
doa^es on, the Lais that most are inamoured upon (as the beasts upon the
Panthers skin, for his seeming luster) what are they but red and white dust,
the base excrements of the earth, blown away with the wind of every casualtie?
Pearls and precious Stones what are they but the spoil of Fishes, good only
in the estimation of the Lapidarie, and in their owners imagination, no^ in
their own nature, nor in any helpful effects?

Nobility, what is it but an opinion, or lot of birth, being our Ancestors not
ours, also often wrongfully acquired by oppression and cruelty?

Glory, what is it but a puff of wind, the vain inflation of the earth,
uncertain, momentanie, often wicked, like his father the multitude, who this day
have Hosanna for a man; to morrow, Crucify him: that in one hour will make
one more then man, and then a murderer, as they did Christ and Paul?

Power, and a Kingdom, are but a spacious molestation; Pulchrum malum, a
beautiful evil, a gilded poison, a Crown adorned with counterfeite Iemmes,
a sea of evils? Honor (if it come not from Virtue) a frivolous and perverse
conceit? Dignity, if desert beget it not, what is it but the bastard of an
uncertain father, often acquired by suite, craft, fraud, ambition, sinister
means and wicked Arts?

Lastly, to draw together the sails of our speech; in one word, what is the
World, with all her Iezabels paint and Peacockes plumes, with which she
deludes her lovers? What is Life, and the best things in life, with which her
Amorettoes and Idolatrous Adorers are so delighted? has not Solomon by a
divinely inspired spirit, given in his impartial and infallible verdict, as
one that knew most in this kind of all mere men, Vanity of vanities, and all
is but vanity, says the Preacher. And as there is little good in life to be
loved, so there is nothing but evil in this life; Maelum culpae, malum p^n^.
either in it own nature, as is the evil of sin; or penal, the fruit of
sin: either crosses, such as the godly try; or curses, such as the wicked
feel. The due meditation whereof has caused many zealous spirits, Augustine,
Ambrose, Chrysostom; Bernard, Fulgentius, as also Pontanus and Stella, with
many more, to write several Tractates, which I think (as the Spider draws her
web) they drew from themselves, and from the feeling of their own hearts,
concerning the contempt of the world, and the not loving this life: Vnicuique
sua cupiditas est tempestas.
some comparing it to a Sea, in which every man's turbulent desires are a
tempest: some to a dark and dangerous Wood, wherein are many wild Beasts,
Bulls of Basan, devouring Wolves, Herodian Foxes, poisoning Basiliskes, The
world anatomized by sundry Similies.
fiery Dragons: for, the Scripture gives the true morrall of Pithagoras and
Ouids fictions in their Transmutations, men in shape are beasts in conditions,
Tit. 2.12. Esaias 1.4. etc. Some to a Net, that is spread for all, but catches
and retains only foolish fishes. Others say it is an ungrateful Host, that
entertaines and retains, yet pills and spoils all that trust it, still
dislodging, dismissing, forsaking, forgetting his old Guests, to retain new.
Some say, it is like the darkesome Egypt, wherein is plague upon plague, at
last deuastation to all that are not the true Israel of GOD. Some compare it
to the Firmament in continual motion. Some to a solitary Desert, wherein is
the roaring Lion, the Devil; the Scorpion and Dipsas, the old Serpent, wicked
Spirits, Thieves, Thorns of sins, and barrenness of grace. Some unto the
Night: First, because of the blindness and ignorance that is in it: Secondly,
the drowsy and secure sleep of sin: thirdly, the wild beasts of the night,
Heretics, Schismatiques, etc. Bores of the Forest, Foxes that spoil the
Vines; the night, the time of forraging, in which also the enemy sowes Tares
of sins and Heresies, the one to corrupt the good Wheat of Sanctification in
the heart, the other of Illumination of the brain. Others, with holy Job, make
it a place of warrefare and combat, wherein we are to fight with several
enemies of sundry natures, as David did, with a Lion, with a Bear, and with
Goliath: some being within us, crafty Sinons, our own lusts; some without us,
like armed Philistines, the lust of the world; some above us, Satan in the
Air; some on the right hand, some on the left, as prosperity and adversity;
some before us, as the forbidden fruit of Sin; some behind us, the barking
mouths and biting tongues of maleuolent men. Some to a prison, wherein though
it feed the body, yet it fetters the soul, like that wherein Joseph had
favor, yet he was kept fast. Lastly, Fulgentius compares it to a fair Amazon
Maid, with these Mottoes writ upon her head, I have wit and policy: upon her
brows, I have comeliness and beauty: upon her breast, Here is strength and
agilitie: on her right hand, Here are riches and prosperity: yet under her
feet, Haec omnia vanitas, All these are but vanity: and so let us account
them. Love not the world* much less the lusts of it, concupiscence of the
flesh, of the eye, and pride of life. Imitate CHRIST thy head, he despised the
pride and pomp of it, in refusing a Kingdom, in washing his Disciples feet,
John 13. in preaching and practicing humility, Mat. 11. in sustaining
temptations and trials, Mat. 4. in assuming our flesh, in choosing his fishing
Disciples, in dying upon the Cross: he crossed the covetousness of it, by
possessing nothing* not so much as Foxes and Birds; in commending the godly
poor, Mat. 5. in dying naked upon the Cross, he crossed the lusts of it, in
his innocent and spotless chastity, in being borne also of a chaste Virgin:
so thou* if thou be a right Christian after him, if one of his Church, despise
these terrestrial things, seek for celestial, Col. 4.1.2.3. etc. tromple the
Moon, these momentanie things under thy feet: use the world as though thou
used it not* look at it and the things of it, as at a Lion in a grate, subject
not thy self to it, be not the slave of it, come not within the reach of it,
it will tear thee, and (as the Panther and Hiena deal with Beasts) by fawning
devour thee: look at it therefore, and like it, as a Pilgrim* a strange
Country, as a Traveler his Inn, only to lodge in it for a few days or
nights: always be in readidesse with old S^meon to depart as the Israelites
were ready in a trice to depart out of Egypt: love this life so, that thou will willingly lay it down, as thou put off thy garments when thou go
to bed, when GOD calls thee to sleep in thy grave.

Thirdly, both from these premises, 3 Use.
we may gather an use of Instruction; as also from the Text, we may ground a
doctrinall observation, concerning the nature of death, comfortable to the
godly, to whom all things; yea, death it self happens for the best, Romans 8.
chiefly if they groan under the Cross: for, if life be so burdensome, death
must needs be beneficial that vnlooseth our yoke, and takes the burden from
our weakened natures vvearyed shoulders. The benefits of death to a Christian
under the cross.
Therefore death comes to the good man, to the crossed Christian, as Moses to
the Israelites in Egypt, to deliver him: it comes to the godly, as Pharaohs
Daughter to M^sos fluctuate on the waters, as the Arc to Noah, as Obediah to
the persecuted Prophets, to preserve them; as the Angel to Lot in Sodom, as
Abraham to Lot in captivity, as David to his captive Wives, to rescue them; as
the Angel to Peter in Prison to set them free; as the Angel to CHRIST in his
Agony; as Jonathan to David, to comfort them in extremity; as Joseph's
Chariots to old Jacob, to rejoice them; nay, as Gods Chariot to Elias, to carry
them into the place of joy; as the Angels to Lazarus, to carry them into
Abraham's bosom. What shall I say more? as Jonas his Gourd to cool Jonas in
his excessive heat; like Saul to those of Mount Gilead, to help them in time of
distress; like the year of Jubilee to the Bond man; like the long looked for
husband to a loving wife; like news from a far Country like meat to the
hungry, and drink to the thirsty; like a messenger from GOD, with this
message, Affl^xite, non-affli^am amplius, I have afflicted thee, I will afflict
thee no more, as God said in effect to Abraham, faith Augustine: Aug.
thou have had tentationem fides, the trial of thy Faith, now receive
benidictionem pro fide, a blessing for thy Faith; blessing us, as the Angel
did Jacob, after we have wrastled with the worlds woes. Therefore the godly
dead, as the Latin bears it (as is well observed) are not so much said to be
dead as delivered, as removed, as redeemed from the worlds warfare: Mortui, i^
est emeriti, quia rude dona^t, and absoluti a militia.
Therefore Plutarch calls death Malorum remedium, and portus humani^
calamitatibus, evils relieuer, and calamities calmer: vitae ianua, says
Bernard, and perpetuae securitatis ingressui, the gate of life, and ingresse to
a sempiternall security: the only Physician that asks no fees (not so much
as thanks) and yet cures all cares inward, all diseases outward, better then
Homers Moli, then the Balm of Gilead, or that marvelous Linguists Mithridate:
yea, it cures all.

Dat cunctis legem, recipit cum paupere Regem. De con^o. ad Apol.

It spares none, and yet be friends even Kings,
And cures the cares of poor mean underlings;
And therefore God oft-times, as our Proverb is, takes them away soonest whom
he loves best: as many Parents know, that oft-times lose their Joseph's, even
that child, whom (by the appearance of graces in them) God and they love the
best, the rest being left them, whom they do not so deservedly love. Hence it
is, that when there were but four in the world, Adam, Eve, Caine, Abel, God
took away Abel the best of them (for he permitted his death though Caine gave
the stroke) and he suffered the worst of them to live still (says Ambrose) as
the greatest blessing to the one, Lib. de Cain and Abel.
and for a continuated plague and punishment to the other. Yea, Christ himself
the spiritual Abel, whose blood speaks better things for us then Abels, was
cut down like a flower in the prime of his years, at the age of three and
thirty, in the midst of his age, which he might have lived by nature, though
he was beloved of his Father above all creatures, Angels and M^n. Lazarus was
not a little loved of Christ as the Jews noted, John 11. in his resuscitation,
yet he dyed young; and though he wept when he raised him up again, to show
his power, he wept (says Granatensit) because he was reduced and brought
back again to the miseries of life.

Hence it is not altogether a Fiction in Herodotus (if his Works as they are
By Mr. Stephens in his World of wonders.
defended, are no Fables) that when the Father of Leobis and Biton entreated
the Gods for the greatest blessing upon these his two Sons, in the morning
they were found both dead in their beds. The like Boon was granted to
Trophomius and Agamedes, that built the Delphicke Temple to Apollo: the Morrall
at least of all which, and such like, is this, that to many a speedy death is
better then a prolonged miserable life: Aug. de ciu. Dei. lib. 14. c. 25
nay, that we never begin truly to live till we dye; Iustus non viuit,
etc. The just man never lives as he would, till he come to that place where he
cannot dye. Therefore let the Meditation of these things comfort us in death,
and encourage us against the terrors and fear of death.

I confess (as we have already enlarged another point) that death is
fearful to all flesh, both man and beast, Exhortat.
much more to a wicked man: stout stomachs have been aghast and turned crauens
at his griefly face, even as all the Troops of Israel were affrighted when
they saw Pharaoh behind them, and the red Sea before them, the two Jaws of
death, ready to swallow them. And surely even a resolved Christian cannot free
his soul from reluctation when he looks only at the corruption of the
flesh, the palenesse of the face, the dissolution of the members, the
obscurenesse of the grave, the lodge with worms, the solitariness of the
sepulcher; and lastly, the dissipation and annihilation of every part: but when
he considers again, Natures course, Gods Injunction, his disposing
Providence, Christ's Passion, the bodies Resurrection, the freedom and
exemption of the soul from her enclosing prison, the Jubilee of the body from
all bondage and servitude: Faith preuails and Fear flies.

Even as those that come from a City to a Country Village, Tradesmen, or the
like, Hom. de Diuite and Lazaro.
when their business is well dispatched (says Chrysostom) return into the
City with joy again: so the Christian soul that comes from the new
Jerusalem, the heavenly City, to traffic here in the low Countries of this
earth, by the Organs of the body, if it have well executed the duties of
Piety, Charity, and Christianity, to GOD and man, may with joy return like
a Ship Royal, laden with precious Merchandise, from whence it came: for, such
a man dies not, but departs.

Death is only a departure out of life, not a final destroyer.
From whence we slide into the third point, briefly, concerning the Epithet
which Simeon here gives to death; he calls it a Departure. From whence we may
see partly into the nature of that which we call Death: it is only a
Departure, a going, or transmigration from one place to another. Therefore
when Abraham speaks of his barrenness, he uses this phrase, Ego vada^
absque liberis, I depart this life, Hom. 36. in Genes.
or go away without Children. Chrysostom notes his phrase, and thereupon
implies, Ecce iustus ille vt philosophatur, etc. That Abraham does truly in
that word, going away, philosophize and dispute of death: which Basil, Hom. de
Martyrio.
applying to the ancient Martyrs, calls Migratio quaedam ad meliora, etc. A
migration to a better habitation: Philosophy calls it* The privation of all
heat; Compar. aquae and ^gnis.
so Plutarch: or, Priuatio vitae, the privation of life; so Sealiger, Exercit.
307. Sect. 23. All which titles and terms may still hearten the Christian to
confront it in the very face courageously, according to Bernards counsel, Volo
mortem, Epist. 10^.
si non effugere, etc. That since they cannot fly it, they should not fear
it. Iustus mortem etsi non caue^, etc. since the just man is not cautelous to
prevent it, let him not be too timorous to encounter it: nay, rather let him
enter the lists (as the Persians went to battle) joyfully, and with a shout,
since it is but a Bugbeare, or a shadow without substance, a Serpent without a
sting, a superficies, no positive thing of it self, but the corruption of the
subject that God and Nature subjects unto it: at the worst to the worst, an
Executioner of a Rebel; M^rs bona bonis, mal^ malis.
good to the godly, a rewarder of a faithful Servant; Joseph's Chariot to bring
good Jacob from the Land of penury to the Land of plenty, Et qu^ non ad
meliora festinet? says Cyprian in his Sermon upon death, Who will not hasten
to exchange for the better?

Lastly, me thinks, here is notably employed the immortality of the Soul;
for, what is it which departs but the soul out of the body, which flies out
when Death opens the door that held it in, like a Bird out of the Cage, living
else where, in pleasure or in pain, in act^ seperato, in a separated act: as
also the Resurrection of the body may not unfitly be concluded; for, in a
departure betwixt man and wife, friend and friend, there is a constant hope of
meeting again: so these two friends which live and love together (like
Jonathan and David) the soul and body shall meet together at the
Resurrection: both which points of Christianity as Simeon believed, and taught
his Scholars, (being a great Rabbi and a Master in Israel,) so he seems to
me, to allude here unto both, and to profess his faith in both.

The body departing shall return again at the Resurrection.
To begin with the baser part, the body, that it shall rise again; howeuer it
be a Mystery scoffed at (because unknown) of the Jewish Saduces, scoffing
Athenians, Braine-sicke Philosophers, stupid Stoickes, hoggish Epicures,
disputing Peripaticians: howeuer denied by all the rabblement of these
Heretical Valentinians, Simonians, Carpocratians, Cerdonians, Seuerians,
Basilidians, Hierarchites, and all the Libertines: yet it was the faith of all
the Patriarchs, Prophets, and Apostles, from the first hour that by revelation
of the Spirit, or by the Word, it was manifested to the Church of God: it was
the faith of Psalm. 17.16 Psalm. 49 15.
David, of Dan. 12.2.
Daniel, of Ezekiel. 37.10.
of Ezekiel, of Esa. 26.19
Esaias, Job 19.25.26.
Job, Act. 24.15 Acts 17.32
Paul, John 11. Arguments to prove the Resurrection of the body.
Martha, John the Divine, of all the Saints, and so of Simeon.

Let these Arguments confirm thine: first, Christ thy head is risen; he is
the first fruits of them that sleep, and the pawn that thou shall rise, being
a member of his, 1 Cor. 15.20. where my flesh and blood is, there shall I be,
(says Cassiodorus) our Joseph is in Egypt before us.

Secondly, the redemption by Christ extends to thy body, as to thy soul*
which body must rise again, else Christ's Passion were fruitless and
forcelesse.

Thirdly, the body, which (like Simeon and Leui) was brother here in sinning,
with the soul, must in Gods equal remunerating Justice, be raised, to suffer
in an equal measure and proportion, as it has sinned.

Fourthly, Gods promises which he has signed with the finger of his Spirit*
sealed with the blood of the Lamb, to the Elect, of peace and Immortality,
cannot be of vigor and virtue unless their bodies rise.

Fifthly, the inseparable union twixt Christ and his Church should be disioyned,
if the body rise not.

Sixthly, many absurdities would follow, which Paul adds 1 Cor.
15.14.15.16.17. whither I refer you, as that all preaching, professing, and
practice of Christianity were else in vain.

Seauenthly, if in other cases witnesses be to be believed, then those five
hundred Brethren mentioned 1 Cor. 15.5.6.7.8. Cephas and the twelve, James and
the Apostles, Mary Magdalene and Paul, that testify Christ's resurrection, by
necessary consequence confirm ours, Romans 8.13. which depends upon Christ's.

Eighthly, these that have been brought to life again after their departure,
either by the Prophets, as the widow of Sarepta's Son, by Elias, 1 Kings
17.22. or the Shunamites Child, by Elizeus, 2 Kings 4.35. And the dead
Soldier by touching Elisha's bones, 2 Kings 13.21. or by the Apostles, as
Dorcas by Peter, Acts 3.40. Eutichus by Paul, Acts 20.10. or by Christ
himself, as the widow of Naims Son Luke 7.15. Iairus Daughter, Mat. 9.29.
Lazarus the brother of Martha and Mary, John 11.44. and those which appeared in
the holy City, when Christ rose, and ascended up to heaven with him, Semi. de
Passione.
(as Augustine thinks) are all Praeludia Resurrectionis, types and figures of
our resurrection.

Illustrations from nature, that our bodies shall rise.
Ninthly, we have many resemblances both in the great Book of Nature, and the
little Book of Grace; in the word, and in the world; Isaacks suruiuing in
sacrificing, whom Abraham received in a figure, Heb. 11.19. Aarons dry Rod that
budded and blossomed, Numb. 17.8. Ezekiels dry bones that came together, bone
to bone, and flesh to flesh, Ezekiel. 37.8.9.10. Jonas delivery out of the Whales
belly, are instances in the Word. In Nature: the Summer, living of Trees,
Herbs, Plants, etc. yea, of Corn it self, 1 Cor. 15.36 37.38.
in their seeming Winters death, when their sap is in the route: these beasts,
as some Bears, and Mice, etc. which sleep all Winter, and seem to revive in
the Spring: Swallows, Bats, Flies, Gnats, Pompon, Mela de situ orbis, lib. 3.
c. 9.
etc. which by the Suns heat seem to revive out of their cold sown: the
Arabian Phoenix, which by her selfe-burning, preserues the indiuiduum of her
kind: the Sea-Vrchin, that rejoynes after her rending in pieces, after she
tastes the salt water: Serpents that are renewed by casting their old skins;
the Sea-Lobsters by casting their old shells; the Eagle by casting her old bill:
Mechanical men that renew many things that are old; Image-makers that make
again their brassie pictures by marring them; Bell founders that mend their
mettall-worke by melting; the Silke-worme, See the Book writ of the Silk
worm.
that lives in the preservation of her kind, by enclosing her self in her
Clue, and dying: nay, man himself, that in his generation receives life into
his flesh, bones, sinews, and vital powers, from a little liquid seed; that
in his preservation often lives again, out of sownes, and ^^ances, seemingly
deprived of breath and life; that in his augmentation, eating, and by natural
heat concocting and digesting the dead flesh of Goats, Sheep, and Bullockes,
makes them his own living flesh. All these speak unto my understanding, and
confirm my Faith, that though Death swallow us that are now living (as the
Whale did Jonas) bind us (as the Philistines did Sampson) lay us in our
sepulchers, and roll a great stone upon us (as the Jews did upon Christ) yet
we shall come to shore again; break these bonds (as the bird the snare,) and
we shall be delivered, we shall flourish like Noah's Olive tree, after we have
been under the water: yea, these bodies of ours, subject to diseases, crushed,
crazed, bruized, distempered, payned; the head, with Megrim; the lungs, with
suffocations; the joints, with Gouts; the stronger parts themselves with
shrinking in of the sinews: these bodies which have borne the burden of the
day, Origin periarct. lib. 3.
shall once with the Angels sing Haleluiah; these bodies of ours, I say, shall
rise, besides these mentioned, we have many grounds of it: as first, the will
of God that will have it so, John 6.39.40. Secondly, the oath of God that it
must needs be so, Heb. 6.13. Thirdly, we have double Hostage for it; 1 the
souls of the Saints lodgers under the Altar, Reu. 6.9.10.11. 2. Their bodies
lodgers in the graves, as our pledges till all things be restored, when they
and we shall be perfected together, Heb 11.40. Fourthly, the pawn of the
Spirit within us, Romans 8.11. All which, are so many nails in the Sanctuary to
fasten our hope. Neither shall we only rise but rise the same bodies for
substance, though altered for quality, to our further perfection. We shall
come again (I say) the same bodies in which we have departed hence: the same
bones, blood, arteries, skin, flesh, veins, sinews, parts, members, Job
19.25. Howeuer, I cannot say in the same age: for, there shall be neither
child nor old man, says the Prophet; that is, Esa 65.20.
neither weakness of youth, nor infirmity of age, but all shall be
flourishing and perfect, like Adam and Eve in their Creation, some say, from
Ephesians. 4 13.

The consideration of our return after our departure, Use Of Consolalation.
and of our resuscitation at the general Resurrection, for before that time
none are, or shall be glorified in their bodies, neither the Virgin Mary, whose
Assumption is but a fiction, nor Enoch, nor Elias, nor the body of Lazarus, nor
of those that rose with CHRIST Mat. 27.52. In his Sermon called The Christians
Watch.
(as Mr. Leigh proves pithily against all Papists) It is a matter of singular
comfort; it is the Anchor of our hope; the life of our Religion (wherein it
differs from Paganism and Turcisme;) the hand that holds up our drooping
souls in the Agonies of death; Fiducia Christiano^um, The Christians comfort
in the Resurrection.
resurrectio mortuorum (says Tertullian.) This made the ancient Martyrs go
to the stake, and burning place, as we go to our beds; this is that
redemption of our bodies, which Paul mentions, Romans 8.23. the time of our
refreshing, which Peter magnifies, Acts 3.19. the time of our Jubilee and
rejoicing, vyhich Esaias fore-sees in the Spirit, and exulteth, Esaias 26.19. when
the hungry shall be satisfied, Mat. 5.6. when mourners shall be comforted, Mat.
5.4. when there shall be no more grief, nor sorrow, nor pain, when there
shall be a year of Jubilee, an end of our journey, an accomplishing of our
warrefare, a cessation from labor, a wiping away of tears, Reu. 17. verse 17.
Chap. 21.4. a putting off this mortal, and a putting on of this immortal, 1
Cor. 15.42. A change of our vile bodies, that they may be like his glorious
body, Phil. 3.22. Oh be glad of this ye Saints, rejoice and sing even as the
little Birds are glad when Winter casts off her rugged mantle, and Summer
brings his flowrie Spring; as Beggars would be glad to put off their rags,
and be clad with Regal Robes. Let these comfort themselves in hope of this
change and renouation, whose bodies are subjected to infirmities, weaknesses
and maladies: De ciu. dei lib. 22. c. 20
for, then it shall cast away (never to resume) all infirmities, impurities,
deformities, tardities, says Augustine.

Asa shall not be gouty, nor Moses stammer, nor Mephibosheth lame, etc. let
Cripples, Lazars, Beggars, Bedlams, lame Soldiers, Hospital men, Spitlers,
and all other impotent, distressed, diseased persons, apprehend this comfort,
being converted Christians and believers.

Let all weak and wearyed wights use this Meditation of the Resurrection, as
Jacobs staff to rest and rely on, in their passage over this worlds Jordan;
as the clifts of the rocks to the Doves, and the stony rocks to the Conies,
to shelter them from the fear of death, the hunting Nimrod of the world: for,
here is Medicamen^um vulneris, etc. a precious Cordial in all thy crosses,
whether public or private, of body or mind: nay, Aqua vitae, to revive thee,
when thou art dead sick, or sick to death, to know that the minute or the
moment of thy afflictions here, shall be succeeded (nay exceeded) with an
eternal weight of glory hereafter, at the resurrection of the just, 2 Cor.
4.17.18. Thus the godly, David, Job, nay, Christ himself, the afflicted
Primitive Christians, that under Antiochus were racked and tormented, sollaced
their souls in the midst of their anxeties, with this melodious Meditation of
the Resurrection, Psalm. 16.9. Job 19.25. Acts 2.26. Heb. 11.35. Which only
apprehension pulls off the vizard from Death, pluckes off his Lion skin,
exposes him as an Hobgoblin, or mere scarre-Crow, to the godlies dirisiou.

Let Atheists and Epicures fear him, that have their portion in this life: let
Infidels and unbelievers fear him, whose hopes of any better estate are
languishing, and faint, and perish with their souls: let his name be as
terrible to careless impenitent worldlings (as the name of Tamberlaine and
Zisca once to Cowards) which like guilty fellons, fear the face of the Judge:
but let those that have learned Christ better, and know in whom they have
believed, entertain it as Cornelius did Peter, as the Galathians did Paul, as
Peter did the Angel that brought him out of Prison, as that which makes the
happiest exchange of a Mansion terrestiall for a City celestial, a veil of
tears for mount Sion, a region of death, for the land of the living, an
earthly tabernacle for an house eternal in the Heavens, 2 Cor. 5.1. For, who
is so improuident or imprudent, that desires to stay in an old smoakie decayed
Cottage, ready every day to fall on his head, when the Landlord offers to
reedifie it and to make it better (since even Mise and Rats by Natures
instinct, fly from an house that is inclining to fall.) Now this clayie
Cottage of thy body, which is vpheld by the weak prop of breath and vapor, is
every day declining; bless the providence of the Worlds great Architect, that
when it falls, by resuscitation, will raise the frame and the fabric a
thousand times both fairer and firmer then the first.

Secondly, Use 2. Of Direction.
let the thought of the Resurrection be, as a consolation to thy heart, so a
direction to thy life. Must body and soul meet together, and either be
blessed together, or else for ever burn together after their departure? and
does their everlasting weal or woe, bliss or bane, depend upon thy good or
evil life here? Oh then, Let us live holily to rise joyfully.
spinne the short thread of thy abridged life well and worthily, that so it may
tie a blessed peace to thy soul: run thy short race here well, that thou
may obtain an eternal Crown hereafter: pass the time of thy dwelling here
with fear: think as once S. Jerome that zealous spirit thought; Quoties
commedo, etc. as often as I eat, or drink, or walk, or talk, or rise up, or
lie down, I always hear the Trumpe sounding* Surgite mortui, etc. Arise ye
dead, and come to Judgment. Think of dying and living again, of departing
and returning, of reviving, and strict impartial judging; which thoughts let
them not perish like abortiue fruit, but fix them by these effects.

First, every day awake out of the sleep of some sin, ere the dark night of
death come, now in this life's light that God lends thee.

Secondly, let it be a spur to prick thee to all good, and gracious actions.

Thirdly, a bridle to restrain thee from sin, both in the action and affection.

Fourthly, let them be means to rouse thee from the bed of security, and to
set thee on thy feet (as the Angel did Elias) in thy journey toward heaven.

Fifthly, as water poured out, to cool the furnace of thy furious affections,
even in thy youthful and burning blood.

Sixthly, a Dial or watch to direct thee how to spend thy time well.

Seauenthly, as a Fan to winnow thee from the chafe of sin.

Eighthly, as a wind to scatter and disperse thy inordinate passions,

Ninthly* as paile or Park to keep thee within thy limits and bounds.

Tenthly, as a Counselor to redeem thy time.

Lastly, a holy director (as if was to Paul himself) to cause thee in every
thing to endeavor to keep a good conscience toward God and man, Acts 24.15.16.

The immortal soul dies not but departs.
Thus we have seen that the body must return to take part with the soul
after the dissolution: the same foundation will bear this truth, that the
soul is dissolved, it dies not: for which cause Paul calls his death a
dissolution, Phil. 1.23. it departs, it dies not: therefore Simeon calls death
only a Departing; and in the mouth of these two witnesses it is euicted that
the soul is immortal: Death kills not the soul, but only lets* it out as
Noah's Dove was let out of the Arc, at a man is let out of prison and fetters:
for, Plato calls the body, Ergastulum animae, the Prison of the Soul; as Luther
calls it the Ass of the Soul; Soma^* i. Sema.
and Erasmus, Sepulchrum animae, the sepulcher of the Soul. Now, death only
breaks open this prison door, unties the fetters of the senses, vnlooseth
this Ass, roules away the stone from this Sepulcher, lets out the soul, sends
grave de^rsum, leave sursum, the gross body downward, the soaring soul
upward: the soul is put here in saccis vilibus, in a base sack, as Joseph put
his golden Cup and silver treasure in Beniamins sack. Now, Death (like Joseph's
Steward) opens the sack naturally, or rips it up violently, takes out the
treasure untouched; if any thing perish the sack is unripped, the body
destroyed; the soul is as safe as Joseph's silver: for, it cannot die, being
vnmateriall, and a form abiding in it self; which form cannot be taken away
(like roundnesse or squarenesse from a Table) because it subsists not in the
matter, but in it self.

Secondly, the soul is impenitrable, insufferable, it suffers not of any
external agent, from the fires heat, or airs coldness: it receives no hurt
from the frozen Ice of Norway, or the scorching Sands of Affricke, therefore
receiving nothing whereby it should decay, it cannot corrupt, or mar, or dye,
since nothing in the whole world is contrary to it.

Thirdly, man is desirous of immortality: Now, how could he desire it, and
discuss of it? how should man so labor and seek for immortality, some by
skill and policy, some by martial exploits, as Hercules, Thesus, etc. some by
Sovereignty, as Alexander and Caesar; some by Books; nay, some by villainies,
as the burners of Diana's Temple; unless man's soul were immortal? for,
Ignoti nulla cupido.

Fourthly, God by creation infusing it, or by infusing creating it, gave unto
it in the first original the gift of immortality.

Reasons proving the souls immortality.
Fifthly, the rage of conscience in the wicked, their souls accusing them of
secret sins, as Caine, and Nero, and Herod, of their murders; Judas of his
Treason, etc. their inward horror appearing by their pale faces, trembling
joints, dejected looks, as was seen in Baltazzar and Felix, Dan. 5.6. Acts
24.25. their consciences, like Magistrates, commanding them to execute
themselves, shows they are more then mortal.

Sixthly, the effects of the soul, in numbering, dividing, discussing,
discoursing, remembering, affecting knowledge, desire of blessedness, respect
to glory, etc. show it immortal.

Seauenthly, if the Soul were not immortal man should not resemble GOD,
neither in Creation or Regeneration have any part or participation of the Image
of God, or any revelations from God, or communications with the Spirit of God
and our spirit.

Eighthly, else there should be no difference betwixt us and Beasts, whose
souls are in their blood, Genesis 9.4.6.

Ninthly, else there should be no use of Judgment, of the day of doom, or of
Christ's second coming.

Tenthly, else were the godly of all men most miserable, if their hope were
only in this life, 1 Cor. 15.19. the Sons of Belial whose portion is often
greater in this world, then the Lords own Saints (as David, Job, Jeremy, in
their times have complained) should else be in better case then they.

But since the Sun of this truth shines clearly in the Scriptures, why
should I give any more Reasons, which are infinite, both in Philosophy and
Divinity: so adding light to the Sun, and water to the Sea.

First, is not the argument that our Savior Christ used against the Sadduces,
from Exodus 3.6. authentic against Atheism? God is the God of Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, therefore the souls of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob are living
still though they be dead themselves.

Secondly, was not Enoch translated that he should not see death? Genesis 5.24.
Heb. 11.17. then Enochs soul still lives.

Thirdly, had not Daniels prayer been an ignorant and frivolous wish, as some
note, praying for Nabuchadnezzar, D. Willet his Hexapla in Da^i^lem.
Oh King live for ever, Dan. 2.4. If the life of his soul had not been the
object of his wish?

Fourthly, does not Elias pray that the soul of his Hostess Child may
return again into him? therefore it was not dead and extinct: (it is no
matter where it was, it is as absurd to say that it was in Limbo puerorum, as
Papists do, as that the soul of Lazarus and Iairus Daughter was in
Purgatory) suppose it were in heaven: Mat. 17.
it was living where ever it was, even as the souls of Moses and Elias were
living and gave motion to their bodies being upon the Mount with Christ.

Fifthly, Christ promises Paradise to the penitent Thief, Luke 23. the very
day of his dissolution, of which he had livery and seasure, and present
possession in his living soul, for his dead body hung all that day upon the
Cross.

Sixthly, Lazarus dying was carried into Abraham's bosom: what was carried? his
Soul, Luke 16.22. as the wicked Angels fetched the soul of the secure Churl
to Hell, Luke, 12. verse 20.

Seauenthly, John saw the souls of those under the Altar, that were killed for
the Word of Christ, Reu. 5.6.9.

All which, with infinite more, being so many Arrows shot against Atheism, do
euince that the soul is immortal, and that the spirits of the just, here with
old Simeons, after their departure from the body, return to God that gave
them, Eccles. 12.7. A truth that the very Heathen saw by the light of Nature,
as appears by their Writings, by Antiochus his Epistle to Lisius, wherein he
thinks his dead Father translated to the Gods, 2 Match. 11. ver. 23. Plato in
his Timeo. Tully in his Diuinations, and in his Book of the sleep of Saeipio:
Pithagoras and the Pithagoreans: Thales Milesius, Hermes, Euripides in his
Tragedies: Plutarch in his Consolatory Epistles: Seneca in his Book of
immature death; yea, the Poets in their fictions of the Elizean fields, and the
like, aim all at this, more like Christians at least Christian Philosophers
and Poets, that the Heavens are aeterna animaru^ domicilia, the eternal
mansions of good souls departed. Use 5. Of Consolation. Chris. What death is
to the godly. lib. 2. de morte.


Let us believe this by the light of the Word, which they saw by the poor
spark of Nature; and let the thought of it still encourage thee (which is the
Nail that I drive at in all this discourse) to look Death boldly in the face,
since to the godly it is but Titulus sine re, a bare title without any
subsisting; a bare name, a blancke without a Seal: good (says Bernard) to the
good in regard of rest, better in regard of security, best of all as the way
to life and immortality, being as Ambrose calls it, alleged by Pontanus, the
birth day of thy eternity, the repayrer of thy life's ruins, not abolishing
but establishing thy best being. Therefore Summum nec m^t^^as diem, etc. Fear
not thy last fate* rather desire it with Paul, because it is but thy
dissolution; be thankful for it with Simeon, because it is but thy departure;
wait for it with Job, because it is thy changing; then fear it, or fret at
it, with the natural and morrall men of the world. For, why should that either
fear thee or fret thee, that cannot hurt the best, the greatest part of thee?
If the gold be saved, who regards the loss of a rotten purse? If the Pearls
within be preserved, who cares for the breaking of an old chest? If the costly
Merchandise and loading of the ship be safe, what Merchant respects the ruins
of a rotten Barge? If the living souls be not endangered, nor the best of the
stuff endammaged, we care not so much for the burning of an old house: we
respect not the loss of the Cradle, if the child be safe: the mangling of the
clothes, if the body be unwounded. Now, that which the Gold is to the Purse*
the Pearls to the Ch^st, the Wares to the Ship, the good Wines to the Caske,
the Honey to the Hiue, the Householder to the House, the Child to the Cradle,
the Body to the Garments; that is the Soul to the Body as much more eminent
and excellent as the thing contained exceedes the continent. If death do
fetter the Body, and free the Soul, where is the loss? what is the cross?

Secondly, Use 3. Of Redargution.
is the Soul immortal and the Body mortal? then execrable is the folly of
the multitude; and lamentable is the dotage of all sorts from the highest to
the lowest, that spend and misspend their years, days, strength, wit,
wealth, and all their Tallents, in pleasing, contenting, satisfying, and
fulfilling the desires of the flesh, with the affections and lusts thereof; in
decking, adorning, feeding and pampering this sluggish Ass, this rotten
Carrion, the body, which perhaps shall take up his Inn in the earth to morrow,
and be meat for worms; in the mean space neglecting and not regarding the
soul, which is to live for ever.

Oh how many millions of men and women to, even amongst common Christians, may
be arraigned, accused and convicted of this folly and dottage (that in other
things are politic Galli^'s and plotting Iezabel's) yet in this are witty
fools, in preferring the Purse before the Gold, the Caske before the Wine, the
Hiue before the Honey, the Body before the Soul?

How many spend years, and months, nay, all their precious time in hawking,
hunting, whoring, carding, dicing, etc. in scraping and gathering yealow dust
together, in doing works morrall or sinful, their own works or the Devils?
how many in doing nothing, or doing evil, or as good as nothing? How many
women spend many days and hours, in tricking and trimming the painted
sepulchers of their souls, I mean their bodies, in a Glass, who (never
considering how the glass of their time runs) spend not a month in a year,
a week in a month, a day in a week, an hour in a day, in the public or
private worship of GOD, in looking into the Glass of Gods word, prayer,
meditation? etc. How many Citizens, and Countrymen, of all sorts, spend the
whole six days in catering and purueying for the body, who grudge God his
Sabbaths, for the provision of their souls? such men, either they think they
have no souls, or that their souls shall die with their bodies like the
beasts, living like Libertines and Epicures: as their faith is like the
Saduces, which denied any Spirit or Resurrection, Josephus antiq lib. 8 c. 2.
and de bello Iud. lib. 2. c. 7.
or souls immortality, as Josephus testifies of them. Oh we had need cry to
such deluded frantic men, and tell them, that they have souls, and souls
immortal, to reign with GOD, or to be plagued with the Devils, after their
departing out of the body.

His hoped Pacification. In these words, In peace:
NOW follows the last part of this holy Hymn; Simeons Qulet^s est, or his
Pacification, God suffering him to depart in peace. Calvin and Bucer renders
Simeons mind thus; Nunc libenter, sedato and quieto animo moriar; Lord, now I
depart willingly, with an appeased heart, and a settled soul, since I have
seen thy Christ.

From whence I gather, Doctrine.
that a good man that lives piously, always dies peaceably. It appears here
in Simeon, so in the rest of the Saints; as in Abraham, to whom it was
promised, Genesis 15.15. that he should go unto his Fathers in peace, Godly men
always die in peace.
and should be buried in a good age: which promise was plentiously performed to
Abraham, for he yielded the spirit, dyed in a good age, an old man, and of
great years, Genesis 25.8. So Isaac, the Son of Promise, gave up the ghost,
and dyed peaceably, being old and full of days, Genesis 35.29. Neither was the
death of good Jacob, that prevailing Israel, discrepant to his holy life; for
he dyed quietly, making an end of his charge unto his Sons, he plucked up his
feet into his bed, and gave up the ghost, Genesis 49.33. After the like manner
was the death of chaste and merciful Joseph, Genesis 50.26. of penitent and
patient Job, after he had seen his sons and his sons sons, even four
generations, Job 42.16. Of zealous and sincere David, 1 Kings 2. after he had
counseled and charged his Son Solomon to walk in the ways and Statutes of
the Almighty. Deuteronomy. 34.
Of Moses the faithful Servant of the Lord, who dyed when his eye was not
dim, nor his natural force abated, though he were an hundred and twenty
years old, God himself being present at his death and burial. So Ioshuah
that courageous Leader of Israel, Josh. 24.29. Aaron the Lords Priest, who dyed
before the Lord in the Mount Hor, Numb. 20.28. Eleazar Aarons Son. Josh.
24.33. Samuel the Lords Prophet, 1 Samuel 25.1. with all the rest of Gods
Children, Patriarchs, Prophets, Judges, Kings, Martyrs, Confessors, the
learned Lights of the Church, such as Ambrose, Augustine, etc. as they have
lived holily, they have dyed happily: of which in their several Histories they
have given demonstrations, most of them, if not all, in these three particulars.

First, Three things demonstrate that the godly dye in peace.
that they were gathered to their Fathers in a mature and full age, full of
years; reaped like a Ricke of ripe Corn into the Lords Barn, taken like
mellow Apples from the Tree of life: in which full age Abraham, Isaac* Jacob,
Ioshuah, Job, with the rest before mentioned: as also the Patriarchs before the
Flood, which out-liued them, with others of the faithful, did blessedly yield
their spirits, and quietly slept in the Lord; which blessing of long life being
the promise annexed to that fifth Commandment of Obedience, is peculiarly
incident to the godly rather then the wicked, whose sins (as the Iuie kills
the Oak) ordinarily abbreuiate their days: or if any of the faithful dye
young, or in their middle age, before they have attained to the years of their
Fathers, either by a natural dissolution, as Josias; or by a violent death, as
the ancient and modern Martyrs; either they are taken away from the evil to
come, as Augustine was immediately before the siege of Hippo, by the Goths and
Vandals: or else because they are ripened already in grace, and come to that
maturitie, which GOD, in his foreseeing wisdom knows they would or could
attain to, and so are fitted for glory: or else they testify the truth here
to others confirmation, Gods glory, and their own consolation.

Secondly, the Elect usually have their wishes, The godly often have their
desires before, at, and in their deaths.
and the fruition of their desires ere their departure, to the great
satisfaction of their souls; the contentation of their hearts: the
corroberation of their faith, and the sealing pledge of Gods special love unto
them: thus Simeon ere his death, had CHRIST in his arms, which was the desire
and longing of his heart. So Abraham saw Christ's day before his death, in the
spirit, and rejoiced: what did old Israel so long after in the whole world,
(except the sight of Shiloh, the Messiah in the flesh,) as to see his darling
Joseph? which longing of his the Lord satisfied at the full ere his death* for,
his dying eyes did not only see Joseph's face, but his seed, Ephraim and
Manasses, Genesis 48.11. What did Moses desire more then the fruition of Canaan,
the promised Land? Now, even before the Lord shut his dying eyes, the Lord
took him up into a mount, and as a relish and a taste of his favor, gave him
a sight of Canaan, Deuteronomy. 34. ver. 1.4. In what could David's heart be more
settled, then to see his Throne settled in Solomon his Son; which his desire
was accordingly accomplished, for his eyes did see what his heart desired; for
which he blessed God 1 Kings 1.48. And the like ordinarily falls out, as many
aged Christians at this very day can bring in their experienced probatum est
(as many that are fallen a-sleepe before them could have testified) how the
Lord has heard their requests, and granted the desires of their souls, in
these and these particulars before their deaths.

Thirdly, the godly express the hidden joy, The last words of holy men are
holy.
and inward peace which they find within their souls, by their seasoned and
sanctified words of grace, which they breathe out as a sweet Perfume, from holy
hearts, to the refreshing of others, upon their sick beds, with which they
usually wind up the thread of their life: words so good, so gracious, that
they are worthy to be writ in Letters of Gold, and for ever to be remembered, as
they are recorded in the sacred Cannon, and collected by holy men, from the
Saints of latter times.

For example, what a sweet gratulatory speech is this of Simeons, in his
farewell to the world? Lord, now let thou thy Servant depart in peace, etc.
Every word having his weight and Emphasis. Ponder the last Sermons that Moses,
and Ioshuah, and Samuel, these faithful Servants of the Lord made immediately
before their deaths, unto the Israelites, Gods chosen people: how zealously
they persuade to the service of the true God, dissuade from Idolatry and false
Gods; enumerate Gods special mercies, exhort to obedience, dehort from
rebellion against God and their Superiors; proclaim the promises to the
obedient, pronounce mercies to allure, denounce judgments to terrify the
disobedient; blessing GOD by gratulatory Songs for his benefits, and blessing
the people in their Tribes ( Deuteronomy. 32. and chapter 33. Josh. 12. 1 Samuel 12.) and a
man shall see the peace they had in their hearts, by the grace of their lips.

The last words of Jacob were blessings and prophecies. Of Joseph, were
admonitions and cautions: the one to his Sons, the other to his Brethren, See
1 Samuel 22. and 23.1
Genesis 49. Genesis 50. The last words of David were his charge to Solomon his Son,
concerning Gods worship, and the government of his Kingdom, 1 Kings 2. verse.
3.4.5.6. etc. The last words of Steven, the first Martyr after CHRIST, were
prayers for his Persecutors, Lord, lay not this sin to their charge, Acts
7.60. Last words revealed of the Thief on the Cross, Gregory.
that bonus Latro, good Thief, that so happily stole Paradise, were; Lord,
remember me when thou come into thy Kingdom, Luke 23. The seven last
words that Christ spoke upon the Cross, to the Daughters of Jerusalem, to his
Virgin Mother, to his beloved Disciple John, to God his Father, De Passione.
to the penitent Thief, as recorded by the Evangelists, explained by Ferus
Nahumius and Gueuarra: these, and all these of holy men in the sacred Cannon,
Mons Cal^^riae.
and of Christ himself (as one speaks of Cyprians Epistles) referunt pectus
ardore plenum; show their deaths were full of peace as their lives were full of
grace.

If I should instance in all the rest of this kind, and set down at large,
What speeches the Saints have uttered in their deaths.
the gracious words, like Apples of Gold in Pictures of Silver, that have
proceeded out of the mouths of Saints, even when they lay upon their sick
couches, drawing their last breath (testifying their faith in Christ, their
hope of Heaven, their zeal for Gods glory, their sorrow for sin, their
sealed pardon.) Or when they were to be martyred, and sacrificed by fire, as
they are collected and recorded by Ecclesiastical Authors, Eusebius,
Nicephorus, Apotheg. morientium.
the tripartite History, the Centuries, Mr. Fox his Martyrologie, Grineus, Mr.
Perkins, and others; to whom I refer you; It would easily appear that where
the Premises are Grace in Life, the Conclusion will be Peace in Death.

Let us chew the cudde in the Meditation of some particulars. How to dye well.
Eusebius lib. 3. cap. 30. Idem lib 4 c. 15.
The last words of Peter in his crucifying death were thus to his wife; O
Coniux, memento Domini, Oh Wife remember the Lord Jesus. Of Polycarpus, were
praises and prayers. Of Cyprian, Salus mea, virtus mea Christus Dominus, Christ
the Lord is my strength and my salvation. Of Ambrose, Nec pudet viuere, nec
piget mori, etc. I neither am ashamed to live, nor grudge to dye, because I
have a good Jesus both in life and death. Of Augustine, Paulin. in eius vita.
It is no great matter that wood and stones fall and ruin, or that mortal men
dye, using that sentence of David's Psalms; which also Mauritius the Emperor
used, Possidon. in eius vita.

Oswaldus M^conius de Zwingli^, anno 153^.


when he was slain by Phocas his Centurion: Just is the Lord, and righteous
is his judgment. Zwinglius thus, when he was wounded in the wars mortally,
Well go to, they may kill my body, my soul they cannot. Erasmus dying in the
house of Jerome Strobenius, breathed out his soul, crying thus. Chare Deus,
etc. Dear God, oh God my mercy, deliver me; make an end, oh Christ, and save
me, Peter Martyr, says Simler and Bullinger that were present at his
departure, confessed his faith, acknowledged Christ his Savior, expounded and
applied Scriptures, exhorted his Brethren, and in his death was wholly divine.
Obijt anno Christi. 1564.
So was Oecolampadius that burning Lamp in Gods house, who supplied with the
oil of grace, gave a wondrous light, even in his death, as appears by Grineus
his Epistles to Fabritius Capito, and others. Luthers death resounds joyful
praises for Gods revelation of the truth unto him, and victory over the Romish
Antichrist. Calvin (as Beza reports that heard him) with David's heart dies, not
speaking, but sighing out David's Psalms. See a little Book from the
Martirologie gathered, called, The deaths of holy Martyrs.
Ridley, Latimer, Hooper, Saunders: with many more constant Professors, dyed
desirous of the fire, saluting the Stake, professing their Faith, confirming
their Brethren, and calling upon God.

If I should ascend a little higher, How great men have lived and dyed good men.
and look into the sick Couches of Emperors, Kings, Queens, Dukes, Earls,
Nobles; which, like those Bereans, Acts 17. were truly noble indeed, I should
occasion you to magnify Gods mercies, in calling some great ones, who by
their works and words, as living so dying, testified that their Graces did
equalize their Greatness. I might instance in Charles the fifth, in Theodosius
the great, in Maximilian the second, in Stephen King of Poland, in Frederick
the third, Prince Elector; in Ferdinand; in Queen Anne Bullen; in Ioahn Gray,
the Duke of Suffolks Daughter; with diverse others. To omit the last words of
Chrysostom dying in his exile, of devout Bernard, of Ignatius the Martyr, of
these Belgicke Lights, Phillip Melancthon, Tremellius, Musculus, etc. with mamy
more: some whereof thankefully recording the benefits they had received from God
in life, spiritual and temporal; some, pouring, out their souls for the good
of the Church; which they have bequeathed unto Christ; some discoursing of the
vanities of this life of the fruits of sin, of the miseries of man; some
rejoicing in the Spirit, for the mitigation of their pains, the consolations
which they felt from the Spirit, their union with Christ, their happy passage
into Paradise, their transmigration unto their Savior; exulting at the joys
of Heaven which then they have seen, as Moses saw Canaan, and in part tasted:
nay, some as it were by a Prophetical Spirit, illuminating them as it did
Jacob and Joseph, fore seeing and foretelling what should happen after their
deaths; as John Husse and Jerome of Praige did, concerning the Papacy, have
all of them, here with Simeon, departed in peace.

And though some amongst the Heathens, as Cyrus, Caesar, Augustus, Titus,
Tratan, Seuerus, Adrian, Pompey; as also some of their Philosophers and Poets,
as Aratus, Socrates, Aristotle, Anacharsis, Antisthenes, Theophrastus, with
others, have spoke, to admiration, concerning the necessity of dying, the
miseries of life, the exprobration of Tyranny, the souls immortality, the
true God, which they called The thing of things, to whom they have called and
committed their Children; as their Apothegmes and speeches are recorded by
Plutarch, Zenophon, Laertius, and others, yet they have come so far short of
Christians, either in their civil acts and morrall works living, or their
words dying, that it is as easy to discern betwixt them, the strength of
Nature, and the fruits of the Spirit, as betwixt conduit water and Aqua vitae
by the taste.

Now the Reasons why the godly depart in peace are these. Reasons why the godly
depart in peace.


Peace shall come; that they shall rest in their beds every one that walks
before the Lord, Esaias 57.2. which promise as it was verified in Enoch and
Elias, that vvalked with GOD, so it shall be in all the faithful.



Phil. 4. which sets them in an assured persuasion of the love of God to
them in his Christ, the Lord shining in their hearts with the beams of his
Spirit, and the memory of all their well done deeds then reflexing upon their
upright consciences, fill them even full of hidden joy, and inward peace.

These Reasons might be amplified, Cauils removed that blemish the deaths of
the Saints.
and many more added, but I hasten to the Uses, being only intercepted with
some Objections of carnal reason, which must be removed.

Object. 1. The first is this; Death is the wages of sin, Romans 6.23. the
curse of the Law, Gal. 3.10. the enemy of Christ and his chidren, 1 Cor. 15.
How then can it be good?

A^s. I answer, the nature and property of death is altered by the death of
CHRIST to the godly, to whom it is a short cut to heaven; it is only a curse
to the reprobates, whom it sends to hell; even like the red Sea, that drowned
only the Egyptians, but gave a passage unto Gods people into the Land of
Promise.

Object. 2. Christ, Ezekias and David, prayed against death, therefore it
brings no peace.

Answ. We have showed the reasons of Ezekias and David's prayer before: the
first wanting Issue to succeed him, the second being afflicted with an issue
of sin, which was not healed, which caused for the time, both their doubts
and fears: Mat. 26.39
for our Savior Christ, he prayed not against death simply, for he dyed
willingly (else his death could not have merited) he prayed for the remouall
of the cup of his Fathers wrath, being the curse of death.

Object. 3. The godly often dye suddenly, therefore not peaceably: for, sudden
death is a Judgment against which we pray.

Answ. Death is not evil because it is sudden (for the last Judgment shall
come suddenly, and yet not evil) but it is evil to the unprepared, as to the
wicked Mammonist, Luke 12.20.21. Secondly, it is never sudden to the Christian
in respect of preparation, either more or less, general or special; which
preparation, if it be the shorter, God accepts in their intention, Heb. 11.17
as he did Abraham's sacrificing of Isaac, as he did David's in building him a
Temple: if they have no more time then with the Thief on the Cross, to
implore Christ to remember them; with the Publican to give one knock on their
penitent breasts, with Peter to give one shrike unto Christ, crying, Help
Master, who dare say but with that outcry they awaken Christ? If Moses and the
believing Israelites had been cut off suddenly by Pharaohs Sword, or the
surging waves, if Peter had sunk when he walked on the waters, if the
Disciples had been lost when they were tossed in the tempest, if Paul had
been drowned when he suffered shipwreck, we should have thought their
deaths sudden in the execution; but who durst have censured them in respect of
preparation? no more then we censure Mephibosheth that was slain in his bed,
or Bethlems Children, or those that perished in the French Parisian Massacre,
by the devils means, and the Duke of Guize; or Jonathan that was slain in
Battle; or Abner that was killed by Ioab. Nay, I know none of judgment that
dare censure the fowls of Jobs Children, and of Lots Wife, that were taken
away in the act of seeming sins: Quest. ad Dulc. c. 24.
I think with Augustine that God respects not, quo modo, after what manner, as
quales morimur, what manner of ones we dye, in Christ, or out of Christ. We
came not together hither, but like the Laborers in the Vineyard, some at one
hour, some at another; so must we go forth, some sooner, some later.

Object. 4. But some of the godly rave, rage, blaspheme, behave themselves like
frantique men; nay, seem to despair.

Answ. First, these are the effects of their Melancholy, or are to be imputed
to burning Feauers, the Collique or other violent diseases, the fruits only of
their infirmities, or at the most the temptations of Satan, which the devil
must answer for, not they, being rather passive in these sins then active: and
therefore they not arguing any want of love toward God, any deliberate purpose
of sinning, but weakness of Nature, tenderness of conscience for sins
committed, they hinder not their peace.

Secondly, we see ordinarily, and I can speak it by certain experience, in
the visiting of many, that these by Gods mercy recovering again the use of
Reason, they seriously repent of these infirmities, their faith appearing like
the Sun from under the darkening cloud.

Thirdly, these and all other unknown sins, are pardoned and buried in
Christ's death, to these that are in Christ, Romans 8.1.

Fourthly, in the matter of salvation God often works by contraries, and by the
gates of Hell brings his Servants to Heaven. Therefore let us not play the
arrogant Crittiques in condemning those that have lived well, either of
Impiety or Hypocrisy, by their deaths. Let us look into their former courses
of life and conversation: let us judge charitably and Christianly, as we would
be judged in the like case.

Object. 5. But Gods Saints are at their deaths most of all molested,
assaulted, and tempted by Satan; some in one nature* some in another, as was
the good Mr. Knoxe, and Mris. Katherin Stubbs, and others. How then can they
dye in peace?

Answ. Many of the godly (God tying and chaining up Satan) dye, as here old
Simeon, and others before recited, as a Torch or Firebrand, without sense of
pain or trials, Esa. 57. verse. 1.2.

Secondly, Exercentur in praelio, vt maiori remunerantur praemio, they are
exercised in the last combat, that they may receive the more joyful Crown of
conquest.

Thirdly, by Faith, Prayer, and Gods Word they resist Satan as Christ did,
Mat. 4.4.7. and he, like a Crocodile, pursued, flies away, James 4.7. 1 Pet.
5.9. for, the godly, in that hour laying hold upon the promises, flying unto
Christ, he mannaging their cause, the holy Spirit assisting, when Satan
looks for the greatest victory, he receives the greatest foil.

Object. 6. But some that go in the rank of the godly, have dyed of the
Plague and Pestilence, Numb. 25. 2 Samuel 24.
which has been usually sent as a judgment for the sins of disobedience,
uncleanness, diffidence, etc. upon the Israelites and others, from which the
godly are promised to be preserved, Psalm. 9.10. How then die such in peace that
die of the plague?

Answ. First, that promise of preservation from the Plague in the Psalmist, is
to be understood of those Jews that in David's time were untouched with it.

Secondly, then the Plague came by Gods immediate hand, now by means.

Thirdly, the godly are preserved from it, as it is a curse, but not as it is a
fatherly correction: for, do we not think that many Christians in Corinth,
died of the Plague, 1 Cor. 11.30.31? Vide page 30.38.45.54.92.36. Hinningi
Grosij.
In these great Plagues which Grosius has mentioned in his Tragical
Histories, which have swept away whole Countries, with these that have raged in
particular Cities, as in Venice, in Florence, the year of our Lord* 400. in
which thirty thousand: or in Constantinople, when Leo Isaurus ruled, wherein
there dyed three hundred thousand Citizens (as both Volateran and Aegnatius
testify,) shall we say that none of these dyed the Servants of God? Shall we
censure Alphonsus the eleauenth King of Spain, that good Ladouicke, with his
Son John, many zealous Divines, as Beza and others, for bad men, because they
have dyed of the Plague? Suppose it be an accursed death; did not Christ, the
penitent Thief, Peter and Paul which were crucified by Nero, with their heads
downwards, dye an accursed death, even the death of the Cross.

Fourthly, besides, is it not Gods visitation like other diseases?

Fifthly, is it not oft-times sent, Lib. de Mortalitate.
as Cyprian well notes, as well for the sins of those that live, it of those
that dye, as appears in the Plague sent upon David's Sheep, when he the
Shepherd sinned in numbering of them.

Sixthly, is it not a disease, though sharp, yet short, and more tolerable
then the Stone, Dropsy, Gout, Palsy, or the French disease?

Seauenthly, did not David desire this kind of death, rather then either
Famine or War?

Eighthly nay, have not Gods Saints, as namely, Job, for many months together
been troubled with a more grievous malady?

Ninthly, is not God very merciful to many that dye of the Plague, that have
their senses and memories, till the last hour? are not those blew spots which
appear, Gods tokens, as they are called, fore-warning them that have them, as
God did Ezekias, to prepare themselves, for they must dye?

Lastly, is their any death, much less this, can hinder the soul after her
d^arting from Gods present and immediate fellowship, or the body from a
glorious Resurrection? and, what if none visit the afflicted in this sort? the
fewer that gaze on them, the fitter they are to look up to God. And what if
they dye and want solemn burial? what prejudice is that to the bodies
resurrection, or souls salvation?

Object. 7. But some of the godly dye of Famine, as did Lazarus; from which God
promises to preserve them, Psalm. 34.

Answ. First, it is uncertain whether Lazarus dyed for want of food, or the
violence of his disease.

Secondly, this death is rare, and seldom falls out, God providing for his (as
he did for Jacob and Elias even in Famine) but if this happen, God arms his
with patience, and strengthens them with the assured hope of life eternal, as
he did the persecuted Hebrews, who were exposed to nakedness and hunger,
Heb. 11.38.

Thirdly, the Promise is conditional, as all others are that concern these
outward things, which fall alike to all. Eccl^s. 9.

Fourthly, some understand the place in the Psalmist, concerning the souls of
Gods Saints, which are fed with the hidden and precious Manna of the Word, to
life eternal, John 6. Apoc. 2.17.

Object. 8. But some are slain by their enemies; these dye not in peace.

Ans. Yes: for no death can separate Gods Children from his love, Romans 8.38.

Secondly, though they kill the body, as Cain did Abels, the Philistines
Ionathans, yet (as Zwinglius said in the like case, as you have heard) they
cannot kill the soul.

Thirdly, it is a privilege if they dye in Gods cause, and procures them a
greater increase of glory. Apoc. 14.13. Mat. 5.8.

Object. 9. Lastly, it is objected, that some of the godly, as Sampson and
Rasis, have killed themselves, others have done the like in our days. How have
these dyed in peace?

Ans. For Rasis, it was a weakness in him, Vide Polani Synt. de inter. Scrip.
Lelius de expresso dei verb^.
if he were a good man, or a wickedness if he were not. For Sampson, what he
did was typical, as he prefigured Christ's death, that overcame dying.

Secondly, it was by a special instinct and motion of Gods Spirit inimitable:
no more then Abraham's sacrificing his Son, for those which our experience
instanceth in. I confess it is a ticklish point, and the knot is hard to be
loosed.

I know that Saul, Achit^phel, and Judas, that killed themselves, are noted in
the Scripture for reprobates. And it seems that those which do this inhumane
deed, do not for the instant think of hell torments, yet what then? God
never forsakes his chosen: Secondly, his mercy is bottomless; from the Ocean
of which mercy, he may distill some drop of grace at the last point of time.

Thirdly, this act is done commonly in some Frenzy or predominant Melancholy,
when they are not themselves.

Fourthly, Satan is a wily Serpent, that observes his advantages, and the
Lord knowing his malice and wickedness, and man's frailty and weakness,
punishes this sin, (as he did the first sin, Adams sin in Paradise
wherein this Serpent was chief actor) more in Satan the agent, then in man
the patient.

Fifthly, many Selfe-murtherers live after the self inflicted fatal stroke*
and repent ere they dye. Let us judge the best of them, and pray to GOD to give
us grace never to yield to the like temptations. Amen.

And now these Doubts discussed, these Objections removed, we come to the Uses.

The first is this: Use 1. Of Instruction.
is it so that the Servants of the Lord do dye in peace? we must then if we
mean to dye well, as the Lord shall enable us, learn to live well. He that
would die well must live well.
If we will dye in peace, we must live the life of grace: for, it is not ^am
vetus, quam verum, so prouerbiall as true; Qualis vita, finis ita, as is the
life, so is the death. Instance in all particulars in the Scripture, from the
first line in Genesis, to the last Letter of the Revelation, and we shall
never see otherwise, excepting one example of the Thief upon the Cross,
which is particular, miraculous, upon a special occasion, to magnify the
effect of Christ's blood, and the power of his Passion, to eternize his mercy
that gave life even at his death; and to show and demonstrate his Deity, that
at the lowest ebb of his crucified Humanity, was able to save a soul, to
strengthen the Disciples, and allure the unbelieving Gentiles: I say, excepting
him, which is an extraordinary example, and not to be propounded as a president
by any presumptuous soul; we shall not find any one that lived ill and dyed
well; but that had the Prologue of their evil life shut up with the Tragedy
of a damned death. Genesis 4.
Look upon Cain the murderer, that desperate Run a-gate, Genesis 7. Genesis 4.24:
Genesis 38.8.^0.
on the licentious Worldlings, on Lamech the seauentie time avenged Polygamist;
on polluted Onan, and wicked Err; on unclean Sodom, Those that have lived
wickedly died wretchedly.
with her Sister Gomorrha, Genesis 19 25. on rebelling Israel, hard-hearted
Pharaoh, obdurate, superstitious, and irreligious Egypt, Exodus 6.7.8. and chapter
14. on disobedient Saul, 1 Samuel 15. on lying, Iesuitically aequiuocating
Gehezi, Examples.
2 Kings 5. on theeuish Achan, treacherous Achitophel, traitorous Judas,
adulterous and murtherous Herod, bloody Ioab, covetous Ahab, persecuting
Iezabel, deluding Ananias, deceiving Saphira, cruel Antiochus, proud Hamman,
usurping Athalia, rebelling Absolon, with millions more: look at their lives,
observe their deaths* peruse their Stories, parallel their doings with their
sufferings, and tell me if they have not sealed up and concluded sensual and
sinful lives with cursed deaths: Amos 6.2.
nay, as the Prophet says, Go ye to Calneh and see, and from thence go you
to Hamath the great; then go to Gath of the Philistines: look upon Ioppa,
behold Tharsus, wonder at Niniuie the pride of Assure, Esaias 13.19
gaze upon Babylon the beauty of all the Chaldees honor. And as you pass by,
cast your eye upon Jerusalem, that virgin Daughter Sion. And if you please
reflexe upon proud Troy, renowned Carthage, famous Constantinople, learned
Athens, rich Thebes, warrelike Numantia, populous Samaria, ancient Rome, old
Antwerpe; and when you have viewed them all, in the Map of your retired
Meditations, tell these renowned places, these wonders of the world, that
sin has sacked them, that pride has been their period, that their faults
have caused their falls; that they have been miserable because unmindful of
God and of themselves; that they with their inhabitants, because they have
wanted grace, have wanted peace.

But if these be to general for thy application, descend into particulars; The
fearful ends of Heretics and Persecuters, in every age.
run over Histories, read the Tragic parts that wicked men have acted upon
the Stage of this world, and mark their ends, when Death has struck them
Nonplus. Leave all other sins and sinners; look on these that either have
broached errors Heretically, or resisted or persecuted the truth obstinately
and cruelly, and you shall see them dying horribly: Eusebius. lib. 7. cap* 20.
Theod. lib. 1. c. 14.
you shall see blasphemous Cerinthus killed with the ruins of an house, as he
was sitting in a Bath at Ephesus. Manes, the Father of the Manichees, exposed
to the teeth of Dogs, Sabellicus lib. 5. c. 4.
with his skin flaine off by the command of a Persian King. Arius, Euagrius
lib. 1. c. 7.
that hellish patron of the Arians, voyding out his bowels with his
excrements. Olimpius, struck with Thunder, by a threefold Dart from Heaven,
for his blasphemies against the Trinity. Anno 1553.
Nestorius perished in Egypt, by the rotting of that tongue of his which
denied Christ's humanity. Tandemus, Eusebius lib. 10. c. 8.
that Gygantean and profane contemner of the Word and Sacraments, cloven to the
brain by a sailing Priest. Eus. lib. 3. c. 13. Oros lib. 7 c. 11.
Michael Sernetus burned at Geneua. Maximinian the Tyrant, smit with a sudden
plague from GOD, his eyes swelling, his whole body burning, so dyed. Cruel
Domitian, the next persecuter after Nero, slain by his Wife and Servants, and
buried like a Dog. Eus. lib. 9.
Lucius Verus cut off by an Apoplexy, the eleauenth year of his cruel
reign. Maximinus the Thracian, murdered by his Soldiers. Decius drowned in a
puddle. Valerian, King Sapors slave, after his persecutions, had his skin
plucked off his rotten carcass. Dioclesian with his Collenge, butchering
seauenteene thousand Christians in thirty days, consumed miserably, in his
Frenzy, by a lingering disease, and his fellow hanged himself. Vide Zonaram.
annalium lib 2. Eus. lib. 8.
Vale^s the Arrian Emperor, burned in his Inn, by his pursuing enemies.

What need I give Coale-worts twice sod, and set before you again those
dishes that have been cooked by all authent^cke Ecclesiastical Authors that
are of credit, concerning the miserable death of Julian the apostate, whose
blood his own hands threw into the air: Cent. 1. c. 12. Hist. Eccles.
of Aurelian smit with a Thunderbolt: Commodu^ strangled: of Paulinus possessed
with a Devil, after he had martyred Martinian and Processus: with diverse
others, in which the Antichristian Popes, as they have acted the chief parts
in filthiness, blood-guiltinesse, and superstition, so if we observe their
ends, as they are recorded by Platina, Onuphrius, etc. and their own Writers,
we shall see they have dyed fearfully and desperately, as they have lived
damnably: as may be instanced in Siluester the second, Alexander the sixth,
Heldibrand, etc. and others: all which instances, with all other examples, that
Jews or Gentiles, the Christian or Pagan world afford unto us, are nothing
else but comments upon that Maxim which S. Augustine draws from his own
experience, when he says, Nunquam memini male mortuum, etc. I never remembered
any to have dyed ill, that have lived well, and hardly does he dye well, that
has lived ill.

Therefore to extract another Use from these premises. Use 2. Of Redargution.
Is it so that only the Servants of God, the Lords Simeons dye in peace, and
none else? then the madness of those men is to be mourned (as Samuel mourned
for Saul) and their ignorance or obstinacy is to be pitied, that flatter
their own souls, and secure themselves they shall dye happily, when they have
no care nor conscience to live holily. Numb. 22.
Feign would they, with Balaam, dye the death of the righteous, but they will
not live the life of the righteous: they would act Simeons part in death, but
they will not labor for Simeons Spirit: they would dye like Jude, but live
like Judas: dye like the Sons of God, live like the sons of Belial: dye
like Saints, live like sinners: dye like David, but live like Dives, in
chambering and wantonness, in surfeiting and drunkenness, in delights and
dalliance, in pleasures and pomp: they would be with Christ on Mount Sion,
but they will not follow him to Mount Caluarie; they will not be crucified with
him; nay, they will not crucify one lust, nor sacrifice one sin, nor
mortify one member, for the love of Christ, for the love of their own souls:
they will not pluck out their right eyes, cut off their right hands, throw
away those sins that are as dear to them, as either eyes or hands; for
gaining of God, for purchase of Paradise, for conquest of a crown: nay, they
will rather carry both their eyes, and both their feet, all their dear and
darling sins (whither Judas carried his Hypocrisy, and Herod his Lust) even
to death with them, even to the grave with them, even to Judgment with them;
then cast them off (as the wild Beast hunted, casts away his stones, for which
he is pursued) to save their life by dying; nay, to save their souls by dying
to sin. Do these men believe the Scripture, that tells them, Gal. 6.6.
as they sow so they shall reap? Nay, do they believe Experience, that in
every Garden, Field, and Seede-plat shows it? Do they credit the holy
Oracles, that if they live after the flesh, they shall dye; but if they
mortify the deeds of the flesh by the Spirit, they shall live? Romans 8.13. And
do they, (nay, dare they) then go on in sin and think notwithstanding to
reap salvation? Are they but dead men all their life, even dead in sin and
trespasses, without the quickening Spirit, Ephesians. 2.1. ver. 5. and do they
think to be living men in death? Do men use to gather grapes of Thorns, and
figs of Thistles? they know to the contrary: and think they that a good death
will grow of a bad life? An ill life is the usual Prologue to a Tragical
death.
let them never hope it. I ask such men as Iezabel asked Iehu, 2 Kings 9.31.
Iehu, Iehu, did Zimri prosper, that slew his Master? I trow no. So I ask every
licentious loose sinner; Did ever any sinner dye well without repenting, that
offended God his heavenly Master, by treasonable sinning?

Apply all these precedent examples to thine own soul, and make them thy
presidents: read them over again, and remember them; and parallel thy self
with them. Art thou a Thief? look how Achan dyed, that was a Thief, Josh. 7.
Art thou a Whore-master? look how the Sodomites dyed; how Er and Onan dyed,
Hophni and Phinees, that were unclean. A Whore? look how whorish Iezabel
dyed. A Swearer? look how blasphemous Rabsakeh and Senacharib dyed, 2 Kings
19. An Idolatrous Papist? look how the Idolatrous Israelites dyed. A Drunkard?
look how drunken Nabal dyed, 1 Samuel 25. Art thou addicted to any other sin?
look whether those that have run in the same race, in the same sin, have
prospered or perished; have dyed ill or well: if they have prospered, follow
them; good luck have thou in thy journey: if perished (as they have) then in
Gods fear retire, Faciant ali^na pericula cautum, let their harmings be thy
warnings; Praemonitus, praemunitus. Be not more insensible then Birds and
Beasts: the Bird will not fly into the Net, or light on the Lime-bush, or
run into (the Snare, where she sees another Bird flackering before her. Thy
Horse, as thou art traveling, will not follow the tract of another horse that
sticks fast before him. Oh be not thou like the Horse and Mule, without
vnderstandng: thou would not follow another into a gulf, a Turne-poole, a
pit, a Quag-mire; oh follow not Sinners (as the Beast the Drove to the
slaughter) through the jaws of a desperate death, into the pit of damnation
after death, that have gone the very same way, in the very path of that sin
wherein thou live. The vain hopes of wicked men.


But thou think perhaps to escape scotfree, or that GOD will be more
merciful to thee then to them. Nay, that cannot be, he is the same GOD that
he was to judge, if thou be the same soul to sin. What desert is there
in thee to plead sparing more then in them? nay, rather less. Si in Jerusalem
scrutinium, quid faciet Babylon? If he spared not Ierusalems sin, he will
not spare thee, a Sodomite, a Babilonian: if he spared not the sins of the
Jews his own people; nay, of Judas his own Disciple, he will not spare thee,
a sinner of the Gentiles, a slave to Satan: if he spared not Cedars, great
Kings, he will cut down Shrubs, such as thou: nay, thy case shall be worse
then these fore-recited; because thou have had more mannuring and watering then
they, more Grace offered, more Gospel preached, now in the day of thy gracious
visitation.

But thou hopest to recoyle and retire out of the way of sinners. Indeed back
again by repentance is the better way; to unweave again (as once Penelope
did) the web of thy sins. But when will this retyring be? Thou purposest in
thine old age. Oh fool! who has given thee a Lease of thy life till thou
be old? The rich Churl says, Soul, take thine ease, thou have laid up
enough for many years, when he had not one night to live: here was a short
Epitomie: perhaps the cases stand so with thee.

Pelles tot Vitulorum quot Boum.
To the Market comes to be sold
As well the young sheep as the old.
Go into a Golgotha, a Churchyard, thou shall see as many young sculs as old;
little, as great: observe Funerals, and thou shall see the Fathers oftener
mourning for their dead Children, then Children for their deceased Parents.
Apply to thy self what has been spoke of this point.

It is hard to leave the custom of sin.
But thy carnal heart says, that thou can leave thy sin when thou wilst,
and repent, and that GOD will accept thee. Art thou so persuaded? do thou
think the custom of sin is so soon left? is not Custom another Nature?
Can men that have been accustomed, leave to swear by their Faith and their
Troth (the Jewels that they pawn to Satan and the World upon every triuiall
occasion?) and can thou leave greater and grosser, more pleasing and more
profitable sins when thou wilst? Can thou not leave such sins, which thou
may as well spare as the dirt from thy nails; namely, thy vain words, thy
oaths and blasphemies? and can thou leave these that have nearer alliance
with thee, and stand thee in more stead? Is an inueterate sore, a long reigning
Disease so soon cured? Is that Devil that has taken long possession, so
soon cast out? Can the Aethyopian leave his blackness, and the Leopard his
skin? then will it be easy for thee to do well that still accustomest thy
self to do evil.

Besides, thou think thou can repent when thou wilst. Thou may as well
imagine that if thou were dead thou could revive and live again when thou will (for a wicked man is a dead man, living in the life natural, dead in the
life spiritual) thou may as well think to work a Miracle when thou will;
for, it is no greater Miracle to raise a dead body (as Christ did Lazarus) then
to raise a dead soul: None can repent when he will.
to turn stones into flesh, then a stony heart into a fleshie that can repent.
Indeed if Repentance were in thine own power, there were policy in it to
defer this fight with sin (as Fabritius lingered to fight with his enemies)
and still to taste the sweet of sin: but it is not in thy power to repent, it
is the gift of God. Acts 5. ver. 31. from whom this grace and all other come,
James 1.17.

I, but thou have Scripture for thy purpose: so has the Devil his Scriptum
est: is it not written, says the ignorant Layman, or the carnal Cauiller
(that remembers no other Text but this, which he wisely urges to his own
destruction) that, At what time soever a sinner repents from the bottom of his
heart, the Lord will be merciful, etc. It is true, that at what time the
sinner repents, he shall be pardoned, as Mary Magdalene, the Publican, and
others were: but the Lord says not, that at what time soever a sinner sins,
he will give him Repentance: Aug.
Qui dat poenitenti veniam, nescis an dabit peccanti poenitentiam. Repentance
is the gift of Grace, it comes not from Nature: a stone has as much power to
mount up to the Church Steeple of it self, as a wicked man to repent of
himself. Therefore dally not with sin; be not deceived, God is not mocked. If
thou could leave the traffic and commerce with sin when thou would,
and repent from thy heart, sin might with greater show be retained, and with
less danger: but since the longer thou continuest in it, the more thy heart is
hardened; since (as the Prophet speaks of Wine and Women,) so every other
sin takes away the heart, Ose 11. and makes it incapable of any Christian
duty; let it be thy wisdom (as Daniel councels Nabuchadnezzar) to break off
thy sins betimes; leave sin ere it leave thee; begin at length to live
ere thou dye: for, (as Similis once said of himself) though thou see many
years, thou live but those that are piously and penitently spent.

Now redeem the time which thou have misspent: now is thy Harvest lead home:
now provide against the rainy day of thy last day; now in the calm of life,
arm thy self against the tempest of death. Oh it will be too late to think
of leading a good life when life is ended, too late to buy after the Market is
done, too late to traffic after the Mart, too late to sail when the Tide is
past, and the Sea is rough: therefore prepare a medicine before the wound, Sero
Medicina paratur. Hear not the voice of the Serpent, Eritis sicut Dij, you
shall be like Gods, to puff you up with pride; but fear, and believe the
voice of God, Moriemini, ye shall dye like men: for this death prepare
betimes; now is the acceptable time; now is thy time, thy day, thy hour, thy
visitation; now the voice calls, Christ knockes, the Angel moves the waters,
Moses and the Prophets persuade; the shortness of thy life, multitude of thy
sin, difficulty of repenting, thy Houre-glasse running, time spending. thy
former fruitless living, danger of deferring, death approaching, all urge,
move, plead, for a converted soul, a holy heart, a renewed life, that thou
may dye a blessed death, find a joyful resurrection, and enjoy a happy
glorification.

Lastly, to conclude this Text, for this time, Doctrine.
and so this Work (having exceeded my purposed and proposed brevity) let me
only offer unto your considerations this meditation, that there is a direct
and a certain method and rule as of living so of dying well, There is a way
laid down in the word, to a blessed death.
so plain, so perspicuous, that some have writ whole Tractaites of this
subject; from whose Harvest I will not be ashamed to gleane something (as Ruth
out of the field of Booz) and insert their ears into this Garland, borrowing
some few grounds of him, whom I heard as a Master out of Moses Chair, living
Mr. Perkins. Mr. Sutton in his Book Learn to Dye.
, and reverence dying. If any therefore demand in this great and maine point
of all points, what course he is to take, that with old Simeon he may die in
peace; for Resolution of this case of Conscience, I say that to dye well, there
are two things requisite, A preparation before death, and A right disposition
in death. This Preparation is two-folde; general and special: general, is
that whereby a man prepares himself to dye throughout the whole course of his
life: to this the Scripture continually exhorts, when it inioynes us straightly
to watch and pray, to awake from sleep, to prepare to meet the Bridegroom,
to be in a readiness, every day (like Soldiers that expect their General)
against the second coming of CHRIST to Judgment: not to have our hearts
oppressed with surfeiting and drunkenness, and the cares of the world, least
that day come upon us unprovided, as the thief upon the careless householder;
as the snare upon the Bird, as the Flood upon the old world, as fire upon
Sodom, as desolation upon Jerusalem: A thing that stands us all much upon, as
a duty not to be omitted. First, Death is certain, yet uncertain.
because of that uncertain certainty that is in death, certain for the
matter, (as before we have proved) uncertain both in respect of the Time when,
which none knows, whither morning, evening, midnight, or Cock crow: in
Winter, Summer, Spring, or Autumn. Secondly, in respect of Place; for none
knows where, whether at home or abroad, by Sea or by Land, in his bed, or in
the field. David dyed in his bed, Jonathan in the field; the deceived Prophet,
and Amasa, in the highway; Abner at the Court; Icarus, Hell, Aegaeus, by Sea
(from whom the Aegean, and Icarian Sea, and Hellespont were named:) three
Popes, John the first, John the foureteenth, and Caelestine the fifth, dyed in
prison: nay, some have dyed in the very Priuies, as Arius, and Lampridrus.
Heliogabalus, two Monsters, and there had Saul dyed had not David spared.
Therefore Mors omni loco te expectat, Seneca.
tu expecta eam, since Death expects thee in every place, expect thou it.
Thirdly, for the Manner, no man knows how he shall dye, whether of a natural
or violent death: Josias was shot by the Archers and dyed, Eglon was thrust in
at the fifth rib, so was Abner, so was the late French King: some suddenly, as
Fabius the Roman, Gandericus the Vandall: some of a lingering disease, some of
a burning Fever, some of a cold Collique, some this way, some that, according
to the phrase: Vt moriar scio, nescio vbi, quomodo, quando.
I am assured to die, yet do not know
The way that leads to death, when, where or how.


Therefore we are speedily to prepare for this journey of death, since it must
be gone, and we know not how soon we shall be enforced to travel: in other
matters morrall, the Axiom may beseem the most politic, Deliberandum est
diu, quod perficiendum semel, that we should determine that deed with
deliberation, which we purpose to put in execution: but in this weighty
work, the less we are in demurring, and the more in action and doing, the
better it is: to learn to dye is Ars Artium, an Art of Arts, which all the
Schools of the Gentiles could not teach without Theology; great Rabbis in
humanity, are mere Idiots in this heavenly Science. It stands us in hand then
every day (as the Pythagoreans in Philosophy) to be proficients in this
Mystery: for therefore is the last day unknown, that we should prepare our
selves every day: and the rather, because our last day is the inchoation of our
perpetuated sorrow or solace: the day of our Marriage with the Lamb, or of our
massacring with the roaring Lion; Vt in illo die, Mors inueniet, Heb. 9.27.
Dominus iudicabit, as the Tree falls, so it lies, as death at that day shall
leaves us, so shall Judgment find us: The pains of hell are without remission
or redemption. Esaias 30.
many changes and conuersions from evil to good, but at that day there is no
change no conversion, Nulla remissio, nulla redemptio, no remission, no
redemption: If Death find us barren Trees, so it cuts us down, so Hellfire
burns us in that Tophet prepared of old. If death ceaze upon us impenitent
sinners, as it did on Cain and Judas, so Judgment finds us, so Hell holds us,
so the unclean Spirits torment us: there we shall continue more millions of
years, then be Atoim or moates in the Sun, then Bees in Hybla, then there
were Locusts in Egypt; nay, more then there be Sands on the Seashore, pyles of
Grass on the Ground, or Stars in the Heavens, in such exquisite torments,
that Perillus his Bull, Diomedes his wild Horses, Maxentius his tying the
living to the dead, till they dye with stincke and Famine; the French
Burning-Chamber, Spanish Inquisition, tearing with Lions, boiling in Oil,
pinching with burning Pincers, and the like, are pleasing Baths, cooling
Harbors, and refreshing recreations in comparison: never to be relieved, never
to be released, not to be ransomed with thousands of Goats and Rams, with
rivers of Oils, not with all the Masses, Trentals, Dirges, etc. and trumpery
of Romish Superstition; nay, not with all the Prayers of the Saints in earth or
heaven: nay, if Noah, David and Dani^l should entreat, if the Virgin Mary
should mediate, if all the Angels should supplicate, either the remission of
their sins, or intermission of their sorrows and plagues, it were bootlesse
and fruitless.

Oh then, how much does this mature and preparatorie repentance concern every
soul, that by it the union being made betwixt Christ and their souls, their
sins being washed away in the blood of the Lamb, the Lord at that day may
freely accept them, and seeing no iniquity in Jacob, Numb. 22. Psalm. 32.1.
nor transgression in Israel, may cover their offenses, and not impute their
sins to their deserved condemnation? In omitting or pretermitting of which
duty, we may justly blame and exclaim against wicked and secure worldlings,
that never think of this weighty work, Repentance is not to be deferd till
sickness, or death.
till by sickness they be summoned to their dissolution: then, with the
unrighteous Steward, they begin to shuffle and bussle a little, to make all
straight, in some superficial and hypocritical Repentance, like Ahab. ^
Kings. 21.
Which preparation of theirs, for their Passe-ouer out of this world, is at
that time very preposterous, because then all the senses and powers of the body
are occupied about the pains and troubles of the disease. Besides, Physicians
to be consulted with, Plurimis intensis minor, ad singula sen^us.
Friends to be conferred with, Household affairs to be set in order: a Will to
be made; order taken how debts must be either paid or received: neighbors
coming to visit; oh how do they divide, how distract the sick party! Is that
a fit time of this preparation? When so many Irons are in the fire, it is
likely this great one will cool: much less is it convenient to defer it
till the hour of death, as is the practice of carnal and careless men,
imagining that if they have but time to say, God forgive me, Lord have mercy on
me, with the Publican, but especially to run over the Lords Prayer, and the
Creed, which they use in ignorance and superstition, as Popish Charms,
without any faith, feruencie, and feeling; they hold themselves cocke-sure of
salvation, though their preparation be not so good, as the Jews for their
Passover, as a Christians is or ought to be, for his ordinary hearing the
Word, and receiving the Sacrament. Do not these men presumptuously think
(like blind Bayards) that they have God, and his Grace, and his Mercy at
command; that they can repent when they list: the contrary experience whereof
improues their folly, discouers their delusions, and shows that they build on
the sand, and rest on a broken staff; The danger of deferring discovered.
for, was there not a time when Esau sought the blessing with tears and found
it not? Would not Judas feign have repented, as appears by his hypocritical
confession, Mat. 27.3.4.5. and yet a Halter was all the comfort he got? Would
not Anti^chus Epiphanes had mercy, when notwithstanding his expired life ended
in misery? Would not the foolish Virgins have entered the Bridegroomes
Chamber, when it was past time, but were excluded? And does not the Lord
threaten that many shall seek to enter in at the strait gate but shall not be
able? Why so? Because they seek too look, when the time of grace is past. And
indeed it is just with God to reject them in adversity, that have rejected
him in prosperity; not to hear when they call, though they howl on their
beds like Wolves, that would not hear when he called by his Word, and the
motions of his Spirit; to forget them in death, that would not remember him in
life; to harden those that would not be softened.

Consider with thy self what reason there is to the contrary: is it reason
that God should accept the Winter of thy life, thy barren and frozen soul,
when thou have offered up the Spring, Summer, and Autumn of thy years to
Satan? that he should receive the evening Sacrifice, when Mammon, or Lust,
has had the morning? that he should be pleased with thy lees and dregs, when
thou have given the best wine of thy blood to the Devil? will he pledge
Satan in such a cup? will he take the refuse, and offals, and leauings of
Sin? It is possible he may, I do not limit the unbounded Ocean of his
mercy, but it is not probable he will.

Make it thine own case: would thou entertain an old decrepit Servant,
that is able to do thee little or no service, and give him great wages, that
has spent his youth and strength in the service of thine enemy? I trow not.
Will any General admit of a lame Soldier past service, that has served all
his life against him, in his enemies Camp? will God admit thee into his
service, entertain thee into his Camp, receive thee into his House, reward
thee in his Kingdom, when thou have spent the prime of thy years in the
service, nay, in the servitude and slavery of Satan? I say as Augustine said
to such a deferrer as thou, Non dico saluabitur, non dico damnabitur, I will
not say thou shall be saved, I dare not determine thou shall be damned: I leave
thee in the hands of God, that has thee as the Potter has the Clay, as the
Smith his Iron, as the Carpenter his Wood, as the Creator his Creature, to
harden or soften thee; to make thee a vessel of honor or dishonor; to
glorify himself in his Mercy, in thy conversion; or in his Justice, in thy
confusion.

But thy heart tells thee, and Satan tells thy heart, that thou may repent at
thy last hour. Thou may indeed if God will, but (to drive thee from this
false hold) it is not likely thou shall repent truly and sincerely. It is
said, Judas repented in his death, so the Word is, Mat. 27. verse 3. he had a
Legal sorrow in him, yet he is called a reprobate for all that: it is too
true, that Poenitentia sera, raro vera, late Repentance is seldom true
Repentance. It is commonly as sick and weak as is the party; it is not
voluntary and free, as that is which brings salvation, 2 Cor. 7.10. but
usually constrained and extorted, by the fear of hell and other Judgments of
God: for, crosses and afflictions and sickness, will cause the grossest
Hypocrite that ever was, to stoop and buckle under the hand of God (as did
Pharaoh twice) and to dissemble Faith and Repentance, and every other Grace of
God, as did Ahab; as though they had Gods graces, as fully as any of Gods
Servants, whereas they are altogether destitute of them, naked and blind, like
the Laodiceans. Reu. 3.18.
And that such repenters commonly counterfeite, it appears by this
demonstration: True Repentance is a turning to God; so the Word calls it, Joel
2.12. an auersion from sin, which is his Terminus a quo: a conversion to God,
Terminus ad quem? so most Divines hold it. Now where is the turning from sin
in such repenters? They forsake not sin, but sin forsakes them: they leave
their evil ways, because they must leave the world: they leave sin in
action, but hug it still in affection: if they had a new Lease of their
lives, they would begin new sins. Nay, Si nunquam morirentur, Gregory.
nunquam peccare desinerent; If they should never dye, they would never desist
from sin, as appears in the practice of these pretended repenters: for, if
God do recover them from their sicke-beds, and take his hand off them, do
they go their ways and sin no more, John 5.14? Nay, do they not return to
their former bias; Canis ad vomitum, like Dogs to their vomit again, and
Swine to their wallowing? insomuch that though the world say they are mended,
yet Christians can see no amendment in them, but they keep their worst wine
unto the last, and their end is worse then their beginning?

Yet for all this which has been said, the Thief on the Cross sticks much
on the stomachs of many? Why may not they live as ill as he did, and yet
defer their repentance till the last, and be saved as he was? I have
unloosed this knot before. But to give still further satisfaction.

The theefes repentance upon the Cross examined.
First, it may be, (nay, it is likely) the Thief was never called before that
time, so much as outwardly: that, he never heard Christ's Sermons before then
that he saw him; which thou do, or may do, in this light of the Gospel:
therefore if he had dyed impenitently, he should have been more excused then
thou.

Secondly, as his example is extraordinary, so it is particular: now,
particulars are not to be urged for a general practice.

Thirdly, his example is singular, we have no more late repenters saved but
he. We have him indeed (says Augustine) that we should not despair, if we
do defer; and yet we have but only him, him and no more in the whole
Scripture, that we should not presume. You know his other fellow-theefe, that
lived as he did, dyed not as he did, but impenitently, scoffingly, and
desperately: so have all other obdurate wicked ones dyed, as we have proved out
of the Word. If then Satan, and Nature persuade thee still to live in sin,
thou may repent at last, with the good Thief, and so be saved: think that
it is more probable thou shall dye impenitently, with the bad Thief, if thou
continue thy courses, and so be damned.

Thou know, amongst many Traitors, the King pardons some; but for one that
is pardoned, an hundred are deservedly executed: were it not folly to attempt
treason upon hope of pardon, because some one is pardoned amongst many? but it
is greater folly to live impenitently till death, because one Thief was in
that case saved, when as we have instanced in Cain, Judas, Herod, etc. and an
hundred more, that as they lived in iniquity, dyed in impenitence, and now are
damned eternally.

Therefore to conclude, Exhortat.
let me heat thy heart a little, and inflame thy affections to prepare
speedily for thy dissolution: to take time before thee, it is bald behind; to
work whilst it is day, ere the night of death comes, harden not thy heart any
longer, but to day hear his voice, that calls thee, as it did Samuel and David,
to awake and to seek his face: Cry not with the Crow, Cras, Cras, to morrow,
to morrow, but this day with Noah's Dove, come into the Arc: yet Jonas cries in
the streets, Jonas 3.4. yet the Angel stays Sodomes flames, Genesis 19. yet the
weather is fair to build an Arc in, Genesis 7.5. yet the Prophet cries. Oh
Judah, how shall I entreat thee? Hos. 6.4. yet the Bridegroom tarries and
stays the Virgins leasures, Mat. 25.7. yet the Apostle beseeches for Christ's
sake, that thou would be reconciled, 2 Cor. 5.20.

Oh therefore prepare oil betimes, with the wise Virgins, enter whilst the
gate is open, seek the Lord whilst he may be found, call upon him whilst
he is nigh, wait for thy Masters coming with the good Servant, build the
Arc ere the Flood come, prepare thy soul ere Death come: this is thy time,
thy day, tempus tuum: Death is Gods day, tempus suum, and his time. Now is the
time to repair the Ship of thy soul in the Haven, but the tempestuous Sea of
Death is no fit time: the breach is to be made up in the time of peace, not in
time of war. Now make peace, in the day of peace, with the God of peace, that
with old Simeon thou may dye and rest in peace, and remain in glory. Thus
much for preparation.

Now the manner of this Preparation consists in some particulars, which we
mean to prosecute.

Meditation of death is a principal part of preparation to die in peace
The first whereof is Meditation: Memento mori, must be every man's Motto: a
point that as the Scripture in^oynes, so the Saints have practiced, and the
Heathens have approved this principle, that To^a hominis vita, mortis
meditatio, the whole life of a man ought to be the meditation of death: the
best Scholars that ever were in the School of Christianity, have been taken
up in this thought. Adam was no sooner created, but God his Schoolmaster
catechizeth him in this point of death: he calls him Adam, rubra terra, red
earth; he casts him into a sleep, the Image (nay, as the Cynicke calls it) the
Brother of death: he tells him, if he sin, he shall dye the death. When he
had sinned, he fore-warnes him that he shall return to his dust from which
he came: he makes him garments of Beasts skins, that had dyed for
sacrifice, to show him that he was mortal, like those Beasts whose skins
he wo^e: he sets him to dig and till the Earth, to put him in mind both of
the dustie matter whereof he was made, and into which he and all his
posterity must be dissolved. Adam, it seems, took out these Lessons, and
taught them his Children; for though he called his eldest Son Possession,
yet he called his Brother Abel, Vanity, when he had more experience of the
vanities of life, and life it self.

In this Meditation the Patriarchs were wonderously taken up, the very form
and fabric of their Mansions, not dwelling in seiled houses, as we do
(though they were both greater men and of greater means) but in Tents and
Tabernacles, such as they use in the wars, ready upon all occasions to be
removed (even like the Boothes in Sturbbish-Faire) show, that they did
constantly ponder of their own remouals; nay, their tongues expressed the
abundant thoughts of their hearts in this kind, Abraham confessed himself but
dust and ashes, Genesis 18.17. Jacob acknowledges his life a Pilgrimage. Joseph
gives order for the burial of his bones, Genesis 50. The greatest purchases which
we read the Patriarchs made, or that ever they spoke of, was only a place to
bury their dead in. Moses so thought of his mortality, that he makes a Psalm
wherein he both acknowledges man's frailty, and inferres this Petition
pathetically, that the Lord would teach him, Psalm. 90.12.
and the Israelites, to number their days: which Psalm the ancient Fathers
used in form of a Prayer. Job waits till his changing come, Job 10.14. David
makes no other reckoning of himself then of a Pilgrim, Psalm. 120.3. and Peter
accounts his continuance here, but his abode in a tabernacle; 2 Pet. 1.3.

Oh that such thoughts did possess us! they would make us more familiar with
Death, and it more welcome unto us; for, Iacula praeuisa, minus faeriunt, Darts
foreseen do the less harm. Oh, how many sins would they cut off, (as
Hercules did the heads of Hydra,) which are the only weakeners of our Faith,
wounders of our souls, workers of our vvoes, and disturbers of our dying
peace. Therefore says the Wiseman, Remember thy end, and thou shall never do
amiss. For, as the Bird directs her self by her tail flying, and the ship it
directed by her stearne, sailing, to avoid the Rocks: so is a Christian
conformed and confirmed in an happy course, preserved from the Soule-splitting
Rocks of sin, by the thought of death.

First, it mortifies from the world: Effects of deaths meditation.
he easily contemnes all, that thinks he must dye, (says an old Hermit)
for, what cares a condemned malefactor, that fits himself for his every hours
expected execution, for thousands of Gold and Silver.

Secondly, it curbes the pomp and glory of the world: for what cares old
Berzillas for all the pleasures of David's Court, when the keepers of his house,
his hands, tremble; Eccl. 12.3*^
his legs, these strong men bow themselves; when his eyes, the windows of his
body, wax dark; when his ears, the daughters of Music, are abated; when
the Grasshoppers, or bended shoulders, are a burden; and his teeth, the
Grinders, cease? he thinks rather of returning to Gilead, and dying in his
own Country, then of Ierusalems Court, 2 Samuel 19.

Thirdly, it curbes pride: Quid superbis puluis and cinis? says Bernard; Oh,
how can dust and ashes be proud? meditatio mortis, etc. Augustine.
the meditation of death is the nail of the flesh, which fixes all the proud
lusts thereof to the wood of the Cross. What Peacocke can be proud when he
looks at his black feet, the earth from whence he is, and whither he tends.
Therefore even amongst the Heathens, says Caelius Rodiginus, when their
Emperors were crowned, as a counter-poyson against pride, they were carried
unto the Sepulchers of dead men, and there it was demanded of them, what one
should be made for them. So Climachus reports of that good Basil, that the very
day wherein with great joy and applause he was propounded Doctor and Pastor to
the people, as an Antidote against pride, he made one to tell him thus; Pater,
sepulchrum tuum nondum est perfectum; Father, thy sepulcher is not yet
finished. The like thoughts, amongst others, Augustine used, when he found
himself tickled with secret pride, with the applauses of the people, for his
exquisite Sermons.

Fourthly, it is a means of temperancie, and a restrainer of intemperancie,
and a curber of Carnalitie and Epicurisme. Hence it was that the ancient
Egyptians, Lib. 3.
as Heroditus reports, in their Gemalia and Feasts of great and Noblemen,
there was the portraiture of a dead man, in wood, which was round, like a
Globe, had to every guest to behold, with this Motto writ on it, In hanc
intuens, pota and oblectate, talis post mortem futurus.

Beholding this use merry glee,
For as this is, so thou shall be.
Hence it is that Augustine, as he would have a man always to think upon
these quatuor nouissima, four last things, Death, Judgment, Heaven, Hell; so
chiefly in their Festiuals and meetings, wherein Satan chiefly beguiles men,
as he did Adam and Eve by eating. And sure, amongst other things, this made
that Cinicke Philosopher so abstinent, because he was continually amongst
tombs and Sepulchers: but sure the meditation of their Tombs and Sepulchers,
De orig. Monich.
caused Paul^s Symplex, Macariu* Pambo, and other Hermites in Hospinian, to be
so abstenuous, even to a marvel, if not to a miracle. I wish the Tricongij,
Biberij, and Heliogabuli, I mean the Epicures and Belly-gods, that eat and
drink till there be as little Grace in their Souls, and Wit in their Pates,
as their be Wines in their Pots, that they would drink out of an earthen
vessel, with Agathocles; or looking upon a Deaths-head, as is the fashion in
some Countries; or that a dead man's skull were presented unto them the first
dish at their Table, as it is in the Court of Prester-Iohn: or at least, that
if the picture of Death which I have seen in the bottom of some cups, will
not, yet that the sight of the dead creatures before them, might call unto them
as Phillips Boy to Phillip, Memento te esse mortalem, Oh Epicurish Glutton*
remember thou art mortal: or that they would ponder the voice which S. Jerome
always imagined, even when he was eating and drinking, Arise you dead, and
come to Judgment. Perhaps these thoughts would make them put their knives to
their throats as Solomon speaks, and damme up the gulf of their inordinate
appetites.

Fifthly, this thought would work in us contentation in every estate, as it did
in Job, who in the midst of his afflictions, comforts himself with this
consideration, Naked came I out of my mothers womb, and naked shall I return.
The thought of this, that we shall carry naught away with us but a Coffin, or
a winding sheet, should keep us within compass of too eager pursuit in
purchasing, or impatiencie in parting with this unrighteous Mammon.

Sixthly, this thought of death is a notable means and spur to further our
Repentance: it will cause us, if any thing, not only with Ezekias and
Achitophel, to set our houses in order, but our hearts to: for, what so hastened
the repentance of Niniuie as the belief and thought of Jonas his Sermon; it
was time for them to bestirre themselves, when they had but forty days to
live. So when Elias tells Ahab that the Dogs shall eat him and Iezabel, he
makes some superficial show of repentance. So the third Company of fifty,
with their Captain, that came by violence to fetch Elias, when they saw the
two other Captains with their fifties, consumed with fire, they seem to
relent, and deal with the Prophet by entreaty.

If then meditation of death have such force, both in the godly and wicked,
both in Christians and Pagans, to incite to virtue, restrain vice, curb
covetousness, cure pride, bridle lust, moderate murmuring, keep in
intemperancie, procure repentance, cause mortification, and do every way so
correct a vicious life, and so direct a happy death: since of all other
Meditations this strengthens the mind, as of all other meats bread
strengthens the body: since it is as needful to a good life as wings for
Birds, sails for Mariners, tails for Fishes to swim, wheels for Coaches
to run, as Climachus makes the comparisons: since you see the holy
Patriarchs, Abraham, Jacob, Joseph, Job, Moses, David; nay, I may add our
Savior CHRIST (who was most frequent in discourse with his Disciples of his
death, his Passion, his hour, his crucifying; nay* even then when he was
transfigured in glory, having two dead men with him, Mat. 17.
Moses and Elias, and talking of his death when he came from the Mount, (as
appears in the Evangelists) did so often think of death: since the Saints,
after Christ's death, Augustine, Jerome, Basil, Bernard; the devout Hermites;
nay, even Ethnicke Kings and Philosophers, made such good use of this
Meditation, as we have proved: then let the thought possess us that are now
living, of our inevitable dying* that it may work in us the same effects that
it did in them.

Exhortat.
Oh let us think of it in our prosperity, in our pleasures; let us meditate of
it in our Orchards, in our Gardens, as did Joseph of Aramathia; who ( John
19.41.) had his Sepulcher in his Garden, even the place of his recreations: let
us think of it in our beds (those Embleames of our graves,) in our Closets, in
our Cloisters, in our Walks and Galleries, that so remembering it in every
place, expecting it at every hour, it may not come upon us unprovided, as the
storm upon the Mariner, as the enemy upon the drowsy Sentinel, as David's
Company upon the drunken Amalekites, ^nua^un^ vrbem somtio vinoque sepultum.
as the politic Graecians upon the secure Troyans. Death is like the
Basiliske, it hurts not if it be spyed betimes: if Death spy us first, it kills
us, as the Basiliske does the Traveler; if we spy it first, we kill it, as
the Traveler does the Basiliske, as Ambrose makes the Application: and
therefore as Aristotle writes of two Fountains, the one whereof if a man
drink, it makes him laugh so much till he dye; if of the other, it both
hinders laughter, and preuents death: Et risum impedit, and mortem.
these two fountains are the Remembrance and the Oblivion of death: the last
is like poisoned water to kill us, the first like strong distillatorie waters
to revive us.

Yet alas, for all this who thinks of death? Expostulation.
there is such a general crust of Security grown over this Land, that it is
to be feared we are exposed to the same dangers that Jerusalem was, the cause
of all whose plagues was, she knew not her visitation, she remembered not her
end, Lament. 1.9. Oh how few number their days that they may apply their
hearts unto wisdom? How few think of their ends, till sickness end them,
till Death say to them as GOD to Ezekias, Thou must dye: and as the Prophet to
Ahaziah, Thou shall not come down from thy bed to which thou art gone up? 2
Kings 1.4. How few look into hell ere they leap into it? How many
Arithmeticians are in the world, that number all things but their days; their
corn, cattle, sheep, stock, money, wares, and the like; that are as wise
Serpents in every thing, excepting in foreseeing their death? How many, like
careless debtors, still run into the debts and arrerages of former sins
with GOD, their patient Creditor, never thinking of the day of account, the
strictness of the Judge, the closeness of the Prison, the Serieant at their
backs, Death ready to arrest them? How many sleep out their time, like
Salomons sluggard? How many cry, Soul take thine ease, eat, drink and be
merry, singing to the Tabret and the Harp, stretching themselves upon their
Iuory Couches, saying (like these Epicures, which Tertullian blames in his
Books of the Soul) Oh Death, what have we to do with thee? trouble not thou
us, and we shall not trouble thee: yea, though we have so many Monitors,
every day, in all the things of Nature: the Sun setting over us, the graves
under us, Monumentum, quasi monens mentem.
though we see many Tombs even in our Churches and Monuments (as the word
signifies) to admonish us; Crosses and Sicknesses, Deaths summons, that tell us
Death is approaching, vellicat haec aures, atque ait en venio; yet
nevertheless, as the sight of one object or color takes away the eye from
beholding another: the thought of the world, and the lusts thereof, takes away
the thought of death. And as Absolon carried on his Mule, whilst he hung by
the hair of the head, was thrust through three times by Ioab; so our souls
being carried here upon our flesh, (which Augustine, Hugo, and Luther, call
the Ass of the soul) whilst our thoughts are climing, and fixed upon the high
Tree of Honor, Pleasure, Preferment, Death, like Ioab, comes and kills us with
a triple Dart that we see not, Time past, present, and to come: never thinking
of these darts till we feel them, no more then the fish of the hook till it
hold her; yea, though we see daily, wiser, wealthier, holier, healthfuller,
and younger then our selves, go to their graves, yet this thought still
reigns in us, that we shall not dye till we be old, as Seneca notes, Non
patemus ad mortem, etc. yea, Ad Mart.
even such as think they shall be happy after death, think little of the day
of death; Lib. de gratia noui Test.
Tantum vim habet carnis and animae dulce consortium, says Augustine, such
force has that sweet consort betwixt the soul and the flesh. But it is more
which Tully notes, that there is no man so old, but he thinks he may live
one year longer, though he use his third foot when one of his other feet is
in the grave already: and this makes even old so incline in their thoughts and
desires unto the Marriage Bed, who in the course of Nature, have but a few
steps into their graves; yea, to associate themselves with such young
yoake-fellowes, that if Sophocles were living, he would blush once again for
shame to see them; and Cato should have more matter to laugh at, then to see an
Ass eat Thistles: in which we verify Christ's prophecy, that as in the days
of Noah, we marry and are married, never thinking of death till the Flood
come. This makes such an inundation of sin, as delights Satan, who takes as
great delight to steal away our hearts from the thought of Death, as Absolon
did to steal away the hearts of the people from his Father David: for, he
knows full well, that if we should think of Death, we should not practice
sin: he knows that as the Serpent, when she stops the one ear with her
tail, the other with the earth, she will not harken to the voice of the
Charmer; so the Lords Doves, that are as wise as Serpents, laying their ears
to the earth, remembering their mortality, will not be deluded with the charms
of his temptations: he knows that his hook bayted with riches, will not be
bit upon if a man remember himself, breuis incertique huius iteniris, of this
his short and uncertain journey: he knows he will not sin, that knows
after death he shall inherit Serpents and Worms. For which cause when he
would have us to sin, he hides the griesly head of Death, casting the scumme
and mist of some deceiving pleasure before our eyes, (as they say Iuglers do
in their tricks,) showing us only sins pleasure, (as the Panther shows his
pleasing spots to the Beasts) to deceive, hiding his head, that he may devour
us.

Therefore to conclude this Part, as our Savior Christ said, De paup. amand.
Remember Lots Wife: as Nazianzen says to oppressors, Remember Naboths
Vineyard: so I bid those that are terrigenae and Brutigini, the sons of the
earth, Remember their earth: nay, God w^isheth thee to remember thy earth, Oh
that they were wise (says God, of Israel) and woul'd remember the latter
things, Deuteronomy. 32.29. Oh that we were wise even in this particular! oh how
should we avoid many snares of Satan, that preuailes over us, even by our
security in this kind? And therefore Quos viu ^ntes blanditijs decipit, etc.
whom he decei^es by fraud living, Greg. in Mor.
he deuoures by force dying. Oh how should we be prepared for the second
coming of CHRIST, if we had but an eye to the pale Horse and him that sits
thereon! Apoc. 6.8. Oh that we had but the wisdom of the Cock, that eating
his meat, has ever an eye upwards, to look at the Eagle or the Hawke! Oh
that we, as we look downwards with the eye of Reason, to the things of this
life, would with the eye of Faith look up for the coming of Christ, who as
he rose like a Lion, is ascended like an Eagle, and will descend again to
judge us: then should we be fitted, with the good Servant, come when he will
come, to entertain our Master with joy, Mat. 24.23.

But alas, woe be to the secure world, we neither think of Judgment
general nor special, after death or in death: sometimes indeed deed we can
say, we are all mortal, but ( ex vsu magis quam sensu) as some pray, it is a
word rather of custom then feeling: we seem to be a little more moved when
we follow a Funeral, then we weep and wail, and cry out, This is the end
of all flesh: but as soon as we are at home, the most we do is a carnal
fruitless mourning for the dead; we make no spiritual use of it to dye to
any sin: in which, as some compares us, we are like to Swine, who when some
one in the Heard is bit with a Dog, all flock about and gruntle, but
presently it is forgot, they fall again to wallowing and rooting: or, like
little Turkies and Chickens, who if the Kite or Buzzard swap and catch one, all
the rest with their dammes, are in an uproar, but instantly they fall again to
feeding: so when Death that devouring Dog, that ravening Kite, that preyes upon
all flesh, snatcheth away any of our Friends and Neighbors, we complain and
exclaim of life's brevity, the worlds vanity, we mourn and pretend
mortification; we lament and seem to repent, but within few days all is
drowned in the Leth of Oblivion: we forget Death, as Nabuchadnezzar forgot his
Dream; we fall again to our former sinful security, and so we continue
till we dye, excaecati, insoporati, impraeparati; excecated, insoporated,
unprepared. God reform this, and teach us, as David prays, Psalm. 38. the
number of our days, and make us wise to salvation.

Besides this Meditation, which we make a part of preparation, to the
attaining of this peaceable departure, other duties are to be adjoined: some
whereof are to be performed in health, some in sickness, some in the immediate
summons of Death it self: of all which briefly in these subsequent directions.

First, let him that will die in peace, The life of Faith brings peace in Death.
live by Faith, Hab. 2.2. let him not content himself with an Historical
Faith, such as the Devils have, James 2.14. nor with a Civil Faith, such as
mortal men have, and as the Heathens have; nor with an Implicit General
Faith, See D. Moss, his Sermon of the Faith of Devils.
which the Papists have, even the Cobblers Faith, to believe as the Romish
Church believes: for alas, all these kinds of Faith bring no more peace and
comfort to the soul, in any extremity, then cold water to a man that is in a
sown. And therefore many men are deceived, which think they show themselves
exquisite Christians, and have enough to salvation, if to their Pastor or
others, in their sickness, they can repeat and render their Faith, according
to Gods Word, and the Articles of the Creed; with a renunciation of all points
of Popery, of Heresies, and Superstitions: for alas, this general
illumination, this knowing Faith, which only swimmes in the brain, without a
particular applying Justifying Faith, which works by Love, and brings forth
the fruits of Prayer, Repentance, godly Sorrow for sin, Zeal,
Sanctification, new Obedience, etc. never heates the heart, nor comforts the
conscience, nor has the answer of any sound peace from God. Oh therefore
labor for a Justifying saving Faith, for a special and an applying Faith;
such as Paul preached to the convert Iaylor, Acts 16.31. Phillip to the baptized
Eunuch, Acts 8.37. such a Faith as is commended in the ancient Patriarchs and
Primitive Worthies, Hebrews the eleauenth Chapter; such as CHRIST commended in
the Centurion, Mat. 8.10. and the Canaanitish woman; Mat. 15.28. such as Thomas
had after his incredulity, calling Christ his Lord and his God; John 20.28.
such as Paul had, when he professed that he lived even by Faith in Jesus is
Christ, Gal. 2.20. such as Simeon here had. Oh get Christ into thy heart by
Faith, as this good old man had him in his Arms* and in his heart, and thy
death shall be peaceable like his.

Repentance the means of peace with God.
Secondly, if thou wilst die in peace, repent speedily of thy fore-past and
present sins: for, sin hinders all true peace; There is no peace to the
wicked, says my God, twice for surenesse in express words, Esaias 48. verse 22.
so Chap. 57.21. Iniquity makes a division and separation from God, Esaias 59.2.
even in life, much more in death: for then the souls of the wicked go to
Hell, Psalm. 9.16. much more in Judgment* Mat. 7 23. Where there it plain and
palpable whoredom discovered there can be no peace betwixt man and wife: all
sin is whoredom, and sinners are called Adulterers and Adultresses, James 4.
verse 4. they are spiritually and corporally polluted by the Flesh, the World,
the Devil; for which cause, rebellious Israel and Judah are compared to Whores
and Harlots, Ier. 3. v. 8.9. etc. Now, if any wicked soul should ask with a
desire of resolution, as the two Messengers of Iehoram, and as Iehoram himself
asked Iehu, Is it peace? Is it peace? 2 King. 9.18.19. Is there peace, or shall
there be peace betwixt God and my soul? I resolve him roughly from God, as
Iehu did Iehoram, verse 22. What peace? What have thou to do with peace, since
thou want Grace, the inseparable companion of Peace? 2 Timothy 1.2. What have
thou to do with peace, whilst the whoredoms of thy Mother Iezabel, and her
witchcrafts are great in number? whilst the pollutions of that whorish Iezabel,
thy unclean soul, are daily increased? whilst thy Treasons and Rebellions
against thy God (which, as Samuel tells Saul, are like the sin of witchcraft,
1 Samuel 15.23.) are with an obdurate and obstinate heart continued? Was there
any peace to Absolon, though a Son, when he was a Traitor against his
Father? Can there be any to thee, not a Son of God, but a slave of Satan,
rebelling against the Father of Spirits? Had Zimri peace (says Iezabel to
Iehu) that slew his Master? 2 Kings 9.31. Zimri was a Traitor, and slew Elah,
as he was drinking till he was drunk, in the house of Arza his Steward (an
usual end for drunkards) 1 Kings 16.9.10. Iezabel argues well; Can Traitors
have peace? look to it Iehu; thou art a Traitor against Ahab: sure Traitors
seldom or never dye in peace. Witness, Absolon, Sheba, Adoniah, our English
Traitors, Romanized Semenaries, treacherous Conspirators, Lopus, Squire,
Titchburne, Babington, Parry, etc. our late Powder-plotting Pioners, the French
Rauillack, millions more, which being like Ioab, men of blood, have come to
their ends (as is said of Tyrants) cum caede and sanguine, with blood and
slaughter. Oh then, how can thou, a worm of the earth, a wretched man,
because a wicked man, living in treasonable sins, with a heart as hard as
the neather-Milstone, rebelling against so great, so glorious, so potent, so
powerful a God, once hope that ever thy gray hairs shall come to the grave in
peace, or that thy soul after her flitting, shall rest in Abraham's bosom the
place of peace. Can a man have peace in Rome, and be opposed against the Pope,
the usurping Herod (that supposed earthly God, as his flattering Parasites call
him?) oh then, can thou dust and ashes, be opposed on earth against the
mighty Jehovah, the God of heaven?

Christ that opened the eyes of the blind, open thine eyes to see, and thy
heart to believe, as he did Lydia's, Acts 16.14. and give thee, at last, a
resolution to break off thy sins by repentance, Dan. 4.84. the enemies of
thy peace, least God break thee like a Potters vessel, and tear thee in
pieces, whilst there is none to deliver thee, Psalm. 50.22. Oh, sue for pardon
for thy sins, seek for peace to him which is the Prince of peace, Esaias 9.6.
seek for peace by him and his merits, which was ordained to be thy peace, and
to work thy reconciliation, C^l. 1.20. so thou shall shut up the last period
of thy life with inward peace, and go to keep an eternal Sabbath, with him,
that is the God of peace.

Thirdly, that thou may die peaceably, invre thy self to dye daily; and that
after this manner.

First, every day mortify some sin, nip some Serpent in the head; crucify
every day some corruption, set upon thy lesser sins, and so get ground of thy
greater sins: Three ways how to dye daily.
as in particular, leave thy dangerous and damnable custom of swearing and
blaspheming, by these degrees: first, break off thy Civil Oaths, First dye
to sin.
as in swearing by thy Faith, Troth, Christendom, etc. Secondly, then set upon
thy Ridiculous and Childish Oaths, as by Fay, How to leave the damnable
custom of Swearing.
Fakins, Trokins, Bodikins, Slid, Sounds, Cock and Pie, with the like; whereby
thou seek to mock and deceive God, who will not be mocked: Gal. 6. Thirdly,
then invre thy self to leave thy Superstitious Oaths, as by the Mass, Rood,
Cross, by our Lady, and by Popish Saints: etc. Fourthly, so proceed against
thy Heathenish and Idolatrous Oaths, in swearing by the Creatures, (as Laban
and Iezabel by their Idols, Genesis 31.53. 1 Kings 19 verse 2.) as by men, by S.
Peter, and by S. John, etc. by the Heavens, the Earth, by Fire, Sun, the
Light, Meat, Drink, Money, etc. or by the parts of thy body, as Hands, or the
like, or by thy Soul; all condemned, Mat. 5. ver. 34. James 5.12. And so with
a courage set upon thy impious, horrible, fearful, damnable, blasphemous
Oaths, as by the Lord, by God, the eternal God, by Christ, by Jesus, and such
like; or by the parts and adjuncts of Christ, by tearing his Humanity (as the
Jews did his body; by dividing him, as the Soldiers did his garments, Mat.
27.35.) in blasphemy, by his Death, Passion, Life, Soul, Blood, Flesh, Heart*
Wounds, Bones* Sides, Guts, Arms, Foot, Nails, etc. of all which I tremble
and quake to think, write, and speak, though thou make no more scruple of
such Hell-bred Oaths, then of thy ordinary words: so deal with all other
sins (of which thy soul is as full as a Serpent is full of venom, and a
Toade of poison) Crucify them by degrees, and dye to them daily, else thou
dyest for ever if thou dye (...) in them.

By this course thou shall take away the sting of Death, which is Sin; for,
the strength of Death is Sin, 1 Cor. 15. even as the strength of Sampson laid
in his hair, Judge. 16.17. which sin, when it is subdued, Death it self is
as easily conquered as weakened Sampson was by the Philistines, verse 21. yea,
it can do thee no more harm, then a Dragon, Viper, or angry Waspe which have
lost their stings.

Secondly, dye daily to the world, Secondly, dye to the world.
love it not, nor the things of it, that so thou may more happily dye out of
the world, and more hopefully entertain thoughts of a better world. And in
this case do as Runners use who often run over the Race before they run for
the Wager, that so they may be better invred and acquainted, when they come to
try their ability: or, as is said of Belney the Martyr, that being to suffer
by fire, many days before, he would hold his hand a pretty while in the flame,
so to prepare himself to sustain the pains of Martyrdom, which he was to
undergo.

Thirdly, Bear crosses patiently.
Thirdly, dye daily, by invring thy self to take Crosses and Afflictions
patiently, as sickenesses in body, troubles in mind, loss of goods, of
friends, and of good name, etc. which indeed are little deaths, even petty
deaths, not only Prologues of death, but Preparatiues to death: for which
cause GOD sends them to his children more then to the wicked, even to weane
them from the world, and prepare them for death (as the Nurse weanes the Child
from the Teate by doing bitter Aloes upon it) and sure he that bears Crosses
most patiently, is well prepared to dye peaceably, as appears by S. Paul, 1
Cor. 15.31. who by making good use of afflictions, dyed daily: it holding
commonly, that Mors post crucem minor est; Death is less dolorous after the
cross.

Fourthly, Prayer often preuailes for a peaceable departure.
Fourthly, pray seriously for a peaceable departure: it is confirmed by examples
of all ages, and experience of all Gods Servants, that he that prays well
speedes well. Jacob and Abraham's Servant had Gods blessings upon their
Iourneyes, as an effect of their Prayers, Genesis 24. Genesis 27. Thou shall find
Gods presence even in that hour of the last iourneying of thy soul from her
earthly Mansion to her heavenly Country, if thou pray for this grace
particularly and effectually: therefore as thou ought to pray continually
for other Lu. 18. 1. Ephesians. 6.18.18 Things to be prayed for, that death may be
prosperous.
things, so even in health and prosperity pray frequently and fervently: 1.
That God would make this backward, repugnant, and nilling nature of thine,
willing to her dissolution: 2. Prepare thy unprepared soul: 3. Subdue thy
corruptions: 4. Purge out the dross of thy sins: 5. Give the patience to
kiss his correcting Rod, when he whips by sickness or diseases: 6. Succor
thee in thy last and greatest conflict: 7. Support thy weakness: 8. Aid thee
against Satan's force and fraud: 9. Strengthen thy Faith: 10. Renew thy decayed
graces: 11. Give thee the power and comfort of his own Spirit: 12. Not to
visit thy sins in Justice but in Mercy: 13. To preserve thy soul from the
Hunter, and thy darling from the Lion: 14. To give his Angels charge over thee
in thy extremity: 15. To keep thee from 1. Impatiencie, 2. Frenzy, 3.
Distraction, 4. Idle fancies, 5. Rauing, 6. Raging, 7. Blaspheming, etc. least
thy death be scandalous: 16. To touch thy tongue with a coal from the Altar,
that thou may speak, 1. to Gods glory, 2. and to Edification: 17. To dye the
death of the righteous: 18. Lastly, to receive thy soul into that new
Jerusalem which is above. Such Prayers we have upon record in holy Writ, as of
David, Psalm. 39. and Moses, Psalm. 90. true patterns of our Prayers in this
kind. And sure, who ever approaches often to the throne of Grace, and
supplicates to a pitiful God, from faith and feeling in these and the like
petitions, he shall be sure to find an answer from God, even when he lies
upon his sicke-bed, as the fruit of his form^r desires. Besides that his former
acquaintance with God, in speaking to him, and talking, as it were, with him
oft-times in life, by Prayer, will increase in the sick Patient, even a holy
boldness, in a filial fear, to come to that God, (as one friend to another
in extremity) with whom he has so often conuersed and conferred with, by the
Word and Prayer, in health and prosperity.

Fifthly, that thou may depart in peace, make sure to thy soul the
inheritance of life eternal, even here in this thy life natural: for as
worldlings are something at quiet when they have made sure such houses, lands,
leases, and purchases, as they have long gaped after; so, assurance of life
eternal is the only pacification to the spiritual man; this is the lot, the
portion and inheritance that his soul longs after, the estate that he
preferres before all the fleshpots of Egypt, or the Jewels of Egypt. Now for
the purchase of a fixed place in the heavenly Canaan, thou must provide these
treasures: 1. saving Knowledge, 2. Faith, 3. Sanctification; of more price
with God, then Gold, Pearl, and precious Stones, with men. For the first,
there is no traffic with God, or purchase from heaven without it, John 17.3.
This is life eternal, to know God, and whom thou have sent Jesus Christ. For
Faith, the Truth affirms it with asseueration; Verily verily, he that hears
my word, and believes in him that sent me, has eternal life, John 5.24.
John 3.16. For Sanctification, whosoever submits their hearts and lives to the
regiment of the Spirit of Christ, they are the children of God, Romans 8.14. Now
God has an heavenly inheritance for all his Children: get therefore these
graces, and salvation instantly comes to thy heart, as it did to Zacheus house.
Luke 19.

Sixthly, it will make much for thy dying peace, to do all the good thou can
in life, to all men in general, to the Church, the Saints, and household of
Faith in special, by thy 1. Wit, 2. Wealth, 3. Power, 4. Place, 5. Authority,
6. Credit with great men, (as Nehemias and Mardocheus did to the Jews) or by
any other means whatsoever. Therefore has God put it into thy heart to build
an Hospital for the distressed; to give some annual contribution to the
poor; to mend some common ways for a public ease; to erect or repair some
Grammer-Schoole, for the trayning up of youth; to found some Fellowships or
Schollerships in some College, as a furtherance to learning; to plant some
Library, for a help to good Letters (like that famoused BODLEY, the Phoenix, in
this kind, of our time;) or to erect and maintain in some barren place, a
preaching Ministry (the best work of all, because conversant about the best
object, the saving of souls;) or any the like: Oh then strike whilst the Iron
is hot; go about this work speedily, even as speedily as David went about the
building of Gods house, who would not have given any rest to the temples of
his head, till he had finished what he intended, had not God staid his
resolution.

And here I cannot but take notice of the preposterous charity of some, that
do little or no good living (unless to themselves, and those to whom Nature
ties them) yet after their death they do some good, by their Deputies, and
Assigns, and Executors (which oft-times aiming at their own ends, by some
qui^ques and euasions, prove executioners of the desires of the deceased,
rather then Executors) yet suppose the Will be Legally performed, what may be
censured of thine intent, that have been close-handed in life, and now art
seemingly open-hearted at thy death? First, that thou give what thou can no
longer retain: Secondly, or thou give to good uses, what thou have got by
ill means: or thirdly, that conscience accusing thee, thou would stop the
mouth of it, by this sop, cast to that barking Cerberus within thee, as Judas
did, by casting away his thirty pieces of silver, the price of blood, Mat. 27.
Fourthly, or else from some opinion of satisfaction for bypast sins, or
present merit, with our blinded Papists: but chiefly the censorious Critical
world will judge, that if thou had not parted with the world, thou had not
departed with thy bewitching wealth: therefore All that thine hand shall find
to do, do it with all thy power, Eccles. 9.10. For there is neither work,
nor invention, nor knowledge in the place whither thou go: to Salomons
counsel I join Paul's; Do good to all whilst thou have time, Gal. 6.10. Do
what service thou can to Gods Church, to the Commonwealth, to every
particular man, chiefly to the poor members of CHRIST.

Oh what a comfort will it be to thee, if thou have been bountiful and
beneficial to the distressed, when thou can say on thy sick Couch, with
Nehemias in another case; Lord remember me concerning this good work, and
concerning that good work, Nehem. 13.22. Oh blessed is he that judges wisely
of the poor, the Lord shall deliver him in the time of trouble: the Lord will
strengthen him upon his bed of sorrow: thou have turned all his bed in his
sickness, says the Psalmist, Psalm. 41. ver. 1.3.

A good conscience in life, brings peace in death.
Seauenthly, keep a good conscience with God and man, that it may be a
continuated comforter unto thee, as in life, so in the agonies of death, as it
was to Paul in all his pressures, Acts 24.16. and as it is to the Saints in all
their sorrows a continual feast, Prou. 15.15. a perpetual Christ-tide, a
Iubilee in the jaws of death, a peace passing all understanding, Phil. 2. For,
as the want of this is the Rack and Gybbet unto the wicked, the greatest
heaviness and plague, Sirach. 25.15. as the Wiseman terms it; a plague of
plagues, an evil which goes beyond all evil that tongue can speak, as even
Seruus in Mustell.
Plautus and Lib. de moribus.
Seneca have thought it: the greatest wound and grief that can be sustained,
as Solomon determines it, Prou. 18.14. nay, the very flashes and Prologue to
hell, as Judas Latomus and Hoffmeister have tried it in their despayring
deaths: so the inioying of a good conscience is the greatest joy; Hugo lib. 2
de anima. cap. 9.
Hugo calls it the Temple of Solomon, the Field of Benediction, the Garden of
delight, the treasury of the King: the house of God, the habitation of the
holy Ghost; the Book sealed, and shut, to be opened in the day of Judgment;
the very thing (says Ambrose Lib. 2. de officijs.
,) that makes a blessed life, yea, and (I may add withal) a blessed death:
for, to use the words of Bern. in Sermon.
Bernard, as he prepares a good dwelling for God, whose Will has not been
perverted, nor Reason deceived, nor Memory defiled, so God prepares a dwelling
for him that is pure in heart and soul, Psalm. 15.1.2. and in whose spirit
there is no guile, Psalm. 32.2. Of which blessed mansion they have some taste
even in death, that keep a good conscience in life.

Hence is it that the godly take there deaths patiently like sheep, sing
joyfully like the Swanne, as Martyrs have done at the stake, and as did our
good Simeon: when the wicked dye like Swine repiningly, like the Hiaena
ragingly.

Naturalists Cicero lib. 1. Tuscul. quaest.
write, that the warm sweet blood recoyling to the heart of the Swanne,
tickleth her with such a secret delight, that it makes her sing even in her
death. Contrariwise, when the Hiaena is in dying, the black and distempered
blood gathers to her heart, which makes her sad and mournful. This is worth
applying: the conscience of holy actions so warmes the hearts of Gods Servants,
with that inward joy, that they dye singing their Hosanna's, tryumphing and
rejoicing in spirit: but the consciousnesse of wicked ways and works of
darkness, oaths, uncleanness, profanenes, etc. like streams of black blood
recoyles back upon, and clogs the hearts of the Sons of Belial, which makes
them dye as woefully and cursedly, as they have lived retchlesly and wickedly:
oh therefore good Readers, who ever you are, Ministers or Laymen, keep a good
conscience I entreat you, with God and with man, in all your ways and
walkings, in your courses, callings, functions and tradings; that in your
deaths you may show your selves the Lords Sheep, the Lords Swannes, like
Simeon; not the Devils Swine and Hels Hiaena's.

Now thou art to be directed in some duties in thy sickness, the probable
summoner of thy death: for, though God only know when death is nearest, he
having as the keys of the heavens, and the keys of the heart, so the keys of
the earth, and of the grave, of life and of death, 1 Samuel 2.6. yet it is
probable that life is nearest expiring, when sickness is approaching; as the
walls are nearest ruin, when the Cannon is laid to batter them. Now these
Directions I refer to these three heads. First, respect God; secondly, thy
self* thirdly, others.

In respect of God: first, renew thy former repentance, seek earnestly to be
reconciled to God in CHIRST; get more assurance of the Mercy, Favor, and Love
of God toward thee; gather together all thy spiritual forces; strive and
wrestle courageously against Diffidence, Distrust, Infidelity, and Despair,
like an active runner, show some brunts as it were of inward strength, even
when thou see the Goal, and art nearest the end of thy race. Now, for
strengthening thy Faith, and renewing thy Repentance the better, take this
course.

First, when Sickness or Infirmity ceazeth on thee, consider that it arises
not from 1. Chance, 2. Fortune, 3. Rawnesse of Weather, 4. Ill Air, 5. Bad
Diet, 6. Catching of cold, or the like (which are either no causes at all, or
else only secondarie) but by an immediate providence.

Secondly, search out the cause for which God afflicts thee, and thou shall by
the light of the word and of thine own conscience, find, that the cause is thy
sin: other causes there may be, as CHRIST shows in the case of the blind man,
who neither sinned nor his Parents, John 9.2. As 1. trial of Faith; 2. of
Patience, as in Jobs case; 3. exciting to Prayer and Repentance, as in Ezekias
case, Esaias 38.1. 4. to prevent sin, to which Nature and corruption inclines;
5. the Humiliation of pride; 6. manifestation of the works of God often cause
the Lord to visit even his own sons with sicknesses and diverse diseases, but
in Gods revealed will, sin is the ordinary cause, as appears, Deuteronomy. Six
causes of sickness besides our sins.
28.21. Leut. 26. etc. Sin caused the Egyptians Botches, Exodus 9.10. the
Philistines Emerods, 1 Samuel 5.6. the Widow of Sarepta's Sons sickness, 1
King. 17.18. and therefore when CHRIST cured the bodies of his Patients, he
first remits the sins of their souls, and so remoues the cause, Mat. 9.2.
John 5.14. as in the blind man, and the sick of the Palsy.

Five duties to be done in sickness.
Thirdly, when thou have felt thine own pulse, and laid the finger on the right
cause, which is sin; then by examination of thine own heart find out what
special sin causes thy present scourge: oh search thy self thoroughly, Zeph.
2.1. examine thy soul narrowly, Psalm. 4.4. Play the self Constable, make
privy search in every room within the house of thy heart, for thy secret
sins, as for privy Traitors.

Fourthly, when thou have found them out confess them, bring them to the
strict bar of Gods Justice, arraigne them; nay, be thy self a Witness
against them; yea, a Judge to condemn them, as Paul prescribes the
Corinthians, in the like case, 1 Cor. 11.30.31. and as David practiced in his
own particular, Psalm. 32.5.

Fifthly* supplicate and entreat the supreme Judge of Heaven (that may
condemn thee, or repriue thee) to pity thee, and pardon thee. Jeremy and
Hosee will direct thee how to put up thy supplications in forma pauperis, as a
poor penitent, and what words to use, that will plead and prevail for pardon,
Lam. 3.40.41. Hosee 6.1. David sets thee an holy President, most beseeming thy
imitation, who when he was sick, at least upon the occasion of his sickness,
penned special Psalms of repentance; as namely, Psalm. 6. the 22. the 38. the
29. which I prescribe to be read of thee, repeated, and applied with David's
heart: also, as spiritual Physic, 1. to purge the ill humors of thine
heart; 2. to quicken thy dullness, 3. to excite thy deadness; 4. to inflame
thy desires; 5. to comfort thy conscience; 6. to strengthen thy faith. 7. to
prepare thee to Prayer: What Scriptures are fittest to be read of a sick man.
read seriously the History of Christ's Passion, recorded, Luke 22.23. Chap.
the 29. Psalm, the 42. Psalm, the 51. Psalm, the 143. Psalm, the 14.
Chapter of Job, the 11. the 14. the 17. Chapter of Saint John Ecclesiastes
Chap. 1. Dan. Chap. 9. Romans Chap 8. the 7. Chap. of the Apocalypse, 1 Cor.
15. Chap. these will give thee some holy heat.

Thus thou have the true preparatiues in thy sickness in respect of God: they
are the more worthy remembrance because so few follow them; for alas, how many
that have lived long in the bosom of the Church; are so far from renewing
their* Faith and Repentance, that when they lie sick and are drawing to their
deaths, they must be catechized (as Christ did Nicodemus, and Philip the
Eunuch) even in the maine doctrines of Faith and Repentance; like as some new
converted Pagans were in the Primitive Church. There be few Ministers
acquainted with visiting the sick, but they shall find that men that have
been under the means, twenty, thirty, or forty years; do, at the end of
all, begin to inquire as the Jews of Peter, Acts 2. and the Iaylor of Pa^l,
Acts 16. what they should do to be saved; not yet knowing the means and the
way to salvation: which argues the great security of our age, and contempt of
God: oh take thou heed betimes, use all good means beforehand, that thou
may be able in sickness, to put in practice these spiritual exercises of
Repentance and Invocation.

The second branch of the sick man's preparation concerns himself; and that
either his soul or his body: for the soul.

D. Maxeys Sermon on the Agony of Christ. Laboraui in gemitu meo.
First, the sick party must arm himself against the fear of death, and
feeling of sickness. Death is very fearful to all men, even to the godly, as
one observes well in David for all, who though he were neither daunted with
Saul's malice, nor the Philistines hatred, nor Absolons Treason, nor Achitophels
treachery, nor in grapling with a Lion, nor in fighting with a Bear, nor
incountring Goliath, yet when Death began to close with him, and lay hold on
him, then he cries out; Oh I am troubled above maesure. Oh spare me a little,
Psalm. 6.3. and 39.13. Therefore, thus encourage thy present feeling, and
greater fear.

First, that sickness, and so death, is the rod of a Father, not the whip of a
Judge, the correction, not destruction of a Son, Heb. 12.6.

Secondly, since it is the Lord, say with Eli, Let him do what seems good, 1 Samuel 3.18. His will be done on me, in me, and by me: on me, in suffering; in
me, by his grace working; by me, in obeying.

Thirdly, Christ thy high Priest and Intercessor is even touched with a
fellow-feeling of all thine infirmiti^s, Heb. 4.15.

Fourthly, against deaths fear, 1. Short furnitures against the feeling of
sickness and fear of death.
consider the estate of thy life, which life is but a vanishing Vapor, James
4.14. a Weather-cocke which turns at every blast, a Wave which surgeth at
every storm, a Reed blown with every wind, a Warfare as doubtful as
dangerous, fear not the vanishing of a Vapor, the turning of a Weather-cocke.
2. Consider thy body as a body of sin Romans 7.24 the souls prison, the minds
iayle, the spirits cage: no Bocardo dungeon, sincke, puddle, pit, is so noisome
to the body, as it self is to the heavenly inspired soul. Now since death is
the leaving of this body of sin, as Augustine calls it Super Johan.
: it is not to be eschewed, but embraced, says Chrysostom Super Mat. 11. 4.
Reasons why the sick man should set his soul in order.
. Other encouragements I leave to their due places.

The second duty which concerns the soul, is this; thou must set in order
thy soul, reconciling and recommending unto God this desolate darling of
thine, after the manner before said: for, as the sickness of the body often
comes from the sin of the soul; so, the curing of the one, often procures the
health of the other: but if thy sickness be to death, by this course: 1. thou
shall dye more quietly, 2. more comfortably, 3. give good example to thy
visitors, 4. leave a comfort to thy suruiuing Friends.

Now, for the performance of these things the better, others ought to assist
thee, as others brought the sick of the Palsy to CHRIST, Mark 2. James tells
thee that the Elders of the Church must be sent for, Iam. 5.14. which Elders
were not only Apostles, but ancient men endued with the spirit of Prayer, and
gift of Miracles; a gift which not only many Parents had, but even Christian
Soldiers, says Tertullian, de corona militis, c. 11. In these times S. James
his rule still holds: though then those gifts cease, yet make thou choice of
such Christians, as have the spirit of Admonition, Exhortation, Prayer, etc.
for to their prayers for thee a blessing is promised, James 5.15. their
prayers, if they be fervent, may prevail for the restoring of thy spiritual
life, or corporal health, as the prayers of 1 King. 17 17
Elias, 2 Kin. 4.31
Elizeus, Act. 20.10.
Paul, and our Ioh. 11.14
Savior Christ, prevailed for whom they prayed; but chiefly, send for thy
Minister, or some faithful Preacher: for, he will play the part of a
spiritual Physician; 1. he can unrip thy ulcers, 10. Reasons why the sick
must send for his Minister.
search thy sores better then thou thy self; 2. set before thee thy sins; 3.
cast thee down by the Law; 4. raise thee up by the Gospel; 5. comfort, 6.
direct, 7. instruct thee; 8. speak a word to thee in due season from God; 9.
be thy mouth to speak, from thee, and for thee, to God; 10. pronounce thy
pardon on earth, which shall be ratified in heaven, upon trial of thy
Repentance, John 20.23. The practice of the world and worldlings is condemnable
in this case: for alas, instead of sending for knowing and zealous men, which
could comfort them with such consolations wherewith they themselves have been
comforted, 2 Cor. 1.4. and in some measure restore them, Gal. 6.1. they send
for their carnal friends, entertain and welcome profane men that come to
visit them; from whom they receive as much comfort as Judas did of the Scribes
and Pharisees, when he was in despair, Mat. 27.3.4. First, either they say
nothing to them (like Jobs friends, that were silent seven days, Job 2.13.)
and in silence look upon them (like a Dear at gaze. The small comfort that a
sick man gets from carnal visitors.
) Secondly, or else they speak to little or no purpose; saying to the sick
party, they are sorry to see him in such a case, they would have him take
(that which themselves want) a good heart, and be of good courage and comfort,
but wherein and by what means, they cannot tell. Others more vainly and
profanely, that they doubt not but he shall do well enough, and recover, and
that they shall be merry and drink and carouse together, as they have done
before, etc. and they will pray for them if they will, when alas, all their
prayers are nothing else, but the Apostles Creed, or the ten Commandments,
and the Lords Prayer uttered without Faith, Feeling, and Understanding; and
this is the common comfort that sick men get of their neighbors and friends,
when they come to visit them: alas, we may say (as Job of his friends)
miserable comforters be they all.

Secondly, herein many men are also culpable, 1. that they either send not for
a Minister at all; 2. or else for such a one as is as good as none, a cloud
without rain, a dry pit without water; such a one as wants the tongue of the
learned, to speak to him, or the heart of the humble, to pray for him, unless
in saying (as they say) some set prayers; which good Sir John is as far from
truly praying, as the sick Patient is from profiting by them. Or thirdly, if
they send for a Minister it is preposterously, when it is too late, in some
maine exigent, when they see no way but one; The Minister is to be sent for
before the Physician.
Oh then send for a Preacher, send for a Minister, as Pharaoh in his deep
distresses, knowing no means of evasion, sends for Moses, and sends for Aaron,
Exodus 9.27. whom in his welfare he both despised And despited. If Iannes and
Iambres, Astronomers and Astrologers, could have helped Pharaoh, Moses and Aaron
should never have been sought to, nor God by their means. If Physicians and
Galens Art, Natures Simples (nay, with some, if Sorcerers, and white Witches
and Satan's power) or the virtues of the waters, or ought else, could comfort
their souls or cure their bodies, the Preacher should be unsought to, or
unsent for of many, that in their health have hated him and his doctrine, as
much as Ahab hated Michay and his Ministry, 1 Kings 22.8. Vbi de^ini^*
Theologus, ibi incipi^ Medicus.
Oh what an unequal course is this, that although till help be had for the
soul, and sin, which is the root of sickness, be cured, Physic to the
body seldom auailes? (for which cause the Physician should begin where the
Divine ends;) yet usually the Divine begins when the Physician makes an end;
nay, often when life is making an end: the Physicians are sent for in the
beginning of sickness, we in the end of life, when a man is half dead; yea,
when he lies drawing on, and gasping for breath, as though we were able then to
work Miracles, and recover him.

If I knew not these things by experience, if I had not been present with
some, of whose sickness I never heard, till I came to the closing up of their
dying eyes; if I had not spent much spirits with some that were no more
intelligent what I prayed, or what I said, then stocks and stones, who for a
good space before, in their sickness, had strength of Memory and natural
powers, I should not now so occasionedly have given thee a caveat to prevent
the like preposterous course, when God casts thee on thy sicke-bed.

Now follows such duties as concern the body of the sick man: they are two;
1* using, 2. right using the means. The means is, good and wholesome
Physic, which we must esteem as an ordinance of God for our recovery in this
case. For how ever many (chiefly the vulgar and common people) despise
Physic as a thing needless and unprofitable, having from blindness and
ignorance a preiudicate opinion of it, yet the Scriptures approve it, Mat.
9.13. the Saints of God have practiced it. Ezekias by the Prophets
prescription, applied to his boil, a lump of dry Figs, 2 Kings 10.7. which
Figs, Galen lib. 1. de art curat. c. 6.
even Galen prescribes as an ordinary medicine to soften and ripen tumors in
the flesh: therefore the cure was not altogether miraculous, (as some think)
but in part natural. Besides, The lawful use of Physic plainly proved.
did not the Samaritane, Luke 10.34. pour into the wounds of him that
traveled from Jerusalem to Jericho, Wine and Oil; which Valesius makes a
right Physical practice; Wine serving to cleanse the wound and ease the pain
within; Oil to supple the flesh, and assuage the pain without: to which kind
of curing it seems Esaias has relation, Esaias 1.6. Besides, as the phrase is, as
there is no sore but there is a salve for it, so God has given unto some men,
Art and Skill, how to apply the medicinable virtues that are in Beasts, Birds,
Fishes, Herbs, Plants and Fruits, etc. to the cure of man: which who so
neglects, neglects the means, and so directly tempts God; in which respect his
death can neither be so comfortable, nor conscionable, as if he had submitted
himself to this ordinance of God. Therefore since thou may use Physic
lawfully and commendably, let it be thy care in the second place, to make
choice of such a Physician, as is skillful and conscionable.

I know there are some of great Forest de vrin. Indicijs lib. 3. Lang. lib. 2
Epist. 41.
judgment, that do accept against the skill of those Physicians that
administer to their Patients upon the bare inspect of their Urine, without
further knowledge of their estates; affirming this judging by the urine to be
very deceitful, since the water of him that has the Plurisie, or the
Inflammations of the Lungs, or the Squinancie, as also of him that has a
quartan, or any intermitting Fever (chiefly if they have kept a good diet
from the beginning) looks, for substance and color, as the water of a whole
man. Others take also exception against those which will administer no
Physic, nor use Phlebotomie, without the direction of judicial Astrology, a
supposed Art, in which there is much superstition, little certainetie See
Heidon against Iud. ^s^ro. S^ H^i^ is preser^atiue against the poison o^
^p^osed prophesies.
, whereas it is thought that it is a far better course to consider the matter
of the disease, with the disposition and ripening of it, as also the courses,
and Symptoms, and Crisis of it, then to minister Purgations, and let blood* no
otherways then they are counseled by the constitutions of the Stars. But I
meddle not with their Mysteries; I see but with others eyes in this case; I
know the Cobbler is not to go beyond his last, only make thou choice of a
meet Physician for thy health, as thou art careful of a good Lawyer for thine
estate, and of a good Divine for thy soul. Meddle not with Emperickes,
Quacksaluers, Women^Physitians, and the like, who often do more harm then good.

Now, in the third place, What to do in taking Physic.
use this means of Physic conscionably: 1. Let it be sanctified unto thee
(as thy meat and thy drink) by the Word of God and Prayer, 1 Timothy 4.3. 5.
Rules obseruable in the use of physic.
Commend it to Gods blessing for restoring of thy health, if it be the will of
God. 2. Humble thy soul, that God may heal thy body. 3. Persuade thy self
that it can neither prevent old age nor death, but still prepare thy self for
thy departure. 4. Rely not only upon the means, but wait Gods leisure in
blessing the means. 5. If thou recover, be thankful to God: a duty much
neglected (as it was of Ezekias, as also of the nine cleansed Lepers in the
Gospel) so of many in our days, for which the Lord is angry even as he was
with them, 2 Chronicles. 32.24 25. Luke 17.17. wherein they are more unthankful
unto God then the Ephesians were to Esculapius, that writ in Tables all the
cures done by Physic, and hung it up in Diana's Temple, where Hipocrates
found it.

Thus thou have the duty to be performed in sickness both in respect of thy
soul and body, for the furtherance of thy peaceable departure.

I should now conclude, but that the cursed custom of the world calls me in
conscience to condemn the practice of those, that contrary to these
prescriptions, from the Word, in their sickness, seek for help from Satan,
(as Ahazia that sent to Baalzebub the God of Ekron) and that either directly,
or secondarily, when they run to Coniurers, South-sayers, Charmers,
Inchanters, Witches, Wizards, Wisemen, and Wise-women, (as the unwise deluded
Country People call them) who are in far more respect with the common people
(and some great ones too) and more sought after, then either God is sought to
by prayer, or the Physicians for Physic: for, if any of these simple souls
be in any extremity, by sickness or diseases, or their Wives, Children, etc.
even as they do also (like beasts) for their beasts and Cattle: such a
Wiseman, such a Wise-woman, such an old Hag, such a white Witch, such a
shee-Diuell must be sent to. Earnest inuectiues against such as in extremities
seek to Witches and Charmers, with disswasiues from such Idolatry.
Alas, what is this, but to run from the God of Israel to the God of Ekron,
from Samuel in Ramoth, to the Witch at Endor, from the Rivers of Samaria to the
Waters of Damascus, from the living to the dead, from God to the Devil? What
is this but to fall down and worship the Devil, to sacrifice to him with the
poor Virginians, and the Heathenish Savages? Oh Atheistical Sots, is there
not a God in Israel?

Therefore take thou heed of this cursed course, and Satanicall practice in
thy sickness: for alas, to run a whoring afrer such, is not the way to cure
thee, but to kill thee; for this heinous sin usually prouokes the Lord to
plague the practisers of it, even with death it self, as the Lord himself
threatens, that he will purposely set his face against those that work with
Spirits, etc. yea, and that he will cut them off to from amongst his people,
Leuit. 20.6* So the Lord verified this threat in Ahazia: for, because he did
seek to Baalzebub, and not to the God of Israel, in his sickness, God sends
Elias directly to tell him, that for that cause, he should not come down from
his bed, but should dye the death, as indeed he did, 1 Kings 1.6. So Saul was
slain notwithstanding that he went to the Witch at Endor, 1 Samuel 31.

Oh that our common people would read and remember this, Against seeking to
Witches and Charmers, in sickness.
that in stead of getting help by such Satanicall means as thy use, they
provoke the Lord (as Paul tells the Corinthians in another case, of receiving
the Sacrament unworthily, 1 Cor. 11.29.30.) to plague them either with further
diseases, or else with death it self, as he did Saul and Ahazia.

Secondly, suppose thou should get help, it is by the Devils means, and who
would go to such a filthy Physician?

Thirdly, if by this means thou be relieved, thy soul is a thousand times
more prejudiced; the cure of thy body is the curse of thy soul; thou procures
the health of the one by the sickness of the other; so thy salve is worse then
thy sore: therefore when Satan and his Instruments can help thy health, so
much as Superstition and Idolatry in seeking to them, hinders thy salvation,
then I shall say to thee (as Elizeus to Naaman (Go in peace, even to the house
of Rimmon.

Others there be that use other means, which have no warrant: of which kind
are those that use any manner of Charms or Spells, or that hang about their
necks Characters and Figures, either in Paper, Wood, or Wax, etc. which are
all vain and superstitious, because neither by creation, nor by any ordinance
in Gods word they have any power to cure diseases: for, words do only
signify, Figures can but only represent.

Indeed I confess, there are some things that have some virtue in them, being
hung about the neck, as white Galen. lib. 6. and 10 de simpl. Medic.
Peonie in this kind, is good against the Falling-sickenesse; and Wolfes-dung,
tied to the body, is good against the Collicke; so there are many the like,
which have not their operation by Enchantment, but from an inward virtue: but
all Amulets and Ligatures, etc. which work not by some virtuall contract, must
needs have their power from the Devil.

The last duty which must be done in sickness, is relative, concerning
others: of which briefly, even as we have spoke of those that concern God
and our selves. Others I call either our Enemies or our Friends: those without
us, or our own Families.

First, to thy enemy thou must be reconciled; forgive him, and desire to be
forgiven of him: thou art now about not to offer a Lamb or a Bullock, as in
the Leuiticall law, but thy self, thy body, thy soul a sacrifice to GOD, Romans
12.1. Oh then first be reconciled to thy God ere thou offer thy gift, Mat.
5.23. Now, if the party whom thou have injured, either be absent, or present
and will not relent; yet thou in seeking peace have discharged thy conscience,
and God will accept thy will for the deed.

Secondly, if thou have wronged any man by any manner of Injustice whatsoever,
secretly or openly, thou must make restitution, evil gotten goods must be
restored, be they gotten by Usury, Oppression, Extortion, keeping the pawn,
the pledge, or by any sinister means whatsoever: the LORD strictly inioynes
it, Leuit. 6. verse. 1.2.3.4. Zacheus practiced it, Luke 14. The Law of Nations
and of Nature approues it, and the very Law that is writ within us does press
and urge it.

The practice of the world is against both these rules: for alas, are there not
many whose malice is (like coals of Juniper) unquenchable? The throwing of
dust amongst buzzing Bees, makes them quiet; but the summons to their dust,
causes not some to leave their waspishnesse: they carry wrath boiling within
their breasts, as in a Furnace, even to Tophet, the fire and Furnace of Hell;
never purposing to forget nor forgive; nay, wishing that their very spirits
could torture and torment their enemies after their dissolution. And for
restitution, how few be there that once dream of it, Reconciliation with
enemies, and restitution in wrongs, in sickness to be practiced.
much less determine it? in which case they come far short of Judas, who at
his desperate death would restore those thirty pieces which he got in life
with the price of blood, Mat. 27.4.5. In which those men do not only
prejudice their own souls, but their Children also and posterity, even in
earthly things, in leaving to them riches wrongfully got, which bring
deservedly the curse of God upon all the rest of that estate which they
bequeath unto them; according to the phrase: De male quaesitis vix gaudet
tertius haeres.
Goods evil got, who ere enjoy them,
Help not the third heirs, but annoy them.
like that coal of fire which the ravenous Eagle carried to her nest, which
set all the rest of the nest on fire.

Thirdly, thou must have a special care to provide for the peace, welfare, and
prosperity of those that are committed to thy charge, that it may go well
with them after thy death.

The Magistrate, after the example of Moses, Deuteronomy. 31.1. Josh* 25. 1 King. 2.
Joshua, and David, must provide for the godly and peaceable estate of that
Town, City, or Commonwealth, over which he is set, Magistrates, Ministers
and Masters must provide for the good of their charges, even after their death.
that pure Religion may be maintained, outward Peace established, civil
Justice executed, etc.

The Minister, as much as he can, when he is in dying, must cast to provide for
the continuance of the good estate of that Flock, over which the holy Ghost
has made him Ouer-seer. Thus our Savior himself, the chief Shepherd, had a
care of his Flock, ere he left them; he moderates the mourning of the
Daughters of Jerusalem; gives Commission to his Disciples to teach all Nations,
Mat. 28.^9. comforts them with the promised Comforter, John 16.7, Thus Peter
endeavored, that those to whom he writ and preached, should have remembrance
of what he taught them, even after his departure, 1 Peter 1.15. If Peter's
pretended Successors stood not so much on their personal succession, as they
should in the right of succession, laboring to imitate the doctrine of Peter,
of the Prophets, and Apostles; nay, if this care of doctrinall succession were
in the Ministers of the reformed Religion, we should not have here so much
blindness and ignorance, where once was light; there so many Schisms, Errors
and Heresies, where once was an unity in verity; elsewhere so many Wolves
come into the rooms of faithful Pastors, Acts. 20 ver. 29.

Thirdly, if thou be a Master of a Family, thou must set thine house in
order, as the Prophet from God commands Ezekias, Esa. 38.1. Now for as much as
all Scripture is from God, 2 Timothy 3.16. 2 Pet. 1.20. and all examples are for
our learning, Romans 15.4 what was said to Ezekias, is said to every man, Set
thine house in ordrr. For, Order (says Nazianzen De moderatione in disputat.
ser^anda.
) is the mother and preserver of all things. Now for the procuring this order
in thy Family, do two things: 1. concerns the temporal: 2. the spiritual
estate of thy Family.

For the first, make thy Will and Testament, thou should make it in thy
health, as Abraham did Genesis 17.
, who in his health makes a Will and gives Legacies: but chiefly in thy
sickness, as did Isaac Gen 27.
; and Jacob in that prophetical Testament of his. Genesis 49. So some thus set
down Christ's Will on the Cross Luke 23.46.52. Ioh. 19.27. Luke 23.43.34.
: he gives his Soul to his Father, his loving Mother, to his beloved Disciple
John, his body to Joseph of Aramathia, to the penitent Thief Paradise, to the
Jews his heartiest desires, when he prays for them, etc. Now, 5 Reasons why
a sick man must make his Will.
it is not a matter of indifferency, but a thing that conscience binds thee
to, even to make a Will, and to distribute thine inheritance, as Siracides
counsels, Sir. 33.22. for thus discharging a good conscience, thou may more
freely depart in peace, as a man takes his journey more freely when he has
set his house in order.

Secondly, Romans 16.1^
so thou cuttest off many contentions, and stayest many suites in Law.

Thirdly, thou take away scandal and offense, and so preuentest a woe
threatened, Mat. 18.7.

Fourthly, thou shall be thought a wise man, and not dye like a Nabal and a
fool, in setting all at six and seven, and so shall leave behind thee a
good name, as a precious Ointment, Eccles. 7.3.

Fifthly, thou shall in this imitate God, who is the God of order and not of
confusion.

Now in the manner of making thy Will, let the Rules be, 1. the Law of GOD, 2.
of Nature, 3. of that Nation whereof thou art a member, 4. of common equity.
If thy will be against any of these rules, it is culpable. First, then it is
Gods will to prefer thine own blood, in disposing of thy estate, before
others; as GOD tells Abraham, that Eliazer, a stranger, shall not be his heir,
but his own Son, 4. Maine rules in making all Wills.
Genesis 15.4. The like, God commands the Israelites, that if any man dye, his
Son shall be his heir; if he have no Son, his Daughter; if no Daughter,
his Brethren; so descending still to the next of kin, Numb. 27.8.17. It is a
fault then for any man to alienate his goods or lands wholly from his blood and
posterity, the light of Grace and of Nature to, condemns it; even the very
Schools of Lib. 2. de rep. polit.
Plato and Lib 2 c. 8
Aristotle.

Secondly, those are culpable, that give all to the eldest, and little or
nothing to the rest; or all to Sons, nothing to Daughters: for, though it be
equal that the eldest have more then the rest: First, because he is the
eldest, the Re^ben, and first strength of the Father. Secondly, because Stocks
and Families are preserved in their persons. Thirdly, that they may do
special services to the Commonwealth: yet it is exceeding unequal to give so
much to the eldest, as though he should be my young Master, and a Gentleman,
and the younger borne to bear the wallet; as though he only were a Son, and
the rest Illegitimate. Fourthly, in the Laws of equity, remember him with
something, or her, in thy Will, that have been trusty and faithful Servants
to thee: gratify in thy death, their loves, labors, and strength spent for
thee: deal not with them (as the Spaniell with the water) shake them not off
when thou have no more use of them. Secondly, allot some Legacies to thy
friends, as memorials of thy lasting love. Thirdly, as thou art able remember
the Chruch of God, and those that are in it, poor Ministers, or poor Members.
Fourthly, such Societies in the Commonwealth as thou have lived in.

Now, concerning the spiritual estate of thy Family, teach, instruct, exhort,
admonish, and pray for every particular person in thy Family. In this, read,
and imitate the example of David, 1 Kings 2. the whole Chapter. Exhort thy Wife
to be the Spouse of CHRIST; thy Children, Gods Children; thy Friends, Gods
Friends; thy Servants, Gods Servants: so shall God, and Gods Spirit, give that
testimony of thee, that he did of Abraham, Genesis 18.19. even for instructing
thy Family after thee. The practice of these Precepts concerns thy peace,
both in sickness and in death.

Lastly, when thou feel Death approaching, coming near to the Agony and
pangs of it; then, with the Mariners, stearne aright, to get into the Haven:
there is the greatest danger, and if recovered the greatest joy.

Now labor, as thou have lived, so to dye by Faith. Now apply the Promise to
thy Soul; trust in it, let it quicken thee, as it did David, Psalm. 119.49.
Comfort thy self (as that persecuted Patriarch did, A christian carriage
prescribed even in the hour of death.
when Death was before him) even in the Lord thy God, 1 Samuel 30.6. Now let God
be the strength of thy heart, even when thy flesh fayles, and thy heart also,
Psalm. 73.26. Now with the Israelites, look to him with the eye of Faith, of
whom the brazen Serpent was a figure, even when the Serpent Death imbraceth
thee to sting thee, John 3.14. Now call to mind all the former mercies of thy
God, to thy soul, and suck spiritual sweetness from them. Now, with Moses,
cry unto God, even when thou see the dead Sea, (as he the red Sea) before
thee, Exodus 14. Now pray with all thy powers and spirits; love the Lord with
all thy heart and affections; rejoice that thou art going to meet thy
Bridegroom: now mourn and weep more then ever, that thou have offended so
good, so gracious, and so loving a GOD: Now, with Ezekias, remember thy former
sins, in the bitterness of thy soul, turn thy self to the wall and weep
in the secret silence of thy Soul, Esaias 38.3. that so thou washing thy soul
with penitent tears, thy CHRIST may, at that instant, vvash away the
pollutions of it with his blood: that so it may be presented spotless before
the Lords Tribunal, vvhither it is approaching: that so (as it is said of the
Dove and the Eagle, that when they have plunged their vvings in the water, they
are better fitted for their flight) thou plunging thy self into the troubled
Bethesda poole of thy repentant tears, distilling from the Limbecke of a
remorcefull heart, thy soul may take the wings of a Dove, and fly out of the
Cage and Coat of thy body, to her eternal rest in Abraham's bosom. Now with
Simeons heart, sing Simeons Song: now awaken all thy powers, to praise the
Lord; so (as in singing we ascend to higher notes,) thy soul leaving the
earth of thy body, shall with the Lark mount still higher and higher; nay, it
shall be carried up on the wings of waiting Angels, till it be transcendent
amongst the Quires of those heavenly Hierarchies, that sing continual
Halleluiah's unto the once incarnate, now deified Lamb, even Simeons Lord,
that sits upon the throne. To whom, with the Father, and the eternal Spirit* a
Trinity in Unity, and Unity in Trinity, as his due, and our duty, from the
ground of our hearts and souls, be ascribed all Honor, Glory, Power,
Majesty, and Mercy, of us and all Churches* now and for evermore. Amen.

Necessary Encouragements, and Comforts, against the grieuances of several
Crosses.
Because that many are too much dejected, and disconsolate, at the death of
their friends, Parents for Children, Children for Parents, Husbands for Wives,
and Wives for Husbands, Brother for Brother, and Friend for Friend, mourning
(like Ier. 31.16.
Rachel for her Children) and will not be comforted: let these Motives move
thee to take truce with thy tears, and not to sorrow as did the Heathens
without hope.

1 KNOW and acknowledge that it is GOD that has taken away thy friend, the
pleasure of thine eyes, thy Wife, or the like; therefore, as God said to
Ezekiel in the like case, Mourn not, nor weep, neither let thy tears run
down: cease from sighing, and make no mourning for the dead, Ezekiel. 24.16.17.
Murmr not as did the rebellious Israelites, when their Brethren were taken
away, Numb. 16.41. Kick not against the prick. Act. 9.5. resist not God with
a stiff and uncircumcised heart; Act. 7.51. but, like an obedient child,
embrace the stroke of thy Father, and kiss the rod.

2. The Saints of God have been patient spectators of the deaths of as near
and dear friends, as any thou have parted withal; whose Patience, in this
cross, I propound unto thee to imitate, as James propounds Jobs Patience to be
imitated in every cross, James 5.11. Thus Adam and Eu^ saw the death of their
son Abel, Genesis 4. Noah the destruction of the whole world, by the Deluge,
Genesis 7. Abraham, of Terah his Father, Genesis 11.32. so, of his dear Wife Sarah:
Genesis 23.2. Let, of his Wife: Genesis 19 26. Isaac, of his Mother, and of Abraham
his tender Parents: G^n. 25.8.9. Jacob, of his Father Isaac, Genesis 35.29. of
his beautiful and beloved Rachel. Genesis 35.19. Thus when Aaron saw his two
sons, Nadab and Abihu, devoured with fire from the Lord, he held his peace:
Leuit. 10.2.3. Job blessed God as well when his Children were slain, as his
goods imbezeled: Job 1.21.22. for Eli lamented the loss of the Arc, rather
then the slaughter of Hophni and Phinees; for which his Daughter in-Law also
was more moved, then for the death of her Husband: 1 Samuel 4. v. 18.19.20.21.22.
David more bewailed the spiritual death of the souls of Ammon and Absolon
then the corporal deaths of their bodies, thy dying in their sins of Incest
and Treason Crimina doluit, non exitis filiorum Amb.
2 Samuel 14.14. Lastly, the Virgin Mary and John the Disciple, stood by the
Cross of Christ in his Passion, only with compassion Stan^em lego, stentem
non lego. Ambr. in orat. suneb.
, without that outward lamentation which Christ condemned in the Daughters of
Jerusalem, and in them, immoderate mourning in all; Mat. 27.56. Luke 23.28.
which particulars, chiefly the last, as Ambrose applied them in his Funeral
Oration of Valentinian the Emperor, so they must be laid to heart in our
application and imitation in every Funeral.

Genesis 5.
3 If he dyed in the Faith of Christ, he is translated (like Enoch) from this
life to a better; from this veil of misery to eternal glory: he is a Citizen
of Heaven, an inheritor of a Kingdom. Luk 12.3^.
Sorrow not for his triumph, he is gone to possess a Crown in Glorification,
which was granted him in Predestination, promised him in Vocation.

4 He is blessed, being dead in the Lord, Apoc. 14.

5 He is returned home to his Fathers house; he is gone to his better
friends, even to the company of innumerable Saints and Angels, and to the
Spirits of the just, Heb. 12.22.23. Mat. 22.30. Reu. 15.11. Mat. 8.11. 1 These.
4.17.

6 He is inseperably united unto GOD, the chief and perfect Good: first, whom
to see is Tranquillity: secondly, whom to rest in is Security: thirdly, to
enjoy is Felicity. Being incorporated into that City; first, whose King is
Verity: secondly, the Laws Charity: thirdly, the Dignities Equity:
fourthly, the Life Eternity; Augustine. Prosper.
in which he shall be sempeternally blessed, ioying in, and inioying, first, a
certain Security; secondly, a secure Tranquillity; thirdly, a safe
Iocunditie; fourthly, happy eternity; fifthly, an eternal felicity.

7 He is now married unto his Bridegroom CHRIST, to whom his soul was
contracted in earth, and the Marriage Feast is now solemnized in Heaven: now,
thy mirth, not thy mourning, becomes a Marriage, Hos. 2.19. Mat. 22. Phil.
1.23. John 12.26. and 17.24. Luke 33.43.46. Reu. 7.17.

8 Consider that his warre-fare is now at an end: his journey is finished, and
his work is accomplished: if GOD had had any more work for him to have done,
he should have lived longer: for, as God sweepes away the wicked when they are
at the height of sin, as he did Er and Onan, Genesis 38. the Sodomites, Hophni,
Phinees and Absolon; so the godly in the height of Grace.

9 He was here a Pilgrim and a stranger, as were the Patriarchs, Abraham Heb.
11.9 10. Cha. 13.14.
, Isaac Gen 47 9.
, Jacob Psalm. 39.14.
David, and the rest; now he has hoyst up sails, he is gone home into his
own Country, therefore why should thou grieve at his happy voyage and safe
arrival?

10 Thou have not lost him Amici mortui non amissi sed praemissi. Bern.
, but left him; he is not dead but departed; nay, (as Christ said of Iairus
his Daughter, and John 11.11.
Lazarus,) thy Friend, thy Damz^ll, thy Daughter, be it he or she, is not
dead but sleeps; and (as Verse 2^.
Martha believed) there shall be a time when they shall waken. Now, what mother
grieves that her unquiet child sleeps and takes the rest? many weep because
their Children will not, or cannot sleep, few because they do sleep.

11 He shall be restored unto thee again at the Resurrection of the just,
even in his body, Psalm. 17.15. Job 19.25. John 5.29. as his soul is now
immediately gone to God, as did the soul of Lazarus, Luke 16.22. of Stephen,
Acts 7.69. of the penitent Thief, Luke 23.43. yea, of CHRIST himself, verse
46. where it remains in joy, Mat. 25. v. 21. and 23. so the body shall be
reunited to it again, participating with it in glory 1 Cor. 2.9.
unspeakable and Mat. 25.46. John 3.16.36. 1 These. 4.17 2 Timothy 2.10 2 Cor 4.17.
everlasting. Therefore mourn not excessiuely for him, like the Gentiles, the
Epicures, and Sadduces that have no hope of the Resurrection.

12 Though he cannot come to thee, as the dead Dives desired, Luk 16.24. yet
ere long thou shall go to him, as David said of his deceased 2 Samuel 12 23
Child; yea, thou shall in all probability, know him again, in thy
Glorification, as Adam knew Eve in the Creation Genesis 2.23
, and as Peter knew Moses and Elias Mat. 17.4.
in Christ's Transfiguration. Therefore have patience for his absence, till you
meet again to your more mutual comfort, as Genesis 46.29.30.
Jacob met with Joseph in a better place.

13 His better part is yet living, Mors non interitus sed introitus, non obitus
sed abitus.
his soul is immortal, John 11.25.26. only the Cage of the body is broken,
and the soul, like a Bird, has taken vvings, and is at rest.

14 His estate is now bettered, and far more blessed then it was: of a
Bondman being made a Freeman. Freed by Death:

Romans 6.7. to which here he was sold Romans 7.14
, as Joseph Genesis 37.28.
was sold to the Ishmaelites.

Romans 6 23
, as from a prison, by this Goale-deliuery Death: his pains Genesis 3.16.17.18.19.
in this life Lu. 16.25
, concluding in the pleasures of the next.

of the world, and from those evils which are foretold in the last times, Mat.
24. Luke 21.25.26. 1 Timothy 4.1.2. 2 Timothy 3.1. ad 9. Chap. 4. ver. 3.4. 2 Pet.
2.1.2.3.

Fourthly, from the vanity under which all the Creatures groan. Romans
8.20.21.22.

Fifthly, besides, he is with Triumph and honor recalled from exile and
banishment, as was once Themistocles amongst the Athenians, Judge. 1.7.8.9.
and Iphtah amongst the Israelites, to receive dignities in his own Country,
from whence his soul came. Now, are any Parents sorry, when their Children, of
Bond men, are infranchized; of Prentises, are made Freemen? Is any man grieved
that his distressed and disgraced friend is recalled home from Banishment, and
that by the King himself? Now, this is thy case, if thou take pains to apply
it.

15 In thy exceeding sorrow thou laments what could not be prevented: for he
was one of the Sons of Adam Gen 3.19. Heb. 9. vlt.
, therefore borne to dye Pro. 26.6. Quod generatur corrumpitur. Quod oritur
moritur. Seriu^ aut citius metam properamus ad vnam.
; he could not escape the stroke, as the Swallow by flying. For, the God of
Nature now confirms the Principles of Nature; that whatsoever has motion by
generation, must have a cessation from motion by corruption.

16 Thy case is not alone, but thou have millions and thousands, both in the
Christian and Heathenish world, sailing, at this instant, all along with thee
in the Sea of sorrow, driven with the winds of their own sighs and sobs, for
the like, or greater crosses then thine, bewayling public and private
calamities. Solamen misoris socios habuisse doloris.
Therefore if companions in grief (as the phrase is) mitigate grief, then let
society assuage thy Sorrow.

17 Thy impatient sorrow, 1. hurts thy self, 2. preiudiceth thy health, 3.
consumes thy moisture, 4. occasionedly shortens thy life, 1 Cor. 7.16.
5. Discontents thy friends, 6. displeases thy God: therefore either moderate
it, or leave it off: or, (which is best of all) turn the stream of it, from a
natural to a spiritual, from a carnal to a Christian sorrow for thy special
sins, which is that godly sorrow Joel 2.12 13. v. 17.
commanded of God, 1 Samuel 7.6 Esaias 38.3. Mark 9 24 Mat. 26.75 Luke 7.
practiced by the Saints, 2 Cor. 7.10.11.
causing repentance unto salvation, never to be repented of.

Thy extreme sorrow for the dead is as fruitless as faithless, as
unprofitable to the dead, or to the living, to others and thy self, as
unpleasant: therefore let David's considerations when his Child was dead, be
thy directions, 2 Samuel 12.22.23.

The Lord is still living, who is thy Head, thy Husband, thy Father, thy
Mother, thy brother, thy sister, all in all unto thee, if thou hear him,
belieuest in him, and obeyest Luke 8.21
him: therefore, as David in another extreamitie, comfort thy self in the Lord
1 Samuel 30 6.
thy God: happy is he that is ready to leave all for Christ's sake Mat. 10
37.38.39.
; that can say with one of the Ancients, Deus meus and omnia.
My God and all things: my God, my Guide, my Rock, my Defense, my Salvation
Psalm. 18.1.
, therefore that love which thou did bear to them that are gone,
sequestrate it from the dead, and reflexe it upon God: there is danger in our
earthly love, whether natural to our Child, conjugal to our marriage Mate,
or morrall to our Friend: in which we may soon offend, in the defect of too
little, or in excess of too much. For which cause, God being a Exodus 20.
Jealous God, and not enduring that our hearts Pro. 4.23
should be set on any thing in loving it, too much, over, or above, or besides,
or equal with himself, often depriues us of our loved Idols. Therefore he has
crossed the loves of his dearest Saints in this kind: of two Wives Iacob^
Rachell dies, which he loved above Leah Genesis 29.30. Chapter 35. v. 18
; of twelve Sons, Jacobs Joseph is sold, his dearling, more then the rest
Genesis 37.4 v. 23.24. Chapter 39.
; of many Children, David's Abs^lon and Adoniah 1 Kin. 1.6
, whom he most pampered, soonest perish; of all David's Friends he soonest
sorrows for his best Friend* his halfe-soule Jonathan. Thus perhaps it is with
thee: thine own 2 Samuel 12.3.
Sheep from thine own bosom, thy Turtle-doue, thy loving Hind, thy Wife,
the fairest male-Lambe in thy Folds, thy Heir and eldest Son, thy strength,
thy Reuben, or thy Friend, thy second self, is taken from thee; perhaps thy
heart was more upon them then upon God, therefore God has taken away the
occasion of thy Idolatry.

Then there is danger in earthly love, but there is no danger in loving,
ouer-louing, our loving God. The speech was as seasoned, as the heart was
sanctified, which I once heard of a young Gentlewoman; Lord, thou have deprived
me (quoth she) of my dear Husband, of mine only Son, whom I loved too
dearly. I see now thou would have my whole love thy self: Lord, take it
all, thou shall have it, thou art worthy of it, it is too little for thee.

20 Lastly, think with thy self, that if those whom thou bewaylest were
sensible and capable of thy immoderatenes in this kind (as they are not) they
would say unto thee, as God said to Ier. 31.16.
Rachell, and Christ to Luke 8.59
Iairus, and to the Luke 7.13.
Widow of Nain, lamenting their Children, Weep not: nay, as he said to the
bewaylers of his Passion, Luke 23.28.
Weep not for me, but weep for your selves: I am well, your case is worse; I
have conquered, you are still fighting; I am in the Haven, you are fluctuate on
the Sea: and therefore as it would be a means to restrain the Papists
Idolatry in praying to Saints and Angels, if they had but eyes to see how they
enforce upon them this Idolatrous worship, which themselves have Acts 14. v.
12.13.14.15. Apoc 19.10 Reu. 14.7. Acts 10.25.26.
prohibited, and directed unto God: so leave thy sorrowing, till thou consider
how little notice they take of it, how little they desire it, or delight in it,
for whom thou sorrowest: being to no more purpose, then to pray to the dead, or
for the dead, which is gross Superstition. This made even E^nius the Heathen
Poet, forbid that any should weep for him after his death; which, Solon and
others ambitiously have desired.

Other Motives might be urged, to move thee to moderation in this point; yet I
would not so reform this abuse in the excess, as though I condemned the mean
in mourning: this were to run from one extreme to another: let this
therefore conclusiuely determine for thy judgment, and direct thy practice,
that it is lawful to deplore the departure of the dead; as the Gen 50. v 3. v.
10.
Egyptians lamented Jacob seauentie days, and his Children seven days; as
Genesis 23.2.
Abraham mourned for Sarah, the Deuteronomy. 34.8
Israelites for Moses, for Numb. 20 29.
Aaron, for 2 Chronicles. 35.24.
Josias, for 1 Samuel 25 1.
Samuel, 2 Samuel ^8.33.
David, for Absolon, for 2 Samuel 1.11.12.
Jonathan, for Abner, the faithful for Steven, the women for Dorcas, etc. yea,
the very cruel Scythians, Hircamans, Sabeans, the savage Indians,
Lothopagians, etc. howsoever they be not so curious in burying their dead is
we: some casting them on dunghils, some unto Dogs, some into the Sea, some
into the fire, etc. yet they show some motion and mourning for them. Then, if
Jews and Pagans mourn; why not Christians? And indeed as it is a curse to
the wicked. as it was to Ieconiah, that none shall say, alas for them, when
they are dead, Ier. 22.18. so the godly ought to be lamented: First, because
they did much good in their places, Acts 9.39. Secondly, because the world was
bettered and blessed by them, Prou. 11.11. Thirdly, we may fear some
Judgments after their departure, Esaias 58.2. Fourthly, because the wicked will
be more ready to sin, and there are fewer left to pray for the wicked, and
to stand in the gap, as did Abraham, Moses and Phinees. Fifthly, because they
were worthy lights and ornaments in the Church or commonwealth where they
lived, Lam. 4.20. as was Josias, for which cause we may even wear mourning
apparel to express our sorrow. So the wicked to, may be bewailed; because,
for ought we know, they are gone down into the bottomless pit of perdition,
the place for wicked men, Psalm. 9.17. the place whither Numb. 16 33.
Corah and Dathan, and Acts 1.25
Judas, and 2 Samuel 18 33.
Absolon went unto, for ought that is to the contrary: yet we must mourn in
that mean: First, that we discover not our own self-love, because we have
lost some good by them: Secondly, nor hypocrisy, in seeming to mourn: Thirdly
nor distrust, as though there were no resurrection: 1 These. 4. Fourthly, nor
excess, knowing that they are but gone a journey, and we shall quickly
ouer-take them: no for ever sent away from us, but for a time sent before us.

Comforts against the Cross of sickness and diseases, howeuer intolerable
and incurable.
BEcause Sickness and Diseases, which distress and distemper every part and
power of the whole man, are very burdensome to the flesh: as, besides their
present pains, being the Heralds and forerunners of Death, tending to the
dissolution of Nature, let these Considerations be so many Cordials and
spiritual lenitiues, to mitigate and assuage the extremities or permanencie of
thy dolours in either kind: For, misery comes not out of the dust, neither
does affliction spring from the Earth. Job 5.6.

1 Consider that this visitation is the message of the Almighty God: it comes
not by chance or Fortune, colds, surfettings, sweatings, etc. are but the
means, Gods hand throws this stone at thee, for it was he that smit Exodus 7.
Exodus 8.
Pharaoh, and the Egyptians, and the 1 Samuel 5.9
Philistines, etc. and cast Esaias 38.
Ezekias upon his sick couch. Therefore storm not, murmr not, he has sent
it, and who has resisted his will? Romans 9 19.

2 Consider the nature of this God, Ephesians. 2.4. Exodus 34.6 Joel 2.13. Jonas 4.2.
Heb. 12.7. 1 Cor. 10.
under whose hand thou groanest; that he is rich in mercy, of tender
compassion, abundant in goodness and truth, and loves thee in his CHRIST,
correcting thee of love as a Father, not punishing thee as a Judge: for though
these sufferings be plagues to the wicked, as were the plagues of Egypt, of
Sodom, and of Moab, yet to thee and all the Elect in Christ, they are but
fatherly chastisements.

3 Consider Gods gracious ends and purposes in these thy visitations.

First, to draw thee to the sight and sense of thy Ioh. 5.14.
sins, the cause of this effect; that so repenting of them, thy souls
sickness may be cured.

Secondly, thou art judged in this kind, and chastened of the Lord, that thou
should not be condemned with the world, 1 Cor. 11.32.

Thirdly, to break and pull down the pride of thy heart, a sin which the
Lord abhorres and detests, both in the wicked, as he did in Herod, Acts 12.
and in his own children, as in Ezekias, 2 Chronicles. 32.25. for which cause he
brings down thy heart through this heaviness, because thou have rebelled
against the word of the Lord, Psalm. 107. v. 11.12.

Fourthly, to try thy Faith and Patience, whether thou will kiss his rod, and
cleave to him in adversity as thou promisest in prosperity: for, God delights
to try his like gold in the fire; as a Master tryes the fidelity of his
Servant, and a Father the obedience of his Child: and therefore according to
the sincerity and measure of our graces in this life (as we see in Gods
proceedings with Abraham, Job, David, yea CHRIST himself) shall our trials and
our afflictions be, both inward and outward.

Fifthly, to shake off thy carnal security: for prosperity makes thee forget
God, as did the Israelites, Manasses, Psalm. 30.6.
David, etc. but this visitation drives thee home by weeping-Crosse to thy
Father, as it did them and the prodigal Child, Luke 15.

4 Remember that thou worthily deseruest this Cross of sickness, as a
punishment for thy sins, the sins of thy youth and of thy age, omissiue and
commissiue: sin being the cause and original of all diseases, Agues,
Feauers, Consumptions, Plague-sores, Leprosies, and the like, Leuit. 26. v.
14.15.16. John 5.14. Therefore as God from time to time has visited the sins
of others, both of the righteous and the reprobates, so he has found out
thee: he that punished the Israelites with diverse and sundry plagues, for
Numb. 16 49
rebelling against Moses and Aaron, and for Numb. 24 3.12.
murmuring against God, he that plagued Exodus ch 8 Chapter 9. Chapter 10 Chapter 12 and 14
Pharaoh with Frogs, Lice, Blood, Death of the first borne, and Drownings, for
contempt of God, hardness of heart, and oppression of his people. He that
smit the 1 Samuel 5.9.
Philistines with Emerods in their secret parts, for their abuse of the Arc:
King 2 Chronicles. 26.19.
Vzziah with Leprosy, for abusing the Priests Office: Gehezi, for his 2 Kin.
5.27
Covetousness: the 1 Samuel 6 19.
Bethshamites with death, for prying into the Arc: the 1 Cor. 11.36.
Corinthians with sickness and death, for profaning the Lords Supper: 2 Chr.
16.10.11.12.
Asa with diseases in his feet, for imprisoning the Prophet: Sueton.
Domitian, Spart. lib. 2. c. 12,
Hadrian, Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 3.
Valerian, Dioclesian, Maximinus, Julian, Aurelian, Arnolphus, Antiochus,
Herod, and others, with incurable diseases and death it self, Ruffinus,
Niceph. etc.
for their pride, blasphemy, persecutions of his Children, and the like sins:
Cerinthus, Arrius, and others within the Church, with sudden Judgments for
their blasphemous Heresies; nay, even his own people with the plague of
threescore and ten thousand men, for the mistrust of David his Servant 2 Samuel
24.
, that God which never suffered sin to go unpunished in Justice, if it were
not pardoned in Mercy: he that sees no iniquity in Jacob Numb. 23 21.
, nor no sin in Israel, in covering the transgressions of his Children Ps.
32.1.2
, and remitting the eternal punishment to the penitent in respect of their
souls: yet there are causes sufficient for him, some secret, some revealed: 1.
Both in respect of God: 2. of his Church: 3. of the wicked: and 4. of thy
self; that he should exercise thee with temporal afflictions here, as he did
David 2 Samuel 12.10.11.
, as with sickness, diseases, etc. Therefore, as the Israelites found out
Achan the Thief Josh. 7.24
, the cause of their plague; the Mariners, Jonas Ion 1.15.
, the cause of their storm, whom they punished condignely: so, find thou out
by a diligent search, thy Achan, thy Jonas, thy special sin, which occasions
this blast and storm of sickness: put Achan to death, crucify that sin,
cast Jonas into the Sea, drown it, or wash it in a flood of tears, as did
Peter Zeph. 2 1.
, and Ezekias Mat. 26.
* and CHRIST will wash thy wounds with his blood, he will recover thy soul
and restore thy sick body, if it be good for thee, or renew thy state in a
heavenly mansion provided for thee Esaias 38.3
. Depend upon God for the issue, have recourse unto him by Faith, in the first
place: look upon the brazen Serpent as soon as ever thou art wounded John
14.2.3.
, and thou shall be healed and helped; either thou shall be delivered from this
cross, as was Ezekias Mum. 21. John 3.14.15.
; or have patience to endure it, as had Job; or a happy issue in it, Esa. 38.21
22.
as had David: but run not in the first place to the Physician, with Asa, 1 Chronicles. 16.12. nor to Charmers, Witches, and Coniurers, as did Ahazia, to
Baalzebub the God of Ekron 2 Kings 13. as Saul to the Witch of Endor, least
thou perish as he did, least thou pay the Devil thy soul, as our ignorant
superstitious common people do, for curing thy body, the wages that he
requires, least thy medicine be worse then thy disease; but Return unto the
Lord, he has spoiled thee, and he will heal thee, he has wounded thee,
and he will bind thee up. Hos. 6.1.

5 God inflicts less upon thee then thy sins deserve, though thy pain be
great: for as we are all by nature sinful, Psalm. 51.4. Corrupt and
abominable, and gone out of the way, Psalm. 14.3. Psalm. 53. all offending in
many things, James 2.3. so he might condignely pay thee the wages of thy
sins, death, damnation, Hell fire, Romans 6.23. Romans 21.8. for indeed it is
the mercy of God, that we are not utterly consumed, because his compassions
fail not, Lament. 3.22.23. He has not dealt with thee after thy sins, nor
rewarded thee after thine iniquity, Psalm. 103.10

6 God afflicts thee not so much as he might and could: for, as thou have
sinned in every part, in thy tongue, in thy head, thy eyes, thy feet, Romans
3.13.14.15. as every member has been made a weapon of unrighteousness to fight
against God, Romans 6.13. so he could rack and rent, torture and torment thee
in every member: even as he will deal with the reprobates in hell. Does thy
head ache with the Shunamites child? 2 Kin. 4. ver. 18. he could make thy
heart ache to; he could scorch thy tongue like the rich Gluttons, Luk^ 16 24.
burn thee within thy bowels, as he did A^tiochus, etc. Is one member
distressed? he could smite thee with boyles from the crown of the head to the
sole of thy foot, as he did Job, Job 2.7. Therefore it is kindness to punish
one part, when all have offended.

7 The Saints and Servants of God have endured greater extremities, then as yet
thou wast ever invred unto: thou have heard as of the patience so of the pains
of Job, thou have not felt a Flea's biting in respect of him, and yet there was
peace to him at the last, Job 42. ver. 17. Look upon the Patients of Christ,
that heavenly Physician, in the Gospel, one good woman troubled with an issue
of blood twelve years long, Luke 8.43.44.
which had spent all she had upon the Physicians, yet at last cured. An other
woman vexed with a spirit of infirmity, Luke 13.11.12.13.
eight and fifty years, that was bowed together, and could not lift up her
self in any wise, yet loosed by CHRIST from her disease. John 5.5.6.7.8.
A man that was diseased eight and thirty years, lying at the poole of
Bethesda, yet at the voice of Christ rose up, took up his bed, and walked.

How long, think you, was Lazarus pined with hunger, wanting crummes; payned
with ulcers, wanting comforts; rejected of men; his best Physic the Dogs
tongues, ere he were carried by the Angels into Heaven, Luke 16. I might
instance in the Creeple that was lame from his mothers womb, that sat at the
gate of Salomons Temple, called Beautiful: Acts 3.2. v. 6.
and in that other impotent Creeple at Lystra, which were both of them healed
and helped: the one by Peter and John; Acts 14. v. 8.
the other by Paul and Barnabas, Acts 14.8.9.10. In Aeneas that kept his couch
eight years, sick of the Palsy, yet in the name of Christ made whole, John
9. v. 6.7.
Acts 9.33.34. In him that was blind from his birth, John 9.2. In those two
blind men that cried after Christ, Mat. 9.27. All which by faith, received
their sight from him that is the light of the world. So, in those whose Sons
and Daughters were dispossessed of those tormenting Spirits, Mat. 9. ^ 29.
wherewith from their Cradles, they were possessed, Mark 9.21. verse 25. Luke
9.42. Mat. 15.22. with all the rest of the halt, blind, dumb, maimed, etc.
that were cast down at JESUS his feet, and healed, Mat. 15.30.31. If I should
set before you, in order, David's sufferings in this kind, you would wonder; who
though he were a King, a Priest, and a Prophet, a man after Gods own heart,
yet endured dira and dura, hard and harsh pressures: GOD so tempered his cup,
that he occasionedly cries out, that by reason of his outward and inward
sorrows, there was no health in his flesh, no rest in his bones, his wounds
stinking through corruptnesse, his loins filled with sore diseases, no sound
part in his body, his flesh trembling within him, and the terrors of death
coming about him, his heart panting, his eyes dimmed, his strength failing;
every way so perplexed, that his extremities cause him not only to cry and
call, and complain and groan, but even to roar and bellow out, (like an Ox
pricked,) in the bitterness of his soul, Psalm. 55.4.5. Psalm.
38.2.3.4.5.6.7.8. etc. yet for all that so freed, so comforted after, that his
heart was filled with joy, and his mouth with laughter; that he broke sorth
into praises unto his God, with joyful songs for his deliverance. Apply this
Mithridate of these examples to thine own ruptures. Did not the LORD love
those whom he so visited as well as he loves thee? Did he release those, and
can be not release and relieve thee? Is the Lords hand shortened, that he
cannot help? or his care heavy, that he will not hear? Esaias 59.1. etc.

8 Thy dolours are nothing if they be compared with the sufferings and Passion
of Christ the Messiah, Psalm 22. Esaias 53.
neither in their vehemency or continuation; all his whole life, from his
Cradle in Bethlem, to his Cross in Golgotha, being a dying life, or a living
death; exposed to the malice, madness, opprobries, and calumnies of his
enemies, Herod, and Herodians, Scribes, Pharisees, Sadduces, Jews, Judas; to
1. Poverty, Hunger, 2. Thirst, Weariness, etc. which miserable life was
concluded with such a death, so ignominious, for the shame of it, Phil. 2.8. so
dolorous, 1. both in respect of pains of body, by the Nails and Thorns, in
the sinewie parts of the body* 2. and of griefs of mind, for the ingratitude
of the Jews, the treason of Judas, the faintness of his Disciples: 3. and of
the tortures of soul, in the apprehension of the wrath of his Father, that in
his entrance into it, he sweat water and blood in the Garden; in the
undergoing of it, he cried, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me! All
concurring together, make such a confluence of sorrows, that thy greatest
pains are but pleasures and refreshings: nay, the sufferings of all the
Martyrs; 1. Steven, John Baptist, 2. James, 3. Peter, Paul, Lawrence, etc. and
the rest do not poize and parallel it in the least particulars. Now, can
thou grudge against thy God, for afflicting thee deservedly, that art nocent,
being his Son by Adoption, when he imposed so much upon his own Son by
Nature, being innocent, only made sin for thee, Romans 4. verse. 25.

9 By these sufferings thou art made conformable to the Image of Christ, Romans
8.29. who by many tribulations entered into glory, Luke 24.26. Non debent sub
spinoso capite membrae esse mollia.
It is unseemly for the members to go one way when the head goes another; if
thou be a part of Christ's body, then a head of thorns must have pricked
members.

10 There is no grief so great, but the Lord can, and will in his due time,
ease and relieve thee, as he has promised, Psalm. 50. verse. 15. yea, from thy
most grievous diseases, Exodus 15.20. Psalm. 34.18. For, when did any of the
Lords Children cry unto him, but he heard and help them, Psalm. 107.13.14. God
is able to help, he will help, he knows how to deliver his out of every
tentation, and will deliver them, Esaias 5.2. Esaias 59.1. 2 Pet. 2.9.

11 Christ thy high Priest is touched with a fellow-feeling of thine
infirmities, having had experience of them, in thy own nature. Heb. 4.15.16.

12 This sickness of thine is the Herald and Summoner of thy death, the
warning-peece of thy departing: it is needful that this earthly house of
thine, thy terrestrial Tabernacle be pulled down piece-meale, by sickness,
that thou may be clothed with a better house from heaven. 2 Cor. 5.1.

13 This thy sickness is an excellent Tutor to catechize and instruct thee in
the School of Christianity, it reads (as it were) a Divinity Lecture unto
thee in Christ's own College, 1. of the Gen 3.18.19.
fall of Adam; 2. the miseries of man in life; 3. his mortality in death; 4.
the desert of sin; 5. thine own vvretchednesse and unworthiness; 6. thy
corruptions original; 7. thy transgressions actual; 8. the vileness of man;
9. the Equity, Justice, Majesty, Mercy, Goodness, and Greatness of
Almighty GOD: besides, it fits and prepares thee for a better life.

14 Remember how many gross and reigning sins this thy sickness has
cured, or, at least, curbed in thee, besides those which it has restrained?
Quod medicina corpori, hoc morbus animae.
how has it quenched in thee the fire of Lust? how has it pulled down the
head of Pride? how has it brideled thy Anger? how restrained thy Malice? how
dammed up the stream of inordinate passions? of headstrong, lustful,
luxurious, covetous, and carnal affections? For, to whom sickness is
sanctified, it is Physical to the soul, as medicines are to the body: thy
soul is sick of the Lethargy of sin, scorcht with Lust, inflamed with the
burning Fever of Concupiscence, distempered with the cold palsy of
Covetousness, coldness of Zeal, tympanie of Pride, swelling of Aemulation,
with a number of such like infirmities. Now, as Physic is ungrateful to the
Patient, yet wholesome; so is sickness to thy body: but take it patiently,
because God thy Physician prescribes it for goods ends.

15 As this thy sickness cures many sins, so causarily and occasionedly, it
preuents many, to which thy nature is inclined. How many do live, and lie, and
snort in sin, soyling their souls with all manner of pollutions, that it
were better for them to be sick in their beds? How many profane Heb. 12.
Esaw's, Luke 15.
prodigal young men, loose Libertines, like Ier. 5.8.
Horses, are neighing after their neighbors Wives? like Prou. 7.7.
Salomons Fool, are watching the twilight to sleep in the house of the
strange woman; following Verse 22.
her (like an Ox to the slaughter,) to the very Chamber of Death? How Verse 27.
many are drinking daily in Alehouses, Hell-houses, or Tauernes; in their
German healths, following the sins of Ezekiel. 16.
Sodom, Idleness, and fullness of bread, and fullness of drink to, like
Epicures and Belly-gods, till they break out into all excess of Riot,
Blasphemies, Oaths, Beastialities, Swaggerings, Swearings, Raylings,
Reuilings* Pro. 23.29
Fightings, and Bloud-sheds; whose states were better to have sober souls in
sick bodies, then to have defiled and damned souls in such pampered bodies,
Esaias 5.11
that are strong to drink Wine, and to pour in new Wine, till they be
inflamed? How many are scraping, and scrawling, and scratching for this earth,
in which they wroote and dig, like Moales and Swine, till they open a pit,
from which they leap into Hell, selling their souls for the Mammon of
iniquity like Mat. 26.15.
Judas and Domas; whose bodies, if they were more sickely, perhaps their souls
would be more healthy and holy, and their estate more happy? How many
Countrymen ride and run, like mad men, up and down to the City, and in the
City, for the term of life, from the Innes of Court to Westminster, not
sparing the very Sabbath, to effect their covetous or malicious plots against
their neighbors, who were safer at home, sick in their beds, then here to
employ their strong bodies and politic pates in the Devils Office* to be
accusers and tormenters of their Brethren?

The Whore that hunts for the precious soul of a man; the Thief, that waytes
like a Lion in his D^nne* to catch his prey; the Usurer, that bites to the
bones, and deuoures the flesh; the Pro. 21.17
Gamester, that holds a false Plough; the Player and the Pander, and all the
rest of Satan's Factors, that exchange his sins for souls, living in
unlawful callings, upon the sins of the people; how much better had it been
for them that their Mothers vvombes had been their perpetual beds and graves,
or that they were all their life time imprisoned in their private Chambers,
tied to their couches with the cords of sickness, then to run headlong in
such courses to hell, strong and lively, where they shall be chained and pained
eternally in the bottomless pit.

Besides, how many abuse their outward members and senses in the service of
sin and Satan, whose case would be easier in judgment, if they had never
had them, or by diseases were deprived of them? The unchaste Eye that lusts
after a woman, the window that lets lusts into the soul, were it not better
plucked out? Oh that Sampson, Sichem, Potiphars wife, and David, had been
blind then when they beheld th^se beauties that were there banes! Those whose
feet are ready to shed blood, swift to evil (as Hazael) speedy to run to
sin; how good were it for them to be lame? those that have hands to
perpetrate mischief, were better their hands were withered like I^roboams. Oh
what a blessing were it to be dumb, to those whose tongues being set on fire
on hell, are a world of wickedness, polluting either the Name, the Word, and
Works of GOD, by oaths and blasphemies, so obliging their guilty souls to
condemnation and swift vengeance: 2. or the good name of their neighbors, by
slanders and calumnies: 3. or their chastities, by filthy and rotten speeches?

How much better were it for our riotous Libertines and licentious Gentlemen
that live here, like the Athenians, to do nothing but hear or see, or tell
new things, to be deaf without ears, then to drink in daily such deadly
infection through that sense, as the Sponge suckes water, from soule-poysoning
Plays.

Now, how merciful is God to thee, not only by this cross to mortify sin
in the inward affection; but to restrain and refrain thee from the very
outward action.

16 This thy sickness it glorifies God, it tends to the glory of God: thou
art not punished because God hates thee above others: for, those upon whom the
Tower of Siloh fell, were no greater sinners then the rest, Lu. 13.1.2.3.
Neither did thou or thy Parents (perhaps) sin above others, as Christ said of
the blind man, John 9.3.
but that the glory of God might appear; both the glory of his power and
free will in creating thee so, Esaias 45. v. 6. v. 9. Esd. 4. as also the glory
of his might and his mercy in curing thee: for, so all the miraculous cures
that the Lord wrought in the old or new Testament, did tend to his own glory,
both in the thankful gratulations of his Saints for them, as in their joyful
promulgations and declarations of them. Thus David, and Esaias 38.9.10. etc.
Ezekias, in their Eucharisticall Hymns, and Songs of deliverance, after their
sickness; 2 Kings 5.15. John 9.17. Mat. 8. Luke 17.16
Naaman his acknowledgement and confession of the true God of Israel; the
sick of the Palsy healed, the blind man cured, the Centurions servant
recovered, the Samaritan cleansed, confessing their sins, proclayming Christ's
mercies, and divulging the Miracles, were instruments of Gods glory.

17 These thy Maladies are no arguments that God hates thee; for, in this
nature, or some other, God chasteneth every Son whom he receives. None ever,
either Patriarchs, Prophets, or Apostles went to heaven out of the cross way,
Mat. 22.
by which CHRIST himself went to glory. Therefore as Christ to show his love,
pity, and compassion to the diseased and distressed, invited the halt,
blind, and lame to his great Supper; and wills others to inuit them to their
feasts, so he himself will accept them in his Kingdom, as he did 8 Lazarus.

These Cordials may be applied to every ordinary visitation, ^ut if thy pains
be permanent, and thy dolours extreme and durable, yet thus revive thy
fainting spirits, and strengthen thy self by these Meditations.
18 THat at furthest they can but continue this short and transitory course of
this life, they shall expire with death: thy days fly as fast as the Bird in
the air: the Ship in the Sea, the Arrow out of a Bow, or the swiftest things
in Nature. Now, thy Diseases are designed within the limits of this brief and
brittle life: they have their date in thy death; at which time they bid thee
adieu, never to return, but joys to succeed.

19 Secondly, they are nothing in comparison of those pure, Celestial,
blessed, and eternal joys in Heaven, which we have before mentioned, as
they are in the Word revealed; so sweet, so great, that all the Arithmeticians
in the world cannot number them, nor all the Geometritians measure them, nor
all the Logitians define them, nor the tongues of Men and Angels describe them;
nay, if I were all tongue, as Saint John was all voice, I could not express
them* as thou shall experimentally feel them, after thy pains have here their
period, when thy warfare is accomplished: therefore endure this rod for a
time, since thou art an Heir for ever.

20 Thou art freed surely by Faith in CHRIST from eternal death and the pains
of hell: which are fearful in respect of the place, horrible in all the
diversities of punishments, painful in the variety of plagues, ineffable,
invtterable, endless and infinite in the continuation of time: bless God for
this exemption, for this redemption.

Comforts against the unkindness of merciless friends.
Objection.

OH, but this adds grief to thy pains, that thy Friends are unkind unto
thee in this thy distress; and thou art destitute of comforters, none
compassionates thy extremities.

Answ. 1. This must not seem strange unto thee: thy case is not singular in
this kind, but usual and ordinary. Friends, like Swallows, sing and make
merry with thee, lodge and lie with thee in the Summer of prosperity: but
take their sudden and far flight in the Winter of adversity: it made the
wise Heathen exclayme, Oh friends, no friends.

2 The Saints have had this measure. Did not good Job find his three friends
miserable comforters in his greatest exigents? Was there any more comfort in
them Job 5.13.14.15.16.17.26.27.
, then water in a stone, or oil in a flint: they were as a brook dried up.
David had some experience in this case, when by reason of Saul's persecution,
even his Father, his Mother, and Brethren so far forsook him, his Companion
that are meat with him, was so treacherous to him, that he was lest as
destitute of true friends, as the naked Bird of feathers: his friends few, his
enemies many, Psalm. 69. v. 8. ver. 21. Psalm. 22.12. Psalm. 25.17.18. Psalm. 69.4.

3 Christ himself was rejected, not only of Herod and his Courtiers, Luke 23.
ver. 11. See Psalm. 22.6.7.8.12.13.14. Psalm. 69.21.22. applied to Christ.
of the Scribes and Pharisees, etc. but even maliced of his own Brethren, John
7. v. 3.4. yea, forsaken of many of his Disciples together, John 6.66. of all
in his Passion, except John, Mat. 14.50. denied of Peter Luke 22.57.58.
, betrayed of Judas, etc. Mat. 26.49.

4 There is usually hatred amongst the nearest friends by nature, even in
prosperous estate, much more in distress: thus Caine hates his Brother Abel,
Genesis 4.8. Ismael persecutes Isaac, Genesis 4.29. Esau, Jacob, Genesis 27. ver. 41.
Cham mockes Noah Genesis 9.22
, when the old man was ouer-seene in Wine; Michol 2 Samuel 6.20.
mocks David, ouer-spent in zeal; and Jobs breath did smell distastfully, even
to the Wife of his own bosom.

5 Though the arm of flesh, and thy carnal friends forsake thee, yet GOD,
will not reject Psalm. 9.10 Psalm. 51.17
thee, he cares for thy soul, his love is more constant and continual: the
Lord will never despise thee, nor fail thee, if thou be of an humble and
contrite heart; but Christ and his Father will come in unto thee, and dwell
with thee, if thou hear his voice: and openest the door of thy heart, to
entertain and retain them. Ponder these places and chew the cud upon these
Promises, Esaias 66 2. and 57.15. Psalm. 51.17. Reu. 3.^0. John 14 23. yea, he
has sworn that he will never fail thee, nor forsake thee I^sh. 1.5. Heb.
13.6.
. Thus when Christ's friends and favorites Luke 22.43.46.
, either sleep or fly, or faint, an Angel comes to comfort him from heaven:
so when he was alone in the Wilderness Mat. 4.11
. This is David's comfort, let it be thine, though Father and Mother forsake
thee, yet the Lord takes thee up, Psalm. 27.10. He is thy God and thy
salvation, Psalm. 18.1. Therefore live by faith, Hab. 2.4. Heb. 10.38.

6 If thy friends have received kindness of thee before time, and now they
forget thee, which grieves thee the more.

First, examine thine heart, whether thou have not first been by committing
and continuing such and such sins: unthankful and unkind to thy GOD, after
so many sins pardoned, so many mercies received, so many comforts renewed, so
many crosses removed, etc.

Secondly, Gods dearest ones have been more stung with this viperous
generation then ever thou wast, as Christ with Judas John 18.5
, a Disciple Act. 1.16 and v. 25.
, a Devil, a Viper in his own bosom Psalm. 41.9 Ioh. 13.18.
. Pharaohs Butler was ungrateful and unmindful of Genesis 40.23.
Joseph and his affliction, even after his restitution: the Israelites of
Gideon, killing with Abimelech his seauentie sons, Judge. 9.15.17.18.

Thirdly, what ever man do God, is a faithful rewarder of all that are his;
being not unmindful of the fruits of thy Faith, either in the works of
Piety toward him, or of Charity toward thy Brethren.

7 God has elected thee and chosen thee, before all time, to life and glory,
therefore care not though man reject thee, 1 John. 3.1.

8 Though thou can not see thy friends here with comfort, yet ere long thou
shall see GOD as he is, 1 John 3.2.

Preparatiues against Poverty.
BEcause that Poverty, as it is intolerable to the carnal man, driving him
either to despair in God, or to murmr against God, or to take some base and
sinister courses against his own soul; so, it is burdensome to the carnal
part of a Christian, chiefly concurring with sickness; when Family-charges
growing, strength to labor in his calling failing, diseases increasing,
friends shrinking back, the means of his maintenance fayles: for which cause
the wise Agur prayed against it, Prou. 30. v. 9. let these considerations move
thee yet to take up this cross patiently, and to follow Christ.

1 Because it is the providence of God that thou should be poor: the Lord
has tempered these two estates so in this life, riches and poverty, that they
may be both to his glory. The rich and the poor meet together* the Lord is
the maker of them all, Prou. 22.2. Prou. 29.13. He will have the rich and poor
mingled together here, Lazarus and Dives, Luke 16. even as he will have Sheep
and Goats, Corn and Tares, good and bad together (as the Israelites and
Egyptians dwelt together Genesis 47.27
) till that great day of separation Mat. 25.33.34.
, therefore submit thy heart, and subject thy soul to the will, the work, the
pleasure, and the providence of God.

2 Thy case is not singular, nor thy cross alone: there are thousands at this
day that drink deeper in this bitter cup then thou: how many have thou heard
of; how many know thou of Gods dear Children, that have and are utterly
exhaust and spent? some by shipwreck or Pirates by Sea, some by Fire, some by
Thieves and Robbers, some by bad Servants, some by bad Debtors and Customers,
some by Suertiship, some by prodigal and unthrifty Children, some this way,
some that; and some by the Surgions and Physicians, like the woman in the
Gospel, which perhaps is thy case? Now, what ever the means be of thy
impouerishing. God is the Author of it, afflicting thee with it, as a trial of
thy Faith, and to excite thy prayers: or inflicting it as a punishment of thy
sins. Job knew well that Satan could not stir up the tempest to blow down
his house, nor the Chaldeans and Sabeans take away his goods, without a
commission or permission from God; therefore with him have thou recourse unto
God: say, The Lord gives, and the Lord takes away, blessed be the name of the
Lord, Job 1.21.22.

3 Poverty is no token of Gods displeasure to thee: for, as it is no argument
that the Lord loves a wicked man, because he is rich, so it is no argument that
God reiects the godly, because they are poor: nay, where wealth and
wickedness, poverty and piety, concur, it testifies Gods wrath upon the
wickedly wealthy, Psalm 37.3. v. 18.19.
setting them in slippery places, feeding them like Swine, with the mast of the
world, against the day of slaughter: and giving them their portion in this
life, as was seen in Nabal, the two rich Churles in Saint Lukes Gospel, with
diverse others. Besides, it is Gods love to his Children to keep them bare
here, to that end he may the better bless them. The Servant sometimes has a
greater portion then the Son for a time; the slave is better fed and clad
then the Heir, that is kept at hard meat till his inheritance fall, yet the
Father loves the Heir better. Ponder well, Psalm. 49.6.7.8.9.11.12.13.14. and
19.20. read it all and apply it: so Job chap. 5.
The poor Sheep that the Householder means to hold and to keep, goes in a
bare pasture, a short common, is straitely folded in the night, kept in
obedience by the Shepherd and his Dog, once a year coldly washed and nearely
shorn; but his Ox or Bullock that he purposes to butcher and kill, he
puts in a fat pasture to feed, he goes grazing at liberty in Summer, is
stall-fed and housed in Winter. Apply this to thine own particular, if thou
be poor, and poor in spirit, thou art Gods Heir of his inheritance, Gods
Sheep of his pasture. The wicked, though wealthy, are slaves and bondmen, 1.
to Satan, 2. to their Lusts, 3. to their Wealth, 4. to the World: they are fat
Oxen, fat Bulls of Basan, like the Ox and the Ass that know not their Master,
Esaias 1.4.
like the Horse and Mule, without understanding.

Now, how much is thy case better then theirs Vide Chrisost hom. de Diuite and
Lazaro, 4 and hom. 13. in 2 Cor.
? thou art crazed in the outward scaberd, thy outward man; but they are false
metal Psalm. 37.17
which shall be burnt and broken, their souls damned when their bodies dye.

4 A little that thou have with the fear of God, is better then great riches
of the ungodly, see Prou. 16.8. Psalm. 37.16.

5 All things fall out to the best to those that fear GOD; yea, all things
Romans 8.28
, and every thing, as well poverty as riches. GOD is thy Physician, thou art
his Patient: the Physician knows better then the Patient what is good for him.

6 If the Lord had foreseen that a rich estate, and an higher pitch had been
good for thee, thou should have had it: but he knows what is best for
thee, how ere thy corrupt desires incline this way or that way. The Father will
not give the Child a Sword or Knife, though he cry for it, he knows it will
hurt him. How know thou with what heart thou should have used, Mat. 25.
with what hand thou should have employed thy Tallents of wealth if thou
had them? whether in the practice of sin, and works of darkness, as
dangerously to thy soul, as a Child, or a mad man, use a sharp weapon, to
the hurt of their own or others bodies?

7 Poverty hinders not the acceptance of thy Prayers, Tears, Cries, and
Sacrifices unto thy God. A wise poor man has not so free access in earthly
Courts, to earthly Kings, as silken Courtiers; but, The Lord hears the desires
of the poor, he bends his ear unto them, Psalm. 10.17. For the sighs of the
poor I will up (says the Lord) and help them, Psalm. 12.5. The Lord turns
unto the prayers of the desolate, and despises them not, Psalm. 102. verse 17.
Psalm. 145. ver. 18.19. The mighty Jehovah, the King of Heaven, will hear, and
help, and relieve thee, when the hautie, and high minded, and wealthy, and
wicked witty of the world, are with their sacrifices rejected Esaias 1.13 14 Ier
7.10.11 Prou. 28.9 Psalm. 51.16 vor. 7.
, like Caines Genesis 4.5.
: For, the Lord heales those that are broken in heart, and binds up their
sores: yea, the Lord relieueth the meek, but abaseth the wicked to the ground,
Psalm. 147. ver. 2. v. 6. Agar e and her Child, in their poverty and distress
in the Wilderness, after they were cast out of Abraham's house, cried to the
Lord, being like to perish for want of water: so did the Israelites in the
extremities of their thirst E^od. 17.3.4.5.6.
, and Moses for them, complain unto the Lord in a Land where no water was: so
did Judge. 15.18.19.
Sampson call on the Lord, after his conquest of the Philistines, being ready
to faint for drink, and the Lord heard their distress, and granted their
desires: Agars eyes were opened, and she saw a fountain; Moses smit the rock,
and the water gushed out; Sampsons Iaw-bone of an Ass sent out a spring of
water: many are the like examples. This poor man cried unto the Lord, and he
heard him, says David: so did this, and this, and this. Oh then be thou
patient, and penitent, and pious, and thou shall still find God gracious, in
the midst of thy grieuances.

8 Consider, that if thou be poor in thy spirit, as in thy outward estate,
thou art rich in Christ (even as the good Servant is the Lords Freeman) thou
art the Lord of all the Creatures sublunarie Psalm. 8.6.7.8.
, in title and interest, how ever the wicked (to whom all things are impure,)
as Rebels and Traitors to God, usurp them from thee. As thou have an interest
in CHRIST, so to all the Creatures. Christ is all in all unto thee Revel.
3.17.18.
: if thou be naked, he is the Wedding Garment to thee; if blind, his
Spirit is Eye-salue; if hungry, he is the Manna, John 6.48 58
the bread of life, the bread of Heaven; if thirsty, he is the fountain of
water, of John 4.14.
living water; if in want, thou have a Kingdom Luke 12.32
; if kept bare for a time, yet thou art an Heir Romans 8.17
, and a Coheyre with him; though rejected of men, yet elect of him. Iam. 2.6.
Hearken my beloved Brethren, has not God chosen the poor of this world, that
they should be rich in faith, and heirs of the Kingdom which he promised to
them that love him, James chap. 2.6. Let this be to thee like Sugar under the
tongue of the Child; let it not go, but suck comfort from it.

Animus est, qui been imperat matrimonio and virginitate. Chrysostom.
9 Poverty is no hinderance to thy salvation: Lazarus was saved, Luke 16. yea,
though neither Poverty nor Riches simply of themselves, please God, no more
then Marriage or Virginity; but the sanctified heart in the right use of both:
there being rich men in Heaven, Abraham, the Patriarchs, David, Solomon, Job,
etc. who were here rich in grace: and impatient and impenitent poor men in
Hell, who were here as destitute of goodness, as of goods; of heavenly
wisdom as of wealth; of faith as of friends; yet nevertheless there is more
peril in the rich estate: 1. both as riches Osea 13.6 Prou. 30.8
puff up the heart: 2. as they are weapons of tyranny and oppression, as in
Ahab 1 Kin. 2 1.
: 3. as they are got with fraudulencie: 4. kept with diffidence and anxietie: 5
means of Idolatry Ephesians. 5.5. Col. 3.5. 1 Timothy 6.17
: 6. Thorns Lu. 7 8.14
to choke the seed of the Word: 7. Snares of the Devil, to fetter the soul
1 Timothy 6.9
: 8. bars out of Gods kingdom Mat. 19.23.24.
. Therefore as some Philosophers cast away their wealth into the water, because
it hindered their Philosophical studies: so, it were good for rich men,
according to Christ's desire Ioh. 12.8.
, command, and Injunction, to cast their wealths on the watery faces of the
poor Eccl. 11.1 Luke 14.12
, to make them friends of the unrighteous Mammon, etc. least they incur the
vvoes denounced, James 5.3.2.3. Luke 6.24. But there are no such baits, and
snares, and traps, in Poverty; if the rich young man in Mathewes Gospel Mat.
19.21.22.
, had been poor, perhaps he had followed CHRIST, with as great facility
and felicity, as Peter, Andrew, James, and John, those poor Fishermen Mat.
4.20 21.22.23.24.
; if his Cable had been untwisted, it had gone through the Needles eye. Oh how
comfortable may this cross be to thee, that it cannot of it self, cross thee
of Heaven, nor curse thee in Hell.

10 Besides, the poorer thou art, the fewer Tallents thou have received Mat.
25.14. etc. 29.30. Luke 19.12 13. etc.
: the less that is committed to thy disposing, the easier shall be thy
reckoning and thy accounts, when thou shall be demanded an account of thy
Stewardship, and the use of thy tallents, at the Lords great Audit, when he
comes to Judgment, Luke 16.2.

11 Even for the things of this life, though it appear not so to carnal
reason, yet the Lord has a care of thee, and will administer unto thee things
needful, though not superfluous. For, thy heavenly Father, like an earthly
father, may see his child need, but not bleed: Prou. 10.3.
for, the Lord will not famish the soul of the righteous, Prou. 10.3. Though
he suffer thee to want for a time, yet he will help in due season: he
brings the needy out of the dust, the poor out of the dung Ps. 113.7
, and Joseph out of prison Genesis 41.14.
. David never saw the righteous forsaken, nor their seed begging their bread.
The Lord will replenish the souls of the Priests with fatness, and his people
shall be satisfied with goodness, Ier. 31.14. Job 5 16.19.20.21.22. Therefore
cast thy care upon God, he cares for thee. How careful was CHRIST for the
two poor married couple, in turning their water into wine? John 2.6.7.8. The
like care the Lord has over every poor married couple, that have small
means, great charge: for* The eyes of the Lord are upon them that fear him,
and that put their trust in hit mercy, to deliver their souls from death, and
to feed them in the time of dearth, Psalm. 33.17.18. Thus he fed Jacob and his
Children, when there was a dearth in Canaan Genesis 43.1 Chap. 47.11
, he sent Joseph before into Egypt Psalm. 105 16 17.18.
, in his special providence to provide for them. So God fed his Israel, like
Sheep, in the wilderness, with Angels food Ver. 39.40
, and water from the Rock. Thus Christ fed his fainting auditors in the Desert
with bread and Fishes Mark 6.35.42.
, as he did his Disciples upon the shore with the same diet John 21.9
. Yea, he still feeds all his, he feeds even the wicked; he gives a soppe
to Judas Ioh. 13.26
; nay, he feeds the Eagles, Crows, and Ravens, Birds and Beasts. Nay, he
clothes the Lillies, and will he not feed and clothes thee and thine, oh thou
of little faith?

Ponder well Christ's seven arguments in the sixth of Matthew, against thy
diffidence: if thou could but rest in him, and rely upon him by faith,
though the Lions should want and suffer hunger, though the Lions and and Bulls
of Basan, the great ones of the world, should be famished, as were some in the
siege of Samaria and Jerusalem, yet thou should want nothing that is good.
If thou have faith but as a grain of Mustard-seede, in truth and sincerity,
which extends to thy body as well as thy soul, ere thou should perish the
very Heavens should rain Manna, as it did on the Israelites Exodus 16 15
, the Rock should give her water Exodus 17 6.
, yea, the law-bones of Beasts should afford thee moisture, as to Sampson Judge.
15.19.
; the very Ravens, nay, the Angels should feed thee, as they did Elias 1 King.
17 6. Chapter 19.5.6.
, the very Fishes of the Sea should afford thee silver, as they did Peter, Mat.
17.27.

12 Man's life does not consist in abundance of earthly things, Deuteronomy. 8.3.
Luke 12.15. Man lives not by bread only; Mat. 4. God can bless a small
pittance and portion unto thee: he can multiply a few Loaves and Fishes to the
feeding of thousands Mark 6. Luke 9.13.
; he can increase the little Oil in the Cruize 1 King. 17 14.
, and the Meal in the Barrel, to the poor widows, to the sustentation of
their families, and the paying of their Creditors, to whom they are indebted, 2
Kings 4.2.3. Dan. 1.12.13.
He can make Daniel and his three Companions, prosper, look and like as well
with pease and pulse to eat, and water to drink: nay, to be fayrer and better
liking for three years together, then those Children that eat meat of the
Kings portion, and drank of the Kings Wine, Dan. 1.12.13.^4.15. As it is all
one for the Lord to save with many or with few, 1 Samuel 14.6. to overthrow whole
Armies with a few Water-lappers Judge. 7.5.6.
, with a Warrior and his Armor-bearer 1 Samuel 14 13 14.
, by a Boy, or a Shepherd 1 Samuel 17 50
; yea, to slay a thousand with the law of an Ass, in the hand of a strong man
Judge. 15.15
, so it is all one with him to feed and to foster thee with this portion or
that, with course meats or cates, to sustain and maintain thee and thine
with great means, weak means, small means, no means, or contrary to all
means: how many (if we believe Histories and experience) both in sieges of
Cities by land, and in storms and extremities by Sea, have been preserved for
a long time, even with such meats as nice and dainty stomachs would loathe
and detest unless hunger were the Cook; as the flesh of Horses, milk of
Mares, Frogs, Mice, Rats; nay green Herbs, Plants, Grass, and Leather of
shoes. What small portion of bread has glewed and holden the life and spirit
together, for many days together; yea, even Tobacco it self, that much used,
abused Plant, I have wondered to hear Mariners relate?

It were much that a Daughter should nourish her Father, by opportunities to
visit him in prison, such a time, by yielding her only breasts to be sucked by
him, that the expectations of all those that commanded he should be famished
to death, were frustrate, (if the Authors may be credited) unless that Gods
help were able to bless small means above humane hopes. Even the crummes
will suffice Lazarus; neither do I think that he dyed of famine, but either
naturally, or by the violence of his diseases: I am persuaded God provided both
crummes and crusts for him elsewhere (if there were such a Lazarus
historically, as the most think; and not Parabolically as Salmeron and others
discuss,) so will the Lord provide for thee.

13 The best of Gods Children have been as poor as thou now art; even Christ
the Son of God by nature Heb. 1.1.
, heir of the earth Verse 2.
, and of the nations Psalm. 2.8.
, whose al things are Psa. 50 10
, was here on earth poor. So was Job, Job 1.15.16. so Elias, 1 Kin. 17.11.
begging a piece of bread; the Apostle Paul and Peter, and the rest of the
Disciples, poor Fishermen, wanting silver and gold, Acts 3.6. So were there in
every place poor Saints, as in Macedonia, in Ierusa^em, and elsewhere, in the
Apostles Ministry, 1 Cor. 4.11. So from time to time, the most excellent of
the Saints, such as wa^ted for the coming of Christ, that they might receive a
better resurrection, were without house and harbor, means and munition, Heb.
10 34
Tossed to and fro, wandering up and down in sheep skins and g^ate skins,
being destitute, afflicted, tormented* Heb. 10.24. Heb. 11 35.36.37. To which,
besides these before and in the Apostles times, we might add those and many
millions recorded by Eusebius, the Tripartite History, and the Centuries: of
such that were in the same case, in the persecution, either of heathenish or
heretical Emperors; chiefly by Ar^ians, amongst whom were Athaenasius and
Chrysostom in their time, as also those that were spoiled by the Goths and
Vandals. What need I mention David, 1 Samuel 21.3.4.
that was almost famished, till he ate the Shewbread? so the stock of David,
Joseph and Mary, the mother of Christ, whose offerings of Turtle-Doues, for
want of better sacrifices, showed they were not rich Luke 2.24
, yet the Lord supplied their wants to carry Christ into Egypt, by sending the
Wisemen of the East, with gold unto them, Mat. 2. even as the Lord will supply
thy wants upon the like occasions, for his glory and thy good: or if thou live
poorly, or dye in debt, as many of the Lords servants have done; yet, if thou
have Christ and the riches of his mercies by faith, thou art rich enough,
living and dying.

Object. But this perhaps troubles thee, that thou have been in a good estate,
and art now declining, and at the lowest ebb.

Ans. Since this is a burden, it is a misery to have been happy, yet even
the very Philosophers, as Seneca and others, besides Petrarcke, have prescribed
comforts in this cross: but the word has balm plenty for this sore; the
Saints have tried the like, as did Job whose plenty ebd to poverty, Job 1.
and 2. and did flow again to plenty, Job 42. So the Disciples of Christ were
indifferent prosperous, till Christ's death, after which they were in storms,
Luke 22.35.36. So Jeremy for eighteen years had comforts in his Ministry,
but, after, whips, imprisonments, and poverty: thou art not exempted from
drinking of these cups, neither need thou fear to pledge the Saints.

FINIS.
To the READERS.
FRiendly Readers these Errors, with others, whether in words or syllables, in
misse-quoting or wrong pointing of some places, which have past the Press in
my absence, by reason of the close writing of my Copy, I pray you censure
favorably and correct friendly.

Also I desire you to take notice, that as I have added (more then I did
preach) some Historical Amplifications from page 273. to 278. as also, from
page 305. to page 318. so I have left out the Merginall Quotations as needless
for the unlearned, that neither read nor regard them: as for the learned I
refer them to Zwinger his Theatrum humanae vitae, Lonicer his Theatrum
Historicum, Grosij Historicae Tragicae, Osiander his Epitome of the Centuries,
Textor his Officina, Diogenes Laertius, Valerius Maximus, Fulgosus etc. From
all whom I have epitomized these Histories, as they from others.

ERRATA.
PAge 60. line 20 for Bolserus read Bolsecus. p. 123. l. 23. for dispertment r.
disportment. p 133. l. 13. for Segor r. S^or. p. 169. l. 17. for renijs r.
remis. p. 182. l. 8. for Licinus r. Licinius. p. 283. l. 12. for. Cressus r.
Cresus. p. 314. l. 11. for Gods r. God. ibid. l. 28. for Oreseence r.
Crescence. p. 456. ( in mergine) for Heidou r. Chambers.

FINIS.

