THE HVMBLE AND EARNEST REQVEST OF THOMAS JAMES, Dr OF DIVINITY, AND SVB DEANE
of the Cathedral Church of Wells, to the Church of England; for, and in the
behalf of Books touching Religion.
1 THat the Latine-Fathers works, (whereof diverse are already done) the Books
of Councels, and the body of the Canon Law, may be diligently reviewed and
compared With the best Manuscripts; and the Collections and needful
observations thence-from arising, printed; together with the pieces and
fragments of the Fathers works (if any shall be found.)

2 That the Latin Translation of the Greek Fathers may be collationed by able
and fit persons, by reason of diverse Christophorsons and Jesuits, that have
too-too much abused the ignorant of the tongue.

3 That the Jndices: Expurgatory may be likewise perused, all of them, as many
as can be gotten, the places forbidden to be transcribed, of which labor there
is a third part at the least already taken either by me, or my procurement.

4 That Lyra and the Gloss, the Great Bibliotheea sanctorum Patrum, Platina,
Caietan, Alphonsus de Castro, and sundry others of all sorts of Authors, may be
compared with former Editions, and Manuscripts (if need be) to meet with their
secret Jndices Expurgatorii, which are the more dangerous, because they print,
and leave out what they list, at pleasure, and yet make no words of it, neither
have any Commission known for to do it.

5 That the Authors of the middle age, that wrote in the defense of that
Religion, which is now (thanks be to God) publicly established in the Church
of England, for the substance thereof, may be faithfully transcribed,
diligently collated, and distributed into volumes, whereof many may be made of
orthod oxe-writers;; if not so many as of their Bibliotheca Patrum Probabilium:
adding hereunto such Writers, as being bred and brought up in the bosom of the
Roman Church saw the disorders, discovered their abuses both in doctrine and
manners, and wished almost for the same reformation, that was afterward most
happily wrought and brought to pass by Martin Luther and his companions: of
the first sort are Wickliffe, Peacocke, Gu. de S. Amore, Jo. P. Mi^orita,
Normannus Anon, Nic. O^em and sundry others: of the Later kind, Wesselus,
Wicelius, P. de Alliaco, Faber, Gerson, Cusarius, and such like.

6 That the Catalogus testium veritatis, compiled by Illyricus, may be
rectified out of the originals, quoting Book, Chapter, and Edition; and
supplied out of the unprinted Manuscripts.

7 That out of all these an Anticoccius may be framed out of Fathers, and
middle-aged Writers, that were in their times esteemed of the Church of Rome,
and out of them only: nothing doubting but we shall be able to match, if not
exceed, his two large Volumes both in greatness and goodness; quoting as
before, precisely, our Editions, and doing all fide optima and antiqua,
religiously and impartially as becomes Divines.

8 That the supposititious and Bastard Works of the Fathers, noted by Doctor
Rivet, or Master Cook, or any other, may be re-examined; their exceptions
scanned or weighed with indifferency, and other reasons added to their
challenge, if any shall be found.

9 That the suspected places may be viewed in the true Fathers, which are
justly challenged of corruption, either by our own men, or the adversary, with
the like indifference of minds, and vnpartiality of judgments, being compared
with the touchstone of the old Manuscripts, and printed books, which are quasi
Manuscripts.

Tenthly and lastly, the perpetual Visibility of the Church, more or less,
and the History of the same Religion that we profess for the substance
thereof, throughout all ages, may be showed to the Eye, noting when those
Novelismes and superadditaments of the Church of Rome, came in as near as may
be guessed, the time when, and parties by whom they were opposed.

All which 10 Propositions, (needful and important as they are) I do
willingly commend unto my dear Mother the Church of England, and from her to
the Clergy and Gentry of this Land, to be proceeded in, as they shall see it
most expedient for the common good; promising nothing but my pains to be
commanded in these public services. And I make no doubt (if God will) but
that all this may be effected, within some fevv years, if the Almghty give
grace, the Rich whom God has blessed with this vvorldly substance,
encouragement; and the rest their prayers. Of the likelihood hereof I am the
rather persuaded, because already by my own means, and small endeauours,
there is almost a fourth part of the Work done in all these 10 Articles. If
one alone may do so much within such a time, what may a dozen able Scholars
(such as I know and could name) do within 5, 6, 7, or 8 years, which is
the utmost in my conjecture?

For the raising of the charges, which will amount to three thousand pound
Stock, or three hundred pound a year at the least, (so much shall well content
both me and them,) that shall be employed in this happy Work: (though if more
be offered, we know well how to use and employ it to the public benefit:)
and of raising such a sum as this is, I doubt not, if some one of the
Clergy or Laity shall not take upon him the whole charge, as many in this
Kingdom are (thanks be to God) able, and would be willing, if they either
knew of the good that is likely to come unto the Church, or the Honor unto
themselves, and chiefly how much this business does concern the glory of God,
the assuring of the most material points controverted, whiles there are daily
questions made, and doubts arising either about the Editions, Readings,
Translations, Corruptions of whole Books in Pseudepigraphous Writers, or of
diverse hundreds of places in the True Books, all which difficulties will
easily be avoided (as I trust) by this one Work being once well done. But that
such a Stock or annual rent may be made, I doubt not; but am somewhat
confident, when I see how fruitful our Religion has bin of good Works, and
how many Suttons and Bodleyes, and other godly men it has yielded, no Nation
more: and herein no city, (I except not Rome her self) without the hope of
pardon, guile of Confessors, and fear of Purgatory, is able to match or
equalize, much less to surpass or exceed our famous City of London in the
right use and end of giving as tokens of our Faith, not as the means of our
salvation. What shall I speak of the Sages of our Law, or Innes of Court? but
my desire is, and proposal shall be to offer this great Honor, first unto the
Clergy of this Land. The Popish Clergy in France have (as I am informed) at
their own charges printed the Greek Fathers, and shall not we be provoked to
do the like for the Latin, and many things else that import the Weal
Public of Learning? Twelve pound out of every Diocese one with another, from
the Cathedral Churches, the Reverend Bishops and Clergy, will make up the
su^me; or if every one of the Clergy of this famous Church, will either give
yearly xijd, or but lend ijf, till any thing be printed, he shall have the
same again with thanks, (if it be demanded,) deducted out of the Book, when
any thing shall be printed; I mean this xijd or two shillings of every hundred
pound, they making their own estimates of their livings, and paying the same
half yearly to the Register of every Diocese. But my intent is to desire,
and not to prescribe unto my Superiors, who know better then I how to manage
so weighty and important a business, resting theirs

Wholly to command T. I. S. T. P. B. P. N.

I Approve of the things here proiected, and wish with all my heart they may
take good effect

LV. PRIDEAVX Vicecanc. S. T. D. Prof. Reg. Theol.

ROD. KETTELL Preses Coll. S. Trinit.

LEON. HVTTEN Aedis Christi Praebend.

GVIL. LANGTON Coll. Magd. Praeses.

SEBASTIANVS BENEFIELD Lecturae Margareticae Professor.

IO. PARKEHVRST Magister Coll. Ball.

IO. RAVLENSON Principalis Aulae S. Edmundi.

IO. WILKINSON Aul. Magd. Praep.

GVIL. PEIRS Decanus Petriburgensis.

SAM. FELL Aedis Christi Praebend.

THO. ISLES Aulae Cervinae Principalis.

RIC. ASTELEY Custos Coll. Omnium Animarum.

ROB. PINCK Novi Coll. Custos.

GV. SMYTH Coll. Wadham. Guard.

IO. TOLSON Coll. Oriel. Praepositus.

PAVLVS HOOD Coll. Lincoln. Rector.

GVIL. IVXON Coll. D. IO. Praeses.


