GOD and the KING: OR, A DIALOGVE showing that our Sovereign Lord King JAMES
being immediate under God within his DOMINIONS, Does rightfully claim
whatsoever is required by the Oath of ALLEGIANCE.

CAMBRIDGE, Imprinted by his Majesty's special privilege and command. 1615.

The Contents of this Dialogue.
1. THe occasions and chief end of the Oath of Allegiance: from page 1. unto
page 25.

2. The special heads and branches of the Oath of Allegiance: from (...) page
3^.

3. The principal grounds of the Oath of Allegiance, are proposed and
established, as

First, That our Sovereign Lord King JAMES has no Superior besides God, unto
whom he is immediately subject within his Dominions: from page 31. unto page
65.

Secondly, That the bond of Allegiance from his Subjects unto him as their
supreme Lord, is inviolable, and cannot by any means be dissolved:from page
65. unto page 93.

(...) Law, be neglected for saving the life of a King, upon whom so many
lives depend* So that neither the seal of Confession does free us from any
part of the duties of allegiance unto our Sovereign.


Philalethes: If the bond of Allegiance from subjects unto their Prince is so
inviolable, that nothing, no not the seal of Confession, can dissolve it; is
there no means to stay the fury of a Sovereign Commander, If he should be so
Tyrannous, and profane, as to endeavor to oppress the whole Church at once,
and utterly to extinguish the light of Chri^^^^ Religion* (...)


obedience unto their Sovereign, is grounded upon the law of Nature; beginning
with our first beginning: For as we be borne Sons, so we are borne
Subjects; his Sons, from whose loins; his Subjects in whose Dominions we
are borne. The same duties of subjects are also enjoined by the moral law, and
particularly (as you showed in the very entrance unto this out Conference) in
the fifth commandment, Honor thy Father and thy Mother:where, as we are
required to honor the Fathers of private families, so much more the Father of
our country and the whole Kingdom. And as the Bishop of Rome cannot dispense
with these laws imposing upon us obedience unto his Majesty, so neither with
the oath we take to persevere in this obedience. When David said, I have (...)
sworn that I will keep thy righteous iudge^^^^


obedience unto excommunicated Princes: besides, excommunication (according to
the doctrine of the Aquin. in sup. que 23. Tolet Inst. Sacerd. l: 1. c. 9.
Romanists themselves) does not free a servant from obedience unto his Master,
or a son unto his Father. And Kings are as Masters, and Subjects as Servants;
for so Dauidcalleth Saul 1 Samuel 24.11.
his Master, and styles himself his 1 Samuel
Servant: Kings are as 2 Chro. 29. Debora a mother in Israel. Judge. 5.7.
Fathers, and subjects as Sons; for so King Ezechias was a Father over the
Fathers of his people, even the Priests, and therefore much more over the rest
of his subjects. As then excommunication does not dissolve the bond of duty
between Fathers and Sons, of service between Masters and Servants, no more
does it the bond of fidelity between Princes and their Subjects. And so at
length I have ^^oued unto you, that neither sup^ (...)


nor the Episcopal Acts of dispensation, and excommunication; and so in
effect, that nothing can free subjects from their fidelity and allegiance unto
their Prince.


Philalethes. Nothing! The seal of confession does at least in part free some
subjects from special duties of obedience unto their Sovereign; as Priests
from revealing treasons and Conspiracies which they know, as Ghostly Fathers,
from the penitent. For if conspiracies or treasons be known unto a Priest in
confession, the bond thereof does bind him to conceal it, Aquin* in sup. q.
11. Art. 1.
because they are known unto him as unto GOD, whose Vicar he is in hearing the
humble confessions of repentant Sinners.


Theodidactus. If Priests in confessions do understand of treasons and other
^mous (...)


(...) ^^^monweale as GOD, and as his Vicars; then they are to imitate GOD,
whom they would represent, in the discovering of these greiuous crimes. For GOD
always does after a miraculous manner, and (as it were) by his own immediate
finger bring to light crying sins, when they are done in secret, and for a
time are in wrapped in darkness.

Did he not by the birds of the air detect the murder of Ibycus vt perijt,
vi^de^ fuit alti^gens. A^s^^.
Ibycus? And because the persons of Princes are more sacred then the persons of
private men, GOD has made a special (...) Kings, by the (...) Heaven (that
is) after a strange and miraculous manner, if by ordinary means they shall not
be revealed. And therefore some Priests of France have detected intendments of
treason, only in thought, heard by them in confession: and the Authors of
these intendments have been punished with death. A Bodin. lib. 2. di Repub.
ca. 5.
Gentleman of Normandy in France confessed unto a Friar Minor, that he had
once a resolution to murder King Francis, and that he repented of his wicked
purpose. The Friar gave him absolution, but revealed his wicked purpose unto
the King: and after deliberation had thereof in the Parliament of Paris, the
Gentleman was executed; and the Friar not punished with any censure of the
Church for his detectio^ (...) ^ents con^ing their sins, not to conceal
these sins if they be enormous and dangerous unto the public state; but
according to their commission; (whose sins ye remit, they are remitted) 2
Ioh. 20.
to declare unto them the remission of their sins as they are offenses only
against GOD, and before his heavenly Tribunal.


Philalethes. But the law of the Church commands Priests to conceal all such
sins as come unto their Knowledge by way of Confession.


Theodidactus. This Law of the Church is but the Law of Pope (...)
Innocent the third, cited in the decretalls (for he is the most ancient Author
that the (...)
Romanists can allege for their seal of Confession:) But were it a Law of the
whole Church, it is (...) been then in his fullness of power, could he have
dispensed with this oath? And so if any now, by the example of David, swear to
keep Gods righteous judgments of not committing adultery, or of honoring
their Parents, and Magistrates; he cannot free them from this oath: but if we
violate both these commandments, we are as well Rebels, as Adulterers.


Philalethes. Are not the excommunications of the Bishop of Rome of more
force to loose the bond of allegiance, then his dispensations?


Theodidactus. These likewise have no power to work this effect.
Excommunication upon a contempt unto the Church does not make a man worse then
an d Ethnike: but you have heard that both S. Peter and S. Paul earnestly
exhort us to be subject unto heathen, and Ethnicke Princes; (...) they do
labor to effect so heinous an impiety, the only means we have to appease
their fury is serious repentance for our sins, which have brought this
chastisement upon us; and humble prayer unto GOD, who guides the hearts of
Princes like rivers of waters. You know how before the coming of CHRISTthe
visible Church was only amongst the Jews; and that whiles they were Captives
under the Persian Monarchs, Assuerus at the instigation of Haman sent forth a
decree to Ester. ^.
destroy them all both young and old, children and women in one day. (...)
Ester. cap. 4.
great sorrow amongst them, and fasting and weeping, many lying in sacke-cloth
and ashes, to humble themselves under the mighty hand of GOD for their
sins, and to auert his wrath hanging over their heads, by the cruelty of so
bloody a Tyrant.

And the ancient Christians, upon the like occasions, imitated these Jews. For
when they were threatened by Julian the Apostata, with an utter extinction of
Christianity, they hindered and Nazianz. ora. 1. in Julian.
repressed him with their tears, having this only remedy against the
Persecuter. If any therefore are oppressed (...) the sins of offenders, are
the strength of Tyrants.


Philalethes. To be freed from Tyranny and oppression in this world, is a
temporal benefit: and many times GOD hearkneth not unto our prayers for
temporal benefits. How then are faithful and loyal subjects to comfort
themselves, against the pressures of merciless Tyrants?


Theodidactus. Their only comfort in this case, is that which Saint Augustine
long since ministered unto them. The rod of sinners (says he, speaking of
wicked Masters (...) but (...)tim^ ^ill come when one GOD shall be
acknowledged: The time will come, when one CHRIST, appearing in his
brightness, shall gather before him all Nations; and sever them, as a Pastor
seuereth his Goats from the sheep, and place his sheep upon his right hand,
and his Goats upon his left. And then thou shall see many servants, and
subjects, amongst the sheep, and many masters, and Princes, amongst the
Goats: and again many masters, and Princes, amongst the Sheep, and many
subjects and Servants amongst the Goats. So when all other helps and comforts
do fail distressed subjects; the day of Judgment, the end of all transitory
things will bring an end (...) this (...) GOD so to affect the hearts both of
Princes and Subjects, with a serious and frequent cogitation of this last
Judgment; that they in Governing* these in Obeying, both in all their actions,
De Reg. and Monacho.
and whatsoever they do, may (with Saint Hierome) have the voice of the
Archangell always sounding in their ears, Arise from the dead, and come unto
judgment.



