ONE OF the four Sermons PREACHED BEFORE THE KINGS Majesty, at Hampton Court
in September last.

THIS Concerning the Antiquity and Superiority of Bishops. Sept. 21. 1606.

BY The Reverend Father in God William Lord Bishop of Rochester.

LONDON Imprinted by I. W. for Matthew Law 1606.

To the Kings most Sacred MAJESTY.
IT was your MAJESTY'S express Commandment, (most dread Sovereign) that
this SERMON should be printed: your HIGHNESS intention therein very honorable,
that neither by misreport it might be traduced, nor through oblivion perish in
the air where it was uttered: but that they which heard it, might record it;
they which heard it not, might read it; and that almight be satisfied. This
royal purpose of your Majesty, either prejudice to the question, or malignitie
to the person, will, I fear pervert: for more largely and soundly has this
Theme bin handled, and yet the labor lost in fore-stalled co^ceits: and by me^
more popularly applauded, and more profoundly learned, then my self; and
therefore small hope that I shall persuade. But be the event as it haps, I have,
in the mean time, discharged both my conscience in discussing the point
sincerely, and, I trust, vnoffensiuely; and, withal, my duty to your
Majesty, whose unworthy servant I am, and for your Highness many gracious
favors most deeply obliged: in which acknowledgement I will live and die; and,
which is the whole requital I can make, heartely pray for your Majesty's long
life, and prosperous reign, that you may be (which, I am sure, your Majesty
desires) a King of Peace, as in Judah and Israel, your temporal state; so in
Mount Sio^ also, in the state and among the Persons Ecclesiastique; effecting
in us all, both of Ky^ke and Church, unity in doctrine, unanimity in
affection, uniformity in obedience to your Majesty's Supremacy, whether in
matters, either absolutely necessary as enjoined by God, or in themselves
indifferent, but authoritatiuely necessary, as Commanded by your self; in
which desire, rather then hope, I end and rest

Your MAJESTY'S poor Chaplein, most deuoutely bound VV. ROFFENS.
TO THE MINISTERS of SCOTLAND, my Fellow Dispensers of Gods mysteries.
BRETHREN (for as I esteem you, so will I style you, judge you of us as you
please) some of your sort, being at this Sermon when it was preached, were
desirous that it might be printed. The end of their request themselves best
know. If to traduce it in their Preachings (as many of your Ministers serve
other Books of mine, not sparing my self, as I am credibly informed) they
shall do as many use, but not as they ought. Charities precept is to speak
well of all; yea, even Ciuilities rule, not to backebite the absent. If to read
it for their further satisfaction, as not accustomed to the accent of our
Pronuntiation (for so it was said) it has pleased his Majesty I should yield
to their request: although their Notes they took, with some personal
conference easy for them to attain, might without this noise have effected
that. If to answer it (for that also was given out) let it be with modesty
and learning, nothing shall be more welcome. (and yet we may say therein as the
Emperor of the Cobblers Crow, Satis istarum auium habemus domi). Indeed, this
purpose for answer I rather suspect, because I understood of a Challenge
offered in an Admonition Epistolar to your late Parliament, directly
confro^ting the maine subject of this Sermon, namely, that the Calling
Episcopal has neither Gods word, ancient Canon, nor learned Father to abbett
it. To say this, not to prove it, is but Hercules tragical club in the Poet,
(...).
massy in show, but of cloth and straw, an affrighting vanity; to aver it, (...)
and not to be able to maintain it, were but Ignorances brood in Nazian:
breaking the shel and cackling before it be full hatched, Naz and Thucyd.
a praecipitate boldness: to avouch it and make it good, were a labor worthy
your travail, and of us much desired. And yet neither this your Challenge, nor
the Maintenance thereof, when it comes, might any way concern us, it being a
combat within your own lists: saving that the Challengers, not enduring (...)
Bishops within their own Church, could not refrain, but contra^y to S Pe^ers
charge, in the very same letter make themselves (...) Bishops and Censurers of
other Provinces, 1. Pet. 4. 15.
by intituling the Church-gouernors among us, PAPISTICALL English Bishops. A
slanderous Epithete (pardon me brethren, and yet S. Hierom says, that he
which is suspected, much more accused of Heresy, may without pardon asking,
bre^k the bond^ of patience) a slander, Isay untrue and unchristian. For first,
every opinion or Ce^remonie which in the Cockpit of Elderlings i^ concluded to
be POPERY, is not so Secondly the world can witness that English Bishops have
for Religion done that, which never any Clerolaicall Consistorien, or Bench
Presbyterian, either Southern or Northern durst, has, or can perform, viz.
written learnedly and laboriously, disputed soundly suffered manfully, and died
constantly in defiance of PAPISTRIE, readily inclining both their heads to
blocks, and their bodies to stakes, rather then by DECLINATORS from their
lawful Princes tribunal, appealing to any Synodicall Conuention whatsoever.
This, doutbles, is PAPISTICAL, the other APOSTOLICAL: for S. Paul appealed to
Caesar his judgment seat, as the supreme; whereas PAPISTS and PVRITANS will
have the King, but an HONORABLE MEMBER, not a ch^ef Governor in the churches of
his own Dominions. But to return if an Answer hereunto, be the Babe we must
atte^d, (and of it I often hea^e) not ^uno Lucina, but Charitas and Veritas ^erte
open. Let love of truth conceive it, truth of judgment breed it; variety of
reading frame it; modesti^ of style deliver it* ornaments of learning cloth
and adorn it, and we will embrace it: not doubting then, but like a modest and
true borne child, it will speak in the language, and with reverence of
Antiquity. In the mean time, God grant both you and us Obedience and
Hume^^^y, that, to our Sovereign; this, within our own hearts: so shall we
neither vnder-vallue him, nor ouer-weene our selves. Farewell in Christ.

Your loving friend, and fellow Minister in the Gospel W. ROFFENS.
Obseruaos Regis, and praecepta iuramenti Dei. Eccles. 8. 2. Escapes made in
the Printing.
Only one or ^. of substance: the rest, which are but in points or accents,
the courteous Reader may please to amend: in the body of the Sermon

Page 16. lin. ^. for Psa 18. read Verse 18. Page 19. lin. 9. for No mean
Praesbyteriall. The professors of Boem, wish etc. read No mean Presbyterian,
the Professor of Berna wishes etc. Page 20. lin. 2. (that his authority) read
that is, his authority, Page 21. lin. 17. of that gift, read of that guess.
Acts 20. 28. Take heed to your selves, and to the whole flock (In quo
Spiritus Sa^ctus vos posuit Episcopos) in which the holy ghost has placed you
Bishops, to feed the Church of God, which he haeth purchased with his own
blood.
THe Conuenting of Bishops and the inferior Clergy into Synods, whether
Occumenicall, for whole Christendom, or National for one Region, deriues the
antiquity from this book of the Acts. The General Councels from the
fifteenth Chapter, the National and Provincial from this 20. Naz. ep. 42. ad
Procop.
And howsoever Greg. Nazian: seems to decline all Councels, 1. Cor. 11* 17.
concluding of them as Saint Paul of the Corinthian Assemblies, that they meet
together (...), bringing with them more loss then gain to the truth; yet the
Church has by experience found, that as they have Authoritatem v^errimam,
being grounded upon a practice Apostolical, so have they, ^aith Saint Austen,
August.
Vsum saluberrimum, they are of a Physical nature, as necessary for the body
of Christ, which is his Church, as Physic is for the natural body of man:
the same two ends being of them both, either to prevent or cure. If any
Heresy in doctrine, or enormitie in manners, like a fretting Gangrene, have
already eaten into the Church, (whereof Saint Paul complains to Timothy) then
is it Synodus (...), 2. Tim. ^. 17.
the Clergy meets to cure the malady, either by incision or infusion; if a
fear of a future disease, whereof those superfluous itching humors, 2. Tim. 4.
3. 2 Timothy 4 3.
do occasion the conjecture, then is it Synodus (...), the Assembly meets to
prevent the mischief. That this Synod here in this Chapter met to both these
purposes, is the opinion of some Divines, Saint Paul the President of the
Convocation, calling together the Clergy of Ephesus, verse 17, first
concerning those beasts of Ephesus, whereof himself speaks in the Epistle to
the Corinthians (their whelps are multiplied with us in England) which made a
jest of the souls immoralitie, 1. Cor. 15. 32.
and the bodies resurrection; and so he conuented them ad Medela^, by cutting
off that Strumam to stay the infection. Secondly, because in the next verse to
my Text, he foresawe dangers, both foreign and domestique, both Lupos
ingredientes Verse. 29. Wolves entering, and devouring the flock; and Canes
oblatrantes, even the very dogs of the flock misleading and seducing them, he
therefore assembled them ad Cautelam to make them wary. And this last is the
most apparent subject of this whole Sermon ad clerum, and thereunto the most
emphaticall and inforceing motive, this ergo, this illatiue for Attention, Take
heed therefore etc. Which some, not unfitly, do call Saint Paul his trumpet,
not that whereof he speaks in the 1. Cor. 14. 8. 1. Cor. 14. 8.
which sends out (...) a dull and uncertain sound: but like the trumpet of
Sinai, Exo 9. 16.
wherein there is both Clangor and Horror, the shrilnesse thereof able to awake
the most slumbring spirit, and the horror to amate, to affright the sturdiest
heart. Whereupon some of the Fathers doubt whither they may call it Tubam or
Tonitru, a trumpets blast, or a thunder clap, so vehemently it ratleth out this
Episcopal, this Pastoral cautell* First intrinsecally, Take heed to your
selves, for as a City mounted on a hill cannot be hid, but is subject to many a
flaw, Mat 5. 14.
so Qui sibi nequam cui bonus? He that cannot rule himself, 1. Tim, 3. 5.
is unfit to rule the Church; and if the salt it self be unsavory, wherewith
then can it season other things? Secondly, extrinsecally, Take heed to the
(Flock) for Christianity extends both her charity and industry to the good
of others; Philip 2. 4.
yea, to the (whole Flock) as Ezekiel does particularize it, Ezech. 31. 39.
to strengthen the weak, to heal the infected, to splint the spreined, to
reduce the wandering, to seek the lost, to cherish the strong: this is the
Clangor of the Trumpet. Sed sonitus buccinae ad huc crescit in maius and
prolixius tenditur, says Moses of that Trumpet, Exodus 19. 19. Exodus 19. 19.
And still Saint Paul raises his blast by a threefold inforcement.

First, expressing the burden of the office it self, Posuit vos ad
(Pascendum) ye are set to Feed, for God loves no loiterers, either in the
market vnhired, or in the vineyard enclosed, but Mat. 20. 8. Call the laborers
and pay them.

Secondly, the author of the office, Spiritus Sanctus, for no man, says Paul,
takes this honor unto himself but he that is called of God, Heb. 5. 4.
who imposes the office, and will exact the account.

Thirdly, the quality of the flock which is to be fed, even that which Saint
Peter calls populum acquisitionis, 2 Pet. 1. 9.
a precious people, purchased with a price of greater value then a Kings
ransom, as it is here, with blood, with Gods blood, with Gods own blood;
(which he has purchased with his own blood) this is the horror of the
Trumpet. Now then, let him that has an ear, hear what the spirit speaks
unto the Churches, Apoc. 2. 7^.
says Saint John; or rather foundeth out to Churchmen: ^say. 51. 17.
for there is no Clergy man, unless he has, as the Prophet speaks,
caroused the cup of slumber ad fundum, even to the very dregs, but the voice
of this Trumpet will be unto him, as Samuels message, 1. Sam. 3. ^.
making both his two ears to tingle, and his heart strings to tremble. Every
blast of this Trumpet, and part of this Text thus dismembered, to express to
the full, I should want both wind and time. I purpose therefore to take Saint
Peter's course in his Sermon, Acts 2. who, though he took a long text, ^ct. 2.
even four verses of the sixteen Psalm, yet principally insisted upon one
verse, which hit the point whereof they most doubted: so, to select out of this
long Text a few words, which are drawn into question against the calling
Episcopal; for it has been a long time buzzed into the ears of many, that
the function of Bishops is but an humane Invention.

The words therefore are these (In quo spiritus sanctus vos posuit episcopos.
In which the holy ghost has placed you Bishops.) The discussing whereof, shall
be like the trial of an Ephra^mite, Judge. 12. 6.
by Shiboleth and Siboleth, to see whether it lisp for the Presbytery, or
speak fully for the Praelacy. The first is coniectuall, because whom verse 17.
he calls Presbyters; them in this verse he intituleth Bishops, their names
not distinct, their offices therefore are not different: that is their
conclusion. The second, I think, is direct, these words describing fully every
part of the outward function of Bishops. First, their preeminent superiority
in the word (Episcopos) for as there are (...) seers Philip: 3. 17. Philip. 3.
17.
which expresses the duty of each Pastor over his flock, so are there 1. Pe.
5. 2. (...) ((...)) such as must visit and ouerlook both the Flock and the
Seers. 2. in the word (posuit) both their Cathedral Seat, this word only
distinguishing a Bishop from an Apostle (setting aside their extraordinary
indowments, and immediate calling) the Apostles function being an unlimited
Circuit, Ite in vniuersum orbem Mat. 28. 19. Mat. 28. 19.
the Bishops a fixed or positive residence in one city: as also (posuit) not a
change or regencie like the Leuiticall service, a weekly, monthly, or annual
course, but (posuit) settled in their persons during life. Thirdly, their
Diocesan Jurisdiction (In quo vniuerso) for a Parochian assembly, a petty
parish, came not within S. Paul's cognizance for a Bishop. Fourthly, the author
of these all (spiritus sanctus) this calling being no humane invention: for
every plant which my heavenly Father has not (...) shall be rooted out. Mat.
15. 13.
Fifthly, the manner thereof, that is also in the word (posuit) First posuit
actu, he acted it by the hands of the Apostles, and so the Episcopal function
is (...) an ordinance Apostolical Secondly, posuit iure, he has enacted it for
succeeding posterity, and so it is (...), a Canon or co^stitutio^ of the whole
Trinity. These are the parts, many in number, easy for proof, and yet hard in
the task, only in this respect, because of whatsoever shall be uttered by me in
this discourse, Eccle 1. 10.
that of Solomon is verified. Non valet quisquam dicere, ecce hoc recens est:
so many treatises there have been compiled, conferences had, books stuffed
with proofs in this argument, to which nothing can be added and less has
been answered. (for an answer worse then silence, is less then nothing)
Notwithstanding, though Quintilia^ and Seneca do both of them repute it to be
tardi ingenii, to set a man's wit working no further then his reading, I had
rather in such a case, which stands upon authority, Sapere exco^mentario and to
be wise by other men's labors, then sapere prae commentario, as some in this
very point do, who, like unto him Ezec. 28. 3. Ezech. 28. 3.
taking themselves to be wiser then Daniel, (for he grounded his wisdom upon
books reading) prefer their own fancy before al antiquity. Dan. 9. 2.
My humble request unto you is, it might please you to cast off all prejudice
either to the question in hand, or the party that handles it; and before I
enter it, to join with me in humble and hearty prayers unto almighty God,
that what shall be uttered by me his unworthy minister may turn to his glory
and to your instruction in Christ Jesus. In which prayer etc. The prayer.


The first thing I am to handle is the prioritie and superiority of Bishops
over their clergy in this word (Episcopos)

IT is Saint Paul's rule, 1. Cor. 14. 4^.
that all things be done decently and in order, for where there is no order
there can be no decency: the best means for order, is, when S. Paul's (...)
commandment with authority, Tit. ^. 15.
is followed with S. Peter's (...) a subordinate obedience. 1. Pet. 2. 13.
No place does order become better then the Church of Christ, which himself in
the Canticles calls Aciem ordinatam, Cant. 6. 36.
an army well marshalled, wherein every company has a Captain, and both
Captains and companies are under one General. For (...), equality in
government is the entertainer of confusion says the Philosopher, (...) polit.
and that is so fit guest for the Churches of the saints says the Apostle. 1.
Cor. 14. 33.
Wherefore, as the great shepherd of Israel professed of himself that he led
his people, and gouernd his flock with two staves, Zach. ^^. 7.
which, Zachary the eleventh, he called the one bands, and the other beauty:
so the great clauiger of heaven which has the key of David that shuts and
no man opens, opens and no man shuts, Apoc. 37.
for his Church government has left two keys in the 16. of Matthew. the one
clauem scientiae the key of knowledge, Mat. 16 19.
the preaching of the gospel, Luc. 11. 52.
which as the more essential part are the bands of our function: for that
necessity is laid upon us, and woe unto us, says Saint Paul, if we preach not
the Gospel, if we turn not that key. The other of power and jurisdiction,
which by distinguishing of functions, causes as Saint Paul describes it 1.
Cor. 12. Cor. (...)
a singular decency in the Church of Christ: the one imposes a duty, and haec
oportet f^cere; there is Zach. his first staff. (B^ndes) the other makes for
the comlines of the regiment, and hac decet fieri, there is Zach. his second
staff (Beauti.) And as the Father and the Son so the holy Ghost also would
make it known, that as in his dedit, Ephesians. 4. Ephesians. 4. 7.
the gifts which he has conferred upon Churchmen, there is an imparitie; and
some better then other covet after the best guiftes 1. Cor. 12. 1. Cor. 12. 31.
so in this (posuit) the functions and offices of the Church, he has
appointed an inequality, and some to be higher then others, not only that
there be (...) 1. Cor. 12. 28. 1. Cor. 12. 28.
some to govern, some to obey, but that among the governors there should be a
disparitie of honor in the 1. Tim. 5. 1. (...). ^. 17.
some to be advanced with double honor in respect of others. This is the
project of the whole Trinity for Church government, and their practice was
semblable. For God himself in the old Testament in the paritie of priesthood
allotteth an imparitie of government, one Leuit above an other, Priests above
them, and the high priest chief of them all: So Christ, while he lived on
earth, of 84. whom he appointed for the general service, which Saint Luke
Act^ 6. 4. Act. 6. 4.
calls (...) the ministration of the word, he selected 12. to be the
principal and superior to the other; which appears manifestly, Act. 1. Act.
1.
For as an Apostles room became void, one of the 72. was chosen into his place:
yea even of those 12. there were, as S. Paul intitles them, Summi Aposto^^ the
chief Apostles, 2. Cor. 1^. 5.
by good conjecture those 3. Peter, James, and John, whom in the 2. to the Gal.
^al^ 2. 9.
he calls Columnas, Pillars. For those 3. alone did our Savior make
pertakers of his transfiguratio^ on the mount, Mat. 17. Mat. 17. 1.
and of his agony in Geths^many, Mat. 26. Which Selection did not so much
express his love to them more then the rest, Mat. 26. 37.
as, which Nazian. N^z^an.
well observes, argue their (...) prerogative and pre-eminence above the rest.
An evident argument (or probable at the least) Epip. Epiphan.
makes thereof, in that our Savior dignified them and not the rest (...) with
names and styles of Honor, calling Simon, Peter, and James and John,
Boan^rges, the sons of thunder. Mat. 3. 16. ^7.
So the holy ghost, after Christ's ascension, first Symb^lically 1. Cor. ^^. 1.
Cor. 12. 12.
distinguishes persons ecclesiastical placing some as the head, others as the
eyes, others as the feet, all together, like members of the body, with equal
concord, but unequal dignity, conspiring together for the safety of the whole.
Secondly, directly, in the word (...) 1. Tim. 3. 13. ^. Tim. 3. 13.
which the Geneua has not well translated, They which have ministered well. For
the words are (...) Those which have discharged the office of a Deacon (...)
prepare unto themsel^es, (...) a (...) to ascend to a higher degree, as first
to be Pre^byter, and then Bishop. Which takes away that distinction of
Priority in order* not of degree; as if the calling Episcopal were a Numeral,
not a M^nerall function, a Priority in order, and not a Superiority in degree.
For the word properly signifies a staire or step, as Act. 21. 35 ^ct* 21. 35.
Paul stood (...), upon the stairs. Which interpretation of mine, both
Councils and Fathers do confirm: (...)
Concil^u^ African, calls the three functions ecclesiastical, of Bishops,
Priests, and Deacons, (...) the three degrees of the Church. Conc. Sardicen. No
man may be called to be a Bishop, which has not risen by every (...), Sardie.
ad culmen Episcopatus. Conc. Calcedo^. Chal.
To reduce a Bishop, (...) back to the degree of a Priest is sacrilege. So
Nazia^. Nazi. vit. Ath^
speaking of Athanasius says, that he had (...), as much pre-eminence and
honor for his virtue as by his dignity, and degrees. Of Saint Basil also he
says, vit. Basil.
that he rose to his Bishoprik, (...) by the order and law, of the spiritual
Ascent: which metaphor Saint Hierom himself uses to Nepotian, Hier. ad Nepot.
if thou desire the office of a Bishop, gaudeo de ascensu, I rejoice at thy
Climing: and of the same Nepotian, fit Clericus, and per solitos gradus
Presbyter. In the infancy of the Church, these degree; Idem in epit. Nep.
were not distinct, for they were not extant. The first that were made were
Deacons, Act. 6. Act. 66.
Presbyters there were none solemnly ordained (that we read of) till Act. 14.
23. Ibid. 14. 23. The highest degree which was the function Episcopal, the
Apostles reserved unto themselves a long time, and that for 3. maine reasons.

First, there was no Church established, and but a few at the first converted,
wherefore all their whole labor they bent in turning the first key, to open
that door of faith Act. 14. 27. namely the conversion of the Gentiles, Ibid.
14. 27:
which the Apostle 1. Cor. 16. 1. Cor. 16. 9.
calls a great door and effectual: and all the help they could make either by
Prophets, Evangelists, Coadiutors, Pastors, Doctors, Planters, Waterers, or
whatsoever was little enough for that work.

Secondly after the conversion of many people, even in settled Churches, they
hasted not to place a Bishop, for (...). No great thing is suddenl^e brought to
pass, says Nazian. and a Presbyter fit to make a Bishop, Nazi^^. (...) 2.
Cor. 2. 16.
is hardly found, said a Carthaginian Bishop in an open Synod: Na^ ad haec
idoneus quis? says Saint Paul, (though our Church here, for a long time
doubled the Echo with a quisquis) The rule therefore of the Apostle being unto
Timothy, 1. Tim. 3. 6.
that in no case he should take him that was Neophytus, a new convert and make
him a Bishop, of them the Church was at that time full; even for that cause
also they absteined.

Thirdly, few being found fit for that high calling, the Apostles left some
Churches to be governed by Presbyters, (reserving still the highest command to
them selves) but when they found that humor whereof Saint James speaks that
every man would be a master. Iam. 3. 1.^ lin. not hist.
(like Pliny his Amphisbaena, a Serpent which has a head at each end of her
body, both striving which should be the maister-head, in the mean time toiles
the body most miserably, and in the end re^ts and tears it self most lothso^ly)
finding I say those 2. effects which use to follow Parity and Plurality, viz.
dissension and confusion, Hieron in Tit. cap. 1. and epist. ad Euagr.
it was generally decreed, as Hierom confesses, Vt vnus caeteris
superponeretur, that one should be placed above the rest to govern both
Presbyters and Flock, and that the whole care of the Church, ad vnu^
pertineret should belong to one, and he should be styled by the name of Bishop:
particularly, over this Clergy here assembled, Timothy, who is subscribed in
the end of that second Epistle, (...) The first Bishop of the Church of Ephesus
by impositio^ of hands (...) and so was Titus also styled Bishop of Creta, as
in the subscriptio^ of that epistle appears. Yea but these were S. Paul's
Bish^p* (say some) and between them and ours a great (...). True, 1. For
variety of gifts and graces of the spirit. A maine difference, as (...) as
between (...) and (...), 1 Cor. 12. 8. their knowledge for the most part (...)
Revelation, 1 Cor. 12. 8.
ours acquired with much study and ndustry.

2. In respect of the honor and reverence which their Clergy and flock
performed to them. A great difference; 1 Cor. 5. 13.
ye see Saint Paul describes it. 1. These. 5. to be (...) more then a
superaboundant aw and love.

For maintenance they and we somewhat semblable, theirs impeached by
persecution, ours exhausted by Sacrilege.

It is a pretty observation (though a sharp one) which a Romish writer of the
Church story long since made, (...)
that the word Conscientia has had very ill luck, in the Church of Christ, it
could never yet be at once in full Syllables; in the Apostles time^, when there
was Con and Sci, a (...) and a (...) Clergy, then entia was defective, they had
the (...) of the Spirit, but no indowment of possessions: Afterward when there
was Con and Entia a religious (yea a superstitious) and a very (...) Clergy,
then Sci was (...), they were not then the (...): And in my time (says he) Con
and Sci are both gone, and (like Phil^poemenes army in Plutarch, Plut. in
Philopae.
which had neither head nor feet, but whole belly) they be all Entia, they
have all the Honors, all the Manors and all the ^at of the land: But with us
again it is come round, for now that we have Con and Sci, a learned (God be
thanked) and a religious Clergy, the Entia are gone, our ma^ntenance is
imb^aseled, our honors envied: yea, even that poor Ens and Vrum which by Gods
and the Kings favor we enjoy, was of late cast whole into the Kings mercy, as
if they would have made v^ non-(...). But the authority and pre-eminence over
the Clergy, is all (...) in them and v^, they receiving it from the Apostles,
and we deriuing it from them: which is manifest in two principal things,
wherein the Bishops then, and we now, are Superior unto the other Clergy which
for your better memory may be reduced to two words each very like to other,
(...) and (...).

First, Collation of Rewards, which Saint Paul calls Ordination, Tit. 1. 5.
Tit. 1. 5.
(the highest honor that a Bishop can reward a Scholar of desert withal, to
make him a Priest of the High God.)

Secondly, Iu^iciall Censure, i^ their Consistory and Visitation, not of the
Flock only, but of the Pastors also: both which Jurisdictions, Distributive
and Correctiue the Apostles kept unto themselves, till they appointed Bishops
either Substitutes in their absence; or Successors after their death. In the
Church of the^^alonica, where there were many (...) both Preachers and
Governors; 1. These. ^. 12.
yet says Saint Paul, If any man obey (...), ^. These. 3. 14.
note him by a letter, and shall I come unto you with a Rod? says he to the
Corinthians, 1 Cor, 4, vlt,
which Church had many Pres^yters; there is the Censure reserved. For the
other, Philip though full of the holy Ghost and of power having preached and
converted many in Samaria, Act. 8.
yet had no authority to lay-hands upon any, but the Apostles were feign to
send, from Jerusalem. Peter and John to do that office, there is Imposition
of hands reserved: both these they conveyed unto Bishops.

First, for Ordination by laying on of hands, in this Church of Ephesus, there
were many Presbyters long before Timothy was appointed their Bishop, 1. Tim.
5. 22.
yet Saint Paul sent him of purpose to Imp^se hands. 1. Tim. 5. 22. Tit. 1. 5.
and for that intent also he left Titus in Creta. Neither would the Church of
Christ succeeding admit any other but Bishops to that business, as not
justifiable for the Presbyters, either by Reason, example, or Scripture.

First for Reason, it is a rule which admits no contradiction, Heb. 7. 7.
says the Apostle, that he which blesses, should be greater then he which is
blessed, (taking it for the benediction which is ex authoritate not deuotione,
for the subject may bless the Prince, and man blesses God in hearty
devotion, but the blessing of authority comes from the greater, as honor is
in him that confers it, not in him that takes it. And this is Saint Ambrose his
reason. Ambros. in. 1. Tim. 3.


Secondly, for example, not one to be showed through the whole story
Ecclesiastical, that any besides a Bishop did it. If some one of the inferior
rank presumed to do it, his Act was reuersed by the Church for unlawful (as
in the case of Coll^thus, a Presbyter of Alexandria, Athanas. Apol. 2 in
li^^^is Pres.
whereof Athanasius and Epiphanius do both make mention, Marit.
who took upon him to give orders, for which both himself was censured and
what he did was revoked, ^piphan. (...). 69.
and they received as mere Laymen, (and no otherwise) unto the communion,
whom he had ordered.

Thirdly, For scripture, there is none, either of Holy men, or of the
Holy Ghost, not holymen, for all the Fathers (...) with one consent do
contradict it. Chrysostom upon the 1. Tim. 3. and 4. Chrysostom. Theodoret.
Oecumen. Ambros. vbi supra. Hieron. ad Fuagr.
Theodoret upon the same places. Ajax ^^agel.
Oecumenius upon 1. Tim. 5. Ambrose is peremptory, that it is neither Fas nor
Ius, consonant neither with Gods nor man's law, that any besides a Bishop should
do it. Yea, Hierom himself who sets a Presbyter like him in Sophocle, (...)
and aduanceth him as high as he can to make him go aequis ceruicibus with a
Bishop, yet takes him this one peg down, Excepta Ordinatione, what is it says
he, that a bishop does which a Presbyter may not do, saving Ordination? No
scripture of the Holy Ghost, either analogically by consequent or directly by
precept: For analogy, none but the Apostles did it, or might do it, (as before
you heard) not directly, for to what Presbyter was the authority committed as a
Presbyter? 1. Tim. 5. 21.
unto Timothy a Bishop of Ephesus it was said (lay hands hastily on no man) And
to Titus a Bishop of Creta I have left thee here to ordain presbyters. Tit. 1.
5.


But to each of these there is an objection, First for example, that of Ananias
Act 9. Act. 9.
who being neither Apostle, not Bishop, only a disciple, laid his hands upon
Paul, and had a commission for it. True, but they were Manus curatoriae, not
confirmatoriae, as appears verse 12. verse. 12^
to restore his sight, not to give him his function. Else should he have been
first actually consecrated an Apostle of Christ, before he had been baptized
into Christ, which was Psalm, 18. Secondly for scripture, Saint Paul's precept
seems to imply a practice of consecration by the Presbyteri, 1. Tim. 4. 14*
in those words (neglect not the grace which is in thee, and was given thee
[cum impositione manuum presbyterii] fair colors in show, but they will not
hold. Shall the Fathers b^e judges? They al, with one consent, interpret the
Presbytery by the Praelacy, that is by the Bishops, for they only (say the
Fathers) may do it. Shall modern writers, and the best of them Master Calvin
(presbyterii) nor the College, says he, is here meant, (for the Bishops had
then and after a college of priests to assist them in their sacred business,
Hierom in Esa. 3.
which Saint Hierom calls (Senatum ecclesiae) but the office, as if Paul
should have said (neglect not the grace which was given thee, when by
imposition of hands thou were made presbyter) which interpretation he borrowes
from Saint Chrysostom. Shall Saint Paul himself determine it? 2. Tim. 1. 6.
In the second Tim 1. 6. (Stir up says he the grace which is in thee by the
laying on of My hands) So that either Saint Paul was himself that whole
Presbyter (...), as having in him (being an Apostle, which Bishops also have)
all the fu^ctions Eccl^siastical, as the Philosopher speaks of anima
rationalis, that it has in it all the inferior faculties both sensitive and
vegetative. Or at least he was principal in the action, and without him it
might not be done. Which were it so, (yet Master Calvin Calvin.
stands resolute that S. Paul alone did it) it preuentes a third objection
taken out of the 4. Iustit. lib. 4. c. 3.
Carthaginian Council, where there is a Canon that when a Bishop lays hands
to give Orders, all the priests present do withal lay their hands iuxta
manum Episcopi. True, First (iuxta manum) so that the Bishops hand must
necessarily and (...) b^ on. Secondly there is (...) scripture a twofould (...)
or stretching forth of the hand, the first, extended to consecrate and b^esse.
So did the ^a^ria^chs and priests in the old testament: our Savior and his
Apostles in the new. The other, stretched out, ad testimo^um, for a witness
and assent. rod. 29. 1.
The Bishops hand is the first, for that blesses and consecrateth, the
pre^byters assisting do with their hands (...) and approve what he does. How
will that appear? demonstratiuely, because if there were an error in the
ordination, as that a man, either insufficient for learning or scandalous for
life, or otherwise Canonically impeached, were admitted into Orders, the Bishop
only was censured, the assisting presbyters never called in question: whereof
the examples are infinite, and therefore the divines have very well observed
out of that place, 1. Tim. 5. 22.
1. Tim. 5. 22. (lay hands hastily on no man) that the Bishop as he has
manu^ porrigenda^ he only has authority to impose hands, so he has also manu^
corrigendam (if as S. Basil speaks) he has (...) hands too hasty and easy
for admittance into orders without trial and testimony, his hand only is to
be corrected. For (...) it is thou Timothy (not the Presbyters) that
communicatest with their sin whom thou so admittest. So then since neither
the error was imputed unto the Clergy assistant nor the Censure inflicted upon
them, the conclusion is found, therefore the authori^^^ not committed unto
them. Whereupon some, because if they grant Imposition of hands; they see a
superiority must needs follow, (...) Act. and Monument.
have therefore done as it is recorded of a Painter in the time of Queen Mary;
who having drawn King Henry the 8. against the Queens coming through the
City in Triumph, with a Bible in his hand being checked by a great Counsailor
of State, and willed to wipe it out, because he would be sure to leave no part
of the book visible, he wiped out Bible and hand withal so they, with the
superiority have removed also the ^^remony, insomuch that in some Churches, as
it is well known to your Majesty when they admit any into Orders they shake
hands with them; as bidding them welcome into their company, Gal. 2. 9.
grounding it upon a Text of Scripture (to say no more) wrongfully interpreted
Gal. 2. 9. where it is said that the ^. chief Apostles gave unto Paul and
Barnabas, dextras societatis, the right han^s of fellowship, as if they at that
time had either given or confirmed unto them their function. Where, as the
truth is, that the Apostles finding the doctrine of Paul and Barnabas to be
all one with theirs, and al^o their preaching very effectual in converting
many to the faith, thereupon they entered a Covenant that Paul and Barnabas
should take the charge of the Gentiles, and they them selves would be Apostles
of the Circumcision, and upon this they struck hands. But Paul and Ba^nabas
Act. 13. 2. Act. 13. 2.
received also imposition of hands at Antioch: If before they came to the
Apostles, (as some think) then this shaking of hands (be it for ordination)
was superfluous: If after (as others more probably conjecture) then were this
defective. The truth is that the A postle Paul received not his function by
hands either imposed or stro^ken, but by especial revelation, Gal. 1. 1. 2.
The hands imposed Act. 13. were commendatiue, the right hands stricken Gal. 1.
were stipulatiue, and therefore no mean Praesbyterial. The Professors of Boem
wish Imposition of hands in consecration to be retained, as signifying 4
things fit for a Minister, for some of them will have Ceremonies to be
significant: And so much shall serve for the first part. We come now to the
second that is to Correctiue jurisdiction, which Saint Paul to Titus 1. 4. Tit.
1. 4.
in one word calls (...) a setting of things to rights. Correction judicial
is either Correctiue or Coactiue, either restraining, where there is too much
forwardnes, or enforcing where there is a slacknes, this the Rod, that the
sword Apostolical. 1. Cor. 4. (...).
Veniam ad vos in virga? 1. Cor. 4. there is the po^. v^inam abscindantur qui
perturbant vos, there is the sword Apostolic, ^al. 5. 12. Both these the
Apostles kept in their own hands; Gal. 5. 12.
as will appear, for example, in the Church of Corinth, where there were many
excellent Preachers, Presbyters, of eminent gifts, yet none of them could
proceed against the incestuous offender, 1. Cor. 5.
before they had received a Commission from S. Paul, who being offended that
they had no sooner informed him, Iam iudic^^i (says he) as soon as he heard
it [I have already decreed to deliver him to Satan] He did not say decreed that
you shall deliver him: and therefore wills them in the name of Christ and his
spirit (that his authority) being with the^ to execute that his decree, and
deliver him up, whether, by excommunication or corporal infliction, is not to
this purpose. But where they placed Bishops unto the^ they transmited the same
preeminence. Against an elder receive no accusation, ^ Tim. 5. 29.
says Saint Paul to ^imothy, he says not against a Co-Presbyter, as his
equal, but he speaks unto Timothy a Bishop as a Judge of Presbyters says
Epiphan. Epiph. lib. ^.
In particular, Hae^. 75.
if any of the Clergy, do (...), preach any other doctrine the^ that which is
^ound, 1. Tim. 1. 4.
prohibe, command him not to do it. If any of them do preach profanely or
bablingly, ^. Tim. 2. 16.
Cohibe, restrain him, that their doctrine spread not to further hurt. If
Timothy might not thus censure alone (which is the opinion of some) without the
consent of the bench, what needed that dreadful charge unto him 1. Tim. 5. 21.
1. Tim. 5. 21.
I charge thee before God, Christ Jesus, and his elect Angels that thou
proceed in this order, without prejudice or partiality (the 2 cu^ thro^es of
al upright proceedings.) For had he bin to sit in the Consistory; only to cap
voices, himself having no Negat^ue, scarce a casting voice, allotted him, what
fear might be either of his prejudice to the cause, or partiality to the
accused, sithence that, as in Arithmet^ke, the number of voices do there over
sway, and not the weight of reason. Again of al Presbyters is expected the
abi^^ty, Tit. ^9.
and to each of the^ committed the authority (...) to censure gaine-^aiers, but
with force of argument, not in place of judgment. Tit. 2. 15.
For unto Titus alone, a Bishop, was that (...) that universal authority Tit.
2. 15. Tit. 2. 15.
commended, both for pulpit and Consistory, [for I have lef^ thee at Creta to
reas esse things amisse] says the Apostle unto him Tit. 1. 5. Tit. 1. 5.
For particulars if any preach otherwise then becomes him (...) it is thy du^^
to put him to silence Tit. 1. 10. Ibid. verse. 10.
And (...) reprove some of them sharply* as the word signifies, eue^ with
cutting them short, that their vnround doctrine infect no further. And again,
if an Heretic, after the first and second admonition recant not (...) av^yde
him, that is excommunicate him, Tit. 3. 10. Tit. 3. 10.
To say this authority was committed unto either of them as Evangelists

First, that is but a conjecture, for there is as good proof that Timothy was
an Apostle as that he was an Evangelist; for he that said unto him, 2. Tim. 4.
5. 2. Tim. 4. 5.
Fac opus Euangelistae, Do the work of an Evangelist, (which is the ground of
that gift) the same said also of him 1. Cor. 16. 10. 1. Cor. 16. 10.
Operatur opus Domini sicut ego, He work the Lords work even as I; And we
all know Saint Paul was an Apostle.

Secondly, the work of an Evangelist ceased with the function, as being but
temporary and personal, but these things which Saint Paul inioynes to
Timothy, as a Bishop, must remain in the Church government, to perpetual
succession. For so the Apostle, 1. Tim. 6. 14. 1. Tim 6. 14.
charge him before God and his son Christ that he keep these In^unctions
without stayne, or chang^, ill the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. Which
ti^othie could not perform in his own person, who (as the Apostle knew) could
not live so long: Ambrose in (...). cap. 6.
therefore as S. Ambrose well observes, it is spoken to Timothy a Bishop, as a
precept for those that should succeed him in the same function, much less were
they imposed upon him as a Presbyter; for though the names in Scripture be
often confounded, yet the functions are distinct, For in the 24. of Matthew,
Verse 45. Mat. 24. 45.
he that was appointed Rector super familiam, Steward of the household: under
the chief Lord, was in the 49. verse called (...) a fellow servant with the
rest of the Meany: all servants under one Lord, but yet some superior to other
in Office. In the Civil state, being more familiar unto you, this distinction
will be more apparent. For the style of Bar^n is a ti^tle belonging to men of
great Honor, and of noble birth, but yet communicable to men scarce of mean
Worship, Yea, even in that honorable rank, both Earls, and Lords are called
Barons, yet their places and Dignities unequal: every Earl being a Baron, but
every Baron not an Earl. So in this case, both Bishops and Priests, in respect
of that general service to our Lord, 1. Cor. 4^.
the Dispensation of his word and mysteries, are all Presbyters and
fellow-Presbyters, but the styles being communicable the terms are not
conuertible, for every Bishop is a Presbyter, but every Presbyter is not a
Bishop. For S. Peter calls himself a Presbyter. 1. Pet. 5. 1. 1. Pet. 5. 1.
and yet he was an Apostle, the community of names confound not the offices.
Neither shall we ever read, that any of those things enjoined by Paul to
Timothy, were committed to Presbyters, either to a singular person, or to a
whole College, where there was not a Bishop. Whereupon the very same
authority, both of Ordination and Jurisdiction, the Churches succeeding
reserved to their Bishops only. I marvel, says Hierom, that the Bishop of
the Diocese wherein Vigilantius is a Presbyter does not crush that
unprofitable vessel with his Apostolic rod. Hierom. ad ^iparium.
And it is thy humility, Cyprian. ad Rogat.
says Saint Cyprian to Rogatianus a Bishop, that thou would complain to me
of the con^umelie offered unto thee by a Deacon, whereas thou might pro
Episcopatus tui vigore and Cathedrae authoritate, that is, through the strength
of thine office, as thou art a Bishop, and the authority of thy Chair, have
power sufficient to revenge thy self on him: And therefore wills him that if
the Deacon do still persist in that his malipert carriage, he should either
Deponere, or abstinere, Depose him from his Ministry, or suspend him at his
pleasure. And thus much of the Superiority of Bishops over their Clergy: the
nature whereof, what it is you see.

We must now come to examine the authority, whereon it is grounded, and that
is, in these words, Spiritus sanctus, the Holy Ghost, For his authority runs
through all the parts, as in the beginning I told you. Of his immediate
disignment, of any to the place, we speak not yet, though ^ome refer the
calling of Timothy, to his Bishopric, upon those words, 1. Tim. 1. 18.
[per Prophetiam] thereunto. Oecumenius upon that place, Oecumen. ibid
infers that general conclusion, that Bishops were not made (...) pell-mell,
at all adventures, but by the Commandment of the Holy Ghost; we speak of
their appointment, by men endued with the Holy spirit from above, Luc. 24. 49.
that is, the Apostles, (for every ordinance Apostolic, we take to be the
action of the Holy Ghost) In trial whereof we will follow M. Beza. Ad tract.
de diuersis grad. cap. 23.
Surely, says he, Si ab ipsis Apostolis profecta esset etc. If I could find
this superiority of a Bishop over the rest of his Clergy, to have proceeded
from the Apostles, I would not fear to attribute it Divinae in solidum
dispositioni, Wholly and fully to the divine Institution; August. de bapt.
contra Donat. ca. 24. lib. 4.
Let us then join that issue. Saint Augustine* shall begin. That which the
whole Church reteineth, and no Council has first decreed, and was never
al^red, must be believed to be an Apostolical ordinance. Now ^or this
particular, Hier. ad Euag.
Saint Hierom himself c^nfesseth^, that not one Church only, but the whole
world decreed the superiority of Bishops, Vt vnus coeteris superpo^er^tur. As
for a Council that first erected it, there is none. The Canons, Can. Apost.
vbique.
which for the antiquity of them, are called Apostolorum Canones, Nicen. Con:
4.
distinguish the^. Degrees as we now have them. The Nicen Council, which is the
first general we have in print extant, Can. 6. etc. 7.
reckons them in the same order, with the same prerogatives, and establishes
them to be continued according to the ancient and former custom, with this
short Aphorism, (...). For alteration there was none for 1500. years
together; until young Joshua his emulation, envying that some had the Key of
Knowledge, Numb. 11. 29
more then other, [Enuiest thou for my sake?] joined with Corah his repining,
that some had the Key of power and Jurisdiction above others: [You take too
much upon you, Numb. 16. 3.
Moses and Aaron.] I say, not for 1500 years did any Church alter that
Government or opinion: perhaps a pedling Heretic or two, The^al^s in the
Church of Jerusalem, and Aerius elsewhere, fancied unto themselves a Paritie,
but their ground was Malecontentment, as Eusebius, and Epiphanius both witness,
Epiphan. haeres. 75.
because they could not be made Bishops, which they earnestly affected.
Egesippus the ancienst Historian cited by Eusebius has branded Theblis, gesip.
apud (...). lib. 4. cap. 22.
with a mark that will not out, while there are books extant, viz. That the
Church of Jerusalem, remained no way infected with error in so much that she
was by men styled a Virgin: the first that corrupted her was Thebulis, because
he was not made Bishop: So that by Saint Augustines inference, the Institution
is Apostolical, and therefore by M. Beza his concession, Divine. But this is
perhaps but an oblique and indirect proof.

Surely, we are no Arcadians, to fetch our Pedigree from beyond the Moon:
shall Histories of fact, or Testimonies of the ancient, be our Heraldes for
record? Eusebius. hist.
Eusebius, the most ancient of the Historiographers, that we have, Eccles.
^par^^m
for 300. years succession names the persons and calculateth the times of the
Bishops of four principal Churches of the world Jerusalem, Antioch, Rome,
and Alexandria; Socrates, Socrat.
and Theodoret the rest, Theodoret.
who lineally succeeded the Apostles in those Sees, until the Council of
Nice, who with 314. Bishops more subscribed unto that General Council. And
that which Eusebius witnesses of those four, (...) lib. 4. ca. 63.
the same does Irenaeus, more ancient then he, by almost two hundred years,
justify to be the case of all the Churches in the world, that the Bishops
the^ governing, could derive their succession from them, to whom the Apostles
by hand, delivered the said Churches, to govern in every place. August. ep.
42. 1.
Which certain successiue propagation, Saint Augustine makes the maine root
of Christian society: Tertul. de prescript.
and Tertullian, the maine proof of true doctrine. And here if I would seem
ambitious, in heaping Authors, I might go downward from Irenaeus, through the
whole course of the Fathers, delineating this succession, and thereby trouble
rather your patience, then mine own memory.

The best course therefore to determine this question, in this short time
allotted me, will be, as I think, if we make him the vmper, who^ they make
our Accuser, that is S. Hierom, whom Master Beza, with others do principally
rely upon. Page 145. in resp. ad Sarav.
Nam cui notior? For who, says Beza, was better acquainted with the History
of the age succeeding the Apostles, then Hierom? Yes surely, a dozen more in
print, of as great note and truth, as he; who all concord the Succession, and
Superiority of Bishops, to be Apostolical. But what says Hierom?

First, he will have this same, Excelsiorem gradum, of Bishops over the
Clergy, to begin in Alexandria, Hier ad euagr.
a Marco Euangelista: Aster S. Mark the Evangelist (for they would make the
preposition to be exclusive) as if in Saint Marks time, neither that Prelacie
was heard of, nor then els-where, but in the Church of Alexandria only. Well,
could Bishops go no higher for their Superiority, they need not be ashamed
of their Progeny: for Saint Mark dyed, Eusebius. li. 1. cap. 24.
and Anni^nus presently succeeded him, six years before the death of either
Saint Peter, or Saint Paul: thirty five years before the death of Saint James
the Apostle: forty five years before Simon Cleophas, who was one of our
Lords disciples, of whom we read, Luke 24. Luke 24.
Who was Bishop of Jerusalem after Saint James: and therefore made Bishop,
because he was our Lords kinsman, as Eusebius witnesses. Eusebius. li. 4. ca.
22.
So, that this Superiority, (though it began, as they say, in the next
Successor to Saint Mark) was extant in the Church, these Apostles viventibus,
videntibus, approbantibus; living, seeing, approouing it: (for silence argues,
if not an approbation, yet no dislike) But Hierom confesses, that Saint Mark
himself, the in^erpreter of Saint Peter, (for the Gospel, which bears Saint
Marks name, he received from Saint Peter's own mouth, as some write) was the
first Bishop of Alexandria. Hieron. p^o^em. in Euang. Matthei. Hieron. de
scriptor. Eccles. in lacobi.
And were there Bishops only in Alexandria? No, for Hierom also witnesses
that James the just, our Lords brother, was the first Bishop of Jerusalem, and
so ordained by the Apostles, presently after our Lords passion: yea, Bishops
doubtless, but not Superiors, over their brethren, before that time which was
after Saint Mark. Ignatius, Hieron. in ^gnatio.
who as Hierom himself records, conuer^ed with the Apostles, and saw Christ
in the flesh (by good likelihood, as some think, one of those five hundred
brethren, of whom Saint Paul, 1. Cor. 15. 1. Cor. 15. 6. Ignat. ad Smyrn.
6. speaks) Or, rather, as Ignatius of himself witnesses, even then, when
Christ said to his Disciples, Handle me and see, for a spirit has not flesh
and bones etc, Luke 24. ^9. The second Bishop of Antioch, Ignat. ad Antioch.
after Saint Peter, writes to the An^iochians, for amongst them he was a
Presbyter, to remember Euodius their Bishop, who first received from the
Apostels, (...) the Praelacie, and Superiority above us: Ide^ ad Trall.
for Episcopus est sacerdotum Princeps, says the same Father els-where. And
afterward, when himself came to be Bishop of the same Church (being ca^yed
to Rome to be martyred for his profession) he writes unto the Pastors, and
Clergy of Antioch, that they would be diligent in feeding the Flock,
committed unto them, until God did show unto them, Ignat. ad Antiochen.
(...), him that should rule over them, Idem ad sar.
after his death. But in his Epistles, ad Sarsenses, inioyning in particular
each order his subjection: Presbyters, be obedient to your Bishop; Deacons, be
subject to your Presbyters: and Laymen to all. His conclusion is very
patheticall, My soul for theirs, who observe this order, the Lord will be
always with the^. This was blessed Ignatius, to whom our Savior appeared, and
spoke in the flesh. And Clemens of Alexandria, in a Story that he rehearses
of S. John, reports that the said Apostle, after his return from Pathmos,
Eusebius. lib. 3. cap. 23.
in some places where he came, made Bishops, and chose into the Clergy, such
as the Holy Ghost thought fit: and upon occasion of a young man, of whom he
took especial liking, turned unto a Bishop, who was, as the story speaks,
(...) Superior, or set over them all, committed the youth to his Custody:
which Bishop after his return, he called Caput illius Ecclesiae, the head of
that Church. Hieron. aduers. (...).
Yea Hierom himself acknowledges, that unless to the Bishop there be given
Exors quaed^m and ab omnibus emi^^ns potest as, an extraordinary and pe^reles
pre-eminence above the rest, tot essent schismata, quot sacerdotes, there would
be as many schisms as there are Priests. And this shall serve for the first
objection out of Hierom. But the second is that which they urge most, for that
seems to strike home, namely, that this Maioritie of Bishops came rather ex
consue^udine Ecclesiae, by the Churches custom, quam dominicae dispositionis
veritate, then by the truth of the Lords ordinance. Some, I know both Papists
and Protestants, Hiero^. in Tit. 1.
are so angry with Hierom for this, that they rank him with Aerius in the
number of rank Heretics, as maintaining, by this speech, the Parity of
ministers; A wrong to that Father doubtless. For what Church meant he to whose
custom he ascribed it, the church in the Apostles times or after? if in the
Apostles times, shall we think S. Hierom would fasten upon them such a crime,
as that they would erect such an office contrary or not consonant unto their
Masters prescript? And yet it is certain he meant of that Church, Hieron.
ibide^.
for in the same place showing what occasioned this Pre-eminence of one above
the rest, he says it began when the Devil made that faction in the church,
that one would say I am of Paul, and another I am of Apollos, a third I am of
Cephas, and an other I am of Christ, and this was as appears 1. Cor. 1. 1.
Cor. 1.
in the time and prime of the Apostles. Yea indeed, Hierom is direct, that the
suppressing of schisms occasioned the first sourse and erection of Bishops as
the best remedy against them. And when were schisms more rise then in the
Apostles times? There is no Church to whom Saint Paul writes an epistle but he
complains of them. Where, by the way, two things we may observe here-hence by
this occasion of Saint Hieroms speech. Cypr. ad Rogat.
First that of Saint Cyprian, that this maligning the superiority of Bishops is
an infallible note of Schismatikes. For as you might know, that Demetrius and
his fellow Goldsmiths, by raising a tumult against Paul were Dianaes
tradesmen, because they foresaw if Christ were preached, Act. 19.
down must Diana, and withal their gain: so may we descrie who are inclined
to Faction by their spurning against this superiority, because if Bishops be
raised, their Schisms must be scattered. Secondly, if advancing of Bishops
be the suppressing of Schisms (as their own author affirms) and Saint Paul
prophesies 1. Cor. 11. 1. Cor. 11.
Oportet haereses esse, that there must and will be heresies and Schisms while
the world stands, then surely, it behooves your Majesty (to whom the care
of Church and kingdom is committed) if you will have Schisms abandoned, to
maintain and continue this government Episcopal: unless, as it pleased you
to write to your most noble son, you will retain factions in your kingdom,
(...). P^. ^2.
as Socrates did his wife Zantippe, to try your own patience, and the Churches
constancy. But to answer the point, if this superiority came by a custom in
the Apostles times, and they, we must think, did nothing derogatorie to their
Masters precept, why then should Hierom say it came not by the truth of the
Lords ordinance? Clemens Alexandrinus, by a pretty distinction upon that place
1. Cor. ^. 1. Cor. ^
[yee are Gods husbandry] gives me a good hint for a fit resolution. The
Apostles, says he manured the Church with a double tillage: there was (...),
Joan. (...).
the first, that of the Euan. John. 20. Haec scripta sunt, direct written
precepts which our Lord had left them: 1. Cor. (...)
the other, which Saint Paul 1. Cor. 11. calls (...), things vnwrite^ which
they either did, or spoke as the times occasioned, and the holy Ghost directed.
If any think that this makes way to Popish traditions, unwritten verities, It
is no other then Saint Paul's own distinction of Praeceptum and Concilium out
of his own practice. 1. Cor. 7. 6. that he spoke some things by permission,
some things by precept. 1. Cor. 7. 6.
This speak I, says he again Verse 1^. not the Lord, Psalm 12.
did Paul utter any thing contrary, or not agreeing to the Lord his Masters
doctrine? No, but persuading himself Verse forty, verse 40.
that he also had the spirit of God, verse. 25.
though I have, says he Verse 25. no commandment from the Lord, yet I give
this advise. So means S. Hierom, that this Matority of Bishops is that (...)
that unwritten husbandry whereof Clemens speaks, vz that there is no written
precept or express rule from Christ, but yet that it is an Apostolical
tradition, and grew to be a custom even then in all Churches, I^enae.
for so Irenaeus long before him calls it Traditione^ Apostolica^ toti mundo
manifesta^. Neither does this objection out of Hiero^ make more against the
Priority of Bishops then against the observing of the Lords day, whereof that
speech of Saint Hierom may be as well, yea more truly verified, that it is
rather ex consuetudine Ecclesiae quam Doninicae dispositionis veritate. That
the seventh day shou^de be kept holy there is express scripture both before
the law upon the Creation, Genesis 2. Exodus 20.
and in the law at the fourth commandment, but where is there any place
either in the Gospels that our Savior commanded, or in the Acts and Epistles
that the Apostles ordained the alteration of Sabatumin Dominica^, the first day
to be sanctified for the seventh? In the first of the Revelation it is once
named and called Dies Dominicus, Apoc. 1.
which by all testimony was not the seventh day, and so in the old testament
there is a day which David so intitl^ t^, Psalm. 118.
hic est dies This is the Lords day, he has made it, we will rejoice and be
glad in it, and that by all assurance was not the Sabbath. The truth therefore
is, that the Church finding the observation, but not the first ordinance
thereof, continued it to be kept, and accounted it as an Apostolical
institution. And the very same is the true sense of S. Hieroms speech in this
point of praelacy, saving that the placing of Bishops is more apparent in the
epistles to Timothy and Titus: Otherwise he should much have forget
himself, Hero^. ad Man.
for in his epis^le to Marcella confuting or rather contemning the errors of
Montanus, this he puts for one. With the^, says he, the Bishops are thrust
into the third place, but with us (in the Christian orthodoxall Churches)
Apostolorum locum tenent Episcopi, The Bishops have the Aposils room, that is,
the first place. Yea els-where he acknowledges it to be Dominica dispositio,
The Lords own ordinance, though indirectly and obliquely, and that out of the
old testament 1. alle^orically out of Ps. 45. wherein the Church of Christ is
rep^ele^ted in the person of Salomo^s Queen: Aug. in ^s. 44.
upon those words, ver. 16. Prepatribus ^ati (...) tibi (...), Let it not
gree^e thee, says S. Austen that the (...) not Peter and Paul, by whom thou
wast bego^^e^ for o^ thine own brood, a fatherhood is grown unto thee: Instead
of fathers, children are borne unto thee: Quos (...) principes s^per omne^
^erra^, ^^^ron. ibid.
that is, says S. Hiero^, The Gospe^ being spread through all quarters of the
world, in them Bishops are placed rulers of the Church. Secondly, by
co^paris^n, (wherein he plain^ly (...) what he meant by those words, (...)
the Custom of the Church: namely an Apostolic ordinance) Vt Sc^amus says he
Apostolicas traditiones sumptas de vete^i testamento etc. That we may know how
the Apostles grounded their traditions, or ordinance upon the old Testament,
and from thence fetched their Modele, this is one particular, That which Aaron,
his sons and Levites were in the Temple: the very same let Bishops,
Presbyters, and Deaco^s challenge in the Church to the^ sclues. T^is were
sufficient, if we should rest here: but neither S. Hierom, not they must so
pass, as if it were not directly the Lords own institution. For Spiritus
sanctus, not only by the Apostles, who had received him in great measure, but
even by Christ himself, who, Ioh. 3* ^oh. 3.
was endued with the spirit without measure, ordained this Superiority, if we
will credit S. Hierom his ancients by many years. S Cypri. Let the Deacons
remember, that Apostolos, Cyp^. ad rogat.
id est. Episc^pos Do^inu ipse eleger^t: The Lord himself choose Apostles,
that is Bishops; but the Apostle after our Savior his ascension, choose Deacons
to serve them at the Altar, etc. For, that the Apostles were Bishops, besides
the rest of the Fathers, Hierom himself by allusion confesses. Non om^es
Episcopi, Episcop^s^^t, Hieron. ad ^liod.
All that are in the place, and carry the name of Bish^ps, are not Bishops
Atte^de ^etrum, sed and (...) consider; Look upon Peter, but withal behold
Judas. For they whom we now call Bishops, Theodo^. in ^hilip. 1.
were then called Apostles. says Theod. Yea, though they all were silent in
that point, the Holy g^ost will confirm it; who speaking of Matthi^s choice
into Judas his room in express terms calls Apostolatum Episcopatum, Acts
1. 20. Acts. 1. 20^ ^sal. 109.
(...) out of the Psa. 109. Let another take his Bishopship. Saint Hilary with
many of the Fathers ^f^irme, that our Saui^r in direct words appointed this
superiority Episcopal over their brethren, in that place and part of his last
Sermon, Hilar. in Math. 24.
Mat. 24. 45. Who is a faithful and wise servant quem Dominus constituet
[super familiam?] who^ the Lord shall make ruler ^uer his household? But that,
which is in the Apocalypse, is (...) admits no contradiction, where our Lord
himself, wills S. John to write unto the 7. Angels of the 7. Churches.
Wherein 3. things are very worthy observation. First, he calls them Angels,
there is their eminence, both for dignity, and integirtie, Secondly, they had
the trial, both for proof, and reproof of their Clergy Apoc. 2. 2. [Thou
have examined them which profess themselves Apostles, and are not] there is
their preeminence for jurisdiction over their brethren. Apoc. ^. 1. 2. 5
Thirdly, the perpetu^tie of their place during life: Else, what need that
threat, ver^e 5? I will remo^ue thy Candlestick. For had he but st^ied a month,
or a year, the Presbytery would have turned him out of his socket, when his
turn was expired. Instit. lib. 4. cs. ^ Sect. 1.
But as with M. Beza we begun, so will we conclude al with M. Calvin, who
d^rects us, for the finding out of Church gouerme^t according to the divine
Institution, unto vetere^ Ecclesia^, the ancient Church, wherein we shall see,
Imagine^ quanaa^, a certain representa^ion thereof. For howsoever, says he,
the Bishops of that time made some Canons exorbitant from Scripture, yet with
such caution, did they constitute their Discipline vt facile videas ni^il ^ere
hac part ha^uisse a verbo Dei alienu^: that it may easi^y appear nothing
therein almost to differ from the written word. For this particular in hand,
Sect. ^.
in the next Paragraph, he exe^plifieth the form thereof. Out of their number
of Presbyters, Pas^ors, and Doctors in every city, they chose one to be the
chief, who^ they entitled a Bishop, (for which he adds a reason) Ne ex
^qualitate, vt fier^ solet, dissidia nas^erentur. And lest you should think (as
some do) this Bishop to be but a Parso^ of a Congrega^io^, (...).
he proceeds to tell us, that to every such cit^e attributa erat certa regio,
an whole territory or Country was annexed, the villages whereof, set their
Pastors that fed them from the Cathedral Church, or College of Presbyters,
whereof the Bishop was chief, and where he sat. A lively Idea thereof still
remains with us in the Churches of the old fundation. And this makes way to
the parts ensuing, namely, first [Posuit] their Cathedral Seat: and Secondly
[In quo] their Di^cesan jurisdiction But I fear, I have been too troublesome
already, and therefore will here stay my course.

God, for his great mercies sake, grant that the words which have been
spoken, may turn to his glory, and our Instruction in Christ Jesus, To whom
with the Father, and the Holy Ghost, etc.

FINIS.

