I tell you, John Iarret, you will break: OR, John Iarrets wives counsel to her
husband, to have care to his estate in this hard time, lest he turn Bankerout.
To the tune of the wiuing Age.


PRay gentle John Iarret, give ear to my words,
It is my true kindness this counsel affords,
And every good husband to his wife accords:
If your time you wast away at Alehouse boords,
I tell you, John Iarret, you will break,
I tell you, John Iarret, you will break.
You see how the world to vices inclines.
Which if you do follow, my soul thus divines,
That you will want the money which you wast in wines:
Men being drunkards, are worse than base swines.
I tell you John Iarret, etc.
They say, at the Talbot you run on the s^^re,
Beside, at S. Katherines you keep a brave whore.
Where you on a night spent an Angel and more:
If you use such dealings, twill make you full poor.
I tell you, etc.
I hear y'haue a wench, they call her Black Ka^e,
Whose dwelling, they say, is near to Billingsgate,
Besides, how you gave her a new gown of lase:
If you upon harlots do thus waste your state.
I tell you, etc.
Besides, at S. Tooli^s, another man's wife,
They say that ( John Iarre^) you love as your life,
Twixt her and her husband you daily breed strife,
Consuming your means, if you lead still this life,
I tell you, etc
I hear say at Wapping that you keep another,
And when you go there, you say it is to your brother
But you maintain her with the old bawd her mother
Such scuruy dealings I by no means can smother:
I tell you, etc.
You rise in the morning before break of day,
And unto the Alehouse you straight take your way,
Where you in base manner at shuffle-boord play,
Until you have wasted your money away.
I tell you, etc.
You have a Bastard at Brainford at nurse,
That weekly does cost you two shillings that's worse:
These things, sweet John Iarret, will empty your purse
Besides, if you still persevere this course,
I tell you, etc.
You into ill company daily d^^ rome,
Whilst I and your children sit sighing at home,
With brown bread and small drink I sit like a mome
And sometimes at midnight you drunk in do come
I tell you, etc.
This is a hard world, and every thing's dear,
Sweet gentle John Iarret, my counsel pray hear
Before all be wasted, I pray have a care.
For if you do hold this course one other year.
I tell you, John Iarret, you will break,
I tell you, John Iarret, you will break.
The second part. To the same tune.


YOu see how the Farmers do hoord up their grain,
No care will they lend to the poor men's complain,
Although we should starve, these Curmugins will gain
They never think on us, nor pity our pain,
I fear me, John Iarret, you will break,
I fear me, John Iarret, you will break.
This is no world to borrow nor lend
Nor (if you consider it) vainly to spend:
Receive this my counsel (good John) as a friend,
For if you pursue this vain course to the end,
I tell you, etc.
When you in your shop should be plying your work,
In some scuruy blind Alehouse you all day do lurk,
More like than a Christian to some Jew or Turk:
If thus you neglect your living and work,
I tell you, etc.
Be ruled by my counsel, good husband, I pray,
For it will be your own I Am sure another day:
Yet, if you please live full well you may,
But if you persist in your drinking and play,
I tell you, etc.
You know, you have wasted away a good Farm,
And now we want firing for to keep us warm,
Besides a good house for to shelter a storm:
I give not this counsel unto you for harm:
I tell you, etc.
Give over in time your scuruy base whores,
For fear they should fill you with scars and with sores
And labor besides to pay your old scores:
If whores still you follow, with company that ro^es,
I tell you, etc.
You see that the old year is almost quite spent
The new one is coming* good John then repent
Your wicked old follies, and with one consent,
Your downe-sinking state with care to prevent.
I tell you, etc.
Some that have enough, at Gods blessings repine,
But whilst I live, that fault shall not be mine,
When to thy power* sweet John, with me join,
And pray that God daily will guard thee and thine,
I tell you, etc.
Be ruled by your wife, that does love you full dear*
And all ill society see you forbear,
And of these children I pray have a care,
Begin a new course, I pray, with the year,
Or else, sweet, etc.
There comes no goodness by following of queen*
But ryotous drinking, and wasting of means.
Who trusts to such harlots, on wickedness leanes,
And may with the Prodigal feed upon beans.
I tell you, John Iarret, you will break,
I tell you, John Iarret, you will break.
Fin.

