JEHOVAH,

A free Pardon, with many Graces therein contained granted to all Christians
by our most Holy and reverent Father GOD almighty, the principal high Priest
and Bishop in Heaven and Earth: First written in the Spanish tongue, and
there published by a Spaniard unknown, (yet as it seems) the servant of our
said Holy Father. And now Translated into the mother English tongue, by John
Danyel of Clements Inn.

Printed at London by Thomas East, for Andrew Maunsell, and are to be sold at
his shop in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the Parrot.

To the right honorable, Sir Ambrose Nicholas, Lord Mayor of the City of
LONDON: To the right worshipful master William Fleetewood esquire, Recorder
of the same: To the right worshipful master Edward Osborne, and master
VVoolston Dixie esquires, and Sheriffs of the same: To the right worshipful
their brethren the Aldermen: To the worshipful master Norton, and the rest of
the privy counsel, for the renowned and worthy government of the same, and to
every of them, grace and peace from God the Father, and from our Lord Jesus
Christ, Amen.
WHen (as right Honorable and right worshipful) I had made an end of this my
travail in translateing this preatie pamphlet and Pardon general, to the
receivers of the same, and with my musinge mind, remembering with my self to
whom I should dedicate so worthy a work, and could not think of any with in
this noble City more fitter to be my patro^s and defe^dors in publishinge
hereof, being as I trust (with you) a poor member of one body, whose head is
Jesus Christ our Lord, and beholdi^g the firmnes of the true faith in one of
the me^bres of the same body (the aucthor hereof) spronge out from among the
principals of Pope Antechrists panyons in Spain: I, having therein great
comfort and joy, did presume to make you partakers of the same: Because I do
see daily every one of you, like worthy wightes, heads and rulers of such a
noble city, do practice and put in ure, by all means possible such good and
godly acts and orders for the good setting forth of Christ's faith and true
religion, as makes me to think, that thus in presuminge herein, I do rather
please you all, then offend any: If you take it in good part, I am thereby
encouraged to take a greter trauail in hand, to the same effect (I trust to the
glory of god) the treatise is very divine, the conclusion comfortable, it is
also short, and therefore soon read over, wherefore I beseech you most humbly to
accept it, with the good will of the geuer, who will daily pray for all you and
yours, that with faith ye may flourish and prosper in all godly doings till
the end, and in the end, that you may inherit the celestial kingdom, with all
the benefitts in this Iubily contained. From my house in saint Brides
churchyard the. 13. of January. 1576

Your honors and worships, most humbly, John Danyell.

REmember (dearly beloved) that ye were not baptized in the name of men, of
Images, nor yet of Idols that be dombe, to be their servants, to honor them
contrary to the commandments of God, but in the name of Jesus Christ, because
you should worship and serve him, as he does command, but for all that since
the time we were indewed with knowledge, and the reason thereof, we have been
blinded, and led astraye, far from our duties, yet God having pity upon us,
and willing to save us, did so by his deuyne prouydence, although by his
ryghteous judgment he might worthily condemn us, wherefore let us make no
small accoumpt of this benefit of Pardone and Indulgence now offered unto us,
by that most Holy and reverend Father, most worthy of praise and glory, for
that we see, he asks no money of us for it, as Antichrist does for his trash,
he demands of us nothing but that only we should have a sure faith, hope,
and confydence, in the same, for that he himself does grant it, and give it
us, in his son Jesus Christ, and therefore, let us not for the vain fear of
men, leave nor let slip, the inioying of such pardons, and graces, with the
benefit thereof, but accept the^ gladly, for as the Lord our god says, we
cannot be saved without them.

A short sum of all the Indulgences, Graces and Pardons, granted of god our
most holy father, by his son Jesus Christ, to al faithful Christians in this
Iubily mentioned, and commanded to be publyshed, because that all those that
do repent them of their sins, and tourn unto him, may enjoy the benefits,
contained in the same, in this world, the favor of god, and in the world to
come, life everlasting.
Gala. 4. Esaias. 6. To. 2.16.
WHen the fullness of time was come, and the acceptable day of our saving
health, according to the determinate will of god, ordained in his divine
counsel, before the beginning and creation of the world, Ephe. 3. Ephe. 3.
Esaias. 6. Coloss. 1. Romans 8. 2. Cor. 5. Gala. 4. 2. Tim. 1. Ephesians. 2. Genes. 3.
Ephe. 2.
our most holy and eternal father, having pity upon us, of his mighty free
will, and bounteous lyberality did send his only begotten son, to be borne of a
woman and made subject to the law, because that by him should be preached
unto us the great and gracious reconsiliation made by him self between god
the father, and us, being as we were rebels, and the children of rebels, for
that all by one, had incurred the pain of a rebel, to his deuyne majesty, by
the which the Devil and Death, had gotten empery, Hebr. 2. Romans 5. John. 8. 1.
Pet. 2. psalm. 13. Romans 6. Ephesians. 2. Deuteronomy 17. Leuit. 26 psalm. 13
rule, and the upper hand, over us absolutely, and we made the slaves of sin,
and did obey sin, and were made abhomynable and corrupted, abhorrors of all
righteousenes and lovers of all kind of wickedness, dead in sin, and
buried in errors, children of wrath by nature, and subject to the curses and
malediction preached unto us, as against the enemies of gods truth, so, that
as out castes, and desperate people, Zach. 9.
we were without remedy, and ready to be cast into the prison of darcknesse, 2.
Pet. 2. Mat. 5.25
and fire of hell, in the company of the devil and his Angels, of whom we did
give so wilful obedience. 1. Cor. 1. ephesians. 2. and. 3. Romans 5. Col. 1. apoc. 1.
ebre. 2.


But our blessed God, and most holy Father, as he is rich in mercy, so is he
willing to show unto us his imme^sible charity, with the which, although we
were his ennemies, yet he loved us, to the end to deliver us from the power of
darcknesse, and cleanse us from our sins, 2. Cor. 5. ephe. 5. These. 5. Col. 1.
to make us partakers of his righteousenesse, to destroy the Empery of the
Devil, by the potency and might, of the redeemer of the world, and so to
preserve us from his just wrath, and indignation, and or wicked condemned
children of darcknesse, to make us children of light, iere. 16.
and so to bring us to the kingdom of his beloved son Jesus Christ, he did
ordeyne, that this his good will, Mat. 10.
should be publyquely preached and declared unto us, to this end, after that
Christ had accomplyshed, col 1. Math. 8.15.28.11. Mar. 16.
and fulfilled the work of our redemtion, and gloriousely tryumphed over all
the ennemies of his glory, to our salvation, esaias. 53.
he made to sound throughout the whole world, that trumpette of the
predycation of his grace and mercy toward us, iere. 31. john. 8.
sending his legattes, and Apostles, to preach his pardon general by his
gospel, to all those, and us that had been traitors, and rebels, unto him and
his glory, for that beleeuyng the grace, and doctrine that on his behalf was
pronounced unto them and us, they with us, and we with them, should be
absolved, and made free from all manner of Sins, both venial, and mortal,
and the punishments for the same, the which they had brought themselves and us
into.

This mercy, acts. 10.15 Romans 16.
although it were general to all, yet it did take effect, but only in those,
which did truly believe, with faith, and that did leave of the service of
sin, and did submit them selves, with all their hearts, to truth,
righteousenes, and holiness of life: for it has been seen in our age, Genesis
6. Psalm. 16. ier. 2. esaias. 45
that men have been deceived, forgetting of him, who is the fountain of life,
and wisdom, in whom does consiste, all true health, 56. ihon. 34 Genesis 3.
Romans 5. Psalm. 88.89. exodus 15 Heb. 9.
and trusting in vain things, we have lived like unbridled horses, in
vnrighteousenesse, and abhomynable Idolatryes, by the cause whereof, be and
have been, wars, honger, pestelence, and many other ordynary chastisementes,
common and particular in and through al Christendom, the which are testimonies,
that the wrath of god, is justly inflamed against us, and that the last day, of
his deuyne judgment, is at hand, our most holy and sempiternall high priest,
with desire of our health, and salvation, and for that by trwe repentance, we
should, convert unto him, to be made partakers, of the life everlasting, moved
by his mercy, does charge, and command now anew, yt this Iubily, in the which
is declared the fruit of his death which is the full pardon, of all our sins,
and offenses, iere. 18. Sap. 11.
be preached to all christians, throughout the whole world, because that those,
which by true repentance, and amendment of life, Math. 3.
do receive it, be and are reconfiled, and put in peace with God, and so by
consequente, set free from all evils, present, and to come, the tenor
whereof does follow.

This is the Iubily and full pardon of sins ( a Culpa et Pena) most graciously
granted, to the church of god, dispersed throughoute the whole world.
BY the auctority of our most holy Father, Gene. 1. Psalm. 104
God almighty, supreme head and prouyder for all creatures, and in the name of
Jesus Christ his son, 1. pet. 2.
the great pastoure and Bishop of our souls, and by the virtue of the holy
ghost, john. 14.16.
master and conseruer, of the true church, it is enjoined and expressly
commanded, by the virtue of holy obedience, to us al, and to as many of us, as
have received the Sacrament of holy baptism, that we read and understand, Romans
12. pet..2.
and that we give to understand, from one to another, every one, according to
the Talent or gift yt we shall receive, hereby to preach the nature and
property of him, who does call us from darcknes, to his admirable light, and
these imme^sible graces, and the great privileges granted therein
(perpetually) to all the faithful servants of Christ, ihon. 1.5.10. Gala. 3.
Romans 6*
and to as many, as will be, and do receive him, and do believe and trust
firmly in the life everlasting gotten only by the sheading of his most
precious blood, for that it is he that is that christ, that from the beginning
was promised by god the father, Genesis 1. apoc. 13 17. john. 3. Mat. 1. Luke. 1.
acts 4. Genesis 3. esaias. 43. and 53. Mat. 3.8. 2. pet. 1. colo. 1. Psalm. 12.9 Heb
9. ephe. 1. Luke. 1. Romans 5. ezech. 18.
to our forefathers, to be their savior, and a savior of their seed and
descendents, by whose virtue, strength and power, should be destroyed that old
serpent, by whom, they, their seed and discende^ts, were brought into the
state of perdition, the which he did conclude by his death, and did appeasethe
wrath of god, and satisfy to his judgment, for our sins and offenses, and
by his righteousenesse, did obteyn for us, most copious, plentious, and eternal
redemtion, and pardon general for our sins, ( a Culpa et Pena) as his most
holy Father had decreed and ordained, from before the beginning, and creation
of the world, and afterward to the end to conuide or inuit us, to the receite
of our health, heb. 9.10 Romans 6.
and discovering of his riches and mercy, (though we be unworthy) yet he
notwithstanding, did love us by his son Jesus Christ, and did promise us, by
his saints, and servants the prophets, that in whatsoever time and place
(although our sins were never so great, and in number to the sands of the
sea, yet, if) we did call upon him, ier 31. Miche. 7
with a penitent heart, and trust in his mercy, and desire pardon and
forgiveness, at his hands, yea even then, of his great love, we should be so
truly pardoned, and restored to his grace and frendshyppe, as if we had never
offended, ezech. 18. heb. 4.10 Romans 8. phi. 2.
nor sinned against him, with promise, never to remem- them again,
notwithstanding, they were never so great nor grievous, because that Jesus
Christ being become man, in the parson of our flesh, and in all things like
unto us, did take upon him our sins, and so by us, was brought under curses
and malediction, Gala. 3. 1. pet. 2.
for that he took upon his shoulders, our sins, and did suffer most cruel
death for them, upon a tree, and by the infinite power, and virtue of the
Sacrafice, that he took upon him self, to offer upon the cross he did blot
out and destroy all our offenses and sins, esaias. 59.
wholly, and did obtain by his merits only, so rich, and plentyfull a
liberty, for us.

esaias. 55. Heb. 10 gala. 2. john. 11. Titu 3.
Low the father of all mercy, and god of all comfort and consolation, to
certify us of his good will, with yt which, he will save and take us from the
captivity and bondage of the devil, having established, in his holy church,
this inestimable treasure of redemption, of reconciliation, 1. pet. 1. 1. cor.
6, Heb. 9. 1. john's. 1
and grace gained only, by his only begotten son, he does now most
liberally, open it, unto us, for that as many as will, may enjoy the same, and
receue the benefit thereof, every one, apoc. 1
with having of a sure faith, and affiance, that the blood of the lamb without
spott, was shed, and once offered for the sins of all mankind, 2. pet. 2.
heb. 8.9.10. 2. cor. 5.
to be a true oblation, for the same, and that there needs no other
satisfaction, nor absolution, before god, but only it.

And therefore, for as much as this is only pardon for sin, esaias. 43. john. 1.
Mat. 26.
it is now publyshed, by the infinite mercy of god, which does pardon us, by
one, only, Jesus Christ, whose blood was shed, to the same end, and there is no
health in none other but in him, because there is none other name under heaven
given unto men by the which they should be saved, acts. 4.
but only his, esaias. 9. Gal. 2. 1. cor. 1. 2. cor. 2.
he will, that all beleuers have and houlde, the same, by, and for, his proper
wisdom, righteousness, santification, and redemption, because, as he is god,
and redemer of all generally, so is he, of every one particularly, and
therefore, he will that every one of his, in particular, shall take, have, hold
and enjoy, the gracious redemption and pardon obtained and bowght with christ's
blood, for all mankind, the which shall be sealed in their hearts, 2. Timo. 1
ephe. 1. phi. 2.
by the holy ghost, the spirit of promise, for that quickened by it, they
should show the fruits of holiness and righteousness with the which they do show
themselves obedient to god, and true and lively members of Jesus Christ, who
does say unto all and to every one in general and particular, esaias. 43.
I am, I my self am he, that does race and blot out the wickedness and offenses
of my people, for mine own sake, and I will never more remember their sins,
ezech. 18.
and by Ezechiell as truly as I live, (says the lord) I will not the death of
a sinner, but rather that he turn from his wickedness and live: john. 11.7.8.
and by Saint John, I am the resurection and the life, he that believes in me,
although he be dead, yt shall he live, and whosoever that does live and
believe in me shall never dye, and he that thirsts let him come to me, and I
will give him drink, and I am the light of the world, and he that follows
me shall not go in darckenes, but shall have the light of life, and therefore
be does grant as follows.

esaias. 61.
To all those that be of contrite heart that do trust in his mercy, in his
blood, death and passion, Luke. 4.
that they shall be partakers of the fruit of his redemption, Romans 3.
which is a full remission of all their sins and offenses, for ever.
ITem, to those which are meke, pacient 'and full of long suffering, which
suffer rather to be injured and deprived of their goods and substance, Mat. 5.
Luke. 6.
then to consent unto sin, Idolatry and abhomynable wickedness, he does
pronounce and grant unto them, that they shall inherit the earth, and be in
the number of his own children and servants.

Item, to those that hold Satan and his servants, for blind, captyue, and
bond, to hell, death, and damnation, and do give faith to all that is
granted, esaias. 6. ephe. 1. colo. 2.
in this Iubily, he does grant unto them a true sight in his gospel, and also
does set them clear, and at a francke and free liberty, from that bondage.

Item, to those which have obeyed sin, and were therefore banyshed, and
depryued of the joys of Paradise, if now they believe in the, gospel and be
ruled by the same, Gene. 3. john. 3.11.
he does grant unto them that they be restored wholly into a sure and firm
hope, to have and possess them again, and never more to be depryued.

Item, to those that for the hate they have unto wickedness, do mortify, and
kill, with the spirit, the evil inclynations, affections, and concupiscences
of the flesh, conform and according to the profession, Romans 8. gala. 3. colo.
3.
that every one, by the holy ghost, did make in his baptism, he does grant
unto them a glorious victory in the end.

Item, to those which always are in war and strife with them selves, and do
bide pain, Mat. 5. Luke. 6. john. 1.2.16.
to resist the sin, that is in them, and in the world, and to those that go
with grief of mind heavy, and morning, for the same, he does grant unto
all such, all trwe celestial and heavenly comfort, with promise, that in the
end, he him self will wype away the tears from thyir eyes, and their
heaviness, shall be turned into joy, and their weepyng into laughter.

Mat. 5. Luke. 6 Esaias. 65. psalm. 30
Item, to those that do honger and thyrst for righteousness sake, and that in
all things do procure with all their hearts, that which god does command, by
his divine word, he does grant unto them, plenty of joy, and heavenly
delights, that never shall have end.

Item, Mat. 5. Luke. 6. james. 1.
to all those that be and have been merciful, and that have pitied the
afflicted with a christian affect, burning with charity, to succor them in
their necessities, he does grant unto them ( Plenissima indulgentia) a most
full, francke, and free pardon, and does give unto them for ever, his mercy to
be their patron, and defendour in judgment, with a joy pardurable, in the
company of his saints and chosen.

Item, to those that are persecuted as christians, Mat. 5. pet. 4. john. 16.
Gala. 5.
for faith, love, and righteousness, he does grant unto them, the
blessedness of his heavenly kingdom, and that the sprite of his glory, and
grace, shall rest upon them, and that they have joy and christian delights, in
conscience, while they shall be in this world, and for ever.

Item, to those that by Christ do believe and trust in God, and do purify their
souls with love without fayning, 1. pet. 1. Mat. 7.
he does grant unto them, a perseverance by faith in his gospel, with a
blessed end.

Deuteronomy. 15. Tob. 4. Gala. 5. 1. cor. 7. john. 14.
Item, to those that with the bowels of charity, will give their alms, for the
building and repayring of the living temples, that Jesus Christ did redeem,
with his most precious blood, which are the true poverty, faithful, and
afflicted, he does grant unto them full pardon, and that they be sanctified,
by the holy ghost, to be a temple for ever, for him to inhabit and dwell in.

Item, to al those which are faithful, and that do know the truth, he does
grant liberty, 1. timo. 4
that with temperaunce and respect of charity, had to all them, that are weak
in faith, that they may indifferently, 1. cor. 8. Mat. 15. acts. 10.
all the days of the year, with action of grace, that is, gyuyng of thanks,
use and eat, of all kind of meats, created of God therefore,
notwithstanding, the vain and foolish decrees and diffe^ces, made, had, and
mainteyned, by and under false tytles, of men without pity, the fear of God
and his righteous divine judgment.

Item, Psalm. 9. Mar. 11. john. 14 15. iere. 29. joel 2.
to all those which in their heaviness of mind, and all their troubles, do
run and apply them selves, only to God, and call upon him in the name, and
by the merits of Jesus Christ his only son, he does grant unto them, a
spiritual health and comfort, with an unloading and setting at liberty, of
their burdened, and troubled conscyences.

Item, ihon. 10. Mat. 6.16
to all those that hold and accoumpt, Jesus Christ for their only savior,
high Priest, King, and Prophet, he does grant unto them a full pardon and that
no evil shall prevail against them, but that they shall be partakers of his
everlasting kingdom, and glory.

Item, for as much, as it is necessary for the health and salvation of all
christians, and of every one that is a chrystian, to fulfill the first and
most holy sacred vow, made in baptism, which is to love always
righteousenes, Mar. 16. Romans 6. Gala. 3. james 4. 1. timo. 5.
truth and godliness, and to abhor the contrary. The only law geuer, which
only can save and spill, bind, and loose, for that they should be able to
fulfill the same, 1. These. 4 1. cor. 6.7.
does grant to all men and women, of what estate or condition soever they be,
(being christians) that they need not have, nor keep the bond of continency,
for notwithstanding what soever vow or promise of chastity, or virginity, that
they have made, yet they may freely take upon them (and enter in) to the holy
estate of matrimony, to avoid fornycation, and to the end that the holy
temple of the Lord, 2 cor 6. 1. cor. 3.
(which is their bodies) be not profaned, contayminated, and fall into
perdition, and so be destroyed, by his divine potency and might.

Item, to all those which for the love, and obedyence they do owe unto god,
will visitt them that are imprisoned, Mat. 2.5. 1. James. 2
the sick, the desolate, widows, and poor orfanes, and according to their
power and ability with pity, do relieve, and help them he does grant,
unto them, a confirmation of that hope which they have to enjoy his holy, and
blessed kingdom, which is prepared for them, from the beginning of the world.

Item, esaias. 58. Mat. 25. Romans 1.2 Heb. 15. 1. Pet. 4.
to those that with charity do provide for, maintain, help, succoure and
comfort the needful, hungry, and naked, and that does lodge the poor
stranger, he does grant, a confirmation unto them of the same hope, that is,
help unto them, in their like necessities.

Item, to all those that with a chrystian effect, do teach the ignoraunte,
These. 5. 1. Pet. 3. Pro. 17.
and comfort them that be heavy in mind, for good and righteous things, he
does grant Indulgentia plenaria.

Item, to all those that are superiors and masters, ephe. 6. 1. cor. 7.
if they do make a christian profession, in government, and that they with
their inferriours and servants, do with equality in their degreese, keep a
christian life, like servants of our lord almighty, as redeemed a like, by
the blood of Christ, he does grant unto them, Indulgentia plenaria.

Item, to al those that accoumpt them selves dispensers or stewardes, 1. cor.
4. mat. 13.25
of spiritual and temporal goods, and riches, which they have received of
God, if they distribute them to gloryfie him, and to help their neighbors,
he does grant unto them a multiplication, of the same goods and riches, so
distributed, and therewyth Indulgentia plenaria.

Item, to all those that have not firmly stood to, 2. These. 2
and loved the truth, but have been beguyled and deceived by the blind
doctrine of Antichrist and his mynysters, and induced to follow the doctrine
of Devils, which are tradicions of men, 1. timo. 4 ieremi 2.
in place of the gospel, and that now, with a true, fervent, and hearty desire,
are willingly reduced to trow and deuyne obedyence, and do know by the light
of godly scriptures, the errors, superstitions, guyles, deceites, idolatrise,
exo. 20. Deuteronomy. 6. john. 4.
and other abominations, in the which they have been and do renounce them,
withal their hearts, and hold the trwe god, for their god, and do worship him
in spirit and truth, and let their whole trust depend and be upon him, his
goodness and promise, his high holiness, does grant unto the^ and such
like, pardon general, because they may freely perform the same, without fear
of foul Antechristes excommunications, of his inquysitors, or other his
mynisters, because that for all them, or any other sensor of their church,
(whatsoever) that is thondred out and does flame against them, his hollynes
does also grant them absolution, and does freely restore them to his fatherly
grace, that they in his Church, may have a place for name and being of his
faithful children, and that they live in hope to possess and enjoy, 1. Pet. 1.
the immortal inheritance, not contaminated, but incorruptible which is
conserved and kept, for them in the heavens.

Item, to as many as be, and desire to be, faithful servants and disciples
of Jesus Christ, his deuyne majesty, and most reverent holiness, does grant,
that with a stout heart, without fear of the aforesaid exco^munications, or
other decree whatsoever, made by the said antichrist or his ministers, that
they may and do read in the Spanish, French, Italien, English, or other mother
tongue or language, the books of the old, and new testament, and all other
books, of trwe and sound doctrine, for that they may know, how to govern
themselves, john. 5.17 Deuteronomy. 12. Luke. 11. Gala. 5 esaias. 8. 1. cor. 14
to live hollily, to know him, and so to have life everlasting, and herewith he
does expressly command, that they suffer not them selves to be depryued of
this liberty, under the pain of death, perdition, and damnation, together with
the enemies of his grace, that do rebel against his holy will and
commandments, and that have made the said excommunication and decreese.

Item, the same Lord Jesus Christ, trwe interpreter, john. 1. Mat 5.6 7.
of no will of our most holy Father, does declare by these presents, that all
exco^munications, and such like, as be proceed from the said Antichrist,
chief and high priest, of the man of same, the son of perdition, or from his
inquisitor and false butcherly Bushops, 2. These. 2
are trystes and of no validity nor effect, because the office nor power to
excommunicate, is not given to one that is blind, apoc. 17.
nor to a blind and apotestaticall church, embrewed with the blend of faithful
martirs, and the saints of god our Lord, and governed by the doctrine of
desperation, Tit. 1 1 timo. 4.
such as are the traditions of men, but that office does belong to such a one,
and to such a Church, Mat. 18. john. 2.
whose head is Jesus Christ, to the apostles in his name, and to all such, as
be their true successors, guided by the spirit of truth, and that do teach
and live by the true doctrine of the gospel, so pure as possible, the rule,
lock, and key, to open, and communicate, the kingdom of heaven to all
believers, and to shut it again to all that do not believe, and to the
unfaithful rebels, proceeding from (and like unto) the Devil and his members,
for whatsoever exco^munications they be, if they come not from the trwe court
or office, (which is Christ's church) if they be thondred out with book, bell,
and candell, never so fiersly, if they be forged and formed by the free will
and forsight of them that have the name of pastors, (and yet in truth are very
Idols and ravening wolves) never so firmly, zacha 11 esaias. 56. Mat. 7.
yet, it is not ratified nor allowed in the kingdom (nor by the faithful) of
Christ, but condemned and that with just reason, Mat 23
and good right. The Scribes and Pharisees, were set in Moses chair, and did
set at naught the excomunications, John. 9.11.17.
that Christ and his Apostles did preach, and pronounce unto and against them,
yet we are taught by the holy Ghost, to abhor them, their examples, and the
like examples, by whom soever they be showed, much more, the examples of those
Antechristes which are now the mockers of God, and even now do sit, not in the
chair of Moses, but in the chair of pestylence, Psalm. 1 Iere. 23. 2. Cor. 2.
Phil. 3. Luke. 19. Ier. 2. James. 1.
to entrap, blind, and be the perdition of the people of Christ, if they
could, and to be the trwe members and mynisters of Satan, and enemies to the
glory of Christ, and of the blood of the new testament. To all those that do
renounce these (and such like) false religions, of perdition, invented by me^,
and with all their hearts do embrace the true, healthful, saludable, and
celestial religion, that our Lord and holy Father Jesus Christ does teach,
and by his spirit, the Patriarcks, apostles, and Prophets, he does grant
unto them, plenaria indulgentia, and that they do enjoy all the benefits most
blessed, that are herein contained.

Item, apoc. 1.7 22. Heb. 1. 1. Pet. 2.
all those that according to the church of God, that he taught by the fathers,
of our faith, the holy apostles and Prophets, do believe that for all our
sins, venial, and others, that the blood of Jesus Christ is the only maker
clean, the clenser, and purgatory purger of them, and that there is not,
cannot, 1. John. 1
nor may not be any other, and that we have no need of any other but he, 1.
Pet. 1. Apoc. 7.22.
unto them and such like is granted, by our almighty most holy Father,
indulgentia plenaria, and that they receive the benefit of his passion, and so
made clean, of all their sins.

Item, to all those that are studious, and desirous to hear, (and so work
according to) the word of God which is the only rule for to please him by,
Esaias. 8.
and to know the trwe Church, to be enjoined and incorporated with Christ,
Luke. 11.
his most mighty holiness does grant unto them, that they shall be blessed for
evermore.

Item, to all those that notwithstanding, the exco^munications, 1. John. 2.4
Romans 13. Gala. 15. Mat. 10. Mar. 9. Ihon. 14.15. 1. Cor. 10. 1. Pet. 4. Acts.
9.
Barbarian, and Turkish defenses, and decreese, and other tyrannical, and
Pagan cruelties of antechrist, and his ministers, do and will love, receive,
incur, communicate, defend, help with counsel, sustenance, and charitable
intreatise, the faithful members of Jesus Christ, and which by the mercy that
they have received at his hands, do acknowledge him to be their only health
and salvation, and be immitators, and followers of him, in life and doctrine,
and do run away from the errors and other abhomynable abuses, in the which
they have lived contrary to the gospel, and for the same be, and have been,
abhorred and persecuted, by the children of darcknes and of the world: his
almighty holiness and deuyne magnificence, Psalm. 40. Mat. 10.25.
does promise and grant unto them, that they shall be beloved, received,
gwarded, kept, comforted, prospered, delivered from their ennemies, helped in
all their troubles and necessities, and at the last day, allowed and accepted
before the father and his holy Angels, for faithful confessoures of his truth
and righteousness, and in the end of al, enriched with the eternal riches, of
his celestial blessedness.

Item, John 1.3, 11. Gal. 5.
to all those that do, and will believe in Jesus Christ, with all their
hearts, and all their powers, and will live with doing worckes of faith, with a
firm hope and trust in Christ's merits, and righteousenesse, as is commanded
by the gospel, Apoc. 14.
he does grant unto them (millions of millions years of) pardon for all their
sins, A pena et culpa, and also peace and rest in conscience with promise,
that after their departure out of this world, they shall presently enter into a
full possession of the eternal kingdom of Christ Jesus.

Item, to all and every one, and to whatsoever parson or parsons, Esaias. 53.
Ier. 32.
that will embrace Christ and his righteousenes with a trwe faith and hope
therein (if they be in the article of death) whether it be by signs, Ezech. 18
tokens, or words, so it be from the bottom of their hearts, and do
faithfully believe that Christ Jesus made a full satisfaction to God the
Father, Romans 3. 1. Cor. 1.
for the sins of all mankind, his most high holiness does grant unto them,
Plenissima indulgentia, a most free pardon, remission, and absolution, from all
their sins, and are set at liberty fully for all pains and punishments due
for the same.

Item, because the sainctifier of al men is of nature merciful, and does love,
and will the salvation of all these which he did redeem with his most precious
blood. ezech. 10. Ihon. 17. 1. Pet. 1. Psalm. 144 Rom 11.
He does grant and it is his almightines most holy will, that if it chance
that any such parson or parsons, so in tharticle of death, do not dye at that
instant time wherein they so called them selves to their duties, that for their
so pure hearts and minds toward him, they shall not only enjoy,
thabsolution aforesaid, but also for ever after during life, be continued in
the same with health of body and soul, in this world, and in ye world to come
life everlasting, for God our holy Father is not only so ready to pardone, at
the hour or article of death, but also at every hour whenever his servants
will call upon him with a penitent and pure heart.

Item, to all those which by usurping usury, by insatiable gain, in buying and
selling, by fraudulent devises, or any other unlawful means, have obtained and
gotten into their hands, the goods and riches of this world, if those usurping
vsurors, insaciable gayners, fraudulent deuisors, and unlawful doers, (being
abhomynable sinners) do from the bottom of their hearts repent for the same,
and profess in their lives and doctrine amendment of life, and do seek to
make some restitution, either by rendering back again, or reconsiliation, to
them which they have so hindered, he does grant unto them that they shall rest
in his tabernacle, and dwell in his holy hill, for S. Augustine says ( Non
dimittitur peccatum nisi restituatur oblatum) sinz are not to be forgeuen
without restitucion.

The witnesses of the old and new Testamente to testify the truth and strength
of this Iubily.
(...) in 18.^^.25.
In the book of Genesis and in many other places of the Law, and testamente of
scriptures, Moses and others, do restify, that al nations of the earth should
be blessed and saved by Jesus Christ (the son of David of the seed of
Abraham) and that they should receive by him an eternal and celestial,
benediction or blessing.

Acts. 10
Item, saint Peter does testify, that all the Prophets bear testimony of Jesus
Christ, and that whosoever believes in him, shall receue remission of sins in
his name.

Mat. 20.
Item S. Mathewe does testify, that Jesus Christ did say of himself, my coming
into the world was not to be served or ministered unto, but to serve and
minister unto others, and to give my life for the redemption of many.

Item, Ecce, hae aqui, behold this is my blood which is shed for the remission
of sins, Mat. 26. 1. Cor. 11. Mat. 8.9
and unto one that was sick of the Palsy, he said thy sins are forgeuen
thee, for that I see there is faith in thee.

Item, Luke. 7.
to a woman that was a sinner, go thy ways in peace, thy sins are pardoned,
also to a woman that was sick, to a leper, and to many other he said the same.

Item, unto the father which had a child possessed with a dombe spirit, if
thou couldeste believe, Mar. 9.
all things were possible unto thee, for unto him that believes all things
are possible.

Item, saint Luke in many places does testefy the like in effect, and in the
first chapter he says, Luke. 1.2 24.
Blessed be the Lord God of Israel for he has visited and redeemed his
people, and has raised a mighty salvation for us in the house of his servant
David, as he spoke by the mouth. etc.

Item, Luke. 1.2 24.
the Angels do witness the same, saying, fear not, (to the Sheepheards)
Ecce, hae aqui, behold I bring and preach unto you glad tidinges, and great
joy which shall be to all people, for this day is borne unto you, a savior,
which is Jesus Christ the Lord

1 ioh. 1.4.
Item, S. John says, in this is the love and charity of God showed unto us, in
that he does send his only begotten son into the world, because he might
live in and by him, and herein consists the charity and love, not that we
have loved God, but that he has loved us, and sent his son to make an
atonement for our sins.

Item he does command that repentance and remission of sins should be
preched in his name throughout the whole world. Acts. 10 Luke 2.


Item, S. John Baptist does point unto him with his finger, 1. John. 1
and says, Ecce illi^, hae illi, behold there the lamb of god which takes
away the sins of the world.

John. 3.
Item, he that believes in Jesus Christ the son of God, shall have life
everlasting.

Item, John. 5.
verily, verily, I say unto you, he that does hear my word and believe in him
that sent me, shall have life everlasting, and shall not come into damnacion, but
is escaped from Death unto life.

Item as Moses lifted up the Serpent in the wilderness, John 3. john. 3.
Even so shall the son of man be lifted up, because that all that believe in
him should not perish, but have life everlasting, for god so loved the world
that he gave his only begotten son, 1. john. 4
that al which believed in him should not perish, but have life everlasting, for
God sent not his son to condemn the world, but that the world through him
should be saved.

Item, 1. john. 2.
if any man sin, we have an advocate with our Father, even Jesus Christ the
just and righteous, and he it is that obtained grace for our sins, and not
only for ours, but for the sins of all the world

Item Saint John in his revelation says, Apoc. 1.11.16.
that he did love us and did wash us from our sins, in his blood.

Heb. 1.
Item, saint Paul does witness, that Jesus Christ did make purgation for our
sins, and for the sins of all the world.

acts. 4.15.
Item, Saint Peter says, that it is Christ Jesus by whom we have remission
of our sins, and that by faith in him, our hearts are purified and made
clean from all kind of wickedness,

Item, the Augell Gabriell did pronounce unto the holy virgin Mary, Mat. 7.
Zacha. 9. Esaias. 53.
that she should conceive and bear a son, whose name she should call
Jesus, for that he should save his people from their sins, and deliver them
from the condempnation the which they were in.

Item, forasmuch as our eternal high Priest is the only wisdom of god,
Heb. 24. 1. Cor. 1.
and does know the infinite vallew of these pardons, and that we our selves
cannot buy their, for any thing we have or can do, (for that a thing of
such vallew infinite, 1. cor. 6.7 1. Pet. 1. Romans 5.
may not be bought) the will of his Sacred Majesty is, to communicate them
most graciously and lovingly unto al sinners, 1. John. 2.
that feel their necessities, and call to him for mercy, without leuinge or
taking any money for them, for if that every one of us, were Lord of or over
the whole world, or such like, if one would grant his seigniory or Lordship,
for ye least benefit contained in the same, yet it could not be boughte, for
the valewe of the world may be known, and the valewe thereof is vnspeakcable,
but for that he does know the great poverty and misery, in which we live,
yet by the great and invaluable riches, Ephe. 2. Psalm. 15.
of his mercy, and for that he does know our necessities, better then we our
selves, and of his abundant leave, does command, for the health of our
souls, Iere. 1.
all his co^missaries and officials, the Prophets, Evangelists, Ezech. 2.
and mynisters of peace, Mat. 28. Mar. 16. Esaias. 51. Esaias. 52. and 55.
that with great Instancie, and earnesty, they do call to all people, and
command, that they receive this Iubily, of grace without giving for it any pe^ny
of money, or other thing that perishes.

By the Prophet Esaias he does publicly commanded in this manner, all those
that thirst let them come unto the waters, and those which have no silver let
them make have and come, let the^ buy, and (...) come and buy without silver,
or any thing this, change wine for milk, you spend and wast your money, but
not in bread, you spend your travail and receue no hire, nor reward.

And because he will that the immutabilitie of his truth, and the love that
he has toward us should be notorious, he does desire and command that all
the graces granted in this Jubilee, esaias. 54. Romans 11.
be for ever, irreuecable, with a privilege sempiternall, to as many as receive
the same, and that it be not derogated by any other privilege, or decree, what
so ever, neither in death nor life, but that it have alwayse, full force,
effect, and virtue, to deliver al them which receue the same, from all evils
presently, and in the end, to deliver them, into the possession of the
eternal and everlasting riches of his heavenly kingdom.

But forasmuch as you, Nom. my officials, have receued the grace of me by the
gift of my holy Ghost, and have given credit to my promises and word, John.
6. Romans 3. 1. Cor. 1.
and have receued my son Jesus Christ for your reconcilyatoure by the faith
that you have in him and his blondshedding, which is the privy signet and
seal of my church, the which I do put to these presents, whereby I do
grant unto you, all the graces, pardons, dispensations, Indulgences, and
privileges in this Iubily, contained: In witness whereof, James. 2. 1. John.
3. Leuit. 19. Mat. 22.
I have commanded these presents to be firmed with mine own name, and
sealed with my seal as aforsayde, and therefore for a sign that you have
receued the same, you shall bear in your hearts, John. 13.
the love that you do owe, and that is due unto your neighbors, and show the
same by your worckes. Jehovah.

Item, our most holy Father does condemn all, Gala. 1.
and as many as do rebel and gainsaye any thing herein contained, or that
does the contrary, and more over does excommunicate them for ever from and out
of his most holy heavenly kingdom.

Here follows the tenor of the excommunication and curse, that the sprite of
god, which into say, the holy Ghost, does pronounce against them their
familliers, fautors, somnors, and doers.

The holy ghost by the Prophet David to all the enemies of the grace and glory
of Christ, that by any manner of mean, or way what sooner, do defend, stop,
and let, the publicatio^ of these pardons, or the privileges therein
contained, which are the only fruits of the Gospel, he does curse,
exco^mmunicate, and perpetually enclude the out of his kingdom, in this manner,
O Lord, shed thy wrath upon them, Psalm. 68.109. Psalm. 69.
and let the fury of thine Ire comprehend them, there habitations be brought
low and let no man dwell in their tabernuckles, let their tables be made a
mare unto themselves, and let those things which should have been for their
wealth be unto them an occasion of falling, let their eyes be blinded that
they see not, and ever bow thou down their backs, let them fall from one
wickedness to another, and let them not enter into thy righteousness, let them be
wipped out of the book of the lyuinge, and let them not be written in the
book of the righteoues, constitute and set thou an evil Prince over them,
Psalm. 109.
and let Satan be still at their right hand, let them be as duste before
the wind, Psalm. 35.
and the Angel of the Lord scattering them, let their ways be darcke and
slippery, Psalm. 109.
and let the Angel of the lord persecute them, when they go to receue
Judgment, let them come forth condemned, and let their prayers be turned
into sin, Psalm 109.
let their days be shortened, and let another take their charge, let the
extorcioner consume all that they have, and let ye stranger make spoil of
their travails, let them cloth themselves with curssynges, and let it come
into their bowels like water, and into their bones like oil, let curssing be
unto them as a cloak, and like a girdle wherewith they girde their loins, and
let them perish for ever in thy presence, like as did Coran, Bathan and
Abiram, Nume. 16 Psalm. 104
enemies of thy truth and righteousenes, and also to thy saints and holy
ministers, Amen.

The form of the absolution granted to al those that receue this holy
Iubily, and rather fear god then men.

Mat. 16. John. 10.20. 1. Pet. 1 Acts. 20 Romans 1. 2. cor. 5.11 Psalm. 51.
Misereatur tui omnipotens Deus. etc.
I The minister of God the Father, by his auctority in that behalf to me
committed, and to all granted, also by Jesus Christ, the only good and trwe
pastor, or sheepehearde of the shape, that he did redeem with his most
precious blood on his behalf, and by the virtue, efficacy, and strength of the
gospel of eternal and most gracious reco^siliatio^* Col. 11.
ye which with your hearts, you have believed, I absolve you from all your sins,
vemall and others, which you have committed against his most great holynesses
deuyne majesty, so that you be penitente for the same, and can find in your
hearts to amend your lives: I do restore you to the Church constituted for the
living members of Jesus Christ, the head and espouse thereof, Romans 11.
and to the participation of the two true sacraments, which are the sacrament
of baptism, and the sacrament of the true supper of our lord, and do assure
you of all the aforesaid graces, pardons, and privileges, and do pronounce
that it is his fatherly will and pleasure, that you do enjoy them with an
assurance of life everlasting. In the name of the father, of the son, and of
the holy ghost. Amen, go in peace and sin no more. John. ^.

I am the good shapheard, John. 10.
that does give my life for my sheep, I do know my sheep, and they hear my
voice and follow me, and I do give them life eternal, says Jesus Christ our
savior.

The.x. Commandments of Almighty God, published by Moses, with a short
explanation of the effect thereof.
The first Table.
HArken, exodus 20. Deuteronomy. 5.
O Israel, I am the lord thy God, which have brought thee out of the land of
Egypt and out of the house of bondage.

The first Commandment.
Thou shall have none other gods but me.
THere is no more gods but one, in whom it is very hard for us to put our
trust only in, not for that he is untrusty, but because we are so corruptible
in our flesh, that of our selves we cannot but give credit unto vanity, for
whosoever putrech his trust many thing makes, a strange god of the same that
he puts his trust in, so that a man (...) many strange gods as are the
things wherein he trusts, and herevppon it did rise at the (...), the
worshipping of dombe Idols and Images, so condemned of God, by the Prophets,
but to accomplish and fulfill this com^^^ (...), it is necessary to have a
constant faith, and confidence in God, that is, a perfect love, fear,
reverence, and hope, and to let all our trust depend only upon him, the which
is, to worship him in spirit and truth, and this commandment is a fountain
from whence does spring the whole Law, and the observance thereof.

The second Commandment.
Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image, Deuteronomy. 4. Psalm. 80. leuit.
26. esaias. 41. acts. 17. Romans 1. Iosue 24.
nor the likeness of any thing that is in heaven above or in the earth beneath,
or in the water under the earth, thou shall not bow down to them nor worship
them, for I the Lord thy God am a gellous god, and visit the sin of the
fathers upon their children, unto the third and fourth generation of them that
hate me, and show mercy unto thousands of them that love me and keep my
commandments.
BEcause God is a spirit, he does forbid us hear to represent him in the
likeness of any corporal or bodily thing, as though he were in it, or like it,
wherefore those that will worship visible things, and maintain the same,
contrary to the word of God, are threatened here as Idolatoures and breakers of
the law, because the honor which they do owe unto God, they do use it unto
his creatures.

The third commandment.
Leuit. 19. Mat 5.
Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain, for the Lord will
not hold him guiltles, that takes his name in vain.
HE does command that with our tongue we should testefy that we have a God
almighty, whom we ought to fear, to reverence, and to love, and not to
swear by his name in any light thing, nor by his creatures to cover a lie, but
if we do swear, we must do it to his glory, our salvation, and the help of
our neighebors in good things, and then must we swear only by the name of
the living god.

The fourth commandment
Deuteronomy. 5. ezech 20 genes. 1.2
Remember thou keep holy the Saboth day, Six days shalt thou labor and do
all that thou have to do, but the seventh day is the Saboth of the Lord thy
God, esaias. 58. Heb. 4.
in it thou shalt do no manner of work, thou nor thy son, nor thy daughter,
nor thy manseruant, nor thy maid servant, nor thy cattle, nor thy stranger
that is within thy gates, for in Six days the Lord made heaven and earth
the Sea and all that is therein, and rested the seventh day, wherefore the Lord
blessed the Seventh day and hallowed it.
The ceremony of keeping of the saboth day, did finishe and end with the
cerymonies and shaddowe of the law, by the death of Jesus Christ, but the
substance thereof does remain to this day, and perpetually, that is, to keep
the saboth spiritually, to cease from labor and worldly work, that god may
work in us, and that in all things that we do, we give him ye glory, god
grant we may seek the same for ever. Ame^. Ame^.

The Commandments of the second table and so the first and fyfte in order.
Honor thy Father and thy Mother that thy days may belong in the land which
the Lord thy God gives thee. Deuteronomy. 5. Mat. 15. ephesians. 6.

It is commanded unto us by this commandment, that we reverence and honor
our carnal fathers, every one in his place, that is to say, our superiors in
each estate and degree, from the lowest to the highest, and so back again,
to help them in necessity according to our habilities, to honor, reverence,
and obey them, for that they are called to their places by god, and to draw us
unto it, to do it according to his word, he does incite and encourage us, by a
cheerful and comfortable promise, and that is, our days shall be enlarged, and
we have long life, the which is fulfilled, in them that please god.

The Sixth commandment
exodus 20. Mat. 5.
Thou shalt do no murder.
We are not by this precept or commandment only forbidden to kill or do any
murder, and ye interior causes of the same, but also he does command a virtue
clean to the contrary* and that is, to love our neighbors as our selves, and
so to do them good, as we would be done unto, yea even to the sauegarde of
their lives, if need be, by all the means that we possibly can devise.

The Seventh commandment
Thou shall not commit adultry. 1. Cor. 3.1 2. Cor. 6.

Herein is forbidden all kind of carnal concupicence, between men and women,
oneles it be by lawful matrymony, and there withal is demanded, a chaste
heart with clean and pure thoughts.

The eighte commandment.
Thou shall not steal. exodus 20.

THis precept or commandment, does command us not to steal, and therein
establishes the possession of any thing that is righteousely gotten, and does
also put us in mind of the brotherly love which we ought to have toward our
neighbors, and so one to an other with all humility.

The ninth commandment.
Thou shalt bear no false witness against thy neighbor. Pro. 5.6.19.21.28.

IN this commandment we are forbidden to bear any false witness against our
neighbors in judgment, and does forbid us to lie, backbits, and sclaunder,
but does command us to speak always a truth before men, as if we did speak
before our heavenly Father, the searcher of the secrets of all hearts.

The tenth commandment.
Deuteronomy. 5. Romans 7. Mat. 5.
Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house, nor his wife, nor his maid, nor his
manseruant nor his Ox, not his Ass, nor any thing that is thy neighbors.
IN this last commandment, he does bid us to be void from evil and hateful
covetousness, and that in place thereof be placed godly virtues, according to the
good will and doctrine of god, to the profet of our neighbors, proceeding of
love to them as to our selves

Romans 10.
The end and fulfilling of the law is Jesus Christ, to Justify al believers. I
will show thee O man (says the holy ghost) that which is good, Miche. 6
that which the Lord does require of thee, and that is, (trwely) that thou do
Justice, love mercy, and always call upon god.

Finis.
Glory be to God,
quod I Danyell.


