AN APOLOGY FOR JOHN WICKLIFFE, showing his conformity with the now Church of
England; with answer to such slanderous objections, as have been lately
urged against him by Father Parsons, the Apologists, and others.

COLLECTED CHIEFLY OVT OF diverse works of his in written hand, by Gods
especial providence remaining in the Public Library at Oxford, of the
Honorable foundation of Sr. THOMAS BODLEY Knight:

BY THOMAS JAMES keeper of the same.

3. Esdras Cap. 4. ver. 38. Truth does abide, and is strong for ever, and
lives, and reigns for ever and ever.

At Oxford, Printed by Joseph Barnes, printer to the University. 1608.

TO THE HONORABLE Sr EDWARD COOK, Knight, Lord Chief Justice of his Majesty's
Court of Common Pleas.
My very good Lord; it is not long since, It was my hap, to see a Book
published; quo iure, quaue potius miuria, against your Lordships Fifth book of
Reports: Entitled de Iure Regis Ecclesiastico by one, that if he had not
termed himself a Catholic Divine, I should have taken him for any thing else:
So far is he in this lying Libel from being a Divine, much less Catholic
(unless it ^^e in the sense universal) being indeed nothing else but an
universal Historia^. I have also read an other book wherein your Lordship is
most unjustly produced, or rather traduced for an egregious falsarie, a crime
which that Libeller has made common to others of your rank, and of higher
mark, by imputing the same most scandalously unto one of the most Honorable and
religious Peers of this land. Farthermore I have hard of diverse others, whose
fingers do itch, to be dealing with your Lordship, according to the grounds of
your Honorable profession. By all which I perceive, that your Lordship has so
mortally wounded the hayrie scalp of that man of Rome, which would feign be
accepted for head of this Church, that our adversaries do strive with noe
small ado, who shall be most forward, to salve this sore, though it be never
so incurable. But amongst all others, who so aduenturous, as our pretended
Catholic, surnaming himself the Divine, which has spared no cost, no labor,
for the effecting thereof in his late answer. Seely disputer, that where the
question is de Iure, produces testimonies de facto, and being by profession a
Divine, and the question of law brings his proofs out of Hisstorie. Doubtless
the Divine is much beholding unto your Lordship (though he do craftily
dissemble it) for giving him so good an occasion both to show his great
reading, and withal to purg so much choler, being of liklyhood of that
choleric and bilious disposition.

Quod si non aliqua nocuisset, mortuus esset. I gather so much by his writings;
for I am verily persuaded, that this is not the first book, that has come out
of th^s man's forge; ^here be diverse books, I should have said Pamphletts,
cast abroad, which savor of the same style and file: so finely smothed and
framed for the nonce, that a man may know him to be his crafts Master, in
this black Art, though he transfigure himself into an Angel of light, and
profess al manner of Candor and Chari^ie in hi^ writings; but the contrary is
too too manifest in his lyeing Pamphlets. To say nothing of his slanderous
reports against the late religious Queen of blessed memory: against the
reverend Sages and Judges of the Common law in general, and your Lordship in
particular; because he takes upon him to be so great a Clearke in the question
about the Kings Crown and dignity, I have endeavored in this Apology (which
I have framed in defense of that famous writer and preacher of Gods word John
VVickliff) to oppose against his slanderous Libel, his answer; as the answer
of a most ancient, Catholic, and learned Divine. Ancient, for he lived in the
time of K Edward the 3. Catholic, for he maintained the same doctrine then,
which the Church of Eng1 and now (being guided by the Holy Ghost and sacred
writings of Scripture and Fathers) does profess; learned in all kind of good
knowledge, needful for a Divine: and for the maine question touching the kings
Regaltie and the Popes Supremacy, he delivers in other terms the very same
arguments and reasons, which I find written in that your said fifth Book of
Reports: proving the truth of your assertio^s, by the Jaws Civil, Canon, and
Common. Wherein because I profess little knowledge (it being not my element;
and as your Lordship has well observed, Perito in sua art credendumest,) I
have presumed to submit the whole Apology unto your judicious and learned
censure, quatenus de Iure. If your Lordship find him not in this Apology
(where I have, as near as I could, truly related his words) most judicious,
religious, temperate, learned, and altogether conformable unto the doctrine and
discipline of this present Church (which this libeller so much impugneth) and
agreeing with the laws of God and of this Realm, let me bear the fault of
presumption, and undergo your heauiest Censure whom I profess, I do honor
and reverence, as far as any of my profession, and as it becomes me to do
in all Christian duty; knowing your Lordship to be a zealous professor of the
truth, a worthy maintainer of the Clergy, a loving Patron of both our
Universities, and lastly a great furtherer of al good learning: which that you
may live for to do, maugre the opposition of our adversaries, I shall never
cease to pray unto the Almighty, long to continue your Lordship in health,
wealth and prosperity, with increase of spiritual gifts, for the benefit of
both Church and Common wealth. From the Library in Oxford Feb. 10. 1608.

Your Lordships in all Christian duty to be commanded. THO: JAMES.

Faults escaped in the printing of this Apology.
Page 1. l. 15. but, read butte, p. 7. in the marg 1.6. for Auctorziatio, read
Auctorizatio. p. 9. l. 12. impious, read pious, p. 19. marg. l. 36. discipui,
read discipuli p. 25. l. 18. ohfarlanot, read of an harlot, p. 34. l. 2. awere,
read werep. 37. l. 7. the read the, p. 39. marg. l. 34. lucrationes, read
lucratiuas. p. 40. l. 21. secunda^, read secundum p. 42. marg. l. 33. habe^,
read habent p. 44. mar. l. 33. formicator. read fornicator. p. 48. l. II.
excommunication, read excommunications p. 53 l* 20. fitest, read fittest. p.
56. l. 12 rained, read reigned. page 69. l. 10 ia, read in page 71. l 5 should
obey, read obey, lb. marg. l. 16. leges, read legis. in his life, for, many,
read maine, for to pray macks, read their stomachs.

THE PREFACE UNTO ALL TRVE Catholics, and Christian Readers.
Whereas among all the writers, which have since the days of Antichrist
sharpened there pens in defense of the Gospel, and maintained the cause of
Christ against Antichrist and his Supposts, by opposing themselves as
Arch-pillers, against the Arch-hereticks and Caterpillars of there times: there
is none that has behaved himself more religiously, valiantly, learnedlie,
and constantly, then this stout Champion, reverend Doctor, and worthy
preacher of Gods word John Wickliffe, whose very Vetus Hypocrita, Angeius
Sathanae, Antichristi prae a^bulus, non nominandus Io. Wickli^. vel potius
Wickebeleefe, haereticus. Walls. p. 256. Organu^ diabolicu^, hostis Ecclesiae,
confusio vulgi haereticorum Idolum, Hypocritatum speculum, Schismatis ince^tor,
odij seminator incendij fabri^cator. lb. Page 266. o lingua^ ^emper mendacem,
male. dicam and blasphema^! Wald. To. I. page 177. Ps. 64. 5.
name is therefore become hateful unto the Adversary, his parson conte^ptible,
and his doctrine the only mark or but at which those Ps. 64. 5.
qui sagitta^t in occulto which lie privily lurki^^g in co^ners do especially
aim, shooting there arrows bitter words, eue^ lewd and lying Pamphlets: some
challe^ging him of Blasphemy toward God, some of Treason toward the king,
others of monstrous Of Manicheisme. Donatisme, Pelagianisme etc. see Walden
Act. Cap. 25. lb. Verl. 7.
heresies in Religion, all of sundry errors and gross absurdities: knowing
therefore, that howsoever iure soli the Court of Rome may, yet iure poli Gods
law does not condemn any man before his cause be heard, I have thought it most
convenient and sit, to bring him forth before you Christian Readers, as before
so many * Festusses and Agrippaes to the end that you may know the truth of
those things whereof he is accused. And albeit our Romanists, have as euilly
entreated him as ever the Jews did * Paul, laying many and grievous complaints
against him: yet I doubt not, but you when you shall (as it becomes men of
profou^d judgment and good discretion) permit him to answer for him self as
Act. 26. 1. Act. 25. 7.
Agrippa did Paul, will either find there complaints with Festus such as they
sh^l Act. 25. 8.
never be able to prove: viz: that he has nether offended against the law of
God, neither against the Temple, nor against Caesar, and finally pronounce this
sentence of absolution with K. Agrippa: Act. 26. 31.
This man has done nothing worthy of death, nor of bonds.

The order and method which I will, God willing, observe, shall be: first to show
his conformity, with the now Church of England in the chiefest points
co^troversed, thence to descend unto questions not altogether so material, and
last of al to answer al such objections, as have been moved by our late
Popish writers. Whose proofs, because they are of two sorts: drawn either from
From Fox, Stow, Osiander, Melancthon, Lu^her, etc.
Protestants which for want of due information, or from The Apologists and
Father Parsons.
Papists which of ill will, 'which never spoke good of any man, 'haue uttered
any thing prejudicial either unto his doctrine or to his person: I will
endeavor (as much as in me lies, and the truth will permit) to inform the one,
and reform the other. The proofs which I shall allege shall be clear,
evident, apparent, authentical, for they shall be produced out of his own words
and works, as they are extant in sundry good Manuscripts, in our so renowned
public Library, as themselves may see or cause to be seen by others: for
therefore to justify my proceedings against them, (knowing there sundry and
malignant See the Treatise tending to mitigation written by P. R. with the
answer thereto.
oppositions against us) I have quoted in the margent, the very words of the
Auctor, either in As the Author himself wrote them.
Latin or in English noting both Books and Pages. And for a final Conclusion,
I make this protestation; his writings shall not be defended by me farther,
then they are agreeable with the Articles of our Religion, and I exhort you as
many as shall happen to read this Apology, as S. Paul did the I. These. Cap.
5. verse. 21.
The ssalon^ans: on^nia probate, quod bonu^ est tenete. Examine all things,
hold fast that which is good.

AN APOLOGY FOR JOHN Wickliffe, showing his conformity with the now church of
England both in Doctrine and Discipline.
TO proceed the^ according unto the first part of our general division, J doubt
not, but it will easily be acknowledged of al hands, that the greatest
Controversies between the Papists and us, may be reduced into these few
heads.

They concern.

1 The Scripture. 2 Traditions. 3 The Pope. 4 The Church. 5 Justification. 6
Merits. 7 The blessed Sacrament of the Lords supper.
For the rest which concern the other Sacraments, or other points of
doctrine, that are collateral, they shall be handled with the principal
questions; or else in the second place apart by themselves, according to our
former division.

The I. Chap. Of the Scripture.
THe questions to be moved about the Scripture are no less infinite, then the
Scripture it self: but the greatest points controuersed between us and the
Papists, rests in these 4. About the number, Sufficiency, Interpretation, or
Communication of the Scripture, or books Canonical.

Sect. 1.
The first question about the number of the books Canonical. Article 6.
TO the 1. point Io. Wickliffe fully agreeing with the 6. Article of the Church
of England, and S. Hiero^s doctrine, makes but Satis est pro sua militia
habere 22. libros de veteri Testamento-Authe^ticos Wiekliff^ de ver. Scrip.
Page 110.
22. books Canonical, excluding the rest which are as he rightly terms them
books Apocrypha, so called as he writes; Non quia oportet illis discredere
tanquam fa sis sed quia non oportet. Ecclesiam militantem illis libris credere
explicate tanquam authenticis. ld lb.
not because they are to be discredited of falsehood: but because the Church
militant should not believe them explicate, as if they were authentical, and
Stultum et vanum circa veritatem aut passiones Scripturae Apocryphae nimis
contendere cum habemus plene Scripturas sensibiliter nobis authenticas, ld. lb.
he thinks it to sa^or of folly and vain curiosity, for a man to strive
about the truth or proper passions of these books Apocrypha, where there are
so many books besides; which are very sensibly and plainly authentical. Now
if you happen to a^ke Wickliffe how he knows these books to be loss
authentical then the former, The differences betwixt the books Canonical and
Apocrypha.
he will inform and show you that the best means of discerning books Canonical
from the Apocrypha books are. 1. Aucto^izatio little in Nouo, testamento
Wickleff. de Ve^r. Scrip. page 95. and page 109
To look into the new Testament, and to see what books of the old Testament
are therein cited and authenticated by the holy Ghost. 2. If that will not
serve, for Credo, quod Ecclesia discre te examinan^ quemcunque librum, quoad
totam suam sententiam, dicia Spiritu Sancto in alia Scriptura, lo. page 96.
the Church of God discreetly examining any book, to consider whether the like
doctrine be delivered by the Holy Ghost elsewhere in the Scripture. And what
else does the Church of England answer? So that Wickliffe is wholly for us in
the first point.

Sect. 2.
TO the 2 point the Church of England differing from the Church of Rome
professes that Holy Scripture contains althings necessary to Salvation, and
that what soever is not read therein, The 2. question about the sufficiency of
the Scripture. The 6 Article of Religion.
nor may be proved thereby, is not to be required of any man that it should be
believed as an Article of the faith, or be thought requisite or necessary to
Salvation.

To this Article also Diuersorium Lollardorum. Nih^il inquiu^t praeter
Scripturas Sacras accipimus: quicquid istis apponitut aut subtrahitur est
blaphemum Walden. To. 3. Page 3.
Io. Wickliffe most willingly subscribeth, in that most excellent book of his
De veritate Scripturae: affirming positiuely, that Lex Dei patula in d^s obus
Testamentis. VVicklis. in exp^sit Dec^l. Page 5. ^criptura ergo est lex Christi
-- and (...) des Ecclesiae. ld. de verit, Script. Page 15. Lib de 7. Peccat
Mo^^libus Page 40.
Gods will is plainly revealed in two Testaments, which he calls else where
Christ's law, or the says of the Church; that Christ's law suffices by it self
to ^rule Christ's Church; that a Scriptura secu^du^ sensu^ suu^ sacrum, sufficit
pro quada^ scientia necessaria viatori. De Ver. Scrip. page 66.
Christian man well understanding it may thence gather sufficient knowledge
during his pilgrimage here upon earth: that whereas ^u^ in Scriptura S. sit
omnis veritas, pa tet quod omnis disputatio -- quae iin Scriptura Sacra non
habet origine^ est prophana lb. p 39
all truth is contained in holy Scripture, that what disputation soever is not
originally thence to be deduced, is to be accounted profane. Again, that Non
oportet admittere scientiam vel co^ clusionem quae no^ habet Testimonium ex
Scriptura. lb. page 66
we owght to admit of no science, no conclusion, that is not approved by the
Scripture, Nisi in ordine ad ha^c Legem lb. p. 485.
no law unless it be either subordinate unto this law or Nisi de quanto
promouet ad hanc Lege^ld lb. p. 50.
help to bring us unto this law: No Court lb. page 11.
citra Calum besides the Court of heaven: no parson, not the Popes holiness,
which Ex Augustino, contrarius Scripturae etiam Dominus Papa, quem aliqui
fingunt dispensare contra illam, non est vt sit Christianus lb page 128.
if he should dispense (as some feign that he may) with holy Scripture, he
shall not any longer be accounted a Christian; yea, he is so resolved upon the
certainty and sufficiency of the Scripture, that he tells us elsewhere,
that Lib. de biasphemia page 42.
thowgh we had an hundred Popes, and all the Friars in the world were turned
into Cardinals: yet should we trow more the law of the Gospel, the^ we should
trow all this multitude. And this was not a bare opinion of his, which might
grow upon dislike, discontent, or be vtte^ed by way of contradiction: but a
^etled and constant persuasio^ out of the word of God and therefore Log^^cos
and Grammaticos oportet submittere ^e ad di^cendum in Scriptura, tam nouam
G^ammaticam, quam Logicam. De verit. Script page 7.
he magnifieth and extolleth this heave^lie Logike and Grammar above all the
Logiks and Grammars of the world wills Finus non debet infringere testamentum
Patris lb page 72.
true sons in no wise to go about to infringe this will and Testament of
there heavenly father; and persuades al omne genus humanum debet stare pro
de^ensione veritati Scripturae ex integro, vsque ad mortem. lb. page 161.
true subjects to perform al due obedience and subjection thereunto, whether
they be of the Laity, or of the Clergy, saying: that all men ought to defend
it unto the death: Saecularis violentia, Clericus ratio ne lb page 161.
Secular men by power and strength, Clergy men by reasons and arguments.
Professing of him that holds the contrary opinion, Non est vt sit
Christianus. lib. de verit. Script, p. 128.
that he cannot be a Christian, that Quicunque no^ vere fundaue rit, vel vitam
suam, vel sententia^ in Scriptura S; sed ad versatur sibi, and suis
professoribus, hic ob liquat vt pugil Diaboli, atque haereticus. lb. page 189.
he is flatly the Devils champion and finally that Non est vox Theologi sed
Docmonologi lb. page 327.
he speaks not as a Divine, but as a Devil. I could enlarge this point with
infinite quotations, so earnest is he every where in his writings, to
establish this doctrine, which is the ground of al our Protestant opinions. And
the reason of this his earnestnes, and impious zeal was this: he saw the
gross ignorance of those times, wherein few sermons were preached, and those
for the most part out of Lib. de 7. pee cat mort. p. 22 lb. page 22. lb. page
3. de verit. Script. page 332.
Chronicles and fables, leasings and traditions Expos. Decalogi page 69.
profaned with much scurrilitie and emptines, by Lib. de 7. peccat mort. page
10. lb. page 22.
laying aside Gods law and Christ's Gospel. Yea so far were they from
preaching the word of God, that they went about to Contra Fratres mendi^. p. 52
burn the Gospel in English, and to consume with fire or They pursue true men
for preaching the truth. Lib. de 7 peccat. mort. page 102. Like the Bishops of
the Temple letten men to preach lb. page 19. letten the Gospel and Pistles to
be preached, and pursue the true tellers thereof. Lib. Miscell. page 34.
sword, with banishme^ts or imprisonme^ts, the true and godly Professors
thereof: despiting and reviling the Scripture by the name of Opinio haere tica
quod Scriptura S. sit haeretica et blasphema. Lib. de ver Scrip page 196.
Multiplicati qui dixer^it Scripturam secundum magnem partem suam esse
falsissima^. Ibid. page 130.
Blasphemous, false, flexible or changeable unto any sense that a man would
have it, and lastly that Lib. contra Fra^res. mendic. page 44.
it was never well since Lords and Ladies took regard to the Gospel and
leften there ancestors manners. When these absurd, infamous blasphemous, Romish
or rather Devilish opinions began to be broached and bo^stred up by Antichrist
and his dearest Minions, the Moonks and Friars; marvel we at his positions,
doctrine, constancy and resolution, for the authority and majesty of the
Scripture, or that he was as we find him in this 2. and most material point
of al, a sound Protestant?

Sect. 3.
The 3. question of the Interpretation of the Scripture.
THe 3. point wherein we differ, is about the interpretation of this Holy and
sacred Scripture. The Papists, as they make the Pope alone indge of al
controversies: so they make him sole interpreter of all dark and obscure places
of holy writ. Other men as the ancient Doctors and writers may write,
comment, unfold and explane the dark sentences therein contained, but there
writings are humane, there judgments not always certain, and solid,
finally they want that vnerting kay, which the Pope has, to search, try,
examine and determine the truth thereof. Hear we therefore what is VVickliffes
opinion, concerning the interpretation of the Scripture. He affirms every
where in his writings, that the sensus literalis Scripturae sensus quem
Spiritus S. in didit. De verit Script page 27 Omnia necessaria in Scriptura
contine^tur in se^su historico vel lite rali, Wickliff. ex relat. Gu. Wodeford
in lib. ML.

Nulla conclusio authentica tur ex Scriptura Sacra, nisi in quantu^ allegatur
ad se^sum Auctoris Ib. page 201.


true literal sense and sentence of the Scripture, which the Holy Ghost does
principally intend, is that which we are chiefly to regards that it is nothing
for a ma^to cite Scripture, unless it be * pertine^t to the meaning of the
Auctor; which being of it self hard to be found out, (because a carnal man
does not easily conceive the things of God) therefore by Gods providence,
which Ordinauit Deus communem Scriptura^ sensibilem, ad cuius sensum Catholicum
capiendu^ deus, non po^est deficere; quoniam semper quosdam irradiat, ad quam
irradiatione^ confert sanctitas vitae et co^tinuare istam irradiationem in
matre Ecclesia est Theologotum officium, quos oporter stare in suis limitibus,
vnde non licet Theologis fingere alien^^ praeter fidem Script, Catholicae lb p.
205.
never fails his Church in things necessary to Salvation, some are
illuminated and enlightened from above, for the finding out of the true and
Catholic sense of the Scripture, which illumination and irradiation of theirs
(as he calls it) is much confirmed and warranted unto us, by their holy lines
and co^uersations, and to continue it in the mother Church, is the duty and
function of Divines. Who nevertheless, because they are men, and may easily
err, by making false Postilles or b^nging untrue glosses, therefore he wills
them to observe certain means, and prescribes them certain bounds and
limits, quos vltra citrag, nequit consi stere rectum. within the which they are
to contain the^ selves. And first for the means of expounding and explaining
of holy Scripture, they are in his judgment and account Quintuplex medium
dispo nens ad suae veritat is notitiam.
five.

1 Codicum Scripturae correctio.
To look that the books of Scripture be not corrupted, for the Editions. 2
Logicae Scripturae instructi^o.
To have the knowledge of the Scripture logic, that is the Phrase, and manner
of speaking usual in the Bible. 3 Partium Scripturae iugis collatio.
A continual collation and comparing of Scripture, with Scripture, is required,
4 Sui deuoti student is virtuosa dispositio
A virtuous and devout disposition in the Student. 5 Ptimi Magistri interna
instructio. De verit. Script. page 75.
An inward instruction and information of the chief Master Christ Jesus.
These are the best means, which he could find for the explanation of doubtful
places in Scripture, the fourth whereof being somewhat obscure, he expounds
thus. The virtuous disposition of a scholar or student in Divinity,
consists in these 3. points. 1. Primo in auctoritatis Scripturae humili^
acceptatione^
in an humble acceptance of the ^auctoritie^ of the Scripture 2. 20. In sui
and rationis conformatione.
in a conformation of himself and his reason thereunto. 3. 30. in SS. Doctorum
testificatione. De Verit* Script. page 78
In admitting the testification of the holy Doctors. What could be said more
plain for us, concerning the two former points, as for the latter, observing
the bounds and limits which Wickliffe prescribes there can be nothing more
consonant and agreeable, with the Protestant doctrine here in England at this
day professed. For first of al he proves that the best, Interpreters do
sometimes Causa vari^^tatis interpretum, vt cognoscomus vniuer^alo doi donu^ --
in paenam superbie Ib. page 8^. The diuersi^y of opinions as S. Aug. says may
standwel enowgh with the unity of faith, so long^ as their opinions do vary,
but not contrary one another, that they are diverse but not adverse.
vary: the cause of which variety springs, either from Gods universal
goodness, g^uing gifts unto me^diuersely according to his good will and
pleasure: or else from man's wickedness and pride, which is hereby justly
punished.. Secondly for the Theologi debe^t completius cognosce^e Doctores,
prop^er videnda completa eorum originalia and radices rationum quas eliciunt ex
Scriptura De Verit. Script. page 456.
holy Doctors and Fathers of the Church (whom we are to reverence and esteem
in the next Non oportet plus credere homini quam ma^dato quod docet: ex hoc
principio, propter quod est vnum quodque ^ipsum est magis. De, Ver., Script.
page 205.
place to the Scripture) we are to understand, that A^legando. alios extra
auctores, Scripturae, non allegamus eos vt auctores dantes probationem per
locum a ^ide; sed per locum I opicum a Testimonio humano; vt tale Testimonium
viz. arguendo ad hominem, allegando sibitestem quem ipse acceptat ta^quam
authenticum, vt arguendo contra infideles, allegamus eis proprios auctores* De
Verit. Script. page 107.
there testimonies and auctorities, being ^o Topic places in Divinity, other
then hum^ne prosies, not inducing belief per locum a fide are to be all eadged
in this manner only: whereas lb. page 108.
they speak somthings assertiue, by way of assertion; somthings recitatiue, or
interrogatiue, b^ way of narration or interrogation; and somthings by way of
jest or merriment Ironice: we are to admit or accept of no proofs, no
auctorities, but such as are definitiuely vttred by way of assertion, or
asseueration. Wherein also in his judgment, we are warily to heed and attend
this Caveat, that because they speak somthings Ib. page 108.
opina^do by thinking them to be so, somthings ratione probando, by proving
them to be so, by humane reasons and arguments thirdly and lastly vt sententiam
Dei praeconizando, by citing Scripture for the farther proof of them: we must
note, that in this last sense only, there words are chiefly to be regarded:
because this is his final resolution and conclusion of al; that Nulli creden
dum est p er locum etc. lb. 109. Homini creditur non vt sibi, ^ed vt
promulganti divinam sententiam. De Ver. Scrip. page 205, Non debet credi
creaturae, nisi de quanto Ioquitur confo^rmiter ad Scripturam De Verit. Scrip
page 206. Non sunt de capitulo eorum, de quibus sequitur, Ipsi sic aslerunt
ig^tur verum. lb. page 151.
no man living is to be credited, per locu^ ab auctoritate, for his
auctorities sake, nisi in quantum praconizat verbum Domini, unless he urge
Scripture for the maintenance of his opinion. And thus, we see VVickl^ffe in
this third point also, an absolute Conformitan unto our Church.

Sect. 4.
THe 4. point determinable is, The 4. question whether the Scripture should be
translated into the vulgar tongue.
whether it be behoueful and necessary, that the Scripture should be
translated and communicated in English, to edify the simple people. Wherein it
shall suffice out of S. Lib de verit. Scrip. p. 331.
Gregory, to note his earnestnes in this point, in writing against Lib. Miscel
page 24.
this wicked sin, which would that the Gospel slept, lb page 34.
and did let it to be preached. lb. page 24.
The truth of God (says he) stands not in one language, mor^e the^ other.
lb. page 25.
Christ taught the Pater noster in a language understood, and therefore lb. page
24.
why may not men write in English the Gospel, and other things? For lb. page
26.
Clarks should joy that the people knew Gods law, and certainly lb. page 24.
this Heresy and Blasphemy should men cast out from there hearts, for it
springs up of the Fiend, and lb page 24.
who is cursed of God but he that lets this mean. And this moved this
worthy instrument and chosen vessel of Gods glory, to carry his name before
the Gentiles, to translate the whole extant in his Majesty's Library at
White Hall.
Bible, to comment upon some part^ thereof, and chiefly those parts of Holy
Scripture, which are most in use; as the Extant in the public library very
faierly bound of the gift of M. Doct. Bond the worthy president of Magd. Col.
in Oxford, a true favourer and furtherer of al good learning.
Psalms of David, the Te Deu^, Nunc dimittis, the Magnificat, and other Hymns
now read and retained to this day, in the usage and Liturgy of the Church of
England. And so we see, that in this point as well as in the three former,
nothing lets us to pronounce him to be an absolute Protestant.

The 2. Chapt. Of Traditions.
THe next question follows about Traditions, wherein although he has
sufficiently manifested his judgment of them positiuely; by teaching us that
Habemus -- completam notitiam necessarioru^ ad salutem ex fide Scripturae. De
Veritate Scrip. page 108. Though there be not a particular decision of al
questions that may be moved in Divinity touching doctrine or discipline; yet,
sententia dati iudicij est inuenibilis in Scriptura-vnde'pateat quomodo esset
in casibus particularibus indicandum. In Expos. Decal. page 6. Status, statu^a,
et. ritus a diecti secundum traditiones humanas, omnes inseparabiliter peccant,
cum difficultant legem Dei, and impediunt cursum Sermonis sui. Art. 41. Oxon.
condemnatus Regist, Acad.
we have a complete and ^ure knowledge of things necessary to salvation out of
the faith of the Scripture; yet exclusiuelie, By removing the contrary
opinion, he farther manifests his detestatio^ of al Popish or humane
traditions, such as are contrary to the word of God, which are of diverse
natures and conditions; some invented De verit ate script p. 487.
pro questu, for gain; some profastu, of pride; a third sort Traditiones
humanae com mixtae cum ve ritate Eu angelica lb. page 330.
mixed, partly humane and partly divine, partly good, and partly bad, (the
which came in with the Tempore Christi coepit calumnia^ tempore Mahometi am
plius dissipata est et a tempore editionis Decretalium decreuit honor et
ponderatio Legis Scripturae continue quae videtur -- esse via praeparatoria
Antichristo. lb p. 207.
Canon Law:) you must observe, that he does not blame, or reprehend al rites
and Ceremonies in the Church: (for some are lawful, some expedient^) but
wills us to observe these few precepts only, in the observation, or
establishing of them.

1 That our rites and Ceremonies, be surely Obseruantie -- fundabiles in
Scriptura. lb. 529. Sunt Deo and Ecclesia sua o dibiles nisi de quanto
sunda^tur in Script. p. lb. 411.
founded and grounded on the word of God. 2 Cauendum est Principibus Ecclesiae,
ne onerent ^ubditos rituum multitudine ^b. 529.
That the chief Prelates of the Church, do not surcharge or lade them with
too many Ceremonies. 3 Videtur probabile, qu^d nuliae constitutionez Pra
positorum Ecclesiae sunt licitae, vel a^ populo obligare admittendae, nisi de
quanto sunt media facilitantia ad obse^uantiam Legi^ Christ^ Expos^ Decal. page
18.
That we admit of none, but such as are means facilitating the observation of
Christ's law.
Lastly, that in observing them, we prefer not Conquirimus non manda^a
saluatoris led Caesaris non pra^cepta Capitis Ecclesiae qui est Chris^us, sed
Temporalis Pontificis De Verit Scrip. Page 68.2. Our Lord Jesus Christ, very God
and very man, is head and P^elat of this Religion. In supplicat. ad Parl. page 1
any Caesar' before our Saviour', or any Pope before Christ, which is Supreme
head of the Church, and chiefest Prelate of our religion: and hence it was,
that he rejected there popish superstitions and traditions, of salt, Artic.
43. in syn. Const^ damnatus.
spittle, chreame, oil and ^uch like: Artic Var. damnat.
there 5. Sacraments, and 5. Orders, and the like, which were Propriae
adinue^tiones plus pecuniae lucratiuae. De Verit. script. page 333. omnes
sonant -- ad lucrum Ecclesiae lb.
plus pecuniae lucratiuae, established more for money, then for religion, and
rather propriae adinuentiones commanded by men, then commended by God. Such as
he blames every where in his writings, Optare^ quod omnes ritus nostri forent
a Deo confirmati De Ver. Scrip. p. 581.
wishing that no Rite or Ceremony might be received in the Church, but such as
are confirmed by God. Which opinion of his, I am sure, will be received for
current amongst all the true professors of the Gospel, throughout al Protestant
Churches.

The 3. Chapt. Of the Pope.
THis controversy about the Supremacy, or Primacie of the Pope, being the
very soul and life of Popery, may be resolved into sundry questions. 1. It
may be questioned, whether the Pope be supreme Judge here upon earth, in all
causes, and over al persons. 2. Admit he were so, whether he may intermedle
with the Temporal affairs of Kings and Princes. Thirdly supposing that also,
whether he be of that temper and making, that he cannot err in his final
Conclusions. Fourthly and lastly, whether he be Antichrist or no.

Sect. 1.
Touching the 1. point, it cannot be denied but that John Wickliffe supposing
the Donation of Constantine (which afterward proved but a counterfeit) did for
a while hold, that the Pope was to be consulted in the greatest points of
Religion, and that he had De Verit. Scrip. p. 122.
plena^ and solam potestatem, plenarie and full power of himself, and Peccatum
paganitatis incurrit, quisquis dum ^e Christianum a^^erit sed i. Apostolicae ob
edi re; contemnit De Verit. Scr. page 426.
that he did incur peccatu^ paganitatis, the crime of Paganism, which did
not obey his mandats. But what of all this? Was Wickliffe a Papist? No,
verily. For first his plenarie power, was built upon a rotten Tempore
Constantini translation Sacerdotij. nec fuit decretum quod^ Episcop: illius
Ecclesiae haberet necessario primatu^ in alios, vt hic supponitur De Ver.
Scrip. page 565.
foundation, which afterward fell to the ground of it self. 2. It was given
him only, Habet plena^ and solam potestatem ad ae^ dificandum Ecclesiam. De
Ver. Scrip. page 122.
ad aedificandum Ecclesiam, for to edify, not to destroy or demolish the
Church. 3. It was so limited, that he could do nothing lb. page 455.
contra Deum, or contrarationem against the Law of God, or against the law of
reason. Lastly, if his laws Certum est ex fide Scripturae quod quicunque
Secularis vel Clericus maxim obuiat Christi legibus, hic est potissimus
Antichristus De Verit. Scrip. page 590.
did obviare Christi legibus, an Oportet inferiorem nomine tenus Superiorem
^uum corrippete lb. p. 524.
Inferior might, and in conscience ought, not only to disobey him, but to
reprove, correct, and contradict him; as lb. page 524.
Paul did withstand Peter unto the face: and will our Papists grant this?
Farthermore, he grants the Pope no greater authority or superiority over his
fellow-brethren, Pe^^^s ipse and Apollo exclusi a Dominatu suorum conuer^^rum:
imo ipsos esse quasi nihil and abiectos seruos D ^esu cui omnis scientia, omnis
amor vel honor Christiani debet attribui; cum nullum creatum debet sciri
amarivel honorari* nisi Christus, vel in habitu diuino ad ipsum De Verit
Script. page 494.
then Peter and Apollo had, over there new Converts: whom he excludes and
debarreth flatly from any such Soveraintie, taking away all honor from them,
and giving it unto Christ Jesus, to who^ all knowledge, all love, all duty, from
al Christians is to be ascribed, so far: that no Creature is to be
acknowledged, loved, or honored, but Christ, or in respect of Christ. Nec credo
quenqua^ Catholicum ad ^antum desipere quod credat quod vbi Christi^ vicatius
sc^ibit Fiat and ipse qui dixit and facta sunt non approbat ad quiritur ius
aliquod impetranti cum de isto solo verificatur hoc metricum-sic volo sic
iubeo, sit pro ratione voluntas. in Expos. Decal. p. ^.
Nether is it possible (as he thinks) for any Catholic, to be so unadvised
or inconsiderate, as to follow the Popes fiat, Let it be done, when he that
spoke, and it was done, shall say no. Because this verse can be true of no
earthly man, but of our blessed Savior Christ Jesus: Sic volo, sic iubeo, sit
pro ratione voluntas.
This is my will this I command,
My will for reason good shall stand.


Finally, to conclude this point, he was Quod Papa sit summus Pontifex est
ridiculum, and Christus nee in Petro ne^ in alio talem approbauit dignitatem
Art. 17. damnat. in Syn. Constable.
condemned as an heretic, for denying the Popes Supremacy, and therefore cannot
very well be accounted of the Romish Church.

Sect. 2.
The 2. question whether the Pope may intermedle with the Temporal affaiers of
Princes.
NOw we come to the 2. question, where we consider his civil dominion, or right
in Temporal estates: which question Wickliffe does In civilly dominio non
possunt esse duo dominantes aequo, oportet quod vnus sit capitalis Dominus and
alter subdominans-Regem, nostrum nolumus. in hac part sibi ^ubijcere cum
donans quicquid ad manum mor tuam sibi reseruat capital e dominium Wickliff de
Ciu. Dom. p 67.
every where determine against the Pope, for the king, and his regalty, and
that of set purpose in an especial Treatise of his Extant in the public
Library.
De Civili Dominio* strengthening his opinion very plainly out of the The
contrary opinion (a^ he says) videtur impugnare iura and consuetudines Regni
de Civilly Dominio page 66. Tenendo quod iura Angliae in hac part sunt nullo
modo Iuri contraria lb. I know the particular and approved custom of every
na^ion is the most usual binding and assured Law. my L. Cook in his 5. l. of
Reports in praes:
Fu^dame^tal laws of this la^d, with great judgment and knowledge, of the
common law, which I speak in fide aliena, being not able to judge of that
which is beyond my profession: but I do verily believe it to be so, becauseth
he seems unto me, to urge the very same reasons, laws, and arguments, which
that thrice. My L. Cook Chief Justice of the Common pleas in his 5. book of
Reports. Wickliffe maintains it as an old Custom, the which our King, Lords
and Prelates been sworen to sustain and maintaine-as pertaining to the Kings
Regalty and of Common Law. In supplicat. por recta ad Parliam. page 9. The
kingly head of this politic body, is instituted and furnished with p'enarie
and entire power, prerogative, and jurisdiction, to render justice and right,
to every part and member of this body, of what estate degree, or calling
soever, in all causes, Ecclesiastical, or Temporal, otherwise he should not be
head of the whole body. My L^ Cook. in his 5. book. of Reports page 9. The
very same reason is urged by Wickliffe, in sundry places: else he were not
King of al England but of a little part thereof In supplicat. ad^ Parliam. page
10. Non haberet plenae pacis. custodiam. De Verit. Script. page 453. Non ^oret'
Rex totius Angliae sed Regulus paruae partis. De Verit. Script. page 424. []The
Title of his book is this: Controuersiaru^ Rob. Bell larmini Defensio Auctore
Iac. Gretsero Soc. Jesus S, S. Theol. Doct. et in Academia Ingolstadiensi
Professore. Ingol. Anno. 1607. in fol.
Reverend and learned Judge, does faithfully mention, in his fifth book of
Reports, against the truth of which doctrine, no Parson, nor Parsons, I
suppose, shall ever be able to prevail; rail they may, and brag they do, which
are the two ordinary means of late days found out, to answer al objections;
as that vpstart Goliath, or Rabsache of Rome, James Gretser, which is newly
come forth to revile the whole host of Protestant writers, has abundantly
testified, and declared in his late [] voluminous book, written in a supposed
defense of Bellarmine: but to give the Devil his right, he has far
exceeded, not only his Equals Jesuits, but surpassed all other writers
whatsoever, in this supereminent art of railing, or scolding rather: so that to
use Similes sunt-authori discipui omnes equorum libris, si iactationes,
mendacia, sco^mata, maledicta, conuitia tollerentur ex maximis voluminibus vix
libelli perexigui effici possent Bell cont. 4. To 1. page 328. in 8o. justly to
be retorted upon the Jesuits. He railes against D. Rainolds, D. Whitaker, D.
Mo^ton. Iunius, Polanus, Hunnius, Lubbert, etc al which he does befoole, and
depresse, both lewdly and foolishly: as because D. Rainolds was sick of the^
gout, therefore forsooth, nihil ^olidum nihil ne^uosum ab isto sperandum, his
head was not sound enough to deliver any solid matter against them, and that
he did forbear to inuaie more sharply against him Ne sort exasparatis
articulorum doloribus acrius discrutietur, and ad rabi^^ vel desperationem
adigatur. The pain of the gout and of reading his books withal, might drive
him into despair. Gretser. defens, Bell. page 1058, and 1070.
his M. Bellarmines words; if a man should take out al his braggings*
scoffings, reproaches, raylings, reuilings and lewd speeches uttered against the
chiefest writers of our age, ex maximo volumine, minimus libellus efficeretur,
it would prove not only a poor book but a lewd and lying book. In this book
he has taken upon himself such liberty of giueing every man the lie that he
cannot keep from putting a lie upon his Master Cardinal Bellarmiue, where he
writes thus speaking of the Jesuits, Bellarmine the Jesuits the meekest men
alive.
non est nostrum, reddere malu^ promal^, it is not the manner of the Jesuits,
to render evil for evil. Though I cannot say of him as Vide Praefationem ante
Biblia Interlinearia.
Arias Montanus does of his Erostratus, that nostrum pro alijs, but nostrum cum
alijs nomenproscindendum suscepit; that he has traduced me for others; yet
because he has traduced my name with others, I thought good to me^. tion him
only at this present, because I intend ere long be, to In two books of his, the
one in quarto de Iu^e and ^m odo libros prohibendi, abolendi and expurga^
di^the other in folio writ in defense of the 1 part. of of Bellarmins
Controversy he has gone about to reuerse two Positio^s of mine: the 1. That
the works of the ^Ancie^t Fathers are very much corrupted by the Papists: the
2. that their Bibles authorized are diverse, co^trarious, and co^tradictorious,
the one unto the other, Both these God willing shall be proved m^st clearly in
my Apology. God open the ^ies of our hitherto blinded and hoodwinct Papists,
that they may see, and seeing may know, and knoweinge may abhor their
soul corruptions and open contradictions.
salute him in his own language, and to send him to school unto the Jesuits,
'to learn better manners, then being but a young Jesuit in comparison, not
only to abuse al Lutherans, Calvinists, and Protestants; but to write
professedly and purposely, I may say, malitiouslie and spitefully, against the
most aged, and Ant Posseuine wounded thorowgh my sides, For my Collation of
Cyprian which Grerser chiefly impugneth i^ translated verbatim into Possevins
Apparatus, Changing the word Protestant into Catholic, and by affirming the
book that was printed at Geneua, to be printed at Paris, that men might think
it was his work: sic nos non nobis mellificamus apes, hereby you may note his
exceeding great judgment; and yet he takes upon him to be, Censor censorum,
and Criticus Criticorum.
judicious Jesuit at this day in all Christendom: but leaving him unto his
Superiors to be punished for a notable wrangler, and Wickliffe in this point
a sound Protestant, we are now by Gods grace come to examine the most material
point of al others.

Sect. 3.
IF it be doubted whether the Pope may err, or no: according unto VVickliffes
doctrine, The 3 question whether the Pope may err.
it is showed openly and plainly, thoroughout all his works, where he proves
that the Pope is, Papa est pec cabilis. sicur caput Ecclesiae. De Verit.
Script. page 456. est naturae peccabilis, habens supra se capitale^ Dominum in.
Expos Decal. page 123.
natura peccabilis, of that nature that he may err. De blasphe^ page 40.
That one, that men callen Pope, may err: not only in manner and Non dubiu^
quin error posset in ^lectione contingere, and magis in conuersatione sequenti
De Ver, Script. page 457.
conversation of life, but also in doctrine and He may err -- in seeding of
his Churches or Articles of the faith. De blasp page 40. Multi papae deprau^ti
haeretica dep^auitate, De. Ver. Scrip. page 181. hodie inualescit opinio
Legistarum dicentium, quod si quis sit Papa, est impeccabilis, and per
con^equens si quid arbitratur, vel ordinat, tune est iustum, ^um Epistolae suae
vel parificantur vei superant auctoritatem Scripturae. lb. page 47. Non habet a
Deo Chartas talis officij lb page 92. Vtina^ talis Antichristus non destruat
Regna Borealia, occidentalia, or^entalia, s^cut infecit Af^am, Ap^irica^, and
Europam. lb. page 589.
Articles of the Creed. Lib. De 7. Pecc, Mort. page 16.
He may sin, De blasphem. page 40.
and no man in the world lightlier or grievouslier, and de facto erraverunt in
deed they have ^rred and been infected with foul heresies. Yea he thinks it
to be De blasphem page 55.
likely, that all the Bishops of Rome, for 300. years and more before his
time, were fully heretics: and therefore I nothing doubt, but he shall be
accounted of them an Arch heretic, of us (as the truth is) a sound Catholic,
and an Arch Protestant.

Sect. 4.
The 4. question whether the Pope be Antichrist.
THe l^st point controuersed is, whether the Pope be Antichrist. Which point he
proves very largely, by comparing his doctrine and manners, with Christ's, in
sundry places of his works: but chiefly in his Lib. de 7. Pe^cati^ Mortal.
page 16.
Book of the 7. deadly sins; telling us, that forasmuch as thorough his
Decrees, Contra Frat. Mend. page 26
Gods Hests, by his maundements Christ's commandments, by his Decretals Paul's
Epistles, by his Nihil est Canonicu^ quod Regula 1. non approbat De Ver.
Script. page 457.
Canon law, the Canonical Scripture was vilified, nullified, utterly defased
and debased (a fault for which he is bold to tax him, in sundry passages of
his works) he pronou^ceth of him absolutely, that he is De verit. ser. page 590.
potissimus Antichristus, that very Antichrist.

The 4. Chap. Of the Church.
NOw it remains, that we see his judgment concerning the Church, marking how
far his opinions do concur with ours. Here we will enquire his definitive
sentence in these questions following. 1. Whether the Church of Rome be the
Catholic Church. 2. Whether it has the privilege of not erring. 3. Whether
the Church be visible, or not. Fourthly and lastly, whether the wicked, be true
members of the Church.

Sect. 1.
THe 1. question is thus determined by him, The 1. question whether the Church
of Rome be the Catholic Church?
Protestor public, quod amando, and venerando Romanam Ecclesiam, matrem meam,
desidero and procuro defe^sionem o^^isi Privilegioru^ suorum. De ve rit scr^pt.
Page 196.
he acknowledged the Roman Church to be his mother Church, and he professes
that he will to his power defend all the Privileges thereof. Here Wickliffe
may seem to depart from us for a time, (and so in words he does:) but in the
end or vpshot of all you shall see him come back again unto us, and fight
under our Standard. He calls the Roman Church his mother Church he might do so,
for those worthy beginnings which she made in open profession of the Gospel, in
S. Paul's days and this is apparent, by those true privileges, which he
se^teth down, as belonging unto the Roman Church, which to omit al other
stand chiefly Scio quidem ex fide Scripturae tanquam infra^gibiliter verum,
quod omne ^uum privilegist est ex Deo, and de quanto secuta fuerit Ch^istu^
co^for^nius, de tanto amplioribus privilegijs insignitur, De verit. Scr. Page
196.
in conforming her self unto Christ and his laws: so that the nearer she
came unto him, the greater privileges she had. But it is not hereby to be so
much as imagined, that the Church of Rome was endowed with any such
privileges, as they dream of; as if Peter had therefore chosen this place
above all other to rule in, and Christ had given him that privilege and his
Successors not to err in it: he that has this opinion of Wickliffe
deceives himself: for he gives an Absit, to that opinion. Absi^ Ecclesiam
credere, quod fides cuiuscunque alieni membri Ecclesiae depe^deat ab isto Petro
Iohanne vel Gregorio. De verit scr. Page 92.
God forbid that the Church, or that any man should think, that the faith of
other members of the Church, does depend upon this Peter, that John, or that
Gregory. Fie^i potestquod Dominus Papa fo^et igna^us Legis Scripturae, and quod
Ecclesia Anglicana foret long praesta^^ior in iudicio veritatis Cathol^^ae,
quam tota ista Romana Ecclesia collecta de istis Papa and Cardina^ibus. lb, P.
182.
Yea it may so happen, that our Lord the Pope may be ignorant of the Laws, of
the Scripture, and that the Church of England, may be far better and quicker
sighted in finding out the Catholic truth then all this Roman Church of Pope
and Cardinals, being all thrust together. So that the issue, or vltima
resolutio, the Conclusion, is like that of the Apostles, 1. Cor. Chap. 11.
verse. 1.
to follow this Church, I say, above all others, in as much as it follows
Christ, and no otherwise, which Conclusion, if it should be granted by us, it
will neither greatly steed them, nor hurt us.

Sect. 2.
THe 2. question is almost answered by the first: fier^ potest, the Church of
Rome may err, Necesse estS. matrem Ecclesiam per The. ologos regulari:
oportete nim quod reguletur secundum vitam Christi, and Scripturae Sacrae sed
hoc propter euitandas haereses De Ver. Script. page 510.
if it keep not her first faith, which is called by him, De Ver. Scr. page 72.
fides Ecclesiae, or lb page 108.
fides Scripturae, the faith of the Church, or the faith of the Scripture; or
if you will needs have it so, Peter's ^aith, which is so certainly grounded on
the true rock Christ Jesus, that Math, Chap 24. v. 24, 25.
though the rain fall and the floods come, and the winds blow, and beat upon
this Church, yet it falls not, for it is founded (as I have said) on a rock,
and the Math. Chap 16. v. 18.
rock is Christ, against whom 1 Cor. 10.4. Luc. 18.8.
Hell-gates could not heretofore prevail. But because this doubt may herehence
arise; if the Church of Rome, and the Church of England, and so other
particular Churches may err, as you say, then true faith may be utterly
extinguished here on earth, and so we may easily a^^oile that doubt in the
Gospel; when the Son of man comes. shall he find faith upon earth?
Therefore, to prevent this objection, he sets this down, for a maxim. De
Verit. Script p. 105.
Nec esse est in tota matre Ecclesia esse fidem Catholica^. It cannot otherwise
be; God has hitherto providently and will mercifully so provide, that true
faith shall be entirely professed in his Church, in some one place or other, and
the true professors thereof shall be preserved, though it be miraculously, as
Elias, and as our John Wickliffe was, to continue the preaching of the Gospel,
and to show forth the saving health thereof unto all nations, to see the
Sacraments duly and rightly administered, which are the only true notes of
VVickliffes Church.

Sect. 3.
BY that which has been spoken, The 3. question about the visibilitie of the
Church.
not only the second question, but also the third doubt concerning the
visibilitie of the Church, like 1. Sam. 5.3
Dagon before the Arc, falls down to the ground, and Wickliffe remains in
this point, as in all the former, a resolved true, Cathotholike, English
Protestant.

Sect. 4.
FOurthly where the Contra Fratres mendica^tes. Cap. 39. page 54. They ^eachen
that tho men that shall be damned be members of holy Church, and thus they
wedde^ Christ and the devil together Ib.
Church of Rome takes the members o Hfarl an ot, and gives them to Christ,
coupling Christ and Antichrist together, by affirming the wicked to be true
members of the Church, he denies the assertion most flatly and peremptorily
informing us, that there are but two Churches; Ecclesia Christi and Ecclesia
malignantium, De Ver. Scr. p. 490.
Christ's Church, and the malignant Church; Duo capita Christus and Diabolus lb.
two Captains, or Chieftaines, Christ, and the Devil or Beliall, There is no
co^mining, ne consent to Christ and to Belial. Contra F^atr. Mend. page 54.
betwixt whom there is no community. And therefore, I conclude this point with
VVickliffes words: these wicked miscreants and ungodly men Comment in Psalm.
page 2. in Praef.
a^e in the holy Church but not of the holy Church, and in the Church by body,
not by thought, by name, not by deed, in number, not by merit.

The 5. Chapt. Of Justification.
THe fifth maine controversy concerns justification: wherein Wickliffe
according to his usual manner, accords fully with the Church of England;
'teaching us, that Decreuerunt Apostoli sufficere ad saluationem
Christianismi^fide^ Domini Jesus Christi De Ver. Scr. page 494.
faith in our Lord Jesus Christ is sufficient for salvation, Est -- fides --
sum vtilis quia sine illa fide impossible est fidelem alterius Testa menti
placere Deo -cum includit in se diuinitatem humanitatis saluationem tam
causaliter quam efficienter quam finaliter De Ver. Scrip, page 496.
and that without that faith, it is impossible for any man to please God: that
Meri^um Christi per se sufficit omnem hominem redimere a^ Gehenna. Ib. page 552.
the merit of Christ, is able by it self, to redeem all mankind from Hell;
that D^ per se sufficientia intelligitur sine alia causa concurrente. Ib. page
553.
this sufficiency is to be understood, without any other cause concurring,
persuading men therefore to trust wholly to Christ, to rely altogether upon his
sufferings, Omnes sequentes Christum Iustificati ex sua Iustitia, tanquam ^ua
generatio saluabuntur De Ver. Scrip. page 550.
not to seek to be justified but ex sua iustitia, by his justice; that In
genere iustorum est dare vnum iustum, cuius participatione cuncta alia erunt
iusta in Expos. Decal. page 1.
by participation of his righteousness, all men are righteous; that Infideles
non viuunt vi^ tuose; licet de propinquo faciant bona de genere. De Ver. Scrip.
page 468.
the works of Infidels, licet de propinquo faciat bona de genere, though they
do good works, which are good for there kind; yet they are not to be
accou^tedrighteous me^. And thus it may appear, that Wickliffe did fully
understand the point of Walden To. 3. page 24. charge him with Pelagianisme
in the highest degree how truly let the reader judge by comparing Wickliff with
Walden; truth with falsehood. Wicleuistae destruunt liberum Arbitrium Ib. To. 1.
page 68.
Justification, or else he would never have relied so much upon Gods mercy,
and so little, upon merits, as in truth he did, as is declared unto you in the
words following.

The 6. Chapt. Of Merits.
THE doctrine of merits, that you may know that Wickliffe was nether Ecce si
non sit inter Wickliffe and Pelagium germana societas? Walden To. 3 page 14.
Pelagianitae and Wilclevistae gratiam Dei tacent vel abnegant, and in meritis
hominum omnino confidunt Ib. page 25. Ib. Wickliffe diuinae gratiae nihil
tribuendum docet. Ib. Walden must needs be very true in all the rest that is so
notoriously false in this.
Pelagian, nor Papist, is plentifully in all his books refuted, but chiefly in
his Commentaries upon the Psalms. Where he beats down these proud
Pharisees, Comment. in Psalm. page 474.
which say, that God did not al for the^, but thinks, that there Wickliff.
dixisset non, sic, sed propter memetipsum Deus, and propter opera meritoria mea
me audi Walden To. 3. page 28. very like unto himself
merits helps. Ib. page 182.
Heal us Lord for naught; that is, no merit of ours; but for thy mercy. Ib.
page 368.
Lord not to our merits, but to thy mercy, give thy joy. Ib. page 368.
Give us grace, to' know, that all thy gifts beeth of thy goodness: Ib. page
126.
our flesh though it seem holy; yet it is not holy. We all Omnes homines
originaliter peccatores sunt quoda^mo do Adam. De Ver. Scr. page 489. Tota
natura humana inimica Deo. In Expos. Decal. page 77. Concupiscentia peccatum
mortale. Ib. page 144.
are originallie sinners, as Ada^, and in Adam, his leaprosie cleaving faster
to us, then Naamans did to Gehezay. 'For according to his teaching, we all are
sinners, not only from Infans' ex peccato originali est haereticus quia a
numero fidelium diuisus ex caeca electio ne priorum parentum a qua contrahit
maculam originalem. De Ver. Scr page 607.
our mothers wombes, but Infantes peccant in matris vtero. in Expos. Decal page
77.
in our mothers wombes* so that we cannot so much as think a Comment. in Psalm
page 109.
good thought unless Jesus the Angel of great council send it, perform a Ib.
page 423.
good work, unless it be properly his good work; Ib. page 79.
his mercy comes before us, that we receive grace, and follows us helping and
keeping us in grace. So then, it is not good for us to trust in our merits, in
our virtues, in our righteousness: but to conclude this point, good- Comment. in
Psalm page 374.
it is, -- only to trust in God, as the Church of England teaches.

The 7. Chapt. Of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper.
THis is the seventh and last maine question, concerning which we have
VVickliffes confession, both in Haec est confessio Mag. Io. Wickliff. de
Sacramento Altaris in Festo Sanctoru^. Gordiani, and Epimachi. Oxon. Anno
Domini. 1381: extant Ibidem.
Latin and in Wickliffes believe of the Sacrament in English in the Public
Librar^e. This was published after that Concilium Terrae motus at London.
English. For he was not ashamed to yield an account of his faith, 1, Pet. 3.15.
omni poscenti, to any man that would demand it: so far was he from
retracting his former opinion as some shamefully write: but without any ground
in the world, for this there conjecture. For Wickl: de Verit Scr. page 183. Non
sum suspectus de formidine istarum conclusionum, cum transmisi eas per magnam
partem Angliae, and Chr^stianismi -- vnde quia volui materiam communicatan^
Clericis and Laicis, col^egi and communicaui 33. conclusi^nes illius materiae
in lingua duplici. lb.
he sent his opinion touching his belief of the Sacrament, and all other
points wherein he dissented from their Apostata Church into al Christendom, to
be censured by the learned Divines, according unto Sentential mea est
Catholica, Reip. directiua, a fide Scripturae secundu^ postillationes
Sanctoru^, concorditer eliquata page 187.
Scripture and Fathers; whereas on the contrary, the Friars De blasphpag. 38
Friars re^usen to deliver their opinion of the Host. De blasp. page 51.
durst not put out there faithes unto the people. His opinion of the Sacrament,
was the same with the Church of England; Confess. de Sacramento Euchar p. 58.
Isle panis est been, v^^e, and real^ter spiritualiter, virtualiter, and Sacra
me^taliter cor pus Christi Ib.
that the body of Christ was really and truly in the Sacrament, in his kind,
that is, sacramentaliter: and figuraliter, by way of Sacrament, and
figuratively; Sicut Io. Bap tista figura^iter fuit Helias and non per^onaliter.
A^t. 4. in Syn. Constable. damna^.
so John Baptist figuratively was Helias, and not person^lly; and as Sicut
Christus est simul Deus, and homo: sic hostia consecrata est si^ul corpus
Ch^ist^ and verus panis, qui^ est co^pus Domini ad minimum in figura, and verus
panis in natura; vel quod idem sonat, est verus Panis naturaliter, and co^pus
Christi figuraliter. Art 49. Oxon damnatus.
Christ was together God and man so the Posuit panem in corpus and vinum in
^anguinem mystica consecratione conuerti^on rea^iter ita intelligenda sunt
verba Wicklefi ex sent. Will. Woodford vide Lib. Ms. page 107.
consecrated host (for so he calls it) was at the same time Christ's very
body, and very bread: not by way of Consubstantiatio^, as the Lutherans teach,
for it was Christ's body in figure, and true bread in nature; or which is all
one, true bread naturally, and Christ's body figuratively. Moreover, he
affirmed Vae generationi adulterae quae plus credit Testimonio Innocentijvel
Ray mundi, quam sen^u^ Euangelij-, c^e^o quod finaliter veritas vincet eos in
Confes^ de sacramento altaris p. 59.
constantly, without wavering, that this true Catholic and Apostolical
doctrine, De blasphem. page 4^.
lasted in the Church, for a 1000. years, till Sathanas was unbound; and De
blasphem. page 37.
the people blinded by Friars, with the Heresy of accidents without subjects;
which opinion they durst not maintain; whereas I Am certain for the third part
of the Clergy that defends this sentence. that they will defend it on pain of
loosing their lives. Confess. de Sacram. Anglice page 64.
Wickliffe, and the third part of the Clergy that defended the contrary,
were ready to defend it, on pain of loosing of their lives, cum non fu^rit
materia martyrij plus laudanda; Art. Oxon: damnat. 52.
there being no better cause of martyrdom. For De blasph. page 63.
he could speak it boldly, being certain of the truth thereof, that all the
Friars of this land, or other Blasphemers, could not disprove that faith which
he told: and thus, it appears, that Wickliffe was wholly for us and our
Church, in the 7. principal points of controversy, containing 16. questions
in the whole, strongly maintained and defended by him, against the Papists of
his time.

Of other questions, wherein also Wickliffe holds with us, against them;
which are collateral, or accidental to the former, after a more brief manner.
Having sounded these 7. greater controversies, as it were so many Ios. Chapt.
6. v 20.
Tru^pets, see how the walls of this spiritual Hiericho do fall flat unto the
ground as they did, in the time of Joshua Judge of Israel; and as he spoke unto
the Jews, so I say unto al good and perfect Christians: Ib. v. 26.
Cursed be the man before the Lord, that rises up and builds this City
Hiericho.

The 8. Chapt.
FAther Parsons that worthy Jesuit in his Part. 2. c. 9. p. 489. Then belike
Friar Walden will prove a notable liar, whichmaketh Wickliffe to hold almost all the opinions that we do thowgh he charg him besides with many untruths.
book of the three conversio^s, or rather as he has made the^, perversions of
England, would feign make us to believe; that the points wherein Wickliffe
agrees with the Papists, against us, are many, and far more the^ the former,
wherein he ioineth with the Protestants against them. And our Apologists say,
that Tract. 2. Cap 2. Sect. 4. page 108.
after his revolte, he retained still sundry Catholic points. I know not how
^ur Apologists will be able to justify their saying, sure I am, it will pinch on
the Parsons side.

Sect. 1. Of the Number of the Sacraments.
FOr the number of the Sacraments, he held that there were but two. True it
was, I note the same of Wickliffe, which M. Wotto^ observes of Luther, that
having been a long time kept in thedarknes of Popery, he could not by and by
discern the truth in all points Wott. page 29.
that some time after his Conversion, when he began to see and know the truth,
being not fully instructed in all points at the first (for his conversion was
wrought by degrees the elder he grew the more he loathed, and detested there
abominable heresies) he names 7. Sacraments: but. posteriores cogitationes
sunt sapientiores his after opinions, were better the^ his former, else why did
their Art 45.46. 47.48. Damnper Oxon and Syn. Constable.
Church condemn him for an Heretic in this point.

Sect. 2. Of holy Orders.
Videtut SS. Doctoribus quod superfluit in sacramento ordinis ponere plures
quam duos gradus, scilicet Diaconos, vel Leuitas, and Presbyteros, sieve
Episcopos, cum nec dignitas ministerij
TOuching holy orders, he held that there were but two; viz: of Nec auctoritas
facit euidentiam, quod in statu Cleri debent isti^^es gradus; scilicet Clericus
1. tonsurae. Acolytus and Subdiaconus approbari, ^mo irrationabile and
infundabile videtur, quod Ecclesia milita^s s^ cum istis tribus Ordinibus
onerata. Artic. 55. Oxon. damnat^ vide Walden To. 2. p. 200
Deacons and Priests, so do we.

Sect. 3. Of the Chrisme in B^ptisme.
Articul. 43. in Synodo Co^st. damnat.
He held against the Chrisme in Baptism, saying; that Christ contented himself
with pure water, so do we.

Sect. 4. Of the Sacrament of extreme Unction.
Si corporalis vnctio foret Sacrame^tum vt modo fingitur: Christus and sui
Apostoli eius promulgationem non tacuissent. Art. 58. Oxon. damnat. vide Wald.
To. 2. page 268.
HE held, that corporal Unction, or the last anointing, or anealing, was no
Sacrament, so do we.

Sect. 5. Of Popish Confirmation.
Quantum adoleum quo Episcopi vngunt pueros, and poplum lineum quod complexum
est capiti, Videtur quod sit ritus leuis, infundabilis ex Scriptura, and quod
ista confirmatio introducta super Apostolos, blasphem, in Deum. Artic. 8. In
Synod. Constable. da^nat.
HE held that Popish Confirmation, with oil and veil, and I know not what
fooleries, was a Relic of the Devils, but Walden, To. 3. page 105.
such Confirmation as was agreeable with reason he allowed.

Sect. 6. Of Images.
HE preached against the Praedicandu^ est co^tra pretiositate^ speciositatem.
and alias sophisticationes quibus illudimus peregrinos potius propter pecunias
exhauriendas quam propter religionem Christiin proprijs agenda^ In Expos. Decal
page 48. Diabolus action infidelitatis illud it plures, putantes quandoque
esse miraculum, vbi est pure deceptio. lb. page 48.
pretiosity, speciosity, and miraculositie, and sundry other sophistications
about images, being of opinion, that it were better to banish them And
according to his doctrine not long after Will, Neuil, Lewys Clifford, Io.
Clanwow, Ric. Styry, Tho. Latymer. and Ioh. Montagu turned out the Images out
of a certain Chapel. Walls page 3^8.
clean out their of Churches, alleging that noted saying of Epiphanius: and
where as the Papists say, they commit no Idolatry, Adoro illam nomine Sancti:
Si^ dixerunt infideles In Expos Decal. page 48.
for they worship not the Image, but that, which the Image represents: first he
shows, that the Idolatrous heathen men were wont to make this apology for
themselves; but howsoever they dissembled the matter, sure he was, that In mora
imaginandi latet venenum Idololatriae lb page 48.
between there gazing upon the Image and thinking upon that, that was thereby
represented, it was an easy matter for some kind of Idolatry to creep in.
And of the same opinion are we.

Sect. 7. Of the Distinction of sins.
HE holds the Distinction of sins thus; Lib Miscel. page 182.
some sins are called little sins, in comparison of greater, and Lib de 7.
peccat More. page 1. Wald. To. 2. p. 254.
venial, because Gods son forgiues them, so do we.

Sect. 8. Of Auricular Confession.
HE held Confessio vocalis facta Sacerdoti, introducta per Innocentium non est
ta^ necessaria Artic. 9. con deninat. in Synodo Co^st
vocal Confession to a Priest, not to be necessary in Si h^mo fuerit debite
contritus, omnis confessio exterior est sibi superflua and inutilis. Arti^. 9.
Land damnat.
case a man a were truly contrite and sorrowful for his sin, with full Two
manners of perfect Penance, Shrift and amendment. Com. in Psalm. page 129. Shrift
that is hallowing in our hearts, lb. page 367. Shrift, that is forsaking of
sin. lb. page 363. Grave and infundabile est, Presbyterum audire
Confessiones, Populi modo quo Latini vtuntur, Wickliffe. 3 Ser. Dom. in monte.
Wald. page 223.
purpose of amendment: unless the party offending, do find himself very
much grieved, in which case he counsels him, to repair Lib. Miscell. page
247.
unto a Priest that has cunning and good living; and so far this doctrine is
justly ratified, by the Canons of our Church and pity it is, that it is not
oftener used.

Sect. 9. Of Satisfaction.
HE wrote against their, Papa modernus erube seere debet de is it a mother na
penitentia sine fundatione posita, cu^m non licet mortalibus and Apostolis
difficultare legem Dei, vltra hoe quod ip^emet limitauit. Artic. Oxon. damn.
47. Though a man live never so long he might not. etc. Lib. Miscell. page 163.
new found penance, and penal Satisfactions; assuring us, that a man might not
do sufficient penance for one deadly sin, so do we.

Sect. 10. Of Pardons and Indulgences.
SHar^ly he inveied against their Li. Mis. p. 28.
vain sellers, or distributers of Pardons and Indulgences, and other Ghostly
deeds; showing that this treasure, Li. Mis. p. 26.
was not in earthly man's power to deal; but De Thesauris Ecclesiae dispositio
Christi De Ver. Scr. p. 471
wholly in Christ's disposition; and that the De blas. p. 51
parting of this bliss, was proper to God only: and therefore lb. page 53.
we should not trust to the Pope, but to God; Fatuum est credere Indulgentijs
Papae and Episcoporu^. Art. 42. Land. Cond.
not to believe his Bulls, but the Lib Com. in Psalm. p. 173.
Bull of everlasting pardon, which is our Lord Jesus Christ, so do we.

Sect. 11. Of Fasting.
FOr fasting, he held as we do; that Li. de 7. Piece Mort page 28.
abstinence with prudence was needeful, that is, (as he expounds himself)
Lib. Miscell. page 247.
measureable fasting, both of body and soul; of the body from meats, of the
Debemus ieiunare a peccato Lib de Ver. Scrip. p. 8
soul from sins, was requisite; but nevertheless he held absolutely, against
there Foole-fasting is gluttony Lib de 7. Peccat, Mort. page 28.
foole-fasting, that is, fasting from flesh, to glut themselves with fish; or
lb. p. 29.
excess of fasting, that is, to go about to fast more then man's nature would
permit, by seeking too much to even Christ or In operibus humanitatis debemus
sequi Christum faciendo operibus suis proportionalia -- debemus ie iuna^e a
peccato 40. diebus et iuxta possibilitatem naturae, a superfluo corporali cibo.
De Verit. Scr. page 8.
Elias, by so doing.

Sect. 12. Of Vows.
HE speak against there forced vows, of Chasti^e, Poverty, and Obedience:
showing, how there Chastity was turned Lib. Miscelli: 64 lb. p. 63,
into Lechery, and sin against kind; there Friars studien to be rich Vita
Sacerd. page 59. They robb men by beging. Touch a great Cup of Gold or Silver,
but not a penny or farthing Reg. S. Franc. page 76. The King^ garment for
goodness not better then theirs. lb p 77. have chambers for Dukes or Earls --
with lewels -- and mikel hid treasure lb. 77 They magnify more obedience to
sinful men then to Christ. Reg. S. Franc, page 77.
Poverty into riches; there " Obedience, into disobedience, and flat rebellion
against Christ, and his Laws.

Sect. 13. Of Priests Marriage.
TOuching Matrimony, thus stood the case in his time, the Priests were
unmarried: but nevertheless, he held that the In Primitiua Ecclesia ordinati
sunt coniugati Episcopi. De Ver. Ser. page 370. Orietales Sacerdotes vxorati.
lb p. 406, et in Expos. Decal. p. 116. Oftendit quo modo Sacerdotes possint
effe vxorati. De Ver. Scrip. page 407. and lb. Miscell. page 63.
Bishops and Priests of both the Primitive and East-Churches were married, and
that he saw no cause, why the Priests of the Latin Church lb. page 63.
should be forbidden marriage; that the forbidding of it, caused many Lib.
Miscell. page 63.
to live lust full life and easy, and fall into sin against kind^; that who so
forbids it, lb. p. 63.
is enemy of God, Saints in Heaven, and al mankind: because lb. page 65.
true chastity, is as well to be found in wedlock, as otherwise; and this is
our very tenet.

Sect. 14. Of Divorces.
Lib. Miscell. page 54. Quo ad diuortium divulgandum cautelae innumerabiles
adinuentae. In Expos. Decal. page 117.
HE held against unlawful divorces, so do we.

Sect. 15. Of Dispensations.
HE held likewise against Eiusmodi dis, pensationes creditur Ecclesiam nimium
perturbare De Ver. Scrip. page 399.
false and unnatural Dispensations for marriages in case of neerenes of blood
gainful. Lib. de 7. Pecc. Mort. page 33.
dispensations for marriage, in case of neerenes of blood.

Sect. 16. Of Acquivocation.
HE held against damnable Vide Capitu lum 15. de Ve rit. Scrip. vbi rem prolixe
tractat.
Aequiuocatio^ and lying, and that the Pope nor no man else could absolve the^
from lying, or wilful perjury, or breach of their lb. p. 207.
oaths of allegiance.

Sect. 17. Of the kings Supremacy.
HE held that the Kings Majesty, has power within his Realms, -- to whom the
Chief government of all Estates of this Realm, Aliternon haberent Reges in
Regnis ^uis plenae pacis custodiam De Ver. Scrip. page 453. 37. Article of
Religion.
whether they be Ecclesiastical, or Civil, in all causes does appertain, and is
not, nor ought to be subject to any foreign Jurisdictio^, according to the 37.
Article of Religion; not intending hereby, (as slanderous Jesuits do give
out) to give the Prince, the ministering of Gods word or Sacraments, or to make
and establish what Religion he list, as if we Englishmen Iac. Gretserus. Angli
and corpora and animas suas Capiti suo Saeculari prostituerunt in defe^^. Bell
p. 1261
had prostituted (so the lewd Jesuit speaks) both our souls, and bodies unto
the King.

Sect. 18. Of Christian men's goods.
Again, he held the riches and goods of Christians not to be common, as
touching the right, title, and possession (as the Anabaptists now, and a
certain Io. Balle. see Froissard.
Bald Priest in his time did hold) notwithstanding, by Omnes homines debent
charitatiue habereomnia in communi De Vet. Scrip. page 449.
a See the 38. Article of Religion
Christian charity, they were to be made common, as he teaches.

Sect. 19. Of Oaths.
Again he held against Lib. Miscell. p. 124.
the perilous custom of swearing, against fallacious, blasphemous and lb p.
125. and De Ver. Scrip p. 252, 253, and 284. In Expos in Decal page 63 The 39.
Artic of Religion.
Acguivocall Oaths; not against swearing: the contrary is most evident
throughout al his books, and as clear as the Sunshine in a fair Summers day,
and this is an Article of our Religion.

Sect. 20. Of Excommunications.
For Excommunications he held the same with our De Ver. Ser. page 614 Art. 33.
of Rel
Church; that the party excommunicated, being delivered up once unto Satan,
by the Church, ought to be taken of the whole multitude of faithful, as an
Heathen and Publican, until he were openly reconciled by Penance, and received
into the Church, and this made him write, against the abuses of
Excommunication: viz: that those greater Scribit contra leuiter ex communican
tes De Verit. Scr. page 368. Contra excommunica ti. ones iniustas In Expos. Dec
page 124. da^nantes alios fine debito ex amine, De Ver. Scrip. page 612.
Excommunicatio non inuenta propter decimas., lb. page 437 ad tertendum homines
Laicos In Expos. Decal. page 123.
Excommunications were thundered forth too often, too suddenly, upon no dew
information, and for no good end.

Sect. 21. Of the Discipline of the Church.
HE held a reverend opinion of the books Quos decreu^t Ecclesia nec damnare
nec explicit canonizare cum satis sit pro sua militia habere 22. Libros de vet
Testamento. De Ver. Scrip page 110.

He writesagainst those that will not honor their Prelates Lib. Miscell. p. 260
shows how we should honor them In Expos. Decal. page 93.


Apocrypha. For the government of the Church by Archbishops, Bishops,
Archdeacons and Officials, he was (to my seeming) a plain conformitan. There
were noe doubt of it, some Reverend, learned, and vncorrupt Prelates in his
time: and therefore he observed this rule in all his sharp Treatises against
the Clergy: parcere personis, dicere de vitijs, to note the abuses in
general, without He names not any one of his aduersa. ties, Monk or
Friarthrough out al these books that I have seen of his.
naming any man in particular to his disgrace. and for Rites and That which he
blamed was that plus appretiabantur Tradi^. quam Scripturam sacra^ De Ver.
Scrip. p. 96. That they did Traditiones Lucrationes preponderare legi dei. lb.
page 359. pe
Ceremonies, such as were laudable and approueable by the Church, he himself
observed, and wished others so to do* Lastly, though He were soul and body,
for Showing that to preach Gods word is highest Service Lib. de 7. Pecc, More.
page 19. quod praedicatio sit praecipuum opus Episcopi Lib. De Ver. Scrip. p,
331. Mayor quam Eucharistia, lb. 345. Necessario in Archi^^ iscopo and Episcopo
lb. 347. Audacter assero quod non sit Episcopus nisi praedicet aliquo tempore
lb. 392. lo, 21. 15. 16.
preaching and teaching the people, yet he held it a matter of no necessity,
but of indiffere^cie, for the Priest to preach unto the Lay People by weeks,
or months, or otherwise in their discretions; so the people were well taught:
likewise he was not so severe and sharp an inueier against Non-Residents, as
to allow them no time of absence, or recreation, by inculcating and thundering
in there ears Christ's pasce, pasce, pasce, feed, feed, feed: for he shows,
that a man may be absent upon occasion, from his living, either at the Licet
Rectoriad tempis collige^e semen fidei in scholis Theologi^ is extra parochia^
De Ver. s^r. page 437.
Universities, or elsewhere, for the increase of his knowledge, Pascat eos
continue in sancta sacerdotal^ conuersatione in sub. fritu^i^donca preparatione
and opportuna pro horis. congruis absentiae rectificatione Ib.
deputing a sufficient man in his place, and living wheresoever, a godly, and
virtuous life: and for Cum-pastus spiritualis no^ debet este ta^ continuus, sed
maioris effica ciae ac permanentiae quam pastus corporeus, sufficit quod horis
congruis in anno pascat subditos lb.
continual feeding, he shows the difference between corporal food and
spiritual food, the one a man of a strong body and complexion cannot well want
twice a day, the other a man may want many days and weeks; yet he thinks
it not convenient that they should so do, if it might be otherwise. Finally, he
was not for hedge Priests, such as our Familists, which refuse the Church, as
profane, and choose the open fields, or there houses, for their disordered co^.
venticles and meetings: he loved preaching and Necesse, and vtile est orare. In
Expos. Decalogi. est spiritualis Tyriaca contra Diabolum lb. 8^. oftendit
locum, tempus, and forma^ orandi lb.
praying well, and stood firm for the Liturgy of a reformed Church, but yet he
thought the Orandum est in Templis -- non ex dedicatione Ecclesiae ibi oration
facta Deo acceptior sed ex merito obedientiae prae^eptis Ecclesiae and ex
elongatione a curis Seculi ^b. 79.
Church, to be the fittest place for Gods service, for many reasons which he
recounteth: so that as he was no superstitious Papist, so he was no fond
Novellist, but an indifferent, sober, discreet, learned and judicious
Protestant.

Sect. 22. Of Implicit faith.
HE held that every good and perfect Christian should believe not only
implicit, by relying on the Church; but De Ver. Ser. page 111.
secundam fidem formata^ explicit in particulari plus, vel minus, secundum
quod obligantur plus Deo, ex donis suis and opportunitate temporis so do we.

Sect. 23. Of the certainety of salvation.
THat a De Ver. Ser. page 176. It. de blas. p. 55.
virtuous and godly man should be certain of his salvation, though he need
not to swear it.

Sect. 24.25: Of Purgatory and Prayer to Saints.
LAstly, for Purgatory and prayer to Saints, and for the dead. It cannot be
denied, but that in some places of his works, he speaks of the Illi sunt in
statu pae nae acerbissimae, quo nequeu^t se i^vare. In Expos. Decal. page 102.
dreadful pains of Purgatory, and De reddendo pro corpo rali eleemosy na
spirituale suffragium. De Ver. Scrip page 447.
praying for the dead, and Lib^. Diverse. Trat. page 121 It^^ confess.^ Euchar.
Angl. edita.
unto Saints: but it seems that either he was not If they be dead parents I
pray not for them. Lib. Diuer. Trac. p. 3. For now is time of mercy and time of
grace lb. 325 Each man shall be deemed of God; such as he founden is in the
ending of his life. lb. p. 459.
fully grounded in this opinion, whereat some of the grave Doctors of the
Church have stumbled; or rather, that howsoever he had maintained it, yet upon
better advise he changed his opinion: which I gather by these two
Circumstances. First he writes Onnia dicta de Purgatorio, dicuntur solumm odo
comminatorie tanquam pia mendacia De Ver. Scrip. page 267.
that all the sayings of Purgatory, were spoken, by way of commination, as it
were so many religious lies to scarre the people from coming thither.
Secondly, he diuides the Church into 3. parts: The Expos. in te Deum page 478.
highest beth the Angels of heaven, the 2. beth Saints, De Vent. Scrip page 479
Beati in purgatorio, velut in vmbra pau. In Expos. Decal. p. 128. Sabbathum
prefigurat quietem dormientium in purgatorio. De Verit. Scrip. page 479.
dormientes, or pausantes, sleeping or resting in Purgatory, the third is
folk, that shall be saved, here fighting in earth: of these three (says he) and
of none other, is made holy Church: and surely by this division, Popish
Purgatory is thrust clean out of Doors. For there is little rest, and less
sleeping there, if we believe them that have come from thence, and told us so.
And by this reason, if the fire of Purgatory be clean put out, the smoke of
it, that is prayers for the dead, must needs, in a very short time vanish
away. And as for prayers unto Saints, most true it is, that in these Popular
works of his, he mentions a prayer, of Diverse. Trac page 207. It in confessio
ne de Eucharist. Anglice edita
S. Cycily, unto Saints and himself prayed to the blessed Virgin Marie but I
am This persuasion of mine is farther increased by these words of Wald. To, ^
page 204. Hostis omniu^ Sancto^um Wickliffe suffragia viuoru^ despiciens, au su
nimio debacchatur in Sanctos, eos orare prohibens, festiuita tes little et
honores quos libet interdicens. But he, is ordinarily so fall a reporter of
his words that I know not how he may be well credited when he speaks the
truth.
persuaded, that he retracted these opinions in his latter and more learned
works. If ever it be Gods pleasure, that his works which were cut and mangled,
and scattered worse then Absyrtus limbs were in the Poet, may be brought forth
and set together again, that we may have the whole body of his learned and
religious works, and be able to distinguish of the time, and order wherein he
writ: then I say we should receive due satisfaction in this point, sure I am
that Quis rogo faceret scurtam mediatotem suum, vt Regis paratioris and
Clementioris collequio potiretur? ^anctiigitur in, Coelo licet non s^^^
scurrae, sed incorporati Christo per gratiam Saluatoris tamen minus se habet in
comparatione ad illum, quam scurra ad Regem terrenum. Hec Wickliffe, c. 30,
Tertij Trial. Wald. To. 3. p, 213.
Friar Walden, maks him to speak very irreverently against Saints, and Die
S. Thomae Can^uariensis Archiepiscopi lo de Wickliffe dum in S Thomam (vt
dicitur) eodem die in sua predicatione quam dicere preparauerat actiones and
blasphemias vellet euomere, ^epente iudicio dei percusius ^ensit paralysim
omnia m^mbra^sua generaliter in vasiss^. Os nempe quod contra Deum and lanctos
eius locurum fuerat, a loco^suo miserabiliter distortum, horrendum cerne^tibus
spectaculum exhibebat, lingua effecta muta, confitendi vel restandi copiam
denegabat. Walls. page 338.
VValsingha^ the Monk says, it was the death of him: though I believe neither
of both for the circumstance of there Relations, yet for the substance of the
speech, it may be true, that he was not so earnest for prayer to Saints, as
formerly he had been. Thus having run over almost all the noted controversies,
either in Doctrine or Discipline, by co^paring the^ with the Articles of
Religion, and Canons of our church, and showed his uniformity, and conformity
with us, almost in all points fully co^curring ( Which in Waldens judge me^t are
stourly maintained by Wickliffe as has been before proved.
some few excepted^) for which, considering the times wherein, and the persons
with who^, he lived, he may easily obtain pardon of any indifferent reader. We
come now, by Gods grace, unto the third and last part of our first general
Division, to answer such objections, as either Father Parsons, or the
Apologists have made, in the same order as they are propounded by them, and
first I begin with Father Parsons; His objections are in number. 6.

The 9. Chapt.
The 1. Objection of Father Parsons.
IF a Bishop or Priest, should give holy orders, or consecrate the Sacrament of
the Altar, or minister Baptism, whiles he is in mortal sin, Page 487.
it were nothing availeable.

The Answer.
IF it were not for reverence unto Father Parsons years and learning, which
are to be honored in a man's professed enemy, (though it be contrary to their
rules) I should surely think, that this were an errant lie, sophistically and
malitiouslie enforced, not arising naturally out of his words. For his words
are plain, admonishing Priests of their sacred functions, and holy lives he
writes thus: Nisi Christia, nus fuerit Christo vni tus per gratia^ n^n habet
Christum saluato^em, nee sine falsitate dicit verba Sacramentalia licet prosint
capacibus: oportet enim Sacerdotem conficientem, ^sse membrum Christi and vt
Sancti loquuntur quodammodo ipsum Christum, De Ver. Ser. page 138.
V^lesse the Christian Priest be united unto Christ by grace, Christ cannot be
his Savior, nee sine fa^sit ate dicit verba Sacramentalia, nether can he
speak the Sacrament all words without ly^ng, licet prosint capacibus though
the worthy receiver be hereby nothing hindered from grace. Then which words,
what can be said more plain? Here is there Sophistry; Wickliffe after his
usual manner, noting the foul abuses of the Church, and Church men,
Accusantes p^eudo --. Sacerdotes statim censentur hosts Ecclesi^ De Ver Scrip.
p. 460.
inueies against notorious and scandalous offenders, whether Bishops or Priests;
as notable Priests Sin^en much in avoutry Lib de 7. Peccat. 33. Praelati male
viuentes ^u^t Haeresiar^h^e vel Archi^haeretici. De Ver Scrip. p. 602. and 605.
Peccata Cleri causa ruinae regni. Ib. 473. Vehementer Eccle: siam. Christi
destruit me^iores esse Laicos qua^ Clericos. Ib page 423.
adulterers, or Fornicators, and guilty of any such crimes, as wherehence
offense and sca^dale might grow unto the Church of God; wishing that such,
continuing For Rectores Ecclesiae non sunt statim iudicandi lb. page 430.
such, and having Proposito quod sit form cator, vel alio notorio crimine
irretitus De Verit. Scr. 413.
thrice been warned thereof, by order and due form of Law, might be removed,
and better put in the place: because they were De Verit. Scr. page 368.
percussores fratrum, that living so in open sin did consecrate, or minister,
willing the people, not to partake with their sins, lest they should be ^f
they did any manner of ways seem to countenance or conceal the saults of so
notorious offenders in the Clergy.
partakers of there punishments; and in some such case, it might be, that God
might abhor the peoples Sacrifices, for the wicked Priests sakes, as he
threatened the Jews he would do, and this is a very dangerous opinion, is it not?

The 2. Objection.
Parsons in his 3. C^uers. page 488.
It is against Scripture, for any Ecclesiastical Ministers, to have any
temporal possessions at all.

The Answer.
THis accusation is without all peraduc^tu^es false. For what were the lands
and goods of Bishops, Cathedral Churches, or otherwise belonging to Religious
houses, which were given, Deo Regum and Regno^um est rimari radi^itus vtru^
eleemosynae quas contulerunt pauperibus secundum formam legis diuinae Legis
Ecclesiae sint expensae. De Verit. Script* page 466. Interest Regu^ and
aliorumrectificare eleemosynas progenitoru^ suoru^ lb. 466. Da^, Ecclesia talem
legem fi^ijs vel Nepotibus, ac honestioribus propinquis eius qui construxit vel
dotauit Ecclesiam lb. page 455.
and Ecclesiae, were they not The law of the Realm beholds the thing that is
given and pretended, that is i^ the thing, that is given, be of lands or goods,
the determination thereof, of right belongs in this Realm to the Kings
laws, whether it be in spiritual men or temporal, to the Church or to other,
De fundamentis Legum Angliae l. 1. c. 32. It. The goods of spiritual men be
Temporal in what manner soever they come to them, and must be ordered after the
Temporal law, as the goods of ^e^poral^ men must be lb.
Temporal, Possessions? And yet are rightfully held, according to VVickliffs
tenure, by Ecclesiastical Ministers; and long might they and peaceably enjoy
them for him, in as ample manner as ever they did, so long as they did see the^
well employed, according unto the will and purpose of the Donours, willing
nothing contratie to Gods words. I speak of Bishops lands, or lands of
Cathedral Churches* For as for the lands belonging to so Non credo, quod
grandis constructio Monasteriorum, and a dificiorum, velcumulatio Temporalium,
vnigeneri, alio nobiliori depauperato fortifi^ at Rempublicam; sed infirmat-
Quia (si non fallor) omnis tales dotationes generis Clericorum, omnes tales
impe^ta^^nes Caenobiorum-fiu^t ex turpi luc^o and questu illicito, Reipublicae
infectio. lb. alias dixi, quod minus malum fore t Vt ex propriata forent omnia
temporalia quibus Ecclesia Anglicana est dotata, vt exeis darentur stipendia
Lai^is l^teratis, necessari^ is ad officium Regis and Secula^ium dominorum. De
Verit. Scrip. page 465.
many Chauntries, Colleges, Abbayes, Friaries, Priories, Monasteries, and
other Religious Houses, he was absolutely of opinion, that it were great
piety, for Religious kings to dispossess them wholly of them, ^ and give them
gentifacienti iustitiam, to good and godly uses,^ and ^ would to God, this had
been in K. Henry the eighths mind, when he pulled down the Monasteries,
either to have turned them into Colleges, and nurseries for learning and
religion, into Hospitals, Almeshouses, Spittels, and such like religious
Maisons de Dieu, or which, though I mention last, yet considering the state of
the Church and the Policy of our adversaries, I should think fit with the
first to be reco^mended unto a Religious king, and virtuous Nobility, to the
maintenance of a College of writers, Collators, Comparers, and in brief such
a College, as might in short time, with good orders, be able to match and
perhaps overtop, all that rabble of Jesuited Colleges thoroughout Christendom.
Because I have ever been of VVicliffes mind, in this point, that Si quis
laborat in negotijs communibus. S Matris Ecclesiae, viuat de communi stipendio.
De Verit, Scrip. page 436.
those which are employed in common affairs of the Church should have public
maintenance and allowance. But the children of this world, are wiser then we,
Vt iugulent homines, surgunt de nocte Latrones, vt te^psum serves, Horatius ^
Cur Patres Londini haud edidistis? Posseuinus in Append. ad Apparatum.
non expergiscere? If the Devil be so ready to sow tares in our books, shall
not we be as ready to purge them out of our writings? should not we, be as
diligent, to restore, as they are to take away, from the the works of the
ancient Fathers? I speak this, to awaken my self and others, that we may
stir up these godly motions in the hearts of the people, if by any means it
may be brought to pass. Of the Cleargies promptnes and zeal to set forward
so public and profitable a business, which the necessities of the times, and
importunity of our adversaries do in a manner ^ call for at our hands, I
doubt not; but alas, they that should The livings of Bishops, and other Clergy
men, are so greatly impaired or pared rather, by I know not whose default.
help others, are scarcely able to mainetaine themselves and the outward
state and face of the Church (which unless it be maintained with some
Majesty, and reverence of the people will soon decay, and be disfigured) is
so clean changed, vt non cognoscas eandem esse: yet well fare the Papists for
mainetaining the outward discipline of their Church, though corrupted with much
impiety and blasphemy. They know, that it fares not with us, as it did with
the Christians, in the Primitive Church: we of the Clergy want the gift of
miracles, to draw the people unto us, and the people have not the gift of
charity, to draw us unto them: but this shall be my comfort, non simale nunc,
and olim sic erit.

The 3. Objection.
NO Prelate, ought to excommunicate any person, Parsonsin his 3. Conuers. p.
488. Part. 2.
except he know him first to be excommunicated by God.

The answer.
HEre I suppose the Read the answer of the. Venetia^s against Paul the 5. his
exco^municatio^
^ Venetians, will step forth, and and justify VVickliffes assertions: for (if
I be not deceived) they write the very same words. who knows not, that
excommunications as well as other Ecclesiastical ordinances, may be Patet quia
saepe excommunicantur multiimprouide Wickliffe refere^t Tho. Walls. page 302. He
spakechiefly against those excommunications which were thundered forth ad
impediendum homines audire verbum Dei. lb page 303.
abused by inferior officers; as Archdeacons, Officials, Chauncellors, and
Commissaries, yea and sometimes by Superiors, as Bishops, Archbishops, or the
Popes holiness. Some there are, and ever will be, that will corrupt the integrity
of the Church Discipline; with a varice, by ^lli tanquam pontifices, Scribae
and Pha risaei ne dum carnes sed ossa comedunt; non arida irrigant verbo dei;
sed secare and frangere sa tagunt medul losa. In Expos Decal. p, 130.
praying not only upon the flesh of there underlings, but even by breaking and
crushing the bones, by the thunder of there Excommunications: some by rashness,
proceeding, sine De Ver Scr. page 612.
debito examine, without due examination: some of Ad terrendu^ homines Laicos
In Expos. Decal. p. 123.
pride, to be feared of the people; whereas the greater Excommunication (for of
such I speak) should begin in Gods name, and end in his fear.

The 4. Objection.
Parsons in his 3. Conners. page 488.
SO long as a man is in deadly sin, he is nether Bishop, nor Prelate.

The Answer.
STill our adversaries play the notable Sophisters, First we will see the
occasion ministered unto him. of speaking these or the like words, then we will
consider the manner of speaking of them, and lastly consider the words
themselves, and the consequence or illation. The occasion given unto him, of
inueying so sharply and eagerly against the manifest and manifold abuses of the
wicked Prelates of the Church, was this. He lived in a very corrupt time, when
the tares had so far ouer-growne the good corn, that he stood doubtful where
to begin his reformation: whether with the head, or with the tail, with the
inferior sort of Clergy men, or with the Superiors: but he resolved with
himself in the end, that it was best to begin with the Prelates and Heads of
the Church, whom he saw as al ^he world besides, positos in maligno altogether
for the most part, set upon wickedness, admonishing them every where of their
duties, which they had so clean forgotten, that whereas the Holy Ghost had
made the^ overseers over the flock, they did as it were so many woolues, or
mastie curs, woorie them, or else fleese the^, nothing caring for to feed them,
by leading them into the pleasant pastures of Gods word; yea, as it may
appear by his writings) they did altogether They held that a Bishop needed
notto preach see Lib. de Verit. Scr^pt p. 331.
refuse to preach unto them, They pursue true men for preaching Christ's Gospel.
Lib. Misc. page 35.
persecuting and prosecuting the true Preachers of Gods word, and they did not
only offend them selves, but encouraged others of the inferior sort, to do the
like, by their wicked examples: De Verit. Scrip. p. 351 and in Expos. Decal p.
34.
giving Holy orders, unto men of unholy life, and unable for their skill and
knowledge to govern the people, committed to their charge, in peace and
godliness; bestowing their benefices for Ab ista sententia nimis coecatur:
Ecclesia, and Praela^i conferetes beneficia. De Verit. Scr. page
carnal respects, not for men's worthiness, or merits, defrauding the poor of
their alms. When he saw (^ say) this Canker or spiritual Gangrene, fretting
and festring the soundest parts of the Church, what could he do less then he
did? to exhort them, to t^ke away these scandals, our of church, to reform
these abuses. His words of exhortation (which is the 2. point, that we are to
observe) are these, mistaken by the adversary, for they are no other, then
such as are frequent in the works of the Holy Fathers; that Nomen non facit
Episcopu^ sed vita. De Verit. Scr. page 443.
it is not the name, but the life that makes a Bishop; that Quicunque nomine
tenus Sacerdos, vel Episcopus qui non compensat illi nomin^ipsius nominis
ratione^ non est ve^e Episcopus, vel Sacerdos. De Verit Script. page 443.
if a man have the name of a Prelat, and do not answer the reason thereof in
sincerity of doctrine, and integrity of life; but live scandalously and in
mortal sin, that he is but a nominetenus Sacerdos a Bishop or Priest in'name,
not in truth; but that hereby we should infer a contempt of the Clergy in
general, and condemn al Bishops and Prelates, is not the meaning (I am sure) of
John Wickliffe, if his He writes against them that will not honor their
Prelates. Lib. Mi^cel p. 260.
writings may be credited against their false surmises, and improbable
conjectures: Reformation is that which he sought, which God (evermore blessed
be his name) did afterward so establish in this kingdom, that the like
again, is not to be showed for discipline and doctrine, throughout all the
reformed Churches in Christendom; by taking away, not the things themselves (
Abusus non tollit rei v^um
for that were to cut down all the vines, for some few dro^ken men sakes) or as
the wise man speaks, to wring the nose of the Church too hard, till the blood
come again; but by taking away the abuses from the things* or from the
persons, which is the happiest kind of Reformation.

The 5. objection.
Parsons in his 3. Conuers. part 2. p. 488.
TEmporal Lords may according to their own wills and discretions, take away
the goods from any Church me^, whenever they offend.

The answer.
Who says so Father Parsons? Wicklyff, no, if you mean that the King, and
the 3. estates of this land, should take away the lands of Religious houses,
so generally offending, by misconuerting them to the maintenance of their
unnecessary orders, and wicked lives; J grant the proposition to be true, and
Hi traditores populi, milita^t cum host humani generis and proditorie i n
vestime it is ovium tra^ dunt exercitui Diaboli pop. Christianum: ideo tota
co^munitas in surgeret contra illos. In Expos. Decal. page 79.
according unto his meaning, urged in more then in one, or two places. The
Colleges of Moonks, were the Colleges that he speaks against, and the
Universities of Friars the Universities which he impugned. For otherwise he
himself passed thorough out all degrees in this famous University, not
without manifest and open proof of his learning, and reward of his industry:
(for he was both Scholar and fellow in Merton ColledgeMaster of Balliol Coll.
Vide Registru^ socioru^ Coll. Merton and Charta^ quanda^ Coll. Ball.
Scholar, Fellow, and Master in diverse Colleges, here in Oxford. Now as for
the p^blike revenues of Bishops, and the lands of Cathedral Churches; he
thought it might stand with equity, reason and law, Common, Civil, and
Canon, that whereas Christian Princes and Temporal Lords, were the Donours of
those large possessions, which they did give and assign to such Bishoprics,
or such Cathedral Churches, for the honor of God, the salvation of there own
souls; and the relief of the poorer sort, especially of the Clergy, they
should have Interest Regum and alioru^ rect ficare eleemo`ynas p ogenitoru^
suo^um De Ve^it. Script. page 466.
some interest in them to see them well bestowed. And who knows not, that the
king receives unto him self an For the chief Lordship in this land of al Te^
poraltiesboth of Secular me^ and Religious pertain to the King of his general
goue^ning. In Suppl. porrecta Parl page 10.
Homage in the one, and a right of Visitation in the other; if they offend
Triplex monitio debet praecedere, and post obstinatu^, no^ occupabit primatum.
De Ver. Scrip. page 431.
notoriously and scandalouslie, and after In defectu spiritualis praepositi
quodindubie no^ obu^at vlli legi.tbt 461.
lawful admonition will not redress the abuses of their lands, or reform the
wickedness of their manners, the King may by his Regaltie (as he proves very
strongly) punish the offenders, and take away their Men of the Church had. free
lice^ to trespass if the King might not be reaue their temporalties when they
sinneden greeuously-when lawful cause exciteth in Supplicad parl. page to.
Temporalties, by his Archbishops, or other Ministers, This Jurisdiction is
united to this imperial Crown, and which lawfully had been, or might be
exercised within the Realm. My L. Cook in his 5. book of Reports page 8.
and this is all that can be said against Wickliffe, in this point, all which
(as you see) is nothing, By the old custom of this Realm, al men great and
small, shall receive Justice in the Kings Court, and this custom is confirmed by
the Statut of Marleb. c. 1. De Fundam. legum Angliae. l. 1. c. 7.
but that which is most reasonable, just and conformeable unto the f Laws and
c^stomes of this land.

The 6. Objection.
Parsons in his 3. Conuers. page 488.
Tithes are mere alms, and may be detained by the Parishioners, and bestowed
where they will at their pleasures.

The Answer.
THat Tithes are mere Tithes giu^n by Title of spiritual alms Lib. de 7. pec.
Mort. page 25. De Verit. Scr p124, 196, 413
alms, he holds every where, it was his error: but that they may be
detained by the Parishioners, and bestowed where they will at their pleasures,
is ^o vnt^ue, as nothing in the world can be more. That Tithes are mere
alms, I say, it was his error. He trusted too much unto the Common Lawyers,
whose judgment he seems to follow in many things very commendably, as namely
in See before
defense of the Kings Ecclesiastical and Temporal power and Regalty. They hold(
See M. Carletons book of Tithes.
if I be not deceived) These opinions of theirs I find in the book de fu^d
legum Angliae That in the new law the paying of the tenth part is by a law,
that is made by the Church^ That Tithes are due by the law of nature -- that
spiritual men which minister unto the people spiritual things ought for their
ministration to have by the law of reason a competent living of the^ they
minister unto lb. p. 165
that Tithes were not due unto any particular Church, before the Council of
Lateran; but that men might bestow the^, where they would, and so Wickliffe
following them, said that within few years before his time, men paid their
Tithes and Offerings at their own free will, to good me^ and able, to great
worship of God, to profit and fairenes of Holy Church fighting on earth. but,
(with reverence be it spoken unto that honorable Profession, and under
reformation, of my opinion, if J think a miss) I am of the same opini^n, that
Master In Lib. de decimis.
Charlton a country man of ours and Hospinianus in Lib. de origin bonorum
Ecclesiasticorum. Cap. 3. page 123. Etsi leuiticum Sacerdotium abolitum sit, and
sacra legalia cessarint, manet tamen ministerium Euangelij, quod absq^
ministris ordinarijs non poterit consistere.
Hospinian a learned German does out of Antiquity maintain, as most consonant
unto the Analogy and proportion of Scripture; to wit^that^ Tithes, that is to
say the Tenth part, is, was, and ever more shall be due, unto the Priests and
Ministers of the Gospel, ante legem, in lege and post legem, before in, and
since the law, as the fitest ordinary means, for the maintenance of the
Clergy; else parishes being so unequally divided at the first, and
Impropriation^ founded in Popery, and continued in Protestancie, growing so
fast upon us, if the Minister should have noe more, but a tenth part (which is
his ordinary maintenance) the At Stratford of the Auen the Minister (as I am
informed) pays well nigh as much, if not more then he receaueth by reason of a
Chauntrie annexed unto the Church.
minister may reach unto them, the bread of life, and mean while starve
himself, for want of materialbread But to return unto John Wickliffe, and to
examine his opinion more strictly about Tithes or Alms, call the^ by what name
you please, for my particular I account them duties, and liuelode, and as the
Common Law calls them the Ministers freehold; to the great confusion of
Parsons, and all that wrangling Sect, I doubt not, but to demonstrate this point
very clearly unto you, that Wickliffe was as earnest, for the maintenance of
the Clergy, and as bitter an inveigher against al Scribit contra auferentes
predia Ecclesijssiue Reges, sieve alios; excipiu^tur tamen pie auferentes a
malis. De Ver Scrip p. 445.
Simoniacal Lay-Patrons, or Temporal Lords detaining the right of the Church
as any of them: Ad Parochianos pertinet in salu^em animae Decimas ac
oblationes idoneo ministrare. De Vet. Scrip. page 435.
that he tells the^ in express words, that it is in Salutem anim^, it is as
much as their soul is worth to pay their Tithes duly and truly, unto the
Parson; and that in case the people, standing, (as they do to this day, in
many places, too ill affected unto the Ministry) should either at their
pleasure, or upon displeasure^, with d^aw there Oportet Sacerdot^s Chri sti
subtrahere verbum Dei ab indispositis 2. si populus fuerit sic obstinatus and
inobediens S. matriEccle siae quod prohibeat vel no^ ministret vitae necessaria
suo Euangelistae. De. Ver. Scr. page 435.
temporal alms, he may with draw his spiritual alms from them. But perhaps you
will reply and say, Tithes are indeed to be paid unto good Ministers and
preachers, but what shall we pay them unto one, that we know to be a lewd
companion, a very varlet, an open drunkard, adulterer or Fornicator, or a
murderer of men's souls, as well as of their bodies? Yes verily, in VVickl^ffes
judgment, Proposito qnod sit fornicator vel alio noto^io crimine irretitus. De
Ver. Scrip. p. 413.
unless the fact be very notorious indeed, such lb. page 420.
as the people know per iudic^um operationis, by their lives and manners (
Laici non debent iudicare de vita vel opere praelatorum and hoc praelatorum
est. lb. page 420.
for it is not for them otherwise to judge their Minister) they have not
iudicium Iurisdictionis; and although they may judge their lives, yet they ma^e
not in any sort take away the Tithes quite and clea^e from the Church; but It
is lawful to parishioners to withhold their Tithes for open for. nication of
their Curate and turn the^ into better use. In suppl. ad parl. p. 14. His
meaning is this as he interprete^h him self in the same place; that if the
Priest be reproved of God for his sins (that is for great and open sins) he
should be put out of his office, and the Sacrifices shoulden not be youen to
him, but taken fro him, as God commands fro the high Priests Hely, and a
another true man walking in Gods ways, as did Samuel, should be ordained to
receaue^such Sacrifices. lb p. 12.
sequester the^, as it were for the next Incumbent in this wise. The party
delinquent is either so vicious a man of life or doctrine, as that there is no
hope of his amendme^t; or else he has committed some such fact, as wilful
murder, or Treason, whereby he is ip so facto depriuable in Law; or finally he
is one that seems to be corrigible: the two former are to be removed or
degraded the ministry, the later sort of offenders, are thus to be proceeded
against: Laici -- tenentur Praela^o prodere Clericum taliter criminosum De
Verit. Scrip. page 428.
complaint must be made unto the Ordinary, (after he has been Rect^tes
Ecclesiae non sunt statim iudicandi lb. page 430.
three times charitably informed, and admonished of his fault by the
Parishioners, and Deficiente correctione Praelati. ^b. page 430.
there follows no amendment) if the Ordinary refuse to punish, or wink at
his offenses, so scandalous unto the Church of God, the Mandentu^ Episcopo
castig andi lb. page 453.
Bishop of the Diocese, must be informed thereof: or if he refuse to give
satisfaction unto the Parishioners, the Archbishop must be interested in the
cause; and if Nusquam foret necesse Laicos Clerum corripere, si praelati plene
corriperent se and suos secu^dum regulam Scripturae De Verit. Scrip. page 456.
neither Ordinary, Bishop, nor Archbishop will right them, then may the Ad
sustinendum istam legem Ecclefiae ordinantur Reges and potentes in Sa^culo, vt
deficiente Clero ab eius completione, suppleatur per-brachium saeculare. lb. p.
4^9.
king by his royal authority, either in person, or by his Temporal Officers
and Ministers, hear Examination of ability and not ability being not taken
from the ordinary.-It shall be judged by the Kings Law, when a benefice shall be
said void and when not -- The King is Patron Paramo^t of all the benefices
within the Realm, and he is bound to see his subjects have right in that
behalf within the Realm and that in that case from him lies no appeal. De
fundam Legum Angliae 1. c. 36.
and determine the offense (though the offense be of that nature, that it
properly belong unto their conusance, by Reges nedum habcnt capitale dominium
super bona Pseudocler. sed and super corpus quia aliter non foret talis eius
homo ligeus lb. page 453. Debent punire tales notorios tanquam laicos, vel
amplius-aliter non haberent Reges in Regnis suis plenae pacis custodia^ lb.
page 453. else the King should not be able to do right to his subjects De
fundam. leg page 125.
punishing the offender either in body or goods. But as Wickliffe says, the
Au^erre a Clerico bo na fortunae est paena mitissima -- punire per charitatem,
per ablationem temporalium, vel dignitatis officij est puni^e misericor diter
citra dignum. De Ver. Scr. page 430.
mildest course is by taking away the tithes from him, not from the Church,
(for that were against his own rule) because ^b page 415.
Decimae praed^ales non debent subtrahi, cum ad Ecclesiam pertineant, in cuius
damnum, factum praepositi no^ redundat, lest many good Ministers should be
punished for one lewd Clergy man's fault. And this the The Kings Regaltie asks
by old statute, that the King may in many in case take Temporalties fro
Clarkscontra Frat mend. page 49.
King may do, ash proves very strongly, out of all the Patet in Sciptura
quomodo Domini Temporales habent potestatem ad rectifican dum Sacerdotium-quia
sapiens Solomon cum Sacerdote a Deo constitu^o ad regni sui stabilimentum
laudabili^er ita fecit multo magis in Nouo Testamento de Sacerdotibus Caesareis
Quo^ Reges and Principes ad cause Regnorum gubernacula ditaueru^t -- quia
principum est curare v^ omnes Sacerdotes sua ^fficia exequantur-secundum Leges
Regni, Iuris Ciuilis and Canonici alias rei De Ver Scrip. page 469.
laws that are, and by the example of the wisest king that ever rained. Now
because there ca^ be no smoke, without some fire, I will in a word or two
inform you of the ground of this their accusation, and how they were misled,
or Wickliffe mistaken in this point, and so dismiss our aged Father Parsons
with his threefolde, or rather manifold peruersions. Wickliffe in all his
books and treatises, does every where commend a kind of Ad hoc vadit tota mea
^ente^tia qua^ impugnant, vt viz. Cle^ici sint pauperes in facto, v^lin animo,
vel vtrinque^ and omnino quod cauea^ ab auaritia, and fastu seculi, cum alijs
malitijs quae sequu^tur De Ver. Scrip page 570. Qui perfect linquunt omnia
iudicabunt mundum. lb. page 512. De. mundi conte^ptu and pauper tate Euangelica
lb. p 196.
Evangelicall poverty, persuading Clergy men to renounce the vain pomp,
and glory of the world, and to lead (if it were possible) an Apostolical or
Evangelical life, to be content or Co^tra frat. mend. page
paid if we han lif elode and to be hiled with, that is, with food and
raiment, this estate to Priest (in those days unmarried) he Status pauperiei
^st status perfectissimus viatori InExpos. Decal. pag^ 50. Creuit Eccle sia
magis secundum pauperem statum De Verit. Script. page 465.
comme^deth as the better; yet he approved well enough of using the things of
this world, and he himself enioied Tithes, went De Verit. Scrip. p 192. Inter
alia peccata de quibus time^, hoc est vnum prae^puum, quod consumendo in
excessiuo victu and vestitu bona pauperum, deficio, dandum exemplum alijs. lb.
Quod aut co^ munem vitam viuendo frequenter auide and lau^e manduco dolenter
profiteor, cum si illud hypoc^itice simulate volue^e, testarentur contra me
socij commensales lb.
well apparelled, and kept a good table, of that which was his own. For I read
not of any great gifts that he had given him, of any man Temporal, Lord,
State or Potentate. Perhaps being so well acquainted with the Common Lawyers, he
was the likelier to keep his own. So that to conclude this point, he did not
Amor temporalium remouendus De Ver Scr. p. 462. Omnia mala introduct^ in
Ecclesiam per affectionem inordinatam temporalium. ^n Expos. Decal. page 150.
Omnes homines, debent praecise secundum mensuram illam vti bonis temporalibus
secundum quam promouent ad aeterna. De Ver Scrip. page 450.
actually debar Ministers from having, but from over much affecting the things
of this world, which were to be renounced per cogitationem and affectum, in
mind and affection: and so forsooth for urging this doctrine and taxing there
abuses, he was Accusantes pseudo Sacerdotes statim censen^ur hosts EcclesiaeDe
Verit. Scrip. page 460.
thought to be a sore enemy to all the Clergy, and a sharp inuaier against
Tithes. And thus much shall suffice for an answer unto all indifferent
Parsons, concerning Father Parsons lewd and frivolous objections: it remains
that we proceed to discuss and examine our Apologists reasons, which may
seem to some men more forcible, because there proofs are fetched from our own
writers for the most part: for that which is alleged as out of VVickliffes
works, I do shrewdly suspect to be verbatim taken out of VValde^, See both
their Prefaces and Protestations, and you shall find the^ alike true
which is as true in his reports of Wickliffe as Niceph^rus Callistus is in
his Ecclesiastical stories, both of them profess great sincerity in words,
and yet in deed have neither truth nor honesty in their words.

The 1. Objection of the Apologists.
Apol. Tr. 2. Cap. 2. p. 106.
HE seemed to contemn all Temporal goods, for the love of eternal riches,
adioined himself to the Begging Friars, approving their poverty, and
extolling their perfection.

The Answer.
HE did not only seem, but in effect as far forth, a^ became a sanctified
and regenerate man, did Certus su^ si vixero in confessione ^oru^ vsque ad
morte^ and habeam co^ summata^ con uersationem corresponde^tem quod relinquam
mun dum vel temporalia, per carnis and mu^ di crucifixionem. De Ver. Scrip. p.
188.
contemn all Temporal goods, and that for the only love of eternal riches.
This is a grievous imputation, or rather commendation, if you consider the duty
of Nemo excusatur ab hac paupertate De Ver. Scrip. page 516.
every good Christian, and the holy profession which he makes in Baptism. For
say, Wickliffe persuaded al other men to be as himself was, that did neither
He is most to praise that least sets by this world and perfectliest, loves
heaven. De. Ver. Scrip. page 346.
set, nor settle his affections upon 'the world, which preached against
Covetousness because he had heard S. Paul call it Idolatry; against an
inordinate and preposterous affection of the temporal things of this life,
because the Fathers and Scripture are against it, and what of all this? How many
Sermons, Epistles, 'and Postels of Jesuits and Friars are extant, which do
commend the same doctrine unto vs^, with exquisite and emphaticall persuasions,
allusions, and amplifications. So that hitherto we see, there is no harm done.
That which follows out of Stow the old, that he adioined himself to the
Begging Friars, is taken out of Walsingha^ which was Stowes Auctour, and
VVickliffes too great enemy to be believed. Master Stow, not to defraud him of
his just praise, was a paineful Citizen, by trade a Taylour, by his industry a
Chronicler, so well minded to the public good, that for fault of better
writers, he took upon him at the first to record such things as happened in
that Metropolis and chief City, and being somewhat encouraged in his labor,
he took upon him to deduce the History of the whole Island, from the first
beginning, and to contract al our stories into one small volume. But here his
learning failed him: for being not able M. Io. Stow a paineful writer, but not
so judicious, for want of the knowledge of the Latin tongue, whereof he was
utterly ignorant as himself ingenuously professed vntome and therefore was
compeled to have his latin books translated for him, to his exceeding great
cost and charges the greater was his co^mendations
to understand his Auctors, how should he judge them? And not judging them, how
could he write or cite any thing out of them, iudicioussie, pertinentlie, and
as became an Historian? I spare to speak, what I know, concerning his books;
his reverend old age, and incredible zeal to the common good, shall be to me
instead of so many garments, to cover his historical imperfections. But to
come to the point, thus our Apologists do reason; Master Stow out of his
translated Walsingha^ says that Wickliffe was of the order of the Begging
Friars, and Walsingha^ was a Liar, ergo Answer Cuius contrarium verum est, we
will believe Walsingham an other time for this trick. For he was so far from
ever being of that order, that never was East more distant from West, or black
opposite to white, then he was to their disordered orders. If you please not to
believe me, take your eyes in your hands, and read these two Viz. His complaint
to the Parliament, and his Treatise a against the orders of the begging F^i^rs.
Treatises, and then say who is the Liar.

2. Objection.
Apol Tr. 2. Cap. 2. p. 106.
HE held that Ecclesiastical Ministers should beg.

The Answer.
Answer as before Cuius contrarium verum est, he held that Ministers should
not beg. Since Io. Wickliffe against the orders of Friars Chap 5. p. ^24.
begging is damned by God, both in the Old and in the New Testament. Read
again the Printed wi^h this Apology
5. Chapter of his book, against the orders of Friars.

The 3. Objection.
HE condemned lawful oaths, savouring therein says Osiander of Anabaptisme.

The Answer.
I now see it verified of Lutherans and Protestants, and of all other writers,
Canus observes this out of Vopiscus.
which Vopiscus observed of Historians, nullum non Historicorum mentitum, that
the best historians by trusting other writers or reportets, may deliver an
Against their wills It is an other thing menti^i to lie and mendaciu^ dicere
to report a lie after another man the first al good men should obhor^e from the
second, the best cannot be fice
untruth now and then. Os^ander was a good Historian, but he never read
VVickliffes works; or if he had seen some of them, he saw not all. For in his
Latin Exposition upon the It is the 2. c^mmandement in his account.
third commandment, and his Scribit contra propositionem incompletam and pen
dulam, intelligendam cum sensu suo sinistro De Verit. Scrip. p. 282.
book of the Truth of the Scripture, he does plainly show the contrary^,
condemning only al Equivocal, amphibological, Vagae and per consequens falsae
propositiones. ^b. page 282.
mixed, and wandering propositions, whether with oath, or without oath, willing
men not for a Nemo menti^etur quocunque leu^ mendacio* pro saluatione vitae
propriae, vitae proximi, vel pro saluatione infinitotum mundo^um, vel alicuius
boni possibilis. De Ver. Scrip. page 242.
world of world^, or for the Non est mentiendum prosaluatione proximi. lb. page
264.
salvation of infinite souls to lie, that is to equivocate (as he interprets
it) much less to swear an untruth, that is to fortweare. His treatise against
De aequiuocis iuramentis and fallacibus vitandis. lb page 284 God teaches to
swear by him in need and not by his creatures. Contra Fra^rmend. page 55.
Equivocatio^, is a most profound, learned, and judicious work; and worthy to
be put in print, if it were an entire discourse of it self, where If he be the
Auctor of the Treatise tending to mit^ga^^^n de^guised by these Letters P.R.
which go as al his writings do the clean contrary way.
Parsons may see, that he has not so much as a small starting hole left, to
put his head in unsought or vnstopt.

The 4. Objection.
HE taught, that all things come to pass by absolute necessity.

The Answer.
I hope our Apologists need not to be sent back again to school, or to
their Schoolmen, to learn this distinction, that al things that shall be, be
in respect of God and his decree necessary, though in respect of us they be
not so, from whom the knowledge of Gods will, in this behalf, is purposely
hidden, because we should not disesteeme or neglect prayer, and other ordinary
means for our Salvation. He tells us, that Gods promises and threatenings are
Deus nemini promittit poenam vel premium, nisi sub condition tacita, vel
expressa De Ver Scrip. p. 383.
conditional, and that as God has appointed the end, so he has appointed the
means of our Salvation but notwithstanding this necessity, these are his very
words, In Expos. Decal. page 81.
qua^vis omnia futura de necessitate evenia^t; Deus tame^ vult quod bona servis
suis eveniant, per medium guo oratur.

The 5. Objection.
HE defended human merits, as the damnable Pelagian held them, in so much
that Melanchthon says accordingly of him. Verily he did not understand, nor
hold the justice of faith.

The Answer.
THis objection is taken for the former part out of Walden, for the later out
of Mela^chtho^, though I have clearly z demonstrated the negative out of his
own words: yet because the later part of the objection has more edge in it
then ordinary, because he seemed to have read some of VVickliffes works, for
answer to him, I say, that either he read some of his works which he made when
he was but Wickliffe wrote not two or three hundred volunes at one time, he
bettered himself by writing, as S. Austine confesses of him self scribendo
discens f^r bear. And therefore noe marvel if writing so much because as the
same Father says in multi loquio non deest falsiloquium, there be somthings
that at the first seem improper and exorbitant which are ^uspiciously set
down in the judgment of our writers, and are maliciously construed by the
adversary
newly converted, which might peradventure savor of folly, or of a bad
spirit; or else that he was cosened by some spurious and bastard Treatises,
which were broached in his name, and laid to his charge, an imputation, I could
f^ll a huge vo^ume with instances, in this point declaratorie of their old and
wonted impostures: but for the present, I will alleadg only the Treatise de
Cardinalibus Christi operibus, imputed to Cyprian, or one of his time, whereas
in the public Library at All-soules it is evident that Arnaldus
Bonauillacensis writ it who lived Anno Dom. 1160.
not proper to Wickliffe alone but common to him with many of the ancient
Fathers and Doctors of the Church.

The 6. Objection.
He taught a seditious doctrine, Apol. Tract, 2. Cap. 2. p. 107.
and mother of all rebellion, teaching that there is no civil Magistrate,
while he is in mortal sin, and that the people may at there pleasure correct
Princes, when they do offend.

The Answer.
IF Wickliffe do teach any such doctrine, he is utterly to be condemned by
our Church, and to be reformed in that point: but if they belie not his words,
he admonishes the king and all other inferior officers and Magistrates, as he
did Bishops erst while, that he bears not the sword in vain, or has his
office for naught, but to do the Damna^i su^t de iure polisi potestatem datam
e^s a Domino non exercent. De Verit. Scrip. page 456.
office of a king, well and truly, to see his Laws executed, and justice Kings
are bound to see their Subjects have right De fundam Legu^ Anglioe l. c. 36
sincerely administered; and if he happen to be defective in his duty, by
suffering the sword of justice to rust in the scabbard, and his people to
perish for want of government; then he tells him, that he is not properly and
truly a king, that is Perdens nomen officij and ordinis in effectu. lb. page
513.
in effect and operation, which words are spoken by way of exhortation: but so
far was he, from This crime of rebellion and treason, was objected unto him
in his life time De Ver. Scrip page 179. and p. 570. which he answers very
fully lb.
mutiny himself, or persuading others to rebellion, that I dare be bold to
speak it, that never any man of his rank, for the times wherein he lived, did
more stoutly and valiantly His maine argument is out of the common Law of this
land, quia a liter non haberent Reges in Regnis suis plenae pacis custodiam.
maintain the kings Supremacy, in all causes, as well as over al parsons
Ecclesiastical and civil, against al usurped Primacie, and foreign
Jurisdictions, and his maine reason was this, (to omit al others) else The King
should ^ot be able to do right to his subjects. De fundam legum, Angliae l. c.
36. He writes directly and plainly against those th at say Rex Angliae non est
Rex totius Angliae sed Regulus paruae partis super residuum vero mortificatum
est Papa Dominus -veruntamen non disputandum (inquiunt) de ista materia,
quousque ^uerit in effectu potentius stabilita sed tole^^ndae sunt iniuriae
Dominorum Secularium, quovsque arisent opportunitas temporis. ^b. page 424.
This he takes to be treason and against this he writes.
he should not be King over al England, but regulus parua partis a petty
governor of some small parts of the Realm. And as touching his He noted the^
of Treason in many points for giving our gold to Al^e^s, and ^omtimes our
enemies for enabling the Pope to fight with the King, with his owne^ money,
di^abling the King by ^eseruations, provisions, dispensations, Collations, and
prese^tations of so many barbarous ^ud e'and unlettered straingers, who never
saw ne came to see their parishioners. finally by threatening the King, that if
they might not have what they would they would go out of the land and come
again with bright heads And (as he'saies) look whether this be treason or no?
Contra Frat. mend. Cap. 27. page 45. page 358.
rebellious followers, and mutinous He that set the writing upon the d^re at
Paul's was one walter Disse a Friar Carmelite: therein he showed the abominable
lives of Sodomittie treason and murders of the Friars; he had preached the same
before in London and was ready to iusti^ie his accusation and therefore I see
little reason why it should be caled a Libel. Wa^sg page 358.
Libellers (if ever there were any such as the Apologists recite out of Stowes
Walsingham) I trust it is not imagined or looked for, that he should be better
attended on the^ Christ was, which had followers of al sorts; so^e which
followed him for bread; some to see the miracles that he did, some to take him
in his words and so it might fare with Wickliffe and his scholars. But (if I
be not deceived) the matter of rebellion and sedition is wholly mistaken, and
wrongfully imputed to Walsingham recitans opiniones haere^icas lo. Ball do^
uit, inquit, and peruer^a d^gmata pe^fidi lo. Wickl^ffe page 292. See the
Catholic diu^ne in his pretended answer to S Ed. Cook page 308.
John Wickliffe, out of whose works (I speak of as many, as have yet come
unto my hands) though you rack them to the worst there is not so much as the
least suspicion to be drawn of words tending to disloialty: but I read in
Froissard vol. 2 page 80 Y estoit vngfol prestre de la Conte de kent, qu^^
appelloit tehan ^alle, and pour les folles parolles ^l auo^^ este mys en p^^'on
devers l' larceu^^que de Cantorbie p^r ^rois fois lb. estoient bien soixante
m^lle, and avoientvng Souuerain Captain, qui^ appelloit Watre T^llier:
auecques luy estoient and de sa compaignie Jacques Straw, and Iehan Balle, lb.
p. 80.
Fraissard of one John Ball, one of Bals Priests for ought that I know, who
drew multitudes of people after him, and was the chief cause of that great
rebellion of the Commons, under the conduct of VVat Tyler; and Jack Straw,
which Il-preschoit and leur disoit Bonnes gens les chooses ne peuuent pas bien
aler ^ n Angleterre, ne yront iusques a tant, que biens yront tout d^ commun,
and quil ne sera ne villains ne gentil^ hommes, and que nous soio^s tous vniz
and que les. Seigneurs ne soient plus grans maistres, que nous etc. lb. Lan ^il
trois cens quatre xx and sept. lb.
taught this doctrine to condemn al Laws, despise the Clergy, and to rebel
against there Sovereign, because there was an equality of al men, and
communion of al things, which is pure Anabaptisme, or Diabolisme rather; and
because he lived about the time of Wickliffe, therefore this foul and
monstrous heresy is by a malicious kind of Vide Tho. Walsingham page 29^.
mistaking, laid to VVickliffes charge, which was as lo Ball seditionem
excitat, ad wickliffianorum inuidiam, ex illa secta and proditione prodijsse
quidam fingunt, falso equidem and ignoranter-Tunc sparsa Wicklefi doctrina-sed
vt in omni nouitate ac mutatione fierisolet, atque ho^iernis temporibus
factitatum est, nu^ciata luce Euangelij, and liberate Christiana, insana plebs
scelerum impunitatem and omnium in Ecclesia atque Rep, ordinum per^urbationem
sperat. Auctor Antiq Britannicarum page 2^9.
far from preaching any such doctrine, as they ^ are from any truth, sincerity
or ingenuity, that affirm it, as has been observed by one very judicious in
collecting the Antiquities of our Land.

The 7. Objection.
Apol. Tract. 2. Cap. 2. p. 108.
He was more given to scoffing, and prating, then became a sober Divine.

The Answer.
This fault was objected unto him in his life time, whereunto heshapeth this
modestand most Christian answer. Testis sit mihi Deus ego principaliter.
intendo honorem Dei and vtilitatem Ecclesiae, ex veneratione Scripturae and ex
obseruantia Legis Christi; quod si surrepserit cum ista intention sinistra
intentiovan^e gloriae, questus seculi, et zeli vindict^e, ego de h^c d^leo and
per dei gratia^ praecauebo. De Ver. Scr. p. 145.
God is my witness, that I principally intend his glory, and the weal of the
Church, by seeking to honor the Scripture, and observe Christ's Law: and if it
has, or shall so happen at any time, that with this good intent of mine, there
creep in, any sinister intent of vain glory, covetousnes of the world, or
desire of revenge, I am sorry for it, and will hereafter by Gods grace amend
that fault. What could be spoken more ingenuouslie, soberly or Christianly? But
were it true, that they say, yet were it not as true, that Clodius accusat
machos, Catilina Cethegum? they were Proprium est haereticis alios no^are huius
criminis cum deficiant argumentis lb. page 188.
guilty of the same, or worse crimes, for did he not Plus attendit hodiernus
dispu^ants vt adquisito ^ubtilitatis nomine videatur concludi respondenti quam
vt ad Dei gloria^ et v^ilitate^ Ecclesiae Dei gloria declaretur non sic ^ancti
Doctores De Ver Scrip page 15.
note the Divines of his time, for giving themselves to much to Ib. page 188
railing and scolding, more mevetricum ^orsethen Cot-queanes, and Verbalis
co^tentio est in doctrina Scripturae invtilis In Expos. Decal page 17.
to such brawlings of words as do inge^der nothing but strife, not tending to
edification, or if it Contentiones verbo^um non ae dificant nisi in Gehennam
Ib. page 135.
were it was but to edify men to Hell?

The 8. Objection.
IT appears by Master Fox, that Wickliffe was an usual dissembler of his
faith, Apol. Tract. 2. Cap. 2. p. 18.
and that to prevent danger of trouble, he did usually practice the same.

The Answer.
HE was so far resolved in the cause of Religion, that he was ready to Non
sum suspect^s de formidine istaru^ conclusionum patebit per Dei gratiam quod
non timeo responde re sibi and suis complicibus, vel in facie, vel, in scholis
De Ver Scrip page 183. It quod si deus dederit mihi cor docile, perseuerante^
constantiam, and ^ha^i^atem ad Christum, ^d eius Ecclesiam, and ad me^ bra
Diaboli Ecclesia^ Christi lani antia, and vt p^ra cha ritate ipsos corripiam,
quam gloriosa causa foret mihi presentem miseriam finiendi? Ib. page 380
die almost for every Article of Religion, that he maintained against them,
and so constant and professed an enemy to al disfe^blets and Equivocators,
that therefore he professes of himself, that he treated that point more
largely, because he took^ himself to be wronged in the highest degree, to have
this Vide Walsingham page 206.
imputatio^ laid unto him, as to be called De Ver. Scrip. Cap. 13.
Magister Aequivocoru^ Aequivocatorum and Aequiuocoru^ Aequivoca^tiu^. And he
did not only think himself happy (if it should so have pleased God to Volo in
Scriptis dare sententiam ex qua imp^titus sum quam volo vsque ad mortem
defendere, sicut credo omnes Christianos debere Walls. page 206. lb. page 518.
He was so constant in the defense of the truth which he taught ita vt cano
placeret quod iuu^ni complacebat Walden To. 2. page 270
die for religion) but he persuaded others to the like martyrdo^e, showing,
that in the cause of faith, there is no dissimulatio^ to be allowed. Finally,
the words I confess are in Fox, but not Foxes. For he had them from Liar Hoc
eodem modo, idem versipellis I. Wickliffe delusit suos examinatores, viz ponen
do inte lectum in suis nesandis propositionibus walls. p. 209. Memo^atus
hypocrita. lb. Vide Martyrol. Fox. page 433.
Walsingham, he is but the reporter, and you might have had his judgment of al
such writers, that he thought they did him The said Articles of his are nether
in number so many, nor yet in nature so gross, as those Cardinal enemies of
Christ perchance do give them out to be: if his books whom they abolished or
rather thought they had abolished were remaining to be conferred with those
blemishes which hey have wrasted to the worse, a^ evil will never said the best.
lb. page 424.
much wrong, by such imputations, as would easily have appeared, if his works
were at this day extant (as thanks be to God many of them are, and more may
happen to be discovered in good time) to convince his conjectures) to be more
then probably true, and there assertions to be more then coniecturatiuely false.

The 9. Objection.
HE invaied against the Church, for that he had been deprived by the Archbishop
of Canterbury, Apol. Tract. ^. Cap. 2. p. 105.
from a certain benefice.

The Answer.
WHere was that benefice? say in Oxford, and because he was deprived of that
benefice, he wrote against the Church: by the like reason, because he was
preferred to an other benefice ia Lecester-shire, where he died, therefore he
should not have inuaied against the Church, the argument is Topical. But our
Apologists have not framed their accusation aright, they shall do well to mende
their bill, and to say, that he inuaied against the Church, because he was
deprived of Ex Chron. D. Albani vide Fox page 425.
his benefice, against Colleges because himself could not get to be Mat.
Parkerus Arch: lib. Antiquitat. Britann. page 258. ex alijs.
head of a College, against Creditur Wickliff dixisse contra Episcopo^, quia
vt dixit Rob. Saresburiensis Episcopus in Magna Synodo Cantuar Cleri, Vigor
niensis Episco patum non a^^ecutus suerat quem optauit. Walden. To. 1. page 326.
Bishops because he could not get the Bishopric of Worcester: Here are three
crimes objected against one man, and verily I think one as true as the other:
for though he ever held a reverend opiuion of Bishops and Prelates, as there
was reason why he should, touching only the The greatest fault which he found
with the Clergy, was for admitting or instituting insufficient men in livings,
such as were rudes and barbari Transmarini, the number where of upon
Certificate made was many. Episcopus propter nullum bonum p^ssibile, obediret
etiam papae, preficiendo ineptum Ecclesiae, vel minus idoneum De Ver. Scr. page
342.
faults of the diseased Clergy, which were then as sick as ever Rome was,
neither able any longer to endure the malady, nor the remedy^ yet I would
gladly have the proof of these things confirmed unto me, by any Auctor, save
a Moonke or a Friar, and then it may be I shall believe it; though if ever a
Religious Clarks Protestation, were to be credited, he protests that he
did, as near as ever he could, both write, and speak and do al things De
Verit. Scrip. p. 145. and page 15.
ad honore^ Dei and vtilitatem Ecclesiae, for the glory of God and the benefit
of his Church, which words he often repeateth, speaking them as became a
professed Divine with Far from that unjust imputation of Walden, that he did
simplici duplicitate and duplici simplicitate, animos hominum tra^^ formare. To
3 page 14.
singlenes of heart, and simplicity of mind, far from al damnable hypocrisy
and dissimulation.

The 10. and 11. Objections.
MOst blasphemously, he affirmed that every Creature was God, and again that
^od could not choose, but obey the Devil.

The Answer.
Bellar. in Praefat. Gretser. in defens. page 8.
THese objections are taken from Bellarmine and some other Jesuits, and it was
wonder they did escape both our Apologists and Father Parsons; but belike they
did not think them to be true, else doubtless they would have urged them: For
answer whereunto, it seems unto me, that the former objection does assoile
the latter, for holding that every Creature was God, belike he distinguished
the term God, into God absolutely spoken, and God cum signo, or adiectione
Dei acceptio duplex -- absolute. Dominus Dominorum; quando contrahiturvel
specifi^atur, per signum detrah^ns, sig nificat quodcunque bonum quod quis plus
diligit. In. Ex. p of Dec. p. 46.
with a sign or addition, and so in truth he does; and in this sense it might
be true, that such a made God, might of its own nature, being (as all
reasonable Creatures are) sin^ul, should obey the Devil: but I will not play the
Sophister. He had a more deep, profound, Theological or Omnes veritates leges
in essentia diuina, sicutomni^a sunt Deus. lb. page 21. Deus est mandatum quod
praecipit lb 4 Omnis res secu^dum esse intelligibile est Deus.
Me^aphysicalspeculatio^ about this matter, which was plainly de^iuered in his
book de Ideis, which book is not yet come unto my hands, and therefore I cannot
answer the objection, otherwise then he does himself, by vt d^ctum est in
materia de Ideis lb 21.
referring you unto that Materiae de vniuersalibus su^t ta^ necessa riae quod
sine earum notitia nemo fit sapiens lb page 29.
learned book of his. The doctrine I am persuaded in his understanding is found
and true, though not fit to be uttered before the people, and though I do
rather admire then conceive it, and do therefore choose rather wholy^ to omit
it^ for a season, then imperfectly to deliver it: yet I cannot omit to give him
this ^estimony, that about the nature, persons, and properties of God, about
the matter of Predestination, Prescience, or Providence, he is most religiously
and piouslie affected, quo magis miror and therefore I cannot but wonder, that
he should run into so Asthey charg him with.
monstrous and soul absurdities. But to leave this, and to answer that alike
monstrous, but more blasphemous objection, that God must needs obey the
Devil, which scarce any Devil of Hell would dare to utter, I know not whence
they have taken this objection, which has no color nor ground in the world in
it, unless it be out of these words of his, which I profess are his, and well
they may be, that because he says, that Com in Psalm page 155.
God is a great king above all his Creatures, that lb. page 48.
all Creatures are made by God to serve him, that the lb page 112.
Devil is clepid Gods Angel, for he may do nothing but at Gods suffering,
that he serves God in tormenting of sinfullmen; that Ib. page 468.
Christ is Victor of the Devil, and lb. page 93.
helps us against the ^iend: thence belike our Jesuits Of this inference a
man may say as Walden did sometimes of an illation of Wickliffes si deductio
ista scintillam habet ingenij, quid sit ingeniu^ hominis no^ noui To. 3. p. 56.
infer, that God must needs obey the Devil. A good wit I confess, may go far,
and such have our Jesuits, or else they greatly belie one another, but I doubt
whether ever they shall be able to infer so foul and irreligious a Conclusion:
out of so fair and religious premises.

The Conclusion.
THus having showed and proved unto you, that this same John Wickliffe, a man
so much spoken against by all sorts of men is so innocent and free from al there
foul heresies and monstrons absurdities, that he has rather declared
himself, to be a Co^formitan unto the doctrine, and discipline of the Church
of England: or rather, that the Church of England at this day, sincerely
professing the Gospel, does teach and preach no new Doctrine, as our Apologists
would have you to believe; but the^ very same doctrine, which was many hundred
years ago retained and maintained here in England, by sundry learned Divines,
and embraced gladly by all Fuerunt eo te^pore and plures alij huius nefandae
doctrinae sequaces and discipuli non in quibuscunque villis aut Ciuitatibus sed
in ipsa Vniuersitate Oxoniae Wal^ page 305 He might have added and in the
University not the meanest but the Chancellor and Proctors and sundry others
as appears by records. Longelatque per^patrias populum maculando suam
predi^ationem dilatauit, ita ut poenema iores prouinciarum little sequerentur
errorem, Walls. page 281. In fide and fide^ articulis plurimi claudicabant ^b
Visus est absorbere ^ordanem and omnes Christianos mergere in Abyssum. lb. page
256 Dixit public et ptaedicauit. Rectoribus Ecclesiarum non valentibus
prohibere cum ob fauorem popalarem qui libentissime cum audiebant, and le
peri^ulo mallebant exponere, antequa^^vel prohiberetur praedicare. Walls. page
304.
of al sorts, Noblemen, Gentlemen, Clergy men, Lay men, men, and women: which
though it were then challenged for a new doctrine, as was sometimes Christ and
his Apostles; yet both it was the very same doctrine, which was from the
beginning, and shall be unto the end of the world, as he himself sometimes Si in
hoe sim Catholicus su^ cerius -- quod sententia qua^ tenco per organa Dei vel
ante aduentu^ Antichrist^, vel postea defendetur, quia super omnia vincit
veritas verbi Deivt dicitur 3. ^^drae De Ver. Scrip. p. 200.
prophesied, and the Popish doctrine to be convicted of plain nouelty, and
newnes, by almost the very same reasons and arguments which our Protestant
writers do now enforce against them, and therefore no marvel, though the
Papists now a days, notwithstanding there prete^ced and usurped notes of
Antiquity, Universality and Iknow not what else, do begin to think upon a
course, how either to abolish all ancient written books out of o ur Libraries,
or else to banish al ancient truth out of their books, by their new inverted
Purgatory of books, which I may be bold to speak it, has done far more
pain to Christendom within these 40. or 50. years, then their fire of
Purgatory has done since the time of its first being: a very lewd and damned
course, and which if it should not please God, and that speedely to stir up
the hearts of Godly Princes, Religious Clarks, and rich Seculars to emploie some
learned and paineful students, in discovery the mysteries of this their
damnable art of corrupting al manner of good writers, either profane, or
divine, under color of correcting the^^ in process of time, the Jesuits sole
Actors of al lewd parts, by printing and reprinting the Fathers works, so often
as they are like to do, in goodly paper, fair letters, and glorious
annotations, whereby they have bewitched the whole world, will in all
likelihoods, by their, more the^ Syrenical enchantments, Circean sorceries and
Diabolical charms, make al writers both new and old to speak wholly for
them; and when they have so filed and framed them unto their purposes, and made
them speak nothing, but the language of Ashdad, the^ be assured, ^ura,
^eriura, secretu^ prodere noli, that they will swear, and forswear their Index
Expurgatoriusses, deny there College of Censors, and make the world believe,
there was never any such thing, for fear least they should rise up in
judgment against them, to convince them of so many wilful forgeries,
treacheries, and foul corruptions, by way of addition, detraction,
opposition; and that you may know them to be cunning Arithmetitians, by their
so often v^ed Rule of falsehood. But my hope and trust is in the good grace of
the Almighty, that the learned and judicious Clergy of this land, which are
most interested in this business, will amidst their sundry and weighty affairs
of the Church, in that there Reverend assembly in Convocation, take some speedy
course, against this damned crew, and execrable College of Censors, for
preventing of farther mischiefs, which are likely to ensue. There is no
country in all Christendom, where the Gospel is sincerely professed, which
has the like opportunity of effecting this business; such and so many are our
written copies, commended as God would have it, by the mouths of our
adversaries, so great the number of judicious and paineful students, that would
account themselves happy, if they might be employed in transcribing, or
comparing the books of the ancient writers. In fine God has put the occasion
into our hands, the days are hitherto peaceable, and quiet, and long may they
so continue, the king Religious and learned, the Noble me^ and Diverse
gentlemen of good mark, have offered large sums to the effecting hereof.
Nobility and gentry willing and forward, our enemies audacious and bold, the
The charges would not co^^ to 200^ per annum.
charges not great, scarce to be spoken of, the time not long, within the which
it might be It may be fully finished within 4. or 5^ years; if this were once
done our con trouersies would have an easier end.
fully finished, the Glory Gods, the benefit his Church, both which I have,
do, and will for ever seek unfeignedly, according unto my place, duty, and
profession.

Deo soli sit gloria.
John Wickliffe life collected out of diverse Auctors.
THis John Wickliffe was borne in the North, where unto this day, some of his
name and family (as I understand by others) do yet remain: brought up in
Oxford in that Merton Coll.
College which has justly had the pre-eminence above all the Colleges, and
most of the Universities in Christendom, for the number, and excellency of men
learned in all faculties, qualified with extraordinary gifts, both for Church
and Commonwealth: such as were, (to omit other Faculties) in Divinity, Bacon,
Burley, Scotus, Occham, Peccham, Bradwardine, with diverse others^ and by
example of these, as well as by the strict Discipline of that House, this Io.
Wickliffe, nothing inferior unto any of the former, either in quicknes of
apprehension, sharpnes of wit, shortness of delivery, greatness of industry,
stoutnes of courage, and variety of all kind of good learning; and above them
all in a full knowledge of the truth of the Gospel, and constant defense of the
same, unto the end: amidst so many troubles, vexations, accusations,
imputations and c^lumniations so many denunciations, exco^munications,
Anathemaes and Curses solemnly pronou^nced against him, at London, and at
Oxford, by Archbishops, Bishops, and Popes; so that he was never free from
their curses, which God (evermore blessed be his name) turned into blessings,
as may appear, by the sequeale of his life and doctrine. He was beloved of all
good men for his good life, and greatly admired of his greatest adversaries,
for his learning and knowledge, both in Divinity and humanity. He writ so many
large volumes in both, as it is almost incredible, He seemed to follow, in the
whole course of his studies the method of the School men: and amongst them
he was a professed follower of Occham; by reading of whose learned books, and
sundry others which lived about the same time, or not long before; such as were
Bradwardine, Marsilius, Guide S. Amore, Abelardus, Armachanus, and that true
great Clearke Rob. Grosthead. God gave him grace, to see the truth of his
Gospel, and by seeing of it, to loath all superstition and Popery. Of Occham,
and Marsilius, he was informed of the Popes intrusions and usurpations upon
kings, their Crowns and dignities: of Gu. de S. Amore, and Armachanus, he
learned the sundry abuses of Moonkes and Friars, in upholding this usurped
power: by Abelard and others he was grounded in the right faith of the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, by Bradwardine, in the nature of a true
sole-iustifying faith, against merit-mongers and Pardoners, Pelagians, and
Papists. Finally by reading Grostheads works, in who^ he seemed to be most
conversant he descried the Pope to be open Antichrist, by letting the Gospel
to be preached, and by placing unable and unfit men in the Church of God. He
passed thorough al degrees in this famous University very commendably, writing
and speaking many things against the then corrupted doctrine of the Church of
Rome. His many Positions were chiefly directed against the Orders of the
Begging Friars, which were his professed enemies, and all foreign and v^urped
Jurisdiction of the Pope. By which means he purchased unto himself the favor
of all good men. The reason was this; he li^ed in a time, when the Friars
orders, by their manifold disorders were become exceeding odious, and the Popes
Jurisdiction by Provisions, Reservations, and Collations very intolerable. This
made way unto those excellent Statutes Laws and Acts of Parliament of
Praemunire, against Pr^visors, and the Abuses of Begging Friars, which so
bridled and restrained the Popes auctority that he could but little prevail
here in England during the reign of K. Edw. the 3. and Rich. the 2. In making
of these laws Wickliffe had a great stroke, maintaining very learnedly and
stoutly the Kings Jurisdiction, Crown, and dignity, by the laws Civil Canon
and Common. And for this reason he was by one King sent Ambassador into
foreign parts, and by an other consulted here at home. He urged the Common law
most of al other laws for maintenance of his opinion, wherein he took great
delight, and had good directions from time to time from the reverend Judges and
Sages of the law. He was not so much hated of the Clergy, but he was as much
favored by the State Temporal. He was openly defended by King Edward and that
noble Duke of Lane aster, and secretly abetted and maintained by King Richard
whose Chaplain he appeared to have been, notwithstanding he showed him but
little countenance outwardly during his minority. Twice was he conue^ted
before the By shops, and thrice summoned to appear. The first time he escaped
by the Duke, the second time by means of a messenger that came from the
Queen. The third time he voluntarily abse^ted himself, because he knew the
Bishops had plotted his death by the way, devising the means and encouraging
men thereunto. Notwithstanding al their devises and plotts, he lived a long
time without death, bonds, banishment or imprisonment, both writing, teaching,
and preaching, openly in their Schools and Synagogues, drawing both Prince and
people, Scholars and others, and all the world almost after him. He begun to
defend his opinions when he was very young, and continued tell he was very
old, constantly retaining and maintaining the same, some few excepted which he
reformed; and refined more and more, as he grew in years and knowledge. He was
Doctor of Divinity almost 30. years, and for some few years Parson of
Lutterworth in L^cester-she^re. He had sometimes before been fellow of Marton,
and Master of Ballioll College and (as some write) beneficed in Oxford. He
began to be famous, about the year of our Lord 1360. and died in the year of
grace 1387. in high favor both with God and men. In his life time. ^ find but
of one or two that wrote against him, which also demeaned themselves very
respectfully, and as became Divines. But after his death many, I may say, the
whole host and ^ost of Moonks and Friars began to pray most cowardly upon
his dead corpse, disgo^ging to pray macks and the very gaul of bitterness
against his parson and doctrine. But amongst al others, Frear Walden, has both
sha^fully and wrongfully belied him in sundry passages of his works; as partly
does appear by my Apology, and farther (God willing) shall be manifested,
against all such as shall avouch the conrarie.

FINIS.

