THE CHRISTIANS APPARELLING BY CHRIST.

Where is showed in three parts: 1. The Happiness, Honor, and comfortable
estate of all true Christians: with the wretched estate of all others. 2. The
Duty it self, with particular Directions. 3. The Trial and Examination of
our selves by distinctiue Notes.


By R. I. B. D.

Romans 13.14. Put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ.

LONDON, Printed by A. M. and I. N. for John Brown, and are to be sold at the
Sign of the Crane in Paul's Churchyard. 1625.

(...) were when they sinned) we, the children of Adam, are stripped and made
naked of the Righteousness and Innocence of our creation, and clothed only
with the shame of our own nakedness and sin, Actual and Personal, as well
as Original; and in regard thereof liable and subject to be clothed eternally
with shame and confusion of face: Our chief or only Care should therefore be,
to get this reproach and shame done away, this nakedness covered, and our
selves clothed and fenced against the wrath and vengeance of the Almighty Lord
God, under whose displeasure we all remain, whilst we continue in this
estate of Nature.

And as this should be our chief Care, so our only Comfort; and heau^^ upon
earth will be, (...) know and find our selves, by a wise judging and trying
of our selves, to be in this happy, honorable, and joyful estate.

Now, blessed be God, who has not debarred us of this hope (otherwise in and
of our selves both helpelesse and hopeless) but has given us both his Son
with his Righteousness, to be a covering to our nakedness, and a covert and
shelter against his wrath; and also his Word and Gospel, whereby we might not
only be made effectually partakers of these his benefits, but also be
certified and assured of so much.

Yet such is the Sloth and Negligence, Ignorance and Inabilitie, Self-love and
Selfe-pride, which reigns in most men, that being disaffected to this most
necessary labor of gaining Christ, they either through Sloth will not, or
through Ignorance and Inabilitie cannot undertake it; Besides, such is their
Self-love and Pride, and ouer-weening conceits of themselves, that they
readily and usually mistake their own estate, and conceive better of it then
they have cause; resting only either in a bare profession of Christianity,
and in the name of Christians, (as do the profane sort:) or in a mere formal
and liuelesse practice of Christian duties, without any power of godliness
imprinted in their hearts, or expressed in their lives, (as do the ordinary
sort of Christians:) who, if to their outward conformities and seeming
holiness they can, by plausible and fair carriage win the approbation and
applause of the most, then are they the only Christians; and all others (that
labor indeed to be what they would seem to be) hypocrites and dissemblers.

Now, Right Worshipful, for my part, as I, from my very soul, hate in my
self, all hypocrisy, especially that which is against Conscience, and in my
Judgment, and somewhat also in my affections and endeavors, prefer with
Saint Paul, the gayning of Christ, and my being found in his righteousness,
(as in a garment) before all worldly pomp, pride, pelf, pleasure and
preferment: So is it, and so has it been my chief care, in my Ministry, to
preach Christ soundly to my hearers, and to plant in their hearts the true and
saving knowledge of him, and that in all Sincerity.

To which end, I have now lately (besides other Arguments in hand) dispatched
this ensuing Discourse concerning The Christians Apparelling by Christ: wherein
I have indeauoured, first, by Motives, (after the Explication and true meaning
of the words) to excite and stir up the Slothful to put on Christ. Secondly,
by laying down Means, to direct, and (with Gods grace) the better to inform
and enable the ignorant and weak Christian so to do. Thirdly, and chiefly,
by Marks, (because all is nothing without sincerity) to assure and certify
the godly Christian of his happy estate in Christ, by which trialls he may
better be assured that his pains and labor in so weighty a business, is
not bestowed in vain; as also the hypocrisy of the unsound may be discovered.

These my pains, I doubt not, but with Gods blessing, they by the eye may add
to the profit of those who originally were partakers of them by the ear; so
they may be useful also to others; which is the end why I make them so
public.

Now Sir, that I prefixe your Name hereunto; you must give me leave hereby
to testify, and publish to the whole world, first, what respect and
thankfulness I owe you principally, on the behalf of the Church of of God,
and Gospel of Christ, for that good will and favor you bear and show
thereunto; as also, and especially, to God for his good Providence in calling
you, in these needful times, to sit at the stern of this our Ship, and little
Commonweal. The poor shall also bless God for you, who stirred up your heart
to care for them, and so wisely and bountifully, with the Assistance and
Allowance of your Right Worthy, and Worshipful Brethren, to dispose of great
part of that Treasure, wherewith (for many other godly and necessary uses) God
has blessed your Treasury.

What interest you have in me particularly, and what, and how many are the
Engagements wherein I stand bound unto you, in respect of private favors and
courtesies, I choose rather thus generally, only to intimate and acknowledge,
then particularly to relate to the world. Herein, (as also in your worthy
deseruings, in regard of the public, both Church and Commonwealth) I know you
will be better pleased with my silence, then with any larger mention of them, as
desiring rather to be, then to be known to be worthy.

The Lord bless this ensuing Treatise to your use, and to the use of his
Church. Amen.

From my house in Newcastle upon Tine, May 5. 1624. Your Worships in the bonds,
as of blood, so of all love, respect, and duty. Robert Ienison.

To the Christian READER.
THe glory of the understanding Creature, is communion with his Maker, and
likeness unto him; this Adam, when he came new out of Gods hands, had, and
inioyed, until by his fall he, and we, Romans 3.23.
in him were deprived of the glory of God; whereupon it is said, they knew
themselves naked; Genesis 3.7.
naked indeed, not only in body, but in soul, stripped of that blessed Image,
whereby they represented their Creator, especially in holiness; whereupon God if
he had not regarded his own mercy more then their desert, might have turned
them and their posterity naked into hell. But our gracious God, intending the
glory of his mercy above all other attributes, and willing to be known in his
Church by that name of grace mercy, goodness, etc. above all other names, sent
his Son clothed with our nature, that we might again be partakers of the
divine nature. God became one with us, that we might be made one with him, and
has enriched our nature with all grace, by marrying it to himself, that so
he might conform his mystical body (his Church) to his own blessed soul
and body in all holiness, in that measure he has thought fit: only it is
necessary for us to see the beggary we are borne in, having not a rag of
saving goodness to hang upon us to cover our shame, that so we might be forced
to get into Christ, and out of the rich wardrope of his obedience, be furnished
with such Robes, as might not only cover our nakedness, but likewise adorn us
and set us out to the liking of our Savior, that he may take pleasure in our
beauty, and might be armor likewise unto us to stand out against all inward
and outward oppositions: Him God has made the public treasury of the Church,
in him all fullness dwells, that out of it we might receive grace answerable to
the grace in him; resembling him, John 1.16.
not as an Image does a man in the outward lineaments only, but as a son does
his father in nature and disposition: Esai. 9.6.
he is the Father of eternity, to whom we must be like in holiness, as we
desire to be like him in happiness, and can we more desire to be like any,
then him by whom we look to be saved? We see men study the dispositions of
those they hope to rise by, and carnal men cast themselves into the mould of
the times, fashioning their opinions, language and demeanor to the liking of
those they hope to be advanced by: but a Christian is of a higher and more
noble breed, and knows the worlds fashion to be the basest fashion, and
cross to the liking of the Father; John 2.15.
he knows that he is predestinate to be like to Christ, unto whose image
now we are conformed, and not to the image of the first Adam. Romans 8.29.
He knows that whatsoever good is in us, is first in Christ, John 17.19
who therefore sanctified himself, that we might be holy; and therefore he
indeauoreth nearer union and communion with him, and labors to put him on
First, in Justification, that so being clothed with garments of our older
brother, we, may find grace in our Fathers sight, and stand upright before
God in him, who is made of his Father righteousness unto us, 1 Cor. 1.30. And
we take him as offered of the Father to us by the hand of a particular faith;
for Christ profits not, as considered in the broad cloth (if we may so
speak) but as suited and fitted to us by the applying hand of Faith. And
because whosoever is in Christ, is a new creature; therefore he aymeth in the
second place, to put Christ on in Spirit and conversation, to be like minded
unto him in meekenes and humility, (as who can be proud, when he believes
God was abased for him?) and to put on the same bowels of love and mercy, to
count it his meat and drink to do Gods will, as he did, going about doing
all the good he could, and often considers with himself what affections and
intentions his Savior would have upon such and such occasions, what he would
do if he were on the earth, and what he did in the days of his flesh, and
unto this pattern he fashioneth his carriage: this accompanies the former; for
none are clothed with his Righteousness, but are likewise clothed with his
Spirit. Therefore our adversaries wittingly slander us, when they enforce upon
us such conceits, as if we severed the imputed righteousness of Christ from
the inward work of sanctification, and made a justified man, like the devil,
appearing as an Angel of light; and like a Blackamore covered with a white
linen garment. No, not so, we know that as Christ saves his Church, so he
purges it, that he may present it to himself a glorious Church. And as he
performed the Law for us; Ephesians. 5.20
so will he perform it in us. By looking with the eye of faith on his
wonderful love to us, discovered in the Gospel, we are tra^sformed from glory
to glory, from one degree of grace to another. 2 Cor. 4.18.
It is impossible that that soul that ever felt peace and joy, by the
satisfaction and obedience of Christ for us, but with co^ceiuing Christ thus
loving and grcious in his heart, he should have the Impression of these graces
that are in our blessed Savior. In what heart soever he is conceived in, he
fashioneth it always like to himself. Indeed those loose professors that are
led with the spirit of the world, and have little of Christianity in them but
Baptism, suppose a Sacramental putting on of Christ (with a powerless
profession, which they may take up, and lay aside at their pleasure as they do
their garments) to be enough: but the true learning of Christ is a deeper
matter then so, there must be an endeavor to put off our whole selves, and
have nothing in us of our own, but what we think, desire, speak, or do,
should ever savor of the spirit of Christ; which who wants is none of his,
and by the which whosoever is endued with virtue from above, it will raise his
soul above it self, and make it firm and impregnable against all
temptations, either on the right hand or the left, and carry it strongly
through all duties. A mere humane spirit can neither do or suffer any thing:
but he that is clothed with a more excellent spirit then his own, is more
then a man, and in Christ can do all things that are required in the covenant
of grace. Phil. 4.13.
How should this sharpen our desires of being more and more filled with the
fullness of Christ? especially, considering we must all lay aside these
garments of our bodies in the dust, and appear shortly before him; and then he
will own none for his, but such as bear his Image: A fearful thing it will
be to be found in his case that is not found in Christ; that has nothing of
Christ in him: for the pure eyes of God cannot look on him, but as an object of
his wrath, and fuel of his vengeance, which will borne to hell.

As we desire to hold up our heads with joy, and not to lie open and naked,
exposed to all the storms of his displeasure, we must labor to put on whole
Christ, and wear him close to our souls. Every day we gather new stains, and
therefore every day we must wash our garments in his blood, and appear before
God clothed with him, that he may look on us with a forbearing eye. John 3.29.
Those friends of the Bride therefore deserve well of her, that lay before her
her own nakedness, and the unsearchable riches of Christ, that she may be
drawn out of her self, to an admiration of the excellency of Christ, and
shine in his beams, Revel. 12.
and trample whatsoever is glorious in the world under her feet, seeing nothing
ere long will be glorious but Christ and his Spouse.

Hitherto tends this Treatise of this godly Minister, whom for his soundness
in Judgment, faithfulness in friendship, painfulness in his calling, and
integrity of his life, I have much esteemed ever since our first acquaintance
in the University: I can therefore (Christian Reader) with the more confidence
commend it to thy reading, and both thee, and it to Gods blessing.

Richard Sibbs.

THE CHRISTIANS APPARELLING by CHRIST.
GALAT. 3.27. For all ye that are baptized into Christ, have put on Christ.


The first part.
Section 1.
THe Apostle having proved, that a man is justified, not by the works of the
Law, but by faith in Jesus Christ, shows, that yet the use of the Law was to
whip us unto Christ, Verse. 23, 24.
that so we might be justified by faith in him; by which faith we become the
sons of God, Part. 1.. 1
which he shows in my text: thus in effect; Who so put on Christ, are
justified and made the sons of God, not from works, (which men do) but by
faith, and from without, by the putting on and application of Christ; But
(speaking according to the judgment of charity, or speaking to such as are
truly and inwardly baptized) all ye (says Paul) that are baptiZed into
Christ, have put on Christ: therefore all ye that are truly baptized, are
justified by faith, and made the sons of God thereby.

How we be^ome righteous.
Whence we may take notice of the manner of our justification, that it is by the
righteousness of Christ, which he wrought for us by his obedience active and
passive, imputed unto us on Gods part, and received on our part, by our faith,
by which our sins are covered. See Psalm. 22.1, 2. and Romans 4.6, 7, Revel. 12.1
8. The Church in this regard is said to be a woman clothed with the Sun,
that is, with Christ the Son of righteousness. Mal. 4.2.
This is that garment of our elder Brother by which we obtain the blessing,
as did Jacob in Esaus garment; and was resembled in Paradise, Genesis 3.21.
when God clothed Adam and covered his nakedness with the skins of dead
Beasts; which signified our clothing and the covering of our sins, by the
righteousness of the Lamb Christ.

This shows us, The 1. use. Original sin remains after Baptism.
both that Original sin remains in us after baptism; and that we are
justified not by any righteousness in us, but by having that sin, which is in
us covered, by putting on the righteousness of Christ: even as the shame of
our bodily nakedness still remains (which argues sin to be still in the
best) but it is covered by our garments.

This is a point also of great comfort, The 2. use.
that though in regard of sin which remains in us; Part. 1.. 5.
the best actions of the godliest upon Earth are imperfect, yet by Christ's
Righteousness they are covered, and we stand as perfectly righteous in Gods
sight, by the only righteousness of Christ; so that though sin be in us, yet
we are not in sin; though sin in us make us cry out with Paul, O miserable
man that I am, Romans 7.23.24.
etc. Yet the perfect righteosnesse of Christ, by which our sin and
unrighteousness is covered, and by which we are justified, will comfort us
again and make us rejoice; saying with the same Paul, Romans 8.33.34.35.
Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? It is God that
justifies; Who is he that condemns? Who shall separate us from the love of
Christ, etc?

Section 2
In the Text we may consider, 1. What Baptism is in it self, and in it own
nature. 2. What it is to us in the right use of it.

1. Baptism is a Sacramental washing or sprickling with water, Part. 1.. 2.
instituted and ordained of God to be a sign and seal of the covenant of
grace between God and the party baptized, What Baptism is in it self.
and of the parties admission into the bosom of the visible Church.

The Covenant is first on Gods part, a promise of life everlasting, What the
Covenant is.
of grace, reconciliation, and of the pardon of our sins, which God makes
unto us upon the condition of our Faith, to believe and apply the promise; and
of our Repentance for our sins and amendment of life; The Articles on Gods
part.
which if we perform, God seals to us his covenant, and assures us of his
promise, by the Sacraments of Baptism and the Lords Supper; Genesis 17.7.
yet are Children baptized because the promise belongs to them also, though for
the present they do not actually believe and repent; if they do so afterward,
they may reap the comfort of their Baptism.

2. On our part, it is also a promise, The Articles on our part.
whereby we desiring the grace and mercy offered, do promise and profess our
selves to keep the conditions of Faith and Obedience; and hereupon by
receiving the Sacraments; first of Baptism, afterward of the Lords Supper; we
scale unto God, and bind our selves for ever into his service. Even as the
Captain by giving, and the Soldier by taking and receiving Presse-money, bind
themselves each to other: and as the Master promising to his Servant, meat,
drink, and wages; if he perform the service required, does bind himself
thereunto, by giving earnest; and as the Servant by receuing an earnest-penny,
binds himself to perform the service required, else he can expect no wages.
So, God in giving us the Sacrament, binds himself to keep his promise with
us, and by the Sacrament assures us hereof; Part. 1.. 3.
and we by receiving the Sacrament; and as often as we receive it do renew
our promise, and do bind our selves to perform better service to God for time
to come, or else we cannot expect to receive what God does promise; The use.
which thing would be well thought on so often as we come to the Lords Table.
etc.

Section. 3.
Now Secondly and chiefly, What Baptism is to us in the right use of it.
the right use of Baptism in regard of us, is that thereby we (who are truly
baptized) do put on Christ.

To put on, signifies, first to be What it is to put on.
whereby our nakedness is covered; as also to be armed and fenced.

Secondly, it implies a kind of Judge. 6.38.
The spirit of the Lord came upon Gedeon, which in the Hebrew is, it clad him;
and the meaning is, it stirred him up to be a Savior, or deliverer to Israel.
So it clad or came upon Zacharias, and caused him boldly to prophecy and do
his message. 2 Chronicles. 24.20.


Isa. 51.9. Awake, awake, put on strength, O arm of the Lord. That is, show
thy self strong for the deliverance of thy people from their enemies. So Isa.
59.17.

Psalm. 109.18.19.

What is it to put on Christ.
To put on Christ, is a phrase taken from the custom of the Primitive Church,
when such men as were to be baptized, put off their own old garments, went
into the water, and after baptism put on new, white linen clothes,; which
custom of baptizing being then used only between Easter and Whitsontide; the
first Sunday after Easter retains the name among the Latins of Dominica in
albis, or Festum in albis, which we give to the last, calling it White-Sunday.

This Custom is yet observed in Popery; and with us there is a fair white
face-cloath laid over the Child after it is baptized; which puts them in mind
of innocence and newness of life. Wherefore To put on Christ, signified by
that custom, implies these things.

First, to be adorned, and to have Ephesians. 5.26.27.
and our selves justified by him and by his righteousness.

Secondly, to be led and guided Luke 24.49
tarry in Jerusalem until they be endued (or clothed) with power from an
high, which was, when the Holy Ghost came down upon them. Act. 2.1.2.3.4

Thirdly, to express him in our actions and lives. Romans 13.14.

Paul, Gal. 2.20.
now J live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me, etc. he and we now being as
one, and all making one (Mystical) Christ. 1 Cor. 12.12. Gal. 3.16. The Church
being therefore called his body, and his fullness or complement. Ephesians.
1.22.23. Now we that are truly baptized have communion and First, with Christ
himself in his person, even with whole Christ, even with his Godhead, not in
regard of substance, but of operation and efficacy, whereby he by virtue of it
works effectually in us, and applies his merits to us; but chiefly and more
nearly with his Manhood. Joh. 6.54.56. by which we receive whatsoever we
receive from the as remission of sin, and imputed righteousness. Romans
4.6.7.8. Reu. 3.5. and 7.9-14. 2. Such as concern our sanctification, which he
works in us by his spirit; making us put off the Old man, and put on the New
man. Ephesians. 4.24. The former of these do cover us in the sight of God, without
which, we appear in Gods sight, ugly, sinful, and deformed, even the best of
us. See these places, Isa. 64.6. Job 9.30.31. Psalm. 143.2. The latter, or
Sanctification and good works, do not cover us and beautify us in Gods
sight, but only in man's sight, they being more outward, and serving as an upper
garment to distinguish a true Christian from a counterfeit. Wherefore to put on
Christ, is to become a Christian indeed, and in truth. It is first to be made
a member of Christ in regard both of body and soul. 1 Cor. 6.15.17. Romans 12.5.
to be cloothed with his flesh as Eve was with Adams. Part. 1. 4.
Ephesians. 5.30. Secondly, it is to be pertaker of his anointing, namely of the
spirit, 1 John. 2.27. and of the gifts of the spirit: Acts. 2.17.18. that is,
such gifts as whereby we resemble Christ and put him on in all his three
Offices; being made by him 1. Spiritual Prophets, in regard of the knowledge
of him and of his will. Secondly, Priests, ready to offer up our selves, souls
and bodies, in obedience to him, by killing the Old man in us. Romans 12.1. So to
offer up by faith the sacrifice of Prayer and praise, etc. Thirdly, Kings to
subdue and keep under our rebellious lusts and sinful affections.

Section. 4.
Christ and his Graces like to Apparel in 4. regards.
Thus we see, Christ and his graces are likened to Apparel; and that in these
regards. In regard first of ornament; for as our apparel does adorn the body,
and cover the nakedness of it, so does Christ and his righteousness (when we
put him on by faith) adorn our souls, and cover the nakedness thereof from
Gods sight, so that he will not look upon our sins to punish us.

Secondly, of necessity: for as

Thirdly, of distinction: for as apparel Christians from Infidels, and true
Christians from false and counterfeit, both in the sight of God and also of men.

Lastly, as our clothes grow not off or from our bodies; so does not our
justification and spiritual clothing flow from our selves, or from the power of
our freewill, which is none, but it is the gift of God only.

Though in these regards the grace of Christ be like unto apparel, yet we may
take notice how it is unlike in other regards: 2. Unlike in 3 regards.
first, our garments are, as to be put on, so to be put off daily; otherwise
they will prove noisome to us; not so Christ, nor the righteousness and grace
we receive from him. Secondly, our clothes are worse for wearing; and
therefore we wear our best apparel but seldom: Psalm. 102.26, 27, 28.
but Gods graces in us, as we must use them daily and continually, so do they
increase and grow by using; like the Israelites clothes in the wilderness,
Part. 1.. 5
which being worn whole forty years together, Deuteronomy. 29.5.
yet waxed not old upon them; being indeed the true Perpetuano, never the
worse, but the better for wearing: the more these talents are employed, the
more they increase.

Thirdly, Math. 25.14, etc. Revel. 3.18. Isa. 55.1, 2.
we may come by apparel by our own industry or money; whereas the other are
only from the free gift of God.

Section 5.
The maine Lesson, We must all strive to put on Christ.
That we hence be stirred up to seek and labor thus to be clothed, and to put
on Christ. Where we must consider Motives, Means, and Marks, or notes of
trial.

For the first; 1. Motives hereunto. The happiness of such as put on Christ.
Consider from what has bin said, the happy and glorious estate of such as are
Christians in deed, and have truly put on Christ, together with the unhappy
estate of all counterfeit Christians. Their happiness is noted by King David,
when he says, as he found in his own experience, Blessed is he whose
transgression is forgiven, Psalm. 32.1, 2.
whose sin is covered, blessed is the man unto whom the Lord imputes not
iniquity. Even thus does David describe the blessedness of the man unto whom
God imputes righteousness without works, Romans 4.6.
as the Apostle teaches. He was a King, and wanted neither honor nor wealth,
nor any thing on earth which might give him content; yet he places not his
happiness in any of these things, but lays a surer foundation (which will
never fail) in the favor of God through Christ, and makes true happiness to
consist in true righteousness, that is, in the righteousness of Christ
imputed unto us, and accounted ours, whereby our unrighteousness is covered,
and our sins are not imputed unto us.

Section 6.
Christ first puts us on in 5. respects
The ground of this our happiness by putting on Christ and his righteousness,
is his putting on of us and of our righteousness. There is first to be
conceived a not imputing of sin to us, Part. 1. 6
or the putting off and translation of our sins from off our selves; and then
withal, an imputing of righteousness to us. By taking on him.
We could never put on Christ, if he had not put us on first. Now he puts us
on first, 1 Our nature
by taking our nature and flesh upon him, Coloss. 2.9.
in which the Godhead dwelt and dwells bodily and personally; which he did not,
till first or withal he put off and laid down the glorious garments of his
Godhead, not by ceasing to be what he was, God blessed for ever, but in that,
he being in the form of God, Phil. 2.6.7
and thinking it no robbery to be equal with God, yet made himself of no
reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant, and was made in the
likeness of men, etc. Secondly, 2 Our sin.
by taking upon him our sins, by making himself our surety, and liable to
discharge our debt; for God in his eternal decree predestinating us unto life,
did this in Christ, whom from eternity he sealed, and deputed to this Office
of Mediation, in due time to effect our salvation; and whom he actually
exhibited in the flesh, in the fullness of time to stand out, and to offer
himself as our Champion, and also surety, on whom therefore the sins of the
elect from the beginning of the world were laid, 2 Cor. 5.21.
he being made to be sin for us, who knew no sin, that we might be made
the righteousness of God in him. He was made sin for us, that is, both a
sinner by reputation, in the worlds account, and by the imputation of our
sins unto him in true account; and also a sacrifice for sin, by laying down
his life for the sins of the elect. And this is a third respect in which he
puts us on, 3. Our punishment.
namely, by standing in our stead and place upon the cross, thus interposing
himself between the wrath of God and us, humbling himself and becoming
obedient unto death, Phil. 2.8.
even the death of the Cross: Christ thus redeeming us from the curse of the
Law, being made a Curse for us; for it is written, Gal. 3.13.
Cursed is every one that hangs on Tree. And of this manner of his putting us
on, it is written, Surely he has borne our griefs, and carried our sorrows.
He was wounded for our transgressions, Isa. 53, 4.5.
He was bruised for our iniquities: the chastisement of our peace was upon him,
and with his stripes are we healed So that before God in mercy look upon us
in him, and in him respect us; he does in Justice look upon him in us, as
clothed with our shame and sin.

4. 4. Our Infirmities.
He puts us on also by his Intercession (that other part of his Priestly
Office) being our High Priest; which was shadowed in Aaron, Exodus 39 6.7.8-14.
carrying upon his Breast twelve Iemmes, in which were the names of the twelve
Tribes of Israel, and so likewise upon his shoulder; and thus he presents us
to God the Father, Part. 1.. 7.
not to speak how.

5. Our protection.
5. He puts us on in regard of his care, providence, and protection. Thus it is
said, Isa. 9.6.
The Government is upon his shoulder; that is, the Church which is his
Kingdom, and which he gouernes. Of which it is further said, that being the
Savior of his people, Isa. 63.9.
In all their affliction, he was afflicted, and the Angel of his presence saved
them; in his love, and in his pity he redeemed them, and he bare them and
carried them all the days of old.

Section. 7.
He having thus put us on, especially by taking upon him our sin and suffering,
Heb. 9.26.
and having appeared to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself; this his
sacrifice being All-sufficient: He, I say thus presents us before the Lord,
before the Father, who accordingly accepts of this his sacrifice for us, as a
sweet smelling savor, Ephesians. 5.2. Mat. 3.17.
saying, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, being also well
pleased with us in him.

Hereupon, Hence his Righteousness becomes ours.
this righteousness thus wrought by the obedience of Christ, both Active in
his holy life, and Passive by his satisfactorie death, for us, is by God
imputed to us, as if we our selves had wrought it, it is accounted ours, and we
are clothed therewith: so that by the righteousness of this One, Romans 5.18.19.
the free-gift comes upon all men (the Elect) unto Justification of life: for
as by one man's disobedience many were made sinners, so by the obedience of one,
shall many be made righteous.

Thus then, Christ first takes upon him from us, our unrighteousness, stands
clothed with it, and suffers death for it, (who yet in himself was most
righteous) and hereupon his righteousness, being first offered in the Word
preached, is by the work of the Spirit, put upon us, so that we, clothed
therewith, stand and appear in Gods sight as righteous in Christ, who yet in
our selves remain unrighteous; our sin for the Nature and Being of it, being
not taken away, but only covered and not imputed. And thus becomes the
sacrifice of Christ, and all the benefits of his death, ours, as if we our
selves had satisfied the Justice of God: and thus we receuing by faith, this
righteous offered to us in the Word, do put on Christ by being incorporated
into him, and by him becoming Righteous; What our Righteousness implies.
which our Righteousness implies and includes.

First, a not imputing and a pardoning of sin, and freedom from the guilt
and punishment thereof. Thus for sin it is said, God was in Christ, 2 Cor.
5.19
reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them.
(for indeed the sins of the Elect are imputed unto Christ and laid upon
him). And for the punishment, guilt, and condemnation of sin, it is said, Romans
8.1. Isa. 43.25.
There is no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus.

Secondly, our Righteousness an Jmputation of Christ's righteousness unto us;
of which together with the former (they being in effect all one, or at least
inseperably going together) we read in Daniel, Dan. 9.24.
where the time of Christ's death is noted, and the end thereof; which is, to
finish the transgression, and to make an end of sins, and to make
reconciliation for iniquity, and to bring in everlasting righteousness: both
which Christ did, by his obedience to the Law, and by his death.

Oh therefore the blessed estate of all such as have truly put on Christ; for
thus they are freed from all sin and misery, they are possessed of all the
riches of Christ, they enjoy Peace with God, and his favor in which is life,
and in the end shall obtain everlasting life. This they have, in as much as
being clothed with Christ, they are made one with him, and are become members
of his Mystical Body. This is a blessed exchange indeed, when Christ puts on
us, and we put on him; it is a sure pledge of our Peace with him, and with God
by him.

Daniels Hist. Lib. 1.
We read in our own History, that Edmund surnamed Ironside (in whom England was
lost) and Knute (the first Danic King) after many incounters and equal fight,
at length embraced a present agreement, which was made by parting England
between them two, and confirmed by Oath and Sacrament, putting on each others
Apparel and Arms, as a Ceremony to express the atonement of their minds, as
if they had made transaction of their persons each to other; Knute became
Edmund, and Edmund Knute. Even such an exchange, as I may say, of Apparel is
betwixt Christ and the true Christian; Part. 1.. 8.
Christ becomes his, and he becomes Christ's, 1 Cor. 12.12, 13.
and both together make but one mystical Christ, as is said.

Section 8.
Under this happiness of the Saints, is contained and included both their
Honor, their Glory and Beauty, with their spiritual Riches, as also their
great cause of Joy and Reioycings.

1. The honor and beauty of such as have put on Christ. Revel. 12.1
What a honorable estate is that of a true Christian? yea, how glorious is it?
The whole Church of Christ, and each true member thereof is clothed with the
Sun, even with Christ Jesus the Sun of righteousness: Malac. 4.2.
and what greater honor can be imagined? Ask the ambitious man, how he
desires to be honored on earth; ask Haman, Ester 6.6, 7, 8, 9.
(for I know none more ambitious) in the words of King Ahasuerus, What shall
be done unto the man whom the King delights to honor? He will answer you,
Let the royal apparel be brought, which the King uses to wear, and the
Crown royal, that they may array the man withal, whom the King delights to
honor, and proclaim before him, Thus shall it be done to the man whom the
King will honor.

Lo then, even thus is it done with every true Christian whom the King of
heaven, the King of all Kings, the mighty and glorious Lord God will honor;
no sooner shall any man, in the sight and loathing of himself, of his sins
and unrighteousness, return to God with the prodigal son, by true
repentance in faith, acknowledging and bewailing his sins unfeignedly, but his
heavenly Father shall presently say, Bring forth the best robe, Luke 15.21, 22.
and put it on him, and put a ring on his hand, and shoes on his feet: which
Robe is the Wedding garment of the righteousness of Christ the King of his
Church, and therefore indeed truly royal Apparel. This is the glory and
beauty of every sound Christian, which therefore being more inward then
outward (For the Kings daughter is all glorious within) may stand with outward
Poverty in the world; Psalm. 45.13.
and which should therefore both Comfort and Instruct such as otherwise are
poor in the world, The 1. use of comfort for such as are poor. 1. In the
world.
and clothed in mean apparel, and in that regard, the more despised and
contemned of the great ones of the world. Such must content themselves with
their inward clothing, as being, not naked, but indeed more gloriously and
gallantly clad, then are their despisers; their life, their riches and glory is
now hid with Christ from the blind eyes of the world: Col. 3.3, 4.
but the time comes, when we shall appear with him in glory. In the mean
time, let it content us more to have it, then to seem to have it; as in
earthly things men desire rather to be rich, then only so to seem.

Know that God judges otherwise of our clothing, and godly men, being assured
that this our spiritual apparel is of greater price and cost, then are the
robes and diadems of Kings, seeing it could not be purchased but by the
precious blood of Christ, of price sufficient in it self to redeem ten
thousand worlds. God that condemns this partiality in men, (see James 2.1, 2,
3, etc.) will not be guilty of it himself, but will accept of us, if we come
clothed with Christ, how naked and despised soever we be in the world.

2. In spirit.
This may also much comfort all such as are poor in Spirit (whether they be
rich or poor in the world) being clothed with the righteousness and holiness
of Christ; they are not more scorned for not following in their bodily apparel
every new fashion, then they are despised in regard of their spiritual
apparel and carriage, which is out of fashion with the world, especially with
our English Nation, which delights in novelties, not so much of strange
apparel, as of Eastern manners, and ill fashion of living, partaking with the
Spaniard in Pride, with the Germane in Drunkenness, with the Jtalian in
Lechery and Fornication, both bodily and spiritual, too much in many addicted
to the fashions and attire of the whore of Rome, 1 Pet. 4.4.
by Romish superstitions; who therefore think it strange, that we run not
with them to the same excess of riot speaking evil of us. But as we are bid,
Put on Christ Jesus the Lord, and follow that fashion only: so are we bid, Put
off, Romans 13.12 13, 14. Romans 12.2.
and lay aside all other fashions of this wicked world whatsoever.

This may moreover teach us, The 2. use, of Instruction.
not to be curious in our outward apparel, beyond the decency of our callings
and estates; for such as offend herein, are for the most part inwardly naked;
and to labor more for this inward apparel of Christ and his righteousness,
Part. 1. 9.
then for any thing else of this life, not distrustfully saying, What shall we
eat or drink, Mat. 6.25-28-30.31-33.
or what shall we put on, thus taking thought for raiment, but Seek ye
first, says our Savior, the kingdom of God, and his righteousness, and all
these things shall be added unto you. For what can we want if we have Christ?
Roman. 8.32. But especially, let Women take out this Lesson, and adorn
themselves in modest apparel, with shamefastness and sobriety, not with
broydered hair, or gold, or pearls, or costly array, 1 Timothy 2.9. 1 Pet. 3.3, 4.
but (which becomes women professing godliness) with good works.

Section 9
2. As the Christian estate is honorable, The joyful and comfortable estate
of such as have put on Christ. Ester 8.16.
yea glorious and truly rich, so wants it no cause of sound Joy and rejoicing;
even hence because of this, its rich clothing, Honor and Joy go usually
together. There is great cause of rejoicing at the conversion of others, Luke
15.6, 7-9, 10-23
much more at our own honor by conversion. Therefore says the Church in the
person of Isaiah, Isa. 61.10.11.
I will greatly rejoice in the Lord, my soul shall be joyful in my God; for
he has clothed me with the garments of salvation, he has covered me with
the robe of righteousness, as a Bridegroom decketh himself with ornaments,
and as a Bride adorneth her self with her Jewels: and this is, when being
married to Christ by faith, we are also by him reconciled to God, and enjoy his
favor, in which we rejoice more then the wicked can do, Psalm. 4.6, 7.
by inioying the best things of this life: for as God would have married
couples to rejoice in the love one of another, bidding us rejoice in the wife
of our youth: so would he have us much more rejoice in him, and in his love; in
comparison of which, he would have them that have wives, 1. Cor. 7.29.
to be as though they had none.

The cause of this lightsome and joyful estate, The cause hereof is their
union with Christ
is their union with Christ their Head, whom they have put on; which strait
union with him we may hence take notice of. It is in Scripture set out by
diverse similitudes, Which is set out by comparisons.
by which we may conceive of the comfortable effects of it. First, as was now
said, it is illustrated from Marryage, where two are so joined together that
nothing must separate them, excepting only Adultery and Death; yet this is a
straighter union, so that sprituall Adultery repented on, shall not break it.
Ier. 3.1. For thus are we knit unto Christ in Love and by Faith; nothing, no
not Death being able, through the constancy of his love, Ioh. 13.1. Romans 8 35.
to separate us from the love of Christ, wherewith he loves us; and by virtue
of this marriage knot, we partake and have right to, not only all the goods and
riches of Christ, but even to Christ himself, who is ours, and all things else
in him, because we are his. 1 Cor. 3.21 22.23.


2. This our strait union is such, as is between the head and the members of
the body, Ephesians. 1.22.23.
which are so knit together by the same spirit and soul, that the members
receive life and influence therefrom; even so do we receive from Christ our
Head, our life, health, and every good thing.

3. He is the Vine, Ioh. 15.5.
we are the branches; we being wild Olives, are graffed contrary to nature
into (him) a good Olive Tree, Romans 11.24.
and are rooted and built up in him, Coloss. 2.7.
and so become one with him, being stablished in the faith, and abounding
therein with thanksgiving, John. 15.5.
bringing forth much fruit, only with this difference; he our Stock changes
us into his divine Nature, in regard of divine qualities and fruits, and not
contrarily (as it is in natural graffings) we, him.

4. This union is signified, and also sealed by our eating and drinking, John.
6.51.
whereby as the meat and drink we take, turn not only to our nourishment,
but into our substance, and so become most straightly one with us; even so Christ
and we are made one body; only with this difference, he changes us to become
like unto him, not we him on whom by faith we feed, as in natural food.

Their comfort.
Lastly, to pass by other similitudes, the selfsame neerenesse and union is
here signified by the putting on of apparel, the nature of which phrase is
already noted.

Section. 10.
In the assurance of their immortal clothing.
Now this is a Consideration full of variety of Comfort. For First, we may take
this first clothing by the righteousness of Christ for a pledge, and as the
earnest of our immortal clothing, when at the Resurrection, 1 Cor. 15.53.
this corruptible shall put on incorruption and this mortal shall put on
immortality: for Christ, Par. 1.. 10
whom we have put on, and into whom we are ingrafted, being risen, we For, he
is become (that belong to his body) be made alive; as now Christ the first
fruits, so afterward as the Apostle proves at large. Though therefore our
bodies die and be laid in the dust, and turn to corruption, yet they rest in
hope; and being members of Christ, shall, in due time rise to glory, even
because he is risen who is our head: the head being safe and above water, the
body cannot perish. Jf then our earthly house of this Tabernacle were
dissolved, we have a building of God, an house not made with hand, 2 Cor.
5.1.2. etc.
eternal in the heavens, with which we both desire and hope to be clothed:
Comfort hence in the death of our friends. etc.
the assured hope whereof affords wonderful comfort to us, in the death of
those our friends that die in the Lord, and arms us against the fear of death
in our selves. Yea, in the midest of all troubles and dangers, yea in the
dangers of Prosperity, which would withdraw us from God; it makes us (it should
at least make us) steadfast, immovable, always abounding in the works of the
Lord; verse. 58.
for as much as we know that our labor is not in vain in the Lord. As we then
desire to be clothed with eternal glory, and to be taken to house and harbor
with Christ for ever, so ought we now labor truly to put him on.

Section 11.
But we want not comfort hence for the present, 2. In case of Trouble.
in case of trouble, whether our trouble be from without, or from within.

1. Outward
If our trouble be outward from persecution, whether of the Sword or of the
tongue; or from crosses, losses, sicknesses, or the like; our comfort is, that
Christ is ours, and that, (not only we in him have a gracious supply from his
riches of what we want, Par. 1.. 11
being all in all unto us, but also that) he is both a covering and a covert
unto us, Isa. 4.6.
a Tabernacle for a shadow in the day time from the heat, and for a place of
refuge, and for a covert from storm and from rain. To this Rock the godly in
their afflictions fly, under the shadow whereof, they find both safety and
refreshment, being able with all thanks to say, Thou have been a strength to
the poor, Isa. 25.4.
a strength to the needy in his distress, a refuge from the storm, a shadow
from the heat, when the blast of the terrible ones is as a storm against the
wall.

The safety and security of believers is, The safety and security of true
Christians.
that Christ is to their souls, what Apparel and Armor are to the body;
arming us against the very wrath of God, much more against the thorns and
prickings of afflictions. And how much makes this for our comfort? seeing there
is no dart can be thrown against us, which does not also pierce him; he is so
near us in regard of his Nature, of his affection and Love, that he is
compassionate with us in all our sufferings; Isa. 63.9.
in all our affliction he is afflicted; and takes all as done to himself that
is done to us, saying to Saul, when he persecuted the Church and servants of
Christ, Saul, Acts. 9.4.
Saul, why persecutest thou me? so that he that touches us, touches the
apple of his eye. Nay, the sting of death, the malice of Satan, the rage of
adversaries and persecuters; nay, I may say, the displeasure of God for our
sin, having first hit upon him in his suffering, have their edge and point
sore bated and abated, that they cannot hurt us; Christ being to us Armor of
proof, these cannot pierce to hurt us his Mystical body; how much less then,
can any bare outward affliction do us harm? Are we then Christ's? let us
persuade our selves, that as the things we suffer, are first borne by him for
us, or at lest, for ease and comfort he suffers them with us; so the very name
of Christ (which is upon us, who by putting on of Christ are true Christians)
is able and sufficient to supply (and comfort us against) all want of good
things whatsoever; The name Christian, answers all wants.
in the enjoying of which, the men of this world so much glory and bless
themselves. Thou perhaps art poor in the world, and thou hear the rich
reproach thee for it, and withal bless himself, saying, I am rich and
increased with goods, with Lands and great Revenues; but thou may in one
word answer him, But I am a Christian. Thou art despised and contemned,
especially of great ones, and thou hear one brag and insult over thee,
saying, I have the love of all men, I have the favor of such great Personages,
yea of my Prince; but thou may without envying of him, and with comfort to
thy self, tell him, saying, But I am a Christian. Or, thou art debarred of thy
Liberty, and other comforts of this life; yea, thou withdrawest thy self from
sinful sports and recreations, and thou see one account thy life and thine
estate, to be without comfort and full of melancholy and sadness, and withal
to cheer himself; I have all things that my heart can wish, I deny my soul
no pleasure, I thank God I can be merry, etc. but thou may answer him in a
word, but I am a Christian. So if there be any thing else which worldlings
boast off, which thou want; thy comfort is, thou have it all in Christ in a
far more heavenly, spiritual, full and plentiful manner. This one name,
Christian, is sufficient to answer all: It includes all riches, honor,
pleasure, happiness; so that nothing of this life is wanting to a true
Christian, which is not abundantly supplied in Christ; unto him with all wants,
with comfort and boldness they may have recourse, call upon him and bind him
with this argument, saying in their trouble, Iere. 14.7.9
Thou O Lord art in the midst of us, and we are called by thy name, leave us
not though our iniquities testify against us, do thou it for thy names sake.
Thus may we gather comfort and assurance in our misery: for God loves his
Name, and will do much for it, though we deserve little, as we see in EZekiel;
Ezekiel. 36.21 22.23.
as he also teaches us by his promise, If my people which are called by my
Name, shall humble themselves and pray, etc. then will I hear from heaven, 2 Chronicles. 7.14.16.
etc. Even as a woman or child wanting any thing, will come with comfort to
her husband or father by this argument, I am thine, thy wife, thy child, called
by thy name, therefore help; It belongs to thy care so to do, and it will not
be for thy credit, that we should seek to others.

Par. 1.. 12.
2. Now secondly, if thy trouble be Jnward; 2 In case of Inward trouble and
Temptation.
then is it from Tentation, and that either to sin, or for sin; whereby thou
art tempted either by sinning to presume on mercy, or having sinned, to
despair of mercy.

1 To sin by presuming.
1. If the first, and that thou find thy self troubled with the assaults of
Satan, and of the flesh, annoyed with covetous, lustful, ambitious, envious,
blasphemous, or any ways wicked thoughts and desires, seeing, whilst in the
inward man thou delightest in the Law of God, Romans 7.22.23.24. and 25.
another Law in thy members warring against the Law of thy mind, and bringing
thee into captivity to the Law of sin, which is in thy members, making thee
cry out saying, O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body
of this death? If thus thou find it, yet comfort thy self, look into thy
self, and thou shall find armor of Proof, to cause thee to withstand, or at
least not wholly to yield to Satan's assaults, thou shall find thy self
clothed with Christ and in the end to obtain victory, and to have cause with
Paul to bless God, saying, J thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord. For, art
thou Christ's? then howsoever sin and Satan will be busy with thee, yet by
Christ whom thou have put on, they have lost their power: whence it is said,
They that are Christ's, Gal. 5.24. Ephesians. 6.11. etc. 8.13. etc.
have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts. But this is said of
such as have put on Christ and the whole armor of God; not of such as through
negligence let their armor lie by, use it not, and put it not to the proof.

Here then, as thou would have comfort, and find victory against such
assaults of Satan, and over thy special corruptions, thou must stir up the
graces of God in thee, 2 Timothy 1.6.
and not suffer the gifts thereof to be smoothered under the ashes, but make
them flame forth; without which diligence in the employment of grace, and of
thy spiritual armor, The Christians armor against temptations to sin.
Psalm. 51.6. 1 His girdle Sincerity.
Christ and his benefits prove fruitles and unprofitable, and Satan prevails
over us. Art thou strongly tempted to any sin? Be thou first then girt about
with truth, with that truth which God desires in the inward parts, that is,
with sincerity; set thy self in Gods presence, respect not secrecy with man,
but in conscience of thy duty to God, answer it, and say with good Joseph in
like case, How can I do this great wickedness, Genesis 39.9.
and sin against God? Thus if we can walk sincerely, we may with much
comfort for all our failings, in our greatest troubles and fears, say with
good King Hezekiah, Remember now, Isa. 38.3.
O Lord J beseech thee, how I have walked before thee in truth, and with a
perfect heart, etc.

2 his Brestplate, a good conscience.
Again, look to thy Brestplate of righteousness, namely, the righteousness of a
good conscience, and do nothing against conscience, always avoiding evil,
and keeping thy self in the ways of God, at least endeavor so to do; and
this thine endeavor shall at least keep thee from being mortally wounded:
this Breastplate will preserve the vital parts.

Thirdly, 3 His Shoes Patience.
if by afflictions for the Gospel, thou be tempted to forsake the Gospel,
or to curse God, as the devil intended in his tempting of Job, then let thy
feet be shod with the preparation of the Gospel of peace, that is, with true
Patience, which the knowledge of the Gospel of peace, and the assurance of our
reconciliation with God, will work in us, arming us, as with shoes and
greeues, against the stones, thorns, and prickings of afflictions, assuring
our selves, that neither the afflictions which we endure, nor the temptation
to sin by affliction shall hurt us, being in Christ, but shall indeed, both of
them turn to our good.

Fourthly, and above all, take the Shield of faith; look to Gods power and his
assistance, Romans 8.28. 4 His Shield Faith.
look to his gracious promises, and so make resistance to the temptation by
faith, and herewith you shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of the
wicked. Though the assault be strong, and that the devil seem by his
temptation near prevailing, to cast thee into the fire of lust, and into the
waters of flowing pleasures to destroy thee, as he did him that had the dumb
spirit, yet if thou can believe, as our Savior said to that parties father,
All things are possible to him that believes. Mark 9.22, 23.
Thus by faith thou shall be able to subdue all enemies, and to do all things;
if thereby thou be in Christ, and fleest to Christ, thou shall find thy self
able to say with Paul, Phil. 4 13.
I can do all things through Christ which strengthens me.

But moreover, thou must also take the Helmet of salvation, 5 His Helmet, Hope.
which is Hope; and being tempted with the vain things of this life, which
would allure thee, and withdraw thee from God, look to thy hoped salvation, and
be content to bear or forbear any thing for the glory that is set before
thee; even as Moses being tempted, Heb. 11.24 25.26.
yet was he not overcome with the honor of being son in law to Pharaohs
daughter, with the pleasures of sin for a season, or with the riches and
treasures of Egypt, (the worlds god and trinity which they adore, and for
which they forsake the only true God, the Love of the Father, the grace of the
Son, the comforts of the holy Ghost, and the hope of glory) but why did Moses
this? or how was he armed against these Sirens? the text adds; for he had
respect to the recompense of reward. He did all this by faith, believing the
promises of God; and by hope, expecting the accomplishment of those promises.

But there is moreover afforded another principal piece of armor, 6 His Sword
Gods word.
which is as well offensive as defensive, and it is the Sword of the spirit,
which is the Word of God, With this spiritual sword we being armed with it,
and using it aright, may not only defend our selves from the enemies of truth,
who would seduce and persuade to error in judgment; and of holiness, who
would allure and withdraw us to sin, but also offend the adversary, drive him
away, and confound him, without which destroying of them, we shall never be
free from their assaults. We must then being tempted to any error and sin,
stoutly resist, and repel it by the authority of Gods Word: so shall we not
only stand against temptation and enemies, but drive them away, so that they
shall no more be able to stand before or against the Word, 1 Samuel 5.3.4
then Dagon before the Ark of God. Thus our Savior, assaulted three times by
the Devil, by the authority of this Word, defended himself against him in
the first and second encounter, and in the third quite drove him away. Thus
we, Mat. 4.4.-7.-10.
having put Christ on as our Prophet, and being well acquainted with his word,
by hearing, reading, meditating, and often conferring on it, are by it safely
fenced against our enemies; The weapons of our warfare being mighty through
God to pull down holds, 2 Cor. 10.4.5.
and to cast down imaginations, and every high thing that exalts it self
against the knowledge of God. Our carnal reason and affections shall not
prevail against us, neither shall we wholly or finally fall into heresy and
sin, or be carried away with the error of the wicked.

Lastly, the true Christian, 7. His defense and safty, by the benefit of Prayer.
by virtue of his union with Christ, has the benefit of Prayer, and
privilege of coming immediately into the presence of God, through Christ, in
whose Name (which is upon him) and for whose sake he may ask any thing, and
be assured to receive it. Christ having suffered, Heb. 2.18.
being tempted, is able to succor them that are tempted. So that we have not
an high Priest which cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities,
but was in all points tempted like as we are, yet without sin: Heb. 4.15.16.
hence rises our boldness, and the Apostles exhortation, Let us therefore
come boldly unto the throne of grace, that we may attain mercy, and find
grace to help in time of need. This benefit and privilege of Prayer and
access to God, which true Christians have, Ephesians. 6.18.19.
is made by Paul, either part of his Spiritual Armor and clothing, or at
least one principal means, by which we come to use our Armor aright;
setting it down in the last place as having a reference to all; and such as
implies a joint use of it with all the rest, Master Gouge on on this place.
as one well notes; for he uses the Participle, Praying, as if he had said.
Put on the whole Armor of God praying; take and use the Girdle. Breast Plate,
Shoes, Shield, Helmet, and Sword, praying.

So then, the Christian being any ways assaulted or tempted, has sufficient
Armor to defend himself, and to keep himself in safety: which if for want
of skill and dexterity to use it well, he cannot skilfully guide, or if his
enemies seem too strong and wily for him (through his weakness and simplicity)
yet, for his comfort he has the benefit of Prayer; by which, darting up a
thought and desire unto God and Christ, his Captain or General, he may have
present supply and succor as his need shall require, according to the
merciful promise of his heavenly Father; and that even because he has known
his Name. Psalm. 91.14.15. Mat. 6.13.

What a comfortable estate then is that of the true Christian, who thus has a
care to put on Christ, Par. 1.. 13.
and his spiritual Armor by Christ? How safely stands he fenced, with verity
and sincerity, with Righteousness and a good Conscience; with Patience and
the preparation of the Gospel of Peace; with Faith, with Hope, with the Word
of God, and lastly with Prayer?

As therefore we desire these excellent graces, privileges, and furniture, as
we desire the security and comfort afforded us thence; so it will behoue us
above all things, to labor to become Christians indeed, and truly to puton
Christ.

Section 13.
2. As a further Motive whereunto, 2. The Christians comfort in case of trouble
and temptation for sin, by desparing and doubting.
consider the Comfort of this our union with Christ, by putting him on; in case
that we be tempted for sin to despair of mercy, after we have been foiled
by sin. In case therefore of Doubting, have recourse to thy Baptism, whereby
thou wast incorporated into Christ, by putting him on; for there God sealed to
thee the pardon of thy sins, and life everlasting. Is then thy title to life
called into question by the enemy of Mankind? What to do in case of doubting.
here do as men ordinarily do in the like case, when their Houses and Lands
are questioned, and they look into the last Will and Testament of their
Parents and Grandfathers, and thence they secure themselves; so have thou
recourse to thy Baptism, where the Will of thy Father, and last Testament of
thy Savior is sealed unto thee, and thence assure thy self thy estate is
good, and sure enough with God, howsoever thou may seem to have broken
covenant with him on thy part. Seek also, but duly prepared by Repentance and
Faith, unto the Lords Table, where the same covenant is renewed with thee, which
was made in Baptism, and there thou shall find thy salvation also sealed; yea,
which is not done in other covenants with men, thou shall find God ready often
in his mercy, to seal to thee; so that though thou by not performing the
condition, have broken thy Bond, and forfeited thy Lease, (wherein eternal
life was sealed to thee) yet God is willing to give us a new Lease of life, or
rather to renew and make the former good again; and hereof to assure us, by
sealing the same often to us in the Sacrament, even so often as we do renew
our repentance, and so repair in faith to that holy Sacrament.

Our union with Christ Indissoluble.
Here further know, that having once truly put on Christ, (in and by the right
use of Baptism) nothing shall separate us from the love of Christ not death
(which seuers between soul and body) nor life, nor Angels, Romans 8.35-38.39.
nor Principalities, nor Powers etc. shall be able to separate us from the love
of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. That is, from the love of God
wherewith he has loved us in his Son. For God so loved the world, Ioh. 3.16.
that he gauen his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him should
not perish, but have life everlasting He then that spared not his son, but
delivered him up for us all; Romans 8.32.33.34.
how shall he not with him also freely give us all things? Who shall lay any
thing to the charge of Gods Elect? It is God that justifies, who is he that
condemns? It is Christ that died, yea rather that is risen again, who is
even at the right hand of God, who also makes intercession for us.

The Apostle thus reasoning from the love of God, On what our assurance is
grounded.
which is ever constant and immutable, from the death of Christ, which for the
value of it, is ever sufficient; and from his Resurrection, Ascension, sitting
at Gods right hand, and Intercession, which ever are available for the
application of his alsufficient merits to our justification, Romans 4.25.
and to our continual preservation in the state of grace, (by covering our
daily faylings and infirmities, and the imperfection of our works by the daily
application of his merits; of which his appearing in the sight of God for us as
our High Priest, it is said. If any man sin, Heb. 9.24.
we have and Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is
the propitiation for our sins etc.) Seeing I say, 1 Ioh. 2.1.2
the Apostle reasons from these, and not from any thing in us to prove the
perpetuity of our union with Christ, therefore we may receive comfort, and
conclude, that being once truly ingrafted into Christ, our sins shall never
after make a final or total separation. For, thus further may we reason with
the same Apostle, God commends his love toward us, Romans 5.8.9.10.
in that, while we were yet sinners Christ died for us; much more then being
now justified by his blood, we shall be saved from wrath through him; for if
when we were enemies, we were reconciled to God, by the death of his Son, much
more being reconciled, we we shall be saved by his life.

So then, if our sins, when we were altogether sinners and enemies, did not
hinder God from setting his love upon us in Christ, how much less will he
estrange his love from us, after he once has admitted us thereunto, and
endued us with his spirit? As our sins then hindered not this union: so neither
do they now dissolve and break it. Satan may as well go about to separate
Christ from thee, which is impossible, as thee from Christ. Thou can not
perish, because Christ, with whom thou art clothed, cannot perish. Christ
living who is the Head, will not suffer any of his members to perish. Because I
live, ye shall live also. Ioh. 14.19.
We are already in heaven in Christ our Head; he is risen and is in heaven,
taking our Nature thither with him, and leaving his Spirit here with us, as a
double pawn of our glorification, by virtue of our union with him, and of his
with us. He, as is said, has put us on, by taking upon him our nature, and so
is united to us; and we have put him on by virtue of his spirit, which dwelling
in and with him, he yet has given us. He therefore having taken our nature and
flesh into heaven with him, (which at first he took intentionally, not for
all men, but only for the elect) he thereby has taken possession of it for us,
and in our names, and in his time will assuredly bring us thither, that where
he is, we may be also: even as Joshua (a type of him herein) brought the Jews
over Jordan (after they had escaped the dangers of the Red sea, and the
wilderness, all typifying the dangers of sin) and gave them full possession of
the land of Promise. In the mean time, 1 pet. 1.3.4.5
we being begotten unto a lively hope, by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from
the dead, to an Inheritance incorruptible and undefiled, and that fades not
away; It is reserved in heaven for us, who are kept (and reserved) by the power
of God through faith unto salvation, etc. Lo, it is kept for us, and we are
kept for it; and what then can hinder us of it? We are weak and frail, and
sin daily; yea, but we are kept by the power of God for it. Christ being
ours, God is ours, his wisdom, and his power are ours: so that the godly once
in Christ, doubt no more of Gods will then of his power; and thence in the
greatest trials and tentations stay and assure themselves, Romans 4.21.
as Abraham, and Paul, who with great confidence could say, 2 Timothy 1.12.
I am not ashamed; for I know whom J have believed, and I am persuaded, that
he is able to keep that which I have committed unto him against that day:
that is, the eternal salvation of my soul.

Here then is our comfort, that, howsoever we are not to be careless, Philip.
2.12 13.
but with fear and trembling to work out our salvation; yet the chief care
of it is made to belong to Jesus our Savior, who is both the Author and
finisher of our faith, and to God, Heb. 12.2.
who in the forenamed place is said to be he, which works in us both to will
and to do of his good pleasure: In which regard, the Saints of God are
confident of this very thing, Philp. 1.6.
that he which has begun a good work in them, will, (he being able) perform
it until the day of Jesus Christ. As we then by our faith lay hold on Christ,
and put him on: so he by his Spirit lays hold on us, knits us to him, and
puts us on; as in other regards, so in regard of his care and providence
(according to his promise) so that though we should let go our hold of him,
yet he lets not go his hold of us. While then we look into our selves and to
our sins, we have some cause of doubting; but while we look to God and
Christ, we have none. As one tied fast by a chain to some high and towering
Steeple, or rock which ouerlooketh the sea, looking down, he quakes for fear;
but considering how fast he is tied, he cease to fear; so is it with us:
for, says the Lord, Iere. 13.11.
As the girdle cleaves to the loins of a man, so have I caused to cleave unto
me the whole house of Israel, and the whole house of Judah. And this is more
specially true of the faithful and believer. Now, we looking down to our
sins, and into our selves, see nothing but hell beneath gaping for us, which
makes us tremble and it may be, doubt and fear: but considering again how
we stand knit unto God by our faith, or (in case we have not for the present
the feeling of it) how he holds us fast to him by his Spirit, through his
power, and according to his promise and love, our fear is dispelled, and our
assurance is sealed to us: our own weakness and readiness to fall; nay, our
very falls, through Gods merciful decree, shall not hurt us. He has the same
regard of us, as a loving father or mother has of her child; he knows our
weakness, and thence assures us of mercy. See Psalm. 103.11, 12, 13, 14. If we
be weak, yet he is faithful, and will not suffer us to be tempted above that
we are able: 1 Cor. 10.13
but will with the temptation also make a way to escape, that we may be able
to bear it. If then we cannot see (our sight being for the while blinded with
our sin) how we may escape, yet let us believe that God according to his
promise here, and power, will make a way to escape. Rather then we faint or
fall away, he will either strengthen us, or remove that temptation whereof we
are in danger. As in outward temptations and trialls, so also in inward, from
sin and Satan, (and if in the one, much more in the other, Gods end being
alike in both) the Lord promises to the great comfort of his servants, when by
reason thereof, and of their weakness, they are ready to forsake him (whether
by unbelief and despair, Par. 1.. 14.
or by ungodliness and iniquity) that rather then they so do, the occasion
and the temptation shall be removed: for thus he says, Psalm. 125.3,
The rod of the wicked shall not rest upon the lot of the righteous, lest the
righteous put forth their hands unto iniquity. And is this Gods end in so
removing the rod? Seeing then Apostasy and Despair is a most heinous sin,
greater then the sin for which men despair; therefore we conclude, that
though this rod of Satan touch and smite the righteous, yet it shall not rest
upon them, lest they fall away.

Section 14.
Only it belongs to our care, that we separate not our selves; which yet we
seek to do, seem to have been. But I answer hereunto in the general, God
will not have us reason against our selves.
That God is not well pleased that we should so reason, and make arguments
against our selves, (as yet is usual for distressed souls to do:) for thus
says the Lord in a like case, Let not the son of the stranger that has
joined himself to the Lord, Isa. 56.3.4.5.6.7.
speak, saying, The Lord has utterly separated me from his people; neither
let the Eunuch say, Behold I am a dry Tree: for thus says the Lord unto the
Eunuchs that keep my Sabbaths, and choose the things that please me, and
take hold of my Covenant, even unto them will I give in mine house, and within
my walls, a place and a name better then of sons and daughters; I will give
give them an everlasting name, that shall not be cut off: Also the sons of
the strangers that join themselves to the Lord, to serve him, and to love the
name of the Lord, even them will I bring to my holy Mountain, and make them
joyful in my house of Prayer: their burnt Offerings and their sacrifices shall
be accepted upon mine Altar. etc.

By these gracious promises, the Lord would stop their mouths from reasoning
against his mercy; and yet these of all others were such as might seem
rejected of the Lord, being either the Heathen (who we now are) who, not
joining themselves to the Lord and to the holy Covenant, were, Ephesians. 2.12
without Christ and without hope: Or such Jews as for the present by reason of
their sins, were given into the hand of their adversaries, and dispersed in
the Captivity, amongst the Heathen; even these, being accounted as Dogs and
far off, Ephesians. 2.13.
yet in Christ Jesus, and by his blood, were made nigh. If then we, not only do
not reason against our selves, but with that woman of Canaan, Mat. 15.23. to 29.
withstand all contrary arguments and reasonings, and cleave close to Christ in
the acknowledgement of our unworthiness, and of as much evil as can be laid
to our charge; we shall find a most gracious answer from him; and that, though
in regard of our sins and unworthiness we be no better then dogs; yet in
regard of his merciful acacceptation, we shall be accounted as children, and
accordingly fed with the childrens bread.

More particularly, consider what our Savior says, Mat. 11.28.
Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you
rest. Now tell me, God calls burdened sinners unto him.
what can thou object against this? thou art a sinner; lo he calls such to
him; thou art a grievous sinner, and laden and clothed, yea clogged with sin;
why then doubtest thou? thou art even the very party unto whom he speaks.
Only then, if thou be gone and departed from him by sin, return to him by
repentance, and come to him by Faith, receive what he promises, namely, the
pardon of thy sin, and the further assurance thereof; and be of good comfort,
for the Master calls thee.

Yea, None accepted for his own worthiness without Christ.
but thou art unworthy of such mercy as thou have found formerly, and as is
offered thee; they belong to others more worthy, not to thee. Say thou, and
think thou so indeed? yet say I, despair not; but know first, that God
never yet received any for their own worthiness, how worthy soever they might
seem; and therefore, though thou were not so great a sinner as thou accountest
thy self, but as free from sin as any, yet thou are nere a whit more worthy in
thy self; the best of all can look for nothing for their own worthynesse,
Psalm. 143, 2 None rejected for his own unworthiness, who seeks acceptance in
Christ.
but must acknowledge that in Gods sight shall no man living be justified; and
accordingly pray, Enter not into judgment with thy servant. Know again, that
God never rejects any simply for their own unworthiness, that sought unto
him in the worthiness of Christ. In Christ then thou art worthy, and so does
God look upon thee. Come therefore in his presence clothed with his
righteousness, and in his name, and doubt nothing of being heard in any
request whatsoever. So did Daniel, Dan. 9.7.8.
who in his own name and the peoples, renouncing their own worthiness, and
confessing that to them belonged confusion of faces, yet despaired not, but
desired to be heard, verse. 17.
for the Lords sake, and so they were heard.

Yea, but thou will say, thou have no feeling of this love of God or of any
gracious answer from him, but that God himself fights against thee. I answer,
so he did with that woman of Canaan formerly mentioned, How the Christian may
stay himself in the want of feeling.
and yet she let not go her hold; for which, her faith was highly commended.
Here then thou must walk and live by faith, and look back to Gods Covenant
and former mercies; by which argument God himself would comfort every penitent
soul, as well as he does his whole people Jsrael. Isa. 63.10, 11. etc.

Here we must know, First that

Secondly know, God does often

Thirdly, know, that as the wicked are miserable, poor, Reu. 3.17.
blind and naked, yet do often account and persuade themselves that they are
rich and increased with goods, and have need of nothing: so on the contrary,
Gods Children may indeed and truly be rich in grace, and clothed with white
raiment, though for the present they have no feeling thereof, and cannot be so
persuaded, or rather will not be so persuaded: a conceited humility may be as
strong in the one, as self-love and pride may be in the other.

But in case of want of feeling, it is good to observe this rule, not to
exclude our selves from Gods favor, but at least for the present; seeing we
will do no more to suspend, and to rest our selves here, that we may be in
Gods favor and yet not feel it; as in other things we believe many things,
as that there is one God in the Trinity of Persons, that we have souls,
though natural knowledge will not reach to the one, and our sense of seeing
do not perceive the other.

Lastly, know, that the thing is Faith, and not feeling, and that therefore
thou may hold him fast enough though thou feel him not; as a man's hand,
which is benumbed, and as we say asleep, may receive any thing that is given,
and hold it fast enough to make it his own, without any great feeling: and as
a man in the extremity of cold, or being in the water, has no feeling for the
time, of his apparel, yet by reason he knows he has them on, and that
without them he might in such extreamities starve to death; so it is sometimes
with Gods best servants in the depths of temptation, and spiritual desertions,
they as at all times generally while here they live, so at such times
especially, walk by faith, and not by sight, 2. Cor. 5.7.
and they must see, it so be with them.

Par. 1.. 15
And thus much of the Comfortable, as also glorious and happy estate of Gods
children, and of true Christians indeed who have truly put on Christ. The
consideration of which happiness, honor and comfort, may be a strong
inducement to us all, by all means, to labor thus to put on Christ, and to
be thus richly clothed; or at the least, by due trial and examination of our
selves, to see whether we indeed stand thus clothed or no, of which
afterward.

Section 15.
And so on the other hand may be the consideration of the wretched, A Motive to
put on Christ, from the wretched and comfortles estate of all such as are not
Christians in deed.
unhappy, and comfortless estate of all such, as either have their habitation
without the bounds of the Christian Church; or otherwise, living in the Church,
and bearing the name of Christians, yet, have not that grace, and that inward
ointment which the name imports. Of which point and motive, briefly.

First, such as have not so much as put on the name of Christ by outward
Baptism; who either through Ignorance do not know Christ, 1 Of such as live
out of the Church.
as the Heathen and Infidels a far off* or through Infidelity reject Christ,
though they hear of him, as do the Turks, but especially the Jews, what shall
we say or think of them; but as was said of us in comparison of the Jews of
old, Ephesians. 2.12.
that being without Christ they are also Aliens from the Commonwealth of
Israel, (and none of the true Israel of God) that they are strangers from the
Covenants of promise, having no hope, and without God in the world? How should
it be otherwise, seeing there is not salvation in any other, Acts 4.12.
then only in Christ: for there is no other Name under Heaven given among men,
whereby we must be saved. Either then must God miraculously, and without his
Word, and the Ministry of it and of the Sacraments, save such amongst them as
are saved (if any be) by applying Christ unto them, and clothing them with his
merits, (which yet to think we have no faith, (because no word) but only
bare charity) or else they all perish for ever, as having nothing to shelter
them from the wrath of the everliving God, which is most dismal.

2 Of such as live in the Church.
Secondly, no better is the estate (if not much worse) of all such as living in
the bosom of the visible Church under the name of Christians, yet do either
seek salvation in any other, in whole or in part, then in Christ only, (which
yet is the estate of wilful Papists, Gal. 5.4.
unto whom, seeing they will be justified also by their own works, Christ is
become of none effect:) Or, who professing salvation only by Christ, yet live
without the power and grace of Christ; (who these are, we shall mark out anon)

They may now be such as in their own conceits and others seem most happy,
yea the happiest on earth, inioyning all ouward blessings whatsoever, of
wealth, health, strength, honor, dignities and preferments, friends, children,
and the like; shining and glittering also, it may be, with golden and glorious
apparel; nay, which more is, with these they may make great profession of
Christianity, and of godliness; yet not having truly put on Christ to their
Justification with God, and Sanctification with men, they are and remain in
true account, the wretchedest on earth, Revel. 3.17.
as still remaining according to their natural estate, wretched, miserable,
poor, blind, and naked. They are naked and contemptible.


Naked they are; and therefore both loathsome and contemptible in Gods sight,
and also laid open and exposed to his just wrath and displeasure in this life
and hereafter, without any shelter, or fence on their parts.

Our natural birth in respect of our bodies, is not so polluted, so unclean
and loathsome, when we are left without help, to wallow in our blood, without
being washed etc. as is the natural estate of us all, in respect both of body
and soul through sin, and thought the pollutions and defilements thereof, as
the Lord himself shows the one of these by the other Ezekiel. 16.3.4.5. etc.

Now, this their nakedness being not covered by the righteousness of Christ,
and the Image of God, whereof they are deprived, being not repaired in them,
they of all others are without honor, and accounted most meanly of by God,
howsoever the blind eyes of the world, which are bewitched and bleared with
their outward pomp of riches, high places, gay apparel, and outward
prosperity; can see no such thing.

Besides, whiles their ^innes are not covered, they lie naked and unarmed,
Unarmed.
and are subject to all storms and enemies whatsoever; they have no promise
from God, they) have none to plead their cause, none to interpose himself
between the wrath of God and them; which benefits yet the true Christian has
by Christ.

And lastly, They now are separated from God,
they by reason of their sins, uncovered and unpardoned, are separate from God,
and from his love in Christ, in this life (for what fellowship can there be
between light and darkness, between Gods most immaculate and pure essence,
and their commaculated, leprous and polluted souls?) the complement whereof
shall undoubtedly follow in their eternal abjection, separation, and shall be
everlastingly. 2 Thessalonians. 1.9.
and everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory
of his power, unless the union be here made by faith: for as now their
sins separate between them and God; so much more shall they be separated
hereafter, when God, at the general Assizes, or Gaole-deliuery of the world,
or at the marriage of the Lamb, when he shall take the Bride his Church (our
only espoused to him) into house and harbor with himself forever, Mat. 25.34.
saying, Come ye blessed etc. when then I say, he shall take a survey of all,
he shall cast such into utter darkness, bound hand and foot, Mat. 22.12.13.
and. 25.41.
as have not on this Wedding garment, saying, Depart from me ye cursed into
everlasting fire, etc.

In vain then shall it be pleaded, that we have borne the name of Christ, and
were baptized into him; Acts. 8.13. Notwithstanding all outward privileges.
for then might Simon the Sorcerer look to be saved: that we have heard Christ
preach, and have frequently heard Sermons, for so should the Scribes and
Pharisees, hypocrites be saved: or that we have preached and prophesied in his
name, Mat. 7.22.23.
and in his name cast out devils, and done many wonderful works; for then
shall Popish miracle-mongers, amongst other hypocrites, (who under the pretense
of Christ's name, but by the power of Satan, either do the like, or seem so to
do, by which they lead men from Christ) then I say, shall they also be saved:
Revel. 20.10
or that we have been familiar with him, and have ingeminated and doubled our
prayers and devotions, crying, Lord, Lord; Mat. 7.21.
for then should Judas be saved, and tautologizing Papists be saved: or that we
have sitten and eaten with him at his Table; for so did Judas also, and that
man (I may say, those many) that wanted his Wedding garment, of whom formerly;
and they may hope to be saved; but even from such holy places as the Temple,
and the Lords Table, and from such holy functions as are preaching and praying,
shall men be separated and cast into hell. These will no more privilege a man
from hell, then the horns of the Altar, on which Joah took hold, 1 King.
2.28.34.
privileged him from being slain, according to his deserts, by the sword.

Section. 16.
Par. 1. 16.
Nothing then will avail us but the righteousness of Christ, and the pardon
and covering of our sins thereby, and therefore nothing should be more
labored after now, whiles by Gods grace we have time and means, then to get
our sins covered, and pardoned. Motives to seek to have our sin covered
and pardoned. Mat. 18.24.
Stand we more in need of any thing then of the pardon of our sins? Alas!
what are we, even the best, without this? First, we by reason of our sin, are
as men deep in debt with God, owing him ten thousand talents, that is, more
then we are ever able to pay his Justice, unless we die everlastingly. We
are bound to see this debt discharged, our own handwriting is against us. Who
in such a case of debt among men, would not earnestly desire, at least accept
of a sufficient Surety, who should offer himself to pay his debt, cancel his
bonds, that he might not be cast into prison? Yet thus much and more has
Christ done for us, offering himself as our surety to God the Father, charging
himself with our debt, and clothing himself with our sin and shame, and
accordingly discharging the same by dying for us, Colos. 2.14
blotting out the hand writing that was against us, which was contrary to us,
and taking it out of the way, nayling it to his Cross: and shall not we
desire earnestly, or at least, accept that mercy which so freely is offered in
the Gospel? and that this payment of Christ's may be of God, accepted in our
names? and we discharged from the bands thereof, in which for the present we
are bound, Pro. 5.22. 2 Pet. 2.9. Jude. 6.
and so kept unto the judgment of the great day?

Our sins make us at enmity

Now, who, though it were but amomgst men, having a great man, the Prince, or
suppose his Land lord, his adversary, would not above all things desire peace
with him, and willingly make use of any that shall offer himself as a middle
party to mediate for peace and reconciliation? Yet this is done by Jesus Christ
for us, who takes upon him our person, and makes request and intercession to
the Father for us, peaceably transacting all matters between us; and having
obtained the favor of God for us, he offers it in the Gospel; and will not
we, yielding to the easy terms of repentance, and of acknowledging our
faults, seek and accept of this favor?

we are in our sins, selfe-condemned; our own consciences, and the Law of
God, have passed sentence on us already; and we are as on the Scaffold, ready
to be mowne down by Death; so that there is but a very haire-bredth, a very
moment between us and death, yea between us and Hell it self. And how soon
and suddenly is the thread of our life cut off? Now with men, what would any
man desire, or more willingly accept in such a case, then a pardon? alas, gold
and silver, Lands, Revenues, Honors and high Titles could do him no good;
only a Pardon would be to him in stead of all the world besides.

This being every sinners case with God, behold the grace of the Gospel, which
in Christ brings to us, and offers a gracious pardon of all our sins, from
the Judge and King of Heaven and Earth: this only will free us from
condemnation, and from Hell, and

Par. 2.. 1
Supper, difference and distinguish all Christians of what Nation soeue^ from
such as are not Christians.

But there is also an Inward and Spiritual putting on of Christ, and that is
by Faith, 2 Inwardly by faith.
in the right use of our Baptism, whereby we put on Christ, both to
Justification and to Sanctification.

Section 2.
1 To Justification.
Now by Faith he is inwardly put on, First, to Justification, for so we receive
and apply him to us, namely by believing; by which we receive the benefit of
the pardon of al our sins, John. 1.12.
which God no longer imputes to us, as also stand clothed with the perfect
righteousness of Christ.

2. By the same faith we put on Christ unto Sanctification; 2 To Santification.
Acts. 15.9. 1. By Mortification.
for it is Faith which purifieth the heart; this is done by receuing the gifts
of the spirit. This consists in the exercises of Repentance; the parts whereof
are first, mortification of sin, and a putting off of the Old man, which
first must be done before we can put on the new man: Par. 2.. 2
and then in vivification and newness of life, in new obedience, 2. By
vivification.
and in the practice of all Christian virtues and graces. Romans 6.3.4.5. etc
Both these are required of us alike; namely, First that we cast off the works
of darkness, Romans 13.12 13.14.
and then put on the Armor of light; first, that we walk not in rioting and
drunkenness, etc. and, then that we put on the Lord Jesus Christ. First, that we
put off, concerning the former conversation, the Old man, Ephesians. 4.22 23.24.
which is corrupt according to the deceitful lusts, and then that we be renewed
in the spirit of our minds, and that we put on that new man etc. So Colos. 3,
8.9.10-12.

Now, 3. By increasing in grace.
this is further done when the grace of Christ increases in us by degrees, and
when we endeavor to strengthen Gods graces in us by use and practice. 2 Pet.
3.18. 4. By imitation.
and generally when we imitate Christ in his holiness, and in the works of
sanctification, and when we express him in all our actions. Part. 2.. 3.


And thus we put him on by Faith, to Justification and Sanctification; of both
which we read, when it is said, that to the Lambs wife, Reu. 19.8.
or the Church, it is granted that she should be arraied in fine linen,
clean and white; for the fine linen is the rigteousnesse of Saints; where
this linen has two properties; it is clean and pure because Christ is so,
and so it serves for our Justification; it is also white and shining, having a
glorious luster to our Sanctification; which extends it self even to our
Glorification, 3 to glorification.
which shall follow upon the former, when in Heaven we shall be clothed
upon, 1 Cor. 15.53.54.
when at, and after the resurrection, this corruptible shall put on
incorruption, and this mortal shall put on immortality, 2 Cor. 5.4.
and when mortality shall be swallowed up of life. But of these more
particularly afterward.

Section. 3.
It may further be demanded, Whether thus to put on Christ be in our power,
Quest^ Whether to put on Christ be in our power or no?
as may seem to be implied in the Text, we being said to put on Christ, it
being a duty also, unto which we are exhorted. I answer: This indeed we are
said to do, yet if God did it not for us, and did not enable us thereunto, it
should be but ill performed by us. The truth is, we are such babes and
children, that of our selves we cannot put on our own clothes. It is God that
clotheth us.
It is God then that clotheth us, who dresseth and vndresseth us, though he
use the ministry of his servants herein. I, even I, Isa. 43.25.
I, am he that blotteth out thy transgressions for mine own sake; Ezekiel.
16.8.9.10.11.
and I spread my skirt over thee, and covered thy nakedness, -- I washed thee
with water, -- I clothed thee also with broidered work, and shod thee with
Badgers skins, and I girded thee about with fine linen, and I covered thee
with silk, I decked thee also with ornaments, and J put bracelets upon thine
hands, and a chain on thy neck, etc. Where we see, that not only our
necessary clothing unto Justification, but our ornaments and our outward
beauty, consisting in holiness of life and conversation, and in good works,
are alike from the gift and power of God. Thus, as we heard, not only the
garment, but the putting of it on, Revel. 19.8
was given unto the Bride; And to her was granted, that she should be arrayed
in fine linen, etc. And behold, says he, to Joshua the High Priest, I have
caused thine iniquity to pass from thee, Zechar. 3.4.
and J will clothe thee with change of raiment.

Now this God does; first, by giving Christ in his person, How? 1 By giving
Christ.
and in his merits and satisfaction; all which he offers us in the Word.
Secondly, 2 By applying Christ to us, by his word and Spirit.
he does it by an application of these to us which is made by his Spirit, and
by the efficacy thereof, accompanying the Word preached. By this he makes us
one with Christ, giving us to partake of the same Spirit which dwells in
Christ: For as the body is one, and hrth many members, 1 Cor. 12.12.13.
and all the members of that one body, being many, are one body; so also is
Christ: for by one Spirit we are all baptized into one body, 1 Cor. 6.17. 1
Ioh. 3.24.
etc. so that he that is joined to the Lord, is (also) one Spirit, by which
he dwells in us, and we in him. By this Spirit, and with the gifts and graces
of it, we are also clothed unto Sanctification, it being said to be that power
of God from an high, with which the Apostles, Luke 24.49. Act. 2.2.3.
according to promise, were endued, or clothed. Which spirit is said to have
come or, as it is in the Original, to have clothed him, Judge. 6.34.
when it stirred him up to save Israel; and upon Zachariah, 2 Chronicles. 24 20.
when it stirred him up to testify against the sins and idolatries of King
Ioash, and the Princes of Judah. God therefore it is that thus cloatheth us,
even as he at the first prepared garments for Adam and Eve; and as Rebecca was
trimmed with the ornaments brought from her husband, both given her, and put on
her.

How yet we are exhorted to this and the like duties? Answer.
Whence is it then, that we are both exhorted, and also said to put on Christ? I
answer: 1. concerning such like exhortatations and commandments. First, that
we are not now to measure our strength by them, as if we were able to do
whatsoever God commands or exhorts to. Mat. 11 28.
Christ says, Come unto me all ye that labor, etc. and yet elsewhere he
says, No man can come to me, except the Father which has sent me, draw him.
Secondly, that they have their foundation, Ioh. 6.44.
not on our natural our whole spirit, and soul and body be blameless, and
that God calls on us for so much; 1 Thessalonians. 5.23.24.
yet says the Apostle, Faithful is he that calls you, who also will do
it, Paul bids us work out our salvation with fear and trembling: but he
immediately adds, saying, For it is God which works in you, Phil 2.12.13.
both to will and to do, of his good pleasure.

Thirdly, Such exhortations are And that not in vain why?
for they put us in mind what we should do, and what we once could have done,
and so serve to make the reprobate with out excuse. Again, such as belong to
Gods election are thus forced, seeing their duty, and withal their own
inabilitie, to fly out of themselves, and to seek strength from Christ, in
the use of the Word, Sacraments, and Prayer, entreating the Lord to do that
for them which he requires of them. Joel. 2.12.
Thus the Lord bids us turn and convert unto him, and so to put on Christ; but
Gods people pray, Turn thou me, Ier. 31.18. Cantic. 1.3.
and I shall be turned; draw me, and we will run after thee; so clothe thou
us, Psalm. 51.2.
and we shall be clothed; wash thou me from mine iniquity; etc. Besides, such
exhortations are sanctified, as means to effect what we are exhorted unto;
God, whose Word is operative, giving grace and strength. Acts 3.7.
Peter bidds a creeple stand up: what power had he so to do? yet he leaped
up, stood and walked, his ankle bones from God receiving strength. Our Savior
speaks to dead LaZarus, LaZarus come forth; What power has a dead man to rise
out of his grave? yet by the power of Christ's Word (who thereby made the world
of nothing) LaZarus came forth. John 11.43.44.
Lastly, when once the first grace is given, and conversion wrought, such
exhortations serve to admonish us, to stir up Gods graces in us, and to seek
after perfection, and to put on Christ still more and more: for so the
exhortation of putting on Christ is made to the Romans converted. Though
therefore we cooperate not with GOD in the first act of our conversion,
neither be able of our selves at first to put on Christ, yet such exhortations
are not in vain, neither must we neglect them.

I answer secondly, How and why this work is ascribed to us.
God ascribes to us this putting on of Christ, and other such like works as
are not done, but either wholly by himself, or not without him principally, to
encourage us in well doing, by giving the action unto us, and to show himself
willing to accept of our endeavors though weak, and indeed none without him.
Our care then must be, we hence attribute not such works to our selves, or
think we have power in our selves to do them, as the Popish sort, and our
common people would hence infer: for, Christ and his graces, wherewith we are
clothed, are herein both like and unlike to apparel.

Like; for as apparel is not bred of us, neither grows out of our bodies, (as
yet does the wool of the sheep) so do not the graces of Christ flow from
our free will, Par. 2.. 4.
but from Christ himself that Lamb of God, the fleece of whose righteousness
and obedience active and passive, covers us.

Unlike; Appparell may be had by our own industry or money; but Christ and
his graces are altogether free, and without our power. Yet this hinders not,
but that we may and must be exhorted to put on Christ, and directed to the
Means, and Manner how.

Section. 4.
What is then to be done? In one word, Our duty is to labor to be clothed
with Christ. Revel. 3.18.
follow the advice and counsel of thy Savior, which he gives thee in these
words, I counsel thee to buy of me gold tried in the fire, that thou may
be rich, and white raiment, that thou may be clothed, Means hereof in the
general.
and that the shame of thy nakedness do not appear. Now this is not done by
any price thou can give equivalent to the worth thereof, or by any merit or
good deserving in thee; but only by parting with thy lusts, and thy sins, by
true repentance, by faith, by prayer, and such like holy exercises. Unto these
thou art called, if ever thou would truly partake of the precious benefits
of Jesus Christ and of his righteousness, that thou may be clothed
therewith. Hoe, says God, Isa. 55.1.3-6 7.
every one that thirsts, come ye to the waters, and he that has no money;
Come ye, buy and eat, yea, come buy wine and milk without money, and without
price: -- Hearken diligently unto me, incline your ear and come unto me,
hear and your soul shall live. -- Seek ye the Lord while he may be found,
call ye upon him while he is near; Let the wicked forsake his way, and the
unrighteous man his thoughts. --

Lo, God calls us to Hearing, hearkening, and to come unto him; which implies
Faith, and the true knowledge of him, to seeking, and to calling by Prayer, and
so to Repentance, and a forsaking of our ways; to which we may add the right
use of the Sacraments, Par. 2.. 5.
especially that of the Lords Supper; by all which we reap the fruit, and find
the effect of Baptism, and so do put on Christ.

What means to be used that we may put on Christ as our Justification.
In the use then of these means labor to put on Christ, both in Justification,
and Sanctification; so shall thou also put him on to Glorification.

Section. 5.
First, If thou would indeed have thy sin pardoned and not imputed, and
the righteousness of Christ in stead thereof imputed unto thee and made thine,
and would be clothed therewith; 1. A conscionable hearing of Gods Word.
then, First, make conscience of thy hearing of Gods Word, where thou may
have it sincearely taught; neglect not the time of Gods merciful visitation
whereby, in his Gospel, he calls thee to the participation of Christ and all
his precious merits; forbear not to frequent Gods Temple so often as thou
may, especially on the Sabbath day; neglect not hearing either through
negliigencce or pride, and conceited fullness, security or presumption; Now, in
the Gospel preached, is the Cloth fair yet open; there if we take our time,
and no where else, may these rich garments be had and fitted to us, by Gods
Ministers whom he uses, as we do our Tailors to shape out, (by dividing his
word aright) spiritual garments for each of us, out of the whole cloth of
Christ his Righteousness, and to fit and apply the same unto us, whereby our
nakedness and sin may be covered from the revenging eye of God, and we
stand in his sight as if we had never sinned. By this diligent, constant and
conscionable hearing of Gods word, we attain to that knowledge of God in
Christ, by which we are truly justified, and made for ever happy, according to
that in Isa, Isa. 53.11. Ioh. 17.3.
By his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many. And in John, This
is life eternal, Part. 2.. 6
that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have
sent.

Only here we must remember, that when we come into Gods presence and Temple
to hear his Word, we set and present our selves before him as poor,
wretched, miserable and naked Creatures; and in that acknowledgement, come with
hungring souls, and unfeigned desires, to eat of the Childrens bread; or at
least to feed on the crummes that fall from that Table, and to have our
nakedness covered, and all our other wants supplied; either thus must we
renounce our selves and acknowledge our nakedness, or otherwise we must never
look to have it covered.

Section. 6.
Repentance then is the next thing which we must carefully look unto, 2.
Repentance.
if we would have our sins truly covered and forgiven; which consists in an
unfeigned acknowledgement and confession of our sins, Par. 1.. 6.
grounded upon a true hatred of the same, accompanied with firm and full
purpose and resolution against them, and followed with an effectual forsaking
of them; such a confession, 1 John. 1.9. pro. 28.13.
such a gracious promise of pardon, and of mercy. Now when our sins are
pardoned, then, and never till then are they covered; and the way to get them
and our nakedness indeed covered, is to uncover them in the sight of God, by a
hearty and full confession of them; in vain else go we about to cover them,
by hiding and concealing them, or by a careless security and seeking ease to our
selves, through a loathnesse to disquiet our consciences by viewing our sins,
or by extenuating and excusing them, or by translating them to others etc. Let
us see this in the examples of David, and of the Prodigal Son. David by his
own experience teaching who is blessed, tells us, it is he whose transgressio^
is forgiven, Par. 2.. 6
whose sin is covered; Psalm. 32.1
thus he found it. But when? not whiles he concealed his sin and continued
without repentance for it; for so long he was in a very Hell upon Earth; When I
kept silence, my bones, says he, waxed old through my roaring all the day
long; for thus, he lay naked to Gods displeasure: Day -- When then? not till
he heartily confessed his sin, but then his very thought and purpose of
confessing, obtained a pardon; for says he, I acknowledged my sin unto thee,
and mine iniquity have I Even thus are we all taught in the practice of the
Prodigal Son, who first said, and accordingly did, Luke 15.21.22.
saying, Father I have sinned against Heaven, and in thy sight, and am no more
worthy to be called thy son. What followed immediately hereupon? Par. 2.. 7
But his Father said to his servants, bring forth the best Robe and put it on
him, and put a Ring on his hand, and Shoes on his feet. Till thus our sins
be covered, by our discovering of them unto God; it is in vain by any means
of our own to seek to hide them: they may be hid from men, (such is the
wisdom of men in the close carriage of themselves in their sins) but yet hid
they are not; for they are known to their own Consciences, (for no man sins
without a witness within himself) much more are they known to God, unto
whose eyes all things, (our very thoughts) are naked and opened, Heb. 4.13
and unto whose Justice and wrath sinners are exposed.

Section. 7.
The next thing is our Faith, which we must reach out as our hand to receive
and apply to our selves, 3. Faith.
this spiritual garment of Christ his righteousness, and the pardon of our
sins offered us in the Gospel of Christ: Part. 2.. 9.
without which faith, neither Christ not his Word will profit us any thing. God
who prouides this clothing for us, Heb. 4.2.
and brings and offers it to us in his Word preached, requires our Faith, and
that we should take it to us; otherwise, we may well, and should justly
starve and perish of cold, if, having garments brought unto us, we will let
them lie by us, and not use them by putting them on. It is our Faith which
truly makes us Christians, and by which Christ dwells in us; by which we
receive the pardon of our sins, and are justified, as was showed in the
beginning,

Section. 8
4. Prayer.
4. Prayer, also is a notable means by which we may obtain the pardon of our
sins, and be discharged of all our debts; this must not be neglected: for
when we have nothing of our own to purchase Gods favor, then the Prayer of
Faith will prevail; as we see in that servant in the Gospel, who, when he
had nothing to pay, and that his Lord commanded him to be sold, Mat. 18, 25
26.27. and 32
and his wife and children, and all that he had, and payment to be made; fell
down and worshipped, saying, Lord, have patience with me, and I will pay thee
all; whereupon, his Lord moved with compassion, loosed him and forgave him the
debt-after saying to him, I forgave thee all the debt because thou desiredst
me. This course we are directed unto in the Lords Prayer, where this is one
principal Petition respecting our selves, forgive us our debts, Mat. 6.12.
Luke 11.4.
or forgive us our sins: now where sin is forgive in, there it is also
covered.

Section. 9.
Lastly, the Sacrament of the Lords Supper is appointed as an excellent means
of our further putting on of Christ, 5 A reverent receiving of the Lords supper.
after once we have received him spiritually by Faith. For this, reverently and
preparedly received, helps to gird Christ, Par. 2.. 10
nearer and closer unto us; seeing in and by it is signified and sealed, our
strait and close union with him, whereby we become one with him, and he with
us, as also our communicating and participating of all his benefits, especially
such as belong to our Justification; and hereby we again renew that covenant
which we first made with God in Baptism, whereof the Apostle says in my
text, all ye that are baptized into Christ have put on Christ.

And these are the means which we must carefully, conscionably and constantly
use, if ever we would put on Christ Jesus unto our Justification.

Section 10
Now we are not to rest here, but to see that we also put him on unto
Sanctification: Means to be used for the putting on of Christ to our
sanctification. 1 Cor. 1.30
for Christ is made unto us of God, not only righteousness, but also
Sanctification.

This is done particularly by Mortification of the old man, and vivification of
the new man; generally by an imitation of Christ, and by an expressing of him
in all things.

The Apostle elsewhere tells us wherein the fruit and effect of our Baptism
consists, saying, Romans 6.3.4.
Know ye not, that so many of us as are baptized into Jesus Christ, are
baptized into his death? Therefore we are buried with him by Baptism into
death; that like as Christ was rassed up from the dead by the glory of the
Father: even so we also should walk in newness of life: -- As therefore
Christ died, and rose again to life: so, if we be Christ's, and have truly put
him on, must we reckon also our selves to be dead indeed unto sin, but alive
unto God through Jesus Christ our Lord. Where we see, the Apostle makes these
two, Mortification and Vivification in us, to be as inseparable, as they were
in Christ; as inseparable in the effects as in the causes, These means are.
the cause of Mortification in us being Christ's death, and the cause of our
vivification being his resurrection, each of them made ours by our faith.

1 Mortification of the old man.
The first thing then is, that we take out the lesson of the Apostle, who thus
exhorts, Let not sin reign in your mortal body, that ye should obey it in
the lusts thereof: and Mortify therefore (ye that are dead, Romans 4.12. Colos.
3.5.8.
and risen with Christ) your members which are upon the earth; (that is, the
members of the body of sin, or of old Adam which is in us) fornication,
uncleanness, covetousness, etc. Put off all these, anger, wrath, malice, etc.
This must first be done before we can put on the new man, as Christ first dyed,
before he could rise again.

Labor then we must to be partakers of Christ's death, and to find the power of
it in us daily, to the weakening of the contrary power of in dwelling sin; not
that we may hope to have this in this life done perfitly in our selves (though
in Christ our Head all our sins are both dead and buried, and not any one shall
make us guilty of eternal death:) for whether we respect the nature of sin,
we find it still in us for being; it is still in us, though it be not imputed
unto us; or the motions of sin, we must though we be regenerate, confess
and say with Paul, Romans 7.23.
I see another law in my members, warring against the law of my mind, etc. But
the meaning, and our duty is, that we see that this sin which is and moves
in us, do not reign as a King in us, that we should willingly obey it in the
motions of it; but that we resist it, by making use of our spiritual Armor,
that we strive against it, and to the utmost of grace received, withstand the
power of it; so that it may be in us as a Tyrant and an Usurper, rather then as
a lawful King, to be willingly obeyed. And a denial of our selves.
There must be a denial of our selves, whereby we through selfe-wisedome, and
self-conceit, through self-will, and selfe-pride, make our selves gods, doing
all things out of our own wisdom and reason (which yet is but folly) out of
our own freedom and authority (which yet is but slavery) and referring al
things to our own ends, and to our own praise. All these must be denied: so
that we must not lean to our selves, or desire to be our own men, at our
own command, at our own appointment and will; but we must indeed show our
selves to acknowledge one only God and Lord, the Lord Christ Jesus, whose only
will should be our Law, our reason, our wisdom, our will, our welfare, honor
and happiness: 2 Cor. 10.5.
so that all our imaginations and reasonings must be cast down, and every
high thing in us which exalts itself against the knowledge of God, and every
thought (of ours) is to be brought into captivity to the obedience of Christ.

This is then to mortify the flesh, when we can deny our own carnal, yea
natural reason, and submit it to Gods word; our own will, and submit it to
Gods will (both by a ready obedience to that he commands us to do, and by a
willing subjection with patience, to that he lays upon us to suffer, without
murmuring or repining; so, when in our affections, we (in comparison of God)
cease to love our selves, to delight in our selves out of God, to seek our
selves, to live to our selves; and in a word, when we cease to walk according
to the flesh, and withal, use all holy means to avoid and prevent sin, and
all the occasions of it: yea, the very first beginnings thereof, by suppressing
and nipping it in the head so soon as it begins to stir and move, and so
soon as it shall be observed, (which observation and watchfulness is here
required) to present and obtrude it self into our thoughts, or at the least,
so soon as it begins to tickle the affection; oh then, to repel it, and to
deny and refuse the bayts of Pleasure, Par. 2.. 11
Gain, Honor, whereby it would allure us, in consideration, and by opposition
of spiritual and better pleasure, gain and honor in Christ by obedience:
this is a high pitch of Mortification; yea, the higher, by how much the
foundation of it is laid lower, and it strikes at the very head of this
Serpent, and at the very first motions and stirrings of this viperous brood of
sin, and sinful lusts, and so far puts off the rags of old Adam, that it
lothes and hates even the garment spotted by the flesh. Jude 23.


Section. 11.
The Second thing to be looked to by us, 2 Vivification.
if we would put on Christ to Sanctification, is to see to our vivification,
and that we live as new men, in holiness and righteousness before the Lord,
Luke 1.75.
all the days of our life; that we now yield our selves unto God, Romans 6.13.
as those that are alive from the dead, and our memberr as Instruments of
righteousness unto God -- and that we obey from the heart that form of
doctrine which was delivered us, that we be renewed in the spirit of our
mind, ^phe^ 4.23 24.
and that we put on that new man, which after God is created in righteousness
and true holiness. This, for the particulars of it, may be understood from the
former, by the contrary, and it is, when instead of our selves, we can
acknowledge God, submit our selves in all things to his Sovereignty Will and
Word, conforming our wills to his will, refering all our thoughts, words and
actions to his glory; loving and delighting in him above all, and walking in
and according to the Spirit. So, when we, in the whole course of our lives
plainly show that we truly, and experimentally, Phil. 3.10.
know Christ and the power of his resurrection; and when we, being risen with
Christ do seek those things which are above, Coloss. 3.1.2.
and set our affections thereon: that is, highly esteem of them in our
judgments; will, and desire them in our affections, seek and labor after
them in, Par. 2.. 12
and by our endeavors. But seeing the former point gives light to this, as
also that which follows, we will proceed.

Section 12.
Thirdly, to put on Christ as our Sanctification, 3. An imitation of Christ.
is to imitate him, in all his imitable verues and graces; as in his humility,
patience, meekness, sincerity, and simplicity, fewness of words, yet
boldness of speech, and so, in and according to those general affections, of
love and charity to man, zeal and respect to his Fathers glory, in and by
which he wrought his Miracles as God, and effected the work of our salvation
as our Mediator, in which particulars themselves, we neither can, neither
ought we so much as dare to imitate him. It was one end, though less
principal, of our Saviors Incarnation, that in our flesh and nature he might
give us an example, and be a pattern to us how we ought to walk; he in it
showed that is not simply impossible to man's nature to keep the Law of God
perfectly, which power man had before his fall; which howsoever we cannot now
attain unto, through the weakness of the flesh, or rather strength of it in
us; yet we are to strive and endeavor our selves to the utmost, that we may
be conformable to Christ both in our doings and sufferings, both in our
obedience Active and Passive he by his example setting us a perfect copy to
write by, that we, so far as he pleases to guide our hands and hearts by his
spirit, might take out those Lessons, which both by word and work he has
taught us; and where we fail, we might by faith have recourse to him, who
coming in the likeness of sinful flesh, Romans 8.3.4.
and for sin has condemned sin in the flesh, that the righteousness of
the Law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not after the Flesh, but after the
Spirit, and after the example of our Savior Christ.

1 In his sufferings and humility.
Seeing then we cannot look to come to Heaven, but by walking in the same way
in which Christ our Savior is gone before us; It belongs to us if we would
approve our selves to be indeed Christians, and to put on Christ, to set him
before us, and to run with patience the same race which is set before us, and
appointed to us: Looking unto Jesus the author and finisher of our Faith, Heb.
12.1.2.3.
who for the joy that was set before him endured the Cross, despising the
same, -- Consider him, says the Apostle, that endured such contradiction of
sinners against himself, least you be wearied and faint in your minds. To
like purpose we are generally called to imitate him, not only in his
sufferings, but in his humility, patience, meekness, obedience, etc. Let the
same mind says Paul, be in you, Phil. 2.5.6.7.8.
which was also in Christ Jesus, who being in the form of God -- made himself
of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant -- and humbled
himself, and became obedient unto the death, even the death of the Cross. Now
this he did in love to us, and for our good and salvation; teaching us in like
love and humility, to submit our selves in all Offices of love to Christ, and
to our fellow-brethren, though in other regards our inferiors; forgetting or
laying aside the consideration of our greatness, honors, wealth, learning,
and stooping to their necessities, out of that love and duty we owe unto God
and Christ. To like purpose Peter tells us saying, 1. Pet. 2.21.22.23.
for hereunto are we called; because Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an
example that we should follow his steps, who did no sin, neither was guile
found in his mouth, who when he was reviled, reviled not again, when he
suffered he threatened not, but committed himself, (or his cause) to him that
judges righteously, etc.

All these places show how we are to imitate Christ in his humility,
patience, and generally in his sufferings: other places teach us to set him
before us, 2. In his holiness end other virtues.
and to cloth our selves with his example, in all holiness of life, and
sinceare and unblameable walking with him, after him, and before him as in his
presence. Thus Peter, as obedient children, 1 Pet. 1.14 15.16.
fashion not your selves according to the former lusts in your ignorance. But
as he which has called you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of
conversation, because it is written, be ye holy, for I am holy. Romans 13.12
13.14.
Even as Paul, formerly, Let us cast off the works of darkness, and let us
put on the armor of light; Let us walk honestly as in the day, not in rioting
and drunkenness, not in chambering and wantonness, not in strife and envying,
but put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ: This one he opposes to all the other,
teaching us, that to imitate the example of Christ, is to have all virtue and
grace; Par. 2.. 13
which therefore he names not particularly, as the nature of the opposition
between vice and virtue required, but includs all in that one, of putting on
Christ. As ye have therefore, Coloss. 2.6.
says the same Paul, received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk ye in him. And
says John, he that says he abides in him, ought himself also so to walk,
1 Ioh. 2.6.
even as he walked.

Section. 13.
Out of all which places, we may observe, Inferences hence.
besides the bare example of Christ, 1. That we are be holy as he is holy. 2.
therefore patiently to suffer for well doing, for even hereunto were ye called,
says Peter, because Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an example, etc.
3. That for us, and for our good, so that his doing and suffering for us,
carries greater force with it then his bare example, as if we could not
without most vile unthankfulness, but be answerable unto him in the like
sympathize and partake with him therein; 2 Samuel 11.11.
as did Vriah with Ioah and the Arc, when they encamped in the open Fields, he
would not go home, eat and drink, and lie with his wife: and as the people
with David, when he flying from Absalom, 2 Samuel 15.30.
went up Mount Oliuet bare headed and barefooted, set down at the right hand
of the throne of God; Heb. 12.2.3.
which we must consider -- least else we be wearied and faint in our minds. 6.
That Christ thus doing and suffering for us, is the efficient cause of the like
grace in us, exciting and stirring us up, and inspiring us by his spirit in us
to do the like. Wherefore, forasmuch as Christ has suffered for us in the
flesh, 1 Pet. 4.1.
arm your selves likewise with the same mind, etc. says the Apostle, and say
I, if you would be Christians indeed, consider well, both what Christ did, and
with what mind he did it; and so far as you may, do you likewise: Christ was
a Prophet to teach and instruct his Church; be thou so to in knowledge, to
teach and instruct thy Family, thy Servants, Wife and Children. Christ was a
Priest, offering himself in sacrifice for thee, and making intercession also
to God the Father for thee; be thou so also, by offering thy self, thine own
carnal reason, will, affections, lusts, in sacrifice to him, Romans 12.1. etc.
by mortifying them; so also by offering him by thy faith to God the Father,
and by giving him the sacrifice of thy Prayers and praises continually. He was
a King and

Par. 2. 14.
thoughts, our words and actions clothed with him. In and by all the powers and
faculties of soul. As 1 understanding. 1 Cor 2.2.
Let each faculty and power of soul and body thus put him on, that thou
may be straightly knit unto him, and become one spirit with him.

Let thy understanding make him especially the object of it; and with Paul,
determine to know nothing, save Jesus Christ, and him crucified, and what may
lead to the knowledge of him. Let him only be thy wisdom, who of God is made
unto us wisdom; that is, 1 Cor. 1.30.
not only the Author, but the object of our wisdom: this is, 2 Will, by
seeking our own by happiness in him.
when denying, as is said, our own reason and wisdom, or worldly, sensual and
deuillish wisdom, we seek only to be wise in him. So, whatsoever thy will
inclines to loves or desires, let it be God, and Christ, or at least, let it
be loved or desired, not for it self, but for Christ. Place all thine
happiness in him; have him once, and have all things in him; as, know him, and
know all things. Ioh. 17.3.
This is life eternal (and so all happiness) says our Savior, that they might
know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent. Which
knowledge implies love, upon an apprehension of Christ by faith. Do thou then
account that in him, once inioyed by faith, are all things that are or can be
desired, but in an eminent, excellent, and most perfect manner, as all wealth,
honor, glory, strength, and pleasure. All these are in God infinitely, not by
collection, but in an union, and as in a fountain; yea, God is most perfectly
all these, they being all one in him, yea himself. If then thou would have
true and solid happiness, seek it only by faith, in the true and
experimental knowledge of God in Christ. Would thou be rich and want
nothing? seek this sufficiency and wealth only in and by Christ. Would
thou attain to true honor and dignity? seek it only in Christ, and by
being a Christian indeed, from God and not from men. Would thou be strong
and potent? labor to be strong only in the might of Christ, not presuming on
thine own strength: so shall thou with Paul, 2 Cor. 3.5.
who of thy self art not able to think any thing as of thy self, Philip. 4.13
yet be able to do all things through Christ which stre^gthneth thee.
Desire thou pleasures, and would thou be happy thereby? seek them only in
Christ, and desire not to enjoy any pleasure, but only in him; and so in all
things else which are desirable. Yea, on the contrary, 3 Memory.
hate and detest what he hates, and for his sake. So, let not only thy
Understanding and Will, with thy Affections, but also thy Memory be clothed
with Christ; 2 Of body as 1 by the tongue. Ephesians. 4.24.
be not unmindful of his benefits, especially recall often his death and
passion, and the benefits thereof; and whatsoever else thou forget, be always
sure to remember them. So, let thy words always savor Christ and the best
things, Let no corrupt communication proceed out of your mouth, but that which
is good to the use of edifying, that it may minister grace unto the hearers.
Ephesians. 5.19.20.
Speak ever to his praise and honor with all thankfulness; not that your
tongues only should be tipp'd therewith, but speak to your selves in Psalms,
and Hymns, and spiritual Songs, singing and making melody in your heart to
the Lord, giving thanks always for all things unto God and the Father, in the
name of our Lord Jesus Christ. Christ is thine husband, Psalm. 45.1.2
think often of him, and speak of his praises. Let thine heart indite a good
matter, and then speak of the things which thou have made touching the King;
and let thy tongue be the Pen of a ready writer, (saying) Thou art fayrer then
the children of men, Romans 6.19.
etc. So, 1 Cor. 6.15.20.
give the members of thy body as servants to righteousness unto holiness;
Know you not, that your bodies are the members of Christ? -- for ye are bought
with a price: therefore glorify God in your body, and in your spirit, 2 Eyes.
3 Ears. etc.
which are Gods. Let your Eyes turn away from beholding vanity, and that
only for God and Christ, and because of your covenant made with him; let your
eyes enter into the same covenant, that with Job, you will not think, Job.
31.1.
or look (lustfully) upon a Maid. Let your Ears, smell, taste, and touch,
enter the same covenant with God; and for God, and with respect to Christ, and
your covenant with him, let them also forbear and abstain from intertaining
evil words and reports, from lascivious and too delicate savors, abuse of
meat and drink through excess and intemperancie, whether in respect of
quantity, or quality, through curiosity; and from Venerious and lustful
touches, and generally from sin.

And that constantly and daily.
Thus do constantly and every day; In the morning when thou first breakest thy
sleep, be sure thou awaken with God and Christ; dart up some short
ejaculation at least unto him, Par. 2.. 15
and lift up thy heart and soul unto him; see thy self enclosed in the arms
of his gracious providence, commend thy self to it still, rest thy self upon
him, if thou sleep again. And when thou risest, think of thy resurrection
out of the grave at the last day by his power. When thou clothest thy self,
think also of putting on thy Savior, put him on with thy clothes. Consider,
thou now layst aside thy night-clothes, which are more homely, and put on
such apparel as will keep thee warm, and arm thee against the injuries of
the weather, and of the way; and because thou go abroad into open view, thou
put on, not soul or torn apparel, but whole, clean, and neat clothing.
Let this put thee in mind of Christ, and of thy straight union with him, and
that thou, by godly meditation, reading, and more solemn prayer, arm thy
self against the dangers of the day, that thou go not out, as not in body, so
not in soul, naked or unfenced; but that thou by daily repentance repair the
breaches in thy soul and conscience by daily sin; wash thy soul as thy
face, in the tears of true repentance, as knowing thy soul and life stands as
well, if not more, in need of clothing, washing, mending, as does thy body
and apparel. Thus go out and answerably, and according to the former
directions, carry thy self all the day, doing all things in the name of
Christ, Coloss. 3.17
and to his glory: Whatsoever ye do in word or deed, do all in the name of
the Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God and the Father, by him --. Having once
put on Chirst, what is then to be done?


Section. 15.
And here remember, that having once put on Christ, as we all of us profess
our selves to do that are baptized, we first, see that we more and more put
him on, 1. Grow in grace.
by increasing in all grace, growing in grace and in the knowledge of our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ: 2 Pet. 3.18.
which is done by exercising of grace received, and employing it to best
advantage; for thus we hold fast our garment, and gird it more and closer to
us.

2. 2. Defile not this garment by scandalous sins.
That we take heed we defile not this garment by sin, we have taken on us
a precious name, the name of Christ; let us therefore take heed we dishonor
not that precious name by which we are called, least Christ and religious
Profession, be made only a cloak to cover our sin from men. If a man carry
glasses or any precious thing that may be endangered by a fall, he will look
warily to his steps; even so should we, least Gods honor fall to the ground
by us. Many stand so much upon the bare name of a Gentleman, that they are very
careful to do nothing which may stain that name, their reputation and
gentilitie. And shall not we be more careful, Par. 2.. 5
that Gods name, which is upon us, be not dishonored, by others and our
selves? take heed: for if he that takes the name of God, though but into his
mouth, Exodus 20.7.
in vain, shall not be holden guiltless, how much less we, that bear and
wear it upon us continually? take heed then of defiling this thy garment, or
of stayning thy profession, by scandalous sins; Eccles. 9.8.
Let thy garments be always white, and look to cleanness of heart and hand,
to uprightness and sincerity in all thy ways; there is great reward belongs
to such; Thou have a few names, Reu. 3.4.5.
says Christ to the Church of Sardis, which have not defiled their garments,
and they shall walk with me in white, for they are worthy: He that
overcomes, the same shall be clothed in white raiment, etc. the contrary
shall be found in others: of many we may say, that in regard of their often
falls and relapses after a seeming repentance and profession, Par. 2.. 15
their garments are at the best, but like a Beggars Cloak, all patched: the
best I know, though like a neat and well clad man walking in miry and durty
streets, he choose his steps, and walk warily, yet he cannot avoid some
spots and besprincklings; yet his care is presently to wipe them off, and rub
them out by repentance. This is the best remedy in such cases: yet such blotts
should carefully be avoided, as knowing that the least sin and folly in a
Professor, Eccles. 10.1
is a great blemish to his profession, the rather considering this our garment
is of fine white linen, Revel. 19.8.
which therefore makes any stain or blemish more conspicuous to the eye.

The third Part.
Section. 1.
IN all these, look to Sincerity, for there are many counterfeit Christians,
who outwardly and seemingly perform many of the forenamed particulars, and so
seem to put on Christ, Par. 3.. 1
and yet indeed remain plain hipocrites: they glory in things outward, as in
outward Baptism and profession in their outward hearing, praying, repenting,
and in a show of faith; and content themselves with the work done, and with
outward performances, and shows of holiness, in their tongues, words,
gestures and outward conversation; whereas all these profit nothing without
Christ, who is the very substance, soul and life of all Religion, without whom
all Sacraments are but shadows, and all profession in Gods sight, no better
then profaneness. I may then conclude the question Who is a Christian indeed,
and who is truly BaptiZed, who not: Romans 2.28.29.
in the words of the Apostle, only for Jew and circumcision, using the words,
Christian and Baptism. He is not a Christian who is one outwardly, neither is
that Baptism which is outward in the flesh; But he is a Christian which is one
inwardly and Baptism is that of the heart, in the spirit and not in the
letter, whose praise is not of men, but of God. In which regard it may be said
off, and to most Christians, as was said by Stephen, off and to the Jews in
regard of circumcision: Oh uncircumcised in heart and ears, etc. So, Act. 7.51.
Oh unbaptized in heart and ears: such selfe-deceit there is our conceited
putting on of Christ. The Prophet David therefore, where he speaks of this
argument, seems purposly to exclude all such as through deceit and hypocrisy,
promise to themselves this happiness of having their sins covered, when only
they can cover them from the eyes of men; for having pronounced him blessed,
Psalm. 32.1.2.
-- whose sin is covered, and unto whom the Lord imputes not iniquity, he
presently adds (declaring whom he means) and in whose spirit there is no guile.

Above all things then, we are to take heed of hypocrisy; for howsoever
thereby, we seek applause from men who see our outside, and upper garments of
profession; yet in very deed, we thereby lose favor and applause both with
God and men; in which regard hypocrisy is worse then oll other sins, by which
we gain favor, honor, pleasure and wealth, at least with men, though we lose
better things with God: for, by seeming religious, we get the hatred of wicked
men and of the world (such is the malignity of ungodly men against very the
shadow of goodness) and by not being what we seem, we purchase the
displeasure of God, and of all good men, and so lose both our pains here (for
it is great pain to be wicked, especially for a man by hypocrisy, to force
himself any long time, to be religious) and our hopes of an everlasting
rewards hereafter.

Section. 2.
It nearly then concerns us all to try and sift our selves, Par. 3.. 2.
whether we be sincere Christians indeed, Trialls of Christianity.
and whether indeed and in truth we have put in Christ or no.

Now this we may do by considering. 1. The nature. 2. 1. From the Nature of
our putting on of Christ
Properties. 3. Effects. 4. Means, of our putting on Christ.

The Nature thereof consists 1. In a putting off of sin, and the Old man. 2.
In a putting on of the New man, and of Christ. And 3. In both these together.

Where Christ is put on, And first by our putting off of sin.
there sin is put off; first, in regard of the guilt of it, by the remission
of it; Secondly, in regard of the Dominion of it, by Mortification.

They then that are Christ's, And that first in regard of the guilt of it, by
remission.
have this benefit by him, and by his death, their sins are pardoned, their
peace is made with God, and there is no condemnation to them; yet many there
are, who being baptized with Simon the Sorcerer, Acts 8.23.
and even therefore because they are baptized and make profession, imagine
themselves to be in good estate, and to be Christians good enough, to enjoy
Gods favor, and to be sure of salvation: yet are these very men, with Simon,
in the gall of bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity, and stand in need to
repent, and to pray, that the thoughts of their hearts may be forgiven them.

Signs of sin pardoned.
How then may it be known, whether our sins be pardoned or no? I answer, 1.
If we have truly confessed, repented, sorrowed, 1 Confession and repentance.
and forsaken sin, in our judgments dissallowing it, in our wills and
affections, abominating and hating it, and in our lives, endeavoring and
laboring against it. Thus we may be assured by our faith of the pardon of
it: for if we confess our sins, 1 Ioh. 1.9
he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins. And, who so confesses and
forsakes them, shall have mercy. Say once with David's heart, Pro. 28.13.
I have sinned; against thee, thee only have I sinned, and done this evil in
thy sight; 2 Samuel 12.13. Psalm. 51.4. and 17.
and thou shall hear to thy comfort, the Lord also has put away thy sin;
and shall be able with him to say, A broken and a contrite heart, O God, thou will not despise. But assuredly on the contrary, he that covers or hides his
sin, shall not prosper. He that can apply particularly first the threatenings
and curse of the law, and see himself, as much, if not more, then any, in
woeful and wretched estate: secondly, the promise of pardon in the Gospel, and
upon both these come to comfort and joy in his soul, and not otherwise; this
man may subscribe to Saint Paul, and say with him, 1 Timothy 1.15.
This is a faithful and true saying, that Christ Jesus came into the world to
save sinners, of whom I am chief; a chief sinner, and such an one as Christ
saues. Where then there is no true repentance, (I speak of men of discretion
and years) there is no pardon, let them flatter and deceive themselves as they
list.

2 peace of conscience.
2. Where sin is pardoned, there the conscience is pacified, and a man finds
himself armed against the very wrath of God. For being once justified by
faith, Romans 5.1.
we have peace with God, through our Lord Jesus Christ. Where then a man can
comfort himself in Christ, when sin and the Law would terrify him, by
presenting Christ between the Justice of God and his sin, and accordingly
rejoice and thank God, that he through Jesus Christ, Romans 7.24.25.
has delivered him from the body of that death, through sin, which he found in
himself; there to his comfort he may conclude, that there is no condemnation
to them, and Romans 8.1. Which may be known by three signs.
that (thus) are in Christ Jesus.

Further Signs of this joy and peace of conscience, are first when we, having
fallen into some sin speed) return again unto God, make our humble and
earnest confession, crave pardon, Psalm. 32.3.4.5.
seek and find our former peace again, finding no rest whiles we keep
silence, and confess not, and cry with David, Make me (again) to hear joy
and gladness, Psalm. 51.8. and 12.
-- restore unto me the joy of thy salvation. 2. When David; And when 3. with
the same David, Psalm. 4.6.7.
we can rejoice and comfort our selves Paul, We being justified by faith, have
peace with God, 1 Samuel 30.3 4. etc.
yea, not only so, but we glory in tribulations also, knowing that
tribulation works patience, Romans 5.1-3.
etc. Thus it is with such as have truly put on Christ, and have their sins
pardoned and covered, excepting only in case of spiritual desertion. But,
there is no peace, says my God, to the wicked: Isa. 57.21.
they can find no such sweetness and comfort in Christ, they have a hell
within them, and their consciences in the midst of their iollities, citing and
summoning them to judgment, and to hell: carnal comforts take up their
hearts; which when they fail, all their joy is darkened; if they sin, (as
almost they do nothing else) they by repentance seek not peace with God,
which they never had, etc. All these are evident arguments, there is no inward
peace to them, no pardon of sin, no Christ put on: and yet many such will be,
and are in their own judgments (oh blindness) Christians as good as any.

3 Love.
3. Where sin is pardoned, there is in that heart wrought an unfeigned and true
love, both toward God and man: 1 Of God.
1. We can never truly love God, till we find and feel in our selves the
effects of his love in us, whereby he has loved us in Christ, reconciling us
unto himself, 2 Cor. 5.19
by not imputing our trespasses unto us; for herein is love, 1 Ioh. 4.10. --
8.19.
not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son to be the
propitiation for our sins, -- and, we love him, because he loved us first:
not but that we also afterward love him, even for himself. By this argument
our Savior would prove, that the woman which anointed him with sweet
ointment, had her sins forgiven her, because she loved much, and testified
her love by such outward signs; where he also proportions our love to the
multitude and greatness of our sins; Luke 7.47.
Her sins which were forgiven her; were many, for she loved much; but to
whom little is forgiven, the same loves little; and by like proportion, to
whom nothing is forgiven, the same loves nothing. As then where sin is found
to be pardoned, and Gods love to us is so testified, there cannot but be love
in us: so where this love of God is not, (and it is not where it does not show
it self by obedience to Gods Commandments) there is no evidence of the pardon
of any sin. Josh. 14.15.
Let such Christians think of this, who love that and those whom God hates,
whose unfruitfulness and continual disobedience, plainly shows that they
truly love not God; its a manifest argument, they never yet tasted of Gods
love in Christ, and that they have not their sins covered by him.

(...) 12.-20.
2. Where God loves us in Christ, we ought also to love one another, which if we
do, God dwells in us, so that if any man say, I love God and hate his
brother, he is a liar, etc. Now he is said to hate his brother, 2 Of man, in
forgiving others.
that loves him not; and he loves not his brother, that having offended him,
seeks not to be reconciled to him; and being offended by him, shows not
himself willing to forgive him. When Gods Children do offend either God or
man, they can have no Peace till by confession, they seek to be reconciled
with them, they dare not offer their sacrifice of Prayer and good works to
God, till they first be at peace, or seek peace with their offended Brother;
they know that otherwise they shall not be accepted of God themselves.
Moreover, Mat. 5.23.24.
when wrong is done them, (if it be a personal wrong) there they ever show
themselves ready to forgive, especially where the offender repents him, as
knowing they else can expect no forgiveness at Gods hands. Mat. 6 12.14.15.
Luke 17.4.
They have learned the Apostles rule, to put on as the Elect of God, holy and
beloved (of God) bowels of mercies, Coloss. 3.12 13.
kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness, long suffering, to forbear one
another, and to forgive one another, when any man has a quarrel against them,
even as Christ forgave them, so also do they. To forgive others then, is made,
not a cause (because of that inequality of men's debts to us, and of ours to
God. First, in number, our debt to God being as 10000. their debt to us, but as
100. Mat. 18.24.25. etc.
Secondly, in weight, ours being Talents, theirs Pence.) but only a sign, by
which we may conclude that our sins are pardoned therefore forgive others,
because we feel that God for Christ his sake has said, Blessed are the
merciful, for they shall obtain mercy. And, Mat. 5.7.
If ye forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive
you: as contrariwise, if ye forgive not men their trespasses, Mat. 6.14.15.
neither will your Father forgive your trespasses, So elsewhere, We know that
we have passed from death to life, 1 Ioh. 3.14
because we love the brethren; he that loves not his brother, abides in
death. How then will they approve themselves to be what they profess,
Christians indeed, whose pride is such, they cannot seek peace with men where
themselves have broken it, they will not acknowledge their offenses one to
another, and yet they will impudently thrust with the foremost into Gods Temple;
and moreover, being offended, they show themselves implacable and no wise
inclining to show mercy, neither forgetting injuries, whiles by Sword, or by
some kind of retaliation, they will avenge themselves, nor yet from the heart
forgiving them, Par. 3.. 3.
but that they will bear hatred and malice there still, and accept of no
submission. Let such consider how that uncharitable person was dealt withal,
who, being forgiven a greater debt of God, (though conditionally) yet was
merciless to his fellow servant. Mat. 18.28.29. -- 33, 34.
Can such say, they have put on Christ?

Section. 3.
Where Christ is put on, there, power, 2. In regard of the power of it by
Mortification.
reign, and dominion of it in us, by being mortified and kept under: for where
sin reigns, Christ reigns not; and contrariwise, where Christ reigns in any
(and there he reigns where he is truly put on) there sin reigns not, though
it remain and be in the best still. They that are Christ's, Gal. 5.24.
have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts. Where any, making
profession of Christianity, shall yet not wholly submit himself to Christ, and
not suffer him by his word and spirit to have a swaying, and commanding voice
in his soul, but has an Ear, an Eye, a Hand and Foot for sin, putting
Gods spirit to silence in him and quenching the motions of it, that sin may
be obeyed in the lusts thereof; this man deceiues himself, as too many do,
with a vain shadow of formal profession. Where sin is obeyed, and the
importunate and impudent solicitations of it yielded unto, and no ear given to
the quiet and still mouings of the spirit according to Gods Word (for the
spirit ordinarily does not thrust it self upon us, but makes his motions
gently and in secret, and looks that we readily and freely, according to the
nature of the spirit, yield our assent and obedience thereunto) there, sin
cannot be said to be put off, (whether it be Covetousness, Uncleanness,
Pride, Intemperancy or any other sin) nor Christ to be put on; for
wheresoever he is truly put on, there that soul wholly resignes it self unto
him, and suffers him to reign universally in the heart. Not but that Gods
faithful servants, are some times led captive, and ouermastered by some
special corruption; but this is neither constantly, nor willingly, but with a
strife and reluctation, whereby they would feign resist and cast off this
burden of sin, and cast out and expel this molestfull guest which
tirannizeth in them.

Trialls of our Mortification.
But you will say, how then may I know whether sin (even this sin into which
I sometimes fall) be truly dead and mortified in me or no? I answer, we may
know whether sin be dead or alive in us, as we may know the difference
between a living and a dead body, not only by the lively motions thereof, but
also by the heaviness or weight, and lightness of the same body, and by the
burthensomnesse, and irkesomnesse of it to us. For as the same body being dead
and becoming a liuelesse corpse, is much heavier then itself whilst there was
life in it; and as it becomes much more loathsome and noisome to us being dead,
then it was whilst it lived, (for then we could play with it, hug it and
embrace it, and receive sweet content in the company and fellowship of it (as
suppose of our wife, child, friend, etc.) whereas now we account the sight of
it loathsome, the smell of it noisome, and remove it out of sight, yea, we
would account it an intolerable bondage and misery to have it any long time
tied and buckled unto us, that we could not avoid and escape the company of
it); even so, when we can find and feel that sin or those sins
burdensome unto us now, which we made light on before, and tushed at; when we
groan under that burden, and unfeignedly desire to be eased of it, when that
sin which was sweet, profitable and gainefull to us before, which was sweet
in our mouths, and which we did hide under our tongus, Job. 20.12.
which we made our play fellow or bedfellow, and made on as of an only son,
and when we cannot now endure the sight of it, or the company of it, or of such
as have bin and are still ready to be the occasions or instruments of it, and
when it is the grief of our souls that it does so haunt us, the we cannot
wholly be rid of it; this is an evidence to our souls that this sin, or
those sins are dead in us, and our desire and endeavor of casting it off
from us, though we cannot wholly do it as we desire, is in Gods gracious
acceptance through Christ, the casting of it off indeed. It shall never be
accounted our sin, whilst we willingly yield obedience to Christ, or would
truly so do; and unwillingly are haled to the acting of sin, Par. 3.. 4.
and give it not our heart.

Section 4.
And thus for the trials of Christianity, 2 Trialls from our putting on of
Christ.
from our putting off of sin. It is also to be tried by our putting on of
Christ, and of the new man; which, as was said, is first to Justification,
secondly, to Sanctification.

1. And first to our Justification.
If we have put on Christ to our Justification, then are we straightly and
inwardly knit and united unto him by faith. Now thou may try both thy faith
and thy union with Christ by these marks.

1. By thy Love; for love is the eldest daughter of Faith, Our faith and union
thereby with Christ known. 10 by our Love of God more then of the world.
and is also a fruitful Mother, and ever big of many children; and neerenesse,
and conjunction of good things causes love; as the marriage bond, either does,
or should tie the straitest True-loues knot. Where then we have put on Christ,
and are truly united to him, there we cannot but love him above all things, and
love both the Father, and one another in him; which our love shall testify our
union with God. For, 1 Ioh. 4.16.
says John, we have known and believed the love that God has to us. God is
love, and he that dwells in love, dwells in God, and God in him. It would
then be well considered, whereon especially we set our love, and unto what more
principally we engage that affection. Iam. 4.4.
We are taught, that the love and friendship of the world is enmity with God,
and that whosoever will be a friend of the world, is the enemy of God, in which
regard men show themselves to be so far from being truly united and espoused
to Jesus Christ, that they are called and accounted Adulterers, and
Adulteresses. 1 Ioh. 2.15.16.
Wherefore Saint John's exhortation is, Love not the world, neither the things
that are in the world, (which are, lust of the flesh, lust of the eyes, and the
pride of life, which are not of the Father, but of the world.) If any man love
the world, the love of the Father is not in him. As therefore our love is, so
are we our selves: if our love be worldly, so are we; if our love be heavenly
and spiritual, so are we. Try then this thine affection: art thou not glued
in love to the vain pleasures, honors, and profits of the world, more then
unto Christ? Do thou not desire in thy soul to enjoy the things of this
world, whether unlawful or yet lawful, more then Christ and his fellowship? I
know thou must be one of a thousand, if thou in this confessest thy self
guilty. Therefore let thy works and thine endeavors speak for thee, or
against thee. What is it thou most greedily, and with an inward affection
pursuest? what is it thou labourest most after? is it to enjoy God or the
world? is it to find comfort in him, and in the inioying of his love and
favor, by keeping and holding the peace of a good conscience, or not rather in
and from the things of this life? Art thou not more truly and inwardly
grieved, in being denied, or in the loss of the comforts and contentments of
this life, as of thy friends, good name, wealth, or it may be, in being
debarred of thy unlawful desires and lusts, then in the hazarding at least, if
not losing of Gods love by thy sinful and immoderate loving and affecting such
things? May not we truly say of many, when we see how they take on and
mourn for temporal losses, as of the love and favor of men and of the world,
and of other worldly things; and withal how little they mourn when they
offend God, as the Jews said of our Savior weeping over the grave of Lazarus,
Behold how he loved him: so behold how they love these things? Behold, how
little such men love Christ, that neither weep for offending him, nor yet for
his sake, and for the love of him will debar themselves of any unlawful
liberty? If then we would indeed approve our selves to love Christ, we must
both show greater sorrow (at least for the soundness and heartinesse of it)
for offending him by our immoderate or inordinate love of worldly things, then
for our forgoing of them; and also learn to love all other things only in
Christ, and for Christ, as given us by virtue of his purchase and death, to be
used and inioyed as tokens of his love, and to be employed to the honor and
praise of his mercy and goodness. In vain else we brag of Christianity, or
of any union with Christ by faith, if thus we suffer our loves and affections
to be commanded, and our selves to be overcome of the world; for whatsoever
is born of God, 1 Ioh. 5.4.
overcomes the world, and this is the victory that overcomes the world even
our faith. Thus it is with the^ that by faith have put on Christ; whereas with
counterfeit Christians it is otherwise; Par. 3. 5.
so that we may turn it and say, This is the victory which overcomes our
(counterfeit) faith, even the word, and the love of it. Who is he that
overcomes the world, verse. 5
but he that believes that Jesus is the Son of God? That is, but he that
truly believing in Christ, is able to justify his faith by his love, and his
love by the fruits and works thereof? of which afterward.

Section. 5.
Secondly, for the trial of our union and fellowship with Christ, 2 by our
affection unto Christ's presence.
we are to examine how we stand affected to the company and presence of
Christ: for if we be one with Christ, and he with us, we will further
express the love of our souls which we bear him ( not only by loving
whatsoever, and whomsoever belongs any ways unto him, and by often thinking of
him with delight, by often talking and speaking of him, and of his praises with
great content, by a ready and willing obedience, and doing of his pleasure;
yea, by exposing our selves, our goods, our names, our bodies and lives if need
were, to danger for him; but also, and that especially) by desiring his
presence above all things else, and by carrying ourselves respectively in the
same, by rejoicing exceedingly therein, mourning and grieuing when we are
debarred of the same.

Now Christ becomes present with us, And first when he draws near unto us.
either when he comes and draws near unto us, or when we come and draw
near unto him.

1. He is near unto us, 1 As he is God, by his omnipresence.
first generally, (and to all others as well as to us) as he is God, in regard
of his omnipresence, and being in every place by his essence and power. But
thus properly and immediately we put him not on. Yet thus far we may hence
try our selves, inasmuch as they that are Christ's, do ever set themselves,
(in the acknowledgement of his Godhead, and of the vbiquitie thereof) as in his
presence, ever, and in all things approving themselves unto him, and not daring
to do any thing which is unseemly in his sight and presence. When Christ is
once ours, then is the Godhead of Christ ours, in regard of the power and
efficacy of it, we being mediately united to the Godhead of Christ, by virtue
of our more immediate union with his manhood, as was said in the beginning. In
which regard, Christ, according to his Godhead and power, does now go before
us, to conduct and bring us safely to the heavenly Canaan, as formerly he did
the people of Israel to the earthly Canaan; and if then, much more now. Exodus
23.20.21.2.
But, said God to his people then, and in effect to us now, Behold, I send an
Angel before thee, to keep thee in the way, and to bring thee into the place
which I have prepared; Beware of him, and obey his voice, provoke him not, for
he will not pardon your transgressions; for my name is in him, etc. And thus do
Gods servants always conceive of Christ, approving themselves unto him as God,
not daring to sin in his presence. They walk before him and are perfect or
upright, as Christ, the second Person commanded Abraham. Genesis 17.1.
Thus Joseph kept himself from sin being strongly tempted, how can J do
this great wickedness and sin against God? Gen 39.9.
2 Cor 4.2.
Thus Paul labored in his Ministry to approve himself to every man's
conscience in the sight of God; yea, he charged Timothy, 1 Timothy 6.13 14.
in the sight of God -- and before Jesus Christ -- to keep the commandment
(given him) without spot unrebukable, etc. which doubtless he did.

Let all us Christians examine our selves hereby, To set our selves ever in
Christ's presence, is a good sign of grace.
whether our behavior, our words, our inward thoughts and affections of soul,
be such as may become the presence of Christ, whose eyes are ten thousand
times brighter then the Sun. If we indeed, as we profess, did always and in
every place take our selves as clothed and beset with his presence, we would
so rejoice therein and reverence the same, that we would nether say, think, do,
or desire to do any thing unseemly; we would make him the witness, yea and
judge of all our thoughts and intentions, and so demean our selves, that we
durst in all things appeal to him and to his omnisciencie, as to our witness
for the present, whom we acknowledge and believe shall come to be our Judge
also. It would make us take heed of secret sins, and carry our selves uprightly
as in his sight, and to take heed of hypocrisy, to show our selves constant,
and the same in all companies whether godly or profane, in private, and when
no eye else sees us, as well as in public sight and view of others, etc. But
thus the hypocrite does not; neither does the adulterer consider this that
waits for the twilight, nor he that closely defrauds and steals from his
Christian brother, Par. 3.. 6
nor drunkards when they, with Baltazer, Dan. 5.5.
sit and carouse together, they think not of the hand in the wall.

Section 6
Secondly, Christ more specially comes and is near unto us by his grace and
gracious presence. 2. As our Savior, by his grace. 1. Outwardly in and by the
Word, Sacraments and his Ministers.
And this is both more outwardly in and by the means and Ministers of grace,
and more inwardly by the presence and motions of his Spirit. First, he comes
unto us by his Word, and by the Ministry and Ministers thereof, as also by the
Sacraments.

Now we are to try our union with Christ through Faith, by our love and
affection unto his Word and Sacraments. For if ever we have been begotten by
the immortal seed of Gods word, and made the Sons and Children of God
thereby, we cannot but bear much good will and affection thereunto, as also
to the Ministers thereof. If then there be that union betwixt Christ and us,
which we make show of by our outward profession, then will we make further
demonstration thereof by our welcoming of him in his Ordinances, whereunto we
should approach with much Joy, and with due preparation and reverence.

It is impossible, if Christ be once ours and we his; if once we be espoused
to him and have put him on, but that we should much desire to hear his voice
and to enjoy his company, and rejoice therein. What man would willingly be
without his garments from which he finds both a covering for his nakedness,
and preservation of his natural heat and life? What man or woman that is
betroathed to another does not wonderfully long to enjoy the company,
conference and presence of their well-beloved, and if they be absent, to hear
often from them, and to receive Letters and Tokens of their love? certainly
where such a bond is, there these longing desires, and this joy will be, else
there is just cause to suspect the truth and sincerity of our love. Even thus,
if ever we have found the benefit and comfort of Christ whom we have put on, we
cannot endure to be without him and his comfortable presence any long time; and
if we be assured and affianced to him, we cannot but much delight in his
company and conference, and (seeing he is in body absent) in his Ministers,
whom he daily sends as his messengers with many significations of much love
and great good will toward us, and from whose hands he will have us receive,
as from him, many tokens of his love, as assurances thereof unto us. Now this
is done not only in the written word, which is as his Letter and Epistle from
Heaven to us, but also by the public ministry of his servants, (and by the
Sacraments) these being sent from him to expound and declare what is the
meaning both of his Word and Sacraments.

To hear Christ's word with desire, joy, care, and in obedience and fear, is
that Eeare ma^k whereby his Sheep are known.
Now our desire to these, and Joy in these, and care to answer his will
signified by these, is ever proportionable to the straightness of the bond and
measure of that love which is between Christ and us. If then there be little
or no desire to draw near unto God in his Word, by reading, hearing and
meditation, little or no Joy, delight and relish in the same, with as little
care and conscience to execute and perform his whole will and pleasure, how
harsh soever his Word may seem to our corruptions; we may conclude there is
as little love of Christ, and not that neerenesse and conjunction which is and
should be betweeene him the espoused Husband of his Church, and such as
profess themselves to be affianced to him, to be members of his body, and to
have put him on. And hereby shall their hypocrisy be discovered; for says
our Savior Christ, My sheep hear my voice, Ioh. 10 27.
that is, they know him and his voice, which they can distinguish from the
voice of a stranger or hireling, they receive and hear it joyfully, they
believe it, and readily and most willingly obey it. This is that special
Eare-marke by which Christ's Sheep are known to him and to themselves, as also
in good part to others; as for others, as the Jews of old, and the Popish and
profane sort amongst us, he says unto them, ye believe not because Ye are not
of my sheep: Ioh. 10.26.
whereas, if ye were indeed my sheep, ye would most gladly hear, most
steadfastly believe, most readily obey; Ioh. 8.47.
He that is of God hears Gods Word; ye therefore hear them not, because
ye are not of God. Such a hearing is there meant, as is accompanied with
Faith, Joy, and obedience; and not simply a bare frequenting the Church and
hearing with the outward Ear, not every Joy in hearing, nor every obedience to
the things heard, for Herod heard John gladly, and did many things, but he
heard him not in all, nor obeyed him in that one thing which neerliest
concerned him, nor delighted in that one reproof and word of God so much as
he did in his Whore. Wherefore that we may approve our hearing and Joy in
hearing to be sound, we must find that we believe and stand well affected,
and are ready to obey every word of God, even because it is the word and will
of Christ our Husband and Head, though it require of us the pulling out of our
right eye, the cutting off of our right hand, and parting with our most
delightsome, gainefull, and aduantagious sins; and that we rejoice in his
word, and in obeying his will, more then in any contentfull thing in the world
besides, even in this regard chiefly, because there, and by the Word and
Sacraments, we enjoy a blessed communion with Christ, are partakers of his
promises, that especially of the pardon of our sins, and receive further
assurances of his love. All other joy and delight in the Word, and presence of
Christ by it, without this now spoken of, may well be suspected of hypocrisy.

But because Christ, whom we profess our selves to have put on, is not only a
loving husband, and Savior, but also an awefull Lord and Master, the mighty
God, etc. therefore his presence in his Word and Ministry, as also in the
Sacraments, must work in us, not only Joy, but also Fear, and much respect
and reverence to him in his Ordinances: Psalm. 2.11. Isa. 66.2.
we must be such as serve him with fear, and rejoice with trembling: for so
are Gods servants described to be such as tremble at his word. This shows,
that if we have this fellowship with Christ in his Word and Sacrament, we will
reverently repair, and conscionably prepare our selves to meet him in his
ordinances, by laying aside all malice, and guile, and hypocrisies, when we
come thereunto; 1 Pet. 2.1.2.
bringing with us teachable spirits, and minds resolved to obey every word of
his, not daring presume to live and continue in any one sin how beloved
soever, or in the neglect of any good duty, how harsh soever, which he in his
Word shall on the one hand forbid, on the other command and enjoin. By this
trial I take, many may be discarded out of the number of true Christians, who
come with as little reverence and preparation to the hearing of Gods word, as
to hear an old wives tale told them; who give credence to the Word no more,
then the Instrument or Minister is of credit with them, who practice it with as
little conscience, Par. 3.. 7.
as if it were the bare word of man only: and lastly, who come to the holy
Communion, as they would come to see a dumb show acted, never thinking
aforehand into whose presence they approach, to what end they come, what duty
they have bound themselves unto; Christ in regard of his spiritual presence,
is as far from their thoughts and minds, as in regard of his bodily presence,
he is far from their eyes and bodily sight. Are these men Christians? Have
they put on Christ, when they have him not so much as in their minds? where is
their wedding garment?

Section. 7.
2. Christ comes near unto such as have put him on, 2 Inwardly by the motions
of his spirit.
in and by the secret motions and stirrings of his spirit, whereby according to
his word, and the motives to goodness, and retractiues from evil, which there
we have, he stirs them up, and remembers them of their duty; nay, he thus
generally comes near unto all such as live under the means, and within the
hearing of his voice in the ministry of the Word, standing at the door of the
their hearts and knocking, expecting entrance and intertainment to be given to
him and to his motions. Revel. 3.20.
Now, whosoever have well indeed put him on, and are united to him, Which to
entertain is a sign of grace.
hear his voice, as being well acquainted with it, open the door of their
hearts, and bid him welcome, giving him the chief room therein, and suffering
him to rule and command in their souls; that is, they dare do nothing
contrary to the will of him, who by his still and silent voice within them,
suggests unto them, what, according to Gods Word they should do, or not do.
Lydia was such an one, whose heart the Lord knocking outwardly by the ministry
of Paul, and inwardly by his own spirit opened, that she attended unto the
things which were spoken of Paul: such open hearts have all true Christians.
Act. 16.14.
On the other hand, we have many, otherwise well conceited of themselves, who,
when God by any good motion comes near unto them, (and here I must appeal to
their own hearts and consciences) resist him, and withstand the work of his
grace, shut him as it were, to the door, and keep him out of possession,
barring the doors of their hearts, by opposing contrary and carnal reasons,
hardening themselves against him, or else with drawing their ear from his
knockings, (who must either be let in willingly, or else he uses not with
violence to break the door,) drowning and quenching the motions of grace, by
drinking, carousing, and merry company, or by other carnal or worldly
employments, resolving to rule all themselves within as they list, according to
their own wills and wisdom. Whereas if Christ indeed were theirs, Par. 3. 8.
and they his; or that they had put him truly on (as they will yet pretend)
they should find themselves willing to give him intertainment, to embrace al
good motions, and to resign themselves universally in obedience unto him, most
glad that they have such a wise, careful, and vigilant counselor within them.

Section. 8.
Now secondly, as Christ comes near unto us by the means aforesaid: Secondly
when we draw unto him.
so do we draw near unto him more specially (as he also to us) 1. By
Prayer. 2. By Death. 3. By Judgment. By our affection to all these, we may
judge of our selves, what union we have and hold with Christ, and whether we
have so put him on as true Christians should.

1. 1 by prayer.
True Christians come boldly (yet not presumptuously) unto the throne of grace,
Heb. 4.16.
that they may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of need. This
proceeds from an assured confidence of Gods favor, and of the pardon of their
sins through Christ, and that he being touched with the feeling of their
infirmities, puts them on, makes their case his own, and makes intercession to
the Father for them. This makes them, To call upon God in Christ a sign of our
union with him.
in all their necessities and wants, to repair to their heavenly Father, with
much joy, confidence and comfort, pouring out their souls unto him in the name
of Christ; nay, they never find more comfort (in any estate good or bad) then
when they enjoy his presence in the heavenly exercise of Prayer. Dares any then
call himself a Christian, and profess himself to have put on Christ as well
as any, that dares not come into his presence, that cannot open his mouth, nor
yet his heart to him in prayer, neither confessing and bewailing his wants, nor
begging any supply thereof from him? I know it should be high presumption in
any, to dare to look God in the face, out of Christ, unless they have not
only a commandment, but a gracious promise, in his name, and for his sake to
be heard in their requests: If there be any such presumptuous one, he may
justly fear that whiles he lifts up his hands and his face to heaven, God
power upon him, Psalm. 11.6.
and rain down snares, fire and brimstone, and an horrible tempest, as the
just portion of his cup. Yet, on the other hand, for any having both precept
and promise from God in Christ (...) name, to come immediately into his
presence, and to receive what he asks; for any I say, not to come, not to
ask, not to pray, is an argument of an unbelieving, impenitent and senseless
heart, and the true character of an Atheist, and of one who is without God, and
without Christ, in that he calls not upon the Lord. Psalm. 14.4.
Yet many such there are, that especially of and by themselves never power
forth a prayer to God, nor willingly with others; Par. 3.. 9.
and yet these men forsooth are as good Christians as any, in their own
conceits, and will be saved by Christ as soon as the best: oh strange
hypocrisy and delusion!

2. Secondly, hereby also may a Christian take a scantling of himself, namely,
by his conceit of, and affection to Death, and to Judgment; It being appointed
unto men (even to the godly) once to die, Heb. 9.27.
after which comes the Judgment, by both these as Christ draws near unto
us, so do we unto him. So that if once we have put him, we by these put him
more on, and draw nearer unto him.

Section. 9.
1. Death, whether it be in the Lord, or for the Lord, 1. By Death Romans 8 38.39.
as it seperates not from Christ, nor from the love of God wihch is in Christ
Jesus our Lord, so it brings a man nearer unto Christ, even to be with Christ,
which is far better, and more to be desired then to be still in the body (if
we respect our own good) Christ indeed now is in us and we in him, Phil.
^.23. Gal. 2.20.
but as yet we are not so properly with him, in which regard it is said, that
whilst we are at home in the body, 2 Cor. 5.1.2. -- 4. -- 6.7.8.
we are absent from the Lord, but by death, we are absent from the body, and
present with the Lord; we so are present with his humanity, whiles here we are,
by faith we are espoused to him, but by death we begin to be taken into
house and home with him for ever, where we shall enjoy his more immediate
presence and company; for here we walk by faith, not by sight. This makes
Death so desirable to such as here have truly put on Christ; for, says Paul,
we know that if our earthly house of this Tabernacle where dissolved we have a
building of God, an house not made with hand eternal in the heaven, for in
this we groan earnestly, desiring to be clothed upon withour house which is
from Heaven -- for we that are in this Tabernacle do groan being burdened,
not for that we would be unclothed, but clothed upon, that mortality might be
swallowed up of life. This affection is also in Gods Children generally, who
though Death be an enemy in it self, and may affright them as men, desiring
their natuall good and preservation, yet whiles by faith they seeing beyond it,
Not to fear death an argument of our union with Christ.
look to their eternal good, they fear it not, but much desire it (as a man
does bitter and loathsome Physic, not for it self, but in hope of health)
and, according to Gods will, willingly embrace it when it comes. There may be
some strife awhile between nature and grace, (as there is in them also
between grace and corruption, between the flesh and the spirit, Gal. 5.17.
which have contrary desires) but the desires of the greater good (of our
souls) by death, preuailes against the desires of the lesser good (of our
bodies) by inioying this temporal life. As therefore we are bid examine our
selves, 2 Cor. 13.5
whether we be in the faith, and prove our selves -- whether Jesus Christ is in
us, or we be reprobates, so may we do it as well by this trial as any; for if
Christ be in us here, and we in the faith of Christ, then assuredly, we cannot
but desire, and according to Gods will to be with him, and further and more to
enjoy his more immediate presence, which cannot be enjoyed but by death; at the
least we cannot, (when our time is come, or that God calls us to seal his
truth by our death, which we professed in our life) be unwilling or
refractary thereunto; which if for any long time, we be, or if that the love of
the world and of our temporal life, prevail with us to make us unwilling to
die, whether in our profession or for it) we have then too just cause to
suspect our selves, that as yet we never truly put on Christ, nor were, by
faith united and espoused to him; for if we were, we could not be unwilling
to depart hence (seeing he now is absent in body) and to go to him, and to be
with him in those Mansion places which he has prepared for us in heaven, which
even Lovers and espoused couples (in like case of absence the one from the
other) do so much on earth desire. Therefore to be unwilling to die and to be
with Christ, argues that that party has no hope to see Christ in his Kingdom
or to reign with him, that he has so little desire to go to him; whereas he
that has once seen Christ here with the eyes of faith (and by it has put him
on) will with good old Simeon, wish and say, Luke 2.29.30.
Lord now let thou thy servant depart in peace, according to thy word, for
mine eyes have seen thy salvation. It argues moreover that such a party

Par. 3.. 10
and have this straight union with him which we make show of, or that we dwell
in him and he in us, we will further declare this by our love to him and to his
coming for so are true Christians characterized and described, to be such, as
not only look for Christ the second time, 2 Timothy 4.8.
as we now heard, but, as love his appearing; 1 Ioh. 4.16.17.18.
now blessed John thus writes. God is love, and he that dwells in love,
dwells in God, and God in him: herein is our love made perfect, that we may
have boldness in the day of Judgment -- there is no fear in love, To love it,
a sign of Faith.
but perfect love casts out fear, because fear has torment: he that
fears is not perfect in love. Here then is the confidence of Gods Children in
Judgment, that though they be not in this life without sin, (which may be
cause of fear) yet, at death and after, they are freed, not only from the
guilt of sin, (which they were before, it being not imputed to them) but from
the being of sin in them, so that coming before the Bar and Judgment seat
of Christ as their Judge, they stand clothed before his Throne, with himself
as their Savior; his righteousness couers their unrighteousness, and they
with comfort expect from him the sentence of absolution, and acceptance with
him for ever, for his own righteousness sake. The assurance hereof makes them
joyful in death, and to love the appearing of Christ, in the certain hope of
the resurrection of their bodies to life eternal, and of a Crown of
righteousness to be given them at that day by the Lord the righteous Judge. 2 Timothy 4.8.
These, reason to their comfort, that if God loved them, and Christ dyed for
them while they were yet sinners, much more then being now justified by his
blood, Romans 5.8.9.10.
shall they be saved from wrath through him. etc.

Now the wicked and the hypocrite has no such comfortable hope in the thought
and apprehension of the last Judgment; he either dares not think of it at
all seriously, or so far as he thinks of ir, it is not without great horror
and astonishment. It is no joy nor comfort to him to look Christ in the face
as his Judge, frowning on him, who here reiects him as a Savior. if any be so
impudent as now being told of these things, to outstare Christ as his Judge,
and to profess a hope to speed as well at that day as any, he may easily be
convinced hence; namely, by his harsh conceits of Christ now in his Word and
Messengers. Such men cannot now endure Christ in the power of his Word; his
sayings are too harsh, his doctrine too austere, his discipline too severe, his
yoke is too heavy for them, and his coards too strait, and may we think they
can endure, Christ coming unto them in the word of his power, by the voice of
an Archangel, in his own most terrible and thundering voice, attended with
infinite myriads of Angels, 2 Pet. 3.11.12.
the heavens all being on fire, and the elements melting with seruent heat;
they had need be other manner of persons in all holy conversation and
godliness, who look for, and hasten unto the coming of this day of God, then
these ungodly, at best, civil men are. If then they cannot away with Christ
now in his humility, and when he comes clouded in the veil of his Word, how
will they endure him in his glory, and when he shall show himself and person
immediately unto them? In a word, if they cannot now endure him as a loving
Savior, how will they then (for all their impudent brags) endure him as a
terrible Judge? Only the justified person at that day (and now in the hope of
it) may and does look up, Luke 21.28.
and lift up his head, for his final redemption draws nigh. The dissoluing
of the world, and Cnrists terrible coming, is for their full deliverance from
the power of the grave, and of Satan, and of wicked men, who have beset and
besieged the godly, and therefore for their comfort: but terrible it must needs
be to all others, against who^ Christ comes in this terrible manner. It shall
be then, as it is with men in some castle or hold, narrowly besieged by their
enemies, when a puissant and migthy army is gathered for their rescue, and to
raise the siege; when it comes near and in sight, the very clashing of the
armor, the brightness of the swords, the noise of Drums and Trumpets, yea the
very roaring of the Canon; all these are comfortable, and as sweet music to
them, for whose succor and deliverance they come; but must needs be dismal and
terrible to their enemies. He then that cannot now in some good measure, and
prevailing manner overcome his fears, and rejoice in the hope of his
deliverance from death, hell, and all infernal enemies, and of his crown of
glory to be given him by the merciful sentence of the Judge at that day, Par.
3.. 11
can hardly be assured for the present, that Christ is his or that he stands
now clothed with his merits and righteousness, whatsoever in word he otherwise
pretend.

Section. 11.
Now thirdly, for the trial of our union with Christ, Our union with Christ by
faith, known, 3 by Self-denial.
it were good for us to examine whether we have made a divorce from our selves
by self-denial, or whether we be not still wedded to our own selves, to our
own opinions, to our own wills and affections through self-love. If once we
put on Christ, we must put off our selves. By this note we discover the
pretended knot which seems to be between many, in regard of outward
profession, and Christ, in as much as the same men, who profess they have put
on Christ, yet reject and cast him off in his Sovereignty, preferring their
own wills before his; in his wisdom, preferring their own reason before his
Word; Par. 3.. 12.
in his righteousness, not submitting themselves unto the righteousness of
God, but going about to establish their own righteousness; Romans 10.3.
in his glory, doing all to their own praise, etc. How have these men put on
Christ, who so far have cast him from them?

Section 12.
4. If thou be one with Christ by putting him on, By other effects of it.
then do thou receive warmth and defense from him as he is thy clothing, sap
and juice, from him as he is the Vine, and thou a branch of him; nourishment,
food, and refreshing as he is thy spiritual bread, on whom thou feedest; and
in a word, thou receiuest vigor and influence from him as thine Head, thou
being a member of his body: for so do all such as have union with him. Where
then we see men lie naked and unarmed, and foiled with every temptation; where
we see nothing but barrennes in the lives of men, whom we see to be dry,
withered and unfruitful branches; where we see men, after so many years of
plenty in the Gospel, to remain in their souls, like Pharaohs lean kine,
Genesis 41.19.
as poor and illfauoured as ever; and lastly, where we see men and women
professing Christ, to be without the life of Religion, without faith, and
without the spirit, (received by faith) by which spirit our union is made with
Christ; and without Love, by which as members of the same body (if we remain
united to Christ our head) we should be knit and conjoined together one with
another: where we see such things, can we say that such men have put on
Christ, or have any true union with him? Oh therefore that men, without
partiality and flattering of thems;elues, (a most dangerous and pestilent
evil to the soul) would but thoroughly try themselves and their pretended
union with Christ, by these four aforesaid notes, that so they might truly
come to the knowledge of themselves, Par. 3.. 13
whether they had indeed put on Christ to their Justification, which was the
first point for the trial of Christianity, from our putting on of Christ.

Section. 13.
We are now in the second place to try whether we be indeed true Christians or
no, 2 Trialls from our putting on of Christ to our Sanctification.
by our putting on of Christ to Sanctification, whereunto the two last notes,
(of purpose so briefly named) may seem to lead the way.

Luke 24.49. Isa. 51.9. ^^d 59.17.
We have heard formerly (in the explication of this phrase of putting on) that
to put on Christ implies both an inward clothing by the Spirit and power of
Christ, as also an outward expressing of this power in our lives and
conuersations. Therefore this sprit of Sanctification, in the having and showing
forth the gifts of it, will be a notable trial, whether we have put on
Christ, and whether we hold the foresaid union with him or no: For hereby,
says Saint John, we know that we dwell in him, and he in us, 1 Ioh. 3.24.
and 4.13.
because he has given us of his Spirit; or, by the spirit which he has given
us: and, Jf any man have not the Spirit of Christ, Romans 8.9.
he is none of his.

Now, The Spirit of Sanctification known.
where the Spirit of God is, there it will give witness of it self, and
manifest it self by the motions and stirrings of it, and also by the
properties thereof.

1. It is no idle spirit, 1 By the motions and stirrings of it.
but active and operative; where it is, it cannot, it will not be hid, being
like fire, which though it be covered, yet will at length burst forth into a
flame, where it is, (and the fruits of it, as Love, Temperance, etc.) there it
will make us that we shall nether be barren, Gal. 5.22.23 2 Pet. 1.8.
nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. Let once the spirit
of God come upon, or cloth, Gideon, Judge. 6.34.
and it will make him take courage to himself, blow the Trumpet, and undertake
with God to become a deliverer to Israel. Let once Gods spirit cloth, or come
upon the Prophet Zachariah, 2 Chro. 24.20.
and he will boldly do his message, and speak unto the People in the name of
the Lord, Why transgress ye the Commandments of the Lord, that ye cannot
prosper? because ye have forsaken the Lord, he has also forsaken you. Thus
boldly will he both reprove sin, and threaten punishment to Prince and
people, though it cost him his life, as it did. And if Jeremy, being
discouraged with the reproaches of the people shall through his weakness in
fear, say, I will not make mention of him, nor speak any more in his name; He
(having a word and message from God) shall find it, together with the spirit in
his heart, to be as a burning fire shut up in his bones, Ier. 20.9.
to make him weary with forbearing, so that he cannot stay. Thus generally are
all true Christians affected, Gods Spirit is no idle Spirtt.
they are not idle but sedulous and diligent in the works of their Callings,
both general, as they are Christians, abounding with, and expressing the
fruits of the spirit, as Love, Joy, Temperance, Meekness, Patience, etc. in
their holy Conversation; and particular, as members of the common wealth or
Societies in which they live, not exempting themselves from some honest calling
or other, being of all men, the faithfullest servants of God, truest Subjects
to their Sovereign, and most profitable to the Common wealth, in the places
where they live. Let such think of this as generally professing the name of
Christ, yet, as Christians live unfruitfully, never showing forth, when
occasion serves, any good fruits of the spirit, as meekness, patience,
temperance, love, joy, but rather the contrary; and as Subjects live without a
calling unprofitably, not working with their hands, burdensome and chargable
to others, not eating their own bread, that is, such as they purchase with the
sweat of their brows. Par. 3.. 9.
Thus to live idly and unfruitfully is, both dishonorable to Christianity, and
far from true profession. It may be a good memento also to many others, and
cause sufficient for them to question their own estates, and whether indeed
they have the spirit of Christ or be Christ's, (as yet they would seem to be)
who, in the waightiest Callings of all other, as of the Ministry as also
Magistracy, themselves live idly, not doing the work whereunto they are
called, and for which they receive wages; Art thou the^ idle in Gods work?
do thou neglect (customarily) to do what God requires of thee? What kind of
Christian then art thou? a mere liueles body without a soul, or a Christian
without the spirit of Christ, which cannot be.

to the Common wealth, Par. 3.. 13.
I minister Justice though I preach not, I give advise, and rule and direct
others, though I teach not ordinarily, etc. Or, it may be a man may say, I
thank God, I am free from idleness, I take pains in my Calling and labor
hard therein: and so indeed we may say of many, they set themselves to do that
which is commanded; they Preach, they do good works, they give Alms, they
hear, they read and pray, and the like.

But here I must tell the first sort, that Gods spirit sets and sends every man
to his own proper work, which, where it is, it will not suffer a man to
neglect upon any pretense whatsoever. And of the second sort, I ask, What it
is that moves and stirs them up to duty? Is it indeed Gods spirit in them?
then they do all in obedience to Gods will, in mere love of God, and of their
duty, which they would do if there were neither Heaven nor Hell to constrain
them; they do all to Gods Glory and not their own. But it will concern them
to examine themselves well, whether they be not stirred up and led by outward
motives, whether they do not their duty, as led thereunto by the examples of
others, by the fear of man, and humane Laws, by the fear of wrath, and
eternal Judgment, with respect to themselves and to their own praise more
then Gods, to their own profit in a servile and base manner, upon an opinion
of merit, and binding God to them even for the work done, never looking to the
manner of doing it, and upon such sinister respects and motives: let no man
father such works upon the spirit of God.

But now seeing every one will be ready to say he is moved inwardly, and by
Gods sanctifying spirit, it will be needful to show how a man may judge of the
Spirit, and know whether, and when he is moved thereby. Where we must know
that there are or may be three things in a man which may move and lead him in
his actions. First, Nature entire, which seeking the preservation of it self,
moves principally upon that ground and motive. Secondly, corruption of Nature
through sin, which blindly seeking its own good, sets a man on work upon
the respects of sinful pleasures, profits and preferments of the world,
through self-love, and selfe-respect, measuring all good and happiness by
such things. Thirdly, Grace, and Gods sanctifying Spirit in the regenerate,
which stirrs him up upon the respects of Gods glory and will, to do his duty
out of love, conscience, and in obedience to God.

Now, all these three being truly in Gods Children, and grace seemingly only,
with the other two, Par. 3.. 14
in hypocrites; its a point of good consideration and consequence to be able to
put a difference amongst these, and so to be able to judge whether a man be
indeed clothed and endued with the sanctifying Spirit of Christ, and have
thereby put him on to true Sanctification, or whether nature or corruption do
not lead him.

Section. 14.
Now we may judge hereof especially by the properties of Gods Spirit, 2 By the
properties of it, which are four.
four whereof only I mean to stand upon; It being called in Scripture, 1. a
holy Spirit. 2. a righteous Spirit. 3. a free Spirit. 4. a strong Spirit, or
Sprit of might; and all these either in regard of the motions and effects of
it, or of the manner of working.

If then a man would know whether this sanctifying spirit of God do move him
or no, let him try this; first, by the holiness of his thoughts, desires,
aims and actions.

Gods Spirt is a holy Spirit; Par. 3.. 15.
and therefore holy David, 1 Gods spirit is a holy Spirit. Psalm. 51.11
having through his negligence suffered himself to be foiled, prays the Lord
not to take his holy Spirit from him: which if God should have done, he knew
that sin should have had the upper hand of him.

Now the hollinesse of this Spirit shows it self in these two things
especially. First, And where it is, it is known by the holiness of it.
in opposing of sin and corruption. Secondly, in working and increasing the
contrary graces and virtues in us.

Section. 15.
1. There is that contrariety in nature between Gods Spirit, It shows it is
holiness. 1 In opposing of sin and corruption. 2 Cor. 6.15 16.
and man's corruption, that they can never be together without opposition and
conflict, whereby one seeks the expulsion of the other: and indeed what
agreement or concord has Christ with Belial? the Temple of God (which we are
through the residence of the spirit in us) with Idols (every sin which we
give intertainement to, being our Idol and god?) Where then Gods holy Spirit
is, there will be a conflict: there shall not any sinful thought, affection,
desire, purpose or endeavor show it self, but it shall find it self
incountred with a contrary holy thought, affection, desire, purpose and
endeavor, either for the present, or not long after; and so on the contrary.
This is that which the godly find continually in themselves, being in this life
but in part sanctified. Where gods spirit is, there is a conflictt and a
combat.
There being in them both grace and corruption, they find both grace thwarting
their corruptions, and corruption thwarting grace. When they find evil and
sin strong in them, they allow it not; yea, though they do it, yet they
neither allow it, Romans 7.15. and 21.22.23.
nor would do it, but even hate what they do; and when they would do good,
they find evil present with them; and when they delight in the Law of God,
after the inward man, they see another Law in their memhers, warring against
the law of their minds, etc. as Paul found it in his experience, being therefore
better able to describe this combat, which he does in these words, Gal. 5.17.
The flesh lusts against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh, and
these are contrary the one to the other. As therefore corruption cannot endure
grace, so neither can grace endure corruption. We are sure the flesh will ever
hinder the work of the spirit, as much as in it lies; and we must see we cry
quittance with it, by resisting through the spirit, the works of the flesh. We
cannot look to be in this life, quite freed from the molestations of the
flesh; we must therefore see that the motions thereof be molestfull unto us;
which if we find, we are so far from having cause of discouragement (though
the indwelling of sin should be a burden to us) that we have thence a
comfortable testimony of Gods grace and spirit in us, by which we feel and
distaste our corruptions; for it is not corruption, but grace that can judge of
corruption. Where then in a man, all is at peace and in quiet, and that he
finds no disturbance in his soul, no opposition when he would do either good
or evil, it is a sign all is not well. Having grace, he cannot but (when he
would do good) find opposition by the flesh, (for that is undoubtedly in all
men, even in the best;) and when he would do evil, unless he also find in
him an opposition made against the flesh, and corruptions of it (which it will
not do of it self) he may conclude, he has not Gods holy and sanctifying
Spirit at all: for as corruption will not let Gods sanctifying spirit be quiet
where it is; so will not grace suffer corruption to enjoy for any long time,
peaceable possession. Has then corruption her full swinge and sway in thee? Is
it not thwarted by contrary desires, affections, and endeavors? It is a
fearful sign that Christ has no part in thee, or possession of thee by his
Spirit, but that the strong man, Satan, by thy sin (is not yet cast out, but)
holds his own, and wholly possesses thee, and that thou art as yet but a
mere natural man and sensual, having not the spirit, Jude 19.
whereas they that are in Christ Jesus, are such as, though the flesh molest,
and now and then hinder them, yet, walk not after the flesh, Romans 8.1.
but after the spirit: that is, though the flesh be a stumbling block in their
way, and cause them now and then trip, or stop, or turn aside; yet they go not
on, they walk not in the way thereof, but rise and return, and walk in the
ways of God, after the direction of his Word and spirit. There is now and then
war within; but this war is a sign of peace. In this combat the victory
in the midst, is often uncertain and doubtful, (in regard of this or that
particular action) for sometime Amalek preuailes, and sometimes Isreal's; this
is because the godly do not at all times, as they ought, fight praying, but
trust too much to their own strength; but yet in the end the spirit preuailes,
and the victory is always on Gods part. It is here as in the pleading of a
Case of law, which being tossed by diverse Lawyers, goes doubtfully a long time,
sometimes for the plaintiff, sometimes for the defendant, till in the end the
Judge decide it. Now in the case of sin, they are ever sure to get the plea,
that do but make resistance, and by the Spirit plead their own cause.

Yea, but is this strife enough? then shall Herod and Pilate, and many a wicked
man have this holy Spirit of God, who are not drawn to sin, but with great
reluctance and strife within themselves. Is every strife then an argument of
saving grace, and of the spirit? I answer, Not every strife, but that chiefly
which is between grace and corruption: Par. 3.. 16.
for there being, as is said, in every man, first nature entire, and secondly,
the corruption of nature; natural reason, will and affections, which are good;
and carnal reason, will and affections, which are bad; and moreover besides
these two, there being thirdly in the godly man who has put on Christ, and in
him only, grace and Gods sanctifying spirit. Hence it is, There is a threefold
combat.
that there is a threefold combat, the first, but especially the last whereof
only is proper to those that are Christ's. 1. Between Grace and Nature. 2.
Between Nature and Corruption. 3. Between Corruption and Grace.

Section. 16.
1. Between Grace and Nature not sinful. 1 Between grace and nature entire.
Nature desires its own preservation, and a man may do it without sin: for a
man is bound to preserve his own life by all lawful means, and to repel
death, and such evils as are hurtful to his health, ease, peace, life, and to
such things as are natural unto him. But it falls out often in the course of
Christianity, that there is some greater good to be respected then this
temporal life, or any thing belonging to it, and that is our spiritual life,
and the salvation of our souls; yea, then that also; and that is Gods glory,
and the manifestation thereof in the Gospel of his Son. Now in such cases as
wherein our natural good and our spiritual good, and Gods glory cannot stand
together, This is in the best.
there Nature must yield; which cannot be usually but with some kind of strife
and reluctancie between Nature and Grace: though properly these be not
contrary but only diverse; the one, (nature) subordinate to the other (grace.)
This strife was in our Savior Christ in his agony; where, nature in him
seeking its own preservation, made him pray, Mat. 26.39.
O Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me: yet it yielded to a
greater good, Par. 3.. 13
Gods glory and man's salvation, so that he added, Nevertheless not as I will,
but as thou will. This combat was also in Moses, who though he could not but
desire his own good and salvation, Exodus 32.32.
yet he preferres Gods glory before it, in the sparing and preservation of his
people, saying; If thou will not forgive their sin, blot me I pray thee, out
of thy book which thou have written. And in Paul, Romans 9.3.
who in like case could wish that himself were accursed from Christ, for his
brethren, his kinsmen according to the flesh. Though this be not that combat I
mean of chiefly, yet hereby we may and should try our selves; when we cannot
enjoy our liberty, goods, ease, life, with Gods glory and the honor of the
Gospel, and the good of our souls, Mark 8.34.35.-38.
there we must yield and forsake all for Christ and the Gospel; else we are
not worthy of him, we are none of his.

Par. 3.. 17
2. The second strife is between Nature and Corruption; 2 Between nature and
the corruption of nature.
which is in men unregenerate. Nature in them is not so wholly corrupted and
blotted out, but that it remains entire in good part for the common and most
general principles of it, which are as the rellicks of the Image of God in
man, according to which he was first created, Genesis 1.21.
whereby he has some general knowledge of good and evil (especially if we
speak of natural good and evil, not Moral) and some general will and
inclination to good, as whereby generally he desires happiness, and has no
will to that which would hinder his happiness and things which are natural to
him, This may be and is in mere natural men.
and so a kind of conscience naturally, of good and evil, grounded upon those
general principles; though in drawing particular conclusions thence, and in
application he fail exceedingly. This is called the Law of Nature in him, by
which natural men, and generally all men, without saving grace are guided and
led hence; there is in natural men that which Paul calls, the Truth, and the
work of the Law written in their hearts, Romans 1.18. and 2.15.
their conscience also bearing witness, and their thoughts the mean while
accusing or else excusing one another. Now these men's co^ciences receive also
information from without, as not only from experience and the knowledge of Arts
and Sciences as of morality; but also by good instruction and from divine and
supernatural Principles and knowledge revealed in and by Gods word, which even
Nature it self in unregenerate men, will, in the general acknowledge should
be obeyed and entertained (which therefore so far we may call natural.) But
all these are wonderfully corrupted, when application is to be made, where
corruption of nature, through selfe-respects of sinful and inordinat affections
and desires of pleasures, profits, honors, intermingles it self, and puts
good nature, (which awhile may resist, stand out and show itself) to silence,
and as for supernatural knowledge and motions, generally approved of, they are
in particular cases, by corruption opposed and rejected, though not always
without some strife.

There is then a strife often in unregenerate men, whereby they are both long a
yielding to their corrupt affections and having yielded, find some touch of
their natural conscience and remorse in themselves for their yielding with a
horror oftentimes: but we cannot make this an effect of Gods sa^ctifying spirit
in the^, seeing the resista^ce is not made against these sinful affections, as
they are sinful, that is, repugnant and ccontrary to Gods will, and to his
most pure nature, in obedience to God, and in a good conscience desirous to
please God; but in regard of some evil consequent or other; as shame of the
world reproach, punishment, temporal or eternal; or at the best out of the
goodness of nature, and out of a general approbation of goodness and dislike of
evil, whereby either reason awhile resists the appetite and passions of the
mind which fight against reason; or natural conscience does withstand the
motions of sin upon the aforesaid respects or the like, it evermore in
resisting being accompanied with some selfe-respect or other, which yet is
often overcome and mastered by the other; so that whether it yield or stand
out, (as it does in many civil men) yet this strife is no work of Gods saving
grace or sanctifying Spirit in the^: As in Herod
see this in and by instances. Herod had John the Baptist in some reverence:
such was John's innocence and integrity and faithfulness, otherwise that
right reason and judgment in Herod must needs approve of it, commend, yea
admire it: yea, but withal, Herod was addicted to his Lust, he incestiously
loved and kept Herodias his Brothers wife, which when once John reproved in
him, there arose a conflict in him between his affection to John, and to
Herodias and his sin, especially when Herodias made request for John's head.
Hereupon Herod is distracted in his thoghts, he finds a combat within him and
hereupon he is very sorry. Yet his affection to sin, which he meant not to
leave, Mat. 14 9.
and to Herodias overcame his natural conscience, and therefore he yields to
the beheading of John. Here was a great strife in Herod, and many a man (such
like as he was) could half excuse his fact, alas it was against his will, what
would ye have had him done? etc. But this strife was not from true grace in
him, which would so have opposed his sinful and lustful affection, and the
unjust request of Herodias Daughter, that he would either never have yielded to
either of them; or if he had, it would have brought him to speedy and unfeigned
repentance for that fact, and to reformation of life in casting off Herodias;
but this it did not. Nay let us suppose Herod had withstood and denied her
request, and therein overcome himself and his rash Oath to her, could we call
this an effect of grace? nothing less; seeing he would have done this evil
before, upon John's reproving of his sin, Mat. 14.3-5
for which yet he laid hold on John and bound him, and put him in Prison for
Herodias sake, and for which he would have put him to death: but why did he it
not? he feared the multitude, because they counted him as a Prophet. He was
then at a strife before what to do with John; his lust bad kill him, his
reverence to John, but chiefly his fear of the people, bad spare him; this
prevailed till new occasion offered it self. Was his sparing of John, a fruit
of the Spirit? No: It had no part in this combat; if it had, it would have
taught him to have feared God more then man, and to have obeyed the motions of
it, and not of sin, And in Pilate.
etc. The like we say of Pilate in his adiudging of our Savior Christ to
death; what anotable strife was in him? the Jews in their malice would needs
have him crucified, he would have him saved. Pilate would feign please the
people, and he would also feign acquit Christ; both he could not do.
Hereupon, he is wonderfully perplexed and distracted in his thoughts. On the
one hand, Mat. 27.18.] 19-24-26.
his conscience judges Christ innocent; For, he knew that for envy they had
delivered him; yet moreover, being further awakened with the Dream of his
wife, tells him of plagues and judgment, if he condemned the innocent and
just; feign therefore would he have delivered him, pleading hard for him: yea
but his affection tells him (when he saw a tumult and that he could prevail
nothing, and how eagerly the people was bent against Christ) that he must
please the people, who told him he else could not be Caesar's friend: hereupon,
making a protestation of Christ's innocence, and of his own unwillingness to
condemn Christ, charging them with his blood; he scourged him and delivered
him to be Crucified. And here, what natural man would not hence excuse
Pilate, and be ready to plead for him, as co^demning Christ against his will,
co^ceiuing him to be innocent, and perhaps sorry in regard of that necessity
which compelled him to give him into the hands of the Jews; Pilate might seem
just and innocent, (which doubtless he was in his own eyes and judgment,
whiles he washed his hands, and protested his own innocence) whiles the
malicious Jews only might seem culpable. But indeed this conflict in Pilate
was so far from excusing his fact, that it makes it so much the more unjust
and hateful, that he, against so clear light of his conscience should
condemn innocence it self; and suppose he had indeed taken Christ's part, and
acquitted him, not giving him over unto the Jews, yet it being done upon those
grounds only, (of natural conscience, fear of plagues in his conscience,
from God) which caused the conflict, it had been no argument of saving grace in
him, nor no work of Gods sanctifying spirit.

And generally in the unregenerate.
Such conflicts then, between nature (either approving of good, or seeking its
own good and preservation, though corruptly) and corruption, are no arguments
of true grace; we see the like daily in natural, yea often, wicked men, who
can say, I see and approve that which is good, but I follow and do that which
is evil; who can also after sin is committed, condemn themselves, whiles the
light of nature shows them the vileness of their doings, and the light of
Gods word generally believed, vengeance hanging over their heads for the same.
But shall any thence conclude they have this holy spirit of God, which makes
them so dislike their doings? No, though I know many yet so do, because, having
sinned, they can say, they did it not without some strife within themselves
before, and some acknowledgment and grief after. But if this be all, then
shall Caine and Judas be Saints, whose consciences troubled them after their
evil deeds; or at least Felix and his like, who hearing or thinking of
judgment due to them for their sins, tremble, Acts 24.25.
and yet live in their sins still, etc.

Section. 18.
We conclude then, that not every combat in a man, 3 The third combat is
between grace and corruption.
but the third and last especially (as in part the first) is a sign of Gods
sanctifying and holy Spirit, Par. 3.. 18.
and that thereby a man has put on Christ. This is between grace and
corruption, as is said in the beginning, whereby this strife being grounded
upon a true love of God, and a desire of godliness for it self, and upon a
perfect hatred of sin for it self, makes a man look in all things to the
glory and will of God, And it is proper to the spirit of Sanctification.
denying himself, and to oppose himself against all sin, which corruption
looks at: where as affection to sin, and fear of evil and punishment make
the combat in the natural man. The difference between which two combats, may
be further conceived hence; In the natural man the combat is in several and
distinct faculties and powers of the soul, And differs from that combat which
is in natural men.
as between the sensual appetite and reason, between rebellious affections
and the natural conscience; but in the spiritual man, (there being in him and
in each faculty both flesh and spirit mixed together, and not flesh in one
part, and spirit in another; no more then we can distinguish hot and cold in
lukewarm water, light and darkness in the dawning) in him I say, the combat
is in one and the same faculty, and in each power of the soul, in which is
both flesh and spirit: so that the mind is carried against it self, it being
at once both fleshly and spiritual, and so the will against it self, and each
affection against it self; insomuch, that when according to corruption we
would do evil, yet Gods spirit teaches us to will the contrary, so that we
cannot do what we would, but either it makes us that we cannot sin, that
is, as do the wicked, Ioh. 3.9.
live in the practice of any one sin, or if we do fall through the strength
of temptation, yet we sin not with full consent of will, but even by grace
hate that evil, which, by corruption, we do: yea, when we would do good, by
the Spirit regenerating our wills, and also do it, yet through the corruption
of the same will, evil is present, and we fail in the doing of it, being not
able to fulfill, Romans 7.18.
or thoroughly to accomplish that which is good. Where then we find our wills
carried against themselves, our heart carried against it self, and against its
own liking, in regard of our dearest and best pleasing corruptions; where we
can find a dislike and loathing of that sin, which corrupt nature most
inclines unto, etc there is the true combat indeed, and there is this holy and
sanctifying spirit, by which we put on Christ, which thus opposes sin in the
motions and lusts of it, as most opposite and contrary thereunto, so that the
godly sin not, in Gods account, when indeed they sin and do evil: Christ,
whom they by the spirit have put on, couers and imputes not to them, their
imperfections and failings. But the differences between these two combats in
natural and spiritual men, Par. 3. and. 19.
will be more apparent afterward by that which follows, and by those other
properties of the spirit.

Section 19.
The second thing then wherein the holiness of the spirit consists, 2 Gods
spirit shows it self an holy Spirit, in begeting good motions.
is not only in opposing sinful motions, but in begetting holy and good
motions, thoughts and inclinations according with the will of God, whereby it
works and increases in us the contrary graces and virtues. The grace of Gods
Spirit in us, where it reigns, does not only withstand and repress sinful
and rebellious affections, but it orders the soul aright, And by renewing us.
and conformes the whole soul to the will of God; even as in a well ordered
Commonwealth or Kingdom, there is not only resistance made against rebels, and
a suppression of them, but a right and willing obedience performed to lawful
authority, a love of Religion and Justice, and duty performed by every man
according to his place one to another: even so is it in the regiment of the
soul in a regenerate man; where the law of grace in him, and the Spirit, is
not only opposite to sin and rebellious affections, which would overthrow,
or at least trouble and disturb that government, but is as a new fountain and
welspring of goodness in him, fruitful in all goodness, though it had no
enemies to molest it. Hereby then may we also judge of our selves, whether we
have put on Christ or no, by the spirit of Sanctification, if we not only
resist and repel sin, not suffering it to reign in us, but also have our
wills and affections renewed to a liking of goodness, and of the contrary graces
to those sins which we would subdue. For natural conscience may restrain
sin in us, and keep it from breaking out; yea, and hate it upon the
forenamed grounds and respects to punishment, disgrace, shame of the world, yet
never in that manner so subdue sin in us, as to beget contrary graces. As for
example; a covetous, and so a passionate and angry man, so an unclean person,
may keep under his sin from breaking into act outwardly; an angry and
malicious man may, even upon some provocation so keep in his anger, and
conceal his malice for the present, that he shall show nothing but love and
fair carriage; even as we see it in Esau his behavior toward his brother
Jacob, who overcame that malice which he inwardly conceived against him for the
birthright, and doubtless, not without a great conflict in himself, repressed
it upon carnal respects and considerations. A man would in this case in
charity have bin ready to have commended his patience and religion, and to have
conceived Esau had rested well content in Gods disposal of the birthright from
him; even as we now in like charity, not knowing men's hearts, commend and
conceive well of their civil and harmless carriage, and abstinence from evil,
whereunto perhaps often they are tempted and provoked; yea but in the mean
time, where is their love and affection to the contrary virtues, of true
liberality, patience, chastity, tempera^ce etc. Esau repressed the evil of
hatred in him for the present, but where was the contrary grace of true and
sound love of his brother? and so we may ask in the other and like
particulars. But this holy spirit where it is begets the contrary graces in
good measure, and makes us who were proud, truly humble, and not only upon by
respects to suppress Pride, but inwardly and sincerely to love humility, even
for it self; so it makes us of angry, meek; of malicious, loving; of
unclean, chaste; of covetous, liberal; of profane, truly religious; not upon
sinister grounds and motives, to repress and suppress these evils, which both
natural conscience in us, and men without us would condemn, if they were
manifest, but upon a good liking and true affections to the contrary graces, to
love, desire, and earnestly to endeavor, inwardly to have, and outwardly to
show forth the contrary virtues. Hence then are we to try our selves; for if
we be Christ's, then this spirit of Christ will teach us to have a great
pleasure to give to the poor, and needy Saints, as ever formerly we had,
either to take from the poor by oppression, or to meet with a good bargain
for our own advantage; it would teach us to be humble for our pride, and to
account our selves the meanest of all, who formerly took our selves as good as
any. It would make us patiently bear wrongs, who before either revenged them,
or forcedly dissembled them --; and so in other like things: so that if

Par. 3.. 20
perties of it, sinceare, upright, and free from all doubling and duplicitie,
And makes a man upright and sinceare.
single and sound; for so is the wisdom which is from above described from
the properties and effects of it, to be first pure or chaste -- and last
without hypocrisy.

(...) Iam. 3.17.
By this are we to try whether we have truly put on Christ or no; for
doubtless where Christ's spirit does cloth any, it purges the heart from the
leaven of hypocrisy; so that where this right spirit is not, that is,
sincerity and singleness of heart, but instead thereof hypocrisy and deceit,
there, not Christ's spirit, which is a spirit of truth, but a lying spirit
guides and rules men. Now how to judge of Sincerity, as also of Hypocrisy
both of the more gross and more secret, both that whereby we deceive others,
and that whereby we our selves are deceived; Not yet published. 1623.
I have showed already at larg, by the special notes of both in a Treatise on
Jam. 3.17. Par. 3.. 21


Section. 21
3. The Spirit of God where it is, it is a free Spirit; 3. It is a free Spirit.
of which David when he prays, uphold me with thy free spirit. Psalm. 50.12. 1.
Freeing us from the spirit of bondage. 2 Cor. 3.17.
Now it is a free spirit, first, because it is a freed spirit, or rather a
spirit freeing us from bondage; so it is said, where the spirit of the Lord is,
there is liberty; that is, a manumission or freedom granted from the
servitude and bondage of sin, in regard of the domineering and binding power
of it. Now the true Christian being clothed with Christ's spirit, is thereby
freed both from the tyranny of sin, and from that slavish fear and terror of
heart in the apprehension of wrath, which keeps him in bondage under Satan. As
sin reigns not in him, so he is not in fear of the eternal wrath of God, or
of the threatenings or curse of the Law; that is, he is not held in bondage
under that fear; he sees himself in Christ freed from the condemnation of
the Law, and made the Child of God by the grace of regeneration, Rom 8.1.
and by the spirit of adoption, whereby he no longer slauishly fears Gods
wrath and Justice, and so flies from God, but in a sonne-like confidence finds
liberty and a way and free passage opened for him by Christ, to come into the
presence of God, whom now he can call Father, and unto whom by this spirit of
God, he can make his requests known. Of this it is said to the believing
Romans, Ye have not received the spirit of bondage again to fear, Romans 8.15.
but ye have received the spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, 2 Timothy 1.7.
Father. So elsewhere, God has not given us the spirit of fear, etc. Whence
we see, that such as now are endued with this free spirit, have formerly had
this spirit of bondage, in the first part of their conversion, whereby Gods
spirit in the first work of it did let them see their sins, and their
servitude and bondage under sin, whereby they were horribly afraid of hell and
of eternal wrath, as the just reward of their sins; but withal we may see
how they are shed from the wicked whom they leave (either in sin without
any the least sense of it, or) under this spirit of bondage, and how by the
spirit of adoption in the sight of mercy they are comforted, Under which the
wicked are left.
and now free who were bound before. This spirit of bondage is common to them
at their first conversion with the wicked; yet with this difference, that to
them it is a preparation and way, and fits them for conversion, even as the
needle by pricking and peircing the cloth makes way for the thread to follow,
by which they are knit to Christ their head; but the wicked are left in that
estate of slavish fear and bondage still, so that in the midst of their
iollities, the apprehension of wrath through their guiltiness of it, does make
them often quake as it did Baltazzar: though sometimes their consciences are so
benumbed, that they are not at all times alike sensible of their thraldom: and
on the other hand the good Christian, through some grievous sin, or
negligence and security, by which he now and then offends, may find himself
much straightened and hemmed in with the fears of wrath, Psalm. 51.12.
being in his own sense and feeling deprived of the comfort of this spirit,
and almost brought back to the spirit of bondage.

See also Psalm. 77.3-7 8. and Psa. 88 7.14.15.16.
This made David, as we have heard, pray to be vpholden with Gods free spirit,
and to have restored to him the joy of Gods salvation: for he found himself to
be overcome and foiled by sin, in the feeling of the guiltiness whereof, he
labors for this free Spirit, whereby his thoughts and himself might be freed
from fear. Yet there is this difference again between the one and the other,
that the godly breaks at length through these straits, whereas the other is
held in bondage still: so that their servile fear at length ends in despair,
as in Cain and Judas, and in the devil himself, who in the apprehension of
Gods Justice, having received a Sentence of condemnation within himself,
seeks no mercy, neither does he obtain it. Besides, the wicked in their
greatest fears of wrath, show no true hatred of their sin as it is sin, but
rather a love to it still, and an hatred to all goodness, and to all such as
would pull them from their sin. It is not so with the godly, who in his
greatest fears, more hates his sin as it is an offense and dishonor to God,
then as it threatens him with wrath. By all these then we may judge, whether
we be clothed with this free and good spirit of God or no: he that never found
himself in bondage, or never freed from bondage, has it not.

Section. 22.
Par. 3.. 22
But secondly, it is called a free spirit, because it works freely, readily, 2
Working freely.
willingly; yea, it so writes Gods Law in a regenerate man's heart, that it
makes him do all things in Gods ways, frankly and cheerfully; not but that
it finds rubs and discouragements, or otherwise hindrances from the flesh, yet
still it makes a man inwardly ready and willing, yea in some good measure able
to say with Paul, Romans 7.22. and 19.
I delight in the Law of God, after the inward man; though he also find cause
with him again to say, The good that I would, I do not. This is because we
are in this life but in part regenerate. Thus our Savior speaks to his
disciples, who when they should have watched with him, fell on sleep; The
spirit indeed is willing, Mat. 26.41.
but the flesh is weak. Now where the spirit which clothes Gods children, once
makes them willing, there they withal striving against their frailties, their
faylings are couerd with the righteousness of Christ, whom they have put on; and
so they are accounted a willing people. Psalm. 110.3.
They are not so much drawn or haled to duty, as sweetly led and brought on by
the spirit in them. Our Savior speaking of the spirit, which they that believe
on him should receive, says, Ioh. 7.38.39
He that believes on me, -- out of his belly shall flow rivers of living
water; whereby, besides other things is noted, that as water flows readily and
naturally out of its fountain or spring head, or out of the rock, (not forced
by the strength of men or horse, as in pumpes and engines for that purpose;) so
when once by faith we are ingraffed into Christ our rock, Not by constraint
as in the Hyppocrite.
the graces of his Spirit flow naturally out of us: whereas by such as want this
saving and sanctifying spirit, nothing is done but by compulsion, and by force
or fear, and as a man would bring verjuice out of a crab, or water out of a
pumpe. Hereby then may men men judge of themselves, even by the willingness
of their service and obedience. Where Gods spirit is, there the necessity of
the duty, (which yet must be done upon pain of damnation) hinders not the
willingness of it, but that though a woe belong to the not doing of it, 1 Cor.
9.16. Mat 25.41, 42.43.
(as to careless Ministers, and to such as are not charitable to the poor
members of Christ) yet that woe drives them not so much to duty, as the Spirit
and the love of God draws and leads them thereunto, and makes them do these
and the like duties willingly and cheerfully. Examine thy self then how thou
do thy duty (for if thou do it not at all, thou art quite deuoyd, and far
short of Gods Spirit) whether thou stand not disaffected thereunto, and
weariest not of well doing, and do it not rather out of slavish fear of God
or man, and out of base and by-respects, Signs of a willing spirit.
then out of true desire and love of it. Signs of a willing spirit in Gods
service, are these; first, 1 desire after the duty
a desire and longing after the duty (though this be not always without some
opposition and reluctancie of the flesh, which is unwilling) as we see how
willingly the men of this world go about their business, when occasion of
gain is offered; yea, how willingly and readily pot companions follow the
Alehouse or Tavern: Thus David longed to come and appear before God in his
Temple, saying, Psalm. 42.1.2
As the Heart pants after the water brooks, so pants my soul after thee, O
God; my soul thirsts for God, when shall I come and appear before God?
Secondly, 2 delight in it
delight in, and after the performance of it; as worldlings also and sinners in
the acting of those things which they inwardly affect. Even so the people of
God rejoiced, for that they offered willingly (to the building of the Temple)
yea David the King rejoiced also with great joy; yea, 1 Chronicles. 29 9-13.14.
they blessed God heartily who made them able, and gave them a heart to offer
so willingly after this sort, etc. even so do Gods people, and good
Christians, inwardly rejoice in the doing of good, and call the Sabbath a
delight, and all the duties of it, both longing till it come, and rejoicing in
hearing, praying, meditating, conferring of the things heard, as also thinking
the time and day so spent, to be short; and not (as do the unwilling)
accounting the time spent in Gods service to be long, wearying of it, in their
thoughts and desires hastening to an end.

3 Sorrow if it be not done.
Sorrow, when either we want opportunities to do good duties, or otherwise do
leave and give them over. A godly heart when necessity and even lawful
occasions keep from doing of duty, will yet be sorrowful for such
necessity, and for such concurrence of duty, and will show they had a good
desire, yea have, to the doing of it still: whereas an unwilling mind is glad
of any occasion, whereby they might seem excused from the duties, and that the
omission of it might not be imputed to them: a manifest sign they had no
heart to the duty. So, where there is willingness in the doing, there will be
a loathnesse to leave off, and a departure from it, with a new desire of
returning to it: which loathnesse to depart will witness our willingness to
the duty. Thus will a willing soul freely and cheerfully serve God and do
his duty, though there were neither any Heaven to reward him, nor Hell to
punish his neglect, though God giving him such helps, he do it with more
cheerfulness. Whereas in the wicked all things are contrary: and thereby,
he, (if, he will not be blind) and others may know, that as yet he is not
possessed of this free spirit, and has not by it put on Christ to his
Sanctification.

Section. 23.
Par. 3.. 23
The fourth and last property (which I will name) or proper effect of the
spirit of sanctification is, 4 Gods spirit of sanctification is a Spirit of
strength and might.
that it is a Spirit of might and of power, and makes such as have it
courageous and stout in the ways of God. They that have put on Christ, are
clothed also with the same spirit which rested upon him. Now that spirit among
other properties and effects of it, Isa. 11.2.
is said to be the Spirit of might. This is that spirit wherewith John the
Baptist (as Elias of old) was clothed, of whom it was said, Luke 1.17.
that he should go before our Savior Christ in the spirit and power, that
is, in the powerful spirit, of Elias. This was that same spirit which was
promised to the Disciples of Christ, who accordingly at the ascension of
Christ, were bid to tarry in Jerusalem, Luke 24.49
until they should be endued, or clothed with power from an high: which
accordingly on the day of Pentecost came upon them and filled them, with a
sound from heaven as of a rushing mighty mind. Acts 2.2.
Now this spirit of might is not proper only to Elias, John, or to the
Apostles, (though in regard of the extraordinary works of of it for a season,
it was,) but by the Apostle it is made common to all the faithful, none of
the^ excluded, though withal proper to them only, who only are included, when
he says, 2 Timothy 1.7.
God has not given us the spirit of fear, but of power. etc. This power, in
good measure, every true Christian has and shows forth, whereby he can say
with Paul, Phil. 4.14.
I can do all things through Christ, which strengthens me. Though it must be
granted that God sometimes lets his Children have experience of weakness, as
David when he was taken with the beauty of Bathsheba, Elias when he feared
Iesabell, Peter when he denied his Master, which he does for their further
strengthening, and for the magnifying of his power in their weakness and for
other ends. Yet generally, and in their Christian course they show themselves
clothed with the power of God and of his spirit, in the strength whereof they
walk and hold out constantly to the end, though now and then, they slip or
fall. And it is supposed to the spirit of fear and faintness in the wicked. 2 Timothy 1.7.
A man may then know whether he be indeed a Christian or no, by this spirit of
power, strength and courage; for each Christian is less or more, according to
Paul's Prayer for the Colossians, Colos. 1.11
stre^gthned with all might according to Gods glorious power, and that not only
to all patience and long-suffering, but generally unto each other grace, having
and showing forth, not a form of godliness, as do hypocrites, who yet deny
the power of it, but the very power and life thereof throughout their whole
course of life.

Section. 24.
Now this power shows it Par. 3.. 24
self in them in regard both of good and evil. It shows it self strong in
regard 1 Of good which is.


1. In regard of good: which is either spiritual or temporal: the former
whereof it makes them undertake, how hard or difficult soever it be to flesh
and blood; the latter it makes them contemn and despise in comparison of the
other, how pleasing and fauning soever it show it self, or contentfull to
flesh and blood.

As they are not idle, first spiritual.
so they are not discouraged, but being strengthened in the might of the Lord,
they set upon the hardest duties, It makes a man undertake the hardest taskes
in Christianity.
and nothing can be so impossible or hard to flesh and blood, and to corrupt
nature, which they dare not strongly assault and set upon, and so, at least
attempt and endeavor to do what they should to the utmost of their strength,
though in the doing of it, they often much come short; like a true bred
Mastiue, which though young and as yet but weak, will yet show courage in
aduenturing upon the strongest Bull or Bear, though it be foiled thus they
quit themselves like men, being strong and courageous. As they sit not still
but will be up and be doing, so what they do, they do with diligence and
courage, even as God requires it at their hands. Thus if God bid Abraham
sacrifice his Isaac, Deuteronomy. 31 6 Josh. 1.5.6.7.
the Son of promise, Abraham will not dispute the case with God or cast
doubts, but strong in faith will deny himself and obey Gods command; and so
do others in some acceptable measure, the like. They find in them much
weakness, but they stir up Gods spirit and grace in them to assist them,
and to subdue their infirmities. As, they find themselves unapt to pray; yet
they desist not from the duty, but stir up and awaken the spirit in them,
which helps their infirmities. They find it difficult to learn, yet they
will do their endeavor, in the use of all good means: worldly mindedness in
part keeps them from giving Alms, but yet they stir up their charity and
prove bountiful. And so in other things, where at least they show their
endeavor, and strive to employ the grace they have received to the utmost:
though they be conscious of their own weakness and can in regard thereof
say, 2 Cor. 3.5.
we are not sufficient of our selves to think any thing; (and this is the
least of many other things required to the finishing and perfecting of that
which is good) yet they can, each of them, Phil. 4.14.
with the same Paul say, I am able to do all things through Christ who
strengthens me.

It is otherwise with a formal Christian; he shows forth no such power: if
he have any measure of common grace afforded him, he uses it not, he puts it
not out to the utmost, not so much as in his endeavor; Whereas the vnsou^d
Christian is sloathful
he ever pretends weakness of grace and the impossibility of doing his duty
as he ought, and therefore he does nothing at all; the true cause is, he will
not do it, Nolle in causa est non posse pretenditur.
he has no heart to it, whereas he pretends want of power; he will not do so
much as he can do, and as God has enabled him to do. Our nice ones also,
whiles so they continue, must be content to heat, they are none of Christ's, as
not being endued with his spirit of power; they can take no pains in Gods
service or in their callings, they cannot watch, pray, read, give to the
poor, visit the poor, or tie themselves to any taskes in Christianity, at
the best contenting themselves with some general and sluggish desires, and
those only of the end; or more of the end and of their own salvation then of
the means leading and bringing thereunto.

Now, try thy self, whosoever thou art, whether it be not thus with thee,
and whether being called to any good duty, thou make it not more difficult,
through thy sloth and disaffectednes to it, then it is, or need be, if thou
would stir up Gods graces in thee; whether thou pretendest not difficulty
in the things, weakness and inability in thy self, when yet thou may do
more then thou do, if thou would set carnal or worldly occasions aside:
whether thou projectest and framest not to thy self many needless fears, many
dangers and inconveniences, many Lions in the way, and so omittest ordinarily
the good thou ought to do: whether fear of man, and of the reproach of
men, though unjust, cause thee not to forbear ordinarily from good words and
works. As thou, impartially judging, do find it to be with thee, so thou have
cause either to be comforted, or to seek pardon, and amend.

Section. 25.
Par. 3.. 25
But the true Christian, to help him strongly to walk in Gods ways, The sound
Christian, to help him in doing his duty, has, as proper to him.
has such affections to follow and attend him, which the wicked want: all of
them issuing out of his faith, as the ground both of them, and of all strength
in the soul stirred up by them.

1 Faith.
First, as is said, the true Christian by virtue of his faith in God, and in
his promises, is able to say, I am able to do all things through Christ who
strengthens me. This Faith is laid down by the Holy Ghost, as that by which
only the holy Patriarks performed all their works of obedience, even in the
hardest commands of God, and most difficult duties. Heb. 11.8. -- 17.18.
By faith Abraham -- obeyed, and went out, not knowing whither he went; -- yea,
by faith being tried, he offered up Isaac, though of him it were said, In Jsaac
shall thy seed be called. So by faith, and through it, Heb. 33.34.
Others subdued Kingdoms, wrought righteousness, -- and out of weakness were
made strong, waxed valiant in fight, and turned to flight the armies of the
aliens, as did David: 1 Samuel 17.40
This faith of his was that sling, which, first holding and containing, then
throwing and sending forth one of those five smoothe stones, flew the mighty
giant Goliath, by which the whole army of those brauing Philistines were put to
flight. A weak means a man would think; and so it was, for a youth,
vnharnessed, with a sling only and a stone, to encounter with a man of war
from his youth, whose height was six cubits and a spanne, armed with a coat of
male, whose weight was five thousand shekels of brass, his helmet on his head,
1 Samuel 17.4.5.6.7.
of brass, and so his greaues and target, the staff of his spear like a
weauers beam, the head of it weighing six hundred shekels of iron: what
inequality was here if we look to humane strength? But David had an unseen
coat of male, and such armor as made him stronger then his enemy, and
strengthened him to undertake the combat, in full assurance of victory, and
that was his faith in God, strenthened by former experience of Gods power and
assistance; with this he came armed, and confronts his brauing and bragging
enemy, saying to him, verse. 45.46.
Thou come to me with a sword, with a spear, and with a shield; but I come
to thee in the name of the Lord of hosts, etc. this day will God deliver thee
into mine hand, etc.

Now this is that Name of God in which every faithful man is confident, even
that which the Lord proclaimed before Moses, The Lord, Exodus 34.6.7
the Lord God (or strong God) merciful and gracious, long suffering, and
abundant in goodness and truth, keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving
iniquity, etc. This mercy, truth, and strength of God, laid hold on by faith,
as the sling, are as the five smoothe stones out of the brook (of which
Christ, Psalm. 110.7
in whom God is all these to us, shall drink in the way, and lift up the head)
by which each true Christian dares deal, and that with assured hope of
victory, with his stoutest enemy that would stand in his way, as an hinderance
to good duties. When he finds himself otherwise weak, naked and unarmed, he
then clothes himself, by the application of faith, with this name of God, and
distrusting his own strength, trusts perfectly in it, and in the power, might,
mercy and goodness of God in Christ, and so sets upon the most difficult task
and work of obedience enjoined him, though he meet with many and strong
enemies in his way to withstand him.

This being the strength of a Christian, who only has this truly bold and
venturous spirit, how weak on the contrary must they needs be, 2 Cor 4.13
who wanting this Spirit of faith, and having only humane helps and motives
to encourage them, and set them on work, faint (...) crucified him, and after
by dying for him, John 21.19.
glorify God, and magnify this his power in him.

2 To seek to and trust in Gods power and promise.
2. He that is weakest and least confident in himself (as is only the sound
Christian) is always most courageous in God, whiles by faith he looks to his
promise: for God calling him to his duty, and to be strong and courageous,
premits this his promise, Josh. 1.5.6.7
I will be with thee, I will not fail thee, nor forsake thee. This made
Joshua undertake the expulsion of many and great nations, and accordingly
effect it. 1 Chronicles. 28.20.
This made Solomon undertake the building and finishing of that most
magnificent, and for outward glory, matchles Temple. This makes ordinary
Christians overcome all fears of want, and perfectly trust in God and in his
providence, in the greatest straits, even because they have the like promise.
Heb. 13.5.
But this, and the like promises made for our incourageme^t to well-doing, is
little thought on by presumptuous and arrogant Christians, who will have ever
somewhat of their own to enable them, some power of their own free will for
the doing of the good enjoined, whereby, they in effect, and as God takes it,
arrogate all or most to themselves, saying, when ought commanded is done by
them, with that proud King of Assyria, Isa. 10.13.
By the strength of my hand have J done it, and by my wisdom, for I am
prudent. But this discouers their hypocrisy; and this their strength is as
weak as Sampsons, after he had lost his locks, and forsaken God, and his
covenant, by breaking the law of Nazarites. His strength was not in his hair
before, but in his God, whom, by letting his hair be cut, contrary to that
law, he thus forsook.

Now besides this faith, as the ground of the godly man's strength, they have
many graces in them, as daughters or attendants of faith, Par. 3.. 26.
by which they are helped, and unto which we must all be exhorted. 2 Pet.
1.5.6.7.8.


Section. 26.
But especially they have three affections, which as good servants and
attendants, 2 He has to help him 3 Sanctified affecto^is.
wait on them, and do help to strengthen them, and further them in their
godly endeavors; all which the wicked want: these are, 1. Love to God and man.
2. Desire. 3 Joy.

1 Love to God and man.
1. Love; this in them is as strong as death, and constraines them to do their
duty; and ouercomes the spirit of fear, and therefore in Scripture it goes
coupled with the spirit of power, 2 Timothy 1.7.
which it makes more strong. This love being stronger in Mary Magdalen toward
Christ (she loving much, Luke 7.47.
as having many sins forgiven her) and in the other Mary, then in the Disciple,
made them show more courage, then the Disciples showed, and overcome all
womanish fears in them, whilst they early came to see the Sepulcher where
Christ was laid. Mat. 28.1.
This in the godly stirs them up to all kind of duty both toward God and
man. If this godly man be a Minister, this love of God, and of Christ's flock
also, will compel him to feed Christ's sheep, and that with diligence; Ioh.
21.16.
yea, to frame his teaching in that manner (and herein to overcome himself) as
whereby he may most edify Gods people. If a private Christian, this spirit of
Love will stir him up, both to admonish and exhort others, though it be a
harsh duty, and a thankeles Office with man; yea generally, this, with Faith
and Hope, from which it is inseparable, says the Apostle, will make you that
ye shall neither be barren nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus
Christ. 2 Pet. 1.8.
It ouercomes all difficulties, and expells all fears and discouragements, and
adds courage and constancy to the weakest, and furthereth our going up into
Christ, Ephesians. 4.15.
which without it would not be.

But, the Hypocrite, because he has not this Spirit of Love, Revel. 21.5.
he is timorous, and his character is fearful, he dares not venture upon
necessary duties, if once they threaten him with danger; he shows no courage
for the truth and goodness, because indeed he loves them not, 1 Ioh. 4.18.
for themselves: fear makes him abstain from doing good, whereas, if the love
of God and goodness were indeed in him, it would make him courageous for God
and goodness, and fill him with an holy zeal, and not at all careful for the
pleasing or yet displeasing of man; as it was an evident sign of Ionathans
true love to David, when, he feared not the displeasure of Saul his Father, for
the love he showed to David.

Section. 27.
2. The godly man's faith is followed with desire of good, 2 Desire
which, being strong in him, (he hungring and thirsting after righteousness)
will not let him take any repulse, Par. 3.. 27.
how difficult soever the duty be; as we use to say, hunger will make a man
break through a stone wall. This makes him pour out strong cries to God by
the prayer of Faith, and whiles he wrestles, he prays, and fights crying, as
did Moses, I^hosaphat, 1 King. 22 32.
but especially Jacob, who would not let God go till he blessed him;
wherefore his name was called Israel, for says God to him, Genesis 32.26.28.
as a Prince have thou power with God, and with men, and have prevailed. Such,
in their measure, are all the true Israelites of God; whilst they strive with
the difficulties of their duty, and hereunto take unto them other parts of
their spiritual Armor, they feeling themselves weak and near foiled, have
recourse presently to their General and grand Captain Christ Jesus, who is
ever, when he is farthest off, in the Rere, and of him, by prayer obtain new
forces, aid and strength, whereby they are undoubtedly conquerours in the end.
But, on the other hand, Hypocrites and counterfeit Christians, wanting this
spirit of Prayer, as not truly longing after righteousness, they are as faint
and languishing in all good endeauours, as they are in their desires, and so
for want of true desire, and of faith whereby they should in their faintings,
retire to God, and seek for strength according to his promise, they quite give
over the pursuit of goodness, when especially it proves difficult, or
prejudicial to their natural, carnal, or earthly desires: and thus, by their
want of desire to goodness, they show they have no courage for it, and by
their want of courage, they show themselves deuoid of Gods spirit, which is a
spirit of strength, and so consequently, that by it they have not put on
Christ; so do they also, by their want of Joy, Delight and sweet content in
the doing of their duty for it self, Par. 3.. 28.
which is a third affection which the godly have to help and further them
withal, which those other want.

Section. 28.
This comfort from well doing from the spirit of comfort, 3 Joy and delight in
doing his duty.
or the Comforter, both quickens, and heartens them to it through Hope, and in
the doing of their duty, sweetens it to them, and so lessens the irkesomenesse
of it, and when it is done, it both gives good content, whereby they think
their labor and pains well bestowed, as also leaves in them a desire and
readiness to set upon it again, or the like duty, and in the comfortable
experience of Gods assistance, not to despair, or yet to be discouraged, but
more eagerly and courageously to perform the same again.

All things are contrary in the Hypocrite; he does the strictest duties (if at
all, then) with little cheerfulness, Par. 3.. 29.
or delight, he halfe-repents of his labor, loss, cost, etc. and in regard of
former discouragements attending or following them, he has less heart then
before, (whilst he foresaw not the inconveniences he now finds) to return to,
or to do the same or like duties again: the oftener he does them, the more he
wearies of them, and less rejoices in them, unless perhaps it be upon
carnal and by-respects.

Section. 29.
2 Gods spirit shows it self strong in regard of Temporal good.
Thus we have showed how the good Christian manifests himself to be inwardly
clothed with Christ's spirit of might, in regard of Spiritual good, touching
which it maks him hardy and truly bold to undertake it, though difficult: Now
we must show the like in regard of Temporal good things, which it teaches
him, in comparison of the other, to contemn. These I call, not only freedom
and deliverance from evils which are outward, as from sickness, poverty,
disgraces, fears, imprisonments, troubles; Which in comparison it makes him
contemn.
but also and chiefly, wealth, long life, power and authority, pleasures and
delights, favor of Princes and of great men, and the like; in one word,
Outward prosperity; in three words, the Honors, Pleasures, and Profits of the
world, which are as the worlds Trinity, which the men of the world do
worship. For prosperity in the general, and generally all good things of this
life; though the godly man, and he only, have the promise of them, and by
virtue of his faith in Christ have right unto them; 1 Timothy 3.8.
yet he has so much spiritual wisdom given him, as in his judgment to
prefer spiritual good things before them; and so much spiritual strength, and
grace given him, as in his choice, will, pursuites, endeavors after such
things, yea in his possession and enjoyment of them, so to order and guide
himself, as that they have not the first place in his thoughts; yea, in case
of competition, and when a good conscience, God favor, or our spiritual good
and they cannot stand together, then, in such a case, to contemn, and to
account basely of the best of these things, nay of them all, though they fawn
on him never so much, and promise all content possible. If he cannot have such
things as servants to godliness, and to further his good and godly intents and
endeavors, he scorns to make them the Masters of his affections; and through
a magnanimous and generous spirit in him, (which is this spirit of strength I
speak of) he labors to make them servants to godliness, or else quite to
abandon and put them out of service. He knows, that if he be Gods, he cannot,
(and therefore must not) serve two Masters, Mat. 6.24
God and Mammon: and so consequently, holding to the one, which is God, and to
Christ, whose disciple he is, he, in comparison despises the other, as
otherwise making himself unworthy of Christ. verse. 10 37.
If therefore the devil come to him with the bait of prosperity, and present
unto his thoughts, and show him all the kingdoms of the world, and 4.8.9.10
and the glory of them, (and so, all things else desirable in the world) saying
and promising, All these things will I give thee, if thou will fall down and
worship me: Suppose withal, it were in the devils power to perform what he
promised; yet the true Christian being sealed with Gods Spirit, and having
received his badge and cognizance, reiects in a holy scorn, all such offers
from him and from the world upon such terms; and will either have them of
God, his own Masters giving, or he will none of them, as preferring better
and spiritual good things before the^: He will worship the Lord his God, and
him only will he serve; and herein follow his Master Jesus Christ, who thus
repelled that temptation. He will leave these things upon such terms, for the
followers of Mammon, and for worldlings to accept of.

Whence we see, that this contempt of the world, is a note and a distinguishing
mark of Gods child; our Savior expressly saying, Ye cannot serve God and
Mammon: Mat. 6.24.
-- no man can serve two Masters; though the Mammonists of this world will not
see and acknowledge so much, The contempt of the world a distinguishing note of
one sanctified.
but do please themselves with their formal service of God; (whose love they
often judge of by their outward prosperity) in the mean time the world has
the chief room, and best welcome and respect given in their hearts; which for
all their fair shows, and leaves of religion, go after their covetousness.
Ezekiel. 33.31
But they who thus spiritually go a whoring from God after the world, must know
and acknowledge so much, if they will be Gods; and therefore says God by Saint
James to them, Iam. 4.4.
Ye adulterers and adulteresses, know ye not that the friendship of the world
is enmity with God? Whosoever therefore will be a friend of the world, is (for
all his fair shows) the enemy of God. The like is said elsewhere. 1 Ioh. 2.15.
Yet this is not so said or meant, but that sometimes Gods servant shows too
much love to the world and to the things of it, and in that regard, walks not
so euenly as he should, so humbly, so steadfastly with God, but that he will be
nibling at that bait, and is sometimes ensnared and entangled in some measure
therewith, yea sometimes foiled by prosperity, as it was with David; who in
his prosperity could say, I shall never be moved; Psalm. 30.6. 2 Samuel 11.2.3.
and 24.2
yea, he grew secure thence and less watchful over himself (as do many his
like) and so was fowly overtaken by Bathshebas beauty, as also in pride numbered
the people: so it was with King Hezekiah, 2 Chro. 32.25. -- 27.30.31.
whose wealth and prosperity (for it is said, he prospered in all his works) it
seems, made him proud, for his heart was lifted up: and so doubtless it is with
many other of Gods children in whom Gods Spirit is; yet, though God sometimes
for a while leave them, verse. 26.
to try what is in their hearts, as he left Hezekiah, yet they live not long
in such sins, but as he did, they also by the strength of Gods grace in them,
humble themselves for their pride, their hearts smite them, 2 Samuel 24.10.
and they are bettered, and made more careful and watchful by their former
worldliness, and failings through such temptations. So that generally it is
true of all Gods children, and of each of them for the most time of their
Christian course and pilgrimage, that they are so fenced and armed by Gods
grace and spirit, How Gods Children use the world.
that the baits and allurements of prosperity prevail not with them, that
they should with their hearts, and constantly do any first, by seeking to
attain to such things, as to honors and high places, whether in Church or
Commonwealth, by ungodly and unlawful means, as by briberies, simony,
flattery, servile and base dependence on great men's humors for advancement,
secret underminings, or the like; and so to wealth and their own ends, by
deceits, cosinage, wro^gs, extortion, usury, falsifying of wares or waights,
etc. Or secondly, thirdly, by suffering fourthly, by waxing injurious to
others, by abusing their wealth, power and authority to the preiudicing of good
lastly, by misimploying, and mispending of their wealth, wit, strength, to the
satisfying of their own lusts and desires in evil. All these evils they are
careful to avoid; and though the world and the devil promise them fair, yet
they will not, by the power of grace in them, accept of them upon such
conditions, or use them to such ends, as whereby God is dishonored, and their
own souls prejudiced.

And how the wicked abuse it.
Whereas all is contrary in the wicked, who notwithstanding all his fair shows
of outward religious profession, and it may be, protestations to the contrary,
is so intised by these baits that he is also catched and choked with the hook,
whiles in a manner he maidenly acepts of the devils offer upon the devils
conditions, and so 1. Having (in the want of such things) a months mind as we
use falls into temptation and a snare, 1 Timothy 6.9.10.
and into many foolish and hurtful lusts, and in all evil, whiles no means,
how evil or indirect soever, but they shall be used: and thus do wicked men
compass their ends, and become great and rich; and why? because, Ier. 5.26.27.
as a Cage is full of birds, so are their houses full of deceit, as God by
Jeremy speaks of them, who brandeth them with the note of wicked men among
his people. Thus Judas will betray his Master for silver, and Doeg will flatter
Saul, Mat. 26.15. 1 Samuel 22.10.
and speak evil of David, in hope of preferment, and Diotrephes will hinder
preaching, that he may be chief himself; and for fat Bishoprics and
Benefices, 3 Ioh. 1.9.10.
the simplicity of the truth shall be left; and many the like things shall be
done, Philips sermons on Mat. 4.9. Page 199.200. etc.
as worthy Master Phillips in his Sermons on Mat. 4.9. instanceth, where he
shows, that never any took the Devil so much at his word, as the Hierarchy
of Rome etc. to who^ I remit See Psalm. 52.7. Luke 12.19.
sets his heart on the^, blesses himself in the^, trusts and rests himself
upon them, and promises himself a long and happy life from these, with the
rich fool, thus putting the evil day far from him, promising himself Mat.
13.22.
he further suffers the care of the world, and deceitfullnesse of riches, to
choke the Word, so that he becomes unfruitful. 4. He uses his wealth,
authority, instruments of evil, to luxury, riot* oppression, and cruelty, or
otherwise becomes proud, idle, vain glorious, by occasion of them. 5. And
lastly mispends and misimployes the

Thus weak does a wicked man show himself, whiles by these or the like
means, he suffers the vain things of this life to have such force, as to
withdraw him from God, and his duty, to the world, 2 Timothy 4.10
as they did Demas. By these things may thou, whosoever thou art, examine
thy self; and as thou, impartially searching, and judging shall find, thou
may conclude thy self either to be or not to be clothed from above with
this spirit of strength, especially, Par. 3.. 38.
try thy self by thy strength in withstanding these three maine baits of the
world, the Honors, Pleasures, and Profits of it; for these are all that are in
the world, 1 Ioh. 2.15.16.
The lust of the flesh, (or pleasures) The pride of life, (or Honors) The lust
of the eyes, (or profit, through covetousness.) These are not of the Father,
but of the world; If any man then love the world, or these things in the world,
the love of the Father is not in them.

Section. 38.
First for the Honors and preferments of the world; The godly man's carriage
towords. 1 Honors.
the godly man being clothed with Christ's righteousness, and with this Spirit
of might, being tempted thereby, has to oppose, and does oppose, the honor he
has in and from Christ, of whom he is not ashamed, by being clothed with
such royal apparel, by which his filthy nakedness is covered, and himself
accounted precious and honorable in Gods sight; Isa. 43.4.
for even thus are they clothed, and thus shall it be done to all whom the
King of Heaven will honor: Par. 3.. 30
Ester. 1.6.8.9.
and this is honor enough in the judgment even of the most ambitious and
aspiring, as of Haman.

But now, the wicked, to whom pride is as a chain and ornament, accounting
basely and meanly of Gods Children, and of the simplicity of the Gospel, and
of the plain path of honesty, seeks his honor elsewhere, in the World, and
from man, and so is easily drawn by such baits as will be offered, and
withdrawn from God, by acccepting of honor upon dishonorable terms.

Secondly, for Pleasures; 2 Pleasure.
the faithful man has drunk of the fountain, and of the waters of Gods
Spirit, which is a comforting and refreshing Spirit; and therefore solaceth
himself in God, feasts continually with the goodness of his conscience; so
that, he is neither easily withdrawn to unlawful pleasures, nor, if he be
sometime ensnared thereby, takes he pleasure in the pleasures of sin, but
showing all sorrow for such delight, he by repentance returns speedily to
God, and, wearying of such earthly joys or carnal delights, he hastens to
regaine the peace of his conscience, and to have restored to him the joy of
Gods salvation, in the comfortable assurance thereof. Contrariwise, the ungodly
wretch, finding no relish in God or in godliness, and knowing no better
pleasure, is drawn aside, and gluts himself with earthly contents, and
delightful vanities.

3 Wealth of the world
Thirdly, for Profit, the godly man's chief gain is godliness, and the
unsearchable riches of Christ; and he is able to oppose such gain, whereby
he has gained God, and his own soul, against all unlawful gain
whatsoever; this makes him withstand all temptations by unlawful gayning;
whereas, the godless wretch, Par. 3.. 31.
knowing no better riches, gapes after worldly gain, and is choked therewith.

How weak then are all they, and how deuoid of this strong spirit of God, whom
such trifles move and remove from their steadfastnesse.

Section. 31.
But Gods Children have here three maine helps to strengthen them, which
worldlings want; The godly man's helps (proper to him) to strengthen him
against the baits of the world.
and these are: 1. Faith. 2. Hope. 3. Love.

1. Faith, looking to Gods word, and promises, makes the godly able to
withstand and overcome the world, and all those three forenamed things of the
world; as it did Moses: Heb. 11.24.25.26.
for by faith he refused to be called the son of Pharaohs Daughter (there is
for Honor) choosing rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, 1 Faith.
then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season, (and that's for Pleasure)
esteeming the reproach of Christ greater riches then the treasures of Egypt,
etc. (and that is said for Profit^.) How strong then was Gods spirit in him by
faith, which made him withstand such strong baits? The like in good measure
do all Gods Children who have faith: 1 Ioh. 5.4.
For this is the victory which overcomes the world, even our faith, and
whatsoever is borne of God, (as is every faithful man, by the spirit of God)
overcomes the world. Whereas the worldling wanting this, how weak is he?
and though he make some show of faith, and seem to himself to have it, yet
the world masters both it and him, so that we may well say, as we see, this is
the victory which over comes many a man's faith, even the world, and the
things thereof.

2 Hope.
2. Hope; by this also Moses overcame the forenamed baits of honor, pleasure,
profit: as a common reason of his victory over them all, Heb. 11.26.
its added, For he had respect to the recompense of reward: whereas the wicked
and worldlings run as they were mad after these things, and being tempted,
yield; because they have neither faith to believe the promise of better things,
which is made only to believers; nor hope to expect the performance of such
things promised.

3. Love of God, 3 Love.
where it is, as it is in the godly, will expel the love of the world; and
where the world and the things of it are not loved, they prevail not with any.
Now the godly truly loving God for himself, and goodness for it self, cannot
be drawn to forsake either him or it for the world; this makes them, if they
love the world or any thing in it, to love it, with a reference, and in a
subordination to God and goodness, and therefore they are not overcome of the
world. Now the men of this world, loving the world more then God and godliness
(loving the one

Par. 3.. 32.
and also other means by which he tempts us, he as the author mediately, by
the help of the flesh, and the world, by prosperity and adversity; but
especially he does tempt more imediatly by suggesting and injecting evil
thoughts and objects into our souls, Whose temptations, the godly man by the
spirit resists.
yea sometimes inspiring, without any outward object at all, some fearful
thoughts of blasphemy, (without any depe^dancy on former thoghts) against God,
his word, his providence; and not only so, but by them he tempts often to
despair, as he did Cain, and Judas, yea in some degree Gods servants
themselves, as Job and David: Job 13. Psalm. 77.
yet most usually, whether mediately or immediately, he tempts men of all
sorts, to all sorts of sin, as to lusts and evil desires, being called in
that regard the father of lusts and lies: for so he also tempted Ananias and
Saphira: Ioh. 8.44. Act. 5.3.
so to covetousness, by which he is said to enter into Judas: so, to all evil
affections and passions, as of anger and wrath, so that to give place unto
anger, Ephesians. 4.26.
is to give place to the devil: so to the denial of Christ, as he did Peter,
and of the Gospel through persecution, and to sins of all sorts. To these he
tempts us, being first most maliciously bent against us, seeking thereby the
utter ruin and destruction of bodies and souls, 1 Pet. 5.8.
going about seeking whom he may devour: Secondly, being a mighty and
powerful adversary, so that we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but
against principalities, powers, etc. Thirdly, Ephesians. ^.12
being moreover most subtle and politic to take advantages against us, Reu.
12.3.
being not only called a great red Dragon, for his wrath and malice against
us, nor only a Lion, 1 Pet. 5.8.
for his strength and power, but a Serpent, and old serpent, Revel. 12.9.
for his craft and subtlety, whereby he can and does take advantage of our
inclinations, age, thoughts, and of all occasions to hurt us. All these are
noted to show his power with who^ (...) in the mean time supports them, Par.
3. 33
as it did Paul, 2 Cor. 12.9. 1 Cor. 10.13 1 Pet. 5.9.10
and he gives that issue out of temptation, according to his promise, that
they are not overcome, neither fall away either totally, or finally, as does
the hypocrite, but have the devil to fly from them, Romans 16.20
and at length tread Satan under foot, as God has promised. Their course of
life is not a perpetual slavery and thraldom under Satan's power, as it is
with the wicked, and with Christians in name only, who, for all their fair
brags, that they are the sons of God, and the seed of Abraham, yet do the
lusts of the devil, whose children, John 8.44.
in that regard, they are, and are in subjection to him.

Section. 33.
Now the true Christian herein sheddeth himself from the wicked and hypocrite,
The godly resists and overcome Satan five ways. 1 by the spirit.
who bears only the name of Christ, that first in case of temptatation, he,
having the Spirit, shows forth so much by that resistance he makes by the
Spirit, which in him lusts against the flesh (Satan's chief instrument) and
by that entertainment he gives unto the good motions thereof, which are
therefore sent and inspired that we may resist evil motions, for (as, where
God puts good thoughts and motions into men's hearts, his Childre^s
especially, there Satan iniecteth contrary evil thoughts and motions, (by
himself or his instruments, wicked men, yea sometimes good and harmless men,
intending us no hurt, but only herein abused by Satan, as was Eve in tempting
Adam, and Peter in tempting Christ) which Hypocrites ordinarily suffer to quell
the other, but Gods children, by these other of the spirit repel; so where
Satan is busy to tempt by evil thoughts and motions, there God, even in the
wickedest (unless he have given him over to a reprobate sense) much more in
his own servants, is careful to present to them contrary good thoughts and
motions; Par. 3.. 34
which when they are offered, the sincere Christian ordinarily accepts of, See
above. page 172.
and hearkens to their voice which he knows and acknowledges, and is thereby
withdrawn from the other, which he consents not unto; but the wicked and
Hypocrite, suffers these wicked and deuelish thoughts to prevail, and quench
those good motions of the spirit, he not making use thereof to make resistance
against the other: thus sinning, he never, or seldom sins without a witness,
namely, the witness of his own conscience, and of Gods spirit, which, at the
latter day will be his accuser, if not judge. If then we smoother good motions
usually, and so quench the spirit of Ghrist, we obey not Christ, but yield to
Satan.

Section. 34.
2 By the word of god.
He again that indeed has this spirit of might, resists Satan and his
suggestions by making use generally of Gods Word, whereunto the other has no
regard. Wheresoever the spirit of Christ is in any, there it looks ever unto
Gods word, and moves only according to the directions thereof, and accordingly
arms the Christian against the fiery darts of the wicked (one) by putting
into his right hand the Sword of the Spirit, Ephesians. 6.15.16.17.
which is the Word of God, and into his left hand the Shield of Faith, (whose
general object is Gods Word) and upon his feet, the preparation of the Gospel
of peace. These are the weapons of their warfare, 2 Cor. 10.4.5.
mighty through God to the pulling down of strong holds, whereby, first, Gods
Ministers weilding these weapons for the^, cast down imaginations, (in them)
and every high thing that exalts it self against the knowledge of God, and
bring into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ: yea, whereby,
(namely by flying to the promises an directions of Scripture, and by Gods word
dwelling in them,) Godly Christians also make resistance and overcome that
strong man; for so says Saint John, 1 Ioh. 2.14.
I have written to you young men, because you are strong, and the Word of God
abides in you, and ye have overcome the wicked one, that is the Devil. Yet
this is not by virtue of their own strength, either of body, because they are
strong, or of their own free will, but in as much as the word of God abides
in them, and finds place with them, whiles distrusting themselves, and their
own strength, they fly to God and to Gods promise, and according to it, seek
strength from it, and conscionably follow the directions of the same: Mat.
4.6.7.
thus our Savior avoided Satan, and so his servants, by Gods word. It bids
resist and never yield to Satan whether he speak true or false, and they
resist. It bids them never be secure but watch, 1 Pet. 5 8.
and they watch. It directs them to stand in the Truth, and, (which Satan did
not) they stand fast in it. Ioh. 8.44.
And it bids use such other means as are next to be named, and they use them,
as we shall see: so that, for the preuentio^ of Satan's temptations, and arming
themselves against him, Romans 6.23.
they account no sin light, whose wages is death; they are diligent in their
callings, they set themselves ever in Gods sight, and are in that regard
afraid to offend him as was Joseph, and so, Genesis 39.9. Pro. 28.14.
fearing always, are kept from falling into mischeife; and with all these,
distrusting their own strength, they pray, as we shall see.

It is not so with dowe baked Christians, whereof some, Whereof some make
little reckoning.
pretending in the spirit more then any, neglect to stir it up according to
Gods word; to meditate they Liberties.
stir themselves up to pray daily and continually, as Gods word bids, they
will not; they will expect a day, two or more, yea a month, whiles the spirit
shall sensibly move within their breasts, and then they will clap down and
pray with their Families, or alone, else not. These are our Familists and such
as smell that ways. But what strength against temptation can they have, whiles
pretending the spirit, they thus neglect or despise Gods word? and how does
Satan prevail with them even in that regard, through such neglect?

2 Papists.
The like neglect of Gods word, and of the armor thereof, we may observe in our
Popish Christians, who, in resisting of Satan's temptations, trust more to their
own free will, and the power thereof, then unto Gods word and promise, and to
his free grace and assistance there promised. It is ill seen in the lives of
most Papists, (who every ways reject Gods word) that they have this strength
against Satan's temptations. This is true also in common Protestants, and
counterfeit Professors, in whose mouths only Gods word is, Par. 3.. 35.
Psalm. 50.16.17.
it not abiding in their hearts, nor showing it self powerful in their lives.

Section 35.
Thirdly, sound and sincere Christians make resistance by faith, 3 By saving
and Iustifiing Faith.
and by flying to the special promise of Christ, according to those precepts,
1 Pet. 5.9. Ephesians. 6.16.
whom resist steadfast in the faith, and, above all things take the shield of
faith, wherewith ye shall be able to quench the fiery darts of the wicked, or
of the Devil. Which faith is that especially, whereby, they, being by it
ingrafted into Christ, in all assaults, fly to Christ, By virtue whereof the
godly (to help them) partake.
trust and rest on him. And how is it possible, that they who are Christ's, and
whose Christ is, should be either wholly or finally overcome by Satan, and his
temptations? 1 Of Christ's victory. Colos. 2.15
When First, being in Christ, they in him have obtained victory over these
infernal powers, he having for them, spoiled Principalities, and powers, made
a show of them openly and tryumphed over them in the Cross. So that they deal
with a vanquished enemy; whereas the unsound Christian, being indeed not
truly, but in seeming only, in Christ, partakes not of this his victory, but is
still in bondage to Satan.

2 Of his intermission.
2. True Christians, being truly in Christ, have the benefit also of the
Intercession of Christ, who, what he performed for Peter when Satan sought to
sift him as wheat, he performs for all his, I have prayed for thee that thy
faith fail not. Luke 22.31.
Yea, this his very example were enough to strengthen his brethren, who in like
trialls and temptations may learn by his example, and by the mercy showed him,
to seek strength from Christ, and from his intercession.

3. Besides these, they being in Christ by faith, have to strengthen them, 3
Example
the example of Christ himself, who was in all points tempted like as we are
(though without sin) which yet, Simpathy.
to strengthen their faith, was more then a bare example, he being tempted for
us, And succor
and we in him, and he for us, and we in him ouercomming the tempter; yea, in
that regard, they have him as a Brother to sympathize with the^, Heb. 4.15.
being touched with the feeling of their infirmities; who accordingly in love
compassionates their case, and shows himself ready and willing to assist them;
nor that only, but being as well God for power, Heb. 2.18.
as man for his pity, he, in that himself has suffered being tempted, is
able to succor them that are tempted; so that they have from him, (who was
tempted before them as an example, for them as a Savior, and now in them as a
head and brother) the benefit both of his sympathy and succor.

4. Yea lastly, 4 Healing power.
in case they be sometimes foiled by Satan, (as through Gods wise and just
providence they now and then are) yet, they being in Christ by faith, partake
of virtue that goes out from him, and of his healing power: for he is their Sun
of righteousness, Malach. 4.2
which arises with healing in his wings; yea that true Serpent, figured by the
Brazen Serpent which was lifted up; Ioh. 3.15.
so that finding any of Satan's fiery darts in their flesh, or themselves stung
with these fiery Serpents, they, by faith looking up to Christ crucified, are
certainly healed.

Thus the true Christian either feeling himself assaulted by the devil, or
foiled by him, either keeps or recouers strength by stirring up his thoughts
to meditate, and his faith to lay hold on these things in Christ: by which he
either keeps his standing against these powers which wrestle with him, or
recouers himself after a foil.

Of such benefits, hypocrites and the wicked do not partake.
But where is the painted Christian now in such conflicts? how is it possible
for him, wanting true faith in Christ, Par. 3.. 36.
being left alone, hand to hand to the devil, to stand out, and not to be
wholly subjugated and captiuated under Satan, when he is left to himself
without any benefit, from Christ's death and victory, from his Intercession and
prayers, from his pity, succor, and healing? nay, being so usually foiled by
Satan and his temptations, yea and in a willing bondage under him, doing,
without much, if any resistance, his lusts and will, we may conclude him, for
all his name of Christian or leaves of profession, to want and be without all
these benefits of Christ, and so to want true faith in him, and to be without
his spirit, which, where it is, is a spirit of strength, and resists by faith
Satan himself.

Section. 36.
A fourth means of the Christians resistance of Satan, 4 By prayer Ephesians.
6.18. etc.
is by Prayer, without which all the other parts of Christian armor are little
availeable, Prayer buckles all the rest on: Par. 3.. 37
he fights praying, and so shows himself to have this spirit, which is a
spirit of prayer: but a wicked man cannot pray, and an hypocrite is never
accepted of in his formal prayers, and therefore can reap no assistance from
Christ, which he either seeks not, or seeks amiss, and so is foiled. But of
this formerly.

Section 37.
Lastly, herein shows the true Christian spiritual strength, 5 By
watchfulness.
joined with wisdom (both which in all kinds of incounters, bodily or ghostly,
must go together) in as much as he is made by the Spirit, watchful against
sin, yea against the beginnings and occasions of it, whatsoever his special
sin be, by which Satan seeks advantage. This he ioynes to his prayers,
according to that of our Savior, Mark. 14.38
Watch ye and pray, lest ye enter into tentation: for he knows that sluggish
prayers will do no good. This makes him avoid all known or suspected
occasions of sin, restraining eyes, mouth, hands, feet, Par. 3.. 38
from beholding, speaking, acting or following vanities; with all these bodily
members making a covenant, as Job did, with his eyes. Job 31.1.
Sin being the devils Bawd, he, knowing it to be a tempter, deals with it,
Prou. 6.27.
as he would do with an harlot, Against such things as by which Satan seeks
advantage.
he remoues his way far from her, and comes not nigh the door of her house;
he puts far from him all stumbling blocks of iniquity, and all to this end,
that he may give the devil no advantage, by such things as whereby he seeks
advantage. Now these are diverse.

Section. 38.
First and generally, Securities through want of watchfulness; 1. Security
he knows and considers that Satan is ever watchful, and that therefore he
himself can no sooner grow careless and secure, and to neglect his watch over
his own heart, Bifields Promises.
and to be without fear of evil, but Satan will quickly epsy the same, and
upon the advantage, give some sudden, unexpected and strong assault, by darting
and shooting into the heart and thoughts some one temptation or other, to this
or that sin, unto which he finds the soul to lie most open. Hereupon he
dares not be secure, but fearing always, (which fear may stand with Christian
courage) he stands upon his Watchtower, has his eyes in his head, soon
espies the danger, or occasion by which he may be tempted, and so either
preuents the devil, (who finding him so watchful, tempts him not) or
withstands and repels the temptation, which he foresaw. Thus, he foreseeing
danger, and how Satan may tempt him by occasion of such company as he is to
frequent, or of such estates and conditions of life as he is to change, or the
like; he either auoyds both the one and other, if no vrgencie or necessity
compel him; or if he must needs, then, foreseeing the danger, and occasions
of temptation to sin thereby, he carefully arms himself against them.
Whereas, Par. 3.. 39
on the contrary, the secure Christian, not knowing his own danger, neither
fearing any evil, lives careless, quiet and secure, like the city Laish,
Judge. 18.7.8.9. etc.
ventures upon all occasions, and so encouraging the devil to assault him, (as
those others did the Danites by their security) he is both assaulted, and as
soon foiled, ensnared and taken: for thus, whiles he sleeps, Mat. 13.25. and
12.44.45
the enemy sowes his tares; and finding the heart empty, swept, and garnished,
he enters with a troop.

Section. 39.
More particularly; the Devil seeks advantage from trying our thoughts and
affections, 2. Intertainement given to the first motions of sin.
by presenting thereunto objects to withdraw them, and by that intertainment he
finds us to give thereunto: so that seeing us to give any the least welcome to
these his Harbingers, and to lodge them with us, he then comes himself,
attended with legions, and takes up the best room, which is our hears, and
there seats himself. Now the wise Christian, knowing this his method in
tempting, accounts it not safe for him to dally with such thoghts, or to give
them the least intertainment: hereupon thus timely resisting and repelling
them, he so long as he so does, finds the less encumbrance and more freedom
from stronger assaults, even as he that stops the floodgates at the first,
and gives no way thereunto, no not a little. But the unsound Christian wanting
this wisdom, pleases himself with such objects as are injected by the
devil, and setting his thoughts thereon, dallieth therewith, and pleases
himself with contemplative vanities projecting to himself now this, now that,
and so delights himself in the thought of that evil and sin, which he never
purposed to commit; and by this means gives the devil hope to proceed and to
employ his skill to put fire to this fuel, and so to inflame the heart to
ensnare the soul; Par. 3.. 40
which he no sooner does, but possession is given him presently, and so from
evil thoughts as the seed, conceived by delight and daliance, the birth of
sin follows, Heb. 3.12.
and so at length by degrees there is a departure from the living God. So
unwise and weak is an unsound Christian, as showing not so much strength as to
withstand the first and weakest assault. A shrewd argument therefore of
unsoundness it is, any ways to dally with sin, and to make no resistance at the
first discovery of it, or to think a man's self able, after he has played
with it awhile, to cast it off when he will.

Section. 40.
Again, the Devil gets great advantage when he finds men excessive and
inordinate in their love, care, 3 Immoderation about the things of this life.
and endeavors after the things of this life, as of riches, honors,
pleasures, etc. For when he sees any so much as nibling at these his baits,
much more when he sees any greedily to swallow them down, he fails not to
pull the line, and to fasten the hook in their jaws; that is, he, seeing them
wedded to these things, hooks them to himself thereby, and as they have
swallowed his baits, so does he swallow and devour them; for, he goes about
like a roaring Lion seeking whom he may devour. Now the wise Christian,
knowing the Devil as a cunning Fowler, will be readiest to spread his Net,
and shoot and strike when he feeds on these his baits, without fear; as he
watches to prevent him, 1 Pet. 5.8.
so also he will be sober in the use and enjoying of these outward things, and
give the Devil no occasion against him by his intemperate love of such things,
or by glutting himself therewith; if he taste of them, as of necessity he
must, then is it, but as the dog by the River Nilus, a lapp and away, with
his eye in his neck, for fear of being devoured of the Crocadile that old
Serpent Satan, Par. 3.. 41
whiles he greedily satiates and filles himself of them. Whereas the greedy
worldling, that knows not to moderate himself in these things, and they that
will be rich (and I may say, 1 Timothy 6.9.
they that will be high and honored in the world, they that will enjoy their
pleasures) fall into temptation and a snare, and into many foolish and hurtful
lusts, which drown men in destruction and perdition. And by such excessive
minding and following of worldly things, and rejoicing in them, they show both
their want of wisdom in not preventing Satan's snares, and of spiritual
strength, in not resisting him in these his baits, of which formerly.

Section. 41.
The sound Christian, knowing that unsettledness in the faith, 4 Vnsetlednes in
the faith.
and doubtfulnesse of Gods truth, favor and assistance, or of his own
salvation, gives the Devil occasion to put at such, and to blow strongly with
the blasts of his temptations upon such, whom he sees to be as Reeds, and as
waves of the Sea, through inconstancy, he hereupon labors to set his feet
firmly on firm ground against a iustle, and to settle himself in the
assurance of Gods truth, love and favor, and upon this ground he stands fast
against seducers, withstands and resists the Devil, 1 Pet. 5.8.9.
steadfast in the faith; thus neither fears of man, persecution, death, Hell,
or the Devil himself can prevail with him, or move him; nor hopes,
flatteries, or the favors of the world remove him from God, or his word and
truth. But the Hypocrite, being double minded, is inconstant in all his ways,
and easily inclined and withdrawn to the right hand or to the left, by hopes
and fears of of the world, and by the inticements of seducers; he is opposite
also to the doctrine of assurance, and therefore a meet object for Satan to
assault, Par. 3.. 42
and this his Inconstancy shows him to have no strength.

Section 42.
Lastly, there are other occasions, which Satan takes for the effecting of his
wicked designs and fastening his darts of temptations; 5 Solitariness.
as first Solitariness whether in regrad of company, or of employment, for so
he watched to find Eve alone from her Husband, and then set upon her; and so he
watches parties given to melancholy and sadness of soul, and preuayleth with
many to cause them destroy their bodies, and souls (without extraordinary
mercy) at once. 2. Pride, and high conceit of a man's self; 6 Pride.
for the^ sends he some messenger or other of his, some further temptation, as
to Paul. 3. Anger, 7 Anger.
by which, as by a door, he enters, and by which we give place unto the
Devil. Ephesians. 4.26.
Now the watchful and wise Christian, dares hardly trust himself alone with
Satan, but either keeps with the company of the Godly (especially when
melancholy apprehensions possess him) or finds himself employed in his
calling, as neither trusting to, nor having any promise of protection from God,
but so long as he walks in the right way; so, his thoughts (whatsoever his
excellencies or privileges are) are humble thoughts for the most parts; and he
watches over his heart least rash anger lay him open to Satan; and all these
by Christian wisdom, whereas the unwise Christian, feeding his own humor,
loves solitariness, and retiredness more then he should, and to walk in the
way of idleness, in which Satan finds him, or otherwise would bring him, Psalm.
41.11.
that being out of Gods protection (who promises to give his Angels charge
over his, to keep them in all their ways, not otherwise) he might the easier
deal with him; or otherwise he gives Satan advantage by pride, which deceives
him, or anger, as did Cain; Par. 3.. 43.
and by these they become Satan's slaves.

This watchfulness is the greatest part of the Christians wisdom; and this
wisdom is the greatest part of his strength; yea, Eccles. 9.15.16.
wisdom (especially in such kind of incounters) though often it be despised,
is better then strength: and this strength argues that the spirit of strength
and power is in such an one; whereas the other shows his weakness by his
folly, and his folly in his want of watchfulness, whereby laying himself open
to all occasions of temptation, he, as it were, tempts the Devil to tempt him.

Section. 43
Now how should such an one make resistance, By these means the wise and
strong Christian, withstands Satan's Malice.
or withstand either the Malice, the Power, or Policies of Satan? Only the true
valorous Christian both can do it, and accordingly in good measure, does it.
1. He strengthens himself against Satan's Malice, which he knows to be
mortal, and implacable, by a steadfast purpose and endeavor to hold out in
this spiritual fight, Vna salus victis nulla sperare salutem.
without ever yielding, as knowing, though he should yield, there is no mercy
to be expected; this makes him bold, if not desperate in his fight, yea this
despair makes him more courageous, and in the end a victor, so that being
foiled, yea wounded, he will fight again, and resist to the last gasp, and
thus being faithful to death, he obtaines the Crown of life. Whereas the
carnal Christian, either goes on securely, as if he had no enemy at all to
deal with, or as if the Devil were some meek Lamb, and not rather a
devouring Dragon; or, if he resist Satan's temptations awhile, he finds that
encumbrance from the^, and himself so hard set and in cumbred therewith, as to
be free, (as he thinks) from such molestations of Satan (who most troubles
them that most resist his work in them) he yields himself to the temptation,
swimmes with the stream of the world and of his own corruption, and so seeks
his ease and thinks he has that peace which he sees others to want, who go
mourning daily under the burden of sin, and are molested with Satan's
temptations. Isa. 48.22.
But there is no peace, says my God to the wicked. It Is an argument of
unsoundness, for a man to seek his peace and quiet here in this world; or to
rest in any such supposed peace with the world, or the devil, or yet his own
flesh and corruption.

2. Though Satan be powerful, 2 Power.
yet the godly Christian does know that his power is limited; though he be a
roaring Lion, yet he himself, though a timorous Heart for any courage or
strength of his own, has a Lion, the Lion of the Tribe of Judah to be his
Leader, and expects, 1 Cor. 15.57
yea finds victory through Jesus Christ: whereas the wicked trusting to his
own power, is foiled.

3 Subtilties.
3. Though Satan be wise and wily, yet the good Christian denying himself,
makes himself a fool (in the account of the world, and in the acknowledgement
of his own folly and carnal wisdom) that he may be wise: his wisdom is to
know and fear God according to his word; he follows the directions thereof,
and arms himself with that armor it prescribes; whereas the worldly wise
care not for Gods word, which they reject, both in judgment and practice, and
then what wisdom is in them? They prove wise only to deceive themselves; Ier.
8.9.
whiles they trust to their own wisdom, 1 Cor. 3.19.
it deceiues them; and as God takes the wise in their own craftiness, so
does the devil take them, notwithstanding their wiliness.

Section. 44.
Having considered the Christian man's strength by the spirit, 2 Gods spirit,
strengthens the true Christian against the inticements of sin.
in withstanding and resisting Satan, the Author of evil; Par. 3.. 44.
we are now to take further notice of it, as it has to deal with evil it
self; which is, first the evil of sin.

Sin and vice is of a bewitching nature; it kills whiles it fawnes upon us and
flatters us, and by the allurements and inticements of it, unsound and unarmed
Christians are drawn aside and mastered. It has conquered the strongest, Which
though strong.
that has not been strengthened with this spirit of might. Was not great
Alexander (otherwise invincible) overcome of wine and wrath? 1 Esdras.
3.18.21.22. and 4.26.
How exceeding strong is wine? It causes all men to err that drink it. It
makes the coward draw his sword, It makes men speak all things by talents: yea,
how much more strong are women, and the love of them? Many (strong men
otherwise) have run out of their wits for women, and become servants for
their sakes, etc. Sampson the strong, by his lust, became a prey to Dalilah.
The like prevailing power has all sin over the sons of men, who are drawn
away of their own lust and concupiscence, Iam. 1.14.15
and are entised: then, when lust has conceived, it brings forth sin, and
sin, when it is finished, brings forth death. This is that strong King, which
reigns in the mortal bodies of natural men, and has them at like command
as the Centurion had his servants, to one saying, Go, and he goes, to another,
come, and he comes, to a third, do this, and he does it: so, men's special
corruptions have that command over them, through the inticements of pleasure,
profit, pride, and the like, that at the first motion they come, they go, they
run, they ride, they lie, they swear, they fawn, they flatter; in a word,
they stick at nothing, but yield themselves and their members servants to
uncleanness, and to all sin, which is uncleanness. How weak are their hearts
whiles thus they do? and how do they plainly thus show themselves to want
the Spirit of Christ, which is a spirit of strength? Where then any sin
reigns, and is not, at least, resisted; there is no Spirit of Christ, though
there be the Name and Profession of Christ.

But the true Christian, It inables him to resist and keep under.
clothed with the Lions skin of the tribe of Judah, shows himself a true and
valiant Hercules, to cut and strike off the Hydra-heads of sin, sprout they
never so fast, and at length to kill the body of sin; so that howsoever it
be ever molesting him, or alluring him, yet he withstands it, resists,
repels, and at length ouercomes it. He so keeps his heart, as one that is
watchful and careful, would keep a tree, which he is set to watch, lest the
birds build their nests in it: though he cannot wholly hinder them from
fluttering about it, and sometimes lighting on the branches, yet he can and
does by diligence keep them from nestling in it: so, though the best Christian
cannot wholly drive sin from him, Par. 3.. 45.
nor be free from the allurements and inticements of it, but that sometimes it
will, whiles he is negligent, rest upon him, and find place and some footing;
yea hinder him, and creep into his best actions and sacrifices; yet, as when
the fowls came down upon the carkeises of Abraham's sacrifice, he drove them
away, Genesis 15.11
and offered his sacrifice: so does the other resist and withstand sin and
corruption, that it neither rests nor nestles in his heart, nor yet hinders the
acceptance of his spiritual sacrifices of Prayer, Praise, Alms, etc. Now
this sin is either that part of Original sin, which we call natural
corruption, and the flesh, or it is actual and more outward sin.

Section. 45.
The flesh is that corruption of nature which is in every part and power of
soul and body, 1 How he deals with the flesh and with inbred corruption.
consisting in a deprivation of the image of God, and of that rectitude and
righteousness which was in us at our first creation in Adam; and in a
deprauation of those powers, whereby the whole soul is both forward and prove
unto all evil, only and continually; and froward, and backward in regard of
all goodness; in which regards, the soul is laid open unto sin in act, and to
Satan, which, as an homebred traitor, is ready to take part with him, to let
him into the soul, and to give him the full possession of it. And this effect
it has in the unregenerate and hypocrite. As for the true Christian, though
this corruption of his nature be covered with the righteousness of Christ,
with which he stands clothed; yet it is not taken away for being; God having
left it in our nature, as for other ends, so doubtless for this one, to
exercise his graces and the power of the Spirit in us, even as he left many
nations vndriuen out of the land of promise, that by them he might not only
prove Jsrael, but also teach them war. These remnants of sin, Judge. 2.22. and
3.1.2.
as those nations left, do ever, either molest Gods servants, or allure and
entice them to actual sin, as the other were ever either making war
against Israel, or enticing them to their Idolatries: and being so near us,
even within us, they prove most treacherous and dangerous enemies; even as if a
city, being besieged by foreign forces, should harbor within it self a
company of traitors, who should either hinder assaults to be given upon the
enemies, or be ready to open the gates, and betray the city into the enemies
hands.

Now, whereas the unsound Christian, being either secure, fearing no danger from
the flesh, or weak, and giving it its will, is foiled thereby, and given over
unto sin, and into the hands of Satan by sin; the sound Christian deals other
wise with it: he, knowing what advantage Satan seeks from his flesh, as also
the treachery of the flesh, watches over it, and not only preuenteth the
treacheries of it, so that it cannot do the evil it would, but proceeds
against it as a traitor, and by the strength of grace, and sword of the Spirit,
kills, mortifies, and abolisheth the flesh; or at least, if he find it too
strong as yet for him, he wisely withdrawes from it food and nourishment, by
keeping under the body, by temperance, fastings, or the like; or howsoever, as
the flesh in him lusts against the Spirit, so he stirs up the Spirit to
lust against the flesh, Gal. 5.17.
and when all helps fail, he cries out of it to God, saying, Miserable man
that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death? yea, implores
the aid and assistance of Gods Spirit, by which he overcomes; and for which
he can accordingly praise God, saying with the same Paul, 1 Cor. 15.57. and
Romans 7.25.
But thanks be to God, which gives us the victory, through our Lord Jesus
Christ: Par. 3.. 46
and, I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Section. 46.
This inbred corruption of ours is never in this life so wholly subdued, 2 How
he by this strong spirit deals with sinful affections and motions.
but that it remains still in the best, both for the being of it, and for the
motions of it, whereby a man shall find himself enticed to actual and outward
sins, and that (through the subtlety of Satan) most, according to his special
inclination, calling, age, occasion, place or time wherein he lives; according
to these, Satan seeks and takes his advantage from our flesh, from our
natural inclination and affection to any sin more then other, to tempt us
accordingly, by the baits and bribes of pleasure, profit or preferment. Now,
neither good nor bad, neither sound nor unsound Christian is free at all times,
from such temptations to one sin or other, by which Satan seeks to get or
keep possession of him. But the difference is to be observed between them,
Par. 3.. 49
which generally is, The difference between the sound and unsound Christian,
in temptation to sin. 1 General.
that by the power of saving grace, the former, masters and mortifies all kind
of sin and vice in him, how pleasing, how gainefull, how aduantagious soever
in the world it may prove unto him, though it be to the pulling out of a right
eye, to the cutting off of a right hand or foot, not suffering any bosom or
beloved sin to keep the hold of his heart, but keeping every sin and
sinful affection under, and himself free for every good duty and exercise:
for he knows, that there can be nothing but a bare form of godliness
without, where the power of any one sin is within: and by this mortification
of sin and of his special corruption, he gives evidence of the presence of
this powerful spirit in him; whereas the other, by suffering some sin or
other to sway his affection, and to remain indeed unmortified in him, shows
the contrary. But of this thus generally long since, Par. 3.. 47.
more particulally, we shall find the sincere Christian to have this spirit of
strength, in as much as he both makes resistance against sin and the
temptations thereof; Particularly.
as also impugnes and assailes his sin, continually laboring to dislodge it,
and root it out.

Section. 47.
No man properly resists sin by his own strength, 1 He resists and
withstands sin.
but by the strength of Christ, and of grace in him: The power of our will by
nature, is so disabled, that it has not any inclination to good, much less
power over evil without a further power of grace from Christ, but is rather in
bondage under it. And therefore that the godly resist temptation, and withstand
sin as it is sin, is from the gift of God, not from any strength of theirs.
1 Cor. 10.13
It is God that will not suffer us to be tempted above that we (by his grace)
are able, and it is he, that with the temptation will also make a way to
escape, that we may be able to bear it. We are therefore bid resist, 1 Pet.
5.9.
steadfast in the faith. Now that we do by faith (which is the gift of God,)
we do not of our selves: we are also, being to deal with temptation, bid to
be strong, not in our selves, Ephesians. 6.10.11.
but in the Lord and in the power of his might, etc. If then any resist and be
not wholly overcome of sin, it is from Gods grace and strength, as it was
answered Paul upon his resistance made by prayer, my grace is sufficient for
thee; 2 Cor. 12.9.
for my strength is made perfect in weakness. This grace in the Godly makes
them either, so soon as they are assaulted, to abhor the temptation, and to
give no manner of consent unto it, as being hateful to God; or if they cannot
be so soon quit of it, yet to account it a burden and an affliction to them,
that they are so song molested, and as it were, buffeted by it; and to make
resistance by prayer, and by wrestling with (...) of sinners, that they both
think and say, they have such a strong faith and such peace of conscience,
that Satan's temptations never trouble them, and have no power over them;
whereas there was never any so strong in faith, but Satan durst and did assault
him; as the Apostles, Adam in Paradise, yea Christ himself. Such again is
their security and sottishness, that they are most of all captiuated under
sin, when they sleep soundly and securely in sin, being most assaulted when
they feel no assault, and therefore making no resistance, because they are
ignorant of the assault. Yea, often they are not assaulted, or at least,
molested by Satan, and why? because they are already by sin his subjects and
slaves, and so when the strong man, Luk 11.21.
Satan, armed, by their sin, keeps the house, the things that he possesses
are in peace, though it be but a false peace, the temptations to sin do
please them, Par. 3. 48.
and therefore they resolve to make no resistance spiritually; and thus are
they overcome of the temptation.

Section. 48.
But the godly and truly spiritual Christian, 2 He impugnes and assayles it.
does not only resist sin when it, or Satan by it, does assault him, but he
moreover assaults and impugnes it, and, to the utmost of his power and of grace
received, he strives to dislodge and dispossess it out of his heart, so far
as it is in him, though it would let him be quiet, (and give him such content
as sinners seek) yet he will not let it be quiet; but if it would lurk or
hide it self, either under his tongue, or in some corner of his heart, either
in his understanding by an ignorance of sin in the nature of it, or in his will,
by obstinacy or an affection of liberty, or in his affections by selfe-pride
or self-love, which often, with the other, will not let a man see his sin;
yet he, (having himself

Par. 3.. 49
stronger then other in Gods children, which, by reason of long continuance and
familiarity, or of bribes, of pleasure, gain, or worldly content, which it
has given the sensual part, has got deeper hold, and more possession of the
heart, this is that, which they (being once truly regenerat) most of all hate,
most violently oppose, and labor by all good means to root out, to subdue,
to kill and mortify: not that they neglect, or spare lesser sins, taking
themselves to have a like charge from God concerning all sin, as King Saul
had against Amalek, to whom it was said, 1 Samuel 15.3.
Go and smite Amalek, and utterly destroy all that they have, and spare them
not, but slay both man and woman, infant and suckling, ox and sheep, camel
and ass. The hatred of the godly being bent against sin, as it is sin, is
universal against all sin; yet most especially it shows it self against
such sins as are strongest, and as which most of all oppose and withstand the
work of the spirit in them. The godly man hating sin sincerely, shows so
much by most hating that sin which in him is most hateful to God. Every
sin he accounts as a devil, yet as among devils there is one Masterdeuill,
most hating him, and most hated of him: so there is commonly some master-sin or
other, which as it is strongest in him, so is it most strongly set upon, and
either fired out of him by the spirit of zeal, or starued by abstinence,
fasting or moderating his affections about the things of this world, which used
to feed and strengthen it. Thus he not only strengthens himself to resist the
violent motions of his strongest corruption, the spirit in him being like fire,
which resists and runs against the wind, and grows more violent and fierce
thereby; but moreover he strains and strives to lay and loune these stormy
winds of temptation, if by no other means, yet by pouring out strong cries to
Christ his Savior, whom both winds and the sea obey, who accordingly rebukes
those winds, so that a great calm is presently in that soul. Thus he never
gives rest unto his soul till thus he find it.

Which the hypocrite spares.
But now the formal Christian having some beloved sin or other in him, which
brings him gain in the world (suppose it be lying, falsifying of wares, scant
weights and measures, or the like) or pleasure, (suppose it be wantonness and
whoring, or else gaming, or misspending his whole, or the best and most of his
time in company-keeping, or in hawking, hunting, etc.) or preferment (suppose
it be a servile dependence on great men's evil humors, and a conforming
himself thereunto in hope of preferment in Church or Commonwealth, or
flattery, bribery, Simony, etc.) he loves this sin to well to part with it;
spare him but this sin, and he will spare you any other whereunto he is not so
strongly tempted by the aforesaid bayts of profit, pleasure, or preferment: Let
but John (in his preaching) spare Herod, and allow him his whore, and Herod
will spare his head, yea do many other things at John's preaching: let Judas
have the bag, and in other things, Mat. 2^.21.22.
to the world and eye of charity, he will live unblameable, so that in case of
question, the other Apostles will every one sooner suspect himself then Judas.
Ester. 3.5. etc.
Let proud Haman have but Mordecai his cap, and his proud humor fed, and the
Jews may live peaceably by him: let Absalom be but King and judge in the land,
and (if you will believe him) every man shall have Justice done him. 2 Samuel 15.4
Thus let that young man in the Gospel, keep and hold his possessions, when
Christ calls for them, and he will keep all the Commandments else, as he
had done from his youth. If an hypocrite seem to oppose and set himself
against such sins as are his bosom sins, it is no otherwise at the best,
then it is with many amongst us, who though they bear the name of Protestants,
and so would be taken, yet Papists as, Papists, are not so hateful to them,
but that though they can now and then disclaim Popery, yet they can better
abide them, and conceive of them, and give them better respect, then some other
of the same religion and profession, (though in greater sincerity) with
themselves: whereas the sincere Protestant, though he truly hate and abhor
all schism and faction, yet he most of all hates and abominates the heresy
and Apostasy of Popery, and least affects the persons of stiff Papists, as
they are Papists. So sinners may seem to condemn themselves for such sins of
theirs, as yet inwardly they more truly affect then the contrary graces.
Howsoever, if any evil be subdued or kept under in them, it is not their
beloved sin, but such as whereunto they are least of all tempted, which
therefore was or is but weak in them. Thus like a coward (who not daring deal
with a Captain or strong soldier, will yet set upon a wearied, weak, or
wounded enemy, and insult over him tyranously, and thence would be taken to be
valiant) so the seeming Christian, would be taken for sincere, because of his
repressing of some lesser evils in him, (which yet is no true mortification)
especially when he shall also conform outwardly to the best duties; yet there
is some strong man within, with whom either for fear he dares not, or for love
he will not deal: either it will cost him too much pains, sorrow, disquiet
in dislodging him, or his love to him, that is, to his sin more then to
himself, will not let him mortify it: he will resolve rather to give it life
and lodging with him; thus he deals with his sins; as Saul with the
Amalekites, 1 Samuel 15.8.9.
who having a charge to destroy all, yet he spared the greatest, their King
Agag; and the best of the Sheep, and of the Oxen, and of the fatlings and the
Lambs, and all that was good, and would not utterly destroy them: but every
thing that was vile and refuse, that they destroyed utterly. This was partly
through fear of the people, whom herein he feared more then God; partly, for
love of the prey, because it was fat and good. Yet having done something which
God commanded, verse. 13.
he comes with his bragges, I have performed the commandment of the Lord.
Thus, the fattest, as I may say, and most contentfull sins to the flesh, yea
Agag, the King of Sins, shall be spared and suffered to live and reign in
the Hypocrite, whiles yet, abstaining from lesser evils, and conforming
outwardly to good duties, he must be taken to do righteousness and all that
God commands. Par. 3. 50
Isa. 58.2.3. etc.
Thus unsound and weak at once does the Hypocrite show himself.

Section. 50.
Secondly, but much more briefly, Gods spirit, 2 He assayles courageously.
where it is indeed, as it especially singles out a man's special corruption,
so it assaults it valiantly and courageously, yea with a resolution never to
give over, though he be now and then foiled and beat down by it; he will
sooner lose his life then ever yield himself a slave to Satan or to his sin;
his resolution and purpose shall be firm against it, and his endeauours will
be answerable. Whereas the cowardly Christian, has at best but half wishes,
faint resolutions, weak purposes against his sin, and accordingly his
endeavors are either none, or such as whereof he soon wearies, when he
comes to any hard encounter, as to pulling out of a right eye, or cutting off a
right hand of offense, where the flesh will both plead hard and long for it
self, Par. 3.. 51.
and make a strong head of opposition. This makes him cowardly to yield, and
resolve rather to become a slave to sin, to obey it in the lusts of it, and
to swim with the stream of the world and of his own corruption, then to
toil, vex and tewe himself, in striving against the stream.

Section. 51.
And thus thirdly, the spiritual man labors by the grace of Perseverance to
show himself constant, 3 Constantly.
to be a victour and conqueror, at the last, to overcome and to keep Christ's
works unto the end: he resolves never to suffer the solicitations of sin and
sinful men to weary him out, Revel. 2.26.
so that by giving over he should lose his Crown. Wherefore he arms himself
against the allurements of his sin, by having in a readiness these twelve
parts of Spiritual Armor, which he makes use of by seasonable meditation. 1.
The shortness of the pleasure which is in sin, Ioh. Pici Mirandulae 12 arma
spiritualis pugnae.
and that small content it can give him. 2. The companions of it, loathing, and
anguish of soul. 3. The loss of a greater good, Gods favor, etc. 4. Twelve
pieces of spiritual armor against sin.
The vanity of this life, being but a very dream and shadow. 5. The sudden and
unlooked for approach of Death. 6. That just cause he has to suspect himself
of impenitencie and unsoundness, if he give way to sin, 7. The eternal
reward of well-doing, with the eternal punishnent of sin. 8. The dignity of
man. 9. The peace of a good Conscience. 10. Gods multiplied and daily benefits.
11. The cross and sufferings of Christ for us.. 12. The Testimonies and
witness of so many Martyrs, and the examples of all the Saints.

These, well pondered, keep and arm him against sin, so that he resolves
never to yeele himself to be the servant of it (as does the Hypocrite and
profane person): Par. 3.. 52
And though he, in some hard encounter, How the sound Christian carries
himself.
be sometimes foiled, yet that is not ordinarily: howsoever, he quits himself
like a man, whether he be foiled, or whether he resist and stand out against
this or that temptation.

Section 52.
In case he be foiled, yet he faints not; 1 In case he be foiled.
he has learned by his own experience that he that is indeed a man, (...).
though sometimes he fly, yet he will turn his face on his enemy and fight
again. He therefore being down, rises again, He rises again.
and though a just man fall seven times, yet by the power of saving grace in
him, he rises up again, whereas the wicked falls into mischief. Pro.
24.16.
Now this he does, First, 1 By good consideration.
by good consideration, whiles, though in his experience he find the way of
virtue hard and difficult to him, yet he considers, that, though he for his
ease, should choose the way of sin and of the world, yet he should be but
deceived in his expectation, seeing he should never be wholly free from
difficulties, adversity, labor, loss, sorrow and vexation, which even the
best things of the world would bring upon him, yea, and that both longer and in
a sorer manner, and with less ease, comfort and fruit, then he finds and
shall undoubtedly find a striving against the Flesh, world and Devil: for in
the former he finds that labor is the end of labor, and one sorrow the
beginning of another, without any sound comfort or content, and at last, death
eternal to follow, and punishment without end. If then he must strive and
take pains, he resolves it shall be where his pains and combating may and
shall receive ease and comfort, both here and eternally hereafter. Hereupon,
finding little content in sin, and far short of his expectation from the
world (unto the baits of which he has now stouped) he resolves he will serve
his old Master Christ, again; and, with the Prodigal, leave of feeding on
husks, and return to his Father by confession and Prayer: which is the second
thing he does after he is foiled; he returns to God by a humble confession of
his sin, 2 By humble Confession and Prayer.
out of a true hatred of soul conceived against it, as dishonorable to his
gracious God, saying, in the deepenesse of his sorrow, Luke 15.18.19.
Father I have sinned, etc. and praying, first, for acceptance again by
Christ into his favor; make me as one of thy hired servants; Psalm. 51.12.
and and then for further strength and assistances, with David, uphold me with
thy free spirit. Luke 11.4.
First, forgive me my sin, and then, lead me not into tentation, but deliver
me from evil. This he prays indeed from the heart and soul, not with his
lips only (as does the Hypocrite), and so according to Gods promise, obtaines
what he prays for; first, remission of his sin, and the comfort thereof, in
the assurance of his justification by Christ, and then perseverance and further
grace to stand out against temptation.

Whereunto add in the third place, that thus by the foil, 3 By circumspect
walking.
he being restored again, is made more circumspect, whiles taking notice and
knowing where he is weakest, he fortifies there, most of all, and so preuents
the like sin, being kept from falling (at least) into it again, when perhaps
he shall be more strongly tempted, and when Gods honor would be more
endangered. This is whiles, first, in the experience of his own weakness, he
renounceth his own strength, and flies only to the power of Christ, being
tempted; and secondly, is made more wise and watchful against the occasions of
sin: as it was in Peter, first foiled, whilst he denied his Master;
afterward, by that fall, fortified to confess in stronger temptations, Par.
3.. 53
even to the death.

Thus he is never so overcome as to fall away, either wholly or finally. All
is contrary in the wicked and hypocrite, who perhaps now and then, in the
hearing of Gods word, may have his conscience somewhat awaked, and hereupon
begin to resolve against his sin, and to withstand it; but being already
down on his back, he is easily kept down, and finding it hard to cast off
his sin, he yields unto it; he sees he has a whole army to deal withal, and
therefore despaires of victory, and so resolves to tumble and wallow in the
delights and pleasures of sin.

Section 53.
Again, in case the true Christian, 2 How in case of victory.
not only withstanding, but assaulting sin, obtain the victory, yet herein he
shows his strength and wisdom, He will yet 1 expect new assaults.
First, in as much as, though he have overcome one temptation, yet he will not
be secure, but expect another, as knowing the devil goes about, seeking whom
he may devour, even like a roaring lion; therefore he serves God in fear, and
cries with that watchman, A lion; Isa. 21.8.
I stand continually upon my watchtower, and I am set in my ward whole nights.
As therefore when he assailes and fights, he aims at victory, and at a
perpetual peace, which he knows God will give him, either in this life, if
he please, or for ever hereafter: so, when he has mastred his sin, he so
carries himself as if he were going to the field again: so that in his
conflict he thinks of victory, and in his victory, of a new conflict.

Secondly, 2 Watch against all occasion.
in as much as though he feel himself well fenced and armed, yet he will not
be secure, but always flies and auoyds all occasions of sin, to his
knowledge, remembering what is said, He that loves danger, shall perish in it:
and if it in any measure prevail, and begin to be formed in him, he takes it
whiles it is young, and dasheth these children of Babylon, and of confusion,
against the stone, Sero medicina paratur.
which stone and rock is Christ, as knowing else, that the medicine may be
provided too late.

3 Take advantage of his enemy.
Lastly, in as much as not contenting himself with his victory, whereby he
ouercomes Satan's temptation, he thence also takes occasion of some further
good, even from that thing by which Satan sought advantage. As for example:
When Satan, by showing him some good and worthy work of his, would draw him to
vaineglory and pride; he not only is not proud, but in all humility
acknowledges it not to be his own work, but the work of Gods grace and mercy
in him, confesses his own unworthiness, and unthankfulness, and gives all
the honor and praise of it to God, saying for his part, Psalm. 115.1.
Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy name give glory: and so the
like in other temptations.

On the contrary, Par. 3. 54.
the counterfeit Christian, never so strongly and constantly assaulting sin,
as the other does, obtaines no victory over his sin, fears no evil,
watches not, seeks no advantage either by his foyles, or seeming victories;
and by these, shows himself unsound, and deuoid of Gods spirit, which in the
true Christian is a spirit of strength, inabling him acceptably both to resist
the assaults of sin, and also to assault and expel sin out of him, at least,
for reigning in him. Both which he the rather and more easily does, The
sanctified Christian has (proper to him) diverse helps. 1 Faith.
in as much as by the same spirit he has affoorded him diverse helps, from his
faith and sanctified affections, which the other wants.

Section. 54.
The first help is Faith and Confidence, joined with Humility, whiles he,
not trusting his own strength, seeks succor, being tempted, from Christ, and
from the power of his death, never thinking himself, of himself, able to
stand, lest so thinking, he fall, but trusting to Gods grace and
faithfulness, 1 Cor. 10.12.13.
who will not suffer him to be tempted above that he is able. Whilst then he
resists, he does it, steadfast in the faith, as is said. Which faith the
hypocrite shows himself to want, whilst he trusts more to himself, then to
the power and assistance of Christ, which he never in temptation flies to,
Which is strengthened by his experience.
or trusts in. Yet moreover, the true Christians faith, in his resisting of
temptation, is further strengthened from former experience: for having formerly
overcome temptation, he has found that comfort and sweet content thence, that
no pleasure of sin, or content from it, in regard of profit, credit with men,
or any thing else, can make him yield to sin, though in the conflict of
temptation, the combat prove sore and difficult, and it go doubtfully with
him a while. He finds more true comfort and delight in his victory over
temptation (whiles thus he finds Christ strong, and sin weak in him) then ever
he found, or can find, by yielding to his sin, whereunto either his nature,
covetousness lust, ambition, or other evil affection does incline him; he
hereby plainly differs from the wicked and hypocrites, who herein deceive
themselves, in as much as being tempted to sin, (though they may carry it
fair in the world, yet) they never compare the sweetness of the victory with
the sweetness of sin, (which the godly man does) but they compare only the
combat and difficulties therein with the pleasure of sin, and therefore to
avoid the encumbrance of the conflict, more easily yield to sin: whereas, if,
as they have often tried what it is to yield to temptation, so they would once
try what it is to overcome temptation, they would prefer the pleasure of
such a victory, before the content that sin can affoard and account it also
every way able to counteruaile the difficulties of the conquest. Par. 3.. 55
But this experience only the godly have, who only therefore both resist
sin and impugn it, not the other.

Section 55.
Secondly, the godly Christian truly fears God, 2 Fear of God.
and in that fear he works out and finisheth his salvation; ever setting God
before him, as did Joseph when he was tempted to folly by his Mistress.
Whereas the wicked, not fearing God, rusheth into mischief, as has been said.
Moderate fear also of a man's own weakness, least it betray him, is good, and I
may call it, as Solomon does the fear of God, the beginning of wisdom. Now
this fear is also in Gods children, whereby, having themselves in a holy
jealousy, and upon former experience of weakness in themselves, And distrust of
himself.
mistrusting their own strength, they are made more weary, they upon every
occasion of temptation, advise and consult with themselves, which consultation
and deliberation causes wisdom: they deal with the flesh, which they know to
be treacherous, as some men deal with others in their trading, bargaining,
buying and selling with them; they will suppose every one they deal with
(though he be never so much commended for honesty and faithfulness) to mean
deceitfully, and so they will deal with him, that by this means they, as they
think, may make asure bargain for themselves. This, to practice generally,
though it be an uncharitable and unchristian course in our dealings with
others, (whom, God forbid we should think to be universally false, seeing
also our charity should never be divided from wisdom) yet it is wisdom
thus ever to suspect our own false hearts, the flesh and the allurements of
sin, which, like the Devil who makes use of them, ever intend deceit. Par.
3.. 56


Section. 56.
There are other three affections which as good Soldiers, attend upon the
spirit of fortitude in Gods Children, which the unsound Christian has not,
which in case of any assault by sin, are ready to fight for them; Hatred,
Anger, Sorrow.

3 Hatred of sin.
1. When sin first comes, and any evil thought or object is iniected by
Satan, it is so far from being entertained, that Gods Children, truly hating
sin, do presently abhor it, at first approach, and as an unwelcome guest,
keep it at the doors, giving no manner of consent or allowance to it.
Besides, secondly, Anger looks it grimme in the face, 4 Anger against it.
and so proves a Whetstone to set an edge on their Christian courage and
fortitude, whereby they, in good seriousness, set themselves against sin,
and in an holy indignation withstand it as an enemy: sin shall not have so
much as a good look of them. Whereas in the unsound Christian, though he set a
good face on it awhile, yet he is not so truly displeased with it as he should
be, but by dallying with it, and using no sternenesse against it, he lets it
creep into him, and falls into familiarity with it. Yet thirdly, 5 Sorrow.
if either by its strength or their weakness and security, sin prevail, (as
it does sometimes in the best, who yet generally are strong Christians) then
such is their sorrow and grief of heart, that they should be so negligent in
Gods cause, and so regardlesse of his glory, that they can never have any quiet
till it, like an unwelcome guest, be shut and put out again; so long as it
remains, they account themselves burdened, they by earnest prayer call in the
help of Gods grace and spirit, and at length get rid of such sturdie
intruders; whereas the ungodly please themselves with such guests. etc.

And thus much concerning the true Christians strength in regard of the evil
of sin, which he withstands.

Now of his strength in regard of the evil of sorrrow and suffering, which he
stoutly, undauntedly, and patiently indures.

4 The fourth property of the Spirit.
The fourth property of the spirit, by which it may be known, and by which
true Christians may be distinguished from others, is this: Which is, that it is
a Spirit of strength.
It is a spirit of power, or a strong spirit, and makes a man so. Now it shows
it self strong, both in respect of Good and Evil.

1. In respect of Good: this being either Spiritual or Temporal; wheresoever
this spirit of might truly is, it make and inables a man, first, in regard of
spiritual good, to undertake and set upon his duty, how hard or difficult
soever it may seem to flesh and blood. Secondly, in regard of temporal good,
to make light of, yea to despise and contemn it, in comparison of the other.

2. In respect of Evil: which in 5 particulars is (if god will) to be handled
in a treatise a part.
now this is either the Author of evil (properly so called) which is the
Devil; whom, and whose temptations this spirit inables a good Christian to
resist; or evil it self. First, the Evil of sin; which it teaches and
inables a man in some good measure to withstand, how pleasing soever it may
seem to be. Secondly, Evil of punishment and of sorrow, whether ordinary
Afflictions, Called,
or afflictions for the Gospel, which it strengthens the good Christian to
endure and suffer, with all long-suffering and patience.

Which five particulars, because I foresee they (especially the last) will be
somewhat large; and seeing, in this Treatise I would not too far exced my
bounds; I therefore of purpose, omit the handling of them here, reserving them
to be handled by themselves in a Treatise apart, unto which I refer the
Reader, The Spirit of Power.
when it shall be published which will be shortly, if God will.

Par. 3.. 57.
Therefore to proceed: Having propounded formerly to give some trialls of
Christianity, and that in the first place, from the nature of our putting on
Christ, which we made to consist, 1. In a putting off the Old man. 2. In
putting on the new man, to Justification and Sanctification. 3 The third things
in the nature of this duty is that it consists both in the putting of the old
man and putting on the new man.
3. In both these together; and now having dispatched, the two former of these;
it remains we proceed to the third and last.

So then, seeing the nature of putting on Christ is such that of necessity it
requires a putting off and laying aside of sin and of the old Adam, thou,
that would approve thy self to be a good Christian indeed, must put this
question to thy self: do I so? do I first or withal put off sin, as well
as profess my self a Christian? do I as well die to sin and to the world, as
I would be taken to live to God and to Christ? and do I as well live holily, as
I would be taken to hate and to avoid profanesse? Assuredly, Both which true
Christian do.
true Christians do both these alike; in whom there is both an Auersion from
evil and sin, and that in judgment, will and affections; and a conuertion
or turning to God and goodness in all these; according to the rule, depart
from evil and do good, and cease to do evil, Psalm. 34.14. Isa. 1.16.17.
learn to do well, etc. so that they are as Affirmatively good, as Negatiuely
not evil, and contrariwise: such an one was Job, who was said to be perfect
and vppright, (not legally but euangelically, which is that which we are
seeking, and trying) in as much as he was one that feared God and eschewed
evil: Job. 1.1. Ezekiel. 18.5.6.7.8.9.
even such as God elsewhere describes the Just man to be, namely one that has
not eaten upon the mountains, -- that has not defiled his neighbors wife.
has not oppressed any; but has restored the pledge -- has given his bread to
the hungry -- has walked in my Satutes, and has kept my Judgments to deal
truly; he is Just, he shall surely live, says the Lord.

The character of such as truly put on Christ, and are in Christ is, that they
walk not after the flesh, Romans 8.1.
but after the spirit; and therefore both these in Scripture go inseperably
together, to cast off the works of darkness, and to put on the armor of
light, and 13.12.13.14.
-- not to walk in ryoting and drunkenness, etc. but to put on the Lord Jesus
Christ so, to put off the old man with his deeds, Colos. 3.8.9 10-12. and
Ephesians. 4.22.23.24.
and to put on the new man etc. to put off all these, anger, wrath, malice,
blasphemy, filthy communication, and to put on, as the elect of God, (namely
as an evidence of our election) bowels of mercies, kindness, humbleness of
mind, meeknes, long-suffering. Good Christians know so much, and therefore
dare not but put on Christ, as well dying as rising, and as well rising as
dying; he so being the object of their faith, is so by faith put on; and
accordingly the effect of both, of one as well as of the other, is found in
them. The effect of his death is the godly man's dying to sin, knowing this,
says Paul, Romans 6.6.
that our old man is crucified with him, that the body of sin might be
destoryed, that hence forth we should not serve sin. The effect of his
resurrection, and the power of his resurrection (in us) as it is called, is our
newness of life: Philip. 3.10. Romans 6.4.5.
For we are buried with him by baptism into death, that like as Christ was
raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father, even so we should walk in
newness of life; for if we have been planted together in the likeness of
his death, we shall be also in the likeness of his resurrection. And both
these effects are in a competent manner in the true Christian who has put on
Christ. Par. 3.. 58.


Section. 58.
But with hypocrites it is otherwise; Unsound Christians. show their
unsoundness.
and where we find these two effects disioyned and severed one from the other
(constantly) in our selves or others, there is too manifest an argument of
hypocrisy. But thus we shall find it to be with many: in whom, though neither
of the two forenamed effects, be in truth, as being not conjoined, yet) that
which seems to be, is single without the other, and so proves it self to be
counterfeit, and not sound.

1 By putting of sin but not putting on Christ. Which is showed 1 in the Popish
sort.
For 1. some seem to put off sin, but they put not on Christ, no not there
where they seem to put on something. 2. Some seem to put on Christ, but put
not off their sin. In the first rank, are first generally the Popish sort,
who profess a mortification of the flesh, by whipping of themselves sometimes,
and by Fastings, and abstaining from flesh on diverse days, and that in a
religious manner and respect (accounting fish holier, as not being destroyed in
the Deluge) in a show of humility, Colos. 2.20 21.22.23.
and neglecting of the body, in will worship, according to the doctrines of
men, whose ordinances are, touch not, taste not, handle not; and yet (not to
speak of the looseness of their lives generally) the same, at the same time,
by dainties provoke the flesh, turning fasting from flesh to feasting with
fish, which of the two are the greater dainties, as might easily be showed;
whereas indeed, the truest way to mortify the flesh, is either by true fasting
and abstaining from all meat and drink sometimes, 1 Cor. 9.25.27.
to humble at once both soul and body, and so to keep it under, and to bring
it into subjection; or otherwise by a constant moderation of our diet, and
temperance in all things; or to do with diligence the duties of our calling
general and particular. More particularly, those of the Popish sort (are in
this rank) who mew themselves up in Cloisters, as men mortified to the world,
and yet live in all idleness, lasciuiousnes, wantonness, (to say no more) and
other works of darkness, which are made by the Apostle, to be far from
putting on Christ, as we have heard; and say, there were no such evils done,
yet what good is done by them? they seem to shake off the world, but where is
Christ put on? I may truly say it, as one has done before me, a mere
contemplative Monk, Gal. 5.13.
in shunning some occasions of evil, flies in a manner all occasions of doing
good, and of being a servant to all by love, and the duties of it.

2 in our selves. 1 Generally, in civil Christians.
Of the same rank there are many of our selves (not yet excluding the other,)
who 1. generally are such as content themselves to live ciuilly and plausibly
in the world, as putting off (and yet not always in heart and affection) the
grosser evils of the time, being no known swearers, drunkards, adulterers,
profane persons, yet show forth no power of godliness in their lives and
godly conuersations, and in the exercise of the contrary graces and virtues, of
sanctifying Gods name by word and deed, of Sobriety, Chastity, and generally
Holiness; nay, in stead thereof such plausible men in their very souls often,
hate the true, zealous and strict practice of Piety in their brethren, so that
sincerity has no greater nor more bitter enemies, then such civil Saints,
who in their own, and in the worlds account are right honest, nay the only,
honest men: all the rest are but precise fools to them, etc. whereas such
forbearance of grosser evils may be an effect, and is usually of Gods (not
saving and sanctifying but) general and restrayning grace, whereby they, out of
the respects of fear, shame of the world, reverence to some in Authority, or
for other their own private ends, abstain from such evils, even as Esau
forbear a long time to revenge himself of his brother Jacob, comforting
himself in the hope of his Fathers death; but where was his true brotherly
love showed to his brother all the while? 2 Chronicles. 24.2.17. etc
so, King Iehoash was a Saint all the days of Iehoiada the Priest, but after
his death, he forsook the Lord and killed his son, who spoke to him in the
name of the Lord: which was an argument of his former unsoundness for all his
seeming forwardness: and even such are many in these days, etc. Some, again,
more particularly, 2 Particularly in unsound penitents.
when they have done amiss and fallen into grosser evils, seem to repent and to
be sorry, yea, with the Jews of old, to fast and afflict the body, Isa.
58.3.5.6 7.
to bow down the head as a bulrush, and to spread sackcloath and ashes under
them, (or perhaps against Lent, upon their heads) yet all the while, even then,
neglect all duties of of true Religion and Charity, as they are there charged.
This sorrow of theirs is not accompanied with reformation of life, with more
care, fear, desire, zeal, and therefore is unsound. Thus men by returning to
those sins which by words and other signs and shows of grief they would
seem to be sorry for, they do but deceive themselves, and mock God (which
yet will come home by themselves, for God will not be mocked,) even as we would
account him to mock us, who says he is sorry he has done us wrong, and yet
continues so to do still. Even so, that sorrow and turning from sin which does
not reform a man is but a deformed sorrow, a sorry one, a foundation without a
building, an Ahabs humiliation, 1 Kings 21.27. with 22.8-26.27
who by putting on sackcloath would seem to put off, and be sorry for, his
bloody sin against Naboth; yet without any true reformation of himself, he
fell to as bad a cruelty against the Prophet of God Michaiah: Even as Judas
also, who was grieved for murdering Christ, yet no change insued, seeing he
fell to murder himself. Thus generally not to love goodness is to hate it,
not to love our brother, Leuit. 19.17
and to express it, if need be by loving admonition, is to hate him, and so
to hate a man's own soul; not to do good, is, in Gods account, Mark 3.4.
to do evil, not to save life (when we may) to destroy, not to be light, is
so far, to be darkness; for if darkness be removed, light cannot but
follow, the corruption of one thing is the generation of another: so if I put
off, and put away the works of darkness and of death, I cannot but also put
on the works and armor of light and life: which last if I do not, I do not
the former; and after this tenor shall the sentence run at the last day of
Judgment, when the secret hypocrisy of all hearts shall be discovered, and
when it shall appear, what men indeed were formerly, not what they appeared;
depart from me ye cursed, Mat. 25.41.42.43.
for J was an hungered and ye gave me no meat, -- a stranger and ye took me
not in. etc. So that as they serve God here with Negatiues, no oppressor of the
poor, no persecutor of the Saints, no adulterer, no murderer, etc. and
therefore good enough; so God will then serve and answer the^ by Negatiues,
telling them, not what evils they have committed, but what good they have
omitted, no charity, no feeding, no clothing, no visiting of Christ in his
members on earth, and therefore, no Kingdom with him in Heaven.

We see then it is not enough to put off sin, but we must also put on Christ
and his righteousness, and holiness. Where we may further note the
hypocrisy of many, who will put off, Some again though they put of, and put
on, yet they put not ^n Christ.
yea and put on to, yet we cannot say they put on Christ; for they put off
rather one sin for another, though they would pretend the contrary: they go
from one extreme to another, make the frog leap, skip over the mean, or by
it, and so in effect, in their repentance and conversion, give but the
half-turne, if so much. Thus many turn from being profane Atheists, to be
devout and forward Papists, yet cannot be said to put on Christ, seeing Popery
it self is plain Antichristianisme. So, from having the Popish religion in
estimation, to a conte^ning of the Gospel, which yet outwardly they will
profess; they being formerly Papists, have left off praying in an unknown
language, but, being Protestants, they pray not at all; they have left
superstition, and are fallen to profaneness; they have put off Antichrist, but
have not yet put on Christ. So others, as one well notes, perhaps have left
their negligent coming to Church, but have changed it into a dissolute and
sleepy carriage in the Church: some now read the Bible, and other good books,
Par. 3.. 59
which they did not before, but do therefore despise preaching, and read,
whether at home or in the church, when they should attend and hear. So, in a
word, many leave their former profaneness, and grosser sins of drunkenness,
whoredom, Sabbath breaking, etc. but rest in civil carriage, and formal
performance of duty, without showing forth the power of Christ and his grace in
their lives, as has bin said. And these are they that seem (and but seem) to
put off sin, yet they put not on Christ.

Section. 59.
Others again seem, (and but seem) to put on Christ, 2 By putting on Christ
(seemingly) but not putting off sin.
but put not off their sin. Such are they, as making show of a great change
and reformation wrought in them, yet never either truly saw and considered
their former sins and errors, or sorrowed for them. And what is this but a
building without a foundation, and such as arguing much folly in the builder,
will quickly fall: they have not dug deep in their hearts, As 1 In unsound
conuerts, who put on Christ, but put not off Sin.
and so builded, neither plowed up the fallow ground of their hearts, by godly
sorrow, and so sowed: and therefore they being unsound at the heart, the
building falls when any blast comes, and such corn as so grows, withers when
any heat of persecution lights on them, if not sooner. Gods order is, we first
put off, and then put on: first put off sin, in the judgment, will, and
affections, and by a change in all these; and then put on Christ, in the same.
So that there must be first, 1 By consideration.
Consideration of sin and error, and distaste thereupon, with sorrow for
sin, hatred of it, and turning from it, and then a turning to God and
goodness. Psalm 119.59
So David, I considered my ways, and turned my feet into thy Testimonies;
which consideration doubtless was accompanied with godly an hearty sorrow,
upon fight and discovery of his sin, as in the 51. Psalm, and other
penitential Psalms. Deuteronomy. 30.1.2 1 King. 58.47.48. Ezekiel. 18.28
The same Method God looks we should use, and true conuerts use it. But the
hypocrisy of many appears in this, that they will turn to God, before they
turn into themselves by good consideration of their sins, or true sorrow for
the same; or if there be any sorrow, 2 By sorrow
it is not in the sight properly of sin, but of the punishment, which only
they would put off, without which no sound joy.
and therefore, so far, as it stays there, it is unsound, as in Ahab and
Judas. And if there be any change or turning, it is on by-respects, hope,
fear, etc. as in such as daily turn Papists, in hope, I take, the state also
will turn, (but for ever be they frustrate) or for some other sinister
respects; not in a true sight, consideration or conviction of error in which
they lived (which can never truly be showed them). Or howsoever, it is without
that true sorrow and humiliation which should be; and therefore many make fair
shows of great profession, and receive the word of God, with greediness and
with Joy, and none so forward as they: but can they say that their reformation
has proceeded from true humiliation; that their Joy (wherewith many on a
sudden in hearing seem ravished) has come from true sorrow for their former
profaneness, and the many dishonours done by them to God, and service done to
Satan? or from a true touch of sin, and remorse for the same, in the sight of
Gods displeasure, and the curse of the Law against it? for assuredly, no sound
Christian Joy, (ordinarily) but such as issues out of true sorrow for sin. I
trow not; the event often makes it plain. Their sorrow (if any) and so their
joy, proves like the morning dew, which the Sun dries and draws up: not like
water in the fountain, which cannot be drained as it is with the godly man's
both sorrow and joy: they are all for Joy and rauishments, nothing for sorrow
at all, neither before, nor after their pretended conversion, and therefore
their joy, which should have begun with sorrow, ends with sorrow: before that
harvest of Joy (which in this life is only sown for the righteous and upright
in heart) do come, all is withered, and they become unfruitful. They, as one
says well, began not in humility, and therefore end not in glory: nay, they
began in pride, and therefore end in shame. They cloth themselves with the
honor of Christians, before they have covered themselves with the shame of
their sins. Whereas the sound Christian begings with a sight and sorrow for
his sin, and though he joy daily, as he has cause, in his Savior and in the
light of Gods countenance; yet that is solidly and soberly, and so that he can
also daily spend some sighs at least, if not tears, for his daily faylings, he
can even then fill his soul with laughter and inward joy, when his heart and
eyes are fullest of sorrow for his sin; he can mourn for his sin, and at the
same time rejoice for such mourning, as an argument of the spirit and grace of
Christ in him.

2 In gross Hypocrites.
But to speak more generally of this point: very many there are (the more, the
more pity) who clothing themselves with the glorious name of Christians, and
many of them making great, yea more then ordinary shows of profession, (I
speak not against profession, we must profess, else we are none of Christ's,
but for the sincerity of it) yet under that cloak, live, not only without
all true sorrow of heart for sin, but in the secret practice of sin, not
putting off their night-clothes of former ignorance and darkness in this
Sunshine of the Gospel, but leading a profane life under a holy profession,
inwardly in heart affecting evil, whiles in the tongue and outward carriage
often (though not always) no such thing appears. Thus is Christ to them but a
cloak to cover their hypocrisy, not to cover their sins from the eyes of
God, as in the godly and faithful, but only from the eyes of men; the old man
is not put off, but only hid and concealed under a show of newness, even as
some filthy puddle, or dangerous quicksand covered over with snow; or as some
leprous, pocky and filthy body should be clothed in silks and fine array; I
speak not chiefly of such as whose ways seem right in their own eyes, and
through deceitfulness of heart, and as some call it, formal hypocrisy,
deceive themselves as well as others, (though it be true of them also) but
especially of such as pretending outwardly much holiness, yet inwardly intend
nothing but evil, and deceive others more then themselves, though in the end,
at the day of accounts, they deceive themselves most of all. Of this rank are
all politic Atheists, As politic Atheists.
and Papists (who are no better) who make religion but a cloak to cover their
impieties and hypocrisy, and clothe themselves with the Lambs skin, to hide
and cover their woluish affection, outwardly arraied in sheeps clothing,
inwardly being ravenous wolves. Such were they, that faining themselves
holymen, came to our Savior with an intent to entrap him, and like Judas, with
a kiss to betray him. Such are they also as clothe their Treasons and
disloyalty to their lawful Sovereign, and Papists.
in the habit of Catholic zeal, and the Catholic cause. In the rank of
such hypocrites, are not only all Papists, who professing the name of Christ,
do under that name serve Antichrist, and cast not off his yoke, whilst they
profess to take on them the yoke of Christ; and especially the Monkish crew,
whose profession makes not a Christian, no more then a Cowle makes a Monk, but
that a man may go to hell, though he be a Franciscan, or die having on him
S. Francis Cowle, etc. but also those amongst our selves of our own
profession, who under pretense and colorable profession of Christ, do
inwardly and secretly serve sin and their own lusts; and others.
and particularly such as in buying and selling abuse the honest simplicity of
their Christian brethren, whilst being frequent hearers of Sermons, and using
good words, they so, by seeming religious, get their shops better customed,
their words better credited, and their false wares and weights better trusted,
and so accordingly deceive such honest minds, as because of their profession of
holiness, repose trust in them.

Of all these I may say; Have these men put on Christ indeed? no verily. Christ
will be no cloak for wickedness, where it is not put off by acknowledgement,
hatred, and loathing of it, sorrow for it, and care to avoid it. No man can put
on Christ, that in these regards at least, puts not off sin; no man can bear
his image by regeneration, who retains still in him the image of Satan by
sin. As those that work in wax, cannot frame any new impression in it, till
the old be defaced: so must the image of the devil be first defaced, before
Christ Jesus and his image can be formed in us. Sound Christians have Christ
sealed and stamped on their souls, and they wear him also as their upper
garments in a holy profession: so that he is seen even in their attire, which
is comely not vain, in their speech which is graceful, not (usually) idle,
vain or impertinent, in their behavior, and in all the actions of their life;
yet so, as that they wear no other garment, either under him next the skin and
heart, by close hypocrisy, nor above and over him, by open profaneness; but
as they are not ashamed to profess him outwardly, so are they specially
careful to be clothed with him inwardly in their hearts, love and affections:
though their profession want not some blemishes, so that they appear worst in
the face and outside; yet their inside is all glorious, as the Kings
daughter, Psalm. 45.
or true Church which they are. Their worst is outward, and they are ever
better then they appear (especially to the blind eyes of the world,) whereas
it is contrary with hypocrites, whose best side is outward, and upward, being
like Ephraim, Hose. 7.8.
like a cake (on the hearth) not turned, hot perhaps, and scorched with heat
and zeal on that side which is toward the world, but plain dough and
rawnesse, on that side which God looks to, namely in heart: like painted and
gilded sepulchers, glorious without, but full of dead men's bones; so they,
dead in soul by sin, whilst they live in the body, yea seem to others to live
spiritually also: just like stageplayers, from whence they have their name of
hypocrites, acting to the eye of man, the part of Kings, Priests, and Prophets,
in one word, of Christians, but being indeed very base rogues and runnagates
(like those other) and wanderers from God; who appear what they are, when
their borrowed robes are taken off the^; as their hypocrisy shall appear at
the day of Judgment, when all vailes shall be taken away: nay, for the
present, these garments of colorable profession cannot so hide their
hypocrisy, but that the ass, though he have on the Lions skin, will bewray
himself by his long ears; so their secret vices can no more be hid under show
of Christian profession, then a bunch or crook'd-backe can conceal it self
under a close and strait garment. But such is this garment; Par. 3.. 60
it is without fold or plaits, without seame and doublings in; and any
deformity, whether swelling of pride, or any other redundancy, or defect of
any member or necessary grace, may soon be seen through it.

Now to conclude this third point also, do thou, whosoever, try and seriously
sift thy self by these forenamed descriptions, and as thou find
(impartially judging) so be comforted, or instructed what to do, etc.

And thus much of this third particular, and so generally of such trials as may
be made by considering the Nature of our putting on Christ.

Section. 60.
Now in the next, or second place, let us consider, to the same end, 2 Trialls
of our putting on Christ from two Properties therefore.
these two properties of the same. The first whereof is, Universality; the
second, Constancy, to name no more. First, he that truly is a Christian, and
not in name only, as he puts off the whole old man, and that wholly, so
especially he puts on the whole new man, or whole Christ wholly. 1 Property. is
universality.
He so does both, as that he never lives in the liking of any one sin,
neither is he an enemy to any one grace. That old apparel which is to be put
off, is also an old man, old Adam, namely a body of sin, consisting of many
parts or members animated with with a spirit of life, The true Christian, 1
puts of sin: 1 whole, or the whole body of it.
by being allowed a kind of Sovereignty, with approbation and liking.

Now the godly Christian, as he, in the matter of Justification wholly puts off
himself, and strips himself stark naked of all the garments of old Adam, not
leaving so much on him as the shirt, nay, not so much as the Figge-leaues of
excuse or extenuation in the least manner to justify his own doings, Not for
being.
or yet his best actions without grace; so, in the matter of Sanctification,
though his sin and Original corruption, not only, for the nature and being
of it, remains with him still, but,
but also in regard of the motions of it (as has often binne said) and so does
beset him, Heb. 12.1.
and as it were, in regard of the attempts of it, cloth and incompasse him
round about; 1 For complacency in it.
yet he puts it off, First in regard of his universal dislike of it, whereby,
being sensible of the burden and annoyance of it, Romans 7.24.
he can truly in soul cry out with Paul, wretched man that I am, who shall
deliver me from the body of this death? which indeed is, the body of sin, which
causes death; and so show himself truly displeased with all sin, even with
the whole body of it, yet not without the comfort of victory; being also able
to say with him, upon it, and 25.
I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord: 2 For dominion.
and so, secondly, he puts it off in regard of dominion; no one sin reigns
in his mortal body, but that he labors the mortification of it, and so puts
it off whole; wherein he may be observed to strike at the whole body of it,
and at all the several members and branches thereof; he lops not off some few
twigs or branches, but fells the very trunk, and aims at the pith and life of
it, and comes as near the root of it as he can. His old man is crucified with
Christ, Rom 6.6.
that the body of sin might be destroyed. He, being circumcised in Christ,
with the circumcision made without hands, Colos. 2.11.
puts off the body of the sins of the flesh, by the circumcision of Christ: so
that whereas circumcision made with hands cuts off only one part and particle
of the body, this puts off the whole sinful body of the flesh, whereby he
mortifieth (all) his members which are upon the earth, and 3.5.8.9.
fornication, uncleanness, inordinate affection, evil concupiscence, and
covetousness, -- and puts off all these, anger, wrath, malice, blasphemy,
filthy communication, etc. and all the deeds of the old man. Thus David, I have
refrained my feet from every evil way, Psalm. 119.101. and 128.
and I (both) esteem all thy precepts, concerning all things to be right, and
J hate every false way. And this universal putting off sin, shall witness
his uprightness and sincerity, for says he, and Psalm. 18.22.23.
all his Judgments were before me, and I did not put away (any of) his
Statutes from me, I was also upright before him, and I kept my self from mine
iniquity, that is, from that sin, which in regard of former affection to it,
might be called his. Even so is it generally with such as are upright and
sincere Christians: for they know, that if they (with their hearts) offend in
one, they had as good offend in all, in as much as there is one common nature
of all sins, all and each being a disobedience, vnthankefullnesse, and
dishonor unto God, all and each therefore seuering and excludidg from God; so
that if they hate not such sins, as they would seem to mortyfie, in such
respects they hate no sin as they should, but would upon like occasion and
temptation commit all sin as well as any; and so Saint James is to be
understood, Iam. 2.10. expounded.
saying, Whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and yet offend in one point he is
guilty of all, namely, not in regard of action but affection and readiness to
do and act any other sin, being upon private respects, and like occasions,
tempted thereunto, as not hating and abhorring sin as it is sin, and so,
universally all sin, (in each there being the same common nature of all) but
this or that sin more then another, as it touches him in his private and
particular aims, etc. but the sincere Christian knows, he that (thus) has
one sin, can want no sin, and he that has any one vice, has them all, and
that by one he as well departs from God, and forsakes him as by any, or all;
seeing, all sins are coupled together, though not in regard of conversion to
temporal good, (for some look to the good of gain, some of glory, some of
pleasure, etc. yet in regard of auersion from eternal good, which is, God.

And as thus the true Christian puts off whole sin, so also wholly, 2 Wholly.
in regard, not of the being of sin, but of himself, and of all parts both
of body and soul: Job. 31.1
with his eyes he makes a covenant, as did Job, not sinfully to behold
vanity; his feet he refraines from every evil way, with David, Psa. 119.101
and so in all other parts of body and soul, not walking as formerly, and as
the Gentiles do, in vanity of mind, in darkness of understanding, Ephesians.
4.17.18.19.
in blindness of heart, in sencelessenesse of sin, in lasciviousness of
affection, in works of uncleanness: and 26.28.29
but, as the Apostle dehorts, he puts off sin, in heart and affection, in
hand, in tongue.

This being the property of a sincere Christian, Par. 3.. 61
all things are contrary in the unsound Professor of Religion, Not so the
Hypocrite. Mar. 6.17.20. 2 King. 10.16.28. and 31
who with Herod, Iehue, Judas etc. may do much, and forbear many evils, yet
retain some one sin in heart and affection, which shall witness his
unsoundness; as the first did his whore, the second, his Idolatrous Calves,
Mat 26.22
and the third his bag, and covetousness, though for other evils
unreprovable of man, and of his fellow Apostles. So many may seem to put off
Ignorance and Error in the understanding, by being turned from error to
truth, but not evil and sinfulnes in their wills and affections, as those
Papists who turn loose and unreformed Protestants, and those Protestants who
coming to knowledge, yet live in profannes; and contrariwise, many others
seem devout in their affections, and zealous in their actions and
forwardness, but without knowledge as the blinded Papist, and without
discretion as the ungrounded Protestant.

Section. 61.
As thus the godly wholly puts off the old man, 2 The true Christian puts on
Christ.
so also he puts on whole Christ, and all his graces, wholly, on all parts of
body and soul.

First for Christ, as his duty is, Romans 13.14
so he puts on the Lord Jesus Christ, and that in all his Offices, 1 Whole
Christ.
as Prophet, Priest, and King, for Christ is all these: and he that is a true
Christian, puts him on whole without dividing him, either in his Person,
Natures, or Offices, or in any other respect, wherein he is wholly to be
considered. Christ in himself wholly considered, and as the object of our
faith and imitation, is like unto his own seamelesse coat which he wore, on
which, when he dyed, lots were cast whose it should wholly be; for, it was not
to be divided: so Christ himself must not be divided, but possessed and
inioyed wholly, of every one, to whose lot by the mercy of God it falls to put
him on. And so it is with sound Christians who put on whole Christ.

According to both his natures, and the whole of each.
First, according to both his Natures, and the whole of each nature, by
acknowledging him to be both God and Man: God of the substance of his Father,
begotten before the world; and man of the substance of his Mother, borne in the
world: perfect God, and perfect man, of a reasonable soul, and humane flesh
subsisting, -- and that although he be God and man; yet he is not two, but
one Christ: One, not by conversion of the Godhead into flesh, but by taking of
the manhood into God: One altogether, not by confusion of substance, but by
unity of Person. This is the faith of a true Christian; whereas heretics in
the Church under the name of Christ, deny Christ, in as much as they divide
him, and so show themselves to be at best but half Christians, even so far
as they do not confess him in and according to both natures. The Arrians
divide Christ, as also the Jews and Turks, by denying his Godhead: the
Manichees, by impugning his humanity: So do not the Arrians Manichees, Papists.
and what do Papists in effect else whilst they will have Christ in body
really present in the Sacrament in every consecrated host, whereof there are
millions at the same time, and so an humane body, Who divide firsts Christ's one
body into many, by their Transubstantiation.
quite contrary to the nature of it, to be infinite at least, at the same time
in many places, and at once to be both visible and invisible; visible, when it
sat at the table, and invisible in the bread, which is so repugnant to the
nature of a true body (such as Christ did assume, and still retains) as that
the Godhead it self at the same time cannot be both visible and invisible,
finite and infinite. What is this in them, as also in the Lutheran (who not
only in the Sacrament, but before and after, teaches and holds an Vbiquitie
of the body of Christ) but to deny that Christ Jesus is come in the flesh, 1
Ioh. 4.3.
and so to demonstrate themselves to be no sound Christians, but to be led by
the spirit of Antichrist? I must needs profess, I cannot see but the Papists
thus plainly shows himself to be no Christian (neither the Lutheran so far.)
In like manner others divide the humane nature of Christ, some denying him to
have a true humane body, saying, Putatiue.
he died only to our thinking: others, to have a true humane soul, saying,
that though he had a true body, yet the divinity of Christ was his soul, as
thought Apollinaris. 2 The cupp from the bread in the Sacrament.
And do not Papists in the Sacrament (for all their distinction of
Concomitancy, saying, where Christ's body is, there it is not without his blood)
do not they, I say, divide Christ, whilst they deny the Cup to the Laity?
and propound him, in the Sacrament, to their faith, not as he dyed, his blood
shed out of his veins, but as he lived, or now lives in heaven? Seeing
therefore Christ profits us not but as he dyed for us, (we having redemption
through his blood, Colos. 1.14. Heb. 9.22. Colos. 1.20
even the forgiveness of sins; for, without blood, no remission) and seeing
our peace with God is made (only) through the blood of his Cross, can we call
them Christians, whose faith, whether out of the Sacrament or in it (seeing the
same Christ, and the same benefits of Christ are sealed in the Sacrament, which
in the word are promised) looks not to Christ crucified? How proportionably are
they given over to teach and acknowledge an unbloody sacrifice, whilst yet they
hold the real presence of Christ's body? They may be as good Christians, as
are Papists, who believe in a Christ who never dyed, and in a false Christ (as
many in former times did) who never shed his blood, unless it were for his
own sin and blasphemy in so making himself. Par. 3.. 62


Section. 62.
Secondly, true Christians put on Christ, 2 According to all his Offices.
as Christ, as one who of God was anointed for them, and is still their
Prophet, Priest, and King, 1 Confessing him in them all.
and one of these as well as another. For they first confess him, not only as
a Teacher, and Prophet, (whiles without the additament of tradition they hear
him only, as he speaks to them in his written word, read or expounded, and
make that the rule of their faith and manners, and not simply the teaching and
authority of men, whether Pope, Councels, or Fathers, without Gods Word, or
the examples of others, whether many or great, or yet their own carnal reason
against Gods Word) but also as a Priest, acknowledging him their only, both
Savior on earth, and Intercessour in heaven; and King, neither Pope nor any
other, but only in the Lord.

Secondly, they savor of his ointment, and partake thereof, whilst they
themselves in him are indeed made, not only spiritually, 2 Partakeing of the
benefits of them.
Prophets, endued in a competencie with knowledge of his will, with charity
also, care and conscience to instruct and inform others, according to their
charges and places; but also Priests, and that both to sacrifice, kill and
crucify their lusts and reigning sins, as so many unclean beasts, yet, in
Christ, acceptable sacrifices to God, whilst they suffer the power of his death
in them to cause them die to sin; and also to offer spiritually by faith, their
Savior, as also the sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving and of Prayer, by the
spirit of Prayer: yea moreover, Kings, not suffering sin any longer to reign
over them as slaves thereunto, but ruling and subduing their sinful
affections, and rebellious lusts, not being in bondage and slavery to any
creature, man or other, but only in the Lord.

Now all these, one as well as the other, is each sound Christian; whereas the
hypocrite and such as answer not fully the name of Christian, Hypocrites and
unsound Christians divide Christ in his Offices.
which they take upon them, divide Christ in his Offices and in the parts
thereof, as must be showed. Where remember, I consider Christ here according
to his offices, not only as he was all these himself, and so is acknowledged
of his, but also as he works the effects of these truly in his children; that
is, Christ as well in his power, and by his effectual working in us, as in his
merit, and working for us. Merito and efficacia.
Now we shall find that the wicked and hypocrites do not put Christ on wholly
in his offices, whether we consider them severally, according to the several
parts of each: or jointly, and as compared together, one with another, (as yet
do the godly and sincere Christians in both respects, as is already said) by
which their Pseudo-Christianisme is discovered.

First, for his Offices severally according to the several parts thereof. 1 In
the parts of his offices severally. 1 In his prophetical Office. Hypocrites
divide,


1. For the Prophetical Office of Christ: Many Christians show themselves
unsound, because they put not on Christ whole as a Prophet: in as much as some
divide between the Word and Spirit of Christ, by both which our Savior
effectually teaches his Elect, (which is not questioned, neither needs any
proof to sober men.) For some, 1 Between the word and spirit. Dividing 1 The
word from the Spirit.
despising prophesying, and the word of God, will be guided only by the
(pretended) Spirit of God without the word, by immediate Inspirations,
Revelations and raptures, as our Enthusiasts, Familists, and other Libertines
of that crew. 2 The spirit from the word.
These put not Christ on wholly, if at all, indeed making a very shadow and an
imaginary Christ of him. Others, on the other hand, and those many amongst our
selves, despise not prophesying; yet do they usually quench the good motions
of gods Spirit, by which the Word being brought to their remembrance, they are
(when occasion of obedience is offered) called upon, and inwardly prompted and
put in mind, to obey and practice according to Gods word, whether command,
promise or threat. Can these hearers be said to put Christ wholly on as a
Prophet? they must therefore be concluded to be Christians in show only, but
not in power; Christians in their Ears, but not in their hearts: enlightened in
their understandings outwardly by the word, but inwardly, for want of the
spirit which they reject, Ephesians. 4.18.
in blindness of heart, their foolish hearts are full of darkness, according
to that heathenisme which is yet vnexpelled. Whereas (Christ teaching both by
his word and spirit) his Disciples, Romans 1.21.
as their duty is, neither quench the spirit (usually and forwardly) nor
despise his word. 1 These. 5.19.20.


And whereas Christ as our Prophet, to confirm his word, and seal his truth
to us, wrought many and undoubted Miracles; 3 between his word and his
Miracles.
such as do not rest in that only doctrine of Christ, contained in the
Scriptures, so confirmed by miracle, especially those who by signs and wonders
and miracles would now go about either further to confirm the same doctrine
(where especially it is established as with us) or by pretended Miracles, to
establish contrary and repugnant doctrines to the truth already received; such
I say, must be discarded out of the number of true Christians, as thus far
denying Christ in his Prophetical Office, and must come amongst the Disciples
and followers of Antichrist, whose badge it is, now in these latter days, 2 Thessalonians. 2.^.10.
to go about to confirm doctrine by miracles, and to urge them as necessary,
and notes of the true Churches, as elsewhere is to be showed in another
Treatise. And these same are they who acknowledge not Christ a whole Prophet; 3
They divide his word into written and unwritten.
because, not a sole Prophet; dividing that Office of teaching (notwithstanding
all their shifts and pretenses) and making it to belong authentically to others
as well as to Christ. For whereas he teaches us fully by his word written, 2 Timothy 3.15
which alone is able to make us wise to salvation, if we believe him speaking
in it, and which he gives to his Church, as a full, perfect and only rule of
things to be known and practiced; these men divide this word and rule, and
make it to be partly written, partly unwritten, namely Tradition, decrees of
Popes, definition of Councels, in a word, (under a fair pretense) the doctrine
and faith of their Church, under which they once bringing and captiuating the
Judgments of their Laity, yea, and Clergy also; under that color, broach and
teach doctrine of their own, at least repugnant, yea, also much of it, quite
contrary to the doctrine of Christ, by which means Christ his word, contained
in the Scriptures, is iustled out of place, and for the authority of it, made
inferior to their pretended Church, yea to beg authority from the same? do
these men acknowledge Christ wholly their Prophet and Teacher, who, under his
name, And under that pretense bring in divisions into the Church. 1 Cor. 1.13.
teach contrary doctrines, and so make divisions in the Church? is Christ
divided? nay, is he not indeed divided as a Prophet, and whilst his only word
(as partly written and partly vnwritted) is pretended, is he not made contrary
to himself? now this being done and taught by Papists, can we, so far as any
stiffly holds this, call them Christians and yet speak truly? Surely if they
be, it is more according to the judgment of charity then of truth and faith,
that we are bound to believe so of them, unless we will call such as reject
his word, his disciples: In Christ I am sure is a fullness, yea all the
treasures of wisdom and knowledge, so that for any to go after other
learning, Colos. 2.3. and 8.
and to suffer himself to be spoiled by philosophy and vain deceit, after the
traditions of men, after the rudiments of the world, 1 Cor. 1.10.11.12.13.
this is not after Christ: such traditions etc. and Christ are opposed: the
very name of Christ should teach us otherwise.

Again, we have others also who divide Christ as a Prophet: 4 Between the Law
and the Gospel.
for whereas he now instructs and teaches us both according to the Moral
Law (which he came to fulfill, not to abolish) and according to the Gospel,
which indeed principally he came to publish and make effectual, freeing us
thereby from the rigor of the Law, which was either do or die, either keep
it to a haires-breadth or be accursed for ever, yet leaving it a rule of our
endeauours and obedience: these men though in some measure they will think the
Gospel concerns them, (which yet they make in a manner, but a preparatiue and
way to further perfection, by the immediate teaching of the spirit) yet, for
the Moral Law they reject it, and think it concerns them not at all. Christ
as our Priest I doubt not to say, is opposed to the works of the Law, but not
as our Prophet: can we then call these men Christians or Christ's Disciples, who
thus divide him? certainly no.

Again, 5 Between his word and Sacraments
whereas Christ as our Prophet confirms the word he preaches, by sealing the
same to us in the Sacraments of Baptism and the Lords Supper, I cannot account
them full Christians, if Christians at all, who shall any ways divide between
his Word and Sacraments, where and so far as God will have them go together.
For Infants, borne of Christian Parents (or of one Christian) it is enough that
the Word of God be in that place, 1 By dividing the sacraments from the word.
and the covenant of grace; the tenure whereof runs as well to the Child as
to the Parent, 1 Baptism.
by virtue of which it has right to Baptism, though as yet it be not capable
of the word. 1 In men of age.
And for men grown, if they coming to knowledge by the Word, shall neglect
Baptism, was it is with Anabaptists commonly, how shall not this neglect be
accounted contempt of Gods ordinance, and so, without repentance and amendment,
prove damnable? especially when it is at least a dangerous error in them (to
say no more of it) that they neglect to baptize their Children, 2 In Children.
seeing the like neglect of circumcision had almost cost Moses very dear.
Exodus 4.24.
But for any, having any competent measure of knowledge, 2. The Lords Supper.
upon any pretense, to neglect (ordinarily) coming to the holy communion,
though it be, as many will pretend, because they are not in perfect charity, or
aright prepared or the like, is to offend double; both by neglecting to come,
and by continuing unprepared, without Charity.

And on the other hand, 2. By dividing the Word from the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper.
for any to perfome to come to the Lords Table, there to receive the seal, who
usually neglects to hear Gods word, or remains in his ignorance, and so has
no right to the promise; what is this also but to divide Christ as the Prophet
of his Church, and to put asunder what he would have conjoined? as he denies
not this Sacrament to any that truly knows him (coming otherwise prepared by
faith and repentance) so he would not have it given (as of right it belongs
not) to any, who is ignorant of his word and will. What Christians then can we
call those, who neglecting to hear Gods Word all the year long, Par. 3.. 61
almost, yet at Easter will flock to the Communion with the foremost? these
must know that as they now divide Christ in this his Office, and will receive
the Sign without the Word; so, they thus continuing in their ignorance and
presumption, shall be divided from Christ eternally.

6. Between his Doctrine and Example.
Moreover, Christ as our Prophet and Teacher, instructs us not only by his
doctrine, but also by his example of life, both in doing good, And in the Parts
of each.
and suffering evil, (as long since has been showed) by both which he is a
light unto his Church. And in both these, and in each of them fully, do true
Christians put him on. But false Christians and unsound professors of Christ's
religion show themselves to be such, by dividing not only the parts of his
doctrine and life, but also by seuering the one of these from the other. For
his doctrine; as some divide the Law from the Gospel, as is said; so for the
Gospel it self, contained in the Articles of the Apostles Creed; Hypocrites
divide the Creed.
whereas true Christians receive Christ according to all the Articles of the
Articles of the Christian faith, (and, Acts 20.27 2 Timothy 3.10
as the Apostles in their doctrine declared all, or the whole counsel of God,
so they do fully know that doctrine, as Timothy knew Paul's) the other do
divide him in the same. Some acknowledge the Father but not the Son.
Some (though not in name Christians) acknowledge God, the creator of heaven
and earth (which in our Creed is more peculiarly ascribed to God the Father)
yet not in the Trinity of persons, as the Turks, and Jews. But for these, we
need not exclude them from being Christians; they, though they acknowledge a
religion, exclude themselves. But amongst ourselves, others acknowledging the
Son, Some the Son, but not the holy Ghost.
and that they Believe in Jesus Christ, and that he was borne man, crucified,
dead, and buried, and so expecting salvation by him; yet, in their lives show,
Par. 3.. 62
that they Believe not in the Holy Ghost, in as much as they remain without
the special work of the spirit, Some divide the articles concerning, 1. The
Father.
which is Sanctification. Others, in the Articles concerning the Father, divide
him, some acknowledging him Creator of heaven and earth, but not their Father
in Christ, for want of confidence: Some, their Father, but not Almighty,
presuming they are his children in Christ, Math. 6.26
yet, in wants or fear of wants, distrusting his power and providence.

2. The Son.
In the Articles concerning the Son, some show themselves to acknowledge him in
his exaltation, and glory, expecting to be acknowledged of him also in glory,
but not in his humiliation, being ashamed of his cross and children, because
of their seeming meannesse. Some again think of him in his humiliation, as he
died, and as he was a Savior, presuming of salvation therefrom; yet never
seriously think of him in his exaltation, and last degree of it, that he
shall come as a terrible Judge, to judge the quick and the dead, that so, by
keeping faith and a good conscience, they might with boldness look him in the
face at that day.

In the Articles concerning the Holy Ghost, 3. The holy Ghost.
some acknowledge the Spirit, who yet by it are not made members of the true
Catholic Church, whereof yet many of them may brag more then any; neither
yet acknowledge Christ in his Saints, whom, in stead of any true communion they
have with them, they hate and persecute. Others will believe the Resurrection
of the dead, and life everlasting, who yet by faith receive not Christ, neither
truly know him, to the remission of their sins.

And though many (at least in seeming and profession) do embrace the whole
doctrine of Christ by receiving all the Articles of the Creed; yet, Hypocrites
divide the life and example of Christ from his Doctrine
do they not set before them the holy and unspotted life and death of Christ,
for their imitation: they like him well in his doctrine, for that is sweet and
comfortable; but his life is thought too strict and too austere, when they are
called by imitation of him to put him on. His doctrine they will both preach and
profess, but in their practice they come infinitely short, and in effect
condemn that, as may be seen, not only in the practice of the Jews of old
against him, who even for his good works hated him (he by his holiness really
reproouing their hypocrisy) but now in the practice, and by the affections of
many, (who yet in the Theorie know Christ and his doctrine fully enough)
toward and against such as in their lives would be followers of Christ, and
imitate him in all his imitable virtues, and in his affections of mercy,
patience, love, humility and the like, in which he did his other inimitable
works of omnipotency and Mediatourship. These men now distasting and hating
Gods children, having them in derision and a proverb of reproach, speaking
evil of them, 1 Pet. 4.4.
(and doing evil to them) because they (laboring to imitate Christ and his
Apostles in their holy lives) run not with them to the same excess of riot,
plainly show how, for all their knowledge of Christ, they would use, yea abuse
Christ and his Apostles if they might live and converse on earth amongst us;
for as they would live in the like holy manner as formerly they lived: so would
these men do as those other Scribes and Pharisees did, who yet so much bragd of
their knowledge. Or if any, more then others, seem to put on Christ in the
works of righteousness, yet of those, and The parts of his life.
very few can or will imitate him in his sufferings, by patience in suffering
reproaches unjustly, etc. when they are called thereunto. All these men, though
by profession Christians, yet in effect are no Christians, whilst they put not
Christ whole on, as he is a Prophet.

2 Hypocrites divide Christ as a Priest.
We must now try whether we cannot find the like hypocrisy or unsoundness in
men, by considering and comparing the parts of his priestly office, namely
Satisfaction, and Intercession, according to both which sound Christians put on
Christ. Of which briefly

1. Making his Priesthood common to others.
1. Such, first, as divide this Office of Priesthood, properly so taken, and
now, after his death and real sacrifice ordain and acknowledge other
sacrificing Priests, who daily in their Mass do offer properly an unbloody
sacrifice to God; what do they but confess that Christ our Savior is but one
amongst many, and not the only and sole Priest (in a proper sense) of the new
Testament? These put not on Christ whole as a Priest, who thus divide the
Priesthood; and for any subordination in that office properly considered, they
will never whilst they breathe, prove it.

2. 2 Dividing between the example of his death and satisfaction.
Such again as in the death of Christ, look more to his example in dying,
then to his satisfaction, made to the Justice of God for our sin, divide this
office; nay, rather plainly deny it: as that most impudent and blasphemous
heretic Socinus, who denying all satisfaction properly in Christ, will have
him to die, not properly for our sins, Romans 4.25.
but only by occasion of our sins, as says he, when a Merchant for riches,
that is, by occasion of riches, crosses the seas, and is cast away. This man
and his followers, what Christians are they? we shall see more of them anon.

3. 3. Dividing the work of Merit and Satisfaction.
Others acknowledge Christ died, and by his death made satisfaction, yet
acknowledge also the merits of others in the treasury of their pretended
church, and so divide the work of satisfaction between Christ and man.

4. The same, though they will say Christ died, 4 Dividing between
satisfaction and intercession. 1 Ioh. 17.9.
and satisfied, yet they in effect deny the same, whiles they acknowledge him
not their only Intercessor, seeing he prays for none for whom he died not.
Do not they divide Christ's Priestly office, whilst they distinguish and say
(and they do but say, for they do otherwise) Christ is our only Mediator in
regard of Satisfaction, but not in regard of Jntercession? do these men put on
whole Christ as their Priest?

5 By seuering praise from prayer. Mat. 11.25.
Lastly, Christ being our Intercessour as well thanks God for his mercies in
him to his Church, as prayers for it; and in both these sound Christians are
also spiritual Priests in him. But many discover themselves and their
hypocrisy, in as much as though their mouths are wide and open to ask good
things in the name of Christ and by virtue of his mediation; yet receuing good
things, are unmindful to return thanks in the name of Christ (with the nine
Leapers) as yet their duty is. Colos 3.17.


Now thirdly, 3 Hypocrites divide
for the Kingly Office of Christ, Christ as a King.
and the power of it in our selves: some acknowledging Christ a King, yet
plainly divide the Kingdone between Christ and his Mother, By dividing the
kingdom.
as some of the Popish sort, who say, that the Father of Heaven having his
justice and his mercy as the chiefest goods of his Kingdom, Biell in cano.
lect. 8. p. 233. as Doct. While cites him in his preface of his way etc.
keeping his Justice to himself, surrendered his mercy to the Virgin Mother:
and this they say was signified in Queen Ester, who coming to appease King
Assuerus, he said unto her, It shall be given thee, though thou ask the half
of my Kingdom. 1 Between him and his mother.
If this be so, either Christ must content himself with Justice (though he
be a merciful Savior) or with nothing. Oh blasphemy! What Christians are
these who so teach?

The same in effect is done whiles the Pope is set up in the Church not only as
a Spiritual King (not under Christ, 2 Between him and the Pope. Whiles he is
made also a temporal King.
seeing his commands are contrary to Christ's) but as a Temporal Monarch, etc.
so that, whiles they pretend he is Christ's Vicar and Substitute on Earth, they
renew and revive the error of the Jews in making him a Temporal King, and so
also divide his Kingdom into Spiritual and Temporal, even as he is our
Messiah and Mediator.

3 By serving some one sin
Others also show not forth in themselves the full power of Christ's Kingly
Office, whiles perhaps keeping under some one or few sins, they are mastered
and made slaves by some other sin, which yet, as a King, reigns in them,
they obeying it willingly; or otherwise, Ioh. 8.33.34
they, as the Jews of old, professing a freedom from man, and themselves,
like Kings, not in bondage to any, yet serve sin and their own lusts, being
slaves thereunto.

Lastly, Par. 3.. 63
others (which is rather often a weakness in them then a reigning sin) being
truly Kings in Christ, 4 By fearing enemies slauishly.
yet by reason of their daily infirmities, do slauishly fear falling away, or
death, hell and damnation; whereas Christ is such a King as will put all
enemies at length under foot, if we be in him. But where this slavish fear of
Hell and Judgment is, and reigns, how is Christ put fully on as a King? but
of this formerly.

Section 63.
We are now Secondly, to compare the Offices of Christ one with another, 2
Hypocrites divide one office of Christ from another.
and thence to see if we may not discover the hypocrisy of many by their
half or partial putting on Christ, 1 Some confess him as a Prophet, but deny
him. 1 as a priest
and that as briefly as I may.

First, some acknowledge him a Prophet, but, in effect at least, deny him to
be their Priest and King.

First, for denying his Priesthood. As first our Jesuits.


1. Our Jesuits especially among the Popish sort, who will be the only
Gnostics of our time, in regard of extraordinary and great knowledge and
learning, and so of being enlightened by Christ, (of which their learning they
brag so much, and in comparison whereof they vilify all others) yet, whiles
they, as generally, the rest will have, as is said, a treasury of meritts
besides his, and a quire of Saints and Angels, for Intercessours in heaven
besides him: what do they, but confess him their Prophet, (and yet not that
fully as we have seen) deny him to be their Priest, seeing if he only be
not, he is not at all?

2 Socinus in his damnable heresy.
2. The same damnable Heretic, lately mentioned, and his blasphemous crew,
grant Christ to be a Prophet, but deny his satisfactory death, in which
especially, his Priesthood consists; saying, that the manner of appeazing God,
is only doctrinall and exemplary, that is, that Christ showed the way of
salvation only by his doctrine (lo his Prophetical Office) and confirmed it
by his example of life, (which belongs to the same Office) but not by his
death; which, as is said, was, in his Language, Language.
but by occasion; God forgiving our sin, without any satisfaction made to his
Justice, merely of his own bounty and mercy, though the Scripture tell us
plainly that without shedding of blood there is no remission, Romans 3.25.
and that God has set out Christ to be a propitiation through faith in his
blood. The like damnable doctrine is held by some (if not all) of our
Familists, for which, if for nothing else, they deserve all execration, and
that their company should be abandoned for ever. 3 Such as knowing him live in
sin.


3. Such, in proportion, are they who having some good knowledge of God, yet
live in sin, kill not their lusts, pray not, praise not God in Christ for his
mercies.

2 As a King. Knowing, but not obeying him
2. Such by so doing, though they know Christ as a Prophet yet live still as
slaves to sin, which is suffered, and not Christ, to reign in them, they
obeying, not him, but sin in the lusts thereof. But of this often, and thus
they, confessing him as a Prophet, deny him as a King; such are they as being
diligent hearers, are negligent prayers. etc.

2 Some confess him as a Priest,
Secondly, some acknowledge Christ (and so put him on) as a Priest, but not
withal, as a Prophet and King.

but not, 1 As a Prophet. As such who hope to be saved by him yet.
1. Not as a Prophet: for many will brag of their Justification, and of the
pardon of sin by virtue of Christ's death, who yet never saw their sins by
the Law, with which they never compared their lives, 1 Never saw their sins.
their actions, words and works; or if they did, then only with the Letter and
words of the Law, not with the meaning and full sense of it, whereby, seeing
the wicked frame of their hearts inwardly, and the stains and Leopard spots of
actual sin outwardly, 2 Live in Ignorance.
they should be truly humbled and ashamed of themselves for the same. Nay,
many, not only of the Popish sort, but of our selves, will hope well, yea, as
well as any, to be saved by Christ (lo thus they would put him on as a Priest
by his death) yet live in ignorance, and neglect ordinarily the means of
knowledge, and hearing of Gods Word, living according to the rule of their own
lusts, and sinful fashions of the world; whereas God couples both together,
salvation, (by the merits of Christ, 1 Timothy 2.4.
as our Priest dying for us) and knowledge, (as our Prophet, teaching and
instructing us by his Word) no salvation then to any (of years) by Christ as
our Priest, 2 These. 1.8.
without the knowledge of Christ in his word, as our Prophet.

2. Not as a King, 2 Not as a King.
for many look to be saved by him, who yet obey him not, but suffer sin to
reign in their hearts, As these who obey him not
the Pope in their consciences, being also slaves to men's humors, etc. which
want of obedience to the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, as our King, cannot
stand with salvation by him, as our Priest, as in the place last quoated is
most plain.

3 Some confess him as a King.
Thirdly, some acknowledge, and would put on Christ as a King, who yet put him
not on either as a Prophet, or a Priest.

but, first not as a prophet.
1. Not as a Prophet: thus many would be accounted the true servants of Jesus
Christ, to obey him as their King, who yet live ignorant of his word, and know
not (from him as their teacher and Prophet) how he will be served acceptably;
as, 1 Such as serve him ignorantly according to their own good intentions.
they serve him only according to their own good meanings, and as they list
themselves, or according to will worship of their own devising, and thus they
serve and obey not him so much as themselves. As therefore there are many that
know their masters will, yet do it not: so also there are many who (would seem
to) do their Masters will, yet know it not, and both alike culpable: the
former offends by negligence, the later by presumption and pride: neither shall
escape stripes, because they divide Christ and his offices. Thus many, in
killing and persecuting the Saints and servants of God, Ioh. 16.2.3.
will think they do God and Christ service; yet these things, says our
Savior, will they do unto you, because they have not known the Father nor
me. Thus the most specious and most zealous works being done in blind
devotion, prove most grievous sins, because men in such actions, pretending to
serve and honor Christ as their King and Captain, do it not according to his
word, and so divide between Christ a King, and Christ a Prophet, Act. 17.23.
and so do service to an unknown God. The like is the obedience (...) slavish
fear of God or man; here may be an obedience to Christ, but no sacrifice
withal; he is only feared, and so obeyed as a King, not loved, and so served
and obeyed in love as a Savior. 2 Not by faith in Christ as a Priest.
There may also be a doing outwardly of what he requires, as a King, but not in
faith in him as a Priest, dying for them, And by resting in the work done.
and therefore a reward is challenged, not (through faith) by virtue of the
death and merits of Christ, whose obedience active and passive makes our
works, even our best works, acceptable; but (through pride) by virtue of the
works themselves, Isa. 58.3. etc
and the bare and formal performance of the same, as we see it in those
hypocritical Jews of old in Isay. But of this again presently.

Now, to conclude this point, of all these, who thus divide Christ in his
offices, and in the parts of any one of them, I must say, they put not on whole
Christ; and therefore they are no true, full, and sound Christians, but such,
Par. 3. 64
as who living in such sins of ignorance, disobedience, and infidelity,
without repentance and timely conversion, may, yea shall go to hell
notwithstanding that name in which they so glory.

Section 64.
Now thirdly, good Christians, not only put on Christ as Christ, 3 True
Christians put on Christ whole according to these two title Lord and Jesus.
Romans 13.14.
(as in my text) in all his Offices, which yet is the chief; but also
according to these other titles, according to which they are exhorted to put
him on, by the Apostle, saying, But put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ. They
divide him not as others do: First they put him on, not only as Jesus, a
Savior, but a Lord and Master, unto whom they owe all obedience. Others divide
between these two
As they look to be saved by him as their Jesus: so are they careful to obey
him according to all his commandments, as Lord. They look as well to his
commands as promises; whereas others show their unsoundness by their solitary
faith, with out good works and obedience, hoping to be saved by Christ as
Jesus, 1 Acknowledging him Jesus but not Lord.
yet unfruitful, and barren in go^d works and fruits, which they should bring
to him as Lord of the Vineyard: yea, many in their prayers to God fo such good
things as Christ has purchased for them as their Jesus, As 1 such as expect
from him good things but use no means, to obtain them.
can use his Name, and hope well to receive what they ask in his Name, (and
these sometime not the worst Christians) yet are not so careful to use those
means, which he as Lord has appointed and commanded them to use, without
which they may not expect to receive what is promised For God bids us not pray
for any thing, but he elsewhere bids us do and practice the same thing, and
use such means, as by which he ordinarily gives his blessings; as may be
partly observed by comparing the Lords Prayer and the Commandments together.
But this is usually practiced by the wicked, who look to the end, and expect it
without ever using the means conscionably, which lead and bring unto that end,
whereas God promising the one in Christ as Jesus, commands the other, (and so
does his Son Christ) as our Lord.

But of all others the hypocrisy of the Jesuits may hence be discovered; 2
Especially the Jesuits.
who glorying in that name more then any, as if Christ were only their Jesus,
yet in their practices go, more then any, quite contrary to his commands, as
Lord, whilst they (not only with other Papists turn many of his commands
into counsels only, as if they could do any thing to his honor, which he
commands not, and is not their duty to do, but also) kill, and practice
against the Lords anointed, of whom he says, Touch not mine anointed; lie,
dissemble, and equivocate, against his express word, Colos. 3.9.
Lie not one to another; which duty is part of our putting off the old man,
which they do not, neither put on the New man, though they put upon them more
especially the name of Jesus: and so by much other disobedience.

The godly in their service of Christ first look to him as Lord then as Jesus.
Now it would be also noted, that good Christians put on Christ more and more
(being once in him) first, as Lord, and then as Jesus, according to the order
of the Apostles words, ever looking in the first place to his glory by doing
his will, before they look to their own salvation and eternal good. For
howsoever Christ is first their Jesus, by saving them from their enemies, and
by paying the price of their redemption, and so becomes their Lord; yet, they
in their endeavors especially have an eye to him as Lord, to do his will, to
do him service, most of all greiuing for the dishonours they daily do him, and
that more then for any evil they suffer from him for their misdoings; they can
more willingly and patiently undergo and suffer the one, then they can think
and call to mind their doing of the other: so that in their prayers, they are
ever as earnest (if not more earnest) in begging further grace and strength
from him, that they may not offend him, as they are for craving pardon to
themselves for their offenses. Not so many others.
But with many it is not so; whose care is not chiefly to seek the honor and
glory of him their Lord, but the good, whether Temporal, or Spiritual, of
themselves; so that, so they may at length be saved by him as Jesus, they much
care not what sins and disobedience they live in against him as Lord; which
they evidently show, whiles, as is often said, they, expecting salvation from
him as Jesus, yet live in all ungodliness and disobedience to his word. Thus
they divide the Lord from Jesus, and put not on the whole Lord Jesus Christ, as
do the godly.

Again, godly Christians not only put Christ on as Lord, 2 Others acknowledge
Christ as Lord but not as Jesus. as, 1 Such as ascribe merit to their works,
and by their obedience destroy faith.
but also as Jesus, they put on the Lord Jesus. But so do not many others. 1.
Our Papists, and the stricter sort of them, take themselves bound to obey
Christ, and keep Gods Commandments, and that according to the strictest rules
that any founder of Orders amongst them can devise: lo, how they (would seem
to) put him on as a Lord and Master. Yea, but they attribute so much to their
obedience, that they either neglect faith, or, by the mixture of works in the
matter of Justification, overthrow it, and so expect salvation, in part at
least, even for the merit of their obedience and works: whereas salvation
properly must be wholly looked for in Jesus, and for his merits, not our
works. Christ as Jesus has abolished the Law for matter of Justification,
freeing us from the rigorous exaction of it; though as Lord and Lawgiver he
has left it (soundly interpreted by himself) as a rule of life, and of
obedience, Mat, 5.
whereby his redeemed, by their endeavors to answer their duty thereby
enjoined, might by obeying him as Lord, show themselves thankful to him as
Jesus, for their redemption and salvation by him. Papists then divide, in the
work of salvation, Jesus from Lord, and so put him not on whole.

And so secondly, 2 Such as specially apply not Christ to themselves.
do many other Hypocrites in the Church, who make fair shows of holiness in
outward obedience, doing also great works in his Name, calling him, yea, and by
many prayers, calling on him, saying, and ingeminating, Lord, Lord: yet are
such, as, (for want of true faith in him as Jesus) cannot especially in their
trouble, from the heart, and truly, call him Jesus, by saying without
hypocrisy, with Thomas, my Lord, and my God; my Savior, and my redeemer. No,
no: not every one that says unto me, Lord, Ioh. 20.28. Mat. 7.21.22.
Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of Heaven.

3 Such as having sined against him as Lord do yet despair of his mercy as he
is Jesus.
Lastly, some also there are, who in the consideration of their great and many
sins against Christ as their Lord, do not, cannot, (shall I say, or) will
not, look withal to him, as Jesus and a Savior, and hereupon, utterly
despayring of his mercy, cast away their hope, and themselves also often both
in soul and body, as did Cain and Judas. True, Judas sinned treacherously
against his Lord and Master Christ; yet having sinned, he should not so have
looked upon him, as a Lord, against whom he sinned, as not to look upon him
also as Jesus and a Savior who came to die for sin, that so his blood might
have washed and saved even him the Traitor, Act. 2.23. with 37.38.39.
as well as it did others, who with him had their hands in that Treason, upon
their repentance. This is a strange division of Christ, when men by dividing
Jesus from Lord, shall divide themselves from mercy and salvation. True
Christians hold a middle course.
True Christians hold a middle course, not dividing but coupling these two
together, neither presuming too much on him because he is Jesus, a Savior, nor
despayring of his mercy, because he is Lord; but they serve the Lord with
fear (because he is their Lord) and rejoice with trembling: they tremble, Psa.
2.11.12
but yet rejoice because he is also their Jesus and Savior. When he is angry,
they kiss the son, least he be further angry and they perish in the way:
blessed are they because (as they fear so also) they trust in him. Philip. 2.12
They work out and finish their salvation with fear and trembling: they
tremble and fear, to offend him as Lord; yet though they do offend him, they
despair not but for all their sins, by faith in him as Jesus, they attain
to salvation, they doubtless as much as any feel their imperfections, and
possess often the sins of their youth, Par. 3.. 65
fearing his wrath as their Lord and Lawgiver, yet they wrestle at length
through their doubts, and make their appeal from Christ as Lord, to Christ as
Jesus, and so being humbled for offending their Lord, they find mercy and
comfort by faith in him their Jesus. And thus also do they, as their duty is,
put on whole Christ, 4 True Christians put on Christ according to all his
graces.
both God and man, in all his Offices, and according to these his titles.

Section. 65.
And as in these so also, (which follows upon these) in all his graces, both
in regard of Illumination, Justification, and Sanctification: they put on the
whole new man, and all his members, bowels of mercy, Colos. 3.10.12.13.
kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness, long suffering, forbearing one
another, forgiving one another, etc. for so did Christ. Herein do they approve
their sincerity, 1 Cor. 1.7. Iam. 1.4.
that they are wanting and come behind in no gift, being in that sense perfect,
that is, entire wanting nothing, but having all and each sanctifying and saving
grace in some good and acceptable measure, (though none in the perfection of
degrees, yet all essential graces, in the perfection of parts, as we usually
distinguish) by which also they put on whole Christ, 1 Cor. 1.5. Psalm. 119.6.
being in every thing enriched by him, and having respect unto all Gods
precepts, the whole Law in regard of the Iniunction in it being but one
Copulative, Delinquens in part, in totum reus est.
not running disiunctiuely, either do this or that, but do both this and that
too, etc. So that the true trial of grace is from the concurrence and meeting
af all together; single graces are counterfeit graces, so that each true
Christian has each sanctifying grace, Vna sine alijs nulla est. Greg. Mor. l.
21
seeing one grace in truth and sincerity is never without another, or if it
be, it is as good as none. And herein appears the hypocrisy of many
Christians from their partial clothing themselves with the graces of Christ:
many have great knowledge, 2 Hypocrites divide between the graces of Christ.
but show forth little obedience, much science and as little conscience: many
pretend great strength of faith, who yet being hot in faith toward God, (as
they would seem) are very cold in love toward both God and man. Their faith
to God, being without righteousness and Justice to man (in the duties of the
Second Table) is mere presumption; Iam. 1.27.
for pure Religion, and undefiled before God and the Father, is this, to visit
the fatherless and widows in their affliction, etc.

Others show a kind of righteousness to man,, doing no man harm, yea, not
wanting in good offices done to them: yet their regard of God is but little or
none, so that their righteousness being without faith, is but hypocrisy. Many
again are zealous and forward in the profession of religion, yet they want
knowledge at least, judgment and discretion to moderate their zeal, and so
run themselves out of breath yea stark dead, in regard of any true life of
Christianity: or for the exercise of their graces, they with Herod and the
Pharisees do somethings, but they leave many other things undone; They pay
tithe of mint, Mat. 23.23
and annise, and cummin, but omit the weightier matters of the law, Judgment,
Mercy, and Faith; a right trick of hypocrites, to practice themselves lesser
matters and duties outwardly, and to urge them fiercely upon others; yet
themselves to make little conscience of weightier matters belonging to faith
and a good conscience: whereas, concerning such ceremonious matters, I say, as
our Savior, of the other, These ought they to have done, (because of
conscience, of the superior power) but by no means to leave the other undone
For so do sound Christians: though there be that great and wide difference
between matter of circumstance and matter of substance, that, God forbid, we
should account them no sound Christians, whose conscience will not suffer them
to practice the former, (it not being out of obstinacy and contempt of
authority, but out of irresolution of judgment, which they labor to get
rightly informed) as we may not account them sound, that practice the former
without the later.

And thus we are come to show that true Christians, 2 True Christians put on
Christ wholly.
put on whole Christ and all his graces, wholly, in regard of their being
clothed with him and them on all parts, in body and soul, and in all and every
part and power of the same: even as it is said of good King Josiah, that he
turned to the Lord, with all his heart and with all his soul, 2 Kings. 23.25.
In all parts.
and with all his might, according to all the law of Moses. Thus Gods children
putting on Christ the new man, and thereby becoming new men themselves, are
renewed, and made new men in all parts in some degree or other, and so in all
things, Ephesians. 4.15.
and parts, they grow up, etc. Christ, Gal. 4.19.
whom they put on, is fully in all parts formed in them, according to all his
graces, and to their renewing in every part; Christ being formed in all parts in
them.
so that whereas they were wholly dead in sins before, they by putting on
Christ, and by application of him to them, are alive in every part; even as
when the Prophet Elisha raising to life the Shunamites child, 2 Kin. 4.34.
lay upon the child, and put his mouth upon his mouth, and his eyes upon his
eyes, and his hands upon his hands, and so stretched him upon the child, and
the flesh of the child waxed warm, and he revived in all these parts, and all
over, yet he remained but a child, and by degrees in time came to his full and
due stature and growth: even so whole Christ, being truly put on, applies
himself wholly to his children, as it were mouth to mouth, eye to eye, etc.
and so quickens them, and is spiritually formed in them, in every part, yet
remain they but children in this life, Yet so as that they grow by degrees to
perfection.
in comparison of that perfection which they at length, partly here, chiefly
hereafter, shall attain unto.

Par. 3.. 66
Now are they like children newly borne, perfect men, for the integrity of
parts; as these want no limb which belongs to an entire man, though as yet not
any one limb or part of the body has attained its full bigness, neither the
whole body came to its stature, full bulk and talenesse, unto which yet by
degrees it is growing, and in time shall attain, if it continue a living body.
Even thus whosoever, being truly regenerate, puts on whole Christ and his
graces, he puts him on wholly in all parts and powers of soul and body,
understanding, memory, will, conscience, affections of love, desire, joy, etc.
and in the outward man, and body, the members whereof are become all of them
instruments of righteousness; each of these parts are renewed in some degree or
other, though not any one of them as yet be come to his due and full growth
unto which the godly Christian, Ephesians. 4.13.15.
in the use of all good means, is ever striving to attain, so that he
increases in spiritual strength and stature, in all these proportionably:
Perfect then he is, A threefold perfection of Christians in this life.
and wholly puts on Christ in these regards (to name no more) 1. In regard of
perfection of parts, as is said: unto which our Savior exhorts in that place
(so much urged by those that will have men in this life attain to such a
perfection as Adam had in his innocence, Mat. 5.48. 1 Of parts.
namely Familists and Libertines, who are furthest of any from it) be ye
perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect, whereby he would
not have us to rest in the graces before commended, but to join hereunto the
love of our enemies. 2 Of sincerity.
2. In regard of perfection of Sincerity, each child of God having grace in
each part truly and in sincerity, though in weak measure. 3. In regard of
striving to the perfection of his estate in Christ, 3 Of their estate in
Christ. Ephesians. 4.13.
and unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ. Thus a man is
perfect that aims at and strives to such perfection, in the sight and feeling
of his daily imperfections; yea, perfect as God is perfect, not in regard of
any equality, (which were horrible blasphemous to think, or say with the
Familist, that a man must be Godded with God, or co-deified) but only of
quality and similitude, when he aims at the same mark, as in his
liberality, not respecting worldly gain; in goodness, striving with the
malice of wicked men, that are his enemies; the same exhortation therefore
being made elsewhere, it is, Be ye merciful as your Father is merciful, etc.
Mat. 5.44.
For as God does good even to his enemies, so he would have us do to our
enemies, and that in heart, word, and deed.

Thus it is with a true Christian, he wholly from head to foot clothes himself
with Christ, and with his graces in imitation of his virtues, This complete
armor needful.
being sound and entire in each, and not only desiring and endeavoring, but
indeed growing in each part to the foresaid perfection: as knowing that unless
he clothes and arms himself fully at all points, all is as good as nothing,
seeing he has vigilant enemies, who go about him, and narrowly view him on
every side where they may find him naked. He therefore takes to him the whose
armor of God (this armor of light) and putting it on, Ephesians. 6.11. Romans 13.12
arms and clothes himself wholly in all parts therewith, as knowing that
though he have an helmet on his head, yet that is no fence for his heart, and
therefore he also arms himself with a Brestplate, and with all those other
parts of Christian armor described by the Apostle. Whereas, Ephesians. 6.10.11.
etc. and 2 Pet. 1.5.6. etc.
on the contrary, we shall find many counterfeit Christians, who in regard of
this integrity of parts, and sincerity of each, are either maimed, Hypocrites
are either,
or monstrous. They will put on Chris, but how? As if Christ were only for the
head, 1 Maimed being covered on the head, not on the heart.
not heart, they are well fenced with knowledge, that heretics and cunning
Sophisters cannot deceive them; but their hearts are in them as cold as lead,
in regard of any true love to that truth which they know, (these two truth and
goodness, And contrary wise.
being for subject the same) and themselves without the power of godliness.
The heads of many now are better then their hearts, so that they may cry out
with Jeremy in an other and different case, My belly, my belly, my heart, my
heart. As in former times of ignorance, many men's hearts were better then their
heads, 2 Kin. 4.19.
(if good at all) full of love and devotion, but as empty of true knowledge,
who therefore might cry with the Shunamites son, My head, my head, who not
long after died. Now the head and heart being principal parts, Par. 3.. 65
if either be left naked and unarmed, how soon is the whole body destroyed?
Some again put on Christ at the tip of their tongues, and from the teeth
outward are Christians good enough; In their tongues not in their hands, or
feet:
but their hands, feet, and other parts are naked, deformed and unarmed, for
want of good works, and of being sho^ with the preparation of the Gospel of
peace; they are white only in the teeth as the Ethiopian, else black all
over. Their tongues can talk of good things, and their brains swim with
knowledge, by Patience to endure crosses and scandales.
but they either want feet to carry them on in Gods ways, according to the
direction of the head and eyes (which may be enlightened) or else they are
unarmed and unshod, and so cannot walk upon thorny and hard places, upon Aspes
and Dragons, that is, cannot endure or suffer hardness and persecution for
Christ, and so, by such thorns are discouraged and given over: Par. 3.. 66
their head is too heavy for their feet, and their feet, that is, their
affections of love, joy, desire, hope, fear, etc. are too weak to sustain
them: and therefore it befalls them which befell Nebuchad-nezzars Image, Dan.
2.32.33.34.
the head whereof was of fine gold, breast and arms of silver, his belly and
thighs of brass, his legs of iron, his feet, part of iron, part of clay; when
the stone of offense smites it upon the feet, it falls and breaks all to
pieces. Even such is the end of such unsound Christians. Thus defective they
are for want of some principal grace to arm some principal member; Or
monstrous.
yea withal monstrous, whiles they grow not on proportionably in all parts,
Being either al head no feet.
being either all heads, swollen and puffed up with knowledge, without legs and
feet, that is, without obedience, or without obedience to answer such
knowledge; or all feet, without head; that is all for a blind obedience, like
the Sciopodes, whose one foot is so big and broad, that the shadow of it couers
the whole body from the heat of the Sun: so these men are covered and fenced
more with shadow, the^ with substance. Or al hands no heart.
Or they are all hands and feet, by works, nothing in heart, for faith: with
the mouth, Romans 10.10 etc.
for outward profession and confession exceeding large; but for the heart, with
which they should believe unto righteousness, very narrow: or perhaps their
faith is wonderful large, extending it self, through too much credulity, to
believe lies, and lying wonders and miracles, whiles their knowledge is either
none, or very little in Gods word. Thus monstrous are they, through this
disproportion of members, whether in the being, or in the growth of them;
whereas true and sound Christians grow up into Christ in all things, which is
the head, Ephesians 4.15.16.
(and that uniformly and proportionably in all parts) for from him the whole
body fitly joined together, and compacted by that which every joint supplyeth,
Par. 3.. 67
according to the effectual working in the measure of every part, makes
increase of the body unto the edifying of it self in love.

Section. 67.
And thus much of this first property of putting on Christ, which is, that it
must be whole, and wholly. The other property is, 2 The second property of
putting on Christ, is,
that this putting on is constant, so that the sound Christian so puts on
Christ, as that (according to the property of this spiritual clothing) he
never puts him off again but wears him constantly and perpetually.

Constancy. 1 In putting off sin.
This implies a constant putting off sin and the old man; for so indeed do
good Christians; they so put off their sin, as that they resume it not
again, neither put it on, in their affections at least: for else there is not
the best nor the most wary, but is in danger to be brought back again and
ensnared in the same sins; yet he having once in his heart and affection,
and in the resolution of his soul, put it off, and cast it away he never so
takes it up again, as to delight himself with it. He so puts it off as the
beggar does his rags, when once he grows rich, and gets better apparel; or as
men infected with the plague, being once cleansed, throw their infected
clothes (especially being course) into the fire, or else so part with them, as
resolving for ever not to cloth them selves therewith again: whereas the
hypocrite and ungodly having once escaped the pollutions of the world, 2 Pet.
2.20 22.
suffer themselves again to be entangled therein, yea and overcome,- being like
the dog which turns to his own vomit again, and the sow, which being washed,
turns to her wallowing in the mire.

But he not only puts off sin for ever, 2 In putting on Christ.
and so gives it a Bill of Divorce, but so puts on Christ, as that he marries
himself unto him for ever, and never casts him off again; which he does not
by his own power, but by the mercy and constant love of Christ whom he puts
on, Hos. 2.19.
who betroths him unto himself for ever. This is from hence, because Christ to
him is such a garment as never either wears (being yesterday and to day, Heb
1.12. True Christians so put on Christ that they put him not off again.
and the same for ever) or wearies him that puts it on, being ever needful,
and never out of fashion with him. In these and in other regards differing from
ordinary clothes, which both wear with using, and with long using prove
noisome, as we see it in beggars, and the poorer sort; as also if especially
we speak of our own nation, in a few years grow out of fashion: so that in
that regard he shall be accounted to be out of fashion; that, the fashion
altering, still uses that fashion, which not very many years before, some
swaggerer began, and first took up.

As do hypocrites:
But we may observe that many who yet in name are Christians, accounting but
meanly of Christ and of his righteousness and holiness, who
put him on and off at their pleasure, and often quite lay him aside, upon like
occasions as they do their own apparel.

Some men so put on Christ, 1 Are day Christians.
as they do their upper garments, as their clokes or gowns; which serve their
use when they go abroad in company; but when they return home, they cast them
off again; or as their best clothes, which they put on only on good days, as
they speak, and on holy days: so these men are Saints in the company of
Saints, and when they are in the eye of the world; but when they are only
themselves, and in secret, they are quite other men, their secret practices and
affections are quite other then were their outward pretenses and semblances.
Such are those whom we may call Holiday-Christians, Or 2 holyday Christians
whose holiness and religion they both put on and put off at the Church door,
or at least at night on the Sabbaths, with their clothes. The next day, and all
the week after they put on again, with their older clothes, the old man, and
think their formal service on the Lords day, may serve and excuse them, if
all the week long they, in their ordinary employments, look not to Christ at
all or to his word.

3 So such as put of Christ in the heart of persecution.
When the heat of Su^mer comes, men cast off such clothes as they kept on
formerly, as now proving but thensome, and a weariness unto them; even so,
many who in the Churches peace made fair shows of constant profession, and
that they put on Christ, yet they being, as the times perhaps served, of a
lukewarm and Laodican temper, when, with Peter they come to warm themselves
in the high Priests Hall, and to be threatened with fire and faggot, then with
him, Christis denied, and quite put off; though in such case, if any be as
Peter was, Christ will not finally suffer himself to be cast off, but in mercy
will stick close to them, Luk 22.55.56.57-61
and keep himself on, by remembering them of their duty; whereas such as are
wholly unsound, though they cast off Christ as Peter did, yet they put him not
surer on again as he did, and thereby show their unsoundness. 4 So such as
whose graces were out.
The like is also done when men's apparel either wear away into holes, or
wear out of fashion, (strange apparel coming more in fashion) and so they
becoming ashamed thereof, cast them off, and take other. Even thus it is with
hypocrites, whose best graces being but in hypocrisy, and not deeply rooted
in the heart, soon wear out, when occasion requires they should be much used:
their Faith proves temporary, their Love cooles, their Hope languisheth, their
Patience is soon wearied, and generally being long holden to it, they weary of
well doing; the waters of their Cisterne are soon dried up with the heat of
the Sun, and their hasty crop soon withers, like the grass on the house
top; their thin and fine clothes soon wear to pieces, when they come to
labor and work in the furnace of affliction for the Gospel. Or otherwise,
before persecution comes, strange outlandish apparel, 3 Such as change good
customs for bad.
Heathenish or Popish customs of serving God, come in fashion with men of this
world, and so they grow ashamed of their older, but better clothes, and putting
them off by littles, take on them the Popish guise and habit, being told, he
is no Gentleman that is no Papist: and thus shaming to profess Christ in the
simplicity of the Gospel, and to be clothed as he himself was clothed on
earth, with a plain coat, without seame, welt or guard, they now serve God
according to the pomp and pride of Popery, where, in their Priests vestments
Christ is put on only on the back and outside, not in the heart, and in the
purity of his worship, and so when they, in their Massings or otherwise, have
played their pageants, they put him off again, till the next act comes to be
played.

And thus generally do many Christians clothe themselves with Christ, as
Actors on the Stage, 6 Such as having acted their parts put off their apparel,
and are unmasked going of the stage of the world.
(from whence, as is said, they have their name of Hypocrites) in borrowed
apparel, whereby they act the parts of great men and holy, of the sons it
may be of the most High; but, if not before, yet when by death they go off
the stage of this world, they leave their masks and dissembled habit, and go as
naked of Christ as they came. Others again, 7 Such as laying aside profession
fashion themselves to the company.
in companies where they would not be known, dissemble themselves to be what
they are (and I wish even good Christians otherwise did not practice this too
much) and so putting off the upper garment of profession, fashion themseles, if
not to the religion, yet to the corrupt and sinful fashions of the company,
being to the eye of any indifferent beholder as profane as the company is, be
it as profane as it will be, and yet the same again, out of such companies,
take to them the habit of sober and good Christians. Of all others the
dissembling of the Familists is most wicked and odious: who, (pretending such a
perfection on earth as Adam had in his innocence yet) frame themselves to the
customs, yea religions of the place where they please to live, in so much that
(if one, once an Anabaptist and very nigh as he confesses one of themselves,
Edm. Iessop in his discovery of the errors of the English Anabaptists, toward
the end of the point.
do not belly them) they amongst us Protestants will perform the Office of
Ministers, (I will not say as he does, in the Kings Chapel, but) in our
Church, and amongst Papists will exercise the place of Popish Priests. Some
again put off Christ, as men put off their clothes when they go to their
bedds and rest, namely when they mean to give themselves to their ease and
security, and to take no pains in the ways of God. Others, through a
careless keeping of their garments and graces, 9 Such as through carelessness
lose their graces.
suffer them to be stolen from them, whiles they sleep securely, and are not
so careful to profit by Gods Word, which they daily hear, by ruminating and
remembering it: for thus Satan steals away the Word out of their hearts, and so
they are as men falling among thieves, 10 Such as account the ways of God too
strict.
who leave them wounded and naked. Lastly, as men trying on their apparel, and
finding them either too wide or too st^ight, put them off again, and get them
made fit for their bodies or else they will not wear them at all: even so is
it with many Christians, with who^ their Christian profession and clothes are
seldom indeed too wide and large (for they willingly take as much liberty and
more then God gives them) but usually the laws and ways of God are accounted
too straight, narrow and strict, so that having a little tried on this
apparel, and, being too strait laced, finding it to sit close and pinch in
their great bellies of Gluttony and Drunkenness, their swellings of Pride,
their corns of searednesse of conscience, and hardness of heart, etc. they
hereupon throw it off, and will either have it made wider for them, that they
may have more scope, and take more liberty in it, or else they never suffer it
to come on their backs again. Whereas Christ is such apparel, as being
shaped for us by the best skilled Artificer, God himself, who knows our
mould, must not be thought either too wide or too straight, too long or too
short, that it should be taken in, or enlarged at our pleasure; it herein
differing from ordinary apparel, which may and must be fitted to our bodies,
not our bedies to it: but we must be fitted to this garment, cast in a new
mould, and must submit and fashion our selves unto his will, Par. 3.. 68
not he to us, and our will.

And thus much also of this other property of putting on Christ, which is,
that we must so put him on as never to put him off again; in regard of which,
as also of the former property, true Christians differ from false and
counterfeit,

We are now to show the same or like difference from those other two Heads
formerly named, to wit from the effects, and from the Means of putting on.

Sectian. 68.
The third head and ground of Ttriall then is from the effects of this putting
on Christ, 3 Trials of our putting on Christ from the effects thereof.
which indeed are proper to it; and these are generally true happiness,
particularly, as has been showed. 1. True Honor and Glory. 2. True content,
Joy and Comfort. For (such is the estate of every true Christian; an estate of
Happiness, Which are three Happiness Honor Joy.

Honor and Joy; and so do all true and good Christians esteem and account of
it; whereas all others show themselves not to be indeed what they would seem
to be, by their contrary judgments and conceits of that estate.

1 True Christians place their happiness only in Christ. Which they show.
First, (as the only happiness of the Saints on earth consists in true
righteousness, whereby their sins are not imputed any longer to them, but
pardoned, (seeing Christ on the Cross clothed himself therewith) and whereby
his righteousness is imputed to them, they being clothed therewith, (as in the
first Motive long since is showed:) so) they make it manifest they have truly
put on Christ, in as much as they place their only happiness in Christ, and in
the pardon of their sins, which benefit they have from their putting on of
Christ. 1 By professing so much.
That they place their happiness herein is plain. First, they plainly
profess so much: as David, a King, and wanting nothing of this life which
might make him happy, (being established in his Kingdom in safety, where he
inioyed much Peace and plenty) yet even he, places his happiness, in nothing
of this life, but only in this benefit, in the pardon of his sin, having them
covered; saying, Psa. 32, 1.2 Romans 4.6.7.
blessed is the man whose transgression is forgiven, whose sin is covered.
But the temporal happiness of his Son Solomon is unmatchable, in respect of
the concurrence of all earthly blessings whatsoever, of the best whereof he
could say, as of Joy, and Pleasure, in this manner; I said of laughter, Eccles.
2.2.
it is mad; and of mirth, what does it? and if wisdom and knowledge be any
better, (as doubtless they are incomparably) hear his verdit of them too: and
1.18.
In much wisdom is much grief, and he that increases knowledge, increases
sorrow. Nay his verdit of altogether, put wealth, honor, long life, peaceable
government, and all else into the balance, and they, in his, and in true
account are lighter then vanity, for says he, vanity of vanities, and. 2.26.
all is vanity, (not only vain but vanity) not only so but vexation also of
spirit, not only unable to make a man truly happy, but helping to make him,
unhappy and miserable? for what greater misery on earth, then vexation of
spirit, Quae dum quaeruntur fatigant, dum accquiruntur infatuant, dum
amittuntur excruciant. Ioh: Pic Mirand.
and a tormented soul, unto which the best things on earth both in their
getting, keeping, and loosing, do make a man (without the benefit aforesaid)
subject, especially in regard of that sting of conscience which follows the
unjust getting, unsanctified inioying, the unmeasurable minding of them, with
the neglect and losing of better things. Wherein then places he happiness?
namely in the fearing of God, and keeping his commandments: Eccles. 12.13
for thus, (these presupposing the former benefit) a man finds peace of
conscience, and assurance of the favor of God in the pardon of his sin: for
it is such a fear as is not separate from faith and confidence in God, and
such a keeping of the Commandments as is according to the Gospel (the chief
commandment whereof is, that we believe in the name of Christ) not according
to the strictnes and rigor of the law. 1 Ioh. 3.23.
Thus Paul accounts all things (the best things and privileges also of this
life) but loss,- yea but dung, that, says he, I may win Christ, and be found
in him (as a man is found in his clothes) not having mine own righteousness,
which is of the law, Phil. 3.8.9.
but that which is through the faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of
God by faith.

Secondly, 2 By sorrowing most, in the want of assurance of Gods favor in
Christ.
they show so much by the contrary, whilst they sorrow most of all in the want
of such assurance, and account sin, unpardoned, the heauiest burden on earth,
and themselves in that only regard unhappy and miserable. Thus David, having
showed his happiness by having his sin pardoned and covered, shows also what
cause he had so to do, saying in the next words, Psa. 32.1.2.3.4.5.
When I kept silence, my bones waxed old, through my roaring all the day long;
for day and night thy hand was heavy upon me, etc. Then I acknowledged my
sin unto thee, etc. and thou forgauest the iniquity of my sin. Lo at once
both his misery, and his happiness. So Paul, finding but the remainder of sin,
by the motions of it in himself, cries out as if he were slain, or beset
with deadly enemies; Romans 7.24.
O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death?

3 By their Desires.
Thirdly, they show where they place their happiness by their desires: for as
all good things are desirable because they are good, so that which is the
chief good of all is chiefly desirable, and desired by those that truly know
it. Now the godly desiring this benefit above al, Gods favor and the pardon
of their sins, show that therein they place their chief happiness. And
therefore the same David in the aforesaid place, in the very next words, shows
what the property and the affection of a godly man is, saying, For this (that
is, the pardon and covering of sin) shall every one that is godly pray unto
thee. As if for this, Psalm. 32.6.
and for this only every godly man should chiefly pray, whereby he, in Christ,
might be assured of Gods favor: for thus the same godly David does difference
himself from worldlings, and such as seek their happiness in the things of
this life, in this manner speaking; There be many that say, Psalm 4.6.
who will show us any good? Lord, lift thou up the light of thy countenance
upon us.

Fourthly, 4 By their tha^kefulnes which is cheifely for Pardon.
this they show (not only by endeavors answerable to these their desires, but)
by their thankefulnes and rejoicing in this favor, and in the pardon of their
sins before and above all things else whatsoever: as we see in the example of
the same holy David, who stirring up his soul, his whole soul to bless God,
and not to forget all his benefits, Ps. 103.1.2.3
begins with this as chief of all, thus; who forgiueth all thine iniquities,
etc.

Now the want of such high estimation of this benefit before all things else;
the want of sorrow in the want of it; the want of desire and Godly endeavor
after it; the want of true thankfulness for such mercies offered in the
Gospel, testified by such unfruitfulness as appears in the lives of most
men, the bare want of such things, is a most clear evidence, that most men
remain unclothed by Christ in their sins and nakedness, as also without the
favor of God in Christ, as might particularly and largly be showed, if I
hasted not to an end.

But their excess in these, concerning the things of this world, is a proof
sufficient of a want and defect in the same, concerning this maine benefit of
Inioying Christ and of being clothed with his righteousness, and holiness,
Hypocrites show themselves, to be so by not placing their happiness in Christ.
and so concequently that they only bear the name of Christians, but (so
remaining, so living and so d^ing) shall never attain to the happiness of
Christians, either here, or hereafter. Which they show.
for wherein do most men place their happiness and felicity? is it not rather
in any thing then in Christ, truly learned by faith apprehended and put on, in
the practice of our lives imitated? is it not more oftentimes in gold then in
God, 1 By their account of him.
in the favor of men especially great ones, then in the favor of God in
Christ? do men usually call and account themselves blessed, when their sin
is pardoned, and iniquity covered by the covering and Imputation of the
righteousness of Christ, as did David, or not rather, when with David, they
only attain to honor, wealth setlednes in their estate, and the, like, all
which yet, in comparison of happiness? Do not most men bless themselves, and
account themselves the only happy men on earth, when they attain to such
things, though in a very slender measure, Accounting better of baser things.
in comparison, which Solomon could truly call not only vanity but vexation
of spirit; and so, in the very truth (without the other) part of a man's
infelicity and wretchedness on earth, so that such happy (unhappy) men, such
rich men are bid to weep and howl for their miseries etc. Iam. 5.1. etc
Do not most men, quite contrary to Saint Paul account Christ and his graces,
which they should put on, but loss, dross, yea dung, in comparison of earthly
trash, wordly gain, or their own formal and conceited righteousness. Isa.
55.1.23. Mat. 22.1.2 etc.
Do they not, when they are called and invited by Christ, to leave, not simply
the things of this life their farms, their oxen, their merchandise, their
wives etc. but the excessive and immoderate love of these things, and to come
unto him that they may enjoy him self and gods favor in him, do they not I
say, make light of him, and prefer these other things before him? do they not
leave him for others to enjoy, in effect saying, as the Jews to the late blind
man, be thou, or thou art his disciples; Ioh. 9.28.
we are Moses desciples (though therein they spoke falsely;) and do they not
account these others, who truly receive and put on Christ, even in that
regard, accursed? as the same Pharisees, saying, do any of the rulers believe
on him? Ioh. 7.48.49
but this people, who konw not the law are cursed.

Again; what one of many with David and Paul, 2 By their want of sorrow in
their want of him
roares and cries out, accounting himself wretched in that (I say not, some
relics of sin is yet in him, but) his sin is unpardoned, and he has no
comfortable assurance of Gods favor? Nay, do they not cry out, they are
undone, when they undergo some of the other, he made no part of his great
loss in their estate, when the burden of poverty lies upon them, when they
have incurred the displeasure and enmity of great ones? though all the while
they have lost (at least not regained) their souls have the burden of their
sins (unfelt, vnsorrowed for) lying upon them, and are in the disfavor, and
under the displeasure of the Almighty? do these men place their happiness in
(their putting on) Christ? ah poor souls, how do they deceive themselves.

3 By their greater desires after earthly things.
Moreover, what desires do they most express? is not this the voice of most
men (really uttered and expressed in their endeavors and practices) who will
show us any good? not, as David, lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon
us; do not men plainly show this when their chief desires, aims, diligence
and time is spent, in seeking and hunting after livings, whether spiritual,
benifices, Bishoprics etc. or temporal, by begging, buying, and catching at
offices and other preferment? etc. Yet the same men, in regard of spiritual
things, and of Christ, are poor, blind, naked, and miserable.

The like they show by their thankful taking any good done to their bodies and
outward estate, 4 By their unthankfulness and reiection of mercy.
whiles, by open Propha^es or contempt they reject gods mercies in Christ
offered in the Gospel, even like many beggars who repairs to the Church doors
in hope to receive a pe^ny, by the co^mers out, or disposers of moneys for the
poor which with many thanks and blessings they receive; whereas they are
ready rather to curse those that urge them to come in and join with others in
praying and heareing, so senseless are they of the benefit of preaching,
whereby Christ offers to cover their nakedness and to enrich their souls.

Oh then! how do men deceive themselves, when, showing such desires after, and
pursuing with such earnestness the things of this life, seeking or finding so
much content in them, they are but, at best, indifferently affected toward
heavenly things, if not wholly averse from them, pouring out either none, or
very cold and formal prayers for the pardon of their sins, and taking no
pains, or very Perfunctory pains in searching out their sins, killing and
mortifying them or in any other endeavor by which they might put on Christ.

5 By their immoderat minding the world.
This immoderate minding of the world, whereby men so seek to cloth their
backs with rich apparel, their houses with rich hangings, Psalm. 64.13.
their fields with corn and cattle, And by making provision for the flesh.
sheep and oxen, themselves with honor etc. is too evident a sign, that they
have not as yet put on the Lord Jesus Christ, neither have any great desire or
purpose so to do; whiles on the contrary they make provision for the flesh,
(for their bodies) yet not simply, for that is needful; but so as that they
may fulfill the lusts thereof, Romans 13.14
especially by immoderate minding and glutting themselves with earthly
contents. Thus to do is made by the Apostle contrary and opposite to the
putting on of Christ, so that such as ordinarily use that liberty which God
has given them, in eating, drinking, marrying, providing necessaries, etc. as
an occasion to the flesh, do thereby plainly show themselves not to have put
on Christ, and therefore falsely to glory in the name of Christian; that name
with out Christ, truly, by faith and imitation of him, put on, will not save,
but rather condemn us.

Do thou then, whosoever, hence try and examine thy self where, and in what
thou placest thy happiness, whether in Christ, truly and soundly, yet
soberly, put on more then in any thing else, and as thou find, either leave
off, or go on.

Secondly, the next effect of this 2 The second effect of putting on Christ is
Honor.
is honor, beauty and glory, even in this life. For the estate of a true
Christian is (whatsoever the blind world accounts of it) an honorable and
glorious estate; True Christians place their honor only in Christ.
and as it is so in it self, even so do they account it, glorying more, that
they by Christ are made true Christians, Ier. 9.23.24.
and that they understand and know God in Christ, that he is the Lord, who to
them, in Christ, exercises loving kindness, etc. then in wisdom, might,
riches etc. as God himself exhorts. And hereby do they show themselves to
be Christians more then in name only, because they glory in being Christians,
Not in earthly honors
not in seeming, or in being called Christians, as do hypocrites.

This was the commendation of Moses his faith, that by faith when he was come
to years he, refused to be called the son of Pharaohs Daughter, choosing
rather to suffer affliction with the people of God -- esteeming the reproach of
Christ greater (Honor and) Riches, Heb. 11.24.25.26.
then the (Honors and) Treasures of Aegppt. This his faith made him in deed a
Christian, though not in name: for, as he with the faithful of old drank of
the same spiritual drink (with us) and of that Rock which (in a figure) was
Christ: 1 Cor. 10.4.9.
(as the evil and wicked even then are said to have tempted Christ,) so here
it is said that Moses refusing other honor, highly esteemed the reproach of
Christ.

The like high estimation of Christ, Psalm. 19.46
even Kings have had and showed, as of old David, who professes he will speak
of Gods testimonies even before Kings, and will not be ashamed; and Christian
Kings and Emperors, as Constantine, and Theodosius, August de civit. dei lib
^. cap. 26.
which last as Saint Austine reports of him, rejoiced more that he was a member
of the true Orthodoxe Church (which was not infected with the heresy of
Arrius, who denied Christ's divinity) then that he was an Emporour on earth.

Par. 3.. 69
Thus others, though otherwise, Mighty and Noble, High and Honorable, yet
have not bin ashamed of Christ, or of performing the meanest duties; even after
the example of the same Theodosius, who, by reason of a cruel fact against the
Thessalonians, being by Saint Ambrose debarred from the communion and Church
assemblies at Easter, Sic egit paenitentiam, vt Imperatoria^ celsitudinem, pro
illo populus orans magis fleret videndo prostratam quam peccando timeret
iratam. Aug. ibid. and viues.
was not ashamed in a Religious humility, to show his repentance, to confess
his fault, and crave pardon, first, of God, then of Saint Ambrose, and lastly
of the whole Church, and that in such submisse manner, that the people praying
for him, wept more to see him so humbled, then feared his displeasure for their
offending him. Thus to do, and to show themselves Christians in deed, and in
the power of Christianity, the godly account their honor, and themselves
graced thereby, (though not always with men, who mock and deride them for
such actions, as Michal did David, for dancing before the Arc) yet always
with God. And why? Why?
because they know that the true practice of Piety and Christianity is the most
honorable profession, By him they have a new and great name.
and that the true and sincere service of God is more honor then to be a King
on earth. This is when withal, their sin is pardoned and done away (as it is
by Christ). For they know it will avail them little to be by birth Noble and
Honorable on earth, and so to have a great Name among men, if they have not
also given unto them, Revel. 2.17.
the white stone (of absolution) and in it, a new name written. Christ was long
since promised to be raised up for his people a plant of renown, In Nomen.
Ezekiel, 34.29
or for renown: and by putting him on, or by being planted into him, each
sound Christian has the reproach of his ignoble birth in sin done away,
Ezekiel. 16.4.5. etc. to 15.
whilst God, finding him in his blood, not salted, nor swadled -- but cast out
in the open field, to the loathing or contempt of his person -- spreads his
skirt over him and couers his nakedness -- washes him -- decketh him with
ornaments -- and puts a beautiful crown upon his head, And their reproach
through sin is done away
makes him exceeding beautiful, etc. This is, whilst being truly baptized
inro Christ, he puts on Christ, for thus he becomes truly honorable; even as
when Joshua of old circumcised the Israelites, the Lord said, This day have I
rolled away the reproach of Egypt from you. Joshua 5.9.
Now the true Christian, not ignorant of this his glorious estate in Christ, is
so well pleased therewith, that he is ashamed of nothing that may stand with
this estate: he accounts the Christians profession his chiefest ornament and
honor, and himself most graced when he can most glorify God therein; he is
ashamed of nothing more then of sin, They shame of nothing but of sin
and of himself, so far as he is sinful: when he remembers his own ways
he is ashamed, Ezekiel. 16.61 and 36.31.
yea loathes himself in his own sight for his iniquities. He knows nothing
to be ashamed of but sin, Which of al things is most loathsome.
which as it is most loathsome of all things, as being compared to mire, 2 Pet.
2.22.
in which the filthy swine wallowes himself, yea to the filthy and hateful
vomit of a dog; so it infects and makes abominable (where it reigns) a man's
best and most glorious actions, his very prayers, Prover. 28.9 Isai 64.6.
yea his very righteousness. Though the world highly esteem of riches, and
both account and make them honorable who are rich; yet he is taught to
account and call it (as commonly it is attained unto) filthy Lucre. Titus. 1.7.
and wanton talk wherewith many please themselves, with him, is filthy
speaking; Coloss. 3.8
yea all sins are in his account, but the (...) in dust and ashes. No, we
see it otherwise; so far are they from being ashamed of themselves and their
sins, 2 They boast of their sin.
and so far from seeking, by the righteousness of Christ, to hide and cover
their sins from God or man (unless it be to commit them closely) that, instead
thereof, they not only by all means they can, go about to lessen and
extenuate them by excuses, but plainly and openly defend them, yea, make a
trade and profession of sin; nay, moreover brag and boast of them, rejoice in
them, account them their honor and ornaments, whereby they would be
distinguished and known, 3 They seek to Grace themselves.
from all such, as of whom they account basely, in regard of their harmless
and holy life and profession. They account so highly and honorably of their
sins, and so basely of Christ, and of Religious duties, 1 With oaths, pride,
cursing. etc.
that they neither think the one worthy hyding or denying, nor the other of
professing. Such are they that (in stead of clothing themselves with Christ)
adorn, and as they wickedly think and imagine, grace their speeches with
oaths, as if they were too naked and unsavory without them; Psa. 109.18
and cloth themselves with cursing like as with a garment; with lying,
slandering and disgracing of others, whereby they seek credit to their own
persons and causes, or religion, (as is practiced by the lying Papists against
us:) and so generally with such vices, of anger, wrath, malice, blasphemy,
filthy communication. Col. 3.8.9. Psalm. 73.6
etc. as we are commanded to put off. Others cover themselves with cruelty and
violence as with a garment, and pride does compass them about as a chain or
ornament. And these are they, who, being enemies to the Cross of Christ (of
which yet Paul rejoiced) glory in their shame, Philip. 3.19 Psalm. 52.1
boast themselves in mischief, speak with delight of their covetousness,
tricks of youth, or of cosenage, of their strength to pour down strong
drink, etc. Are these men clothed with Christ, who thus cloth themselves,
and glory in their shame? no: as now they cloth themselves with cursing, Psa.
109.19.29.
so shall cursing come upon them as a garment which covers them: they shall
be clothed with shame, and cover themselves with their own confusion, as
with a mantle; they shall be clothed with shame and dishonor. Psalm. 35.26
Job. 8.22.
And though all glory not thus palpably in vice, yet many besides these, pride
themselves in vanity, 2 In the vanity of outward apparel.
that especially of outward apparel; for never regarding the nakedness of
their souls neither in a sight of the filthynesse thereof, seeking by Christ to
have it covered, they, desirous to be esteemed in the world, and knowing they
cannot so be for their virtues and graces, do therefore seek respect from
their gay clothes; like Apelles his apprentice, who in painting Helena, when
he could not make her beautiful, he set her out in golden colors and made her
rich. Of these as of the former we may well prognosticate; that continuing
without changing of this their apparel and putting on Christ, the like, or
more fearful judgment will befall them from this their clothing, which is
fabled to have befalne Hercules; who putting on the garment of Nessus the
Centaure, sent him from his wife Deianira, shortly after was so grievously
plagued and tormented that he run mad, and threw himself into a great fire
flaming out of a mountain: So etc.

But besides, 4 They glory not in Christ.
we can have no better judgment of such, as, though they glory not in open
vice or vanity, 1 They see no beauty in him.
yet are ashamed of Christ, of his Gospel, or of those that sincerely profess
the same in power. Many such there are. Those first that see no beauty, no
form nor comeliness in Christ, that he should be desired, but even as it
wear, hide their faces from him, Isai. 53.2.3
despising him and esteeming him not; are these men Christians? If they were
that in truth, which they are in name, then would they see more beauty in him,
then in the whole world besides. They would account it more honor to them to
be true Christians, then to be Kings on earth. 2 They account basely of his
servants. and of his profession.
The like question we may ask concerning such as account meanly and basely of
those that are the truest and most conscionable Christians, whose lives are
accounted madness, and both life and end, or death, to be without honor. Can
any, indeed, himself be clothed with Christ and not account such as truly so
are, to be truly honorable? is the name of Christian a credit, and is not the
thing it self an honor? the very actions, sufferings, and generally the
persons of the godly are, if not derided, yet distasted, and accounted meanly
of, how good soever they be; and men often take it as a matter of shame to
them, to use the company of such, or to converse familiarly with them; thus
David complains of himself, Psalm. 31.11
I was a reproach among all mine enemies, but especially among my neighbors,
and a fear to mine acquaintance; they that did see me without fled from me.
How is this sampled daily, when many are even afraid to have a good man in
their company, least they should be thought to be like unto him. Is this to be
a Christian, when the life of christianity is accounted a reproach? yea the
very name of Christian, with some, is a name of disgrace. It is notoriously
known, D. Fulke Rhem. Test on Acts. 11. sect. 4. out of Christoph. Franch. Col
Jesuit. in fine.

3 They are ashamed to suffer for Christ.


says Doctor Fulke, that the most honorable name of Christian is in Jtaly and
at Rome, a name of reproach, and usually abused, to signify a Fool or a Dolt.

But especially, when men are called to suffer for Christ and for his Gospel,
either for the truth or sincerity of it, how are they then shamed both of the
bonds of godly Christians, and of Christ himself. Whereas thus a man by
suffering, with, and for Christ, shows himself most of all a Christian, and
thereby is most honored, as, not only having his nakedness covered with the
merits of Christ, (which is common to all true Christians) but as being singled
out from many others, to be Christ's Champion and to witness his truth with his
blood; it is an honorable gift given of God to such, added to their faith. For
such have honor both with God, Phil. 1. last. Isai. 43.4. Heb. 11.2. 2 Cor.
6.8.
being precious in his sight and honorable, and with good men, for by their
faith and constancy they obtain a good report: passing by honor and
dishonor, by evil report and good report. The state of a Christian then,
being even at his worst, so honorable, can any be called a true Christian that
in any of the foresaid regards is ashamed of Christ? Christ has cause to be
ashamed of the best of us (though he were not, Par. 3.. 70
seeing he died for us) and shall we be ashamed of him? this shame argues such
to be none of his.

Section. 70.
The third and last effect of this our clothing by Christ, 3 The third effect
of putting on Christ is Joy.
is Joy and Comfort; so that the estate of a true Christian is a joyful and
comfortable estate, in which he more truly and sollidly rejoices, then in all
things of the world besides: the contrary whereunto being found in others, is
an argument they partake not of this clothing, and are Christians only in name.

The godly man's comfort from Christ, The righteous rejoice in Christ and his
estate is Joyful.
has bin showed largely in the Motives. We must here speak of him with
opposition to the wicked and hypocrite.

He having truly put on Christ to his iustyfication by faith, does thence find
wonderful comfort; so that his estate is an estate of joy, whether we consider
him, and it generally, or particularly in case of trouble. 1 General
First; though the men of this world think the godly estate, the only sad,
solitary, melancholicke and heavy life upon earth; yet the truth is, Joy and
sound comfort and content is no where else to be found but in that estate; and
therefore it is made proper to such as are made Righteous, by virtue of this
their clothing by Christ. Job. 29.6.
Of them it is said, The righteous do sing and rejoice, and, Psalm. 64.10.
the righteous shall be glad in the Lord, and shall trust in him; and all the
upright in heart shall glory. Psalm. 97.11.
Yea, Light is sown for the righteous, and gladness for the upright in heart.
Now, who is this righteous and upright man, but the true and sincere Christian,
and 32 1.2. Psalm. 97.12. and 31.7
whose sin is covered, unto whom the Lord imputes not iniquity, and in
whose spirit there is no guile? to them it is said, rejoice in the Lord ye
righteous: and by them it is said, who find this joy in their experience: I
will be glad and rejoice in thy mercy: and 30.11.
-- thou have girded (or clothed) me with gladness, When is this?
thou have put off my sackcloath, Lo, then how he that puts on Christ, does
also put on Joy; and how can it be otherwise? seeing by Christ he is not only
for the present possessed of Gods favor, and so of comfort and refreshing,
(for if this be the effect of the favor of a King, a mortal man, much more of
Gods) but also for time to come, Pro. 19.12. Romans 12.12 See Gatakers just man's
Joy page 5. 6. etc and page 34. 35. etc.
in an assured hope of future glory, in which he rejoices: Not but than his
Joy is often and by many occasions interrupted, (though all yet, nay, the
greatest number receive not such interruptions.) this is sometimes more to the
thinking of others, then to their feeling they rejoice not so much outwardly,
and therefore the blind world, which judges by that only which it sees,
deemeth them sad, whereas they inwardly, truly and solidly make merry. And it
is not denied but sometimes they forget themselves, and by tasting of forbidden
pleasures, How yet his Joy is interrupted some times.
they for a while lose the cast and feeling of spiritual comfort, and are
deprived of the joy of Gods salvation, till by sorrowing spiritually for such
carnal joy, it be restored to them again, as it was with David. Besides,
such joy is not attained but by sorrow, as the joy of a woman has in a
man-child, presupposes the sorrows of bearing him; and at first, the yoke of
Christ seems heavy for want of use: but one chief thing is, that they often
take not notice of their own happiness, through ignorance of their estate and
mistaking; as in the world there are many imaginary crosses, which not God, but
men make themselves, etc. yet may we not say, that in their sorrow they are
without joy; for they often sorrow for their own sins (and others also)
which sorrow may stand with sound and much inward comfort; yea occasioneth it:
they sorrow for their sins, as they ought; yet rejoice (as they may) for such
sorrow. Nay, there is no sound joy in Christians which either is not
accompanied with, or which presupposes not such sorrow. And though the godly
more then any are subject to manifold afflictions in this life, yet it must be
remembered they want not their comforts (as must further be showed) neither here
presently, nor elsewhere: and it being winter here with them in this life, Joy
(though they have it sufficiently enough to carry them through all evils of
this life with comfort, yet) is here but sown for them, their harvest comes
not till hereafter. He that shall desire the larger view of these last points,
Idem Ibid.
let him consult with the worthy Author as the reference is made in the
Margent, with who^ I have made a little bold.

On the other side, the wicked have no true joy, nor comfort, seeing they are
not clothed and kept warm and in safety by Christ: The wicked have no true Joy.
they being out of Christ, have no true Peace, without which no true Joy. Why?
Peace arises from righteousness, and Joy from Peace, and they want both: and
so wanting Christ they want the favor of God, under whose displeasure they
remain; yea, also they want the Spirit of Christ, from which as from a root
true joy buds. Job 21.12.13
And though they seem to be the only merry men on earth, yet it is only from
the teeth outward, they want not their wounds of conscience, whereof they bleed
inwardly, so that often even in the laughter the heart is sorrowful. Pro.
14.13.
What peace or joy can any man have, that has the eternal God and mighty
Jehovah his enemy, and continues in his displeasure? they seek their comforts
from earthly contents, No not in earthly things.
which all of them, without God and his favor in Christ, prove but miserable
comforters. These are comforts when we enjoy them in Christ, else not: he that
inwardly rejoices in God, may reap some good comfort from these also in God;
but none else. The clothes we wear must receive heat from the body, Gatak.
ibid. p 13. ex Plutarch.
before they can return any warmth again unto it; cast as many clothes as you
well upon a dead corpse you shall never be able to put any natural heat into
it. Yet this difference must be observed between Christ, whom we put on, and
outward apparel; that, whereas it is true which is said of our clothes for the
body; yet Christ truly put on, gives not only warmth and comfort, but life also
to our dead souls, and receives not first from us. He then that shall seek to
solace himself, and to rest in the comforts this life does afford, more then
in Christ, and in the love of God in Christ, is not only without true comfort,
but also without true life, and is but dead whilst he (so) lives.

2 Particularly.
Now particularly in case of trouble, the godly Christian wants not matter of
joy from his spiritual clothing: God being his in Christ, The estate of the
godly is joyful in Affliction.
is ever graciously present with him in trouble, by his power, if need be, to
deliver him; howseouer by his grace and spirit to strengthen and comfort him;
neither seeks he comfort from any thing else. David being to undertake a hard
encounter with Goliath, 1 Samuel 17.38.39-45
and being first armed with Saul's Armor, put it off again, and armed and
clothed himself with Armor of better proof, even the name of the Lord of
Hosts, who accordingly both safely kept him, and delivered his enemy into his
hand: thus he was kep^ from evil. See also how in trouble he armed and
comforted himself in the Lord; for when Ziklag was burnt, his wives, and goods
carried away, and himself greatly distressed, yea in danger of stoning from
them that should have bin a comfort to him; it is said, But David encouraged
(or comforted) himself in the Lord his God. 1 Samuel 30.6.
Thus he comforts himself, This Joy is from god in Christ.
even in the danger of death: and doubtless Christ, truly put on by faith,
abundantly comforts his in all their troubles: Mat. 14.36
It is said in the Gospel, that as many as touched but the hemm of his garment,
were made perfectly whole whatsoever their diseases were. If there were such
virtue and comfort to be had from his apparel, what comfort do not the Godly
find from Christ himself, who by faith they not only touch, but also cloth
themselves withal? and that in all diseases, The wicked want this comfort in
Affliction.
bodily and spiritual. Whereas in all these, unsound Christians are left naked
and destitute of al comfort, as being out of Christ: all which might here
largely and particularly be showed, both on the behalf of the godly and
wicked; (the strength and comfort of the one in trouble both Outward and
Inward, Par. 3.. 1^
and that both in regard of tentations to sin by presumption, and for sin
by despair; and the weakness and want of comfort in the other;) but that it
is partly done already above in the Motives, The spirit of Power.
and partly to be done in a Treatise apart. Let this then suffice for this
third effect, which is the third ground of trial, and of differencing the
sound for the unsound.

Section. 71.
Now the fourth and last follows, 4 Trialls of putting on Christ, from the
Means of putting him on.
which is from the Means of putting on Christ. We have heard that these means
principally are 1. A reauerent hearing of Gods Word. 2. Repentance. 3. Faith.
4. Prayer. and 5. Religions and devout Receiving of the Lords Supper, to which
we may add a frequent meditation of our covenant with God in Baptism,
whereby we labor to feel the power and effect of it more and more in our
selves. In the use of these and other means, Par. 3.. 71.
The righteous use means to put on and keep on Christ.
as mortification of the flesh, vinification, imitation of Christ, etc. the
sincere Christian, partly puts on Christ at the first, partly puts him on more
and more, after conversion, whereby he is still more closely knit and united
to Christ, and increases in all grace. And to grow in grace.
As then our garments are prepared and fitted for us by some skillful Tailor,
whose help we use, suffering him to take measure of us, and then out of whole
Cloth to cut a proportion to us what will best fit, and agree with our bodies;
even so Gods Children make use of the Ministry of Gods word, in the mouth of
his faithful Ministers, who dividing and applying the Word aright, (after they
have taken a scantling of them and found their measure by applying the Law unto
them) fit this spiritual clothing to them, or rather them to it; by which,
they (receiving the word by faith) are further built up, and by an increase of
Faith, Love, Hope and other graces, put on Christ more closely and nearly then
before. They being conscious of their own daily infirmities, and readiness to
cast off, or neglect this ttheir garment, and yet (in their judgment knowing
the worth and necessity of it) desirous still to be found in it; do accordingly
make conscience of all good means, not only, at first, to be possessed of it,
but also for ever after to be found in it, to keep it both on and undefiled, in
a word, To grow in grace, 2 Pet. 3.18.
and in the further knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to be conformed
more and more in a holy imitation of him, whereby they may futher, as they are
exhorted, Romans 13.14
put on the Lord Jesus Christ, to this end they show their constant desire of
the sincere milk of Gods word; 1 Peter 2.2
namely, that they may grow thereby: which desire of the word, as the means of
this growth, is ever accompanied with repentance and reformation of life, as in
that place of Peter, 1 Peter 2.1
with faith also, Luke 17.5.
(wherein they desire to increase) with prayer, and the use of the Lords
Supper; so that of them we may conclude, They both use means and use right
means.
that they both diligently use means, and wisely use none but good and lawful
means: so that comparing the practice of many others with them, we may
discover their hypocrisy and unsoundness, these two ways: first, by
observing their negligence or presumption, in as much as they use no means at
all, Not so the Hypocrite and wicked.
whereby they may put on Christ and grow in grace; or if they use any, then,
their folly, pride and selfe-wisedome in using means of their own devising,
not such as God has appointed.

1: 1 The godly make conscience of using means.
howsoever we cannot in Divinity firmly and affirmatively conclued that all that use the outward, means do effectually always partake of Christ and put
him on (except his spirit also effectually concur with the word:) yet
Negatiuely we may conclude from the remouall of the remoate cause to the
denial of the effect, and say, that undoubtedly (without a miraculous and
extraordinary work of God) where no means are used, there is no putting on
of Christ, no growth nor increase in grace, and so consequently no true grace
at all. Where then we see men either in and through negligence, to omit the
aforesaid means of hearing Gods word, praying publicly and privately, etc.
Or, through paid and a conceit of perfection to give them over, we may
certainly conclude (so long as they so continue) they are Hypocrites.

1 Of grace.
1. True Christians stand ever as truly affected to the means, as to the end,
even there where the means are not so grateful and pleasing to flesh and
blood: the end, if it be truly desired, does win grace and love to the
means: so that they ever make conscience of seuering those things, which God
has coupled together, the means from the end, or the end from the means. The
wicked sever the means from the end
But we see the contrary daily practiced by many; who, seuering the means
from the end, will hope for grace enough and salvation by Christ, and
protection from the wrath of God, and yet resting in their profannesse and
security, neglect to use such means, as by which they may be covered by Christ
from the wrath of God; or, it may be, And end from the means.
seuering the end from the means, will persuade themselves, all is in vain,
though they use the means never so, yet they cannot thereby be iustyfied,
there is no proportion between their pains and the reward expected, and
therefore they will do nothing at all. The former argues flat hypocrisy, the
latter, desperate disobedience.

2 True Christians, 2 Of growth in grace.
having once put on Christ, are ever after (as is said) careful in the use of
means to keep him on; and therefore they still grow in grace, and so put him
on more and more. Not but that often in their own feeling, and to their own
thinking, they stand at a stay or else go back; this is because their eye is
ever on themselves, and their growth is by insensible degrees; in which regard
(as the eye can better see other things then it self) they better discern and
judge of the growth of others in grace, Though in their own feeling some times
they grow not.
whom but now and then they look on, and after some distance of time, then of
their own, they to their own eye, (which continually looks homeward)
standing at a stay, though indeed they both grow and go on, and their growth
is apparent to the spiritual eye, How this is.
and observation of others; by the same reason, that a man looking wistly and
continually on the pointer of the Dial, or on the grass in the Spring, shall
not perceive so well the motion of the one (though it move) nor the growth of
the other (though it sprout up) as he shall do, who after some distance of
time looks upon them. He that ever has his child in his presence, does not
observe the daily growth of it, or altering of the countenance, so much as he
who after many days, or years shall behold it, to whom it will seem to be
another man, Yet they show their growth.
then formerly it was: even so is it in the growing of the new man, and in the
increase of grace. Yet the same man, who most doubts of his own growth, (being
sincere) gives evidence thereof (and may gather it to himself for his comfort)
from his true desire and endeavor after a growth; which desire of grace and of
growth being earnest, 1 by their Desires.
makes him often less sensible of it; as the covetous miser conceits himself,
to have little or no wealth, because he has not so much as he would have. So
a godly Christian does often think himself poor in grace (or it may be, to
decrease) because he has not that measure he would have. But such desires in
Gods children are arguments of sincerity, See Mr. Gatakers lust man's Joy, the
8 sign of sincerity.
and that they love grace for it self; nay, undoubtedly have that grace and
measure of grace, which they would have. It argues, they are sensible of their
wants and imperfections, which sense they could not have, without the life of
grace and faith in them. And we know it is an argument of life, and also of a
good and healthful constitution of body in young children, when they grow, yea
(though to the eye of the beholder the growth be not discernable) when they
desire in milk, and cry after the pap: so is it in such as desire the sincere
milk of the Word, that they may grow thereby. And fears.
This desire being accompanied with fear, least a man loose his garments, and
cool in love, etc. (as commonly it is in the faithful) does further assure
him of sincerity: for blessed is the man, who thus) fears always.

The godly man's endeavors, 2 By their endeavors.
also are answerable to his desires, whereby, in the use of all good means,
one as well as another he quickens, and incourageth himself to go on in the
ways of God, yea moreover, both strives against all impediments and
hindrances of his growth, as the care of the world, and covetousness,
idleness, sensuality, etc. and takes all occasions whereby he may grow, often
veiwing himself, and by examining his growth; first, 1 To weaken the power of
corruption.
in regard of the decrease of corruption, in the unregenerate part: where the
very sight and discovery of his corruption, weakness, and inabilitie, works
in him a self denial, and sends him to seek further strength and grace, in
and from Christ, by sticking closer to him, abasing him in his own sight, and
driving him from himself, from his own wisdom, ^ill, strength, love of
himself, to the word, and wisdom, will, righteousness, grace, and strength
of Christ. Thus, he never cease till, 1. sprung out, and observing such
sin, or sins, as whereunto he is most inclined, he further prosecutes the
same, and shows himself to grow wearier of it, ever watchful against self
love, and presumption. 2. Till he find lesser sins to be more burdensome then
formerly they were. And 3. till he find greater strength against stronger
temptations and corruptions. Secondly, in regard of the growth of grace in the
spiritual part; 2 To increase and grow in grace.
where he labors to find in his soul, more heavenly and holy thoughts, more
desire to the best things, more delight in them, a greater readiness to
perform all sorts of duty toward God, with more zeal, power, reverence, and
humility, sincerity, and constancy; yea, a desire and endeavor, to do and
practice more then he can; even as the poor prisoner, who having escaped out
of prison, would fly from his Iaylour, and make homewards to his friends, and
safety, much faster then his boltes or shackles will give him leave. Besides
all these, And to make use (for the bettering of themselves) of all changes.
he labors to make use and go forward, by occasion of changes and
alterations, whether particular, touching himself, or general, concerning him
with others; in the former wherefore, 1 Particular.
as in crosses by sickness, poverty, disgraces, and he labors to be more
humble and vile in his own sight, more to hate sin then the affliction (the
effect of it) more patient in bearing, etc. So, in the change to the better, as
to health, wealth, prosperity, etc. he endeavors to keep, and perform his
vows made in adversity, 2 General.
and is also enlarged unto all good duties. In the latter, as in plague,
war, death, he strives to see, and be humbled for his own sins, as by
which, Par. 3.. 70
he has helped to bring down such judgments, to commiserate the case, and
estate of Gods people his brethren, on whom the brunt of those evils lies
more then on himself; and hereupon to relieve and remember them, if not by his
charity and alms (so far as any may need it, and his ability will reach)
yet by his prayers and humiliation of himself (with fasting) whereby he may
help to stand in the gap, and appeaze Gods wrath for the remoouing of the
judgment, etc. By these and the like means, the godly Christian shows his
desire of growth, and that indeed he does grow, and so more and more cloathe
himself with Christ.

2 Hypocrites grow not better.
But on the other side, how infinitely many, having made a fair offer at Christ
and godliness, and in the use of some means, attained also to some measure of
knowledge above others, some general grace, some show of sanctity; yet take
up with themselves, and either stand at a stay (as to others they seem, whiles
indeed they go back) or at least cool in their love, zeal, and abate of
their forwardness (which was to hasty) if not quite give over, returning to
their former vomit, wearying of good duties, bolder to sin, etc. yea,
pleading for themselves, Who fall back and give over.
as if because they know that they must love God above all, and their neighbor
as themselves, Upon diverse occasions as
this is enough for them, and more then they can practice in have, this is as
much as the Preacher can tell them, 1 Athisme
and what need they hear him so often, and the like. Mal. 3.14.
Now thus it is with those, 1. who Athistically think, it is in vain to serve
God; and therefore, as formerly they served God for the things of this life,
so, missing of these to their desire, they give over their mercenary service.
2. So, 2 negligence.
many through negligence and sloth, suffer Gods graces to decay, for (...) of
watering their young plants, Par. 3. 71.
and for want of stirring up that heavenly fire. 3 Sensuality
3. Others through Sensuality are drawn back, or stayed. 4 worldlins.
4 Others by Worldliness, as Demas. 5. 5 Discouragements.
Others upon Discouragements: As first, want of success, as with Peter in his
fishing, and Jeremy in his Prophesying (though it were a weakness crosses and
oppositions for weldoing: thirdly, weariness, as is said, 6 Conceit of
Perfection.
through love of ease. 6. Some again upon a conceit, and opinion of
perfection, and that they are good enough already, as if they were come to
their rest and full stature; which many imagine in a pride and ouerweening
conceit of themselves and good parts, not knowing, or considering their
poverty, Revel. 3.17.
blindness, nakedness; others by comparing themselves with those who they
conceive (whether truly, or falsely) to be worse or more profane then
themselves.

Thus as they grow not, yea, All which, argument of spiritual life. and
indeed show no desire, or endeavor of growth; so do they manifestly make
good, that there is no spiritual life in them. Hypocrisy.
For where it is, it cannot be without growth, at least, without desire after
the means thereof; which is one principal difference between a living body,
and a dead corpse, in which last, as there is no desire of meat and
nourishment, whereby it might grow, so nothing in it (though it be the body of
one not come to its full stature and growth) nothing grows but excrements, as
nails, hair, etc. Simil.
A living child grows and increases in stature, and in all parts
proportionably, till after a few years, it come to its full stature and pitch.
But the painted image of the same child, after many years is the same, and no
bigger in any member. Simil.
Artificial hair in a Periwig, discouers it self to be borrowed, not
natural, or his who wears it, Par. 3.. 70
because it grows not. Even such painted Sepulchers and Pictures are all
Hypocrites, and such as make no progress in Gods ways. They have no grace who
think they want none for the measure of it. Thus it is with such Hypocrites,
as yet would seem to have grace. As for such who fall away to profaneness,
there needs no other discovery of them; their Apostasy is made known to all
men, and their sins go beforehand unto judgment. Hypocrites greiue not when
they are deprived of their Means.
Such Hypocrites may they also take themselves to be, who being deprived of
the means, or of opportunity and ability to do good, are rather glad that
they have such ease and freedom, and do not rather mourn and greiue for such
restraint and inabilitie. It shows little desire of grace or goodness. And
thus much of the first sort of Hypocrites, who use no means.

Now secondly of such as use not right and direct means. Par. 3. 71.
We have been told that the true True Christians use only direct and right
Means of putting on Christ.
which is especially to his Justification. Now in Justification there is
considerable. First, our union with Christ. Secondly, the covering of our
unrighteousness and sin. Thirdly, Faith, as the means on our part, of this
union, remission, righteousness and Justification.

Now the righteous man pertaking in all these benefits, In particular. 1 Of
their union with him. 2 Of covering their sin by him. 3 Of Faith in him.

has attained thereunto in the use of those only means which God himself
has appointed him to use, which means have bin named before, and repeated in
the entrance of this last point; and the truth is, Ephesians. 6.11
the clothing we have by Christ, being also Armor, it is called the armor of
God, that is, such as God himself has appointed and prescribed in his Word,
and which is agreeable to his will: It is not any humane, carnal, worldly
means, or of our own devising, but divine, spiritual, and f Gods o
appointing.

Par. 3.. 72
1 Bound Christians are truly united to Christ. 1 By Faith.
And 1. for their vnio^ with Christ, which this clothing implies, they come to
it, on their part only by Faith in Christ, and on Gods part, by his Spirit,
effectually communicated unto them, in the use of the word, unto which they
carefully and with conscience do attend; by which, when once they have put him
on and are truly united unto him, they also are further knit and united unto
him, 2 By Love.
in and by the bond of Love, loving him even because he (as their experience to
their comfort tells them) has loved them first, clothing himself with their
sin, shame, and suffering on the Cross; yea, for himself and his own
goodness and not in any, by base, or carnal respect.

They seek their union with him, first, their Vine, by being by faith graffed
into him as branches: Secondly their Head, by being made his members and one
body with him by the Spirit: Thirdly, their spiritual meat, by receiving him
spiritually in the Word, and sacramentally in the Eucharist by Faith: for so
himself says, he that (thus spiritually) eats my flesh, John 6.56.
and drinks my blood, dwells in me and J in him; but how? Ephesians. 3.17.
Christ dwells in our hearts by faith. Fourthly, their Husband, by being
married to him in faithfulness, or by Faith, which, as the marriage Ring, first
knits them together, after which, or with which, goes that other band of Love,
which daily more and more increases, as in married couples. Others in seeming
only.
Now I know Hypocrites, and such generally as live in the Church of Christ,
profess an Union with Christ, whiles they entertain his doctrine, and bear
his Name. Yea, As first the Papists.
but what is it in them which makes this Union? Is it as it should be, (and
also is in the faithful) first Faith, and then Love? no: the Papist, in this
Union and work of Iustyfication, Par. 3.. 71
will have Love, if not before, yet not behind Faith, as the form of it, or as
a concause of our Iustyfication, and not as an effect of Faith, inseparable
from it, as the truth is, and as we teach. Whereunto they bring, allege, and
abuse that place; in Jesus Christ, Galat. 5.6 Explained and vindicated from
misinterpretation.
neither circumcision avails any thing, nor uncircumcision, but Faith which
works by Love: so it does, but not in the work of Justification, but in the
exercises of Christianity; though we admit not of Jewish Ceremonies, to keep
us doing (against which the Apostle there disputes) yet we want not Love, (as
the inseparable effect of that faith which we urge as the only means of our
Justification) which will never suffer a Christian to be idle: which place, to
like purpose almost, the mad Familist abuses; 2 The Familist.
for iumbling it up with a like place, H.N. thus speaks: There avails before
God neither circumcision nor uncircumcision, but only a new Creature in Christ
Jesus wrought through the Love. This new creature, Gal. 6.15. H. N. in an
epistle to two daughters of Warwick refuted by H. A.
(in his language Christ himself) wrought and formed in us, in the Love (for
he makes Christ to be the Lovely Being in us) this new Creature, avails
before God for righteousness, and safe, -- making from our sins, as he
elsewhere speaks. Thus, what belongs indeed to Sanctification, as the fruit
and effect of our Faith, and all Scriptures tending that way, he takes and
puts in place of our Justification, as causes thereof, making this our new
birth and the fruits of faith to be the very cause of our happiness,
righreousnesse it self; yea and Christ himself: these are Christians with a
witness, making themselves, by their doctrine elsewhere, very Christ, and so
one with Christ and God, (unto which they abuse our Saviors words in his
prayer) that they will be Godded with God, Ioh. 17.21.
and made pertaker of the very essence and nature of God. Par. 3.. 72


3 The worldling.
The Worldling also, he will be one with Christ, and will be ready to sight
with him that shall say otherwise. But how is he one with him? Is it by Faith
and the Spirit? nothing less: his gold is his God, and his faith, trust, and
confidence is in uncertain riches: 1 Timothy 6.17 Jude. 19.
he is worldly and sensual, not having the spirit. He trusts God no farther
then he has from him these pawnes and pledges of his presence. Yet this man
will love God, and so show himself One with him. And will he so indeed? may it
not be truly said of many a man's love, as the Devil falsely said of Jobs fear
of God, Job. 1.9.
does Job fear God for naught? So, do these men love God for naught? What
ties them to Christ and to Christianity, and to the profession of it? Is it
indeed their covenant made with him in Baptism (by which they would be taken
to put him on?) Is it indeed true and sincere love to God in Christ, or to
Christ himself, his Truth and Gospel? not this neither. Whom temporal
respects 'ties to Christ and to his gospel.
Christ professed, brings with him often Peace and plenty; and many good things
and blessings of this life the wicked and Hypocrites enjoy here for company of
the godly, amongst whom they live; let there be a divorce once between these
and Christ, or the true Christian profession (as it often falls out and must,
that the godly may bettied and made known, and hypocrites discovered) and then
it will appear by what coards they were knitte and tied to Christ and his
truth: doubtless not by the spirit and true faith (for if by these they had
bin of the number of sound Christians, 1 Ioh. 2.19.
they would no doubt have continued with us) but only in Worldly and Temporal
respects, for peace, wealth, safety and protection; for when these cease, or
are but feared and threatened to be taken away, Par. 3.. 71
how many go out and depart from Christ and his truth, that they might be
made manifest that they were not all of us, says Saint John. This we have
lately seen in the falling away of so many to Popery, upon I know not, what
fears or hopes.

Hence a trial of our selves.
Let each of us try our selves hereby for the present; ask thine own soul
then, what is it that ties thee to Christ and Christian profession? Is it
indeed faith to God, and love to Christ? or is it not only or chiefly, because
simply thou wast borne in this (or that) Religion, because thy Parents are of
the same Religion, or the King and Prince, and that thy Religion is
countenanced by good Laws, and accompanied with peace, plenty, safety and
protection? for these doubtless, or the like to these, are the only coards
that tie many to Christ. Men making choice of their wives are sometimes more
especially and chiefly led by virtue and godliness, sometimes by wealth,
sometimes by beauty; and where all these concur in one woman, or where with
virtue there is either wealth or beauty, there doubtless virtue and godliness
will be pretended by many to lead, and to be the binder of that parties
affection to his beloved: yet it may easily be judged, upon due examination, by
himself and others, that not virtue (though it were pretended) but either
wealth or beauty was the Adamant to draw and knit the affection: for where
virtue, (though in an eminency it may be) is single in any, there she may also
remain single, (for very many;) and where the concurrence of these has bin at
the first matching, if once wealth fail, or beauty decay, virtue and religion
will scarce keep and hold peace and love in such couples, as daily experience
does confirm: even such deceitfulnes is there in our choice and love of
Religion. Par. 3.. 72


2 The godly use only lawful and good means to cover their sin.
Secondly, for the covering of unrighteousness and sin, the godly and true
Christian, knows no oother way, nor uses no other means then such as will
help to make him partaker of the only righteousness of Christ, by which his
unrighteousness may be covered in the sight of God, so that God will not
behold in him sin to punish it everlastingly: And to get it pardoned.
and therefore both for his Justification at the first, and after for the
comfortable feeling of pardon and the mercies of God, when by new sins he
has offended God, he betakes himself to a hearty confession and contrition,
and true sorrrow of soul, utterly condemning himself, renouncing his best
works, and unfeignedly craving pradon in the name of Christ his Advocate,
desiring to be found in his only righteousness, and thereby reconciled to God
again, and fenced from his wrath. 1 Ioh. 2.1 as David. Psa. 32.1-5. and 5^.1
and 143.1.2. and Dan. Chap. 9.7-16.17.
But what do hypocrites? First, the Popish sort both in their doctrine and
practice, go about this work of remission, by other means then ever God
ordained. As

First, by the mumbling over their Not so hypocrites, as 1 The Papist
in the set number of prayers, by saying over so many Aue-Maries, and so many
Pater-Nosters, even as did the Heretics, from thence called Euchetae.

Secondly, by holy Grains and hallowed by the Pope, and sent and dispersed
abroad into the Countries, so that the saluting of these has a promise of a
pardon, if not of sin, yet of the punishment of it in Purgatory for one
hundred years, if not of a plenary Indulgence.

Thirdly, the use of Holy Water, Unction or annoynting, at the hour of death.

Fourthly, the shriuing of ones self to a Popish shaueling, and the pretended
and usurped Power of Popish Absolution (as they use it) at the hour of death.

their Popish Mass, as if in it were made that most special application of
Christ's merits.

the bare and simple use of the Sacraments received without Faith, as if
remission were tied only to the work wrought. (Though we deny not that in the
right use of Baptism, Act. 2.38 and 22.16.
remission is both offered and conferred; yet we say, Baptism does it not by
any power of it own, but of the word and promise by Faith apprehended: Acts.
2.37.
and the Lords Supper presupposes remission, confers it not, where it was not
before, but confirms it where it is.)

lastly, they to this purpose insist much upon works of satisfaction partly in
this life, by vowed pilgrimages, and visiting the Tomb and Relics of this or
that Saint, by whipping of themselves, and hard usage of the body, by building
of Temples etc. Partly after by suffering the pains of their (supposed)
Purgatory, where they must satisfy for such venial sins (so they speak) as
in which they die. Against humane satisfactions.
Thus meanly do they conceive of the offense of Gods Magestie: But how
infinitely short come these works of penance and satisfaction from appeazing
the wrath of God, or from discharging our debt to God? How infinite is our
debt? namely set out by ten thousand Talents; not to be paid and discharged
though we, and all we have were sold and valued. The only way is Prayer, and
entreaty of pardon on our parts, and on Gods, it is his only compassion that
pardons us; as Christ himself showed in the Parable. Mat. 18.24 25.
To seek to other means, what is it but with Adam, to go about to cover our
spiritual nakedness with leaves? to wash off mire with mire, to quench a
great fire by heaping on more wood, in a word, to cover one sin with another,
yea with many. Or if they will pretend, as they do, that these satisfactio^s
exclude not Christ's satisfaction which is for mortal sins; besides the lie
in it (for if Christ be not a full Savior and only Savior, he is no Savior)
what is it at the best but to make a mixture of the merits of man, and humane
satisfactions with Christ, and so, instead of being clothed with the seamelesse
and undivided coat of Christ's righteousness, to put on a garment of
Linsey-Wolsey, which in the Letter was contrary to the Law, and in the mystery
and meaning, is contrary to the Gospel? What vile Hypocrites then are Papists,
and how unworthy the name of Christians? 2 Many amongst our selves.
Secondly, amongst our selves (as well as Papists) how many run contrary
courses, and take the wrong way to cover their sins?

1. Some think if they can do the works of sin in the dark, 1 Such as sin
secretly
so that no man takes notice of them, then are their sins covered
sufficiently, though to God and their own consciences they lie open and naked:
this is sottishness. What will it profit, that men see not our wickedness, when
God sees it, who will judge us for it: whereas to uncover our nakedness, and
uncase our selves to God, is the only way to have sin covered. What madness
were it in a wounded man to conceal the wound from the Surgeon; the only
way to have the disease covered, is (by showing it to the Physician) to get it
cured. Yet this being done, a man is not always bound to reveal his sin to
man, excepting in case of Gods glory. When it will be for Gods glory as in
Achans case, Josh. 7.
man must also know it: whens man's knowing of it will be to Gods dishonor,
we may and must entreat God to cover it, both with himself and with man.

2 Such as never think (or question themselves) of sin past.
2. Some think their sin sufficiently covered when, having sinned, they never
think more of their sin, never examine their consciences, never remember or
call it to mind, never further disquiet themselves with the thought of it; yea
when it offers it self to their view or memory, they by all means they can,
go about to drown all thought of it: they will not accuse themselves, or
suffer their outward peace to be interrupted, or themselves disquieted
therewith. This is searednesse, such as silence the voice of their own
consciences, and sleep securely in sin, will, when it is too late, have it
awaken, and like a mad dog (which lay at the door) rise and fly in their
faces, and at the day of Judgment manifest it self to their greater
condemnation.

3. Others not able wholly to hide their sin from man, 3 Such as would excuse
their sin with shifts.
yet by excuses and shifts, go about to extenuate and lessen it, and so far to
cover it, both from God and man, whiles (if they cannot wholly iustyfie their
actions, yet) they would excuse their worst actions, either by the corruption of
nature, or by examples of others, Ignorance, See al these at large handled by
that worthy instrument of God Dan. Dyke in his book of the Deceitfulnes of man's
heart. Chap. 12.13. etc.
Translation of the fault upon others, as the flesh, the times, their callings,
condition of life, outward occasions, the Devil, Constellations, God, their
brethren, and that from the importunity of their persuasions, commandment or
example, prouocations, discouragements, etc. and this is silliness. What more
childish? whereas if we would put off sin indeed, or have it covered, we must
agrauate it, from all circumstances against our selves, in our confession and
humiliation. This is truly Christian, and the truest Christians practice it
most. From all these try thy self; whether thou seek to cover thy sin by
Christ only, or by these means.

Par. 3.. 73
3 The true Christian seeks to come by faith, by law full and right means.
Now thirdly, for Faith: howsoever it be the means or Instrument on our part,
by which we obtain the former benefits of our union with Christ, and the
covering and pardon of our sins; yet it (being most needful in this work of
putting on Christ) is not attained without means, such as God himself has
appointed; namely the preaching and hearing of Gods word; being increased and
further strengthened from the same Word, Romans 10.17
as also from the Sacraments and Prayer. Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by
the word of God. So that it is the word of God preached and heard, which in a
settled Church and government, is of God appointed to be the means of faith.
And Gods children (if we speak, How faith is wrought in him.
not not of Children or Infants, Fools and others, who are incapable of
knowledge) come to true and saving faith in this order and manner. First, Gods
Word being faithfully taught, expouded and applied (for else man's word profits
not) is of them heard and attended unto, Ier. 23.22. and 32. Act. 16.14.
both the Law and Gospel; as in Lydia, whose heart the Lord opened that she
attended to Paul's preaching. Thus they come to knowledge and consideration of
their own wretched estate by nature through their sin Original and Actual,
and the just punishment due unto their sin; as also of Christ and the
Gospel. Isa. 53.11. Ephesians. 1.18
Hereupon both Law and Gospel are generally believed, and assented unto as
true: whereupon the heart comes somewhat to melt, and to be mollified, being
first pricked with a sense of Gods wrath due to sin; Act. 2.37.38
and then despairing of its own strength, and at a stand not knowing well what
to do; considering the promises of the Gospel and mercies of God in Christ
(who now in his Natures and Offices is known) there is begot a hope of the
possibility of pardon by Christ, Par. 3.. 72
Luke 15.18.19.
which is accompanied with an affection, Mat. 5.8. and 6.33.
an hungring and thirsting after the grace of the Gospel offered in Christ;
whence follows an approach or coming to the throne of grace; Heb. 4.16.
where is first an humble confession of sin, Luke 15.21.
with a iudgeing of a man's self: and then prayer and earnest desire of pardon;
Romans 8.26.
after which follwes a special application of the promise of salvation by
Christ unto repentant sinners and believers, Hos. 14.2.3 Mat. 15.27.28. Gal.
2.20
with a reliance and dependence thereon for salvation. Faith thus being
begotten, is continually increased by the exercise of Hearing, Reading,
Meditation, Prayer. This is the ordinary course by which the Elect come to
believe, and he that finds in himself Faith thus wrought, and the fruits of
it in the change and reformation of his life, as effects of the Ministry of
the Word, may be assured his faith is sound and good.

But now on the contrary, The faith of many discovered to be in hypocrysi.
how many plainly show themselves to have no true faith, and so consequently
to be but Christians in name only, as not putting on Christ by faith?

Ask some concerning their Faith, As being had 1 By nature or without the word.
how or when they came by it, how and when it was wrought, they will very
presently and confidently answer, they thank God, they have believed in Christ
and had a good faith to God ever since they could skill or remember; as if
indeed they had their Faith by Nature, and so brought it with them into the
world, and not by the gift of grace, whereby, in the use of means and Ministry
of the Word, Ioh. 1.12.
they receive Christ and believe in his name (which two are all one) and so
receive the privilege and power to become the sons of God. For, 1 Pet. 23-25
we are borne again, -- by the word of God, -- which by the Gospel is
preached: even of his own will, Par. 3.. 73
does he beget us by the word of truth, whilst we believe, or receive with
meekness the ingrafted word, which is able to save our souls.

What faith then can such men have, who can show no deed, no evidence, how, or
by what means they came to it? How soon and easily, may Satan lay claim to
it, and in the day of trial, bereave them of it, (which indeed they never had
more, then in conceit and presumption.) Yet my meaning is not to put this
trial, upon such strict terms, as some do, who require a man should be
able, (if he would have comfort from his faith) to name the time when, the
Sermon by which, the man and Minister, by whom he was first wrought upon, and
brought to faith.

Whether it be required a man should be able to name the time etc. of his
conversion?
I deny not but very many have this evidence, and are able so to do. And
doubtless, it is a point of great comfort for them to remember it, and, where
possibly it may be called to mind, there it is often to be thought on, and
never to be forgotten. For we know few or none, ever forget the day, year,
place, person, or Minister, when, where, and by whom they were Married; or yet
the day and place of their nativity. And even such is our estate by Faith, it
is a new Birth, and Marrying of us, at least the espousing of us, to our
husband Jesus Christ. Yet because the Lord holds not the same course with all,
for the manner of application of his mercy and grace in Christ, as this work
is not alike discerneable in all, so is it not so strictly to be urged, or
required of all, to name the aforesaid particulars precisely. Gods work of
grace is often apparent in some, who have long lived dissolutely, or without
the power of saving grace, or in a course of opposition, wherein he has met
with them by his word, as he did with Paul. Par. 3.. 72
Others he^ either sanctifies in the womb, Acts. 2, 3.4.
(and that not only to some special function, but it may be, sauingly also)
or in younger age he stils and drops his word by littles into them, who live,
and are trained up in godly families, under a godly Ministry, whereby they
have known the holy Scriptures, as did Timothy, even from a child. As
therefore, we on the one hand, are not to suffer the faith and truth we
profess, 2 Timothy 3.14 15.
to go upon that trial, which Papists would put us to, whilst they require
us to show them, when just, and at what time, their errors of Popery began,
by whom they were first broached; or else we must be in error, not they: So
on the other side, we must not simply deny the work of saving grace in us,
though we cannot always name precisely the time when, and the man by whom we
were converted: for doubtless, many are delivered from the guilt and power of
sin in a word, converted, as St. Peter was delivered out of prison; the thing
is done, and for the present, they wot not that it is true which is done, till
afterward. As therefore we must not deny an aged hoare-headed ma^s hair to
be gray or white, because neither he nor any else can tell, when just it began
so to be, or which hair grew white first; seeing the difference is apparent
enough, to such as can judge of colors; even so, in neither of the former
instances, may we deny simply, either the one to be a false faith and belief,
or the other to be a true and saving faith, for want (if such want sometimes
be) of knowledge, of the exact time, place, and person, when, and by whom they
first began, if, and so long, as either of them can be otherwise sufficiently
euidenced by the word of truth, by the dissonancy of the one from it, or by the
consonancy, and agreement of the other with it, and by experience. But, the
hypocrisy of many Christians, plainly hence appears, because, they cannot
show, and evidence either the one, or the other.

2 Without knowledge.
The like may be said of all ignorant persons, who yet will talk of their
faith. Alas, what faith without knowledge? they believe in Christ, and hope to
be saved by him, as well as any, and yet they know him not, neither his will
revealed in his word, being such as usually neglect to hear his word (whether
by Popish, or profaine Recusancy) or such as hear it negligently sleepily,
drouzily, such as for want of calling it to mind, let it slip, and quite
forget it: these men may as well believe, and persuade themselves that the
King, or some great rich man, will at the years end, give them a thousand
pounds, or lands, and living, whom yet, they never either saw, or received any
message, or word of promise from. How came these by their faith then? Not by
hearing, knowing, and remembering, but by ignorance, arrogance, and presumption.
They are borne, and live in the Church, and amongst believers, and therefore
presume to face as they do, and to speed as well as the best. Or it may be,
they in their ignorance, presume much of their wealth honors, and worldly
happiness, to think themselves as dear to God, as any.

Or hence may they be discovered; they say they have Faith, 3 Without
preparatory repentance
yet were they never truly prepared for faith, by being truly humbled in a
sight of their sin and misery, to see and feel their need of Christ, to cry
out under the burden and preasure of their sins, to cry mightily to God for
his mercy, to turn, in some purpose of heart, at least, from their former
course of life, and so, heavy laden and laboring to come to Christ.

The like is to be thought of all such as having some good knowledge of Gods
Word, 4 Without assent, love and obedience to the Word.
show no love to it, assent not to it, neither receive it with application
either of the threatenings or promises to themselves, and put nothing in
practice according to the direction of that word: which if they did, then would
they diligently sift and search themselves, fear and tremble at his word, and
cry out, men and brethren, what shall we do to be saved? they would fly from
wrath to come, and as the Chickens under the Hen for fear of the Kite, so
would they betake them to Christ, and shroud themselves under the wings of his
mercy, that they might be hid from the wrath of the Lord; then would they, as
good conuerts do, clothe themselves with Christ, whereby their sins might
be covered from his sight, and put him on by faith, that their filthy
nakedness do not appear.

And thus much also for this last point of trial, The conclusion of this
Treatise.
from the means of our putting on Christ, which was the fourth in order.

From all which differences we may observe, that every one that bears the
name of Christ, does not truly put on Christ; Showing how needful it is we
truly put on Christ.
and that in vain we glory in outward Baptism, or that simply we are borne
in the Church, and partake of the Sacraments of the same, unless also, as good
and sound Christians, we partake of the grace of the Sacraments, and of Christ
the substance of them, and of all profession, not looking for grace or
salvation from the bare signs, but from Christ, who by faith we truly put
on. Which consideration, to wit, that there are so many counterfeit, and unsound
Christians, should help to reinforce the former Motives, mentioned in the
beginning, and stir us up in the use of all good means, truly to clothe our
selves with Christ, and moreover, (that we may not deceive our selves herein)
to undertake, (upon just suspicion, and jealousy of our selves, and of the
deceitfulness of our own wicked hearts) this trial by the former notes and
signs particularly of true Christianity. To which end I have bestowed my
pains this way, both for the good of my hearers, and for the better securing
of mine own spiritual estate, and keeping of me from security. I do not
say, I my self am, as I have here described the sound Christian to be: only
this I say; either I am so, or I would very gladly be so. The Lord bless this
my endeavor, to the use of his Church. Amen. (*)

FINIS.

