THE THEATER Of Iaponia's Constancy: IN WHICH An Hundred and Eighteen Glorious
Martyrs suffered Death for Christ, in the year of our Lord 1622. ALSO A brief
Relation of the many, and wonderful Miracles, it has pleased God lately to
work, by the Merits and Intercession of S. IGNATIUS, Founder of the Society of
JESUS, at Munebrega a Town in Spain, in the Months of April and May, of the
year 1623. Both faithfully Translated out of the Spanish Originalls, lately
printed at Madrid.

printer's device of the English College at Saint-Omer, featuring the seal of
the Jesuits or Society of Jesus, a sunburst containing a cross over the
letters IHS over three nails IHS


Mirabilis Deus in Sanctis suis. Psalm. 67. Permissu Superiorum, M.DC.XXIIII.



THE THEATER OF IAPONIA'S CONSTANCY.
THE cause of the ensuing so strange and cruel Martyrdomes, such as were never
heard of in the Kingdom of Iaponia, since the Persecution against the
Christians there began, was this as follows.

Whereas the Emperor of Iaponia some years past, had forbidden, by
Proclamation throughout all the Provinces of that Kingdom, upon pain of
death, that no Sayler or Mariner should bring any Christian Religious man into
Iaponia; which was a thing very easy to be done, in regard that Manila the
chief City of the Philippine Islands is so near, and where there is so great
traffic between the Spaniards and Iaponians: Notwithstanding some there were
both Christians, and Catholic Mariners, who styrred up with zeal of Gods
Honor, not regarding the threats and penaltyes of the laws, did bring at
sundry times from Manila into Iaponia, many Religious men, in secular apparel,
to cultiuate and manure that new-planted Vineyard of this newfound
Christendom.

Amongst the said Mariners there was one more famous the^ the rest, Captain
of a ship, called Ioachim, who as he sailed from Manila toward Iaponia,
carried with him two very Reverend Religious men, the one whereof was called
Father Pedro de Zuniga of the Order of S. Austen, and the other, Father Lewis
de Flores of the Order of S. Dominicke, whom he could not transport so
secretly, but they were betrayed by certain Hollande s, who even upon the very
shore of Iaponia, invaded and robbed Ioachims ship, and also accused him
before the Emperors Officers, for bringing the said Religious men with him
into Iaponia, contrary to the Emperors Proclamation: And for this cause was
Ioachim presently cast into prison at Firandum, together with the said two
Fathers, and all the other Mariners that were Christians.

There was at that time in the same City residing another Religious man of the
order of S. Dominick who went about to deliver the foresaid Father Lewis out of
prison; which indeed he had almost effected, together with the delivery of
many more Christians that were in the same Prison; but because he could not
break open the prison doors without great noise, nor bring to pass what he
had determined, with that secrecy he desired, his plot was soon discovered,
and all the Prisoners brought back again into prison.

When the Emperor heard of this, he took the matter so heynously, and was so
enraged against the Christians, as well in regard of the new coming of those
Religious men into his Kingdom, to preach the Christian faith, as also,
because they had broken his Majesty's prison; that without delay, he commanded
the Governor of Nangasachi presently to repair to Firandum, and there put to
death first of all Ioachim the Captain, and afterward the two Religious men
that he brought with him, as also all the other Mariners, that were
Christians. Moreover he commanded, that all other Religious men, whether they
were of Europe, or of Iaponia who were imprisoned in diverse Cittyes should be
put to death. And the like punishment he charged to be inflicted upon all
Widows, and Orphans, whose Husbands, or Parents had in the former Persecution
of late years, suffered death for the faith of Christ.

The Governor with all speed, at the Emperors commaundment, came to Firandum,
where calling for the prisoners, he began to examine and ask them many
questions; as, whether they were Christians? From whence they came? Of what
Nation they were? And when, and where they were baptized? Nor he did forget,
now and then to exhort them to renounce their Faith, promising them their
lives, if they would so do; and affirming that he had full power and Commission
from the Emperor, for what he promised.

But to this last, one and the self same most constant Reply was made by all;
That nothing in the world should cause them deny their faith, nor break the
promise they had made to JESUS CHRIST in Baptism. Upon which answer and firm
resolution, the Governor presently pronounced sentence, and condemned the
Captain Ioachim, and the two Religious Fathers Pedro de Zuniga the Augustine
Friar, and Father Lewis de Flores the Dominican, to be burned alive, and the
rest of the Mariners, who were twelve in number, to be beheaded.

Now these holy Confessors of JESUS CHRIST having received this doom, the more
to increase their joy and assurance of dying for Christ's sake, demanded of the
Governor, for what cause he adjudged them to death? And they received this
answer in very plain terms: to wit, that the Religious men must dye,
because they had against the Emperors decree, entered into Iaponia to preach
the law of Christ; and the rest for that they had brought the said Preachers
into the Country to that end. Which plain declaration was an exceeding joy
and Iubily of heart unto them all, when they saw themselves condemned to death
for the faith, and love of JESUS CHRIST.

The place appointed for the execution, was out of the City of Firandum, where
there was a fair and large plot of ground, like unto an Amphitheater, all
enclosed round with wooden rayles. Hither were the holy Co^fessours brought
forth of the City, with infinite multitudes of people, and the three foremost
placed each one at a pillar, or stake, whereunto they were bound, with great
abundance of fagots, and wood laid round about them. But before the fire was
kindled, the other twelve Mariners heads were stroke^ off within the foresaid
place, before the eyes of the Holy Confessors, that stood now ready at the
stake to be burned.

Here now the good Captain Ioachim made known the force of Christian
Eloquence, being not only permitted, but also commanded by the said two
Religious Fathers his Companions (who by reason of the short time of their
abode in Iaponia, had not yet learned the language of that country) to
profess the faith of Christ in the name of all the rest. Of whom, such as did
both see and hear him, do affirm, that he seemed rather to speak like an
Apostle, then an ordinary Preacher, much less a poor Mariner; such was the
fervor, such the courage wherewith he preached JESUS CHRIST, in the very
midst of the fire and smoke. And by how much more the barbarous Gentiles
endeavored as well by often interrupting him, as by threats, to make him hold
his peace; so much the more did he cry out, and say, that it was meet he should
rather obey God then Man. Neither, can I be terrified (said he) by your
threatninges: for what more cruel, or more grievous torment can you devise,
then that which I now endure in burning here alive? And this he said out of
the midst of the burning fire, as if it had been out of a flaming pulpit,
with an admirable fervor of spirit, being indeed inflamed with the love of
JESUS CHRIST. Nor did he leave darting out such fiery words, until himself,
together with his two most blessed Companions, with wonderful constancy ended
their lives, and that in so quiet a manner, as if they had been altogether
immovable, and wrapped in heavenly contemplation.

This first Pageant was represented upon the one and twentieth day of August, in
the year of our Lord 1622. in presence of an infinite number of Christians,
who by continual acclamations and crying out, and calling upon God to assist
them, endeavored by all means possible to encourage the holy Martyrs to
suffer death patiently, for the love of JESUS CHRIST.

The Executioners, as soon as they perceived that the Martyrs were dead, went,
and exposed the heads of those which they had first stricken of, upon a very
high Table, to the greater fear, and terror of all that should behold them.
But the bodies, as well of those that were beheaded, as of those that were
burned, they laid them all upon a heap together, within the place of
execution, well guarded round about with railes of wood, as also with
soldiers, until further order were given what should be done with them.

The concourse of the people that came thither both night and day to worship
those Holy Relics, was wonderful; notwithstanding the many and grievous
blows, yea and wounds which they received of the soldiers who were commanded
there to watch, that no Christian should take away any of the same. But yet all
they could do, was not enough to prevail against the good desires of the
Christians, but that some of the more principal sort, what by their own
Industry, and what by bribing of the soldiers, with pious deceyt stole away
some of the bodies. Amongst which they had a particular care to take away the
whole body of Father Pedro de Zuniga, with intention to convey it first to the
City of Manila, and from thence to send it into Spain, where the Honor of so
worthy a death, and the ornaments of so glorious a Triumph, due not only to the
excellency of his Virtue and Piety, but also to the Nobility of his blood and
birth (his Father being Marquess of Manrique, and sometimes Viceroy of
Hispaniola, or new Spain) are expected to be celebrated with all due Reverence
and Solemnity.

The Governor of Nangasachi, after he had bestowed the crown of Martyrdom
upon these victorious Champions, sent his Officers to Omura to fetch those
other Christians, of whom we made mention before, who lay there in prison,
desiring and longing for nothing so much as to see that happy hour, wherein
they might come to shed their blood for the love of JESUS Christ.

Behold now here, I beseech you (Gentle Spectators) behold here a conflict,
nay rather an admirable Combat, and such a Combat as the like was never seen
before in all Iaponia. Five and fifty valiant Champions of JESUS Christ, upon
one and the self same day, obtained the victorious Palm of martyrdom, in
manner as follows.

Of these most happy Warryours of Christ, five and twenty were taken out of
prison at Omura, wherein, though some longer then others, yet all in general,
as young soldiers they had been trained up in this private Fencing-Schoole,
with so hard, and miserable a usage, as barbarous Heathens are accustomed to
entertain such guests withal. For, there was made under the ground, a most
horrible and filthy Cave, scarce large enough for twelve ordinary matt-beds of
bulrushes, to lie one by another. Here sometimes thirty prisoners, sometimes
more, three and three to a matte of eight palms long, and three in breadth,
were constrained to lodge both night and day, without having so much as one
foot of room more to stir up and down in: and which is more (and of it self
alone had been enough to dispatch them all in short time) in the very same
room, they were to give place unto the necessity of nature. And as for their
diet, the daily pittance allowed them, was a little dish of black Ryce, with a
few broyled Pilchards, or as it chanced now and then a suppe of broth, wherein
Radish leaves had been boiled.

In the mean time, whilst the Officers were taking these courageous Cha^pions
out of the foresaid miserable dungeon, to be conveyed to the place of
execution, the Governor called for thirty men and women also out of the prison
of Nangasachi, whom he determined to put to death together, with those that
were to come from Omura. And when he had given sentence of death against them,
commanding that the same should be put in execution the next day, he sent them
back again unto prison: who albeit they went chayned all together, like
malefactors, worthy to dye for most notorious crimes; yet they departed from
the Judgment seat with great Joy and Iubily of heart, every one holding up a
Crucifix, or other Cross in his hand, as high as he could, in sign of Triumph.

The troop of courageous Women marched first; amongst whom one more eminent,
as Captain, went before the rest, with a banner of Christ JESUS crucified
displayed in her hands. After her followed all the rest in manner of
procession, sounding forth the praises of Almighty God, with all honor, and
magnificence, and contempt of the Idols with all scorn and reproach: whereof
many of the woman lifted up in their arms toward Heaven, their little sucking
Christian Babes, as Sacrifices ready to be offered unto God together with
themselves.

After the women followed the undaunted band of me^, putting likewise
themselves in such order of processio^, that affoarded a most worthy and
pleasant show unto the eyes of God, and to all the Christians that beheld the
same; who not contented with the only beholding thereof, but inflamed with an
holy emulation of their hapines, went also in great numbers acco^panying the^,
and following their steps with great reverence and devotion.

Not long after this, entered into the City the foresaid Prisoners that were
sent for from Omura, in number five and twenty, amongst whom one and twenty
were Religious men of diverse Orders: Whom when the Christians of Nangasachi
beheld, what flocking made they (think you) to come to see, and to salute
them? Who is able to recount with what tears and sighs every one now
entertained his ghostly Father, by whom he had been baptized, and regenerated
in Christ JESUS? Who can express with what weeping and lamentation they
deplored their own most lamentable case, that these their spiritual Fathers,
Tutours, and Masters, should now be deprived of life, by whose means the life
of grace had not only been so long nourished and conserved, but even first of
all infused into their souls? In the mean time, the joyful Fathers ceased
not to comfort their afflicted children, bidding them be of good comfort; and
encouraging them to put their trust in the Fatherly protection of Almighty God;
assuring them that his Infinite Goodness would never let them want other Fathers
and Masters to nourish, and increase their good desires. And so finally
exhorting, and animating them to persevere constantly in the sincere and true
faith of JESUS Christ, even until death, they took their last farewells.

Being now come unto the place of execution, the Officers assigned every one a
pillar or stake, whereat he was to be burned; which every one of the holy
Priests, before they were bound unto them, falling down upon his knees, with
great reverence embraced, and saluted with a thousand kisses: The like also did
the lay Religious Brothers, being moved thereunto by the pious example of the
Priests. The sight whereof was a cause of great admiration to the Beholders, and
stirred up in the hearts of many so great feeling of devotion, that they could
not refrain from tears.

In this mean time, whilst those thirty prisoners, which (as before we
recounted) had been sent back with their sentence of death to the prison, in
the same City, were coming toward the same place of execution; the officers
were busied in binding to their several pillars the five and twenty before
named, all whom they bound but very loosely in order following.

Unto the four first pillars were bound four Men, condemned for no other
crime, but only because they had sometimes entertained and lodged in their
houses with great charity some of the said Religious Fathers. Next unto these
stood the one and twenty Religious men, some of Europe, and the rest of
Iaponia. The first place amongst these, was allotted to the Reverend Father
Charles Spinola, an Italian Priest of the Society of JESUS, borne in Genua, and
descended of the renowed Blood and Family of the Spinola's, greatly reverenced
and accounted of amongst all men, by reason of his Birth, but much more in
regard of his excellent Virtue, his rare parts, and singular endowme^ts both of
mind and body; as also for his excessive and continual labors and pains,
employed in cultiuating the vineyard of Christ JESUS in Iaponia, so far from
his Native Country, which he, and all the rest of those who were of Europe, had
forsaken for the love of God, to gain souls in India.

After Father Spinola, followed the Reverend Fa. Angelus Ferrerius of the order
of S. Dominicke; Fa. Joseph de S. Iacintho of the same Order; Fa. Iacinthus,
also of the same. Then followed Father Sebastian Quimura of the Society of
JESUS, a Citizen of Firandum borne in Iaponia, who had lived there thirty
years in the Society of JESUS, of which he had been Priest for the space of
twenty; being himself the first Iaponian that ever took upon him the holy
Order of Priesthood, wherein he showed himself a most worthy labourer in the
vineyard of his Country, a man endowed with singular Virtues, and an excellent
Preacher in the Iaponian language.

Then followed the Reverend Father Peter de Auila of the order of S. Francis;
Father Richard de S. Anna of the same Order; Father Alfonsus de Mena of the
order of S. Dominicke; Father Francis de Morales of the same.

They that were not Priests, were placed in this order: Vincentius, a Religious
Brother of the order of Saint Francis borne in Europe: Anthony Fugia a
Iaponian, of the Society of JESUS: Gonsaluus Fusay of the same Society and
Country: Petrus Zampo of the same both religion and Country: Michael
Iaponensis of the same Order. After these again followed four other of the
order of S. Dominicke: And last of all were brought three of the Society of
JESUS borne in Iaponia, to wit Thomas Acasgin, Ludouicus Cauarato, who were
likewise bound to their pillars, and John Chacoco, who alone amongst those five
and twenty that were condemned to the fire, for want of a pillar whereat to be
burned, was beheaded presently; and first of all obtained the crown of
Martyrdom by the sword.

So as to reckon them over again there were of secular men Four, that were
condemned for receiving of the Religious Fathers into their houses, Nine
religious men of the order of S. Dominicke, Three of Saint Francis, and Nine of
the Society of JESUS, all which being put together, do make the full number of
five and twenty Crowned-Martyrs. The Executioners had scarce made an end of
placing and binding these unto their pillars, when behold that other new troop
of thirty glorious Confessors which were condemned to be beheaded, were
brought to the same place, who as soon as they saw the religious men, they
fell suddenly to embracing, and saluting them with many tears and sighs.

Amongst the rest, a certain Matrone called Isabella Fernandez, came running
to the pillar whereunto Father Charles Spinola was bound, to give him the last
farewell. She was the wydow of a most noble Martyr who for having entertained
the said Father in his house had under gone a glorious death. She had a little
child called Ignatius, scarce five years old, whom she most dearly and
tenderly loved. When she was even now ready to lay hold upon the pillar, and
Father Charles ready to salute her, he cried out unto her, o Isabella,
Isabella, vbi est tuus Ignatiolus? vbi est? vbi est, inquam, filiolus tuus?
Where is your little Ignatius? where is, I say, your little Son? Isabella
hearing this, as she had her heart all inflamed and set on fire, and to the end
she might make answer no less by deeds, the^ by words, made no more a do,
but straight fetching forth her little One from amongst the throng of people,
took him in her arms, and lifting him up toward Heaven, presented him before
the Father, saying: Behold here (my dearest Father) behold my little Son;
behold here I bring you my little Ignatius; I offer you my little son, that
he may be sacrificed unto God, and become a martyr, together with his mother,
in this your Company.

When Father Charles saw, and heard the Mother utter such resolute speeches,
concerning her little son, it is incredible what comfort, and spiritual joy
he conceived in his soul.

Now approached the happy hour so much longed for of all this courageous
Troop: now was the fuel all set ready round about the pillars; but before the
fire was put unto it, the Executioners, with most barbarous cruelty, cut off
the heads of those thirty men and women, as also of twelve young children, the
eldest whereof was not yet full ten years old. And when it was demanded of
them, Why they beheaded these before they had burned the others, that came
first to the stake? They answered, they did it, to terrify and disanimate them,
that they might have little courage to undergo the torment of the fire. And to
the end they might better accomplish what they did pretend, they took up the
heads of those whom they had slain, yet warm, and all-imbrued with their
own innocent blood, and bowled, and tumbled them up and down before their
eyes.

But when they saw that the holy Confessors could not be daunted, or
discomfited with this, they kindled the fire. The fuel now, which on every
side environed the five and twenty Holy Martyrs, began indeed to flame, and
burn vehemently: But (as many with particular diligence observed) there was a
great space left betwixt the fire, and the Religious men; and as some, that
were more curious then others, and took the measure of it, say it was no less
then three yards distant from them on every side. And this was also done of set
purpose, that they might be tormented and consumed by little and little, with a
slow and lingering fire; and therefore the Officers were still ready at hand to
quench the flame when it burned too fast, for fear of dispatching them too
soon.

But for what end did they this? For no other surely, but that such as would
forsake their faith, and woorship their false Gods, might the more easily
escape. And for this purpose also they left their bands so slack, that they
might themselves easily untie the^, and he that would yield to the Presidents
offer before mentioned, might thereby save his life. And for the same cause
likewise they set the gate of the place of Execution wide open, that whosoever
would, might cast down his crown of Martyrdom, and escape both fire and
sword.

But there was not found one amongst all these Glorious Confessors, who did
not in the very midst of the scorching flames rejoice and triumph in our
Lord: Who did not fix his eyes upon Heaven, with all hope and confidence in
God: and who did not finally endure the burning fire with a quiet and cheerful
heart, and with his whole body so immovable, Ac si dura silex, vel stet
Marpesia cautes.
As if he had been as hard as flint,
Which Iron cannot feel;
Or harder then Marpesian rocks,
That blunt the sharpest steel.


Neither was it for any short time, that this admirable Constancy of the
valiant Champions, remained still invincible, and undaunted in the midst of
the raging flames: For there wanted not some (whose diligence is greatly to be
commended) who having of purpose brought hower-glasses with them, to note the
time, affirm, that most of these holy Martyrs endured with incredible courage
and magnanimity, this horrible torment, for the space of an hour and a half,
and some others for the space of two whole hours. Nay (which is more)
concerning the blessed Martyr F. Sebastian Quimura of the Society of JESUS,
they do constantly report, that they saw him broyling alive in the fire for the
space of three whole hours, diligently noted by the hower-glasses, to the
wonderful astonishment of the Barbarous Gentiles, who for many days after did
talk of nothing else, but of this holy Martyrs so long sufferance, and that
not without great wonder, and admiration.

One thing there was, that amongst the rest, was a chief and special cause of
the great courage and constancy of these noble Champions, I mean the so
extraordinary and great concourse of Christians that were present, which could
not choose but be so much the greater, by how much they had notice of the time
and place long before, by means as well of the Proclamation, as also in regard
of the desire they had to see so many famous Religious men, both of Europe and
Iaponia, and such venerable Priests, who had so long labored and taken pains
in the Vineyard of Iaponia, some for twenty, some for twenty five, yea and some
for whole thirty years together.

But that we may make some guess at the number of the spectatours, it will not
be amiss to call to mind what Father John Baptista de Baeza of the Society of
JESUS, Rectour of Nangasachi, who has dwelt in Iaponia now full four and
thirty years, does testify in his Letters sent from thence to Manila, that
there were to be found in that one only City of Nangasachi, and in the
Territory of the same, above fifty thousand Christians: so as there were
present an infinite number of the said Christians, to see, and with great joy
and comfort to behold, how cheerfully these holy Martyrs all ended their lives
in the midst of burning flames; and how some of them as they were most
pitifully broyling, humbly falling upon their knees, dyed most sweetly,
embracing and kissing their stakes which now together with the Martyrs, were
half consumed by the fire.

The fire was no sooner out, but the Christians instantly with great violence
brake into the place of Execution, to reverence and gather up the sacred
Relics. The Barbarous Guard began at first to oppose themselves against them,
laying about them as hard as they could with their weapons: but when they saw
they could not prevail by this means, they invented another, that thereby both
themselves might seem to depart with victory from the holy Bodies; and also
that there should not remain the least jot, or sign of the sacred Relics,
in memory of the Martyrs.

The President therefore commanded a huge deep pit to be made in the ground,
and in the same a very great fire of wood, and all the bodies of the blessed
Martyrs, together with the pillars and stakes whereunto they had been tied, to
be cast into the same, and there burnt to ashes, and lastly all the ashes very
carefully put in sackes to be carried in ships far out of the sight of
Nangasachi, and there to be scattered, and cast into the main sea.

The day next ensuing after this most illustrious Martyrdom, which was the
eleauenth of September, was beheaded M. Gaspar Cotengan-doxico, who was wont to
accompany Father Camillus Constantius of the Society of JESUS, the Apostle of
Iaponia; and who by travailing up and down diverse parts of the Country did
greatly assist him in the conversion of the Infidels. There were also beheaded
with him two children, that were the sons of Martyrs, one whereof was but
seven, the other a little above nine years old.

Another Christian also as he was gathering up some small Relics or ashes of
the sacred bodies of the burned Martyrs, which were kept with watch and ward,
within the forsaid place of Execution, was in the night apprehended, and
brought before the Governor; Who when he understood that he was a Citizen of
Omura, sent him thither presently as prisoner, where the Governor of that
City, as soon as he arrived, put both him, and all his family to death; and
so for the faith of Christ they all obtained a crown of Martyrdom.

The twelfth day of September there was at Omura a famous Martyrdom of the R.
Father Thomas de Summarega, one of the most ancient amongst those of S.
Dominick Order, that had labored in the vineyard of Iaponia; and of the R.
Father Apollinaris Franco, none of the last, or least of the Iaponian Apostles,
of the Order of S. Francis; and also of diverse other Iaponians, who were all
consumed by fire, for the faith and love of JESUS Christ. Amongst these was a
certain Woman whose admirable piety and devotion deserves everlasting memory:
for that after she had been found by the Officers amongst the sacred Relics
of the fornamed holy Martyrs, and had already given sufficient testimony, both
by praying and commending her self to their merits, what she was; being
demanded what she was doing, and whether she were a Christian, or no, answered
very courageously, that they might easily see, if they had eyes, by what she
did, that she was a Christian. And what, (said she) will you have any thing
else with me? For this her resolute answer they made no more a do, but
instantly in the same place cut off her head, and cast her body upon the heap
of the rest of the Martyrs, which together with hers, do in all make the number
of fifteen more.

Ten other holy Martyrs also, together with Augustine Onda of the Society of
JESUS, who were all companions to Father Camillus Constantius of the same
Society, were put to death at Yquinotima, a Town of Iaponia nere unto
Firandum, for the faith of Christ, being all burned alive, and consumed to
ashes.

But the happy death of Father Camillus fell upon the fifteenth day of
September at Firandum, who there obtained a Crown of Glory, ending the course
of his Martyrdom by fire: where the concourse of people was exceeding great,
by reason that there were then lying in the Haven at anchor by Firandum,
thirteen English and Holland ships well fraught with mercha^dize, and
consequently no small store of passengers, Mariners, soldiers, factours, and
the like, that came to see this said spectacle. Father Camillus was an Italian,
borne in Romagnia, who could speak the Flemish tongue well, and diverse other
languages besides. He was a man of an Apostolical spirit, of which he gave
sufficient testimony by preaching in diverse Countries, whereby he greatly moved
the peoples hearts, as well by reason of his rare Eloquence, as of the vehement
fervor of his devotion. In this Amphitheater where he was to be consumed by
fire, from out the pile of wood, as from some chair or pulpit, he made a
speech unto all the spectatours. But the Epilogue, or Conclusion thereof he
converted unto the Iaponians themselves alone, of whose customs and ceremonies
he had got no small knowledge: in which he most efficaciously proved, and
concluded, that the faith of JESUS Christ was both true, necessary, and secure.
And whilst be spoke thus, he did so ravish the Iaponians hearts with the sweet
harmony of his Eloquence, that they would not suffer the fire to be kindled so
soon, as otherwise it should have been, that they might not be so soon
deprived of that sweet fruit of his divine speech. Neither was the heat of the
fire able to overcome that heat of Charity which burned within his breast. For
even after that the wood was all set on fire round about him, he still cast out
fiery words on every side unto all the beholders, and could never make an end
of speaking, until he made an end of living.

The second day of October, Nine other noble Martyrs illustrated the City of
Nangasachi with their glorious deaths, whereof three little children died
ma^fully for the faith of Christ. But that which happened to one of the nine is
admirable to recount: For being in most cruel manner tortured for the space of
seven days upon the Rack, because he refused to betray, and discover
certain Religious men: notwithstanding all their racking, they were not able
to wrest from him any other words then Jesus Maria, O Jesus Maria! O what an
ardent and burning desire have I to enter into the Glory of my Jesus! with such
other like exclamations. So as the Executioners now perceiving on the one side,
that they labored in vain, and on the other side, being ashamed to
acknowledge themselves to be overcome by a Christian, they opened (O most
barbarous or rather inhumane cruelty!) they opened, I say, a hole in the flesh
of his shoulder, and therein poured boiling lead: Notwithstanding all this, the
valiant Champion of JESUS Christ remained still so invincible, that the
Executioners quite despayring of the victory, with all rage and fury cast him,
together withal his family, into the fire, and when there was nothing else of
them left but ashes, they gathered them up, and threw it into the sea.

The 23. of September five other Christians did consecrate their lives to God,
for having entertained and hidden in their houses, the holy Martyr, Father
Hyacinthus a Religious man of the Order of S. Dominicke, whereof three, to wit,
the husband, his wife, and their Child, were burned, and the other two beheaded.

The 27. day of May, four miles from Firandum two other Christians were put to
death for the love of JESUS Christ; the one for having lodged Father Camillus
in his house, the other for having carried him in his Bark to diverse places,
to and fro, to preach the holy Gospel of Christ.

Not long after this, happened a most rare Martyrdom of a very Venerable man
of fourscore and five years old. This man was cast headlong into the sea,
having tied unto his feet two so huge great stones, that one of them would have
been enough to load four lusty strong fellows; who instantly, and as it were
in the twinkling of an eye sunk down to the very bottom: but behold a very
strange thing, as if both he, and the two great stones also had been made of
the lightest Cork, he came gliding up again to the very top, where swimming
above the water, like the swan he began to sing before his death, and with a
most sweet and pleasant voice, he repeated thrice this mellifluous ditty Jesus
Maria, Jesus Maria, Jesus Maria, and then by the weight of the stoones being
drawn down again into the sea, never appeared more.

This Miraculous sight and Martyrdom fell upon the 2. of June, to the great
admiration of all the beholders, and particular joy and comfort of innumerable
Christians, that were present, and did see the same.

Upon the next day after, which was the 3. of June another Christian man, and
companion of Father Camillus Constantius of the Society of JESUS, was likewise
put to death, for having assisted him in Ecclesiastical functions and
ministeries. And upon the 8. day of the same Month, another also suffered
death, for the same cause.

Upon the 28, of July were three other Christians, put to death, for a very
strange cause: for that (forsooth) they would not lend their horses to carry
the holy Martyrs to execution; for indeed the Christians did piously believe,
and persuade themselves, that it was a sin for any of them, so lend his horse
to help forward the execution of so barbarous a Cruelty.

Two others also, that were Twins by birth, were put to a cruel Martyrdom,
only for animating and encouraging of other Martyrs, that were struggling hand
to hand with death in a grievous agony. And another likewise, in another place,
was crowned with Martyrdom for refusing to lend his horse to carry the Martyrs
to their death.

Neither is he to be passed over with silence, who though his Name, and the
manner of his Martyrdom in particular be not known, yet was he put to death
for the faith of Christ in the Suburbs of a little town near unto Firandum,
where certain Husbandmen have a few cottages for their habitation.

This most illustrious and glorious Combat of purpled Martyrs, died in their
own blood, shall be closed up and concluded with the death of that renowned
Apostle of JESUS Christ, the R. Father Paulus Nauarrus of the Society of JESUS,
whose memory in Iaponia will live for ever, where himself gave his life for his
flock which he had for the space of 3^ years, like a good Shepherd most
carefully fed, and amongst so many ravenous wolves most stoutly defended. He
was condemned to be burned alive for having come out of Europe into Iaponta,
against the Emperors laws, to preach the Christian faith, thereby to overthrow
the worship of their Idols, and false Gods. When he had received this sentence,
all replenished with joy and comfort, he was brought unto the stake, or pillar;
whereto after he was bound, and the fire kinded about him, he began to preach
JESUS Christ with his Apostolical spirit, and so continued even unto the last
gasp, when he rendered his blessed and pure Soul into the hands of his
Creator, and received the Crown of his glorious Martyrdom, upon the first
day of November, and feast of All Saints.

Neither did he enjoy this happy Crown alone, but had for his Companions, and
fellow soldiers in Christ JESUS, two Brothers of the same Society of JESUS, to
wit, Dennis, and Peter Sandaye: from whose company we must in no case exclude
another Christian, that was both companion and guide to Father Paulus Nauarrus,
to direct him the way up and down the country, and therefore deserved in like
manner to be made worthy of his blessed death, in requital of his kindness,
and together with him, to obtain a glorious Crown of Martyrdom.

THE CONCLUSION.
Farewell! Adieu most noble Champions! Let them who dye th^^ ^iue for ever! Let
them triumph, let the^, I say, live: let them triumph for all Eternity! Let us
rejoice! This Glorious Tragedy is ended? What applause can be sufficient for
such Noble Acts? for such admirable Scenes, as you have heard? An hundred and
eighteen most sweet Holocausts sacrificed for the love of Christ, whereof
forty and six were offered up by fire, all the rest by sword! O happy Souls!
I honor you all. I reverence your sacred Names and Memory: but especially you,
(you I mean) who being devout Religious men, and of so many Sacred Families,
to wit, of S. Augustines one, of S. Francis five, of S. Dominicks ten, and of
the Society of JESUS fourteen, have thus manured, and tilled the Iaponian
barren soil by your great labors; and carefully watered the same, with the
sweat of your dearest Blood!

Many other notable things have happened in the Martyrdom of these glorious
Saints, which we hope will very shortly come to light. In the mean time, read
here the sum of what we have received from undoubted Authority. Almighty God
in the book of life, has no doubt, made another reckoning. He has set down
the number, not only of their heads, but even of the least hayres thereof,
though now consumed to ashes. He (I say) has set them down, because he
means to crown them. We praise thee, O God, who art so glorious in thy
Saints. We beseech thee, Sweet JESUS, vouchsafe to make us partakers of so
glorious a Triumph. Amen.

GENTLE READER.
This former Relation, or brief History, was written from Nangasachi and
Firandum (two principal Cities of Iaponia, where most of the foresaid
Christians suffered death) unto Manila, the Chief City of the Philippine
Islands, by such as were present at the Martyrdoms themselves; and from thence
very authentically sent into Spain, to diverse persons there of Credit and
Authority: Where the same was first published in print at Madrid, and
afterward at Seuill, and other places; and since translated into Latin, and
printed at Bruxells in Brabant; and also into French, and printed in diverse
Cities, both of France, and the Low Countries, with license and approbation,
requisite for the Truth of so notable and remarkable an Accident.

FINIS.
S. IGNATIUS HIS TRIVMPH. OR A brief Relation of some of the many Miracles,
which God has pleased to work at Munebrega a Town belonging to the Territory
of the City of Calatayude, in the Kingdom of Arragon in Spain, by the merits
and intercession of S. IGNATIUS de Loyola, Founder of the Society of JESUS, in
the Months of April and May, of the year M.DC.XXIII.
UPON the 17. day April, in the year of our Lord 1623. which fell out to be
Monday in Easter Week, Father Valerius Piquer of the Society of IEEVS, after
he had preached the whole Lent in Munebrega, a town belonging to the Commandry
and Libertyes of Calatayude, a City of Arragon in Spain, and situate two
Leagues distant thence; proposed to the people, and desired, that a certain
Picture of S. Ignatius, which then hanged privately in the Sacristy, or Vestry
of that Church, might be more publicly exposed upon some Altar, where Masses
might be said, and the people pray, and do their devotions before it.

So just a petition being condescended unto, the Vicar, and the Clergy of that
Parish Church, with the assistance of the greater part of the Inhabitants,
Euensong being ended, after the solemnest manner they could, removed, and
placed the said picture of S. Ignatius de Loyola upon an altar dedicated to S.
Blase; and having song the Ant-Hymne, and Prayer of S. Ignatius, Father Piquer
aforesaid, made a Sermon for the space of an hour, in honor and praise of the
Saint, and therein recounted some of the Miracles, which by his intercession God
had vouchsafed to show in diverse places of Europe.

Upon this, a Virtuous and Venerable Matrone called Mary Guascon, of the age of
50. years, wife to Hierome Ladron de Gueuara, dwellers of the same town of
Munebrega, who was so lame of one leg that she could not go a step, without the
help of some other person to assist her, hearing of the miracles which the
forsaid Father had recounted in his Sermon, commended her self to S. Ignatius
in the best manner she could, imploring aid of Almighty God, through the merits
and intercession of the Saint; and suddenly feeling a heaviness to come upon
her, fell into a quiet slumber, and by and by awaking, found her self well and
sound, and the lamenesse of her Leg wholly departed from her. At which she
greatly rejoiced, and forthwith went without any help, or stay of any, toward
the Church, to give God, and S. Ignatius thanks for her delivery from that
infirmity, to the great admiration and astonishment of all that dwelled in the
town, who knew full well her long and troublesome lamenesse.

The same day, Mary Pariente wife to Alonso Buesso, who having no use at all of
her left arm, after she had sought and applied many remedies without any good
success, but rather greater harm, seeing that instead of curing her, the
Surgeons had broken the bone of her arm, and that the Physicians had now
abandoned her as one desperate and incurable: And calling to mind what had
passed with Mary Guascon aforesaid, prayed thus devoutly into the Saint: O
blessed Ignatius, if God through thy merits, would be pleased to cure me, I
would show forth his praises and thine, to my uttermost power. And even at that
instant, she felt in her left arm, a great conuulsion of the bones and
synewes, and presently after found her self well, and her arm perfectly
recovered. Wherefore with a loud voice she uttered these words, I am whole, and
cured by the favor and merits of S. Ignatius: and she stirred up and down her
arm, as if it had never been any way annoyed before.

Within a while after Mary Santijus wife to Pasqual Bueno de la Muda, who being
almost blind, and could only discern but the bulkes of bodies, without knowing
any person; coming to the Chapel where the foresaid picture was newly set
up, made her prayer, saying: O holy Ignatius obtain for me, I humbly beseech
thee, my perfect sight, if it shall please Almighty God; and I here faithfully
promise, to procure a Mass to be said at thy Altar, in sign of gratitude and
thankefulnes. At that very instant it seemed to her, that her eyes gave a turn
in her head, and she remained with a clear sight, knowing distinctly and
perfectly all that were present, and so continues still, enjoying this benefit
and favor, which God, for S. Ignatius sake, has granted unto her.

Bernardina Benedid of the age of 31. years, wife to Philip Gomez, dwelling in
Munebrega, had for the space of eight years been tormented with diverse
diseases, as having one ulcer in the liver, and another in the spleen,
together which a defluction from the Head to the Lungs; and sometimes also
there grew a kind of impostume in her stomach, which breaking made her vomit
much putrified matter, and blood; by which means she came to have so great
weakness and debility of stomach, that for six years together she could not
retain any kind of meat, but was feign presently to cast all up again; and
whenever she used any force to hold it in, it would break through her
nostrills: and in case there remained any thing behind, cleaving to some parts
of the stomach, it bred such store of blood, that necessarily she was driven
to be let blood twice or thrice every other month, for fear of being choked;
by which means also she fell many times into fits of swoundings, and at last
was brought so low and feeble that she seemed nothing else but skin and bones,
being unable either to stir her self, or suffer that others should so much
as touch her, for fear of increasing her great pains. Now by reason of these
so many and grievous indispositions of her body, the Physicians and
Surgeons, after diverse Consultations had about her, gave her over for
incurable. At which Philip Gomez her son, much grieuing and lamenting his
mothers pitiful case, told her, that he would carry her to the Church where
S. Ignatius had wrought so great miracles: and her husband being by, bid her
offer 9. Masses to be said there in his honor. She answered that, that was
even to carry her thence to her grave, by reason of her weakness. Presently
after came in Father Valerius Piquer, and said unto her: Have confidence in
God, and in his Saint: and withal gave unto her a Relic of S. Ignatius,
which she reverenced with much devotion, beseeching him to obtain health for
her at the hands of God Almighty. Upon this she fell into a swound, and
extraordinary sweat: but when she came to her self again, she cried out; I
find my self thoroughly well, let me go to the Saints Picture in the Church.
And within half an hour after (for before she could not get away from the
people which came so fast into the house to see her) she rose up from her bed
well and strong, and went alone down the stayres: but the people not
permitting her to go any further a foot, would needs carry her to the Church
door in a chair, from whence she went her self on foot to the Chapel, and
gave thanks to God, and to S. Ignatius.

And after she had ended her prayer, she returned home to her own house a
foot, and supped with the rest of her family, like unto one that was in as
perfect health as any of the rest, without changing any thing afterward of the
common diet of the house, or suffering any indisposition even unto this present
day. The next day after she went again to the Church, where she made her
Confession and received the blessed Sacrament with great devotion and
thanksgiving, still remaning in good health and perfect strength of body.

Paschalis Gabrerizo an honest poor inhabitant of Munebrega had been for the
space of 12 years diseased, and so benumbed in his feet, that he was not able
to go without one crutch at least; besides, he had no use of one of his arms,
and did almost continually suffer extreme pain of the Gout, together with a
great palpitation of the heart. He now seeing the miracles which S. Ignatius had
wrought, with desire to recover his former health, conceived great devotion to
the Saint, and having made up a Ryall in money, which he had gotten by alms of
good people, (for he was very poor) procured therewith a Mass to be said at
the Altar of S. Ignatius, whereat he was present, and devoutly recommended
himself to God and the Saint with great confidence of his recovery. The Mass
being ended, he rose up with his Crutch to go back toward his house, and at
the Church door he found himself well, and free from the lamenesse of his
legs: so as casting away his Crutch, he very nimbly and speedily went up and
down, praising God and S. Ignatius for the cure; nor was he only cured of his
feet, but also of his arm, and of the troublesome passion of his Heart. This
miracle was so public and notorious to all the town of Munebrega, that most
of the people leaving their shops and houses repaired and flocked to the Church
to admire the success; and the poor man was there found amongst them giving
thanks to God and the Saint: in whose Chapel he hanged up his Crutch for a
perpetual memory.

A little child called Mary Pardo daughter to Dominike Pardo, and Magdalene
Ximeno, dwellers of Munebrega, had some two years before fallen into the fire,
and burnt her left arm, especially about the Elbow, whereby the synewes were
dried and shrunk up in such sort, that she had no use at all of that arm.
Peter de Villar, a Religious man of S. Augustines Order, and Bachelour of
Divinity, came to the house, and anointed the child's arm with some of the
oil of the Lamp that burned before the picture of Saint Ignatius in his
Chapel; which being done and the Girl feeling her arm a little more pliable
then before, he willed her mother to annoint it daily wherewith; which as she
was doing the next day, she said: Daughter lift up thy arm; and at the instant
she heard as it were a certain rushing of the bones together, and perceived
that the arm grew somewhat greater, and amended; whereupon continuing to
anoint it, after the same manner, some two or three days more, her daughter
was perfectly cured.

Mary Corriz, wife to Pedro Bueno dwelling in the town of Munebrega, having a
foul Canker in one of her legs whereby she was in danger to have it cut off,
caused a Mass to be said at the Altar of S. Ignatius, and there annoynting the
diseased part, with the oil of his Lamp, the Canker was healed, and leaving
there behind her the Crutch which before she used, she joyfully returned home.

Mary Mun^oz wife of Michael Marina, inhabitants of Vijuesca, had one of her
Legs so dried up and consumed away, that she could not stir or move the
same. The Physicians despairing of all humane remedy, her friends would needs
convey her to Belmonte, to a famous Surgeon of that place. He looking upon,
and considering well the diseased part, said, that there was no means possible
to cure it; and that it were good she recomme^ded her self to S. Ignatius, who
wrought so many miracles at Munebrega; for other humane help she might assure
her self there was none. The good woman followed the Surgeons counsel,
and went to Munebrega to visit the Chapel of S. Ignatius, where hearing
Mass, and recommending her self with great devotion to the glorious Saint,
presently found her self free from her disease, and was able to go her journey
back on foot, to her own house at Vijuesca.

There was another woman in Munebrega, a widow and very poor, who had a
grievous soar in her right foot, and both her legs greatly swollen, which
made her perforce go with crutches. Being thus privy to her own misery and
affliction, and seeing the wonders which God did work by means of S. Ignatius,
she went to his Picture, and reco^mended her self very earnestly unto him; and
before she departed the Church, she recovered her perfect health, and left
there her Crutches, being very well able to walk home a foot. But first of all
she forgot not to render her best thanks unto God, and the Saint for so
singular a benefit.

Agnes Cauallero wife to Martin de Huerta Inhabitants of Nueualo, being blind,
in such manner as that she could not go a step without a guide, having also a
foul Canker growing over one of her lips; and hearing of the miracles which S.
Ignatius wrought, determined to go to Munebrega, to visit his Chapel, and
pray unto him for remedy of these her infirmities. She was led thither, and for
the space of 3. days made continual prayer with great devotion and confidence
in his Chapel, and annoynting her lip and eyes with the oil of the Lamp
that burned before his Altar, obtained perfect recovery both of her lip and
eyes; and ever since her eyesight has been so good, as she is able to thread
a very small needle.

Antony Franco inhabitant of Castejon upon Alarua in Castile, having been
abroad, came home to his house with a burning fever on his back, and an
impostume also, risen through heat, in his stomach, which caused him extreme
pain. The Physician came unto him, and seeing that his sickness was mortal, bad
him dispose of his soul, and temporal estate, for he could not assure him
above twelve hours of life. Now the fame of the miracles which our Lord had
wrought by the intercession of S. Ignatius in Munebrega being spread abroad far
and near, and come unto this place; the friends of the sick Patient, fomented
his stomach with some of the oil which they had gotten of the Lamp that
burned in the Chapel of the Saint at Munebrega aforesaid: and the sick man
himself, with all the rest inuocating S. Ignatius for aid with great
devotion, in a moment he felt himself fully well, and forthwith, in all
gratitude and affection, arose and went to Munebrega on pilgrimage, to give God
thanks, at the Chapel of the Saint.

Francisa Locano, wife of Dominicke Marco Inhabitant of Valtorres, who having
one of her breasts greatly swollen with two great hard bunches, which made her
often fall into a swounding; upon the fame of these miracles, resolved to
visit the Chapel of S. Ignatius and to recommend herself unto him with
great devotion, although she had received the Sacrament of Extreme Vnctio^ but
three days before. Being brought therefore to Munebrega, and recommending her
self in most devout manner unto the glorious Saint in his Chapel, presently
her breast began to sweat, with much ease of her pain, and so continuing to
visit the Chapel for 9. days together, she found, at last, her self
prefectly cured of the foresaid swellings, and the color of the sweat of her
breasts turned into the color of blood. She had endured the pain and trouble
of this disease for nine years continually; and now at last through the merits
of S. Ignatius, received perfect cure and remedy, by her prayers and devotions
of nine days, which she daily powered out before his Altar; and so came
joyfully home to her own house at Valtorres.

Matthew Pola, of the age of 20. years inhabitant of Ateca, having a
continual palsy in one of his arms and legs, being not able to move, or
serve himself with either of them in any occasion; caused himself to be
conveyed to Munebrega with great confidence to obtain remedy by the mediation
and merits of S. Ignatius. When he arrived thither, for nine days space
together, with much devotion, he determined, and began to annoint every day
his leg and arm with some of the oil of the lamp that burned before S.
Ignatius Altar; but upon the eight day he found himself sound, and so
perfectly recovered, as if he had been never troubled at al in those parts of
his body with any infirmity whatsoever.

Peter Garzia Inhabitant of Tortuera, an old man of the age of 74. years, had
so great an impediment in his tongue, that he could not scarce pronounce one
word perfectly to be understood. Hearing others make mention of the miracles
which S. Ignatius did work at Munebrega; he went thither in all last to visit
his Chapel, and recommending himself very earnestly and devoutly unto his
merits, and annoynting his tongue with the oil of the lamp aforesaid, spoke
very clearly and distinctly, and so continues to this day, through the Goodness
of God, and intercession of the Blessed Saint.

A certain woman of the City of Calatayude, having such a benumming in her
hands, that they served her to no use; and her legs also being benumbed in the
same manner, would neither bear her up, nor suffer her so much as to kneel,
did most earnestly and devoutly recommended her self to S. Ignatius at
Munebrega, and without any other remedy she recovered her entire and perfect
health.

Another woman, a wyddow of the same City, having a daughter of some 6. or 7.
years old, who by reason of a great weakness and other infirmityes in her
legs, was not able to go up or down any stayres; hearing of these miracles,
and judging that S. Ignatius liked well, that widows (according to the manner
of Spain) should live retired at home in their own houses, made this prayer
unto him, in a most effectual manner: O glorious Saint, it does not suite well
with my state of Widdowhood, to make iourneyes abroad, in the sight of many
people, no not although it be to go on pilgrimage to visit your Chapel of
Muncbrega; the power of Curing which you can do there, I doubt not, but that
you are able also to work here; and the graces and favors which you show in
that place abroad to others, you can as well show in this, to my little
daughter here at home; Let it please you then (O blessed Saint) to cure her. A
little after this her prayer, she saw her daughter going up and down the
stayres of the house so readily, as if she had never had my impediment, or
defect in her legs before.

A little son of Don John Perez of Nueros, standing by his Fathers Coach,
which was ready at the door for him to go abroad, and playing with the wheels,
the Mules upon a sudden began to run away with the Coach as being feared with
something that passed in the street; and overthrowing the boy upon the ground,
one of the wheels passed over the very middle of his face. A Gentlewoman which
saw it, cried out, and said: S. Ignatius, S. Ignatius save the Child; and even
at that very instant the Mules stopped, and stood still, and drawing away the
child, they found that he had no other harm at all, but only that the marks
of the nails were seen, which the wheels had lightly left imprinted upon his
face.

A Venerable Father of the Order of S. Francis, of the Monastery in Calatayude,
who had been lame, and gone halting a long time together, determined for remedy
thereof to go on foot, by little and little, to Munebrega, to visit the
Chapel of S. Ignatius. He was scarce gone a quarter of a league with great
pain and trouble, when he began to distrust of being able to pass any
further, and so sat himself down; and taking out his Breuiary, began to say
his Mattins in honor of S. Ignatius, which when he had done, he found himself
animated and encouraged to prosecute the rest of of his journey. Going therefore
forward, the more he went, the better he felt himself, and when he came to
Munebrega he found himself wholly cured; so as giving thanks in the Chapel
of the Saint, he returned back joyfully, and in very perfect health to his
Monastery.

At Pardos, a village of some 40. Houses, a young girl of twelve years of age,
became so stopped upon a sudden with the increase of abundance of blood in the
spring season, that within a little time she fell sick and dyed, and remained
four hours dead and cold. Her mother much afflicted therewith, recommended
her to S. Ignatius, with so great faith and perseverance, that all those four
hours she ceased not to beseech the Saint, that by his merits, he would
entreat of God, that her daughter might return to life again. S. Ignatius
hard her prayer, and the Child returning to herself, said unto her mother; O
mother, now I am well, S. Ignatius has raised me up from death, and commanded
me to present my self in his Chapel at Muncbrega; and so presently she was
carried thither, and the next day after sent into the field to keep sheep,
which she was wont to do, by reason of her poverty.

The Physician which dwells at this day in Munebrega, had an Infant some 2.
or 3. months old, that being fed with certain sops, was choked on a
sudden, and as his Father judged, and since protested stark dead, in so much
that he gave order for his burial; but the mother with more faith and
devotion, anointed her little babe with some of the oil of the lamp of S.
Ignatius, making devout supplication to the Saint for the recovery of life
again in her son, and therewith all she offered him to S. Ignatius. At that
very instant the child came again to himself, and began to cry, and by the
favor and merits of the Saint, continues still in perfect health.

This foresaid Picture of S. Ignatius, which God Almighty has made the means
of so many, and so wonderful miracles, some sixteen years since was, by Don
Rocque de Villar Chanon of Calatayude, first set up in the Sacristy, or Vestry
of the Parish Church of Munebrega, together with other Founders of Religious
Orders amongst the pictures of diverse Cardinals, Archbishops, Bishops, Masters
of the Order of Knighthood of Malta, Vicechancellours, Justices, Counselors of
Estate, Judges of his Catholic Majesty, and of other worthy and famous
Persons, which had been sometimes promoted from this place to these dignities;
and being compared with many other pictures of the same Saint, seems to
differ from them all, as showing, somewhat superior, and extraordinary, for
the majesty it carries in the Face.

Upon the first Friday, after it was placed upon the Altar, being the 21. day
of April, having been kept always before in a dry place, it began to sweat on
the right side under the arm, and so continued for the space of 4. hours;
which sweat was an extraordinary kind of liquor, much differing from water,
although it seemed so in color, as also from oil, or any other running
liquor; but it came out swelling, like certain full and thick drops; and as
fast as it was dried up, presently the same liquor began to flow out again;
all which was gathered, and drunk up with two great linen Towlls, and is yet
there kept.

Upon Friday also a fortnight after, being the 5. of May, the same sweat began
again to flow forth, for the space of two hours. Witnesses of these sweatings
were many Ecclesiastical, and Religious persons, who saw them, and the R.
Father Friar Peter Villar of the Order of S. Augustine, and Bachelour of
Divinity, did wet two handkerchers therewith, which are kept until this day.

Some few days after, a certain woman of the town of Alarua, having heard of
the miracles of S. Ignatius, out of a desire to find remedy against a dangerous
great swelling which she had in her breasts, to her extreme grief and pain;
came to Munebrega and reco^mending her self devoutly to the Saint, in his
Chapel, presently she felt certain drops of water to run down her breast,
as if it had been some sweat of that swelling, which much eased her pain, and
which began to grow less. Upon this, one of the Towells wherewith the sweat
aforesaid of the Picture had been dried up, was applied unto her breast, and the
swelling presently resolved it self into great abundance of water, and by and
by after the woman remained wholly cured.

Many other famous miracles have been wrought there, by the Merits and
Intercession of S. Ignatius, which do exceed the number of an hundred; all
which have been wrought within the space of one month, and are most notorious to
all the Inhabitants therabout. Amongst which, besides those above mentioned,
there have byne four blind restored to their sight, many Cripples, many deaf,
and many sick of diverse infirmityes perfectly cured. So that it would be over
long to recount them all here in this brief Relation, since there scarce
passes any day, wherein some one miracle or other is not wrought, and some
days three or four. Therefore it is no marvel if upon the certain fame of
so many, and continual miracles, there be so great concourse of people, from
all parts of Arragon, and other places of Spain, unto this Chapel of S.
Ignatius.

Also many Cittyes, Towns, and Villages do daily repair thither in solemn
Procession; in so much that continually the Church of Munebrega is full of
Pilgrims, some blind, some lame, some with ulcers, others with other diseases,
who daily through the merits and intercession of this glorious Saint do receive
health, and most singular favors at the hands of God. And if the Church of
Munebrega were six times larger the^ it is (and it is of a reasonable good
bigness:) yet would it be too little for all comers, who strive to be there
early in the morning, yea, and many times remain there all night, to occupy,
and prevent the getting of a good and commodious place.

Moreover, it is judged for a thing certain, that there is no one holy Place
or Pilgrimage throughout all Spain, more frequented at this day, then is the
forsaid Chapel of Saint Ignatius in Munebrega. Wherefore the said town of
Munebrega has chosen this Saint Ignatius, for their special Patron, and vowed
to celebrate his feast yearly with all solemnity possible. Also in Maluenda,
Villaroy, and other places within the Precincts, and Territoryes of Calatayude,
they have lately dedicated diverse Chappells and Altars unto S. Ignatius of
Loyola, Founder of the Society of JESUS.

That which most of all ought to be pondered, concerning this famous place of
Pilgrimage, is the great fruit, and the notable conuersions of many lost and
damnable souls, which upon this occasion has been wrought by general
Confessions; besides the wonderful changes in many from most wicked and
desperate, unto virtuous and godly lives. And without all doubt, this is that,
which principally S. Ignatius pretends by the working of so great Miracles.
For although in his life time, he always exercised himself in Corporal
works of Mercy; yet principally did he practice the Spiritual, with all
possible endeavor, as most grateful, and pleasing to the divine Goodness.

THE CONCLUSION.
This Relation has been gathered, and taken from many Examinations, and
Depositions received authentically by an Apostolical Notary, and five others
of the Kings Notaryes, in presence of the Magistrates of the Town of
Munebrega; and from the letters which the R. Father Peter Villar of the Order
of S. Augustine, and Bachelour of Divinity; Father Hierome Alagre Rector of the
College of the Society of JESUS in Calatayude; Father Valerius Piquer, and
Father Francis Perez de Culla of the same Society, and diverse others, have
testified, and authentically written to many principal Persons in Madrid:
where this present Relation was first published, and printed by Lewis Sanchez,
Printer to his Catholic Majesty, with special Privilege.

Let us then be so happy, as not to want the powerful intercession of this
Glorious Saint, to the end we may not only obtain at Gods hands, health and
Commodities of the Body; but much more the Health, Salvation, and Eternal good
of our Souls: and let us all devoutly say with Holy Church, as follows:

The Prayer of the Church, to S. Ignatius.
DEus qui glorificantes te glorificas, and in Sanctorum tuorum honoribus
honoraris; concede propitius: vt qui Sancti IGNATII Confessoris tui gloriosa
merita colimus, eius pia patrocinia sentiamus. Per Dominum nostrum Iesum
Christum filium tuum, qui tecum viuit and regnat, in vnitate Spiritus sancti
Deus. Per omnia saecula saeculorum.

IN ENGLISH.
O God, who glorifiest those that glorify thee, and art honored in the Honors
of thy Saints; Grant graciously, that we who reverence the glorious merits of
thy Confessor S. IGNATIUS, may be made partakers of his pious Patronage.
Through our Lord Jesus Christ thy Son, who lives and reigns with thee, in
unity of the Holy Ghost, one God, for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.
Laus Deo, B. Virgini Mariae, and Sancto Ignatio.

