A Defense of the Articles of the Protestants Religion, in aunsweare to a
libell lately cast abroad, entitled

Certain Articles, or forcible reasons, discovering the palpable absurdities,
and most intricate errors of the Protestants Religion.

Vt loquerentur calumniam and transgressionem, conceperunt et locuti sunt de
cord verba mendacii. Esa. 59. 13 (...). Basilius. LONDON Imprinted by John
Wolf, and are to be sold in Paul's church yard by Matthew Law, 1601.

To the Right Reverend Father in Christ, Richard, by Gods permission, Bishop of
London, my very good Lo^d.
Two venomous worms there are, which (like snakes at the Palm root) do
gaster and infect the floorishing state of a settled Church, Sacrilege and
Haeresie: which double mischief to the Church, is principally imputed to men
of the Church; ambition, basely yielding to any compact for titular
prefermentes, feeding the sacrilegious humor: factious traducing each of other
for opinions different, or rather indifferent, opening a gap for the
haereticall inchanter. This last, through the despite of Rome, transmitting her
traitorous shauelinges to seduce good subjects; disgorging loathsome
slanders, to defame our Prince and State among forreners; and principally,
dispersing their infamous libels against our religion, to make it more odious
to our domestical professors, has of late much pestered, and haunted this our
Church and Realm: the inward cause is their inueterate malice, but this
outrage in multiplying their blows thus thick and threefold (pardon, my good
Lord, if I guess amiss) is incensed by an opinion they have conceived, that
there is among us, a general declining to Popery, and the ruin beginning at
the very groundcelles of religion, our schools of learning; which, God be
thancked, stand both fast and sure, against the strongest battery of the
Romish faction, and if ever heretofore, clearly void of all her superstitious
infections: yet this hot surmise, though very vain and false, has,
notwithstanding, received the flame from a wildefire zeal of some university
men, who pronounce every position to be Popish, which is not within the verge
of their paper book common places; and wanting the Towne-clarke his discretion
Act. 19. 36, to do nothing rashly, but to refer the determination to a
lawful assembly verse. 39. proclaimed that for heresy in a solemn meeting,
which coming to a higher, and more mature examination, proved to be so far
from Popery, that it was on the contrary convinced by the writings and verdict
of the greatest authors of account among us, to be most sound doctrine and
orthodoxall. By which offensive clamor, worse then Cham his irrision, so
far carried and sorting to so small effect of truth, howsoever without
severe and condign punishment it escaped, yet surely, the whole state of this
realm, the university it self, and the particular persons thus slanderously
abused, have received a wrong scarcely expiable by the diuestiture of the
accusers from their places. The Realm, because report, which gets feathers
by flying, will sound it out in foreign parts, that our fountains are
infected; the university, in that no parent of wisdom and religion, will
send his son to a place suspected; the particular men, being iniuried in
their good name, impeached in their preferment, discouraged in their endeavors,
being as ready to confront, as willing to encounter, as able to overthrow any
Papist, as the most forward and whotspurred challengers of the opposite enraged
faction; which by your Lordship, and other of authority Ecclesiastical, being
not allayed and scattered, it is no marvel if the Papist take courage, and
like another Antaeus thus redouble his strength to the prejudice and disgrace
of this our famous Church. An instance hereof, among many other, is this small
pamphlet aunsweared by me, so commanded by his Grace, wherein the author
takes every occasion to triumph in our divisions. Which aunsweare I have
presumed to present to your Lordship, both as a testimony public of that
reverent regard, which I ever acknowledged due from my self unto you; and
principally, for that I am acquainted with that most earnest desire and care
which your L. revealed at your first inuestiture into that great dignity, to
have the common adversary every w^y answered: This if your good Lordship
accept and approve, it is the acco^plishment of mine endeavor; if not, the
second part (for this is but the first) may be imposed upon some other, who
with more opportunity for leisure, and sufficiency for learning, may
discharge it better. In the mean time I commend this to your L. favor, and
your Lordship to God his protection.

From his Graces house in Lambeth January. 11. 1601. William Barlow.

The five Articles objected concerning knowledge and faith.
1. The Protestants have no faith, nor Religion. 2. The Learned Protestants
are Infidels. 3. All Protestants ignorant of the Greek and Latin tongues are
Infidels. 4. The Protestants know not what they believe. 5. The Protestants
have no mean to determine controversies, and abolish Heresies.
In the aunsweare to them, these points are fully handled, occasioned by his
objections.
In the first, the Return of the Article in general upon the Papists.
Antiquity of our particular Church. Inuisibilitie of the true Catholic
Church. Constancy, and Diffusion In the second, the Qualities and nature of
Infidelity. Best exposition of Scripture, Public Private Authority of
Fathers. In the third, the Credit of Councels and the Church. Use of tounges.
Bibles translation. In the Fourth, the Motives to faith, not subject unto
reason. True rule of faith. Authority, of the Apostles Creed. Dignity Use
and Substance Five Articles of the Creed examined. 1. Catholic Church therein
the Definition and Description of the true Church. 2. Communion of Saints,
wherein of the Number of Sacraments. Presence in the Eucharist Invocation of
Saints. Prayer for the dead, and Purgatory. 3. Remission of sins, wherein
of Baptism. Penance. Justification by not imputing. 4. The Deity of Christ.
5. Descent into Hell. In the fifth, The fittest arbiter and judge in decision
of controversies. The differences between Protestants and Puritans. An
aunsweare to an odd extrauagant syllogism about the Certainty of Salvation.

Et me prodes, nec tibi proder is, nisi perlegas. Hieronym. To read as the
book opens casually, not from the beginning orderly, is to betray my pains,
and thy profit.

The greater faults escaped thus to be corrected.
Blunderus. lege Bunderus, page 20. marg. In quos read In quo. pa. 32. lin, 8.
maiestl^, for majesty, pa. 36. lin. 24. (...) read (...). pa. 52. lin, 9. 11,
Cor, for 1. Cor. pa. 53. marg. (...) for (...). pa. 63. lin, 2. abundance, lege
abundare. pa. 64. lin. v^t. page 67. marg. Durius for Duraeus. mendatium for
mendacium. pa. 70. lin. 10. (...) for (...). page 71. lin, 6. (...), lege
(...). pa. 72. li. 14. Ephesians. 42. lege Epistol, 42. pa. 73, marg. ius bt. foris
bu^. page 75. li. 1. guilt. for gilt. pa. 76. li. 10. Art. 4. for Art. 5. ibid.
marg. implicit, e either, for implicit, either. pa. 100. li. 13. speciallyo,
for specially, one. pa. 102. li. 24. mattere for matters. pa. 105, li, 6, any,
good for any good, pa. 133. li. 8. (...) for (...). pa. 144. lin. 6. which
concealed, read which was concealed. pa. 144, li, 6. we, with. read we, who
with, pa. 147, li. 20. erufflations, exufssations, pa. 148, lin, 2. implay, for
imply. page 165. lin. 13. (...) for (...). pa. 178. lin. vlt. (...) for (...).
pa. 181. liu. 21. Pelus. ep. 30. read ep. 299. ibid. Marg. ad Patres, lege ad
fratres. p. 182. marg. their for there. p. 184. lin. 13. (...) for (...). p.
183 li. 3. 1* Tim. 3. for 2. Tim. 3. ibid. marg. high judge, for higher, pa.
190. li. 11. thwey are no, read they are now. page 195. l* 4. division of. for
decision of p. 214. li. 22.

A Preface to the Reader, with an aunsweare of the Letter written to his friend.
IT may pass for a divine Oracle, rather then an humane sentence, which
Publius has, Publius Mim.
Veritatem nimium altercando amitti, that opposition by argument, has not
only much weakened, but utterly abandoned the truth, both for substance of
doctrine (self Gregor. Mag.
love on both parts taking scorn to yield, and so causes an opinion at first
but probably controuertible, to be in the end as an axiom mainely defensible)
and also in the manner of dispute, the opposite arguments of our modern
adversaries being not contradictions doctrinall, but personal maledictions:
Can. lib. ^
as one of their own well notes, having no care to discharge a good
conscience, without prejudice, to enquire the rectifying of their errors,
wherewith they have been deluded, but to disgorge their virulent stomachs
against the Church and profession, wherewith they are discontented: for (...)
says Thucyd. lib. 1.
Thucydides, the present state, be it never so excellent, has his
malcontents. Examples hereof none more pregnant then the Romish Clergy; and in
that rabble none more pestilent, then our homeborne fugitives; and of these the
most aspish and poysonfull, those two Runnagates with three names, Rossaeus,
Rainoldes, and Gifford: who (as if with the Plutar. Auth.
Ophigenes and Psylli, they had been fed and fostered with no aliment but
poison,) have breathed forth, their inbred malice against the heavens, and
infected the air and earth, with their pestiferous libels, (...)
(...), as Epimenides once said, the very Alters and scenes of reproachful
blasphemies, against the religion we profess, even the sincere doctrine of our
Savior Christ. As if the purport of their writings were, as (...).
Jerome speaks, Non quomodo saluentur, sed quomodo superent, not the issue of
Salvation, but the pursuit of conquest, by what means soever; Hom^r.
(...), whether the extremest tyranny, or the most spiteful suggestions,
fastening upon us, what malice could forge, or impudency outface. Yet th^se
writ in Latin, and so the learned alone, if wavering, might be perverted; if
resolute, were assaulted: but of late, a vernaculer penman, an Abyssian Locust;
to verify the Proverb in Epiphan. lib 1 and Tertullian.
Epiphanius, Aspis a vipera venenum mutuatur, having translated them into
English, abbreuiated into a portible libell, dedicated unto a namelesse
gentleman, capitulated into Articles, sorted into two heads, has scattered
them abroad in our vulgar tongue, that so the meanest idiote, carrying fire in
his bosom, and poison in his hand, might hardly escape without danger or
infection. And requesteth his friend, page ^. Epist.
That if an aunsweare be attempted, by any itching spirit, (a fit
correspondence, to such a scuruy libeller) to entreat him to perform it
briefly, orderly, and seriously. First, for the aunsweare, were it not enjoined
me, by him, who by his authority in the Church, and for some favors extended,
does command me, it had been none for me, because, if I were worthy to be
heard, the whole frame of the Articles being, Theodor*
to speak with Theodoret (...) the perturbation of an ignorant and a
distempered Apostata, neither the pamphlet should have been so straightly
suppressed, Nam perfidiam exposuisse superasse fuis^et, as Hieron.
Jerome says, the very front of the articles bringing with it the brand of
manifest confutation: nor any Apology should be shaped, holding that rule of
Contr. Ap. lib 1.
Joseph for proper and sound, (...), Ci^et orat. pro Cael.
silence is the fittest aunsweare for importunate and profuse liars. Their
impudency gayning them this Privilege, says Basil, and Tullie, not at all to
be aunsweared, because as a man cannot fasten B^sil. (...)
(...). any maine stroke and visible upon soft and yielding bodies, in that
they have no repercuss on: so is it bootelesse, and well near impossible, to
confute the manifest madness of shameless heretics (...) with any forcible
reioy^der, because they want modesty: and therefore as the Aristot.
Philosopher would not have them vouchsafed disputation, who deny principles;
no more were this masked Jesuit to be deigned an aunsweare, his articles being
naught else but abominable, and Lucianlike contumeltes. For the brevity which
he requesteth, it may soon be granted, and no other aunsweare made, but
either that which both Zach, 3. 2
Christ and the ^ud. ver 9
Archangell gave unto Satan, The Lord rebuke thee: or that of Senec^
Cato to Lentulus, dicam falli^os quite negant os habere, I will say they are
much deceived, that deny thee to have a mouth and a soul one too: or that of
the Plut. lie.
Spartans, to the Theban Orator, his tedious and bold speech, (...), if, that
is, if he think as he writes, his ignorance is desperate, if otherwise* his
conscience is feared. Yet the iudic^o^s Reader will consider, that as a Plut
mor.
wound though given in a trice with a thrust, cannot so soon be cured: A pull.
Apolog.
so a slander by an ill tongue may be quickly fastened, not so briefly
aunsweared, Act. 24.
Tertullus had soon termed S. Paul a Sectary, a seditious, and a pestilent
fellow, but the Apostle his Apology in clering him self, could not be so
succinct: notwithstanding assure thy self good Reader, that as much as I can,
I will avoid al prolixitie and perplexity, being naturally an enemy to tedious
and ambagious superfluity. As for the order it shall be that of the Terent.
Poet I prae, sequar: the very method (such as it is) which himself has used;
that as face in the water aunsweareth to face, according to Pro. 27. 19
Solomon; so every Article shall receive his several aunsweare: which, being
twelve in all, he refers to page 3. Epistol.
two heads, wit and will, faith and good life, vt vno rotatu gladii percutiat
vtrumque, Hieron.
says Ierom of such another: because, quoth this Articler heresy, inueigleth
the one with error, and seduceth the other with inordinate affections. If we
list to be curious with him, their own divines seem to say otherwise,
videlicet, Tho. Aq. 22. q. 11.
that a prinate conceit of the wit, differing from others, and pertinacy of
the will, defending the difference (both the sprouts of self love) hatcheth
and causes heresy: so that heresy is rather conceived by the wit, then the wit
deceived by heresy. And for good life, how heresies can be referred to manners,
except improperly, no divine shows: for albeit the Gal. 5. 19
Apostle numbreth among the works of the flesh, Sects and Heresies; yet
neither the word Flesh is in that place to be taken for the sensual and
brutish part of man, but for the intellectual corrupted: neither were it so,
is it a work of the flesh Tho. ^bi sup. and Alf. de cast. l. 1
in respect of the object, but of the cause, so far forth as the will
propoundes finem indebitum an undue and unlawful end, which rising from the
depra^ation of the flesh, either pride to be singular; or desire either to be
magnified, or to be enriched, or to have the lusts satisfied, Theoph. ad Rom 13
breeds an heresy, rather then is seduced by it: For carnal men given over
to their sensuality, betake themselves to some heresy in opinion, thereby to
support, or to shelter their lusts: as the Aug. Epiph.
Fathers do show in the Cerinthians, Adamites and Aerians, and experience fresh
and frequent, that the dissolutest livers among us, whom our Church and State
does vomit out for their looseness, therefore fly to Rome, being a place
exempt, and privileged with immunities for filthy wickedness: and that Royal
exchange of Indulgences, by which every sin though never so horrible, for
money may be pardoned, or tolerated, has allured more customers to Popery,
then either the pageant of their Mass, though daily acted, or the preaching of
their Friars, though persuading mightily, or their Jesuits books, though
scattered daungerously, yet upon these premises he infers a bold and
peremptory conclusion. page 3. Epistol.
I say then that no excellent good wit, linked with a religious conscience, can
either accept, or affect the Protestants new coined Gospel. Of the new coin,
anon, when we come to the trial of the min^e. Belike then as the Poet said,
Martial. Ep^g.
Nobis non licet esse tam disertis, qui musas colimus s^u^riores, all our
English professors are but blocks to Papists, and De sig. Eccles.
Bozius says so plainly: but as Zopyrus, who took upon him Plat. (...).
to be a very skillful Physiognomer, pronouncing of Socrates, whom Apolloes
oracle had adiuged the wisest man, to be but a ^ullard and heavy witted, was
laughed at by the company present, but especially by Alcybiades: so beside many
others, A^len, Apolog.
Cardinal Allen, one of as sharp insight as this Pamphleter, has long since
exibilated this rash illation; whose opinion is, with grief, that the finest
wits are ours, for which he yeeldes this reason, because the more pregnant
and sharp wits, not enduring to dig and del^e in those quarries of the
schoolmen, nor to plod at those intricate points, which are the rudiments of
Popery, adhere to us, and embrace our profession, the principles and institutes
of religion with us, being more obuious and easy. As for excellency of wit,
it is true which S. Austen says, that de ciuit. lib 4.
Ingeniosum nasci foelicitatis est, it is a singular blessing to be so endowed
by nature; because in the opinion of the Tull. Tus. quaest*
Orator, men of slow wits have seldom aspired to any great reach, or
illustrious virtue. Notwithstanding, Plut, Co^ol.
pregnant natures, are like lusty grounds, these manured by industry, prove
soundly fertile; but neglected and untilled, tarish and weedy: so those
illumined by grace, prove Theologically judicious, but left in their natural
faculties, the more sharp the more dangerous; as (...).
Basil elegantly speaks (...) the acutest calculators of Atheism and
impiety, the most subject and open to any heresy. And therefore our Savior
Christ appropriateth divine knowledge, and sound judgment in matters of faith,
not to natural apprehension, but to Math. 11. 25.
divine inspiration. But were not the comparison of wits odious in it self,
and in the Tull. ora^.
Heathens opinion over burdensome to the Reader, and among divines ridiculous
and unfit (and yet, Martial.
Qui velit ingenio cedere ra^us erit) if we should take Sophocles his course,
who being accused for a delir^ous and weake-braind Tull. de Se^ect.
man, pronounced that excellent Tragedy, entitled Oedipus Colonaeus of his
own making, and asked if that might be accounted the work of a broken wit,
or dotard; and so make a suru^ew of our men's writings, I doubt not but in the
most rigorous censure of any indifferent judge, they would, both for sharp
invention, sound judgment, sincere interpretation and forcible arguments, be
much preferred before the rude gloses of Bardocucullion Monkish Friars, and the
trumping illusions and Sophismes of the most nimbly witted Jesuits. Millions
of instances might be showed, but promising brevity, I refer thee to Eras
Eacom. stult.
Erasmus and Annot. in Aug.
Viues, only one I bring because he has made a challenge. The case is
propounded, to a good wit linked with a religious conscience in a matter of
high state, and a deep point of divinity: Whether it be lawful for a subject
to murder his Sovereign an heretic. We dullard Protestants think no,
because S. Paul has said Romans 13.
Let every soul be subject, their fine wits hold yea, because S. Paul says
Haereticum deuita, Tit. 3
id est, de vita toll. In a particular, whether Jacob Clemens the Dominican
might by authority of holy writ, kill Henry the III. of France? We blockish
witted professors are of the negative part, and suppose he should have said
with 1. Sam. 24.
David, God forbid that I should lay mine hand upon the Lords anointed. But
he in the acute excellency of his wit, linked with a religious conscience,
reasons thus with himself, Judge. 3.
Ehud killed Eglon, and therefore I may kill Henry; his ground of resolution
very witty, Eglon was a king, and so is Henry, Eglon signifies a Mer^punc;
Gallobelg.
Calue, and Henry is a Caluenist, and therefore assuredly I may murder him by
Scripture; such excellent wits and religious consciences let Rome brag of and
foster, God keep them from us; and this for his method of wit and will. The
last request he makes is, that the answer should be page 2. (...).
serious. Assuredly in conference about religion, it is no fit aunsweare for a
divine, which Plat. Pel^p.
Archias made to a messenger that came to him, with letters importing earnest
matters, and requiring serious consultation, (...) Serious matters to morrow,
let us now be merry, for a ^er* 48. 10.
curse lies upon him that deals in the Lords work negligently, much more in
jest: notwithstanding having perused this paltry pamphlet, and finding it to
be as (...). ^
Josephus said of Apion his writings (...) a very heap and misken of
shameless untruths, rather then scholar like arguments, or true
controversies, and the objections articulated (...), as Apolog*
^stine speaks, not upon mature judgment, but a passionate coffeehouse,
linked with a bad conscience, little caring, as Nazian (...).
Naz. says, (...) not what he speaks, but how much he can speak; I demurred
with my self, as (...) 2.
that learned Jew did in his grapple with that Granimarian (...) whether it
were worth the while, to deal seriously or no? Because (...) V. g
S. Jerome his r^le is, that such open blasphemies procure and deserve magis
indignationem scribentis, quam studium, rather an aunsweare with skorne, then
in earnest; or such an one as (...).
Lactantius gave Aristoxenus, nimirum manu pulsandus hic est, but I trust by
that time he has read this aunsweare, he will say there has been used
neither dalliance nor jest; unless it be such sport as 2. Sam. 2. 14.
Abner speaks of, Surgant pueri and ludant, the trial of our weapons at the
least. And this for our prolusion, now we meet; and behold an uncircumcised
tongued Goliath blaspheming the most high God.

The first Article.
The Protestants have no Faith nor Religion.

The Protestants have no faith, no hope, no charity, no repentance, no
justification, no Church, no Altar, no sacrifice, no Priest, no religion, no
Christ.

Answer.
LIngua quo vadis? If Pythagoras his (...) were to be credited, a man would
think, that either Es. 36. 7.
Rabshekah his soul had been transported into this man's body, their
blasphemy is so semblable; the one persuading the Israelites, that they had
neither right altars whereon to sacrifice, not true God whom they did worship:
and this other impudently at the first dash auowing, that our profession is
nothing else but Athe^sme and irreligion: Strabo. Herodot.
or else that he were a Lindian borne, who using to offer their sacrifices with
curses and execrable maledictions, thought their holy rites were profaned, if,
all the time of their solemnity, vel imprudenti alicui exciderit bonum verbum,
Lact. lib. 1
says Lactantius, any of them, at unawares, had cast out, or let fall a good
word. By which speech, if he touch our professors, as men living without
Faith, Hope, Charity and Repentance: or, as if there were neither Church nor
Priest, nor Christ, as it is a slander for the untruth, so is it an elench of
the accident, in disputation to reason from the doctrine to the persons: if he
mean the form and substance of the profession it self, then either is he
ignorantly blind, and so verifieth that speech of Esaias in himself, which in
the title of his book he has prefixed, Es. 59. 10
Impegimus meridie quasi in tenebris; like Seneca his blind woman, Seneca.
that said it was dark night, being a clear sunshine day, for we profess
not within the walls, but upon the house top: or else (the opinion of the
schoolmen being sound, that a contradiction of a manifest truth ex destinata
malitia contra conscientiam, Aqu.
upon prepensed malice against a man's own knowledge and conscience is that
great sin and irremissible) he is Pharisaically blasphemous: for as they
being in their minds assured that our Savior cast out Devils by the finger of
God, Math. 12.
yet, upon a fixed malice, auowed it to be coniuring, and therefore were
condemned for blasphemers of the holy Ghost: so this cursing Shemei cannot but
know that we preach Christ Esa. 7
Emanuel, Phil. 2.
God equal with his Father, Galat. 4.
incarnate of a virgin, crucified for man, Romans 10.
the perfection of the law, 1. Cor. 1
the sum of the Gospel. Faith, both assenting, with a settled belief of his
doctrine, and justifying by application of his merits. Hope, the anchor of our
confidence, in the most dangerous surges sure and steadfast. Charity the life
of both, the bond of perfection, binding us to God, making us one spirit with
him; and to our neighbor, both in affection and action, by giving and
forgiving. Repentance, (...) as Chrysostom speaks, Chrysostom. in Romans 12.
as well in the co^trition of heart, as the reformation of the mind: and so of
the rest, proportionable to scriptures. He, I say, which knowing this shall
notwithstanding thus shamelessely pronounce the contrary, condemns himself,
given over to a reprobate sense, by turning the truth of God into a lie, and
therefore not far from that unpardonable sin. Yet this must not much move
us thus to be censured, because even in the Primitive state the Christians were
so entitled by tyrants, Eccl. Histo.
(...), away with these Atheistes. Tutrecrem. vid Canu^
Yea some of the Popish Canonists have not doubted to conclude of the whole
College and company of the Apostles to be heritikes and infidels: and also
that it is an usual custom for the most guilty to be the veheme^tst
accusers, and none so ready to cry treson, 2 Reg. ^.
as Athaliah the only usurper. For this giddie Articler which cannot see wood
for trees, nor in the most glorious Church true religion, if he would but look
back into his own synagogue, might he not say as he in Plut. Plut. de
profect.
(...), is not our Church guilty of that we accuse them? Not to examine all
these particulars, how they rather have no Faith, annihilating it by merit of
work. No Hope weakening it by doubtfullnesse of salvation. No Repentance,
avoiding that by Indulgence of toleration. No Charity, especially toward
God, extinguishing that by their heap of superstitions (for perfect love
casts out fear, 1. Ioh, 4.
but where superstition is, there is fear more then servile. This being the
difference, even in the opinion of a Pagan, between an Atheist and a
superstitious man, Plutar. (...).
that the one, (...) thinks there is no God to reward virtue: the other (...)
wishes there were no God to punish sin.) No Religion, neither as it is the
true knowledge of the true God, concealing that from the meany, Genesis 26* 15.
by casing the Scriptures in a strange translation, as the Philistines stopped
^saac his wells through envy: Nor as it is the sincere worship of one God and
alone, defiling the purity, and dividing the integrity thereof, by that
latrioduliacall distinction of Idols adoration, and Saints invocation: only
let us try the last, whether it may not justly be returned upon them, that
they have No Christ, and that in his own method, which in his Epistle, he
calls Syllogisticall: the doubting whether Christ be the only Emanuel God
and man is the negative of Christ, Innoc. 3.
but their divines dispute, whether the Pope also be Simplex animal.
simplex homo a An vnpure beast
pure man, or quasi Deus participet vtramque naturam cum Christo, or as God,
participate both natures with Christ. Again, the preferring of any man before
Christ in any virtue, is to deny Christ, but they conclude the Pope to be
clementior Christo, Vid. Eras. in 1. Tim. ^.
more kind and merciful then Christ, because he never released soul out of
Purgatory, as the Pope has done many. If it be said, that these are but
Scholasticall combats for trial of wits, Basil. (...).
no positive conclusions: (and yet Saint Basil* says, that such questions
propounded even (...), for disputation sake, are blasphemies against the
spirit, and the poison of religion) you shall have a Thesis, in a comparison
between John Baptist and S. Frauncis. The impairing of Christ's dignity, in
preferring any above him, is to make no Christ; Now hear and tremble: John
Baptist received the word of repentance from the Lord Christ, but S. Frauncis
received it from the Lord also, and, quod plus est, Conform. Fran. fol. 18
a Papa, and, which is more, from the Pope. Add another between Christ and
Dominike. The dividing Christ's sovereignty with another, is to make no Christ,
for he will all or none, because both his father has given him the whole
world for his possession, Psalm. ^.
and himself challenges it, Omnis potestas mihi data. And therefore is he
called, Math. 26. Apoc. 19.
the Lord of Lords: but say they; Christ indede is Lord absolute and
authoritatiu^, Antouin. ^^st. lib. 3. tit. 23.
by absolute commission, but Dominike is Lord possessiue by actual possession:
yea, by the ingenuous confession of one of their own scholars, till the time
of Pius Quintus, Martin. de anni institut.
which is not above 50. years since, Jesus Christ had been banished out of
Rome, but that Pope the^ brought him back again. So then, to give this fellow
his shortest and best aunsweare, this position argues him to be maliciously
mad; for a man being a member of that Synagogue, thus execrably opinionated,
and knowing in his conscience the contrary to this his accusation in our
Church, both by our positions doctrinall, our profession practical, and the
worlds testimonial; thus paradoxically in the entrance of his book to
articulate, Non Sani esse hominis, no^ sanus iuret Orestes, as the Poet says,
Ieronym. aduers. to^uin.
and Jerome applies it: yet least he should seem mad without a reason, thus
he frames one.

For if they have, the^ the world was with out them for 1000. years (as they
them selves must needs confess, videlicet, All that time their Church was
eclipsed) and for 1500. as Quid ta^to dignum ^eret hic pro^^ssor hiatu? Horat.
we will prove by the testimony of all records of antiquity, as Histories,
Councels, monuments of ancient Fathers.

Aunsweare.
Dum breuis esse labor at absurdus fit. He promised us syllogismes, we will
shape one for him. If the Protestants have Faith, Hope, Religion, Christ etc.
then the world for 1000. years wanted them: but the world wanted them not,
ergo they have them not. A fish of three days keeping, and the consequent of
this Mayor may go together for stinking new: it having been a stale objection
made by Hest. 3. 6.
Haman against the Jews: by Act. 17
the Pagans against S. Paul: by Origin.
Celsus against Christ: Eusebius.
by the world against the Gospel: by Prudent.
the Tyrants against Christians: and by the whole cluster of Pseudocatholicall
scriblers against us, that our Church and profession, is but of yesterdayes
breed. But I aunsweare briefly, even as Aemilius Scaurus answered Varius his
accuser, Varius dicit, Scaurus negat, vtri creditis? They object it, we deny
it, and not deny it only, but demo^strate the contrary, that we worship the
same God, acknowledge the same Christ, profess the same faith, have the same
hope, which the Patriarchs before the Law, the Prophets under Moses, the
Apostles under our Savior, and the Primitive Christians under the Gospel,
syncerely kept and professed for 110. years after the Ascension of Christ as
Hegesippus observed, Eusebius. lib. 3
and for 600. years after him in the soundest churches were continued, and by
the learned Fathers were defended. This challenge has been sounded, the
gauntlet cast out; some one has taken it up, Virgil.
and like Virgill his wolf caudamque remulcens turned his back with disgrace:
and yet this namelesse and shameless Catholic thinks to carry it away with
an Hypotheticall proposition, in a three halfepenny pamphlet: and so he might,
if he could make that good which he says, and confirm it, first, by our own
confession, and secondly, by the testimony of all ages. For the first, let it
be supposed that we must needs confess our Church to be eclipsed: yet this
confession is their confutation. For, if our church for 1000. years was
eclipsed, then it follows, it was extant, and that we had one, though a
little one, a small flock, a few names, and this is all we desire, and that
which they so mainly deny (especially Stapleto^, Ca^pian, and Duraeus, from
whom this libeller has gleaned those handfuls of his) for as the Sun though
it be placed in a tabernacle in the heavens, Psalm 19. 4
that both the light and heat thereof, might be seen and felt over the whole
earth, yet sometimes by clouds it is enueloped, and by mists fogged* often times
by eclipses obscured, and once every 24. hours by the earthes shadow, which is
the night, abandoned; yet still as David speaks, Psalm. 19. 5
both like a Giant he continues his course and force natural; and like a
gallant bridegroom, kepes his brightness and glory, though not always
visibly, yet substantially. So Christ's church, though even from the Apostles
time, thorough the mystery of iniquity, and the mistes of impiety, and the
eclipses of Apostacy, and the darkness of ignorance, it was obscured, and as
it were, under the earth, Heb. 11.
in caves and holes, and rocks, and deserts, says the Apostle: yet still she
kept her course inuisibly, but effectually; which makes it says Austen, August.
non vt nulla sit, sed vt parum gloriosa. Not that it wanted her glory at any
time, Psalm. 87. 3
For glorious things are spoken of thee, thou City of God. But the kings
daughter being all glorious within, Psalm. 45.
it was not always aspectable to fleshly eyes. But might it please this
challenger to set down some inforcement of our confession. We say for our
Church, that is, for our profession, Eusebius. lib. 3
with Egesippus, that it remained a pure and immaculate Virgin till the
Apostles were taken from the earth, and so had still continued, if the
Suruiuers and Successors, so termed, had remembered our Saviors caveat of the
Pharisees leaven, humane inventions, or Saint Paul's premonition of aliud
Euangelium, uncertain traditions: Gal. 1.
or that council which Vegetius gives to common soldiers ne palustribus aquis
vtantur, Veger. lib. 3 cap. 2^
to keep themselves to the pure fountain of the Scriptures without blending or
corruption: and by that first church we desire to have ours examined, thinking
the nearer the purer; whereas some of them, shunning this touchstone, stick not
to say that the church, even in the Apostles time, was but rude, and unsound in
many precepts of doctrine, Bl^nder.
and, for example, one sets down an instance of Priests marriage. And for our
particular English church, as ancient every day, and as Christian every way as
the Roman, Polydor.
a primor dio Euangelii says Polidore, Faber.
and therefore by Faber, called Semen Apostolicum: being planted and watered
either by Paul the Apostle of the Gentiles, or by Joseph of Arimathea, Theodo^.
as Theodoret witnesses. And for the integrity thereof, one of their own
auerres, that from the time of Eleutherius Bishop of Rome anno 177. G^lf. Mon.
of Christ, Christianitas inter eos nunquam defecit. And least you should
think this Christianity to be the Romish Religion: first, remember the
difference of our observation of Easter from them, kept according to the
custom of the Eastern church, which for long after would not stoop any way to
the Roman Bishop: secondly, the opposition, which was made against the Monk
Austen, forced upon our land as a Legate: Platina*
and lastly, that which Platina writes, that Gregory his course, which he
took by the ministry of this his Apostle, was not fidei dogma integre
tractare, sed eius integritatem adulterare. His second presumption is, the
testimony of Histories, Fathers Councels, for 1500. years. This is but the
crack of an elder pipe: and as the poor man said of his sow when he sheard,
here is great cry and little wool: he might (affecting such brevity) have
more shortly said, we will prove it by the Pope. For they equalling the Fathers
with Scriptures, and preferring Councels before the Fathers, and amounting the
Pope above Councels (in saying that the sentence of the Pope in rebus fidei,
Naclant. Clugi.
is, penitus definitiua, but of the Councels definitionis ambulatoriae) all the
proofs he can bring, must be from the Oracle of the Popes breast: and yet there
he will fail, for even their own Popes will cross the^, Julius the Pope, for
the immersion of the bread at the Communion. Clement the Pope in the challenge
of both swords Leo the Pope for their reiteration of Masses: and Gelasius the
Pope, for their half Communion. As for antiquity, we request it our judge, so
it be that which Ignatius appealeth unto, Ignatius
(...) the antique doctrine of Christ. For histories, none rather then those
written by his finger, which is the Ancient of days. For Fathers, none sooner
then him whom Iustine calls, Dan. 79 Justin.
Patrem Patrum, that is, S. Paul. For Councels, none more earnestly the^ the
consent and sentence of the Synod of the Apostles. And let him promise us not
to deal as Apelliconis tineae with Aristotle's books, to bring us moatheaten
Fathers* and counterfaite Councels, mutilated, depraved, corrupted, falsified,
as Clement served Theodoret, and Pighius S. Austen, and the Louanistes Origin,
and their Index expurgatorius all the monumentes of antiquity, and his
challenge shall be aunsweared: but he did well to take a day, and say, we will
prove it, for hitherto as great men as he have failed in it, and till he
perform it, we will expect him. Meanewhile let him take the advice with him,
which Archidamus gave to his foole-hardie son, Archidamus.
(...), either to bring more strength, or less rage; for challenging without
valor, argues more rage, then courage. But upon these ^premisses imagined, not
proved; presumed not granted; he infers two corollaries proportionable,
first, that we countenance Iudaisme, secondly, that we induce and support
Atheism. as follows.

1 Corollar.
Whereby it plainly appears, that the Synagogue of the Jews, was more
constant in continuance, and more ample for place, then the Church of Christ
(for they have had their Synagogue visible in diverse countries ever since
Christ's death and passion, even until this day.

Answer
Iron sharpneth iron, Prou. 27. 17
says Solomon, and one absurdity draws on another. If constancy in the same
state, and visibilitie in outward appearance were the indivisible and essential
marks of Christ's Church, there might be some show of these consequentes: but
for the first, it has often been showed, that the Church is in scriptures and
Fathers resembled to the Moon: Cant. Apocal.
which, howbeit nourished with earthly vapors, is lightened from the Sun, and
the nearer the brighter; yet by the interposition of the earth, has her often
eclipses: so the Church of God for the bulk and greatness thereof, consists
of men living on earth, but illumined by the Son of righteousness shining with
his graces, sanctified by his spirit, Clem. Alex. li. 7. Strom. Bern. Cant.
sermon. ^8. Ambr. in Ephesians. 3.
and therefore by the Fathers defined Coetus fidelium and electorum, and also
confirmed in the Catechism decreed by the Council of Trent, and published by
Pius Quintus; yet the opposition of the earth, both their own earthly members,
which they carry about the^, the lusts and concupiscence which are within them,
subject the^ to many imperfections (as the Moon is never without spots) that
they cannot continue the same tenor of sanctity in the same vigor; and of
earthly men also, either the tyranny, or the superstition, or the ignorance of
the world, or some, or all, obscuring it. Constant it is, for durance, whether
we look backward or forward: Backward, having her beginning in paradise,
Iren. lib. 4. Ephesians. ^.
founded not only upon the Apostles, but the Prophets, and therefore by David
called Congregatio ab initio. Psalm 73^
For, ex quo sancti voca^tur, Augustine. Psalm. 73.
est E^clesia in terris, says S. Austen* Forward, ad consummatione^ seculi.
Matthew. 28. Matt. 28
therefore by the Prophet entitled Requies domini in sempiternum Psalm. 131.
Psalm. 131* Psalm. 80
properly resembled to a vine Psalm. 80 the more it is pruned, the further it
spreads; herein differing, because the vine if it bleed, it dies, but the
churches bleeding is her breeding: Te^tall.
Constant, for assurance both of his protection, and of her salvation, being
predestinate in Gods prescience, sealed with the indelible character of his
election Nouit Dominus qui sunt sui; 2. Tim. 2. 9.
accompanied with his graces whose gifts and calling, Romans ^1. ^9.
are without recalling; guarded by his power, Ioh. 10. 28.
for nenio rapiet eas de manibus meis; regarded by his providence stray they
may as sheep, Psalm. 119 (...).
perish they cannot; ascertained of his favor, loving them to the end, Ioh.
13. 1
whom he once begins to love; assisted by his spirit, which being semen
(...) 1. Ioh. 3. 9. 1. Ioh. 3. 9* Ioh. 1^ Romans 8. Matthew. 10.
dwells in them prays with them, pleads for them; assured of their
glory, one lincke drawing on another, Romans 8. 30
for whom he has predestinate, called, sanctified, he cannot but glorify.
This constancy of continuance by succession of time we acknowledge in the
church, it being Gods generation never failing, but not in unchangeable
success either for state or place, being a flock distressed, and dispersed
over the whole earth; sometimes so great, that we may say to it with Esaias, Esa.
54. 2.
dilata locum tentorio tuo; sometimes so small, that we may (...) with the
Apostles Domine pauci sunt qui saluantur? Luc. 13. 23.
As for V^sibilitie it is an external ornament, Symbol. Apostol.
no necessary argument of Christ's church, which we are taught to believe, not
to behold; it is Catholic, and vniuer sale intelligitur, Boethius
says Boethius, singular sentitur; the wind blows where it lists, and we
know not whence it comes, John. 3
nor whether it goes, Iren. lib. 3
but where the spirit is, there is the church: otherwise this argument would
as well befit Bethel, 1. Reg. 12
where Jeroboam his calves had more concourse, then the Templeat Jerusalem,
Act. 19. 27
and might justify the Ephesians clamor, Great is Diana of Ephesus* whom all
the world worshippeth; and serve Turkey as well as Rome, their church being as
apparent in show, as ceremonius for rites, as superstitious in devotion, as
glorious in temples, and as ancient for succession as the Romish Synagogue
(since that faithful city became an hailot) both of them beginning about the
time of Phocas anno domini 65 6. And good for the Arrians, who measured the
church by multitude, Nazianz*
not qualine, says Nazianz. But let the church speak for her self, I am
black ye daughters of Jerusalem: Cant. 1. 3.
Let S^ John describe her, Apoc. 12. 6.
a woman fled into a desert; Let stories hieroglyphically depaint her, Noas
arc, Genesis 8. 1. R^. 19* 10
Abraham's progeny, Jobs family, Eliahs complaint, Nabuchodonosers furnace,
Dan. 3. Ioh. ^0
the Apostles latent, with the doors shut, the Christians couchant, when their
lives were sought, the private Liturgy in the time of Traiane, and those
antelucani hymni, ^lin. ad (...)*
which Pliny mentions. But admit that successiue continuance, and conspicuous
amplitude, were the true notes of the church, yet neither makes this for Rome,
which has had her many eclipses. Duraeus confesses, Durae. co^^. Whi^ak.
that from the time of S. Peter, til the inuestiture of Pope Syluester, the
Bishops of that sea had no certain place of aboade, but were enforced to
perform their holy rites, in cryptis and coetibus piorum, in corners and
private assemblies of the godly* and so Ciruetus Doracensis, In expos. ^.
Missali.
that the Eucharist was offered occulte sine pompa; and before the Nicene
council the church of Rome was little regarded as Pius the second witnesses.
Pius 2.
Neither again would this Catholics argument follow, it being no sound
conclusion in Logike, to reason from a locally scited Synagogue to a church
universally diffused, that, because the Jews have had a congregation visible,
therefore it is to be preferred before Christ's church dispersed. In deed
visible it has been, but miserable; seen and scorned; acknowledged, but
detested; Orbis ludibrium and opprobrium; in so much that some stories record,
and trauailers report, that those places into which they are remaunded, carry
with the^ such a noisome and strong smell, as may be compared to the remainders
of Sodom destroyed. But have not the Protestants particular churches, been
as conspicuous as Rome it self? View Denmark, Polonia, Boeme, Russia,
Germany, Flaunders, Scotland, and principally Albion, truly (...), England I
meane^, so splendently appearing these 60. years together (only a
quinquenniall Eclyps dreadful and bloody excepted) that the glory thereof,
has enraged Satan and his accomplices with furious discontentments, the beauty
allured strangers from far, desiring to approache it, that they might say
with David Sicuti audiuimus, Psalm. 48. 8 and ver 7.
Sic vidimus, and we with him, Sic videntes admirati sunt: and yet still he
goes on.

Which is the only path to lead men into Atheism, 2 Corollar.
as though Christ were not as yet come into the world, whose (...)
admirable promises, are not accomplished, Math. 16, ^8.
whose assistance has failed in preseruinge his church, unto the worlds end,
Math. (...). 20.
whose presence was absent many years before the final consummation, and
consequently they open the gap to al Machiuellians, who say that our Savior
was one of the deceivers of the world, promising so much concerning his Church,
and performing so little.

Answer.
-- Cytharoedus
Ridiculus, chorda qui semper oberrat eadem. Hora^iu^

Where a man makes his shadow his combatant, or appoints his enemy his
weapon, the victory is easy; still he supposes that weegraunt, the church
must be visible, or else this his second Corollary must be true, wherein he
would conclude, that the inuisibilitie of Christ's church is the gap to
Athe^sme, 1. denying the certainetie of Christ's first coming, 2. the
accomplishment of his promises, 3. the assistance of his protection, 4. the
presence of his power. The contrary were true. Fortake the proportion of the
body by the head, his first aduent being altogether in obscurity, Lu^. ^.
his conception revealed only to his mother, his birth made known to a few
shepeheardes, Luc* ^.
his lodging allotted in a cratch; in account so base, Bernard*
that he was reputed, as Bernard speaks, pro despicatissimo vernaculo, immo
vermiculo, his inward glory so great, that the prophecy was verified
Speciosus prae filiis hominu^; Psalm. 45. (...). 53
in outward show so mean, that Esaias his description was fullfilled, In quos
nec species, nec decor: (which was the Jews stumbling block, who admitted no
good out of Galilee and Nazareth; John 1.
and the disciples scandal, who still expected his Imperial Diadem) so his
body the Church, begun in a few, not known to the world, or if known,
persecuted, even as her head Christ, Bern. set 1 de adu^^.
quem viderunt and oderunt: His second coming shall be maiesticall, and the
church triumphant, shall be conspicuous: therefore this argument inuerted, is the
sounder, videlicet, The state of the body being proportionable to the
apparition of the head, ascertayneth to the world his first coming: but the
inuisibilitie of the Church militant on earth, is proportionable to Christ his
personal appearance in his first aduent; ergo it ascertaineth that he is
already come. So for the second, scilicet, The accomplishment of his promises.
2.
The more ^ Catholic the church, the more those promises by Christ warranted,
by Esaias prophesied, Es. 60. 11.
by this Pamphleter alleged, are in truth accomplished, and our new
Romani^^es dealing with the church, as the old Romans with their Goddess
Victoria, clipping her wings* and chayning her to Rome do both fa^sifie the
Prophet; prediction, and p^nion too straightly the large dona^ue of Christ.
The prophecy was, That the church gate should be open continually, that the
riches of the Gentiles, and their kings might be brought in, and the nations
standing out should perish. Therefore to restrain this universal subjection
to Iewry alone, as the Apostles once ignorantly supposed, Act. 10. 28
and the Jews afterward arrogantly contended; Cap. 11. 2
or to Rome, which all her champions have so challenged, were to abridge most
presumptuously, those bountiful promises which David prophesied, that Egypt,
Psalm. 87. 4.
Babylon, Tire, Aethiope, and Palestina, should be borne in her and to her; and
that redemption, Apoc. 5. 9
which the Elders confessed with joy, out of every tribe, nation, and kingdom:
for the church is not gathered ex vna gente, Au* ^erm. (...). 23
sed ex vniuersis mundi partibus reges paritura says Austen not of one people,
but of all the parts of the world, bringing forth kings, which should be, Es.
4^. 23.
as Esaias prophesied, Foster Fathers, and Queens to be nursing mothers to the
church; preresembled in those three kings or sages, which came from far, to
do personal homage unto her head, and king at Bethleem; Matthew. 2
and long before that, in S. Austens opinion, August. yb^sup.
prefigured in the Queen of Saba, her long journey to Solomon. And albeit in
the primitive nonage of the church, this promise of kings allegiaunce
thereunto, was not so fully accomplished, because in those days, that
prophecy of our Savior, was rather verified, Mat. 10. 18.
You shall be brought before kings for my names sake, Ioh. 16
by them to be persecuted even to death; The best of the kings, for a long
time, reaching but to king Agrippa ^ct. ^6. 28*
his (...) a slender inclination to religion,. Po^yd. l^b. 2
And the first^king christened that ever we read of, Lucius the k. of England^
which was 180. years after Christ; and Alexander Seuerus the I. Emperor,
Lamprid.
qui been de Christianis sentire coepit, which was 230. years after; yet both
before that time, was the promise, by Esaias prophesied, accomplished in the
gathering of the Gentiles; and in process of time, the number so incresed,
though still invisibly, that as her love said in the Canticles, Cant. 6. 7
There are threescore Queens and fourscore Concubines, and of the daughters
without number. As for those homages, or rather base vassalages of Emperors
and kings, and that much bragd of donation, which Pipine king of France, gave
to Steven the 2. and his successors, in lieu of the Pope his absoluing this
rebel from his loyal allegiance to his lawful prince, (falsely entitled
Constantines donation) are nothing within the circuit of Esaias his prophecy,
alleged by this libeller; but rather which S. John foresaw, Apoc. 17. 2.
and revealed, that the kings of the earth should commit fornication with the
strumpet of Babylon.

The two last are easily reioyned, for the Spirit of God, which is Christ his
viceroy he^e on earth, ^. 4.
both for his preserving assistaunce, and powerful presence, as he is called
the Holy ghost, sanctifying the elect in their hearts and actions; and a Doctor
informing their minds; (...) 14*
and a Pledge assuring their consciences against the day of Redemption; (...)
so is he principally called the Pa^aclete or Comforter, both assisting the^ in
their troubles, and comforting them in their afflictions: so that, if this were
the eu^dent mark, and continual state of Christ's church to be outwardly
glorious, what need it either a Protector to defend it, or a Comforter to
support it? for the whole need not the Phisi^ion, but the sick. Therefore
because the church should still be endaung^red, Luc. 5. 31.
he promised his assistaunce; and because dismayed, his presence; both
effectual, yet always invisible. For so says Bernard, Bernard de ad^e Dom.
There are three aduents of Christ, in the first, he was seen on earth,
couuersing with men in flesh and infirmity; in the last he shall be seen in
^eauen, in glory, and m^^estle: the middle aduent, which hath-beene since his
Ascension, and is now continual, occultus est, and soli Electi in seipsis
vident ^um, in spirit and power. Then our position, denying the co^spi^uous
constant visibilitie of the church truly Cathelike, to be an essential note
thereof, is neither negative of Christ his aduent, nor impeachment of his
promises, nor weakening his assistance, nor abandoning his presence: but the
poorer and weaker his flock, the more admirable is the accomplishment of his
promises, and the more to be magnified is his protecting power, and his
powerful presence. For, 2. Cor. ^2
my power is per^ected in weakness, says himself to Paul. For Atheism and
Machiauelisme, in the church of Rome they bred and from thence have been
spread, for all her glorious conspicuitie. (...) p^. 278.
Melch. Canus constantly avouches, Italy to be the very fountain of
Atheistes. Machiauell was a Florentine, and the author of that detestable
libell, De t^ibus impostoribus, whether Aretinus or Postellus, either an
Italian or a Frenchman, neither of them a visible member of any reformed
church. And not to ransacke all corners, let a Pope of Rome speak for Rome it
self, so glorious, so gorgious, Franck in (...).
so constant. Pius Quintus often spoke it with grief, Roman adhuc magis
gentiliz are quam Christianizare, and it is not 50. years since he died, that
Rome was yet more heathenish then Christian^ so the^ we conclude this point of
Visibilitie, with that speech of Clement. Clem. Ale.
Alexandr. Any thing becomes a Christian better (...) then to be pompous: if
every Christian, whose body is the temple of the holy Ghost, much more the
Church, which is the body of Christ, should not glory in her pomp.

The Second Article.
The Learned Protestants are Infidels.

1 Whosoever builds his faith upon his own private, and singular exposition
of Scripture, is an Infidel. This is his Mai^r.

Aunsweare.
STrumpettes, Plut.
they say, have more easy delivery in their travail, then honest women; and
Sophistical arguments are sooner framed then true syllogismes: Arist. ^len.
the terms of this proposition being (...), the connection will not hold, for
Faith and Infidelity being ex diametro opposite cannot agree at the same time
in the same subject. Is it a truth which he buildes? then the builder is no
Infidel, is it a falsehood? then that which he buildes is not Faith but error.
Aqu. ad Rom^* d^ ad Heb* 1.
All knowledge in Divinity is threefold, as the light is, opinion, compared to
the twylight; Faith, to the dawning; science, to the Sun shine; the first is
neither certain, nor evident, being still in formidine oppositi, and so
resolving upon nothing, falls either in obliquum ambigui, Bernard.
or errorem mendacii, and is the very fountain of Atheism and heresy; at the
best, Romans 2. 20.
it is but that which S. Paul calls (...), a very morphew and faint color
of knowledge. The third (Scienti^) is both certain and evident, which being
within the compass of S. Paul his non (...), (...)
in respect of us, is proper to that other li^e, (...)
says Basil, where we shall know even as we are known; (...)
because we having here not (...), as Damascen speaks, (...)
but compassed about with this veil of flesh, have no other knowledge but
(...) in part and imperfect. (...)
The middle therefore which is Faith is certain but not evident, being of
things not seen Heb. 11. (...).
quia valde remota est a sensibus (...) says S. Augustine. (...).
But there being exfide in fidem Romans 1. 17. (...).
degrees in ^aith, he which reaches not the highest step, is not to be
concluded an Infidel: for, (...) in universally, (...).
errans in particulari is no infidelity in the judgment of the schools; else
the Apostles deriring to have their faith increased Luc. 17. Luc* 1^.
might be accounted infidels, and the Apostle his difference between a
weakeling in faith and an Infidel, Romans 14
were superfluous, Wherefore as in that moral precept of Epicharmus (...)
^^charm.
to be the strength, Tull* Acad. qu.
and joints of wisdom, there is not enjoined an Academicall (...), an
obstinate restrainte of the assent to any thing we read or hear, but a
prepensed deliberation, not to be rashly credulous: so in divine knowledge,
August.
Faith, being by S. Austen defined intellectus cum assensu, they whom Christ
calls (...) slow of heart to bel^eue, Luc* 24.
were not to be entitled Infidels. For tarditie and suspense of the assent,
may arise by some obstacle not removed, but infidelity proceeds from a
pertinacie of the mind. Therefore his proposition had been more Theological
and Logical, Whosoever builds his opinion or his error is an Infidel. For
nothing is to be accounted faith, whose object is not veritas prima; Aqui^. 22
qu. 1.
Again, building of a man's faith argues his desire to be confirmed therein, a
thing not incident to an infidel. For all infidelity is purae negationis or
prauae, Schola to^^
either privative or contrary: the first in them to whom the truth was never
revealed, as the Pagans and Heathen, 1. Cor. 15
which have not the knowledge of God; and these can have no desire to confirm
their faith which they have not, for ignotinulla cupido: the other, in them to
whom the truth is manifested, which, with David, we may call the Adders
Infidelity. Psalm. 58. 4.
Psalm. 58. 4. that will not hear the voice of the charmer, nor believe the
Prophets report. Esaias 53. 1. but resist the holy Ghost, Esa. 53. 1
and the truth revealed Act. 7. Act. 7.
(the Fathers distinguish the^, with non audire, and nolle audire) and this
being an opposition joined with a contempt of the truth, is right
infidelity, and the defense of such an one his opinion, is not to be called a
rearing but a rasing, not a building but a demolition of faith. If it be
objected that he speaks not of faith in definitely, but limittes it
personally, His faith, which may be false; I aunsweare, that any man's faith, if
it be proportionable to the general faith received, need no other building,
then that which is already upon the Prophets and Apostles Ephesians. 2. Ephesians. 2.
20.
if exorbitant from it, then it is no faith, but either an erroneous opinion in
the conceit, or heretical in the defense, and so no faith, because fidei non
potes^ subesse aliquod falsum. if by his faith he mean an outward
profession, Aqu. 22. ^. (...). 3
he gains naught by it, because any man's profession is either true or false,
according to his knowledge. And so the Mayor is every way absurd. yet thus he
confirms it by two arguments, first, from the nature of faith, secondly, from
the danger of private exposition.

1 Because faith must be infallible, and impossible to be either erroneous or
chaungeable.

Aunsweare
Ex tuo ore^serue nequam. If this be true in faith generally, then he which
buildes his faith, that is, ascertaines unto himself the knowledge of truth
howsoever, neither buildes towers in the air, nor makes by-pathes in the way
idest, neither conceiues fancies easily mutable, nor stablisheth errors
daungerously deceivable, much less is an Infidel* Heb. 11. Aqu. ^n Rom* 1.
True it is, that faith is an assent with an assurance, which certitude makes
it differ from opinion, doubtfulnesse, and suspicion, the inseparable pages of
him, whom S. James calls (...). ^ac. 1* 8.
Iac. 1. 8 Yet there. may be in faith both assenting, and assuring, at
sometimes and in some points hoesitance and wavering, which demonstrate man's
infirmity, not to be called infidelity. For though Christ have prayed that
the faith of his chosen may not suffer an eclipse either total or final Luc.
22. Luc. 22. 23
yet even the saints of God, have their (...) and defectes in faith, 1. The. 3.
10
1 Thessalonians. 3. 10. yea, with faith, especially of assent, there may be (...)
Mar. 9. 24. Mar. 9. ^4
which must be translated incredulity for want of that full persuasion which
S. Paul calls (...) Heb. 10. 22. Heb. 10. 22.
not ininfidelitie, which, being an obdurate pertinacie he calls (...)
Ephesians. 4. 19. Ephesians. 4. 19
and therefore some of their own writers ventilating the title of Alphonsus,
Dubious in fide infidelis est, Alph. de Cast ^^b 1. cap. 10 Vid. Can. lib. 12
are bold to say, that this is but iuris. fictio, not reiveritas, unless with
that doubting there be joined pertinacia. For, subscribing to an heresy
affectu alliciente, non errante intellectu, though in the suspicion of the Law
it be infidelity, yet in truth and properly it is not so, Ibid.
says Canus. His second argument follows.

2 But faith which is builded upon private exposition of Scripture, is subject
to error and change, and consequently upon better advice, and consiration may
be altted.

Aunsweare
His meaning of private exposition, we will examine in the Minor: only here
in a word, let us try whether faith builded upon public exposition be
vnchangeablie true, and may not be altered. By public exposition, we mean,
as they, the Church, Councels, Fathers, or in truth, the Pope only. For so
Canus will have it, Lib. 6. c. 8
because to him alone was given Priuilegium infirmitatis not to err in his
definitiues of faith (in decreto fidei) I demand therefore, Luc. 22
beginning with S. Austen, the opinions which he once held, and after
retracted, were they built upon private or public exposition? if upon his
own private, then, by this fellows Mayor, he was at the same time both a
Christian and an infidel: if upon public, then a faith so builte also may be
chaungeable. The sentences of Councels are public expositions, is faith
infallible grounded upon them? alteration must be when expositions are
contradictory, and these have been often seen in Councels, that speech of S.
Austen holding true, Plenaria Concilia soepe priora a posterioribus emendantur.
August. de bap. lib. 2
As for Popes, the observation has been well made, that since the time of
Stephen the VI. it has been the custom of Popes, rising either from envy, or
vainglory, the succeeding Bishops acta priorum aut infringerent, aut omnino
tollerent, would either narrowly empale, Spec. Pont.
or utterly repeal the decrees of their predecessors. And that the sea
Apostolic may err in faith, not our men alone, but very many of theirs, cited
even by Canus himself, lib. 6. cap. 1.
do dispute and conclude. So then my short conclusion is against this
proposition, first, that he which buildes his faith, is no Infidel, Secondly,
that the mutabilite or error in matters of faith is the event non expositionis
priuatae, but depranatae, not the singular interpretation of any man, but that
which S. Peter calls (...) a distorted corruption of the text, 2. Pet. 3. 16.
whether public or private. His Minor follows:

2 But all Protestants build their faith upon their own private exposition
of Scripture.

Aunsweare.
If by private exposition he mean as Moses speaks Nombers 16. 28. Nom. 16. 28
a man's own fancy without Gods direction, we deny this assumption: 2. Pet. 1.
we say with S. Peter that no Prophecy, whether of the old Testament for
prediction or of the new, for interpretation is (...) of any private
explanation, but holy men in the Law forespoke, and in the Gospel expound as
they are moved by the spirit. 1* Cor. 12
We say with Paul that the natural man cannot perceive the things of God. 1.
Cor. 2. 1. Cor. 2.
yet that phrase of his withal must be remembered alij datur interpretatio
sermonum. 1. Corr. 1^. 1 Cor. 12.
to some one particular man a thing may be revealed, 1. Cor. 14
unknown to the rest. 1 Cor. 14. In the exposition of Scripture it is not
(...), Ephesians. 4. 14
which must carry it Ephesians. 4. 14. neither a sense cogd or numbered, that as in
dicing (from that game the word is borrowed) the more spots the better cast;
Amd^. Fric.
so in expounding, the more voices the sounder sense. For not the Spouse only,
that is the whole Church, but and Tu quoque says Bernard, Bern. ^er. 49
even one singular party, finding that in himself which David did, in
meditationibus meis exardescit ignis, Psalm. 39. 3. Psalm. 39. 3.
the assistaunce of Gods spirit in his studies, may boldly pronounce of
himself particularly, as the church in general Introduxit me Rex in cellam
vinariam. Cant. 2. 4
Cant. 2. 4. even unto me (as he expounds it) has he revealed the
understanding of his mysteries. Lib. ^. c. 8
And therefore both Canus graunts that vnicuique perse, to every particular
man, the doctrine of faith may be evident, if he have the spirit of God in
him; Panormit.
and a great Lawyer of theirs thinks that he deserves more credit, though he
be vnus aliquis, having Scripture his witness, then the huge multitude of the
adverse part without that proof. So then, grounding upon that distinction of
S. Paul (in a case not far different) 2. Cor. 3. 5. 2. Cor. 3. 5.
a nobis, and ex nobis, if it be an exposition given by a private man a se,
from himself, by the assistaunce of Gods spirit, and the anointing within
him 1. Ioh. 2. 27. 1. Ioh. 2. 27
it is sound by that rule of the Apostle, 1. Cor. 2
The spiritual man discerns all things 1. Cor. 2. and by the judgment of a
learned Cardinal, Cai^tan. praesat. ad pentat.
such an one his sense, concording with the text, is to be warranted against
the whole current and torrent of the Fathers; Con^. Nic.
and the council of Nice put it in practice, in preferring the sole judgment
of Paphnutius before so many of a contrary concord: but if it be ex se of his
own brain, and invention like the spiders webb. Esa. 59
Esa. 59. wrought out of her own substance, we deny it, neither rely we on
it. And therefore we say that a man's private exposition may be allowed, so it
be not his own private, that is, of his own wit and reason, without ground of
Scripture. yet he confirms his Minor by a prosyllogisme

Either they build their faith upon their own private opinion, in expounding
the Scripture, or the Church, or the Fathers, or Councels, but not upon these
three, ergo upon their own.

Aunsweare.
The argument is unsound being fallacia diuisionis; for there is another
building, which Christ calls the Wisemans founding, Math. 7
not upon men, they are but sand, but upon the rock which is Christ and his
doctrine; the Beraeans building, expounding scriptures by conference of
scriptures, Act. 17. 11
which S. Austen calls the rule of faith, August de dact. christ.
Chrysostom (...), the most exact balance to weigh the truth; Chrysostom. in
2. Cor. Cypr. ad Pomp.
Cyprian originem Euangelicam, fontem Dominicum, the springing fountain that
never fails us, whereas the Fathers, and Councels, like the waters of Tema,
Job. 6. 19
especially in exposition, deceive us at our greatest need: all of them having
many errors confessed by themselves, manife^t contradictions observed by
others, diverse ^arres in great points of faith, as he might demonstrate too
plainly, which would play Cham his part in discovering their nakedness. Cen.
9.
yet we read them, note them, admire them, quoate them, profit by them, praise
God for them, refuse them not in any Romish controversy, rest not on them,
but, imitate that wisdom of trauailers in Plutarke his judgment, Plutar.
(...).
who passing by many goodly cities, view them and take delight in them, yet
settle themselves in one principal, where they may have more certain profit,
with less danger. For should not a people enquire at their God? Es. 8. 19
says Esaias; whose oracle is the Scriptures. which Christ co^maunds to search
Ioh. 5. Ioh. 5.
they being that more certain word of prophecy, 2. Pet. 1.
to which, we do well if we attend, says Peter: yea, by their own
confession, vltima resolutio fidei, the last repose of our ^aith, Can ^ 3 c. 8.
must not be either upon the church, that is too general; nor upon the
Fathers, that is more rusticall then divine, (iustici ^otius quam Theologi
videamur) for so do the Saracens upon their masters, (...)
the Jews on their Rabbis, the Gentiles on their Philosophers; much less
upon the Pope, that were too Pythagoricall, Ipse dixit; (...).
and (...) (according to the Proverb) too Poetlike, who, when in their
Tragedies they are come to an exigent, (...)*
which they cannot extricate, they have a God in an engine, whom they turn
down with a device to make up the matter. The last and safest refuge is
therefore, which Esaias prescribes, Es. 8, 20
ad legem and testimonium. Esaias. 8. 20. to the law and to the testimony; for
whether shall we go, says Peter, Ioh. 6, 68
here are the words of eternal life? that so we may say of the Fathers and
Councels, as the Samaritans to that woman John 4. Ioh. 4. 42
Now we believe, not because of thy saying, for we have heard him our selves,
and know that this is indeed the Christ the Savior of the world. But here is
the question, who shall interpret them? S. John will answer, you need not
that any man teach you the anointing within you, 1, Ioh, ^, 27
teaches you all things. 1. Ioh. 2. But this is private exposition? nothing
less; a sw^rne Notary, though a private man, yet his hand and testimony alone,
passes for authentical and public: The holy Gho^t, the principal Register
of the Trinity, Exodus, 32
the hand of God wherewith the Law was graven; Es, 53 Math, 12
the Lords arm wherewith the Gospel is made powerful; the finger of God
which wrought all miracles warranted; the penne-guide of the Evangelists; the
tongue of the Apostles; Act. 2 Ioh 14
the suggestor of truth unto the faithful; though he be, as S. Austen calls
him, August.
internus magister, and speaks within us, yet being the Spirit of truth,
Es, 11, 2
and knowledge, and counsel. Es. 11. 2. his sole testimony counteruailes the
authority of all outward and ministerial witnesses. The Church, Councels,
Fathers, are no better then the Apostles; who confess themselves to be but
ministers, per quos credimus. 1^ Cor, 3. 5
1. Cor. 3. he is the Doctor c^i credimus. Ephesians. 1. 13
Ephesians. 1. 13. and fides in infusa, by confession of schoolmen, which is the
operation of the spirit, must prevent fidem acquisitam, Romans 10
which comes by hearing, and the ministry of men; for Lydias heart must be
opened, before she can profit by hearing. Act. 16
Act. 16. and he which has the Key of David, Apoc. 3. 7
Apoc. 3. 7. has this prerogative, before them that have the keys of
knowledge. Luc. 11. 52
Luc. 11. 52. and therefore the order of the holy Ghost, is by some of them
observed, in saying: The people believed God, and his servant Moses. Exo. 14.
31.
Exodus 14. 31. not Moses before, but first the Lord, and then his minister.
The principal act of faith, is assent to those things that are credibilia, 22
quaest. 6. con^lus.
says Aquin. all which amounting the reach of man's reason natural, it must be
wrought by a supernatural cause within, and that is Gods spirit alone; not
our selves, that is gentilisme, and denied by S. Paul. Ephesians. 2. not party
perpale, Ephesians. 2.
first, our selves, and then God, that is Pelagianisme, and confuted by S.
Austen; Aug. (...).
not by a miracle seen, or men persuading, those are outward inducementes, 22.
Aqu, rbi sup.
no sufficient inforcementes* and yet we say with Paul, that faith comes by
hearing Romans 10. Romans 10.
that is by Fathers, Councels, and Church testimony, distinguishing, Gorr^m ib.
as Gorram one of their own does, by them praeparatiue, by God effectiue. and
therefore no reason we should build onr faith upon them, being but mediate
witnesses, not immediate causes. And so we conclude with Aquin as in his own
words, Innititur fides nostra reuelationi Apostolis and Prophetis facta, Aq. 1.
q. 1. a^t. 8. ad. 2
Our faith is built upon the doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles. Lib. 2. c.
1.
And with Canus (alludinge to that speech of Quintilian for grammar) that the
Canonical writ, Quintilian
is that foundation, on which unless we build our faith, quicquid
superstruxeris corru^t, whatsoever we rear will fall. And now his syllogism
is concluded, his article might have ended, ^ull. de Or^^.
but his after wit telling him, that his reasons examined, would prove but
scopae dissolutae: the article and the argument not agreeing; that, proclayming
only the Learned Protestants Infidels: this, co^cluding that all Protestants
are so, and the reason of both, because they refuse the Fathers expositions;
(...)
he now turns Zenoes fist into a palm, and leaves his Logike for a figure in
Rhetorike, which they call Correctio dicti. (...)
Campian belike having rubd him by the elbow, and telling him, that

Some Protestants allow the Fathers and their expositions; so far forth as
they agree with Gods word, and no further; but this is nothing but to delude
the world.

Aunsweare
In deed Thucydides never spoke it more truly, lib* 2
then we may (...) herehence have risen both the mortal spite of Rome against
us; and also this title of Infidelity, because we make rectum to be Iudex sui
and obliqui; (...)*
for using the Scriptures as a fan for the Fathers, to winnow their chafe
from their grain; for urging that place of the Prophet Esa 8. Es. 8, 20
of all writers both ancient and modern, if they speak not according to this
rule, there is no light in them. which is no other thing then the Fathers
themselves wish, and require Tertullian reiects any man's arbitrium suum,
Ter^^llian.
unless it be according to the doctrine taught by Christ and preached by the
Apostles; Cyprian.
Cyprian regardes not quid hic aut ille, Ieron. in
but what Christ did or spoke; it was not parentum or maiorum authoritas which
made S. Jerome to stoop, Ier. 9.
but only Dei docentis imperinm. Not to speak of Nazianz. Nazian.
who peremptorily avoweth that our doctrine is Pythagoricall dixit dominus,
(...).
without reason natural, or Fathers a^thoritie; but Austen cries away with our
papers, August. in Psalm. 57.
codex domini pr^cedat in medium. and excellently to this present purpose else
where, Cont. Cres. lib. 2.
there are books, says he, quos non licet iudicare, sed secundum quos alij
iudicandi. videlicet, the books Canonical, which we are not to judge, but
according to which other Doctors are to be censured; no other thing then the
sounder schoolmen do avouch, in admitting only that to be the church
doctrine, Aq. 22. q. ^
quae procedit ex veritate prima in sacris literis manifestata. No other,
briefly, but what the Apostle inforceth, that if we receive the witness of
men, 1. Ioh. 5. 9
the witness of God is greater. R^m. 3.
For, let God be true and every man a liar. Romans 3. Neither is this a delusion
of the world, but a religion to our God, and our reverence to his word; an
appeal from men subject to ouersights and affection, unto the holy spirit
perfect and impartial; in making the Scriptures the touchstone of their
writings; especially having to deal with such Romish impostors, Basil.
S. Basil calls them (...), corrupting all the Fathers, (...).
and counterfayting many of them: dealing in the first, as Procrustes with his
guestes in his bed, Plut. T^es.
either hacking them off, or racking them out, as may fit their fancies; in the
other as Caligula with Jupiters idol, S^eto^.
took off the Gods head, and set his own in place thereof, citing Fathers
that were never extant: but as the Poet said, Nil mihi vis, and vis cuncta
licere tibi: Martial.
our reuoking the Fathers to Scriptures touch, is delusion, but when some of
their own say, that the Fathers are no Fathers if they swa^ue from the church
doctrine, fol. 140.
that is Rome, or the Pope, as Duraeus does; and others, that both the church
and Pope have authority above Fathers, and against scriptures, Lib. 2. c* 16.
and 16.
as Canus discourses at large (an opinion which is the very male-engine of
all sound divinity) this is plain dealing and allowable Marry, Saint
Chrysostom is so far from counting it a delusion, Chrysostom. in 2. ad Cor. hom.
1^.
the course we take, that he thinks it a gross absurdity among Christians to
be so wary, that in payment of money we will not credit men, but numero and
calculo committere, tell it after them, cast the sums, number the pounds,
weigh the gold; and yet in the grand points of faith, we will rest upon the
bare sentence of Fathers simply, without due trial, especially having so
perfect a touch and balance as the word is to try them by. And now from
arguments he falls to questions, 4. in number.

1 For what mean they when they say, they will allow them so far forth as
they agree with Scripture?

Answer.
If in this question he ask what he knows, it is ironicall hypocrisy; if
not, it is ignorant folly: our meaning has bin often expressed, to be that of
Saint Austens, to prefer Saint Paul himself before all, and above al Doctors
(his expositors) not concording with the text; August. epist. 19.
that as we are not (...) so peremptory and self loving, to take up that old
verse, Nostra haec sunt, veteres migrate coloni, utterly to omit the fathers;
Canus.
so we admit of them, as Canus himself does, read them and allege them with
reverence, yet with choice and judgment (their soundness making us more
learned, their corruptions more wary) least taking the chafe with the wheat,
as the Prophet speaks, Ie^. 23.
that of Lyrinensis prove true, Ly^i^ensis.
Absoluuntur magist^i, condemnantur discipuli: whereas if you take the p^ecious
from the vile, le^. 15. 19
you shall be according to my word, says the Lord, Ier. 15.

2 Mean they perhaps, that if the Fathers bring Scriptures to prove any point
of Religion now in controversy, to allow that point as true?

Aunsweare.
We do, with this prouiso of S. Paul, that they do (...), Phil. 3.
that they march in a squadron, agree without difference in that point. 2.
(...), that the Scriptures they allege be canonically warranted, regularly
understood, and rightly applied. Who shall judge of this? the proverb is,
Lapis aurum probat, Adag Eras.
aurum homines, The stone tries gold, and gold tries men: so the spirit of God
tries between the Scriptures Canonical and Apocryphal, and the Scriptures
try the Fathers, whether their sense be sound or adulterate.

3 If so, why reject they then S. Austen and other Fathers, who bring Scripture
to prove prayer for the dead? yea and all controversies almost in religion, the
Fathers prove by Scriptures when they dispute upon them.

Answer.
In promptu ratio est; our answer is ready and brief, first to Augustine and
the other fathers in this case, (...).
which was Saint Augustines to Cyprian in the like. We repute not their
writings as Canonical, but judge them by the Canon; if they accord, cum
laud little, to their praise we admit them; if they dissent, cum pace ^orum, by
their leave we refuse them. Which in this point is true: Epiphanius
for Epiphanius though mightily opposite in this opinion against Aerius,
confesses that this is not praeceptum patris, but institutio matris, not any
precept of Scripture, (where notwithstanding we read of solemn funerals, Genesis
49. Heb. 11
and honorable memorials of the dead) but a tradition of the Fathers,
Tertu^ian.
and Church, which is also Tertullian his speech. Secondly, for the thing it
self, sithence it has often and impregnably bin proved, that the prayer for
the disceased, neither prevails with God, nor avails the dead; Chrys^st.
therefore Chrysostom, howsoever a great patron for this point, concludes that
it is but (...), a very stage play and mockery. But of this point more in the
treaty of Purgatory. For the last clause if it be true, we commend it as an
excellent precedent and pattern, desiring that they which so much glory of the
fathers, would therein imitate them. For this word the Scriptures is that tower
of David, wherein are a 1000. shields and tota armatura fortium, all weapons
both defensive and expugnatorie for all conflicts of controversy, Cant. 4. 4
Cant. 4. 4.

4 Or perhaps they mean to admit the Fathers when they allege Scripture, but
such as every Protestant shall allow of: so it be conformable to their fancies,
and fit their new coined Gospel: and in this sense, who sees not that every
paltrie companion will make himself not only the true expositor of Christ's
word, but also will prefer his exposition before all ancient Fathers, when
they dance not after his pipe, and consent not with their heresies.

Aunsweare.
These hick scorning terms of new coined Gospel, paltry companion, dancing
after his pipe: and those words also of fie^ie element, fancies, and heresies,
being but the issues of a filthy brain, and loathsome stomach, we return
into his throat, with the aunsweare of the Philosopher, (...), (...).
a fennel stalk will not make a spear, nor such words sound proofs; only
they argue an impatience, with a badde cause, and a worse conscience. The
substance of this demand is, if a private man may discern of Scriptures,
whether truly or falsely alleged by the Fathers? an answer he receives in
the rifling of his Minor: if that content him not, S Paul will tell him that
there is discretio spirituum a gift of the holy Ghost, 1. Cor. 12 (...). 7.
not tied only to the Church and Churchmen, but imparted (...), to every man
illumined by the spirit, imploring Gods direction, and conferring Scriptu^es:
and therefore elsewhere he wishes eueryman abundance in suo sensu. Romans 14*
Romans 14. Wherein as he gives liberty for every man to have his own sense,
so withal (...) to assure his conscience that this his meaning is rectified;
which certainty is wrought by prayer to God, Ber^. ad patres in monte.
diligent conference, serious studies, often meditation, and the like; all
which being evident arguments of a spiritual man, his power is warranted, by
saint Paul, to discern al things, 1. Cor. 2.
even profunda Dei. Whereupon Canus inf^rs, Lib. 2. ca. 8.
that vnicuique praestan^^ quod in se est, to every man using the means before
named, God gives understanding sufficient in all matters of salvation: for the
ear tries words, as the mouth tastes meat, Job. 34. ^.
says Job As therefore the palate, if it be well affected, can discern
perfitely of the sapours which touch it, if infected, it cannot: so, says he,
the affection of a mind well disposed, Canus vbi sup paulo post.
is able to distinguish a truth from an er^our. So true is that of the
Philosopher, Qualis vnusquisque erit, tale etiam iudicium proferet. Aristot.
Notwithstanding herein we verify not that proverb to bring Saul among the
^rophets, 1. Sam. 19.
not to make men deuoide of Gods spirit, though otherwise acutely witted, or
excellent^ie learned, discerners of spiritual things; we know that the
sha^pest Philosophers coming to these mysteries, have fared as the Sodomites
at Lots door; Genesis 19. Nazianzen. August
as Nazianzene speaks (...) as saint Augustine, acut^ obtusi, and as Gerson
observes, disputers in these points, Gerson tract de caus^s. John. 3.
vt caeci de coloribus: but knowing with all that the Spirit blows where it
lists Ioh. 3. we, with the Apostle, grant this prerogative of true
exposition, not to every man pelly melly, but to every spiritual man, whom,
because it so pleases this Libeller, he entitles a paltry companion: but what
says he to his own Melchior Canus? Lib. 2. ca. 6.
who gives this power simplici mulierculae, to a silly woman, assigning his
reason, quia ab unction docetur, because she is anointed with the Spirit.
And here I might nd, but that you shall see either the impud^ncie, or the
ignorance, as I guess it, of this mate, for (...) according to the Proverb as
Saint Paul said of clergy marriage, 1, Cor, 9.
1. Cor. 9. have not I power to lead about a sister a wife? so, say I, have
not we Protestants as good authority to refuse the fathers unsound expositions
of Scriptures, as well as the greasy shauelings among the Papists, who reject
their soundest interpretations, crossing their proiects? In Mat. 16. Pigh^us.
Bernard* Durius.
The Rhemists renounce Saint Austen as an unskillful interpreter of super hanc
petram, Math. 16 Pigh^us abiures him in the tract of o^iginall sin. Aug.
Steuc. barks at saint ^erome in Nomb. and Deu. and Bernardinus at both of them
with a triuiall proverb of dormitat Homerus: and Duraeus the Scot turns off
Saint Ieroms opinion of Baruch his book with a quid tum postea? thus these
transam-eyed hypocrites can spy small motes in us, not feeling their own
beams. The sum of this article, and the drift of this rennagate is, that
fides i^plicita; to drive us to the streights which the Philistines forced
Israel unto, 1. Sam. 13^
the sharpning our instruments, and the fetching our weapons from their forge:
that is, to believe as their Church believes, without any trial or
examination, and then we should not be Infidels: but that is stopped by S.
Peter, who wills every one to be ready in giving an account of that faith
he professes, 1 Pet 3. 1^.
1. Pet. 3. 10. faith it is not which is not certain, nor answer cannot be
made, Aq ^. q. ^. (...). 8. (...) 3.
but by him which is assured; but both Aquinas and Canus conclude, that the
authority of Doctors and Fathers make fidem probabilem, no^ certam, persuade
faith, but assure it not: and thus ends this second Article.

The third Article.
All Protestants who are ignorant of the Greek and Latin tongue are Infidels.

Whosoever relieth his faith etc.

Aunsweare.
IT is the property of Sophisters, August.
says S. Augustine, grandi cothurno incedere, to make stately paces, and great
shows to uphold an ill cause, vel moram faciendo, if with nothing else, yet
with standing upon it: feign would this disputer with his sylly-iesticall
method conclude us all to be infidels, but he cannot find a medium to enforce
that conclusion; therefore as Ixion lying with a cloud in stead of Juno begot a
Centaure, Plut. Ag. and Cleo.
neither man nor beast: so his malice, breeding with a conceit, in steed of
learning, brings forth Syllogismes, neither sound nor acute, his art being
not sufficient to shape him a Logician, nor his subtilty sharp enough to make
him a Sophister. So that his method is, as one of their own (...) once spoke
in a like case, Sir Thom. Moore*
Take it among you, and this it is.

Whosoever relieth his faith upon the ministers credit and fidelity is an
Infidel, has no faith at all.

But all Protestants in England ignorant of the Greek and Hebrew tongues
rely their faith upon the ministe^s credit. Ergo

All those in England ignorant of the Greek and Hebrew tongues h^ae no faith
at all.

Answer.
It is very base Logic where the argument may be returned upon the replier,
(...).
as the Mayor here may, the Papists being bound to rely their faith upon the
mere authority of the Church without denial or trial, which therefore they
call fidem implicitam, a faith inuolued and folded within the Church belief.
A^stot.
And it is very mean Sophistry where there is mendatium manifestum as in the
Minor is evident, and a ridiculous syllogism, where according to the proverb,
aliud Leucon, aliud portat illius Asinus. Eras. ex Zen^d.
The proposition to be proved being that all Protestants ignorant of the Greek
and Latin tongues are infidels, his conclusion inferring this is, that all
ignorant of the Greek and Hebrew tongues are infidels, as if the Latin and
Hebrew were all one idiom. But be it as it is, the Mayor was cut off by me in
the precedent article, the sum whereof is, that where faith is, there cannot
be infidelity; The Minor is there also answered by his own assumption, for if
we build our faith upon our own exposition, as there he says, then this is
false, that we rely our faith upon the ministers credit, which here he
assumeth: and therefore a brief answer might be that of Epimenides in S.
Paul, Tit. 1. Quint. li. 4.
(...) Heretics are ever liers; and Mendacem Opor^et esse memorem, that
proverb in Quintilian. But let us view his proofs.

The Mayor is manifest: because Call. l^b 4 instit. cap 9 Luth. li. de council.
page 14, etc.
they themselves confess that every man may err and does err, neither have
they any warrant why the Ministers do not err, since they constantly do
defend, that whole general Councels, yea and the universal Catholic church
may err, and has erred.

Aunsweare
We deny the argument, the force whereof is, that they which believe men that
may err, are Infidels. For, not to dispute with the Schoolmen, whether the
Infide^itie of Heretics or Pagans is the worse, a known truth resisted, H^b.
6.
aggravating the sin against the conscience, more then against him which
knows it not: yet Saint Augustine makes this difference between an heretic,
and him that believes an heretic. Aug (...).
The first begets or follows an error pertinaciously, either for primacie or
glory: but haeretico credens, is only carried away imaginatione veritatis: so,
this mistaking a falsehood for a truth, is Satan's mockery, 2. Cor. 7.
in his angelical illusion, not the parties infidelity, in crediting a
sinister perswaswasion. For learners carried away by their teachers, though
(...) lying in ambush to seduce them, Ephesians. 4.
Ephesians. 4. in their assent are not Infidels, the Apostle calling this leuitie,
a credulity childish, not infidelity which is ever peevish: and therefore
Aquinas says, that the teachers and masters of the Church, failing in any
truth divine, non praeiudicant fidei simplicium, (...).
do no way prejudice the faith of the unlearned, quieos rectam fidem habere
credunt, who still suppose that they will teach them nothing but truth. And is
it any monster of opinion either in Calvin or Luther, to say that either men in
several, or councels in assembly, or church in general may err? did not
David in an hasty passion, Psalm. 116. Romans 4.
and S. Paul with due premeditation say the same? All men are liars. For
councels, they said not so much as Naz. Ephesians. 42
who denied his presence at any Council, because he saw, as he said, neither
good end, nor happy issue of any of them; nor more then their own men, who
affirm that the sentence of any council, is but as alive man's testament, Nacl
Clug.
ambulatoria, that is, alterable at the pleasure either of Pope, or succeeding
counsel. Yea they and we confess with S. Augustine, Ep. 118
that religious Councels have saluberrimam authoritatem their sovereign
authority, yet not absolute integrity; because, as he elsewhere notes, Li^.
de ba.
the later have often times controled the former; not in circumstances
accidental, as Martin the Mar-testament in his Rhemish annotations would shake
it often, in Act. 15
but in essential points and capital, eue^ touching the Pope his triple
crown, two councels crossing each other, about the primacie and supremacy of
the Romish Bishop; and other for baptising of heretics, for Priests marriage,
for worshipping of Images, for distinctions of books Canonical and Apocrypha,
for humane traditions, all matters of high controversy. And as for the Church
erring, the Reader may observe how this Pamphleter, showing himself more busy
then intelligent, takes upon him to epitomize those controversies, which he
cannot anatomize: for, first, we do not say, that the universal Catholic
Church may err, because that part triumphant in heaven, has no spotte in her
for manners, nor wrinckle for doctrine, but is every way glorious and perfect.
Ephesians. 5. 2. 7
Ephesians 5. ma^ry that which is here militant on earth, being but marching on to
perfection, Heb. 6. Heb 6. 1
and going from strength to strength Psalm. 84, Psalm. 84. 6
cannot as yet sound out that (...) and triumphant song of victory against all
errors, until she come to that day of perfection as Solomon calls it. Prou.
4. 18; Pro^. 4. 18
and David calling the Saints generationem qu^rentium Psalm. 24. 6. (...). 24 6
and the Apostle vi^tores trauailers Heb. 11. 14. Heb. 11. 14
whose perfection, at the best, ius bt a iourny, ambulatoria per fidem, non per
aspectum, walking by faith not by sight 2. Cor. 5. 2. Cor. 5. 7 2. Tim. 4. 8
(...) Phil. 3. 14. not (...) verse. 12: in inquisition not acquisition, tending
and attending to that absoluteness, both for knowledge and life, but not
attayning it, no not then when they come to Paul his consummaui cursum, 2.
Tim. 4. 8
2. Tim. 4. therefore argue them subject to errors fatales, no^ lethales,
Bernar.
such as follow the nature of man continually, not such as separate from God
finally; Eccles. 1, 13
this sore travail is laid upon men to humble them thereby. Secondly, if a man
in this question of erring, should ask this companion (being himself both
errans and erro, a wanderer in true religion, and a runnagate from his native
country) what difference between these two positions, The general Councels
may err, and The Church may err? The learneder Papists say, that when they
auerre the Church cannot err, they mean that Church which the Schoolmen call
Ecclesiam repraesentatiuam, of which our Savior speaks, when he says, Dic
ecclesiae, Math. 18. Mat^ 1^.
viz. the Bishops and Prelates of the church, representing the whole church in
general Councels; and so these controversies are Identicall: for we, saying
that the Councels may err, therein with all implie (and that by their own
confession) that the Church may err; therefore this Libeller, affectinge such
brevity, might have spared this last clause: but bold ignonorance is like
Solomon his guilt potsheard, Pro. 26. 23
Prou. 26. it will bewray it self show it never so glorious. But of this
controversy more hereafter in the fifth article; Art, ^.
As for our Ministers, neither themselves do affect, nor any of ours defend
their immunitie from possibility to err, as Pighius does in the Apology of
his Popes; who, as Canus Canus
witnesses, to rid Anastasius from the brand of heresy, for which he was
anathematized, reuileth Gratian most ^ontume (...)
spitefully, raileth upon the Canonists most turp^ssime.
filthily; and to salve Honorius his credit that way, calls into question
the authority of both the 6. and 7. P^g. ib. 4. (...). cap 8.
Councels. Yea, we say of our selves to our Auditors, as the Apostles to them
of Lystra. Act. 14. 15
Act. 14, We are even men subject to the like passions that ye be. But what
of this? are they infidels therefore which believe us teaching the truth? Why?
Peter halted, and erred in the right track of the Gospel Gal. 2. Gal. 2
John would have worshipped an Angel twice. Apoc. 19 and 22.
Apoc. 19. and 22. The Apostles and brethren in Iudaea thought that the word of
God was not to be preached to the Gentiles, Act 11
Act. 11. (all gross errors) is therefore the assent of the whole church to
their doctrine in other points, though herein taineted, infidelity? God
forbid. In one word, to trusse up this Mayor with a short aunsweare, if this
proposition be true, that the relying of a man's faith upon the ministers
credit, is infidelity, the whole crew of Lay Papists, is but a rout of
Infidels; for, by their own rules, the only and all sufficient faith of the
Laity, must be nothing else, Molanus de pract. Theolog.
but praescriptum pastorum, that which their shauelinges teach and limit them,
which faith thus scanteled, this fellow accomptes infidelity, and therefore
the argument rather concerns them then us, who deny our faith to be liable
upon the credit of any mortal man, albeit he auowes it in his Minor, and
thus would prove it.

The Minor I prove; for all such Protestants ground their faith upon the
Bible translated into English, the which translation, they know not whether it
be true or false, whether the Minister Tindall, for example, erred or no,
either upon ignorance, as Wherein he desires the LL, of the Council to
procure speedil^ a new translation, because that which now is in use in England
is (...).
Broughton, one of the greatest Linguists among the Precisians affirms, in an
Epistle dedicated to the LL. of the Council: or upon malice to induce the
people to Protestancie, and to cause them to leave the Catholic religion, as
Gregory Martin in his discovery most pregnantly proves. These errors, I say,
they know not, and consequently cannot discern a true translation from a
false, and therefore must needs rely their faith upon the silly Ministers
faithless fidelity, which co^uinceth that they have no faith at all.

Aunsweare.
Think you this fellow means what Moses would? that as he upon zeal, to
quell Ioshuaes envy, wished that all the Lords people could prophesy, Nomb.
1128.
Nomb. 11* So this mate, upon compassion of the Laities ignorance, 1. Cor. 14
desires with S. Paul, that all sorts were skillfull in the original
languages? First that were not convenient, as agreeing neither with that (...),
that multi-varietie of Gods wisdom, Ephesians. 3. 10. Ephesians. 3. 10
in disposing his guiftes, not the same to all, nor to all alike 1. Cor. 12. 1.
Cor. 12
but to some above others, as this gift of tongues: nor with the church
government, for orders being appointed in the church, some to be pastors and
teachers, other to hear and learn; the first have received that key of
knowledge, to open and shut, Luc. 11
Luc. 11. such guiftes whereby they are enabled to be both (...) and (...)
sufficient to instruct, and forcible to con^ute. 2. Tim. 3. 2, Tim. ^
as the skill in tongues, the help of arts, the dexterity of interpretation,
the intelligence of mysteries, the use and variety of books, that so they may
be, as Solomon entitles them, Masters of the assemblies Eccles. 1^. Eccles. 12
all which, or most of them, God has denied to the meany, being prone enough
of themselves, ignorant as they are, to control the priest, Hos* 4, 4
Hos. 4. and would much more, if they had this panoplie of learning. Nether is
it probable, that they, which apply our Savior his Proverb to the
commonaltie, Hard. art ^5 sect, 6 Math. 7
ne margaritas porcis, making them but swine; and think as basely of the
Laity, as the Phariseis, Ioh. 7. this rude people is accursed, Hosius de
(...). ve^na.
such great patrones of Scripture-ignoraunce, should either have Elias his
zeal for the Lord of Hosts glory, 1. Reg. 19. 1* ^eg* 19
or Christ's compassion for the peoples want of instruction, Math* 9
Math. 9. or S. Peter's care of the words synceritie, 1. Pet. 2
^. Pet. 2: nor that themselves, the best of them being bound, under the pain
of anathema, to fetch water from that cistern of the vulgar latin, which they
have canonized authentical in their Tridentine conuenticle, Conc. Trid Se^. 4
would turn the people to the pure fountains of the Greek and Hebrew;
nothing less. For to a contrary purpose, as the Spartans enacted, Plut* Lycur.
that none should walk by night with lantern, torch, or any light; so have
they forbidden the scriptures to be vulgarly translated, least the light being
put into a lantern Psalm. 119 or set on a candlestick, (...).
Math* 5. Math. 5 15.
to give light to all that are in the house indefinitely, the peoples
understanding might prove the discovery of those errors, wherewith be^fore
they were by their own ignorance mizeled, or by their blind guides miss-led:
so that their drift is in this their quarrel and mislike of translation, not
that the scriptures should keep their (...) 1. Pet. 2. 1. Pet. 2. 2,
without mixture or ble^ding; but that they might have (...), an uncouth, and
imperfect voice without understanding, 1. Cor. 1^. 8
1. Corint. 14. For would they in sooth, the vulgar sort should have knowledge?
means they must prescribe, it being not bonum innatum, but seminatum says
Bernar: Bernard.
because faith comes by hearing, Romans 10. Rom 10.
(those immediate knowledges of revelation and prophesy, the one a sudden
infusion, the other a successiue instinct, being long since antiquated) the
means therefore is, says Aquinas, either a man's own study and industry,
Eccles. 1. 13. Eccles. 1. 13.
which knowledge he calls Scientia, or other men's labor in preaching, and
that he calls doctrina, (...). Co^. 1^. 6.
1. Cor. 14. 6. to the attayning whereof there are required, says he
elsewhere, (...). 2 Cor. 1^.
both vis mentalis, the vigor of the mind, which is understanding; and
corporalis, the aptitude of the body, which are the senses, two in number, of
the ear and the eye, which both Philosophers, and divines call sensus
disciplinarios, Schol in. ^. John. (...) and. A^st. metaph ^
because knowledge accreweth unto men either by hearing or reading. In which
case God has excellently provided to his people, 1. cor. 14. 10
for the ear viuam vocem, 1. Cor. 14. 10* the preacher to instruct, for how
can they hear without a preacher? To. 10 14.
Romans 10. 14. and for the eye viuum sermonem, Heb. 4. 12. Heb. 4. 12.
written for our learning, Romans 15. 4. which all promiscuously are enjoined to
read, Romans 15. 4.
both to accomplish his desire, who would that all men should be saved, and
come to the knowledge of his truth. 1. Tim, 2. 4
1. Tim. 2. 4 and for the atchiuing our own happiness, which then is
greatest, when we are likest to him; which likeness says Basil without
knowledge is not effected, Bas despit. sanct cap: 1.
nor knowledge without doctrine, nor doctrine without speech, nor speech
without his parts, words, and syllables; so that all are commanded, if it
be possibel, to read, if not, to hear: Now then the old rule holding true,
Oportet discentem credere, the learner must believe, here arises the question,
what if his doctrine be unsound? Es. 28.
a remedy is prescribed by Esaias his direction, Act. 17
by the Beraeans practice Act. 17. try it by the word written: but that
perchance is untruly translated, either through ignorance or malice, and so
the unlearned may be deceived? does a Papist make this supposition, Terent.
and Tute Lepus es? who, presenting to the idiotes the Bible in a strange
tongue, neither move the ear, nor outward sense, unless it be with rattling
in the air, 1. Cor. 14. 8.
1. Cor. 14. 8. nor affect the understanding, leaving it without fruit, verse.
14 but why should ignorance or malice be more feared in our English editions,
or rather prejudice our peoples assent thereunto, then either the Greek
translation of the 70. interpreters, so divinely magnified especially by S.
Augustine and Epiphanius: (...)
or those of Aquila, Symmachus, Theodotion, so often cited by S. Jerome, and a
relic whereof yet remains in the Romish bibles; and that of Lucian the
martyr in the Church of Antioch remembered by Athanasius. (...)
Or if some of them, which Theodoretus affirms, were translated (...),
peruersely and guilefullye, yet the vulgar translation, the author whereof is
uncertain, and S. Ieromes both into the Latin and into the (...)
Sclauonian language; as also that of Vlphilas into the Gottish tongue, and
Chrysostomes into the Armenian, besides that famous work of Origin his
exaplus, are as liable to these imputations; the most of these interpretors
being tainted with some errors, and therefore, by this Pamphl^tors rule, their
translations are subject either to ignorance or malice, as well as ours: or
admit we, that they were more exquisite in the tongues then we, yet, not to
speak of the British translations, (...).
and English also in the time of Beda, what should hinder Tindals, or the
Geneua translation into the English, not to deserve as much credit with our
Laity, as that Rhemish ridiculous version into the same idiome, with their
Catholic idiots? his aunsweare is with a witness, because Broughton avouches
ignorance, and Gregory Martin finds malice in our vernaculer translations.
Eras^us ex Plutar^h.
Accipit and glebam erro according to the proverb, he is near driven that has
no better choice. For want of Kings and Queens, he trumps about with the
short-skirts a Precision and a Papist, mali thripes mali ipes, Diogenian.
says Diogenian, a worthy couple, the one grown mad with his selfe-louing
phrensy, the other possessed with a Popish lunacie, both of them runnagates
from their natural country. For that worthy martyr, and learned man Tindall,
in this respect, we say, as some of theirs of S. Bernard, non vidi^ omnia: and
he of himself to his readers, as S. Origin in the like, Medicente quod sentio,
Orig, in ^^sh.
I speak what I think, vos decernite, do you judge and examine, whether it be
right or no: and for all our translations we obtrude them not upon the church,
(...) 4
as the Trentish council does that vulgar edition, as scripture authentike as
Sybyllaes leaves, not any time to be examined, not any part to be disauowed
(both these arguments of ignorance and malice, for Lex, quae probari se non
vult, suspecta est, says Tertullian. Tertullian.
) nor make them as Sixtus V. the Pope his Vatican edition 89. Sixtus V. in
epist. ad editionem ^atican. 89
vinculum pacis, fidei vnitatem, charitatis nexum etc. the bond of peace, the
unity of faith, the knotte of love, the rule of truth, the loadstone in
errors, the irrefragable compounder of controversies. Only we, by them do
crack the shell* that the kernel may lie open to the sight, and taste of any,
that have appetite thereunto. Indeed Gregory Martin has, in his Pharisaicall
discovery, compassed sea and land, trauersed much ground mounted himself
upon every molehill, ransackt all corners, to descry our translatours
ignorance and malice, and when all is done, it is but the suruay of dronken
zebull, (...). 9. 36
Iud. 9. a shadow of mountains for a band of soldiers: like the African
tumult about S. Ieromes escape, Ieron. epist, 89. and Aug.
^edera for cucurbita Iona. 4. so that any Collatour indifferent and learned in
the Originals, comparing ours with theirs, will borrow Moses his speech, Deu 32.
31. Bellarm. 1. cont^rou. general. page 170.
and apply it more truly then Bellarmin does, Their editions are not like
ours, even our enemies beeinge judges. For not to speak of SS. Jerome,
Augustine, and Hilary, who complained of many wantes and escapes in that
translation, called by some of the^ Ieron.
vulgata, by others August. Gregor.
Itala, by Gregory vetus: eue^ among themselves epist. ad Clem. S^pt.
Pagnine for the old, annotat. 1. in Pand.
Budaeus for the new, defens. ^id. (...). lib. 4
Andradius, and Th^s. 8. in praef. eg. Bibl.
Arias Montanus for both the testamentes, have acknowledged and found therein,
not only words, but sententiam etiam, even the right sense* and meaning of
the holy Ghost to be perverted. yea Sixtus above named, in his preface prefixed
before his Bible, entitled ad perpetuam rei memoriam, says that, before his
Vatican edition, which was but anno 1589. this vete of theirs, Sixtus V.
vbisupr.
their vulgar translation had proved schismatis and haeresis inductio,
dubitationum fluctus, inuolutio quaestionum, discordiarum seges, and pia^um
mentium implicatio, the occasion of heresies, the sea of dou^tes, the Labyrinth
of questions, the seed of contentions, and a snare for religious minds. So
then this imputation scommaticall of faithless fidelity, fastened upon our
translatours by this Libeller, may, in their own men's censure, be branded
upon themselves, and this whole argument returned upon this articler, hac
forma Whosoever relieth his faith upon a corrupt and uncertain edition, This
is the Mayor of this Arti^ler
is an Infidel.

But all Papists are bound to rely their faith upon a corrupt edition. Ses^.
Trid. binds the^r, and they confess it to be corrupt.
ergo All Papists are Infidels, have no faith at all.



And this for his third Article.
The Fourth Article.
The Protestants know not what they believe.

The Protestants know not what they believe, nor why they believe.

Aunsweare.
THe white of an egg, without salt, is flash, and unsavory, Job. 6. 4
says Job, and malice without art, is unarmed bitterness, and a distempered
folly: and therefore as those iangling rudesbies, 1. Tim. 1. 7
titular Doctors in S. Paul's time, knew not what they spoke, nor whereof they
affirmed; Hierom.
so says Iero^. Heretics cum disputare nesciant, tamen litigare non desinunt,
though they cannot reason, yet they will wrangle, and for want of Logic, they
will chop Logic. His syllogismes are wasted, now he comes to profound
divisions of why, and what, and the Protestants ignorance in both, which he
inforceth by a double reuiew.

That they know not why they believe, (...)
I have showed before,

For that the ground of their belefe, (...)
i^ not the authority of the Sc^ipture, of Councels, of Doctors, nor of the
Church, but their own fancy.

Aunsweare.
Both these reuiewes (...) are returned with a remaund semblable, the first,
where he has showed it, (...)
I have aunsweared, and there let him search it: the second, with Nazian.
Nazian.
that Tautology is no means of brevity, ^n epist.
which he so affectes in pretense, and request. But what divinity is this, to
call a Christians belief to a why? vid^licet, to calculate the mysteries of
faith by proof of reason, a thing countercheckt by all the Fathers, Clem.
(...).
especially Clement Alex. in general and particularly by Eusebius in the
Antemonistes, (...)
who weighed all the articles of Faith by Logical Syllogismes. For some, which
have faith, says S. Augustine, have not copiam defendendi fidem, (...)
not the skill to apologize their faith, or render reason thereof; and he
which has this skill, doctior est, non fidelior, is the greater clerk, not
the ^ounder Christian: and therefore his rule elsewher is, not to discuss the
divine mysteries, S^r^. 131
but to believe them; non rationem requirere, sed fidem simpliciter exhibere.
And the Apostle S. Peter, 1. Pet 3. 15
when he wills us to be ready to satisfy every man poscenti rationem des^e,
that asks a reason of our hope, means, that neither we should be ashamed of
our faith in our public confession, nor to shame it by a depraved
conversation. For to give a reason of matters of faith is not possible, they
being supernatural, and man's reason in that knowledge but a beast, Ierem. 1^
Aqu. (...) locum Petri.
says Jeremy. neither, were it so, is it a faculty general, but sapientum
tantum says Aquinas. And they which desire, by questions; to be resolved in
the deep mysteries of faith, do it not as An^elme speaks, vt per rationem
ad fidem acceda^t, that by reasons or resolutions, they might be induced to
believe, (...) ^u^d deus homo. (...).
sed vt ^orum, qu^ credunt, ontemplatione delectentur. For articles of faith,
are the obiectes of admi^ing contemplation, not of Logical demonstration,
says Basil. (...)
yet to follow this fellow his absurd method, we can show him a t^iple why,
three reasons of our belief, the cause why, the means why, and the end why:
the procatarcticall, or first moving cause, the grace and power of the spirit
inclining our hearts to believe: (...)
the demiurgical, (...) 10
or isntrumental means, the word of God read or preached. the teleioticall or
final cause eternal life, which we by faith expect; 2 Cor. ^
the first, for this purpose called spiritus fidei, 2. Co^. 4. 13
2. Cor. 4. 13. the second, verbum fidei, 1. Tim. 4. 6. 1. (...) 4. 6
the last, finis fidei. 1. ^et. 1. 9
1. Pet. 1. 9. so then, the Protestants why, is that which the Schoolmen call,
sufficiens inducti^um, not only doctrina diuina, the holy scripture, sed quod
plus est, says Aquinas, (...)
interior instinctus dei inuitantis, the inward inspiration, and motion of the
spirit. Let the case be in that article of our belefe, the incarnation of
Christ, demand of a Christian why he belieues this, his answer will be, because
the Scripture records it but reply upon him, why he believes the Scripture?
his reason exceedes a why, it is the finger of God opening his heart; else, when
S. Peter handeled those great mysteries in his sermon, Act. 2. Act. 2. 3
why had some of them compunctionem spiritus, verse. ^7. the pricking of the
spirit, whereby their hearts were moved to believe? but others of them,
spiritum compunctionis Romans 11. Romans 11
their hearts pricking against the spirit, resisting it partly by doubting
verse. 12. verse. 12.
partly by scoffinge verse. 13. 13
the same Scripture opened to the^ all, but the same spirit, not working alike
in all. If any ask a why of this belief? S. Paul will cry out, not
aunsweare, O altitudo. Romans 11. 33
Romans 11. non est disputationis, sed stuporis, says Ambrose, Ambros.
it is a matter of amazeme^t, not of argument. Aq. 22. ^. 2
And therefore the scholemen define credere, to be an act of the understanding,
assenting to the divine truth, ex imperio voluntat is, a deo motae, per
gratiam, at the command of the will, so moved by the grace and spirit of
God: a resemblance familiar will make this evident. There are in every man
three parts. 1. The. 5. 23
1. These. 5. 23. flesh soul, and spirit, or rather three men in one man, 1.
Cor. 2.
1. Cor. 2. the carnal, natural, and the spiritual man; and each of these
has his several eye. that Chrystalline humor for the body, the reason for the
soul, and faith for the spirit. Now, then as the eye of the body, though it be
the ca^dle of the body Math. 622. Math 622. (...)
yet the apple in the eye, is the eye of that eye, says Philo; and as the eye
of the mind is reason, (...). 2. 14.
Eccles. 2. 14. yet the eye of that eye, is the understanding, says Aquinas:
Aquin.
so the eye of the part regenerate, is faith, but the eye of that eye, is the
spirit of God, for in his light, do we see light, Psalm. 36. 9.
Psalm. 36. 9. therefore as in the bodily sight, shine the Sun never so
glorious, be the air never so clear, and the medium never so transparent, yet
if the apple in the eye be unsound, the sight will fail, and deceive (for he
that looks through a miste, says Basil, (...)
sees a miss) so be the media of our belief, optime disposita, the Scripture
perspicuous, the church testimony evident, the torrent of Fathers every way
concurrent, the decrees of Councels vnalterably constant; yet if the spirit of
God, qui and sensum dat, and assensum mouet, says Bernar. Barnard.
work not upon the will forcing the assent thereto, all the other are in vain.
Wherefore, if we be asked why we believe? our aunsweare is, that we ascribe
the cause to Gods inspiration, and the means, to the words ministration. As
for this Cuckowlike Palinodie of Councels, Doctors, and Church, being the
fa-burden of every article hitherto, it argues the barrenness of his
conceit, and the badnesse of his cause, but deserves no other aunsweare then
he has received before. And now we must come to his second profunditie, of
what we believe.

And that they know not what they believe is manifest, because they have no
rule, whereby to know what is matter of faith, and what is not. Some will limit
their belief to their Creed, saying, that nothing ought to be believed which
is not in the Apostles Creed: But then I would demand of them whether we
ought to beeleeue that the Scripture is the word of God? that Baptism is a
Sacrament? that in the Eucharist is the body of Christ by faith? to what
article should these be reduced, seeing they are not contained in the Creed?
or how shall we know infallibly, how these be matters of faith, since they are
not contained in the Creed?

Aunsweare.
Were the Law of India and Persiagenerally infortiat, A^ex. ab. Alex.
that he which was thrice taken in a lie, might be perpetually sile^ced, this
fourth article had perished in the Libellers lunges, the three former being
shamelesly false: but sithence he is of his nature, whom the poet describes
(...), that has neither grace to speak truth, nor power to hold in his
chatt; Artoxerxes law will fit him better, Plutarch
as he punished a liar with fastening three nails into his tongue, so to
choke him with three arguments conuincing him of manifest untruth, in saying
that it is manifest we have no rule to know what is matter of faith. First, the
holy Ghost praescript, haec scriptasunt vt credamus, John. 20.
Ioh. 20. Secondly, our writers indesinent challenge provoking, with the
Prophet Esa. 8, Es. 8. 20.
ad legem and testimonium. Thirdly, their own continual clamours, Vide prae
caet. Stapl.
crying out upon us, for making the Scripture alone, the rule of life and
belief, and the sole judge in controversies. Therefore let him know, that we
know our selves to be citizens, subject to a prince, by whose law we are
directed, which as the great Philosopher in humane policy, Aristot.
we, with Tertullian, Tertull.
call regulam veritatis, the (...) of truth; with Cyprian, Cyprian.
regulam doctrin^^um, the rule of all learning; with Basil, Basil.
(...), the rule of right; with Aquinas regula^ intellectus nostri, Tho. Aqui.
in Tim.
the rule of our understanding; Dionys.
with Carthusian regula^ credendorum and agendorum, Carthus.
the rule of contemplation and action. For doctrine, we say with Esaias, Esa. 8.
20
If any speak not according to this rule, it is, because there is no light in
them; Gal. 6. 11
for manners, with S. Paul, as many as walk after this rule, peace be upon
them, and mercy: and so conclude with Cyrill, Cyrill.
that our faith is not derived (...) from the invention of man; (...) but from
the demo^stration of Gods writ. It is their dunsticall glossary that
prescribes, G^oss. disti. 3. ^. veter.
in the discord of the four Doctors, to take Augustins rule in
disputationibus; Ieromes in translationibus; Gregory's immoralibus; forgetting
S. Ambrose, and therefore Ambrosius Spiera (for names sake) prefer his rule in
iudicijs. Spi^ra sermon. 37
But we say with S. Augustine, Augusti^.
Sacra Scriptura doctrinae nostrae regulam figit, the holy Scripture frames the
rule for our faith and profession. This is their torment, that we will not say
to their Pope in sooth, which S. Augustine spoke to Faustus the Manichee in a
scoff, Aug. contr. Faust.
ergo tu es regula veritatis; and so acknowledge his definitive to be the why
and what; the form and matter, the rule and frame of our faith and belief.
That which follows of confining our belief to the Creed, and accompting all
other things extrauagant from faith, not combined within the Apostles Symbol,
is this Tatlers fancy, not our practice. For, first we doubt not, but it is
an Apostolical collection, agreeing with, and derived from their doctrine, yet
resolve not that it was the Apostles frame. Secondly, we acknowledge it
Canonlike, but not Canonical, squared according to that rule the holy
Scriptures, but not the rule it self. Thirdly, we use it, being Christ's
soldiers, as the Romans their Tessera communis in wars, Tacitus
as a short placard, wherein is comprehended the sum of our profession, for
that cause called, as S. Austen writes, Symbolum, August. de Symb.
either in respect of the Authors, arguing their unity in faith, every one
casting in his several share; or of us, it being the Christians Shibboleth
distinguishing Gilead from Ephraim, Judge. 12. Ruffin. in expo^it.
a true trained soldier from a rude nouice, or counterfaite intruder, or open
pagan. And, give, that we made it either the Limitation of our faith, it is no
more then the Fathers have done; Ambros, sermon. 38
Ambrose calls it S. Peter's key, strong enough to open and shut the gates of
heaven. August. sermon. 18 Leoser. 11
Austen calls it certam regulam fidei, an infallible rule of faith. And so does
Leo in his sermons de passione. or, if we call it the perfection of all faith,
it is no other then the same Augustine has done, who intitles it the
abridgement of both testaments totum continens com pendio breuitatis; Aug. se.
131 id^ se^. ^15.
and else where comprehensionem fidei nostrae and perfectione^, the simplicity
thereof, helping the rudeness; the shortness, assisting the memory; the
fullness, perfecting the doctrine of the professors: Hieron, ad Pamma.
nor then S. Hierome, who accomptes it the absolute breuiary Christiani
dogmatis; no more then the Schoolmen who call it summam credendorum,
containing in it the whole matter of faith, vel explicit vel implicit, eeither
directly, or respectively; for, whatsoever things are credenda, says Aquinas,
Aquin. (...) q. 1. art. 8.
are referred either ad esse naturae, and so respect the whole story of the
creation, and consequently the articles of the three persons, each of them
having an hand in that great work, Basil. (...).
as Basil elegantly observes: or ad esse gratiae, which the Creed presents
unto us in the articles of our redemption: or ad esse gloriae, which we expect
by believing the bodies resurrection, and the eternity of life. Briefly, our
faith resting upon that double covenant of God unto his chosen, Apoc. 21. 3
the first, I will be thy God, is dilated in the former and larger part of the
Creed, teaching his omnipotency in the creation; his mercy in our redemption
by his Son; and the assistance of the holy spirit: the other, and they shall
be my people, in the last part, from the Catholic church unto the end. And
yet for all these glorious prerogatives of this Apostolical abstract, none of
our writers have made it the non vltra of our faith, or the listes of our
belief. But did we so, what follows? an horrible sacrilege insues, and
threefold, that is, There is no article to make us believe the Scripture to be
Gods word. that is false, for believing in God the Father, we acknowledge both
his essence, and his providence; Aqui. ^bi supr.
in esse diuino, says Aquine, are included all those properties which we
believe to be in God eternally, whereon depends vita beatitudinis, and amongst
them his truth: infide prouidentiae, all those things are comprised, which he
has temporally dispensed for man's salvation, which lead him in via
beatitudinis, among these is the dispensation of his word, which in our Creed
we acknowledge to be his, in professing him to be a God, and therefore true,
for God is not as man, that he can lie. Nomb. 23 Nomb. 23.
but himself has testified, 1. of the law, that it was the writing of his own
finger, Exodus 32
Exo. 32. 2. of all the Prophets, as he said to Moses os tuum sed verba mea,
their mouth but his words Exodus 4. Exodus 4
for no prophecy is of private motion 2. Pet. 1. 3. 2. Pet 1
of the whole Scripture, that every addition, or substraction is hie treason
against his majesty, as counterfaiting his Pattents Apoc. 22. 18. Apo. 22. 18.
and therefore the Fathers expound the first Credo, August. ^erm. 181
Deum for the unity of essence; Deo, for the verity of his word: and in
Deum, for the assurance of his love. Secondly, the Creed proves not Baptism
to be a Sacrament, yea but Augustine is of opinion, that whatsoever concerns
omne Sacramentum suscipiendum, Idem. ibid.
is therein contained. S. Hierome thinks, Hiero^. in Pamma.
that even in that one article of the resurrection of the flesh, omne
Sacramentum Christiani dogmatis concluditur^ and in truth the Sacraments are,
as I may so speak, a real Creed, acting that which the other enacteth,
performing in deed, which in the Symbol we profess in word, and are rather
seals, then articles of faith. For Baptism, whether by immersion or
aspersion, Romans 6.
exemplifieth Christ's death, and confirms that article of remission of sins;
and the Eucharist presents the effusion of his blood, ratifieng that article
of his death and passion. Summarily, for Baptism, August. sermon. 131
S. Augustine concludes, omne Sacramentum Baptismi in hoc constat, vt credamus
resurrectionem corporum and remissionem peccatorum nobis a Deo pr^estanda, and
so it is reduced to two articles. But whether will we reduce, or how can we
prove, by the Creed, the presence of Christ by faith in the Eucharist ^ Surely
much more easily, then they which defend his bodily carnal presence; for this
crosses both the whole Creed, because corporal presence must needs be
visible and palpable Luc. 24. 39, Luc. 24. 39.
and so the object of the eye, not of faith (for fides est eo^um quae non
vides) and, speciallyo, ne principal article of his ascent into heaven, there
^itting at the right hand of his father. Wherefore S. Bernard, Dionvs. Ca^^hus.
as they write, took another course, for when one of his monks could not be
persuaded either by the Creed or the word, that Christ's body should be in the
Eucharist really, and carnally, so forbore a long space the communion; at last
the good Abbot calls him, and I charge thee, quoth he, upon virtue of thy
sworn obedience, vt mea fide vadas and communices. and thus, not the Apostles
Creed, but S. Bern. faith must enforce that presence. As for the Sacramental
presence by faith, it may be reduced to all those articles which acknowledge
Christ in his two forms, Phil. 2. 7
as Paul speaks; for he wills us so often as we do celebrate, Math 26.
to do it in remembrance of him, videlicet, of him, in the form of a
servant, incarnate, judged, crucified, and dead: and of him, in the form of
God, in assurance of his coming to judge both quick and dead. Lastly, for the
Creed it self, we are no otherwise tied unto it, then the Fathers, who used
other as well as this, both the Nicene, which is called Symbolum patru^, and
Athanasius Creed more large the^ that, and S. Basils in words differing from
them all. Basil.
We use it as the epitome of our profession, not as the perfect rule of faith,
(...).
which title we appropriate to the written word only, by which all mattere of
faith are to be tried and squared, as the quadrant stones of Salomons building
1. Reg 6; 1. Reg. 6 Eusebius Eccl. hist. lib. 7 Hosius.
and conclude with Eusebius, that (...) either the leaving of this rule; or
abusing it with Hosius, as a Lesbian leaden rule, has caused so many ruinous
and deformed heaps, such heresies and schisms in the church of God. But now
doubting to prevail this way, he shows how this rule is cut short by five
inches.

Others deny some articles of their Creed also; for the Protestants deny
three articles of our Creed, and the Puritans five.

Aunsweare.
This division of Protestants and Puritans, as it argues the bitterness of
his malice; so it makes good that parable of our Savior, that Gods field
will have both tares and wheat Math. 13; Math. 13
that position of ours, the church militant has her rebellious members, as the
perfectest body noxious humors; Bern^rd. in Ca^t.
that speech of S. Bernard, velis nolis habitabit intra fines tuos Iebusoeus,
the ^ebusite will dwell in the land, to be thorns in our sides, and pricks in
our eyes Nomb. 33. Nomb. 33 ^^eronym.
yet this is our comfort, that we may truly say with S. Jerome, Ostendimus
tales discipulos, non fecimus. But this slanderous challenge, of our denying
some articles of the Creed, reueales a conscience sea^ed with impudency, and a
tongue set on fire with hell, (...)
as James speaks. What true Protestants deny has hitherto and shall be
still maintained against the whole rout of Pseudocatholikes: as for the
Puritans, if he mean such as have made either Corah his separation from us,
Nomb. 16
in contempt of authority: Luc. 18
or a Pharisaicall secession in maiorem puritatis erenium, Bernard.
as Bernard speaks, in opinion of greater integrity; saying in the spirit
of pride, Esa 6^. ^
Stand a part, for I am holier then thou, Esa* 65. Job his builders in desolate
places Job 15. Job. 15. ^8
taking themselves to be the oracles of wisdom Prou. 26. Prou. 26. (...)
as if the word of God had come only to them, or should proceed from them
alone 1. Cor. 14 such as the Puritano-papist^, 1. Co. 14. 36
Loyala his scholars, among them, the Jesuits, yesterdaies vpstartes, who
prefer themselves both for divinity and purity, far above all the Romish
clergy, regular and secular; for these, I say, as the parents of the blind
man Ioh. 9. John 9.
aetatem habent, let them speak for themselves; I mean not to be their
advocate Martial.
yet as the Poet said, Improbe facit, qui in alieno libro ingeniosus est, it is
a leaud part to miscontrue men's writings, a devilish thing to belie them: but
were it so? I doubt not, but that we have as good authority to abridge the
Creed of some articles, as any of their sideto enlarge it with more; which to
be lawful, not only their schoolmen dispute, and conclude that the Pope, Aqu.
22. art. 1. q. 10
de iure, may do it, but, de facto, they have done it, one of their Popes,
Alphons. de h^res.
having framed a third article of Transubstantiation annexuit Symbolo says
Alpho^sus, has foisted it into the Creed. And now let us see what articles we
deny.

1 The first is the Catholic church, Credo Ecclesiam sanctam Catholicam, I
beeleeue the holy Catholic church, the which in very deed they do not
beeleeue.

Aunsweare
Which of the Protestants believe it not? I am assured that we all profess
there is a Catholic church of Christ, not a Platonicall vtopia, no where
extant, but a company of Gods chosen every where scattered; not a Cyclopicall
anarchy, which the Poet describes, ^uripid.
(...); but as an absolute monarchy in respect of one head, Christ; so a
policy Aristocraticall administered by select governors: no pompous synagogue
aspectable, in gross, to mortal eyes, because God only knows all that are
his, 2. Tim. 2. 2. Tim. 2. 19
for he is not a lew, which is one outward Romans 2. Romans 2. (...).
neither are all Israel, which are of Israel, Romans 9; Romans 9. 6.
not as Noah's family with a Shem and a Cham, or as his Arc with a crow and a
dove, (though this be true in visible particular churches, where are some
straglers not yet called, some weakelinges not fully confirmed; some hypocrites
not easily discerned; some wicked ones not to be avoided) but as Clem. Alex.
Clem. Ale^.
defines it, au elect company into which are gathered the faithful and just,
predestinate by God, before the worlds creation; for this cause called an
holy assembly, while millitant on earth, holy in affection; when triumphant in
heaven, holy in perfection; in both states holy by Christ's imputation. This is
the harmony of our profession, and the true sense of this article: Aqu. p. 3.
q. 2. art. 3
which even Aquine their Angelical doctor con^^meth, concluding that infidels
are not members of the Catholic church, whereof Christ is the head, in act,
but inpossibilitie; no^ so neither, except they be predestinate to life, before
the worlds foundation: and all their Catechistes insinuate so much, Vide Canis.
in making the Catholic church, and the communion of saints all one article:
But hear his reason of our denial.

Because Catholic is universal (a profound note) and so the Church of Christ
which we are bound to believe, must be universal for all Math. 16
time comprehending all ages, and Psa 60
universal for Psalm. ^
place, comprehending all nations: but that Church which the Protestants
believe was interrupted, all the ages beetwixt the Apostles and Luther, which
was 1400. years, or, in very deed was never seen before Luthers days,
therefore that Church they believe cannot be Catholic.

Aunsweare.
A fit aunsweare to this, would cause the reader cry out, ^rasm. ex S^uda.
with that proverb, Date mihi peluim, this tedious iteration rather provoking a
vomit, then edging the appetite; it being the full scope of his first article,
where he received his aunsweare: therefore, since he requests brevity, here
only observe in this phrase (interrupted) either his blasphemous untruth, if
he mean of the existence of the Catholic church, which we believe to be
perpetual; for the head never wanted his body, nor the Sun his beams, nor
the bridegroom his spouse, nor Christ his church; I^en. lib. 4
but, as Irenaeus observes ab initio assistens plasmati suo filius, reuelat
omnibus patrem; it begun (...) at the first foundation, and shall not end
(...) at the final dissolution of the world. The church before Christ
incarnate, and this since he was glorified, being one and the same
co^sanguinitate doctrinae says Tertullian: Tertull. Ioh. 12
or else his Caiphas-like verity, speaking the truth against his will, if he
mean that the glorious conspicuitie, or sincere profession of the Catholic
church was of long interrupted; for that is true, in the old testament by the
worlds deluge the Egyptian bondage, the Idol groves, and the Babilonish
captivity: in the new, at the aduent of Christ by the worlds blindness, the
Phariseis pride, the Jews obstinacy, and the devils malice; after his ascent,
by that threefold persecution, which S. Augustine mentions, Augustine.
violent by tyrants, fraudulent by hypocrites and heretics, and both those
together after the elevation of Antichrist. But if interrupted after Christ and
his Apostles, then was it begun by him, and continued by them, and that is it
which Cyprian said, Cyprian.
and we often repeat, we neither seek, nor reke what was done ante nos before
us, but what he commands to be done, which was ante omnia, before all times,
and above all men; therefore that church which had the foundation by Christ, the
source by the Prophets and Apostles, the frame and iointes by the Scriptures,
we believe in that article to be continually Catholic, always extant, not
always radiant; every where dispersed, elsewhere distressed. pergit nebulo
still he goes on.

Neither is it universal in place being contained within the narrow bounds of
England, which is accounted but as a corner of the world. For the Lutherans in
Germany, the Hugonots in Fra^nce, and the Guiues in Flaunders detest there
religion, almost, as much as the Catholics, neither will they join issue with
the^ in diverse especial poi^ts. And therefore the Protestants church which
they beeleeue can no more be Catholic and universal, the^ England the
universal world; or Ke^t the Kingdom of England, or a pruned bough a wheat
tree; or a dead finger, a man; or a rotten tooth, the whole head.

Aunsweare.
Medusaes ill favored countenance turned men into stones, Athen. dip.
and such brasen-faced ignorance, would make any man astonished. Who ever said,
(except the Roman proctors, for their Babylon) that a particular congregation
was the Catholic church? we have cried it at the cross, and recorded it in
our books, that as the golden candlestick was multiplied into many branches
Exodus 25, Exodus 25
and Aarons rod burgened into many blossoms Nomb. 17. Nomb. 17
so Christ's church was parceled into many particular churches, among which,
this of England to the fretting despite of Romish rennagates, the famous
renown of our Sovereign, and the eternal glory of his name, God has
selected, as among all flowers, the Lilly; among all fowls the Dove; of all
trees, the Cedar; of all the nations, Judea; of all the mountains, this Zion,
to be a sanctuary for his chosen, an oracle for his word, an habitation for
himself: howsoever this viperous scorner in contempt calls it, a corner of
the world; a nooke it is in deed, but such an one as Aegina to Athens, Plu^.
(...), the eiesore thereof; so is this to Rome, the hartsoare thereof. Why?
Bethleem was the smallest among the thousands of I^dah, Mich. 5. Mich. 5. 2
yet the son of righteousness sprung thence and the glorious star directed
thither, Math. 2. Math. 2
The Jews an handful in comparison of the other nations, and yet in Jury was
God known, his name was great in Israel, Psalm. 76. Psalm. 76. 1
a diamond of true luster though set in brass, is of more account and value,
then a counterfaite byrall, or a Portingall perle fastened in gold. We fear
not the Lions paw, the Spanish cruelty; much less the scratch of a strumpet,
the Libellers of Rome; the brain of a Fox, the schisms of hypocrites we
contemn. As for this visible church of ours, we acc^mpt it as the arc of Gods
presence, not believe it as an article of our faith; it is the Romish opinion,
and it was well placed among the extrauagantes, as a position extrauagant from
all learning, Extra de ma^or and obedientis.
reason, and divinity, that a particular Synagogue should be the Catholic
church, that a filthy sincke should be the holy church, yet such a city is
Rome, and such is the divinity of the Popish clergy; and therefore we
conclude this article with a Syllogism inuerted upon this Libeller, being his
own.

Whosoever believes a particular church to be the Catholic denies that
article.

But the Papists avow and believe Rome to be the Church. ergo The Papists
deny that article.

But that I promised, at his request, to answer seriously, I might play with
him about his wheat tree, and ask him where he was borne; and how corn
grows? I have read in S. Basil, (...)
that coals ready burnt, (...)
have grown upon trees, but that corn has bulkt into a stem, and branched
out into arms (non me pudet fateri nescire, quod nesciam) I never heard or
read: but let his folly pass, we will follow him to the second article denied,
as he says, by us.

2 The second article is the Communion of Saints, the which they deny many
ways: First by not believing that Christ has instituted seven Sacraments,
wherein the Saints of his church communicate.

Aunsweare.
The Protestants deny that Christ instituted seven Sacraments, This is his
argument.
ergo They deny the Communion of Saints. The argument is denied, as being
arena sine calce, an in^erence without any coherence, there being no semblable
relation between five of those Sacraments, and this article of the C^eede.
Yet the Anabaptists reason more properly, who because we detest their
Platonicall community, as accompting Meum and Tuum to be more consonant to
Gods law, Plat. de leg.
and all Christian policy, do thereby infer, that we deny the Communion of
Saints. But to this purpose, for the article we believe and confess, that
among the saints on earth, though distant in place, or different in condition,
or aliens by nation, there is an unity in religion, Ephesians. 4 Romans 12
an unanimity in affection, a sympathy in affliction, a mutual charity for
relief each of other, 2. Cor. 9
either comforting the mind if vexed, 1. Pet. 4
or supplying the wantes if distressed, or supporting the weakness if
unsettled, or reforming the ignorance if blinded, or praying for deliverance if
oppressed; falsifying that Heathenish and uncharitable proverb, Athe. dip. 5
Amici qui degunt procul non sunt amici: This is our faith, without breach
whereof, notwithstanding, we deny seven sacraments to be Christ's
ordinance If he mean of them which deny all the seanen he should say
somewhat, but not touch us, who acknowledge two, which ratify this article
most, Baptism, an initiation or entrance into this Communion, 1. Cor. 10
and the Lords Supper which by an (...) and special privilege is entitled
by S. Paul (...) the communion. Romans 6
But if the force of this argument lie in the septenarie number, as it seems,
by the Tridenrine anathema, it must, then all the ancient fathers, and some of
their own doctors, are as obnoxious to this imputation of denying this
article, as we. (...) Tertullian. August. ad (...).
The objections by our men, out of Iustine Tertullian, and Augustine in diverse
places, are triuiall and stale, but especially out of Ambrose, Ambros. de
sacrament.
who of purpose writing a treatise of the Sacraments, ^eckons but two.
Is^idor, Gregory.
Isidore and Gregory excede not three, As for the Sacrament of Matrimony,
grounded upon an ignorant translation of (...) Ephesians. 5. Ephesians. 5. Canus lib. 8
Canus cites the infinite differences, and digladiations of the school
doctors there about. and Lombard, Lombard.
the first hammerer of this seven fold shield, by a close consequent, denies
it to be a sacrament, because it conferreth not grace, as all Sacraments must
do by their divinity. Erasmus.
Erasmus constantly affirms that in S. Ieromes time, it was accounted no
sacrament. Durandus.
Durandus minceth it with an vnivoce and stricte, saying that it is a sacrament
after the larger size, not properly. But Alexander Alensis, Alex. Alens.
the ancientst schole man of credit, concludes, that Christ instituted but
two sacraments, which he proves both by Christ's side pierced, out of which
issued water and blood: 1. Ioh. 5
and also by that triple testimony agreeing in one, the spirit, water, and
blood; reliqua per ministros Ecclesiae ordinata, the rest were the inventions,
or additions of church governors. Petrus a Soto.
And Petrus a Soto confesses that the elements, words, and effects of
four sacraments, cannot be proved by the scripture, Compend. Theolog.
Compendium Theologiae is forced to say, that the element (which in all
sacraments is an external substance and material) is the action and
humiliation of the party penitent, and the word adjoined to make it a full
Sacrament, is the Priests absolution. Bernard.
S. Bernard puts in the Maundie of Christ for a Sacrament, and so makes eight,
others, and above the rest. Dionys. Areopag. Dionys. Areopag.
leaves out matrimony, and so finds but six. But will you see two foxes tied
by the tails, and their heads turned counter? this hood winckt libeller
says, Duraeus co^t. Whitaker.
we deny seven, but Duraeus the Schottish champion for Campian, finds that
Calvin, Beza, and Melancthon agree upon the full number of seven: both alike
true, for we deny but five, having the authority, and precedent of 500.
years but for two only, and none of ours ever allowed of the whole seven.
And therefore I conclude this point, first, that if our denial of just seven,
be a blot to that article, we are not the first, the Fathers, after the
Scriptures, directing us, and ^ounder schoolmen of their own agreeing with
us. Secondly, when he shall bring for those five pseudo-sacramentes, either the
institution of Christ, to authorize them, or any commandment to use them, or
any promise of remission annexed to them, or any element by God appointed for
them, we will with reverence embrace them, but their greatest clerks having
failed herein, we may not expect it at the hands of this sneaking atomite.
And seem they never so zealous in defense of their sacraments, and Saints
communion, how basely they esteem of them, one case in their Cannon law will
demonstrate, which I singled, as concerning this purpose fitly. It happens
that one in iusting and torneament is cast, and his horse falling upon him,
bruiseth him mortally, it is permitted unto him to communicate of the
Eucharist, to be anointed with oil, and to do pennaunce, (there are three
sacraments) and yet after all this, Decreta^. tit. de To^neament.. accedir.
he must be denied Christian burial. First note the absurdity, to prefer
burial above the chiefest sacrament: and then the uncharitableness, to forbid
his body to sleep among Christians, who died in their sight a Christian,
which is a kind of denial of this article, Christian burial bein some
respect, a communion of Saints.

And specially the true and real presence of our Savior Christ in the
Eucharist, by which 1. Cor. 10 (...). 17.
all the faithful members participating of one and the selfsame body, are
made one body, as all the parts of a man's body are made one living thing, by
participating of one soul.

Aunsweare.
To discourse of this double controversy de modo essendi and edendi, of the
manner of Christ's being, and our eating him in the sacrament, consideringe,
how their schoolmen, leaving the simple truth of Gods word, have verified
that proverb, Mendacij multiplex est diuortium; Eras. Adag.
and are at daggers drawing among themselves, would ask more time, then I
vouchsafe to spend in aunsweare of so base a pamphlet as this: the soundest and
acutest of them, having descanted whether he be there, as quantum, or
quantitas; or if so, whether locally, or if so, whether circumscriptiuely, in
the end are driven to say, Thom. p. 3. quest. 75
that he is there secundum quendam modum huic sacramento proprium, qui est
sacramentalis. Indeed, if Christ's natural blood were as properly ours, as
every man's own blood is his own, some show there were of this real and
carnal communion of which he speaks, but sithence his blood, Can. lib. 12.
says Canus, is no otherwise ours, but as the light of the sun is, by
participation, as of those beams, so of his graces; that as the (...), keeping
his certain tabernacle in the heavens. Psalm. 19
Psalm. 19. does nourish and cherrish with his heat and brightness these
inferior and sublunary bodies, so Christ sitting there, as he must do, till
his coming in majesty Act. 3. 21. Act. 3. 21
without local motion, or carnal application, communicates with his saints,
in that holy sacrament, the forcible power of his body and blood, which
works so mightily in faithful hearts, that both it settleth the kingdom of
God within the^, Luc. 17. 21.
Luc. 17. and lifts them into heavenly places Ephesians. 2 faith being that Eagles
eye, Ephesians. 2. 6 Job. 39. 33
which, spying the pray a far off, as Job speaks, makes the saints resort
thither, where the carcass is, Math. 24. ^8
Math. 24. And for the second, great difference there is, perchance, not
observed by many, between our eating of Christ, and our uniting with him. We
are united unto him vt viuenti, as our living head, and nos viuificanti and
making us his lively members. We eat him as our Passover 2. Cor. 5; 2. Cor. 5
that as the Israelites, eat the one mortuum and assum, dead and roasted,
Exodus 12, Exodus 12. 9
so we him crucifixum and passum, dead and slain, and so that speech of
Austen is true, August.
that we have him here in pabu, lo, as he was in patibulo torn and rent; as
himself ordained the sacra^ent in (...) fracto not integro, Lue. 22. 19.
the bread broken, not the whole loaf, thereby signifying, yea saying, that in
doing it we must remember him not as living among us, but as dying for us; vt
in cruce, non in caelo, as he was crucified, not as he is glorified, whereby
we conclude, first, for his presence that his body is so far forth there
quatenus editur, as it is eaten, but his body is eaten as dead and slain, so
himself appointed it, This is my body, and stays not there, but adds
withal, Math. 26
which is given for you: and his blood is droncke, not as remaining in his
veins, but as shed; so himself speaks, This is my blood of the new
testament shed for many. Now his body bruised and his blood poured out can no
otherwise be present in the Eucharist, but by a representation thereof in the
bread broken, and in the wine effused, of the one side; and on the
communicantes part, by a grateful recordation of the benefits, a reverent
valuation of the sacrifice, a faithful application of his merits in his whole
passion; and therefore his presence must be sacramental, and our eating
spiritual, August. de verb. 1 om. sermon. 33
for, non quod videtur, sed quod creditur pascit, says S. Augustine. Secondly
for the union. It is true which Christ says that he which eats my flesh
abides in me and I in him. Ioh. 6. 1^.
Ioh. 6. 56. not that this union is first begun in the participation of that
holy supper (for none can truly eat the body of Christ, unless he be
first united with him, and ingrafted into him, nec vere edit corpus Christi,
qui non est de corpore Christi, says S. August) because prima vnio, August.
says Aquinas, Aqu. 12. quest. 66
the first union between God and man, is begun in Baptism by one spirit,
into one body, as the Apostle speaks 1. Cor 12. 1. Cor. 12.
and continued by faith, hope, and charity, all these the operation of the
spirit. But if we truly eat the body, and drink the blood of Christ, then
by the power of the holy Ghost, and faith cooperating, this union is
strengthened, the vigor and effects whereof, after a true participation, we
shall feel in our selves more forcible and lively. An union more strong and
near, then that which he (...) speaks of the body and soul: for the soul
may be separated from the body, Eccles. 12
but the elect members of Christ ca^ never be disiointed from him; and
therefore the whole body of his church is sometimes called, by his own name,
Act. 11. 26
not as the Antiochians, Christians, but Christ, so Ambrose reads that place
Gal. 5. Gal. 5. 24
Qui sunt Christi, They which are Christ's in the nominative plural, not in the
genitive singular. Briefly, for both I ask, is not Christ as present in
Baptism as in the Eucharist, for in them both we communicate with him, bredd
a new in the one, fed a new in the other, and yet Christ's real presence is
not challenged for Baptism? if they say, no, because of the Eucharist it was
said, Gal. 3
This is my body and blood, not so of Baptism; I aunsweare, as much, if not
more was spoken by the Apostle, They which are baptized have put on Christ, put
him on we cannot unless he be present, and the putting him on, is even the
very same, which he else where calls Christ's dwelling in us. Ephesians. 3
Ephesians. 3, namely, that in Baptism we are so transformed, as now not we, but
Christ alone does live within us, Gal. 2. Gal. 2
as near an unity as may. August. ad infant. and de conseer, distinct. 2.
And in truth S. Augustine is out of doubt, that in Baptism the true member of
Christ corporis and sanguinis Domini particeps fit, is partaker of the body
and blood of the Lord, and therefore no reason withstandes, but that he should
be really present in both, or in neither. Again, is it we, or they which
deny the communion of Saints in this sacrament? we, keeping Christ's
institution, and commandment, participating it to all, which by S. Paul his
rule, 1. Cor. 1^
have first tried and examined themselves, and in both kinds, the bread and
the cup: or they, which by their (...), as the Apostle speaks; their private
mass as they term it, have turned coenam in scenam, the supper into a
spectacle, and this blessed sacrament into an heave offering, feeding the
peoples eyes with the priests elevation, and sole mastucation? or, if once in
a year they vouchsafe them the communion, they defalke on half, denying them
the cup, Lombard. li. 4. did 11 Ambros. in 1. Cor 11
which by Lombards collection, out of S. Ambrose, is to deny the redemption of
the soul; for the body, says he, was broken for the freedom of our bodies,
and the blood was shed, for the redeming of the soul, as it was prefigured in
Moses law. Thus they maki^g their lai^ie but Easter Saints, suffering them no
other time to communicate with them, and the^ also denying them that communion
which assures them to be saints, in bereauing them of the cup, to which
that blessi^g was added, which was not to the bread, videlicet, (...)
shed for many in remissionem peecatorum for remission of sins, and so making
them demi-saintes, are more guilty of annihilating this article of the
Communion of Saints then we, which exclude none, and give the whole. But to
conclude, if the real and carnal presence of Christ, be the only cause of the
Saints union unto him, and their communion among themselves, what then does S.
Augustine mean when he says, August. in. Ioh. tract. ^9.
that, in receiving of the sacrament, some do eat panem domini, and other some
panem dominum? if it be bread, then it is not transubstantiated into his body;
if some do eat the bread of the Lord, and other the bread the Lord, what makes
the difference? if it be his body really, then is it alike to all; for
Christ's body cannot be changed: if to some it be bread, and to others
Christ, the difference is in the receiver, not in the sacrament: summarilie, in
the holy supper, there is sacramentum, and res sacramenti, idem (...). tract.
26.
the first, the two elements, the second, Christ himself: they are tasted
with the mouth, and chewed in the teeth; this must have, as Basil calls it,
(...) the mouth of the inward man, (...)
which is faith. The sacrament is received by some to life, by others to
perdition; but the thing it self, (...)
Omni homini ad vitam, nulli ad mortem, says S. Austen. If therefore Christ be
there carnally present, then indefinitely, quicunque eius particeps fuerit,
whosoever, good or bad, shall participate, eats undoubtedly his own
salvation, and so becomes one with Christ, a consequent necessary, but most
impious.

Seondly they deny the Communion of the church militant and triumphant, by
exclaming (...)
against invocation of Saints; by which holy exercise, those blessed Saints in
heaven, and we in earth communicate, we by prayer glorifiing them, and they
by Mediation.
meditation obtaining our requests.

Aunsweare.
This distinction of saints into militant and triumphant we allow, that there
is but one tribe and (...) of them both we acknowledge Ephesians. 3.
Ephesians. 3. We on earth sub pellibus, lying in camp under sold and pay, fighting
as soldiers 2. Tim. 2. 2. Tim. 2. 3.
the celestial in rest and glory, having coronam repositam, impositam 2. Tim.
4, 2. Tim. 4. 8.
the crown laid up for the^, put upon them, Apoc. 1. 5.
reigning as kings, Apo. 1. That communion with them we maintain, which the
primitive church allowed, both by imitation of their virtues, in our
conversation, Epist. Smyr.
(...), by celebration of their praises in panegyricall orations, by the
example of the Apostle Heb. 11; Heb. 11.
in revolution of their annual memories, at solemn feasts authorized by the
church. Epiphan.
We detest the Cainans, and Eunomians, for contemning the Saints departed,
accounting a living dog, better then a dead lion Eccles. 9. Eccles 9. Aug de
(...).
with S. Augustine, we honor them, charitate, non seruitute, having received
prohibition to be servants of me^ 1. Cor. 7, 1 Cor. ^.
with love, not fear; in admiration of their lives, not adoration of their
images: nec templa sicut dijs, sed memorias vt hominibus dicamus, (...)
says Austen, we rear not temples unto them as Gods, but record their
memories as of holy me^; there being a difference between sepulchra aedificare
Math. 23, Mat. ^3.
and simal^chracolere, between dignifieng them as Saints by celebration, and
Deifieng them as Gods by invocation: this comb^ning of heaven and earth
together, by prayer to them, being rather a mutinous rebellion and conspiracy
against God, then a mutual communion or society of saints; grounded upon an
heathenish superstition, (...)
the chief authors being Plato and Apuleius, who formed mediators
Doemonicall, and Heroical, both, those spiritual essences which they call
Doemones, and the souls departed, which they called Heroes, (as the popish
clergy, Angels and Saints) continued by supposed aparitions of walking
ghostes, and miracles wrought at martyrs monumentes; and confirmed by some
ambiguous irresolutions of a few fathers: for whether they procure us any good,
(...) 2.
even Origin makes it a question, and thinks it not to be chartulae
mysterium, a written verity, but an unknown secret; and they which were that
way, in such affections, most passionate, slaked their heat in this case, Basil.
with a Si, or a Qnasi, as S. Basil: with an (...) as Nazianz. Nazians
as I think and am persuaded: not resolved by the scholemen what their
knowledge, or their power is, whether their knowledge be matutina or
vespertina; and whether they procure us any, Aquinas.
good either impetratiue by mediation of their prayers, or interpretatiue by
valuation of their merits. No where, even by the confession of Eckius, Eckius
in Enchirid.
authorized in scripture by any example or precept; not in the old testament,
Exodus 32. 4.
because the people were to prone to Idolatry, as in the Calfe was seen; and
the saints were the^ in Limbo, not glorified: not in the new, least the Gentiles
couerted should return and worship men for Gods, as the Lycaonians did Paul and
Barnabas Act. 14. Act. 14.
not in the writings, or preachinges of the Evangelists and Apostles, least
they might be suspected of arrogance, as purueyors of their own praises, in
proclayming themselus an (...), a future glory among me^, after their decease;
Durae cant, Wh^ttak.
this says Eckius, although both Duraeus will needs fetch it from the very
cross of Christ, in this manner; (...)
Our Savior, in his passion, cried out Eli, Eli, and the people thought he
had called for Elias, ergo Invocation of Saints was used among the Jews. and
this pamphletor, as you see, will have it an article of faith, which cannot be,
whether we look unto the matter of faith, which is the word, or the object of
faith, which is Christ. For nothing may be an article of faith which is not
squired by the rule of faith, the scripture: Neither is prayer to be made unto
any, but on whom we believe, Romans 10. Romans 10.
and no Christian dare say that we must believe in Saints. It was said of
Caesar, (...)
that in the renewing Pompey his statues which were ruinated, he erected his
own: here it is contrary, for this glori^eng of the Saints, is the
disparagement of the whole Trinity; of God the father, being the principal
object of our prayers by his own precept Psalm. 50, (...)
Call upon me. by Christ's auaunt to Satan, Math. 4, (...).
Eisoli, him only thou shall serve; by his sovereignty of place being our
king of old, Psalm. 74. 12. (...)
nec been cum socijs regna-manent, says the Poet. Of the Son, being the
vnus mediator, the alone mediator between God and man 1. Tim. 2. 5. 1. Tim. 2.
5.
the still suruiuing priest making intercession for us Heb. 7. 25, Heb. 7. 25.
without whom there is no access unto the Father Ioh. 14. Ioh. 14. 6.
who only, as Ambrose says, Ambros.
has that double office of a mediator, imperare vt deus, and visitare vt
homo, as man compassionating our infirmities, Heb. 2, Heb. 2.
as God supplying our wants, as man dying for our sins, as God risen for our
justification Romans 4. Romans 4. vit.
as both God and man, sitting at the right hand, requesting for us, Romans 8. 34.
Romans 8. 34.
Of the Holy Ghost, the life and breath of our praye^s, for we know not what to
pray as we ought, but the spirit it self makes request for us within us,
Romans 8. 26. Verse. 26.
so that the establishing of prayer to Saints were to subject the spirit of
God to the devotion of men, for postulare minoris est, says Aquinas, (...)
it is the inferior his part to sue. Wherefore the Apostle concludes, that the
searcher of the hearts knows the meaning of the spirit, qui postulat
prosanctis, verse. 27. Verse. 27.
for the Saints not to the Saints. Briefly, whereas every prayer must be made
in the name of Christ Ioh. 16. Ioh. 16.
(the sweetest In nomine we can sing) and every prayer not so made, non solum
non delet peccatum, Aug. in (...).
sed fit ipsa peccatum says S. Austen, surely the prayer to saints must
needs be sin, because we must not pray to them, per Iesum Christum for
Christ's sake, for that were to make him inferior to them: and that is no
marvel in Rome, for in their Canon of the mass, Canon. Miss.
the greasy priest, requests God the Father, that he would vouchsafe to
hear his son Christ; as if his orizon were more preualent with God, then
Christ's intercession.

3 They deny the Communion of the church militant, and the souls (...)
in Purgatory, bereauing them of that Christian charity, which charitable
compassion, and merciful pity requires, and by mutual affection the
members of one body help one another.

Aunsweare.
It must needs prove sincere religion, which frames divinity of poetry, and
fetches Virgils Aeneids into the Apostles creed, and makes the Popes
kitche^-stuffe (the furnace and fuel of Purgatory) an article of faith: but
herein is that speech of Tertullian properly instified, Tertull^ Apoll.
That Philosophers are the Patriarchs of heretics. This fancy of Purgatory
being imagined, Home: Odiss. Plat. Phaed. Virgill. Enerd. 6.
first in the dream of Homer, Plato, and Virgill, upon a foolish pity (which
this melting boweld traitor) calls charitable compassion) that those, who
died in their sins which were (...) venial and curable, though they were not
worthy to fly to heaven immediately, yet not so cruelly to be censured, as
to be thrown down into Ta^arus, or Hell: the judge who ballaunced the weight
of the Painims sins was in. exorable Radamanthus, but of the Catholic
ghostes, the indulgent Pope. Among the Christians, the principal founders
thereof, Clem. Alex.
either Clem. Alexand. who was so enamored of Philosophy, that he concluded,
the Grecians might be thereby saved: Origin.
or his scholar Origin, of whom it is no marvel, he should think the souls
departed might be freed from torment, since he also held, that even the
damned spirits, and Lucifer himself should in the end be saved. The
scriptures for this place, (...)
by their own confession, none or obscure; the Fathers in this point to
themselves contradictorie; the greatest patrones among themselves unresolved;
first, of the place, whether in the air, or under the earth, or the brim of
hell; Secondly, for the site, whether extensiue as a cover over hell, in
latitude; or collateral with hell, severed by a partition, in longitude; or
circular about hell, in several celles, as the spots of an apple about the
quore: Thirdly, for the nature of the place to some it shall not be fire, but
tanquam ignis, 1. Co^. 3.
as it were fire, as out of S. Paul they collect: to other it shall be both
fire and water, P^al. 66.
as out of the Psalms they infer; to other it shall be a lake and no water,
as they cite Zachary to that purpose. (...)
Fourthly, for the parties tormented, the most will have them a middle sort
between saints and sinners; this fellow, as it seems, accomptes them
saints, else why brings he the^ within compass of this article? Therefore we,
refusing to build upon sand, leave them to their vnletled conjectures, and out
of the Scriptures acknowledge no Purgatory but one, 1. John. 1.
the blood of Jesus Christ purging us from all our sins: wherein the garments
of the saints are washed white. Apoc. 7. 14.
Apoc. 7. no other clensing but that which Aquinas me^tioneth, Aq^inas. Pa. 3.
q. 27. art. 3.
velper gratiam a culpa, vel per lumen doctrinae a nescientia; either from the
guilt of sins by his grace, or the dross of ignorance by his word. For which
he has appointed a double fire; for doctrine, the fire of the spirit, 1. Cor.
3. 1. Cor. 3.
to try timber from stubble, pearls from strawes: for the other, 1. Petr. 4.
(...)
that which Peter calls the fiery trial, videlicet, the afflictions of this
life, which are as fire to gold, (...).
as the flaile to corn, says Gregory. But two sorts of vessels, of wrath
and savor, either for honor or contumely, Romans 9. Romans ^ Mat. 25.
sheep or goats for the right or left hand. A double state of saints, 2.
Cor. 5.
which S. Paul resembles to a gargarment, in this world (...), the vesture of
this flesh in the other (...), their inuestiture with immortality; either
(...), a peregrination from God here, or (...), a presence with him in heaven.
For both which there is allotted a several burden, (...) Gal. 6. Augustine.
(...)
in this life, that which S. Austen calls onus mutuae charitatis, mutual
affection and compassion in supporting each other verse 2. in the next life,
onus reddendae rationis, the render of account, which every one must bear
himself verse. 5. Verse. 5.
But two places of resort, Luke 16.
Abraham's bosom, and the lake of brimstone; Apoc. 20.
two ways thereunto, the one (...) a straightened path, hardly passable, the
other (...) a broadway, a roadway with trauailers innumerable, Math. 7. Math. 7.
Two rewards in the end, the crown of righteousness, eternal life. 2. Tim.
4. Tim. 4.
the wages of sin, everlasting death, Romans 6. August. (...).
Romans 6. which S. Austen calls ignem aeternum and regnum aeternum. Cyprian
refrigerium iusti, supplicium iniusti; the atchieuement of both in this life,
in the other neither remission, nor redemption says Austen, this being the
time of working that of reward, Nazian^
says Nazianz, this of striving, Chrysostom.
that of crowning says Chrysostom.

The 3. Article is Remission of sins, for they acknowledge no such effect in
the Sacrament of Baptism, but only accoumpt it as external sign of a
praereceiued grace of favor of God, by his eternal predestination, against
the expres word of God: which therefore calls the Sacrament the Tit. 3.
lauer of regeneration, for that in it the soul dead by sin, is newly
regenerated by grace.

Aunsweare.
This fellow purposed from the beginning Asellius his profession, A. G^l. Lib.
7.
which P. Africanus said was malitia and nequitia, to be not only a libeller,
but a liar; that argues his mind to be malicious, this bewrayes his cause to
be bad, both make him shame less, and all spring from ignorance, either making
report his ground, or partial reading his best intelligence, neglecting our
writers, and cleaving only to his own side, whose fashion it is to fasten
opinions upon us, neither conceived by us, nor received among us. The concent
of our church is, that Baptism is the indument of Christ, Gal. 3. Gal. 3. Romans
6.
an insition into Christ, Romans 6. as the ark of Noah, in the deluge, to save
us. 1. Pet. 3. the lauer of regeneration to wash us, Tit. 3. (...)
working a double effect, priuatiuely remissa culpa in washing us; (...)
positiuely data iustitia in sanctifieng us. 1. Cor. 6. 11. 1 Cor. ^. 11.
whether we use it as the water of Jordan by immersion, Math. 3. Math. 3.
or as the holy water in the law by aspersio^ No^b. 19. Numer. ^9.
not regarding the heathenish distinction, between diuing and sprinckling in
Macro. Macrob (...) Clem. Alex.
and therefore with Clem. Alexand. we account it, (...) the sovereign
counterpoison against original venim; (...)
with Nazianz. the deluge of sin; with Basil, the mother of adoption; with
Chrysostom, Chrysostom
the purgatory of life. Ezechiel his aqua munda, cleansing us from all our
pollutions, Ezechiel. 36
Ezech. 36. Notwithstanding, we ascribe not this power either ad clementum, or
momentum, not to the element of water, Aquine.
as though it had vim ablutiuam, as Aquine speaks, this skouring force; or
regeneratiuam this renewing power, as Lombard terms it; Lombard.
but unto the blood of Christ working inuisibly by the power of the spirit,
Tit. 3. non enim aqua lauat animam, sed ipsa prius lauatur a spiritu, vt lauare
possit spiritualiter, Hierom.
says Jerome. Hereupon the Fathers resemble it to the diuing poole of
Bethesda, John 5.
Ioh. 5. as that being moved by the Angel, had an healing power: so this
consecrated by the word and sanctified by the spirit, has a sovereign effect
and operation; and for that purpose, sometimes they call the water, in Baptism,
rubram aquam red water, the blood of Christ, having there his invisible working.
Why? but the Protestants accoumpt it only an external seal of a prereceiued
grace in Gods predestination: he names none, Came. ^at 8.
yet Campian, whose ape he is, Duraeus. contra Whit. lib. 8
quoates Calvin, but cites him not; Duraeus cites him, but understands him
not; that word only is not the first he he has coined; the father of lies,
as the Fathers observe in Math 4. having taught them all a to add or defalke
from a text to serve their turn. Cal^. instit. lib. 4.
The first fruit, which master Calvin, among three principal effects, notes
in this sacrament is, that it is Symbolum nostrae purgationis, the very words
of the Greek Scholiast. Schol. in 1. Pet. 3. Pighius
in 1. Pet. 3. (...) yea of Pighius a gross papist, baptsmus a peccatis
ablutionis signum est. and instar signati diplomatis says Calvin, and as the
kings ^etters pattents under seal confirms our commission: that as a
prince, having purposed a favor to his subjects, graunts it by his patentes
of mere indulgence, and ratifies it by his seal for more assurance; so God,
having purposed in his eternal counsel to save some, which he cannot do
before he have remitted their sins, therefore in Baptism he both conferres
this grace, and confirms it unto them; for which cause the scriptures and
fathers do call it sigillum promissionis and remissionis; conferres it, I say,
Camp. vbi sup.
as Campian confesses it, veluti per canalem, deriuatiuely, not originally;
effectually, not effectiuely; as by a brook not as from a spring; for this is
Christ's blood, quia latus Christi est latex sacramenti says S. Austen: Allen
de Sacra. chap. 3.
as Allen the Cardinal speaks, grace is wrought in Baptism as a man writes
with a pen, powerfully, yet instrumentally* confirms it visibly, se^ling
that which concealed; so, that which was in his secret counsel, propositum,
the purpose of his will by predestination, in Baptism he makes it depositum,
the pledge of our salvation, and only to the elect, for in solis electis
sacramenta efficient quod figurant says S. Augustine, August. de bap. contra
Donat. and citat. a Lomb. lib. 4. did. 4
in the elect only, the sacraments perform really, which they present
figuratively: and therefore that is no heresy nor fancy to call it the seal
of a praereceiued grace. For justification by faith, which oftentimes, in those
which are adulti, preuents Baptism, is a praeaccepted grace, and cannot stand
without a perfect remission of their sins which are so justified. What fruit
then bringes Baptism to them? eue^ this says Lombard, because he who thus
justified comes to Baptism, Lomb. vbi sup. F.
is as the branch brought by the dove in to Noe his arc, Genesis 8.
Genesis 8. qui ante intus erat iudicio Dei sed nunc etiam iudicio Ecclesiae, who
before was justified, and fully remitted in gods secret judgment, but now by
Baptism is made a visible member of the Church, the ^acrament being the
evidence of Gods providence and this was Cornelius his case Act. 10. Act. 10.
Also (...) lib. 4. contr. Apol. Jesuit.
we urge the necessity of Baptism, especially to infantes, least they should
seem either naturally innocent, or generally sanctified without it; yet not
simply, but with a reservation, first, of Gods omnipotency, who being agens
liberrimum, as the schoolmen speak, has not tied his power to the
sacraments, says Lombard; Lomb. vbi sup.
secondly, of preeminence to Christ's Baptism, wherein, not he, but we were
washed, the waters drenching him, but cleansing us: which made S. Augustine to
cry out Omisericordia, August. de temp. sermon. 30.
o the mercy, and withal, the power of God, Nec dum eramus in mu^do, et iam
abluebamur in Baptismo. Thirdly, with a dispensation of that which the
scholemen call articulum necessitatis, there being no contempt of religion,
but either extremity disappointing; or death suddenly preventing, as infantes,
and the thief crucified Luc. 23. Luc. 23.
Fourthly, with a distinction of Baptismus voti, when there (...) in the
parties, but no opportunity for the action, volentes non valentes says
Lombard, as in the case of Valentinian in S. Ambrose: Ambros. orat ^uneb.
Valentin.
briefly, we so highly extol the dignity, necessity, and efficacy of
Baptism, that Duraeus pleases himself triumphantly, Duraeus de Paradox.
contr. Whita^.
in hope that some of our writers are proved, in this opinion, Romanistes,
saving, he misliketh our detestation of that magical conceit of opus
operatum, videlicet, that the very act of Baptism, without either the parties
faith, or the spirits power, should confime grace of it self. To conclude,
whether we or they acknowledge more power and effic^cie in this sacrament, let
the world judge: we, with the Apostle ascribe the effects of grace, of
cleansing, of remission, of sanctification unto this holy Baptism. 1. Cor. 6.
11. 1. Cor. 6. 11
even as it was instituted by our Savior, without any slibber-sauced
ceremonies; or they, who, as if it were not of it self effectual enough, add
exorcismes, and exufflations, and lights, and oil, and spittle, and dirt, with
which neither the river Jordan, nor the (...), and Infantes were ever consorted
or acquainted. And now from ablution, he comes to absolution.

Moreover, they allow not the Sacrament of penance, wherein all actual Ioh. 20.
sins, committed after Baptism are cancelled.

Answer.
The Apostle willing us to offer up our bodies sacrifices, Romans 12.
we use penance or repentance, as the Priests sacrificing knives, to mortify
our earthly members. Colos. 3. Colos. 3.
to kill those beastlike passions and affections which rage within us: applying
it as an wholesome chastisement, not using it as an holy sacrament, it having
neither visible sign, nor divine institution. The Trentish conuenticle
confesses, that it was no sacrament in the old testamente, whereby we infer
that it is no sacrament at all; Act. 10. and 26.
for Peter Act. 10, and Paul Act. 26 profess, that they preach no other
doctrine of repentance, then that which the Fathers and rophets before had
taught. Neither was it, ^ay the Trentistes, a sacrament before Christ's
resurrection, but after it was: then first, the repentance which John Baptist
preached, Math. 3. and 4.
Math. 3. and our Savior published, Math. 4. (both which places the Rhemistes
have translated Do penance) was no sacrament. Secondly, it crosses an other
assertion of their own, when they say that Penance is no sacrament before
Baptism; put the case in those which being converted, and having repented
upon Peter his sermon Act. 2. Act. 2.
were after baptized, which was after Christ was risen and ascended; by the
first opinion then it was a sacrament; it was before their Baptism, by their
second rule then it was no sacrament. Lastly by this concession of theirs, all
the examples, and testimonies, which they enforce for satisfaction our of the
old testament, either of Miriam David, or Manasses are frivolous and
superfluous. And therefore the gloss of their Canon law concludes, Glos. de
poenit did. 5.
it is better to say, that it was rather an universal tradition of the church,
then any scripture institution: and one of their great schoolmen is
peremptory, Bon^^en.
that the agnizing of the fault and desert of punishment, together with the
recognizing of Gods mercy and favor, causes remission of the sin, as for
confession and satisfaction, it is the church imposition. Truth it is, loath
they are to give too much to Gods grace, therefore, because in Baptism we
receive remission of our sins freely, without our work concurring, they have
inverted for falls after Baptism Penance, wherein temporary satisfactio^s
shall be meritorious. As for us, we confess ingenuously, that, by reason both of
that original taint, Cipria^
which Cyprian calls virus paternum, Adams guilt: and our natural
corruption, which David calls virus maternum, our mothers conception. Psalm.
51. Psalm. 51.
and the relics thereof, which S. Paul clepeth the law of the emembers, Romans
7. Romans 7.
^eueling in our bodies, and rebelling against the spirit, till it have gotten
from peccatum babitans to peccatum regnans, Ro^. 6. as S. Romans 6. 12.
James says, Iac. 3.
in many things, we every one offend, even the iustest man, seven times a
day. Prou. 24. Pro. 24. 26
the treacheries of the devil, the lusts of theflesh, the allu rements of the
world, working upon that corrupt inclination, G^^. 6.
sometimes praeoccupate us, with slips of ignorance, through infirmity; Psalm.
19.
oft-times through malice precipitate us into heinous enormities, even those
which the schoolmen call vastantia conscientiam, which without repentance and
faith, cannot be remitted. And therefore we detest the Anabaptists, who
establish a perfection after Baptism, more absolute then Adams was in his
integrity. For as Augustine notes, August.
his was posse non peccare, a liberty, if he would, not to sin: but they
will have it celestial, non posse peccare, to have no possibility to sin,
this is Pharisaicall arrogancy: much more the Nouatians, who deny to those
that relapse after Baptism, any hope of remission from God, or intromission
into the church; this is the gulf of despair. And to them we (...) the
Enthusiastes, who think God will be reconciled (...) without mediatio^ by
prayer, or ministry of the word, or assurance of faith, or sorrow by
repentance, this is Epicurish security: but in defiance of them all, we preach
with S. Augustine, August.
repentance to be arra pacis, the earnest of our peace with God; Basil
with S. Basil, that it is the physic of the soul; Plut. de ^olert. animal.
and as in Physic there are three parts, (...) surgerie by incision, (...)
by purgation; (...) by diet; so herein, first, contrition, which is the
phlebotomie, yea the cutting of the very hart-stringes. Act. 2. Act. 2.
which David calls the acceptable sacrifice. Ps. 51. Psalm. 51
second confession, as the vomit casting out before God and men, to our
confusion, and their example, the filthiness of our sins: as the Scolopendra
turns her entrails outward to scour them; Plutar.
pleading, Grego. in Job
as Gregory speaks, nostras causas apud Deum, and. causam Domini aduersus
nos, acknowledging our sins against our selves Psalm. 32. Psalm. 32.
with shame of countenance, with remorse of conscience: privately, if we be
burdened; publicly, if we be enjoined. Thirdly, fasting and weeping, Joel. 2.
Joel. 2.
which is the diet to keep the body under, and tame it by subjection 1. Cor.
9. 1. Cor. 9.
not only as a prevention of sin, but as a punishment for sin. Psalm. 69.
1^. Psalm. 69. 10.
which repentance, or penance, notwithstanding, we do not say with the
Pseudocatholikes to be a second plancke to save us, a new means of our
remission, eleuating thereby, or annihilating the vigor and force of Baptism,
the effect whereof, I said before, we tied not Sect. 1. huius arti,
ad momentum to the very instant of the celebration, as if any sin after
ensuing might abolishit; for, that were too much to weaken the efficacy of so
mighty a sacrament, and to repeal too sodeinely the force of so strong a
covenant, and to deiect most basely the authority of so great a seal,
especially the holy Ghost having called it, an aeternall mercy, an immovable
league, Esa. 54. Esa. 54
and as a continual current for all times: saluos fecit, for the time past, he
has saved us by the l^uer, Tit 3. Tit. 3.
saluos facit, it does save us for the present state, 1. Pet. 3. 1. Pet. 3.
and for the time to come, he that believes and is baptized saluabitur shall
be saved. Mar. 16. Mar. 16.


And that which passes all in absurdity, is to deny that our sins are
perfectly forgiven, but only not imputed, and as it were veyled or covered
with the passion of Christ, all the botches and biles, the filth and
abomination of sin still remaining, and as it were exhaling a most
pestiferous sent in the sight of God.

Aunsweare.
David seems mad, (...)
but to whom? says Austen, regi Achis, id est, stultis and ignorantibus, to
king Achis, that is, to fools and rudesbies: so to Pharisaicall Catholics
destroying grace, to rear up merits, the divinity both of the greatest
Prophet, and the chiefest Apostle will seem absurdity. To the point, Blessed
he cannot be, which is not fully remitted, but David pronounces him blessed,
to whom sin is not imputed Psalm. 32. Psalm. 32. 1.
Christ's righteousness imputed is the perfect remission of sins, says
Ambrose in Romans 8. Ambr in Romans 8. Oecum. in Romans 3.
for our justification is nothing else, but our sins remission says
Oecumenius: because whom he has called, them he has justified, scilicet,
remissionepeccatoru^, as the Gloss expoundes that place, Gloss. in Romans 8.
Gorram. Romans 4. 11. Pighius sae^^.
to which agrees Gorram. in Romans 4. and Pighius often in his controversy de
fide and iustificatione. But where Christ's righteousness is imputed, there is
true justification, which cannot be perfect, without full remission says
Paul. Roman. 3. Romans 3. 24. 25.
Wherefore in saying, that we deny a perfect remission, is to deceive the
reader, and to abusevs: and to account this doctrine, that the not imputing of
sins, is a perfect forgiveness, as an absurdity, is the disgrace of the
scriptures, not of us, which are so taught by the Scriptures. Sins are debtes
Math. 18. Math. 18.
the creditor being satisfied, the bond is cancelled, the debt remitted. God
is reconciled to us by his son, the price of whose blood has satisfied him
I. Pet. 1. 1. Pet. 1.
the virtue thereof has washed us, Apocal. 1. Apoc. 1. 5.
the handwriting is fastened to the cross, Colos. 2. Coloss. 2. 14
the sin forgiven unto us: yet still we remain debtors, otherwise we need
not daily pray, forgive us our debtes Mat. 6. Mat. 6. 12.
therefore they are remitted, because not exacted extremely, not because they
are taken away radically, for David did not pronounce him blessed says S.
Augustine, August. in Psalm. 31.
in quo non inuenta etc. in whom sin was not found at all, but to whom God
impuleth not sin. Who has had what he could require, death for the
transgression of the precept Genesis 3. Genesis 3.
our Savior has suffered it. Phil. ^. Phil. 2.
a curse for the breach of the law, he has borne it, Gal. 3. Gal. 3.
the hugenes of our sins cannot provoke him, the price has sufficed him; the
lothsomnes cannot offend him, his blood has purged them. No doubt the
corruption thereof exhaleth, as he speaks, of themselves, a noisome savor
and stench, which David confesses, Psalm. 38, Psalm. 38. 5.
yet the son of righteousness has dispersed the fogge, that it cannot
ascend to his father, and the sweet smelling savor of his sacrifice, Ephesians. 5.
2.
Ephesians. 5. has taken away the sent thereof, that it cannot annoy him. and this
is that which David calls the covering of our sins. Psalm. 32. Psalm. 32. ^.
upon which both S. Augustine divinely descanteth, August. ibid.
If he have covered them, noluit aduertere, he would not mark, them; if he
would not note the^, noluit animaduertere, he would not straightly examine
them; if not sift them narrowly, noluir punire, he would not punish them;
noluit agnoscere, maluit ignoscere, he would not acknowledge them, he had
rather forgive them: and one of their own, Flaminius in his paraphrase upon
the Psalms dedicated to Cardinal Farnesius, Flam. in Psalm. 32.
excelle^tly says. Blessed are they whose unrighteousness is forgiven; it is
worth the noting says he, how the Prophet pronounces them blessed, not which
are free from sin, and clean without all spot, for there is none such
living, but them to whom Gods mercy forgiueth sins, and them it forgiueth
who confess and believe that the blood of Christ is the perfect expiation for
their sins and offenses. Who is it then which can lay any thing to the charge
of Gods chosen, and accuse them, Romans 8.
says Paul? if none can convince them, they are perfectly justified, if so,
then fully remitted, so it is, says the Apostle, it is God that justifies.
How? one of their own doctors shall expound it, Gor^an.
in forbearing the punishment, because he has said nolo mortem peccatoris,
Ezech. 18
a sinner he is, but I will not that he shall die. And that which the
schoolmen say, that, formale peccati is abolished, Aqui. p. 3.
but the materiale remains, is nothing else, but that which we say, the guilt
is removed, because God is pacified in his beloved, yet the relics of sin
still remain and dwell within us, even being regenerate, Romans 7. Romans 7. 17.
for if we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, but if we confess
the^, he is faithful and just to forgive the^, I. Ioh. 1. ^ John. 1.
Now in their opinion, how are sins forgiven? Conc. Trid.
by charity infused, which expels sin, as the light does darkness. This is
the bounty of Gods larges, no remission of the trespass; for, though a
creditor give his debtor a stock to set him up, this new donation cuts not off
the former arrerages, which when he pleases he may exact: so that by this
doctrine, not the almighty reconciled, but man qualified; not Christ patient,
but a quality inherent; not god by grace pardo^ing, but an instilled virtue
expelling sin, is the cause of remission; which S. Hilarie manifestly
crosses, in saying, that the forgiveness of sins is not probitatis meritum,
any desert of quality within us, Hilar. in Psalm. 66.
but it consists in miserendo, and miserando, in the free indulgence of Gods
affection, compassionating our condition; and exuberans bonitas, the
ouerflowing of his grace abounding to the act of remission; which in Iustine
Martyr his gloss in Psalm. 32. Iusti. in dialog. ^ryph.
is the not imputing of sin, Blessed, says the Prophet, is ^hee to whom the
Lord imputes not sin, that is, says Iustine, to whom, repenting, God does
forgive his sin. Which not imputing, how meanly soever they esteem thereof,
yet Origin makes the highest step of forgiveness: the first being dimissio
peccati, God not observing our sin, but passing by it, as not regarding it; the
second tectio, Orig. lib. ^ ad Romans
the covering thereof by his grace; the third and highest, non imputatio, the
not imputing them. So that the perfect remission of sins by David his
gradation, and Origin his gloss, is only the not imputing of sin. By which
assertion neither these Fathers, nor we, do any way attenuate the burden of
sin, as being thus easily remitted, nor bolster it out, as presuming of this
indulgent favor: and therefore his flaunt of vanity, which follows, might
well have been spared, especially since he labors to be an Epitomist.

For let them shift themselves as they list, and scarf their soars according
to their fancies; yet no veil nor mantle can cover the deformity of sin from
the piercing eyes of Gods perfect understanding, from which nothing can be
concealed.

Aunsweare.
-- Bullatis vt mihi nugis Pagina turgescit? ^ersius
says the poet: these are the trappinges of Balaams beast, a vain rhetorical
flourish, the displayed streamer of a dastard spirit, either distrusting his
cause, for which he has entered the field; or the weakness of his
arguments, wherewith he should maintain it. His conscience knows it,
because our writings declare, and our preachinges declame, Abac. 1. ^3.
that with Abacuck we confess, that as Gods eyes are pure, Psalm. 7. 9.
not enduring to see evil, or to behold iniquity; so they are piercing,
searching the very heart and reins: Horat.
that he detesteth a sinner- cane peius and angue, worse then a serpent, for
unto the dragons he said, Praise the Lord ye serpents, Psalm. 148, Psalm. 148.
but unto the sinner he says, Why do thou preach my law, Psalm. 50
and take my covenant in thy mouth? that the filthy leprosy of our sins,
make him loath us, and us also loath to look up to him, facies peccatorum, as
David calls it, Psalm. 38, Psalm. 38. 3.
being so Medusalike horribly deformed, that, in beholding thereof, it both
strikes a terror into our conscience, and a shame over our countenance,
confessing with Daniel, Dan. 9. 7
that in respect thereof, there beelongeth to us nothing but confusion of face.
We scarifie them, we scarf them not, we wish me^ to discuss them, not to
excuse them, with Bernard, Bernard.
we will them to lay open their sins, Luc. 16.
as Lazarus his soars, to move the more compassion. We say, with Jeremy, it
is the Lords mercies that we are not all consumed, Lam. 3. 32.
Lam. 3. For if he should mark extremely what were done amiss, none could
stand, Psalm. 130. Psalm. 130. 3.
so far we are from justifying our selves, that we say with the Prophet Esa.
64. Esa. 64.
that all our righteousness is as a menstruous cloth; August.
with S. Augustine, Vae iustitiae nostrae, si re^mota iustitia iudicetur. They
are the me^ who have made scarfes, and veiles, and rebaters for sins, in
saying that concupiscence, (which the Apostle plainly terms sin, Romans 7. 7
Romans 7. which being the devils concubine, is the damme of all actual sins
Iac. 1.) Iac. 1. 15
either to be no sin, but only fomes, the allumettes, or sulphurated fuel,
by which sin is easily kindled; or to be sin abusiuely, as Christ is
called sin, 2. Cor. 5. 2 Cor. 5. 21.
or metonymically, either because it accrueth of sin, or provoke us to
sin. Secondly, in denying the works of infidels, and unregenerate persons,
to be sins, crossing the Apostle, concluding every action without faith to
be sin, Romans 14. Romans 14. 23 August. in Ioh.
and S. Austen who says, Quicquid in te est sine Christo Satan est. Thirdly in
coining a distinction of venial and mortal sins, contradicted by S. Paul,
who awardeth death for sin, as the proper reward, Romans 6. Romans 6. 23 Nazian.
and by Nazian-who elegantly says, that every sin is (...), the life of
death, and the death of the soul: Fourthly, in applying such facile lenatiues,
and remedies for sins, as the sprinckling of holy water; the largess of a
rich Almner; the indulgence of a bribed Pope; at the most, the lash of a whip
in penance, or the flash of the fire in purgatory, these are the scarfes, and
plasters invented by them for sins; of which more hereafter in the second
part concerning manners. 2. part. 2. art
And now from the sins of man, we must follow him to the son of God.

4 The Puritans in effect deny that Christ is the son of God; for they
peremptorily affirm, Ioh. 8. 42.
that Christ is God him self and not God of God. So that he received not his
divinity from his father. The which position flatly takes away the nature of
a son, Ioh. 16. 13.
for the nature of a son is to receive his substance of his father, and it
implies contradiction: that the son receives his person of his father, and
not his substance and essence, for the substance of God is essential to every
person in Trinity.

Aunsweare.
It is well observed by Aelianus, that prei^dice neither hears nor sees any
thing acurately, Aelian. li. 1, cap. 4.
(...), whereupon it comes to pass, that it often times judges amiss: this
objection he has received by tradition from their own, not reading our
writers: yet had he read Bellarmine and not trusted too much to Campians
credit, this section might have been cut off: (...)
For Bellarmine thinks that master Calvin (whom this pamphleter wou^deth
through the Puritans sides) is wrongfully challenged in this point, by
Genebrard: and that when the worst is made of it, it will prove but a
brandishing of words, lib. co. c. 19.
no controversy of substance, says the Jesuit elsewhere. So far then from
being an heresy, Ieron. in Gal.
which, Jerome says, is in sensu, non in verbis, in the meaning not in the
words: that it is not to be accounted a fault, Hilar. de Trin. lib. ^.
for sensus, non sermo fit crimen, in Hilary his judgment, the sense, not the
speech makes a crime. And yet even the words, to a sound and charitable
divine, are no way faulty, videlicet, that Christ is Deus de Deo, contr.
Gentilem.
Deus ex sese, God of God, God of himself, which seems, say they, to implay
a contradiction, for him to be God of himself, which is God of God. (not to
discourse of this point in this short abstract of aunsweare) Basil reconciles
them, ^asil. contr. Eun. lib. 4.
he is God of God, as he is the Son, he is God of himself, as he is an
Essence. For the Son, says he, was begotten (...) not as he is a
substance, (...), but so far forth as he is a son, that is, as S. Austen
speaks, secundum relatiuum, relatiuely as the one is the father, the other
the son. because Essentia non est illud quod generat, did. 4. lib. 1.
says I ombard, it is not the Essence which begets. Neither must we believe,
quoth his Epitomist Spinaeus, Spin. ibid.
quod Pater genuit diuinam ese^tiam, that the Father begat the divine essence:
Bern. lib. 5. de consid.
which is also S: Bernard his opinion, Quod alter ex altero, and alter ad
alterum est, and veracissime dicitur, this relation, that one is of the other,
personarum designatio est, non vnitatis diuisio, is the designeme^t of the
persons, not the distracting of the unity; and this is Calvin his drift
against Ge^tilis, in saying that Christ was (...) God of him self: because
that blasphemer his opinion was, that the Father was Essentiator filij, and the
son Essentiatus: that the deity of Christ was but a portion (...) as a
cantell cut out of Gods essence, by a dependence, and leave, not originally: so
that his meaning is, vbi supra.
as Bellarmine confesses, that Christ as God, borrowed not his essence from
the Father, but communicated from all eternity of the same essence with him,
there being as Cyril speaks, Cyrill.
(...), the same identitie of substance in all the three persons; else were not
Christ God equal with his Father: and so should commit a robbery in making
himself so, Phi. 2. Phil. 2. ^.
for whatsoever incipit esse ex aliquo, or per aliquod, is not idem illi, the
same with it, by which and of which it has his being, Ansel. Monol. c. 18
August. in psalm. 68.
says Anselmus. Therefore Austen concludes, that he is called the son
respectively to his father, but Deus ad seipsum, correspondent to that of
Cyrill, Cyri. in Ioh.
that the Father and Son respecting the substance, are vnum principium, for
that he, which was in the beginning with God, was God, Ioh. 1. 1. Ioh. 1. 1
so that, those speeches of the Fathers, of Ignatius, Ignat.
that the essence of the Son is genita, begotten: of Denis, Dionys. Areop.
Hilar.
that in the Father is (...), the fountain of the Deity: of Hilarie, that the
Son has nothing nisi natum, but to be borne; of Augustine, August.
that the Father has (...), his essence of himself, the Son (...), his
essence from another: these (I say) are to be understood hypostatically, in
regard of the persons, not essentially, which is Caluins opinion and no error,
Bella^mi vbi super.
from which Bellarmine rids him by this distinction. In which positio^ if there
be either Arrianisme, as Genebrard will have it; or Puritanism, as this mate
scorns it; Durae.
or Mahumetisme, as Duraeus will infer it; or Manicheisme, to which Canisius
referres it, Canis.
then even Genebrard himself is that way guilty, who often so distinguishes;
then was Pope Innocentius a Puritan, who definitiuely concludes, for Lombard
against Ioachimus the Abbat, with authority and consent of the Council of
Lateran, Extr, de S. Tri^^t. c. damnamus
we believe and confess that there is vna quaedam res, one certain thing
incomprehensible and ineffable, which truly is the Father, Son; and holy
Ghost, and every of these three persons is illa res, that thing, viz. the
substance, essence, and nature divine: and illa res, that thing is neither
generans, nec genita, neque procedens, neither ingendreth, nor is begotten, nor
does proceed: but it is the Father which begets, the Son is begotten, and
the holy Ghost proceeds, that so distinctio sit in personis, vnitas in
natura, there may be a distinction of the persons, but an unity in essence:
the^ is Bellarmine a Puritan, Simler. epist. ad Pol^^o^.
for he alleging Simlerus his confession, non negamus filium habere essentiam
a Deo patre, sed essentiam genitam negamus, we deny not the son to have his
essence of the Father, but we deny that the essence is begotten (the very
opinion for which the Puritans are challenged) sees no reason, Bellar. vbi
supra.
cur haec sententia catholica dicenda non sit, why this position should not be
catholic and orthodoxall. Then is Epiphanius a Catharist, who calls Christ,
(...), perfect of himself, God of himself. Epiph. haeres. 69.
and Origin also, who calls him (...) life of himself: which is all one,
Orig. in Job.
for idem est Deo esse and viuere, say the schoolmen, it is all one in God, to
be and to live. Briefly, the mystery is intricate, in quo humanum laborat
ingenium, Aug de Tri.
says S. Augustine, intangling the wit, and exceeding the speech of any man:
this objection no controversy, but a slander, long since vnaunswearably
rebutted by us into their teeth, saving that, with the poet, their malice so
either delights or deceives them, that they had rather continue a cavil
vainly, and contumeliously, Horat ep. li. 1.
Quam sapere and ring^ -- And now from heaven, like Lncifer, he glides to hell.

5 Finally, they deny the d^scention of Christ into hell, and desperately
defend, that he suffered the pains of hell upon the cross, whereby they
blaspheme most horribly that sacred humanity: as if Christ had despaired of
his salvation, (...) 66 24.
as if God had hated him, and he had hated God; Man. 9. 48.
as if he had been afflicted and tormented with anguish of mind for his
offenses, Mat. 25. 41.
for which he was deprived of the sight of God, and eternally to be deprived:
all which horrible punishments are included in the pains of hell, and
whosoever ascribes them to Christ, blasphemeth more horribly then Arrius, who
denied him to be God: for less absurdity were it to deny him to be God,
then to make God, the enemy of God.

Aunsweare.
What Puritans deny or affirm, the Church of England, whom this libell
principally attainteth, means not to defend, which, to cut off all factions
in opinions about religion, has jointly concluded the whole sum of her
profession within the compass of forty articles, the third whereof is this, As
Christ died for us, and was buried, Art. 3. 156^.
so, withal, it is to be believed that he went down into hell: which it
inioyneth us to believe, not so much because it is an article in the Apostles
Symbol, so called, (for it is notorious that this article was not admitted
into the Creed 300 years after Christ, neither by the East nor West churches:
Aqui. 22. q. 1. ar 9.
omitted also in the Nicene Creed; nor any where extant, as Aquinas
confesses, in Symbolo patrum, in the articles which the ancient fathers do
recompt) but as being grounded upon manifest scripture Psalm. 16. and Act. 2.
Psalm 16. Act. 2.
The exposition thereof not only in modern times, but even presently after
the admitting thereof, diverse and different; every part of the proposition,
having a diverse acceptance in the scriptures. For the proposition being
this, Christ descended into hell; the subject, Christ, is sometimes put for his
person; sometimes for the efficacy of his death: his person somwhere for his
Divine, elsewhere for his humane nature; his humanity in some places, for his
body only; in other for his soul alone; and sometimes, for both his person
and his office. The copula, descended, signifies either a local motion, from
a higher to a lower place: or some more special pre^ence, and effectual
power, showed more in one place then another; as God, saying in Genesis, that
he will go down: Genesis 18.
and the holy Ghost descending in the Baptism of Christ, Math. 3.
Math. 3. The praedicate, Inferos Hell, either the grave; or the place of the
damned; or the miserablest state, which may befall a man, either by immine^t
perils pursuing him, which was David's Hell Psalm. 18. Psalm. 18. 5.
or anxietie of mind tormenting him, which was Annaes He^l 1. Sam. 2. 6. 1^
Sam. 2. 6.
or both joined together which was Jonas Hell, in his body distressed, being
deuouted of a whale, in the deep sea: in his mind feeling Gods high
displeasure upon him, Ion. ^ 2.
for his disobedience, Ion. 2. From which variety of sense, there issue five
several interpretations of this article, none of them exorbitant from the
scriptures tracke, or erring from the analogy of faith.

1 That Christ his body was laid in the grave. 2 His soul, separate from the
body, went to the place where were the souls departed. 3 His Deity exhibited
it self, as it were present, in the lowest pit, to the terror of the devils,
and further despair of the reprobate. 4 That the efficacy and power of his
death, did even thither stretch it self. 5 That Christ suffered those extreme
anguishes and torments, which, for our sakes, by his father appointed he was to
endure.
There is also a sixth, which passes most rife among the Fathers, who, taking
Inferi for Abraham's bosom, August. and Hieron. et^.
expound it, that Christ went thither ad liber andum liberandos to convey the
Fathers, deceased before his resurrection, into the place where now they are:
but not returning, as the gross Papists express him, like another Hercules
and Thoseus, with a flagge and a cross. Saint Austen confesses he could not
satisfy himself with any exposition thereof, August. ad Euod.
especially of that place of Saint Peter, 1. pet. 3.
which seems most to confirm it. Cyprian, or Ruffinus approve the first, that
he lay in his grave. The schoolmen mightily trouble their heads, 1. into
what place of hell he went? Thomas includes all the parts of hell, as they
have divided it: that as an haruenger he scowred Limbus patrum, Aquinas. p. 3.
q. 52.
and rid all from thence: as a conqueror he presented himself in Tartarus, for
the terror of the damned; as a visitor he surueyed Purgatory, promising them
remission; 2. How he descended, and was there? Caietan stands to it, that
he was there secundum effectum, Ca^^t. in 3.
powerfully, not personally. Durande, that his soul was in Paradise secundum
essentiam, Vide Mi^and.
substantially, but in Hell ad effectum. Their Apollo Aquinas, that he was in
Limbo patrum in the first manner, in the other parts of hell, only, in power
and effect. 3. Whether he endured the pains of hell, or were in loco paenae
sine paena, Bonauent.
as Bonauenture will? or in pain and torment, Caietan.
as Caietan collecteth out of Psalm. 16? 4. What fruit and profit his
descention wrought, whether he conferred any essential blessedness on the
saints, which makes against Augustine: or increase thereof only by hope of
evasion from Purgatory in time. 5. Whether the souls in Abraham's bosom only,
or other besides them were manumitted; Ni^et. in Naz. Isa^,
and among the rest, yea (one legend will have it) before the rest, Plato his
soul had the pre-eminence, having the grace first to receive the faith. These
curious quaerees, and fabulous eliminations of hels secrets, which S. John
properly calls the deepnes of Satan, Apoc. 2.
have made men of zeal and judgment to recourse to the scriptures, if there
they may find a more full, certain and Theological sense of that article. Now
then if the Puritanes (as this scorner terms them) among these Hydraheaded
expositions, one suppullulating after another, admit of the last, viz. his
extreme agony, and fear in the garden, and on the cross, induced thereunto,
respectively, considering, 1. the baseness of that nature, wherein he was
vilified, despicatissimi vernaculi, imo vermiculi, Bernard
says S. Bernard. 2. The cause he undertook, our sins: 3. The punishment
for them, an accursed death. Besides the phrases in scripture, expressing those
anguished of mind: in the ingresse of this abissus, his soul heavy even unto
the death, Mat. 26, Math. 26.
with that strong cry and tears to be delivered, Heb. 5.
Hebr. 5: in the progress therein, those grumi sanguinis, clots of blood
breking from him Luc. 22: Luke 22.
in recessu intimo, when he was deepest in, that dreadful clamor, expressing a
most horrible passion, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Math. 27:
Math. 27
with-all, his triumphs over the powers of hell, Colos. 2.
(...) or (...), admit which you please, either the first, referring it to his
cross, Origin.
as Origin (...), upon the tree, where he did (...), traduce them openly,
videlicet, those spoils which by conquest he had recovered from the strong
man, Math. 12. Math. 12.
or the second, (...), in himself, which must be referred to body and soul
both together, which could not be in hell locally, his body never desce^ding
thither, therefore to be referred to his suffering, which for that cause
Bernard calls actio passiua, Bernard.
and passio actiua; if upon these inducements, having, as they think, more
pregnant proof in scripture, then any the rest, they stick to this (put case
the exposition be not the most proper) yet are they not to be accused of
denying the article, for misse-interpretation is no denial: perhaps, to
express more lively, and impresse in our thoughts more deeply, that direful
conflict, Math. 27
which for us wretches it pleased him to endure, they have used words
somewhat hyperbolicall, as despairing and forsaken: yet if first we consider
our Savior in his mere humane nature, the deity, as it were, sequestring it
self for a time, to lay him more open to this dreadful combat; secondly,
that both some of the Fathers, and also their own writers, have used almost
the very same words of extremity, Hieronym.
S. Jerome, that he did trepidanter renuere, with tre^bling refuse, Damase.
libro. ^.
Damascene, (...), that he was truly and unfeignedly affrighted, Athanas.
citing Athanasius for his authority; Rabanus, Rabanus. per Thom.
that his humane nature was derelicta; for^orne, forsaken; and therefore c^ied
out, as we do in extreme dangers and agonies, qui deseri nos putamus,
thinking and saying with David, Psalm. 31. 24.
we are cast out of the sight of Gods eyes; and Canus, that being derelictus a
deo, Canus. lib. 1^.
omnique penitus solatio destitutus, forsaken of God, and left void of all
comfort from him, he culd not but sorrow; surely the^ this accusation of
denying this article, and of blasphemous Arrianisme, allightes upon these
fathers, and themselves, as upon the Puritans. But who^soeuer this imputation
touches, it no way concerns, as at first said, our English professors, who
establish that article, inioyning it to be accepted as an article of faith, the
exposition whereof, as it is generally received in England, that right
reverend Father the B. B. Bilson.
of Winchester has set down. And so at last we have found an end of this
long article, consisting of so ma^y branches. Whereof we may say with the
Greek Philosopher, ^lutarch.
(...), it has had many lies, and as many contumelies.

The Fifth Article.
The Protestants have no mean to determine controversies, and abolish
heresies.

As the Protestants neither know what they believe, nor why they believe: so
have they no means in their church to settle them in unity of belief, no^ to
determine controversies, nor to abolish heresies, as has the Catholic church:

Aunsweare.
THis is like the Sophister, who having spent all his arguments before his
hour, cries out, repetamus omnia breuiter, and rotunde, let us go over them
again briefly and roundly: he wanted matter to fill up his odd number of
fi^ue, therefore he botcheth it up with the second, third, and fourth articles,
bringing us back to his why, and what, making us worse then emperikes and
quackesaluers: Arist. Met.
for they know, (...), that such a salve is good for such a wound, but not the
(...) the reason thereof: as for us, we know neither why, nor what we believe.
The great Philosopher thought that orators, which would demonstrate their
conjectures; Idem ad Theod.
and Geometricians which would persuade their principles, were very foolish;
because neither things probable could be ratified by demonstrations, nor
things necessary are to be induced by persuasion. The grounds of our faith are
supernatural and divine, the cause spiritual and inward, and therefore not to
be examined, nor aunsweared by why and what, that is humane reason; yet we say
as before, Art. 4. Sect. 1.
that the what, the matter of our faith, is the holy scripture, written, that
we might believe, John 20.
says John; which without doubting, August. epn st. 112. Romans 10.
we must believe says Austen. The why, that is, the means why we believe ex
auditu, Romans 10, by the word preached, Bernar. in Cant.
that is oleum effusum in S. Bernard. The cause why, ex motu, the inward
operation of the spirit, that is oleu^ infusum. For magisteria are adiutoria,
August. in 1. John. 1.
says Augustine, the ministry of the word is a coadiutor with the spirit,
but cathedram in coelo habet, qui corda docet, he that informs the heart, is
the doctor of the chair, not of Moses in the Synagogues and schools of
Jerusalem, Math. 23: Math. 23.
but in heaven is his chair, from whence he teaches by his spirit. Again,
he reuoketh us to Church and Councels, four times repeated within four
leaves, to which, because we will not stand with out due examination or just
co^tradiction, therefore he inferres, that we have no means to settle faith,
to determine controversies, to abolish heresies: all which have been
aunsweared in the former articles, wherein we appropriate these especial means
unto the spirit of God, and the holy scriptures; for the first, Isido^. Pelus
^p. 30. lib. ^
the scripture, says Isidore, works in us faith, not obliquely, hoouerly,
and ambiguously, but (...), firmly amassed and compact, deeply settled, qui ne
branle point, as the French speak, not mutable, not nutable: for that which
only ingendreth faith, is the principal means to settle faith, which are
only these two, the word and the spirit, because all faith, by the
confession of the schoolmen, is either acquisita, Aquin. in Romans 10.
which is the effect of the word read or preached; or infusa, which is the
operation of the spirit, without which the word is not effectual; for nunquam
Pauli sensum ingredieris, nisi Pauli spiritum imbiberis, a man shall never
understand Paul his meaning, ad Patres in montem
unless he have been touched with Paul his spirit, says Bernard: for
which cause, both the Gospel is called the ground and stablishment of faith.
Colos. 1. 23.
Colos. 1. and the Apostles and Prophets, the foundation of our belief Ephesians.
2. Ephesians. 2. 20.
which was not spoken personally, Aqui. ibid.
but as Aquinas well interprets it, of their doctrine and writings, this being
no derogation to Christ his privilege, who is the principal fundament,
because, as the Apostle speaks of himself, 1. Cor. ^.
they having sensum Christi, do preach nothing else but Christ, and him
crucified, 1. Cor. 1. 1. Cor. 1.
so that whereas other writers are to be read cum iudicandi liberate, Aug.
contr. ^aust. li. 11.
with liberty to censure them, as we please, with choice whether we will
believe them or no; the scriptures must be read cum credendi necessitate,
Canusli. ^.
and therefore Canus confesses, that vltima resolutio fidei, the last
resolution of faith, must be upon the spirit his inward operation. Aqui. 1.
q. 1. art. 8.
And Aquinas, that fides non debet inniti, our faith must not be settled upon
any other writings or decrees, then the authors of the Canonical books have
set down. Can. li. 12.
Whereupon the Bishop before named makes this conclusion, proper to our
purpose. Nulla igitur alia etc. no other principles of divinity, no other
doctrine of any divines except of Christ, the Prophets, and Apostles, fidem
ecclesiae fundat, does ground or settle the faith of the church Secondly, for
the determining of controversies, we appeal to the Princes Deputy, the Vicar
general of Christ; not the Pope, whom in this case they deifie, we defy
him, Tertul. de praeser.
but Vicarium Domini, as Tertull. calls him, the holy ghost; and to his
sentence, viz. the scriptures, wherein there is that vicaria vis Spiritus
Sancti, id em de V^g. vel.
that power delegate of the Spirit: and thus put the case with S. Augustine.
Aug. de nupt. and concup
Ista controuersia iudicem requir it? does this Controversy require an vmpire?
Iudicet Christus, let Christ be he: which has those three perfections required
in a Judge, (confessed, though ironically, yet truly, by the Herodians, Math.
22.
Math. 22.) giving a true sentence, wherein we are assured, there is no error;
absolute, admitting no appeal, upright; August. vbi supra.
without bias of partiality: Iudicet cum illo and Apostolus, and with him
join the arbitrament of the Apostle, because Christ himself speaks in the
Apostle. Excellent is that place of Optatus, Optat. Mileu. cont. Parmen.
are their Controversies, in points of Christianity? Judges must be procured
to reconcile the^, not Christians, they will be partial on each side; not
Pagans, they are not capable of these mysteries; not Jews, they are sworn
enemies against the truth: from earth we appeal to heaven; sed quid pulsamus
ad Caelum, but why stand we knocking there; cum habeamus hic in Euangelio,
since here we have him in the Gospel? where if we knock, the door shall be
opened, by him, whom Theophyl. calls (...), Theo^^ l. in John. 10. Basil.
ep. 80.
the porter of the Scriptures. And so, for that point, we conclude with S.
Basil, (...), let the holy scripture determine between us, for there we have
controuersiarum (...) the deuoyement and dissolution of all controversies, said
the noble Emperor Constantine, Theod. lib. 1. c. 7.
in the Council of Nice. For in Gods matters, who more fit to judge then God
himself? Idoneus enim sibi testis est, Hila. lib. ^. de l'rin^^
qui nisi per se cognitus non est. The same we say of the third, for abolishing
herefies, the scriptures being as proper and sufficient (...) to confound an
heresy, 1 Timothy 3. 1^
as it is (...), to found a verity. For which cause both the spirit and the
word are compared to fire. The spirit, 1. Cor. 3. 1. Cor. 3. 13
discerning between straw and silver, Ier. ^3. 2^.
stubble and gold: The word, Ier. 23. disgregans heterogenea, seuering the
precious from the vile, the metal from dross: being both index and vindex,
the discrier of heresies, and the destroyer of them; the book of God, by the
power of the spirit, being as David's sling and stones, 1 Samuel ^7.
able to prostrate Goliath, and repel the Philistines, and therefore, though
Councels assembled for confounding heresies, yet the special artillery
wherewith they battered those (...), 2. Cor. 10.
lofty imaginations of rebellious heretics, were fetched from the tower of
David, Cant. 4, Cant. 4. 4.
this armory of God. For, if the high priest discern not of the leprosy, or
crime secundum legem, Deuteronomy. 17.
according to the law, though his authority were great, yet his sentence was
frustrate; it being not free in matters of religion for men to determine, or
condemn what they will, but iuxta leges, so far forth as the law prescribes
the^, says a Papist on that place: Hieroni. ab O^e.
otherwise it might prove a tyranny over the conscience (...), 2. Co^. 1. ^9.
to be Lords over the faith of men, to enforce them without scripture. So
then, we conclude this point with that precept of the wise man. (...). 12. 12
His amplius fili mine requiras, seek no farther, nor other means then these,
the spirit and the scriptures, for the true Catholic church admittes of no
other, howsoever that Church, thus nicknamed, the whore of Babylon, enamored
with strange lovers, does boast herself of traditions, and councels, and
fathers.

For our Savior Christ by his divine providence did foresee, that heresies
were to arise in his church, as his Apostle S. Paul 1. Cor. 11.
does warn us: the which as plagues were to infect his flock, and therefore
he not only forewarned us of them, but also gave us means how to prevent and
extinguish them. He willed us to hear his Church, if we would not be
accounted as Ethnikes Math. ^8. 17.
and Publicans. He ordained Pastors and Ephesians. 4. 11.
Doctors, least we should be carried away with every blast of vain doctrine.
He promised unto the church, the Ioh. 14 17
assistance of the holy Ghost, in such sort, as luc. 10. 16.
they which would not hear her, would not hear him.

Aunsweare.
Vmbratilis lucta, Era. Chil. ^.
as the proverb is, all this we yield, acknowledginge, that truth must be
planted: that heresy must be extinguished: that the teachers and pastors
must be authorized: that Councels may be assembled; that the Church must be
obeyed: yet with prouisoes, that the truth be no other then the Gospel we
have received. Gal. 1.^.
Nothing counted heresy, which is religion sincerely professed, Act. 24. Act.
24. 14.
that those Pastors, have the Vrim and the Thummim. Deuteronomy. 33, Deuteronomy. 33. 8.
science and conscience, feeding their flock diligently and holesomely, 2.
Tim. 4. 2. Tim. 4
that councels be lawful assemblies, Act. 19, Act. 19.
congregated by command of Princes, not hurried by the Pope; not a rabble of
illiterate Friars; not a banded rout of prejudicial priests; not a factious
bench of partial vmpieres; not ouer-swaying the scriptures by authority and
number, but ouer-awed by the scriptures; Hila^. lib. 1. de (...).
admitting that sense quem ex dictis retulerint, non attulerint, which they can
work out of them naturally, not infer upon them peruersely. Lastly, that
the Church have roometh universally extended, not confined to Rome straightly
pynioned. But that place out of Math. 18. dic Ecclesiae, Math. 18. Did. 19.
cap. (...).
is here a guest, though boldly invited, yet not lawfully arrayed; that precept
commanding a reference, and obedience to church governors, in quarrels
personal, not questions Theological, for reconcilement of mutual offenses,
not determining spiritual controversies. Wherein if either party be found,
auther maliciously implacable, or irreverently obstinate, he is to be cast
out as an Ethnike and Publican, unfit for the company of Christians whose
character is charity Ioh. 13. Ioh. 13. 35.
whose duty is obedience Heb. 13. Heb. 13. 17.


The Catholics therefore believing certainly that the Church cannot err,
that the general Councels cannot deliver false Doctrine; that the Pastors and
ancient Fathers, with joint consent cannot teach untruths, when heresies
spring up, presently with the voice of the church Act. 15 In the first Nicen
counsel was condemned A^^^us: in the Council of Constantinople Macidonius: in
the Council of Ephesus Nestorius: in the Council of Chaledon Euty^hes. Vide
Aug. li. 2. retract. cap. 10.
pluck them up even by the roots; and so ever has practiced, and after this
manner has overthrown all encounters, false opinions, and errors, which the
devil by his ministers ever planted, or established in the world, and so they
have been freed from all braules and quarrels in matters of religion.

Aunsweare.
Those verily are the means, Vide praeci. pu^ Staplet. doctr principi.
wherein all the pseudocatholickes concur for decision of controversies, all
which have before been satisfied, therefore the present answer is easy, and
not necessary: easy, for those means are men's, merely humane: the practice
of the church, the custom of men; the definition of councels, the judgment of
men; the sentence of the fathers, the censure of me^; partial in affection,
prejudicial in opinion, changeable by repeal of a second sentence;
challengeable by appeal to an high judge, lawfully to be reuersed by a
sounder, though a less number: whereas the arbitrament of the scripture, which
is ours, is the infallible rule of truth, and uerdict of the holy Ghost; none
more direct, more constant, more absolute. Easy again, it having been often
showed, that both the fathers, of Which they so vainly brag, Saepe
loquuntur, non quod sentiunt, sed quod necesse est, Hierony. ad (...). ca. 4
says Saint Jerome. That the Church so called by them and the councelles,
which represent that church, have very often been deceived. Some confirming
the blasphemy of Arrius, Luseb lib. 7
no les the^ ten in number; others establishing rebaptization of heretics,
Pamelius in Cypr.
in the concurrence of three councelles, says Pamelius; with the consent of
huge assemblies, says Eusebius; Eusebius. vbi supra.
and among the rest, the council he here names in the margent, the first
Nicen: some prohibiting second marriage, as that in Neocaesaria; others
disauowing return to war; others rearing up Idolatry, and giving Angels and
the souls of men bodies, as the second Nicen; and in this theme might be
infinite, but I shut it up with that speech of Saint Augustine, Sed haec humana
iudicia deputentur, Aug. (...). 167.
and circuuenire, etc account no otherwise of these, then of men's judgments,
either circumuenting by false glosses, or circumuented by corruptions; for
which cause Pelagius the Pope dealt wisely, Did. 21. ca. Quamuis.
who would not stand to councelles for the prerogative of his place, but
fetched it from the Gospel. Not necessary: this difference about authority of
councelles, and soueraintie of the church, being but a muster, no skirmish; no
disputation, but a show: for when Bellarmine has run himself out of
breath, by putting out all his reasons in the behalf of Councelles; and
Stapleton engaged his whole credit with putting in his 15. Cautio^s, about the
judge of controversies; all their Items are at last closed up within the Pope
his Ephod, or his (...), his papal sovereignty, or his sentence peremtorie;
Sext ^. Ab. arbitris. gloss.
for he is lex animata in terris, the living law upon the earth, containing
all laws with in the compass of his breast; ca. de co^stit. licet.
his authority by his flatteres proclaimed to be greater then the Angels
(Councels are shadows) in four things, Antoninus par. 3 sum.
the jurisdiction, the administration of the sacraments, in knowledge, and in
reward: by whom not only the Books and writings of all authors, Ca. si Romans
did. 19.
are to be approved or disauowed; but even general councelles have their
efficacy and confirmation: dict. 17. C. Synodum. dict. (...). ca. Dec^etales
11. q. 3. c. Quatuor.
and the interpretation of the said councelles subject to his determination:
because the judgment of Councels, and persons, being merely humane, dict.
19. c. Sic. omnes
may four ways be corrupted, by fear, by favor, by malice, by largess.
Only his sentence is to be admitted as from Peter his own mouth. Did. 19. c.
Sic omnes. Hostie c. Quando. de trans.
God himself and he, the Pope, having but one consistory, without whose
countenance and authority, the scriptures are but as Aesops fables, in the
opinion of Hermannus and Hosius; the Councels but conuenticles Did. 20.
their decrees like living men's wills, and the fathers no body: wherefore as the
orator said, ^ Decret^.
that pronuntiation had the first, Demosth.
second, and third place in Rhetoric: so in definitiues of Religion, the
erection of faith, the compoundinge of controversies, the abandoning of
heresies is wholly the Popes: the rule of faith, what the Pope allows; the
interpretation of the fathers, which the Pope follows; the definition of
councelles, which the Pope confirms; the practice of the Church, what the
Pope auoweth. But be it the Popes omnipotence, or assembly of councelles, or
consent of Fathers, or tradition of the Church, Augusti^.
we say with Saint Augustine, that none of these are to be preferred before
Christ, cum ille semper veraciter iudicet, sithence his judgment is always
true and irrefragable, Ecclesiastici autem indices, sicut homines, plerunque
falluntur, but ecclesiastical judges, as men, are often deceived; whereby we
nothing impair the dignity or necessity of Councels, acknowledging them with
Saint Austen to be saluberrima, most sovereign antidotes against the poison
of heresies; yet we subject them to the spirit and the scriptures, which alone
have this privilege, Ide^ ep. ^19
non errare: for the heresies which the Councels, he specifieth, did co^demn,
vanished not by their authority personal, but the power of the word, the
principal weeding hook that cuts up the tares, Mat. 13. ^8.
Math. 13. so were the patrons of circumcision confuted, in that Council Act.
15 by Moses law; Act 15.
so the Arrians, Theod. lib. 1. c. ^.
in the Nicen Synod, (...), received their deaths wound by the sword of the
spirit, which is the word of God, Ephesians. 6. ^phes. 6.


But the Protestants admitting of the sole Scripture, as Vmpire and Judge in
matters of controue^sie, and allowing no infallible interpretor thereof, but
remitting all to every man's private spirit, and singular exposition, cannot
possibly, without error, wind themselves out of the Laborinth of so many
controversies, wherewith th^ey are no so inueagled and intricated.

Aunswedre.
Ignorance joined with malice is importunate: this section concerning the
authority and Interpretation of Scriptures, has received a sufficient
answer, Ar^ic ^.
ridding us from all blame, for admitting that which Christ commands, whose
will is that we should search the scriptures, Ioh. ^. 3^
John 5. which are not only witnesses of him, but Judges for him: therefore
called the rule of life and belief, discerning the crooked from that which is
straight; (...), as saint Paul terms it, Phil. 3, Phil. 3. 16
the one rule, not partial, as Bellarmine calls it, but total and perfect.
Theop^ ^bid
Else were it no rule, says Theophylact, if it admitted either appositio^ or
ablation: the ignorance thereof is the cause of error, by our Savior his
judgment, Math. 22. Mat. 24. (...).
the inquiry (...), of a more exact addition thereuuto, is heresy in the
opinion of Basil: Basil. lib. 1. contr. Eun.
it drives from the Church as Christ the merchandise out of the Temple, John.
2.
(...), all jar which might engender controversy, says Constantine the
famous Emperor; by it only were the Arrians quelled, Theod. li. ^.
as Theodoret witnesses; and to it, from the Councelles, Saint Austen reuoketh
Maximinus the heretic, Aug. co^^. Maxim. li 3.
not doubting there to give him the overthrow; for whether shall we go? says
Peter, John. 6. 63.
John 6 thou have the words of eternal life: which word written teaches all
things that concern both our faith, the life of this our pilgrimage, 2. Cor.
5. ^. Cor. 5. 7.
and our salvation, the glory of our purchased heritage; Damas. li^ (...). 18.
working in us, says Damascene, (...)^ every excellent virtue, (...), all
sincere knowledge, without spot or error; and as the night extinguisheth not
the stars, it is the comparison of Zepherinus a Pope: Did. 38. c. sicut.
so no worldly pollution, no soul heresy ca^ obscure or infect the minds of
the faithful, sacrae scripturae firmiter inhaerentes, which hold themselves
fast to the holy scriptures. Other testimonies thou may believe, or not
believe, according as thou shall trust them says Austen, Augstin. epist. 11^.
but these are subject to no humane judgment, being the sole and supreme
judge of all writings, and decreementes, Contr. Crel. lib. ^.
says he else where, and so the fittest Vmpire in all controversies. The same
we say of Interpretation, appealing to the spirit working upon the heart,
and the Scriptures explaning themselves, the two most infallible
interpretours. For if that rule of the lawyers be sound and current, Eius est
interpretari, cuius est condere, he may best expound the law, which made it;
surely the speeches in holy writ, being the motions and dictates of the
spirit, 1* Pet. 1. (...).
2. Pet. 1 no expositor can be so sound and infallible as himself, who best
understands his own secrets. 1. Cor. 2. 11
1. Cor. 2. and therefore Jerome thinks, Ier. in Gai. 1
that any sense which he gives not, that wrate it, is an heresy. Where if
Bellarmine his objection be reco^menced, that the holy Ghost speaks not; and
that the scriptures are, as the philosopher said of law books, Gellin^ lib.
14. c ^
Mutimagistri, dumme schoolemasters; Iudex mortuus, Can. lib. 1. ^.
a dead judge, as Canus calls it; that is false: for God, says the Apostle,
spoke unto us by his prophets, and now by his son Heb. 1, Heb. 1. ^.
not viua voce, for they were dead, but by their writings: and the word of
exhortation speaks unto us as unto children. Heb. 12. 5.
Heb. 12, and the law has a mouth, Deu. 17. Deuteronomy. 17. Chry^ost. homi^. 13.
(...) Genesis
and the scripture, says Chrisostom, seipsam exponit, expoundes it self, not
permitting the auditor to err, and does present Christ unto us, being
understood and opened (...), by the holy Ghost, says Theophyl. Theophil in
John. 10.
For the teacher may be a latere tuo, but if there be nullus in cord tuo,
thou can not understand, August. in ^. John. ^.
says Austen. But because the holy Ghost appeared sometime in the form of a
Dooue, therefore they take it, he has that quality of dooues: Aspicis vt
fugiant ad candida tecta columbae, O^id.
to delight and reside, only in glorious assemblies, in general councels, or in
the radiant dooue-cote of the Popes brain; but the Apostle gives that
privilege (...), to every spiritual, 1. Cor. 2. 51
though a private man ^. Cor. 2. For he respects not persons, no^ places, 1.
John. ^ 20. 27.
nam and vos vnctionem habetis, says S. John, you also have the anointing,
and those were private men. Which anointing, teaches you all things, neither
need you, vt quis, that any man, or Angel, or Council, or Pope, should teach
you: and therefore the scripture, being (...), the rule which cannot err, the
spirit inwardly, and the word outwardly are the most infallible interpreters
for exposition, and by consequent, the only arbiter for controversies;
because he which knows the truth, may soon discern of a lie, 1. Ioh. 2.^^
by S. John his rule, for that no lie, is of the truth. And they which know the
truth, Aqui. ibi^.
says Aquinas, habent sc^e^tiam discernendi, and agnoscendi haereticos, have
the perfect understanding to discern and know heretics, and by knowing them
to avoid them: Psalm. 119.
for that cause, by David, called a guide to our paths; ^. Pet. 1.
by S. Peter, a light in darken^s; August. de Bap. contr. Don. lib. 2.
by S. Austen the balance to weigh all opinions, whether light or heavy; the
touchstone to try the metal, whether base or pure, whether current or
counterfaite, Chryso^t. ^ Cor.
says Chrysostom; the only Ariadnees thread, to extricate our enclosure
within any maze of empestered errors; and the Alexanders sword, to cut the
Gordian knot of the most inexplicable ambiguities. Upon all which premises
we conclude, that the scriptures, having such (...) sole sufficiency in
themselves, and authority from the spirit, thereby have potestatem
decernendi, power to judge; and for the exact knowledge they afford, Aqui^.
have vim discernendi, faculty to discern between truth and falsehood;
therefore the Protestants to be commended, for admitting them the sole
Vmpiere in-controue^sies, and the most certain interpreters of themselves.
Only we pray with David, Psa. 119. 18
renouncing our own insight, Open thou our eyes, that we may see the woonders
of thy law; viz the assistance of the spirit, which both gives the sense
thereof, and mooues the assent thereunto says Bernard. Bern^ in Ca^t.


And the i^reconciliable iarres betwixt them and the Puritanes, in essential
points of faith, give sufficient testimony, that they will never have end, or
can have an end, holdinge those grounds of opinion, which they obstinately
defend.

Aunsweare.
Hypocrites use to see extramittendo, Math 7
Math. 7. but if this Lamia, Plut. de. curio^.
would keep his eyes in his head, when he is at home, as he puts the^ on,
going abroad; he might there behold the iarres and differences of Thomist and
Scotist; of Franciscan, and Dominican; of regular, and secular; of Jesuit, and
Priest, among themselves, in matters very essential and capital: There he
might see Pighius taxed about Adams fall; Chisamensis censured about the death
of the body for sin Vide M^^dinam. and Canur^.
, which he denied; Catherinus vexed about the assurance of grace; Durand
snaped, about original sin, and merit in the works of grace; Caietan much
molested, about the sufficiency of scriptures; and so I might go on: whereas
the iarres among us, though unkind, yet not in this kind, only for
ceremonies external, no points substantial: that fire 1. Cor 3 has tried
the^ to be but stubble, 1. Cor. 3.
and straw controversies; the word of God, has appeased them, and will
confound them, if malice and prejudice make not men irreconciliable. And albeit
some like hedgehogs (as Pliny reports of them, Pliny (...).
who being laden with nuts and fruit, if the least filberd fall off, will
fling down all the rest, in a pettish humor, and beat the ground for anger
with their bristles) will so leave our church and remain obstinate for trifles
and accidents, things in themselves indifferent, though the princes authority
have now made them necessary: Yet this is our comfort, first, that the Gospel
preached among us (like that fire in the mount Hecla, (...).
recorded by Surius, which drinks up all waters, and deuoures al wood cast
upon it, but cannot consume flax, and tow) has dispersed the grosses heresies
of Popery and superstition, though these flaxen rags of ceremonies and shows,
lie glowing, in the embers of some malicious and hot spirits, not consumed.
Secondly, that we make the scriptures the sole judge, not appealing to
Councelles, nor relying upon men's authorities: which having done, we conclude
with Paul, Siquis sec^s, if any be otherwise minded (...) God will reveal it,
Phil. 3. 1^.
and pacify them; and if obstinately minded, Gal. 5. 13.
we wish his (...) that God will revenge them, and cut them off. The truth is,
the Puritanes snarling has fed the Papists humor, and stuf^^^ (...) books
with reproaches, who otherwise had wanted matter to vpbraide our Church withal,
if the other had learned of the God of peace, to have kept the unity of the
spirit, Ephesians 4.
in the bond of peace.

And finally, they have no argument to prove, that they have the true church,
true religion, true faith, which all heretics which ever were, will not bring
to condemn the Church of Christ as well as they. For example, they allege
scripture, so did the Arrians: they contemn Councels, the Arrians did not
regard them: they challenge to themselves the true interpretation, the same did
all the Heretics to this day: and to conclude, they call themselves the little
flock of Christ, to whom God has revealed his truth, and illuminated the^
from above, all which the Donatists with as good reason, and better arguments,
did arrogate unto themselves. The ^ame I say of the Pelagia^s, Nestorians,
Eutichians, with all the rabble of the damned heretics.

Answer.
The Church in this land having the two principal notes of a visible
particular Church, the word diligently preached, the sacraments duly
administered, is more absolutely perfect, and more gloriously renowned, then the
Romish Synagoge; notwithstanding that Bozius the strumpets herald, (...)
has charged her eschucheon with a field of 57 coats, and displayed them in
his standard, as the ensigns of Christ's Catholic Church; for that rule of
Saint Jerome being sound, (...) in Psalm. ^^3.
that Ecclesia ibi est vbi fides vera est, the church is where true faith is,
which cannot be planted without the word, therefore the most certain note of a
true church, is where the scriptures do sincerely sound; August. de (...). 3.
Ciui^atem enim Dei dicimus, cuius Scriptura testisest, says Austen: the
primitive church was known by continuing in the doctrine of the Apostles, Act.
2. 24.
Act. 2. the Lords field distinguished from others by the good seed sown in
it Math. 13. Math. 13.
the children of the kingdom, that is, of the church, 1. Cor. 4.^^
bred and fed by that seed. 1. Cor. 4 the law of God* read and heard among
the Israelites, was the glory of their wisdom over all nations, and the
special note of Gods church, and his presence among the^, Deuteronomy. 4. Deuteronomy. 4. 6.
yea, but heretics also allege scriptures: Tertull. de (...)
first that is false, for if heretics were brought to that pass, says
Tertullian, Vt de solis Scripturis quaestiones suas sisterent, stare non
poterant, to be tried, for their questions, by scriptures only, they were not
able to stand; and therefore they have principally endeavored to abolish, or
falsify them. Dionysius Bishop of Corinth proves it by a co^seque^t, E^s^bi.
li. 4.
that they, which would abuse and corrupt men's writings (for at his they had
been nibling,) much more would deprave and falsify the Scriptures: Saint
Austen found it in them, (...)
that they would deface scriptures prosua libidine, as themselves list, to
serve their lust: pro voluntatis suae sensu, (...) lib. de Trinit.
non veritatis absolutione, says Hilary. Instances they give both, in Mar^io^,
Montanus, Photinus, Sabellius, and others; as for the Manichees, they insisted
more upon their inspired Manes, then the authority of holy Writ. And
Ruffinus reasons thus, (though by a contrary argument) yet to the same
purpose with Dionysius above named, and thinks it no marvel for heretics to
abuse the writings of that famous scholar Origin, Ruffin. in apologia Originis.
sithence they could not withhold impias manus, their profane hands from the
books of God. Secondly, admit they number and quote Scriptures, yet it is but
either apishly, (...)
as Chrysostom compares it, by fond imitation of true professors; or
peruersely, by corrupting the alleged places, mentiuntur, Hilar. ad Constant.
O^igen. (...) Ezech. (...).
says Hilary. Origin will tell him that there is quaedam castitas diaboli,
that heretics will be exceeding holy, both in the deportment of their life,
and in the amoncelment of scripture texts, thereby to insinuate their errors
more plausibly into the minds of men: Iden^ in Romans 10.
yet else where he will distinguish to this our purpose properly, there is a
difference between Euangelizare bona and been (the want of an aduerbe as it
marres a good action, Aristot.
so a sound interpretation) accumulating of scriptures is not all one with the
right understanding, and the proper applying of them: it being not in this
case, Natal, C^^^es.
as in Arithmeticke, where two are more then one, and three more then two:
Judge. 7.
but as in Gedeons army, Judge. 7 non numerus, sed virtus, not the coaceruation
of places, but the true alleging, which supports the truth, and
distinguishes heretics from sincere professors, ^am de intelligentia
haeresis est, Hilar. lib. ^. de Trin^^.
non de scriptura says Hilary, heresy grows, and is grounded upon a wrong
sense, not from the text and letter it self; Origin. in Luc.
and this made Origin to say, that heretics urging scriptures turned stones
into bread, feeding themselves with that which choked them, and overthrows
them; Hila^ius de Synodis.
the reason is given by Hilary, quia scripturas sine sensu loquuntur, they
number, but misconstrue them, either (...) Ephesians. 4. Ephesians 4. 14. T^rtu^l. de
praeser. c. 17. 2. Pet. 3. 16. Math 9.
cogging a sense deceitfully, or (...) rackinge them peruersely; or (...) with
a botch, sewing a new piece to an old garment, by adding to the Text, that
which was not there originally: the three principal properties noted by
Ruffinus among Heretics. Ruffin in Apolog. (...).
And yet as Hilary excellently closes up that point, Hi^ari. (...) supra
male sanctis rebus praeiudicatur etc. it is a bad argument, and a greater
injury against holy writings, because some men have profanely abused them,
that therefore they should not be used at all. Yea rather as else where he
speaks, Idem lib. 1 de ^ ^imit.
Vesaniam and ignorantia^ haereticorum properamus expraeconijs propheticis and
Euangelicis confundere; we make more speed to confute heretics by them. For
the devil encountered our Savior with scripture text Mat. 4, (...)
but Christ made him recule, with the same weapon better handled. The Arrians
pretended scripture for their blasphemy, but the scriptures reioyned proved
their overthrow; the reason given by Theodoret, Theoderet lib. 1. c. 7.
their all^gations were but literal, but the opposition was out of the
scriptures (...), religiously understood, and faithfully applied. Briefly for
this point of heretics alleging scriptures, the philosopher said excellently,
Seneca de benef.
Nihil est tam manifestae vtilitatis, quin in contrarium transferat culpa:
Psalm. 69
and David imprecates it for a curse, and God inflictes it for a plague upon
reprobates, that the things which should be for their wealth, prove unto the^
an occasion of falling. Therefore as healthful bodies are not to refuse good
meats, because men discrased, Plut. (...)
of ill stomachs, and worse livers, turn the best aliment into bad humors:
so though heretics tortuously pervert scriptures, for their own defense; yet
we must not cease to rely upon them, and recourse unto them, and, as S. Basil
wishes, Basil. (...) cap. (...)
to confirm all matters of faith by their testimony, (...), both for the
establishment of the sincerely affected, and the discomfiture of the
heretically infected. The three other objections following are mere
cal^mniations; for, concerning the contempt of Councels, First there is an
ignorance in the comparison between the Arrians and us, for they regarded and
urged councels, and so had good cause to do, their blasphemy having ben
supported by so many. And it seems by S. Austen his appeal from Councels to
scriptures, Aug. contr. Maxim. l 3
that Maximinus the Arrian much insisted upon the council of Arimine: then a
slander against our professors, because, though we make not Councels the
groundcels of our faith, yet we reverence and embrace them, except before
excepted. For albeit a private man endued with the spirit of God, and girded
with the sword, (...). 6.
that is, with the word of the spirit, may confound an heretic; yet in a
public assembly the sentence is more solemn, the consent more weighty, still
adding this withal, that the judgment awarded by them, is but ministerial,
and isntrumental; but the law, according to which they judge, must be the word
written. And thus we regard Councelles, so far forth as they be directed by
the spirit of Council Esa. 1^. Esa. 1^^2
for if we receive the writings of men, the testimony of God is greater, Ioh.
^. 36.
Ioh's. the other for private interpretation, has had his repulse before, we
challenge it not to our selves, but refer it to the spirit of God, and say
with S. Bernard, Luc. 24
cognoscite Dominum in fractione panis, for the bread of life, which we break
unto the people, Bern. in Cant.
though it be nostris manibus, yet it is Dei viribus, it is done by our hands,
but with his strength. And for the Laity Canus often confesses, Canus lib. 2.
cap. 8
that the anointing teaches every private man, in whom he is, easily to
understand whatsoever is properly necessary for his salvation in the
scriptures. If heretics should not arrogate the spirit unto themselves,
there should be no very great use of that excellent gift, 1. Cor. 1^
discretio spirituum, the discerning of the spirits, to try whether they be of
God or no. 1. John 4. 1. Ioh. 4. 1
As for the third of the little flock, it is a fancy of his own dream, no
claim of ours. Perhaps against that vain flourish of visible universality,
whereof the Church of Rome so boasts, we have objected, that it is no
certain note of Christ's Church, (...)
because many, as Vegetius speaks, in this militant state march promilite,
which are not milites; nor all are Israel, Romans 9
which are of Israel, Romans 9. that Christ, in the mustre of his soldiers,
finds many t^multuarios et euocatos, such as are good for a push and away;
many called; but (...) a few enrolled and billed, Apoc. 3. Apoc. 3 Math. 7
that in the suruiew of his herds, there are many pinfolds, and store of
sheepe-skinnes, Luc. 1^. 32
yet but a little flock, Luke 12. that though there be many thousands to be
saved, yet, in comparison of the millions damnable, Luc. 13 24.
they are but few Luke 13. that sullen pride of factious humors, who will
sequester themselves from the multitude, as the purer, because the fewer, we
condemn and disauow. Our number we doubt not, but it is as great as theirs,
and that even in the Court of Rome, there are which loath the abominations of
Rome. That bragging vaunt of universality, we account to be the raskales
reason in the Poet, Horat. epis. lib. 1.
Nos numeras sumus^ which esteem of voices by number, not weight; the Pagans
clamor for Dianaes shrines, whom all the world worshippeth, Act. 19. 27
Act. 19 Constantius his argument for Arrius against Athanasius, Theodor. lib.
^. c. 16
that all the world had received that opinion, and the whore of Babylon, the
Church of Rome, the Chimaera of hethenish superstition in her ceremonies, of
heretical positions in her religion, her challenge, though most false, that
her wine has been drunk iu all corners of the earth: what says Saint Austen?
Luc. 8. 45 August in Euang.
Turba premit Christum, pauci tangunt, there are many which croude Christ,
there are but few touch him; and for the last clause of thrusting us into the
number of damned heretics, if I should trace his steps, it were easy to
demonstrate, Plin. not.
that as the Nabis in Egypt, has the shape of diverse beasts; and Hanniballes
army consisted ex colluuie omnium gentium, hist. Liui^s.
of the very baggage of all nations: so the whole body of Popery is naught
else, but a very amassed lump of Pagan rites, and old heretics dregs, as
in their Purgatory, Idolatry, sacrifice for the dead, holy water, free will,
challenge of the Church, merit of works, renouncing of scriptures, etc is
evident to an impartial scholar; but being not so proper to the scope of this
Article, I conclude the whole in this manner, that sithence by Austens
confession, August.
ecclesiastical judges are but men, and may soon be deceived; that
Councelles, Hilarious ad Constant.
as Hilary excellently notes, are often contrary to themselves; that the Pope,
their sacra anchora, their Church Oracle, is like as he spoke of Egypt, a
splitting reed, ^sa. 36. 6
Esa. 36. daungerously erroneous; therefore the sole means for the
establishing of faith, and of the mind in doubts, and against heresies, are
the books of God. for in the deluge of these waters deep, deceitful,
wavering, where should the Dove rest, Genesis ^.
but on Noah's Arc, or the mind of man repose it selse, but on the word
written? quod proficit ad fidem, ad vnitatem, Hilar. vbi supra.
ad salutem, says Hilary, which au aileth for faith, there is the settling of
our belief, and for unity, there is the division of controversies, and the
repulse of heresies, the two special breaches of Godly unity. And now I had
thought these articles of faith had been ended, but he had a spare
syllogifme, which he knevve not where to marshall, and that he has annexed
to this Article, like a Goose feather to a Woodcocks tail.

And to conclude these Articles of faith, I say that if the principles of the
Protestants religion be true, Saint Paul himself exhorts us to
infidelity, which I prove thus.

Whosoever exhorts us to doubt of that which we are bound to believe by
faith, exhorts us to infidelity: But S. Paul does exhort us to doubt of our
salvation (which we are bound to believe by faith, according to the protestants
Religion, ergo S. Paul exhorts us to infidelity.

The mayor is plain: for to doubt of matters in faith, is manifest
infidelity, because whosoever doubts, whether God has revealed that which
indeed he has revealed, being sufficiently proposed, as revealed, virtually
doubts whether God says truth or lies. The minor is proved by the
testimony of S. Paul, 1. Cor. ^.
Cum timore and tremore salutem vestram operamini, with fear and trembling
work your salvation.

All fear, whether it be filial fear, or servile fear, includes doubt,
the one of sin, the other of punishment.

Aunsweare.
The hottest fire cannot consume a dead man's heart, S^et. Calig.
which has been poisoned; nor the spirit of grace allay the blasphemy of a
feared conscience, cauterized with malice, ^. Tim. 4.
not sparing to accuse even the greatest Apostle of infidelity. Yea but he
does it not simply, only upon condition, that is, if the principles of the
protestants religion be true. Their principles are, that there is but one God,
and three persons; that Christ is the Savior of the world; that he was
incarnate and crucified; dead and glorified, etc. Is S. Paul an infidel,
because we lay these grounds of religion? his meaning is of principles
differing from Popery. First then, that is his lewdness, or his ignorant
rashness, indefinitely to attache all the principles, as accessarie to
infidelity. Secondly, it had been plain dealing to have named them: for,
because we set down, that there is but one purgation, and that in this life,
the blood of Jesus Christ, ^. Ioh. 1
no Purgatory after to be expected; that there is but one sacrifice
propitiatory once offered, Heb. 9
videlicet, the body of Christ crucified, no mass to be reiterated; one
mediator between God and man, the man Jesus Christ, no Saints to be
inuocated; Ephesians. ^
that faith only justifies, no works coadiuuating; these are our principles,
or rather, the scripture positions differing from the Romanistes, does S. Paul
therefore exhort us to infidelity? I prove it thus, says he whosoever
exhorts us to doubt etc, Here is that speech of reverend Synesius verified,
Synes. epist. ad Anastas.
cum ex plaustro, quod aiunt, conuicijs sit insectatus, multaque in nos sit
vociferatus, when he had with full mouth, and open cry, challenged all the
principles of our religion for infidelity, at the last, (...), the base
sophister, shows us a Mouse for a Lion; and seazeth upon one only principle,
namely, the assurance of salvation. Which when it is examined will prove but
the Cyclops out cry, in the Poet, after his sole and only eye was stricken out,
Hom. Ody^.
(...), no body, no body. For first, this question, whether the certainetie
be of hope, or of faith, is not jointly and generally determined. among all
protestants. Again, that we are to ascertaine our selves thereof, even by
faith, is the opinion of some eminent Papists. Med. (...)
Durand, is censured by Medina, and registered in his rue of erroneus Doctors
for it. Catharinus and Gropperus, mightily oppugned the contrary as^ertion in
the Trentish conuenticle. Lastly, the syllogism it self, is both fond and
false: fond in the Mayor, for doubting may be in points of faith without
infidelity or heresy, Art. 2, and 3
as before out of Melchior Canus has been showed, because infidelity, is
commonly lincked with pertinacie: then the probate of the Mayor, in that faith
is not tied to things revealed alone, because multa creduntur quae in
scriptur is non leguntur, says Austen many things are believed, Aug. contr.
Max. lib. 3
not revealed in scriptures. False in the Minor, because that text of S. Paul,
marginally misalleaged, Phil ^ 12
Phil. 2 is no motive to doubting, but an exhortation semblable to that duty
prescribed to every man by God himself Mich. 6, Mich. 6. ^
solicit ambulare coram Deo, to walk warely before the Lord, as a son before
his father, with fear to sin, not of sin, that is, least by sinning, he
should be counted unworthy the graces wherewith he is endowed, and the favor
whereof he is vouchsafed; not of sin, as if it were able to cast him finally
from God, and so make him either to despair, or doubt of his salvation; for
being justified by faith, he has peace with God. Romans 5. 1
Romans 5. and having semen manens, ^. Ioh. 3. ^.
1. Ioh. 3. he cannot sin irremissibly: Lib. 3. de justify. c. 1.
besides this, Bellarmine himself, from whom this impious argument is
borrowed, puts a difference between fear and doubting; for, says he, the
received opinion in the church about this certainetie of salvation, albeit, it
remove not all fear, yet it utterly takes away all anxietie, and haesitation,
Ibid. c. 1^
and ipsam etiam dubitationem, and eue^ doubting it self: and therefore,
though the Apostle will us to fear, yet he exhorts not to doubt, as this
mate infers. Certainly, if we consider the state wherein we stand, 2.
Cor. 7.^
we shall find, as the said Apostle speaks, without terrors, within fears,
and causes of them both every where, by Satan his policy, and malice about
us; by the lusts and affections, raging or tickling within us; by the world,
either flattering or pursuing us: but if we look up unto him that loves us in
his beloved; to that sacrifice by which we are reconciled; that victory
whereby sin is conquered; to that spirit wherewith we are sealed: we may in
a Christian confidence, and assurance of faith say, Bern. sermon. (...). in Cant.
with S. Bernard, turbatur conscientia, sed no^perturbatur, quoniam vulnerum
Dei recordabor, my conscience is tossed, not overwhelmed, because I call to
mind the wounds of my God. For how should he fear, or doubt which has, as
Bernard else where speaks, geminum firmissimumque Ide^ ep. 107
amoris argumentum, the twy-fold and most sure argument of Gods love? both that
faithful witness Apocal. 3 Jesus crucified; Apoca. 3. 14
and the pledge of the spirit justifying him, and testifieng unto him, that he
is the son of God. Romans 8. 16.
Romans 8. a pledge? says Aquine, Aquin. in Ephesians. 1
yea an earnest 2. Cor. 1. for a pledge is restored, when the due is paid, but
an earnest is given upon a price, non auferendu^ sed complendum, not to be
taken back, but to be made up. For which cause S. Augustine calls it Mary's
part Luc. 10 which in this life augetur is increased; Luc. 10. 42.
in the next perficietur is fully complete; August. de verb. dom.
nun quam auferetur, shall never be taken away. This discourse is full of
comfort for the conscience, but See at large in Bern. epist. 107. and sermon. in
Cant. 68. 69
too full of matter for this brief aunsweare; my conclusion therefore, for it
is, that which is an article of faith, is to be certainly believed by faith:
but the assurance to our minds of our salvation, is an article of faith, where
we say Credo vitam aeternam, I believe the life everlasting. If I say, I believe
that there is an everlasting life after death, so much do the devils confess,
and the Pagans have testified, yet there is certitudo obiecti assured unto us,
as being promssio Dei, the promise of God: but when I say, I believe that the
eternal life is prepared and belongs to me, this is certitudo subiecti, and
this is opus fidei, the work of faith; which has both this powerful force to
turn David's quorum into S. Paul's ego. Psalm. 32.^^
Blessed are they, says the prophet quorum, whose sins are forgiven; ^. Tim.
1. 15
quorum ego, of which I am the chief, says the Apostle: and also this skill
to make a garment of Christ to put him on Romans 13. Romans 13
For that is a great comfort, and a faithful saying, that Christ came into the
world to save sinners; yet, that is Christ in the broad-cloth, in the whole
piece: now comes faith and cuts it out, and applies it specially, which loved
me, and gave himself for me Galat. 2, Gal. ^. 20
here is Christ put on. So then faith assuming a particular minor, out of the
mayor general proposition, and making that present which is absent; (for that
cause said to be (...) Heb. 11. 1.) Heb. ^1. 1
the assurance which it gives, is not only spei, of hope in expectation, but
scientie as if it were now in possession, in so much that with the Apostle we
may say, ^. Ioh. 3. ^
We know that when he shall appear, we shall also appear like unto him in
glory. Which assurance works in us, neither presumption upon his favor,
whose majesty is dreadful, whose jealousy is a consuming fire; nor careless
security in our course of life, whose standing is so slippery, whose occasions
to sin so many. For the holy man Job, who looking unto his everliving
redeemer, confidently proclaimed it, though he kill me, yet will I put my
trust in him Job. 14. Job. 14. 16.
yet viewing his own infirmities, and propensity to sin, Job. 9. 28
confesses of himself Job. 9, Verebar omnia opera mea, I feared all my
works: which fear, as also this of fear and trembling in the text cited,
imports no suspense of a doubtful, but a reverent awe of a careful mind,
sollicitous to please, and wary to offend: which, both the phrase of speech,
elsewhere used, implies, as in 1. Cor. 2. 1. Cor. 2. 3
where the Apostle conuersed and preached among them in fear and much
trembling. Of what? Doubted he his calling? impossible, for he had it
ascertained him, not by mediate instruction, but immediate revelation Gal. 1.
Gal. 1. 12.
or his doctrine? unlikely, he knew it to be the power of God unto salvation
Romans 1. Romans 1. 16
or their persons? a base conceit, for if he sought to please men, he could
not be the servant of Christ Gal. 1. Gal. ^. 1^
but being an Ambassador from God, and to deliver his message, as in the
presence of God, he carefully looked both to himself, in the deportment of his
life; and to the divine majesty of words in the manner of his preaching; that
neither by his prolapsion into any sin, his doctrine should be sca^dalized,
nor through vanity of rhetorical flourish (the flags and rags of the false
Apostles) the dignity of the Gospel should be amoindred and made frustrate. So
the Corinthians intertainement of Titus, was with fear and trembling, 2. Cor.
7. ^. Cor. 7. 15
if they doubted of his function, they need not fear, they might have
renounced him; for intrusion without just authority, strikes no terror. It
was, as a Friar expoundes it, Ti^tleman ^bide^.
both the reverend regard of his person, being the dispenser of Gods
mysteries; and a duetifull obedience to his doctrine, being the word of life,
lest they should seem unworthy of an embassy so comfortable, of a messenger so
divine. As also the purport of the Apostle his counsel in this chapter Phil.
2. Phil. 2.
which, sum marily, is nothing else but (...), that they should be like minded
to Christ verse. 5. Phil 2. ve. ^
in showing that humility and carfulness of upright behavior in Paul his
absence, as if he were present verse. 12. 12
least living in the midst of a froward and wicked nation verse. 15. 15
the Apostles labor by their careless leuitie, or carnal security, should
be deuoyded and abased verse. 16. 16
this solicitous reverence, Tittleman ibidem.
eue^ in Tittleman his paraphrase having reference to S. Paul his person and
their profession, with a fear or wariness to avoid all scandale, either
passive from their adversaries, who observed their ma^ners preiudicially; or
active, least themselves should commit any action offensive to God his
majesty, who had called them; or derogatiue to the Apostles ministry, by
which they were called: so that this fear and trembling, to which he
exhorts, is for ordering their conversation, a cautele most profitable; not
diffidence of salvation, a motive most discomfortable. For, questionless that
mind, which cannot rest ascertained of his future happiness, is most unsettled,
and miserable, even in the reach of philosophy. Seneca. epi. lib. 1.
Quid (...) refert qualis status tuus sit, si tibi videtur malus? what profit
or comfort is it, for a man to know, that the^e is a kingdom prepa^ed, Math.
25, and yet he must doubt whether doom he shall recei^e, Math. 25.
either ite, or venite, go ye accursed, or come ye blessed? this being the
very dictate of nature, in the Comicall poet, Non est beatus, esse se qui non
putat, He is no happy man, which thinks not himself to be so. The minds
felicity resting not in the future expectation, but in the present persuasion.

And thus have you his five Articles of Faith objected, like five vials of his
malice eff^sed; whereof, the sum total being, if you make them, the erection
of their C^^rch her tribunal, you may conclude as S. Cyprian of the five
schismatic Priests, (...)
Ecclesiam spondent, vt qui illi credit, in totum ab Ecclesia pereat; they urge
and would establish a church, which who so believes, takes the ready course
wholly to renounce the Church.
A conclusion to the gentleman M. F. T with whom this Pamphleter begins and
ends.
Sir, for my salutation must be such, as Phauorinus gave to an uncouth
scholar, Gellius lib. 4. cap. 1.
quicquid est nome^ tibi, what you are I know not, nor will e^quire; as you
have, no doubt, perused the pamphlet of Articles directed against us, dedicated
to you, so, if prejudice have not fore-stalled your affections and
understanding, compare this aunsweare ingenuously and with a good conscience,
then judge of both: some diseases are haereditarie, so is not heresy; for were
it so, and you, by conjecture, the heir to an open and stiff recusant, not
the book of the mighty God, much less this aunsweare of a mean man, can
move or dissuade you. If you be, as he pretendes you, a Protestant settled, so
remain; if you were once, and are fallen, return; if you never were, repent;
if you never will be, perish.

Yours in Christ William Barlow.

