Englands vvelcome TO James by the grace of God, King of England, Scotland,
France and Ireland, defender of the faith, etc. Wherein is showed her zealous
love, and reverent duty to her Sovereign. Composed into three Cantoes.

LONDON, Printed for E.VV. and C.K. 1603.

The Authors encouragement not to be discomforted for the folly of every
finde-fault.
IF men may credit ancient writs,
or nouels great of fame,
Or wander safely through the straites,
where Wisdom winnes her name:
Or if deeds done in former days,
may have some fresh attire:
To make the Reader arm himself,
a new with fresh desire:
Or if that Poets pens, may win
such profit for their pain,
As elder days did gladly yield,
as guerdon for their gain,
Or if that praises spoke in right,
and glory of a King:
Unto the Author breed no spite,
but true aeternizing:
Then have I hit the white
where-at ten thousand shoot:
If acceptance be the leaves,
and gratitude the root.
For why such Dastards as do doubt,
the noise of rattling Drum:
By my consent shall never be,
preferred to Captains room.
For he that doubts annoy,
before his suit begin:
May lump in bogue with country Kate,
when ventrous Ladies win.
So he that spares the poole to lade,
can hardly come by fish:
Nor he that still conceales his grief,
can ever win his wish.
Nor yet the Meacocks mind,
that is drownde in self conceit,
Can ever scale Pernassus Tops,
although the pathe be straight.
So he that fears the frumpe,
of every lesting swain:
Conceales the pride of natures gifts,
and spends his time in vain.
Each writer must be armed,
to bear and brook a scoff:
And as it is by folly given,
with wisdom shake it off.
Despair not for a scorn,
lean still on patience staff:
For Pallas clearkes are sifted out,
as Corn is from the Chafe.
Strive thou with all thy strength,
the golden mean to keep:
Please thou the good, and let the rest
in scorners saddle sleep.
Let all the rash rewards,
not make thee ill apaide,
Thy work shall keep thy fame alive,
when they full low are laid.
And children yet unborn,
shall descant on thy deeds,
With treble blessings to the ground,
that bare such happy seeds.
Grudge not to loose an inch,
so thou may gain an ell:
Fear not at all the fools reproof,
if wisemen like thee well.
Thou must be bought and sold,
by difference of delights:
Some laud the life of bloody Mars,
some reverence carpet Knights.
Some honor love, some loath her law,
some music do esteem:
Some hunt, some hawk, with several sports
such as they dearest deem.
Give every man his scope,
to love what he likes best:
Weak is the work that willing minds
make not a welcome guest.
Leave off thy hope to please,
both Court and country too;
Or else thou take in hand a work,
that Christ could never do.
Drive from thy study sloth,
with pain be busy still:
So shall thy wants be all excused,
and guarded with good will.
FINIS.
An Epitaph upon the death of our late Sovereign Lady, of famous memory
Queen Elizableth.
ALL dames that ever tryumpht in joy,
With sorrowful hearts come wail ye.
Your pleasant Songs may turn to sobbet,
No sighings can prevail ye:
A Diamond flower of late ye lost,
Whose loyal heart was kept with cost,
For ever let fame her name go boast.
She makes me sigh when I should sleep,
With blubberd tears lamenting,
No earthly joy can profer'd be,
To my poor hearts contenting:
But still, and still in sorrow I say,
A precious pearl is turned to clay,
Whose virtues floorisht as flower in may.
This wretched life compared may be,
Unto the flowers springing,
Or to the bird on lofty bush,
That surged notes is singing:
Yet in the minute of an hour.
The fowler does her breath devour,
And life retains no longer power.
The fragrants flower that ever did grow,
The beauty will be fleeting,
The brauest branch that ever did blow,
With Sithe sometime is meeting:
The stoutest heart that ere was borne,
Has been disgraced and left forlorn,
Death holds all golden gifts in scorn.
What though her mortal shape be gone?
Her memory restes behind her:
Deserving praise of worthy dames,
That many a day will mind her.
Then though her corpse be shrin'd in clay,
And death has rest her hence away,
Her noble fame shall live for aye.
Virtutie excepta, concedunt omnia fato.
FINIS.
God save
I In memorable brass let there be writ
A An everlasting story of a King:
M Marvel of men! wonder of chiefest wit!
E Eternal glory does to England bring.
S So let his style be framed, and he be said,
E Englands true King, successor of a Maid.
K Know foreign powers: Englands true loyalty,
I Is bent in service to her Sovereign King:
N Nor shall the fierce allar'ms, nor frown of enemy
G Give alteration, or daunted courage bring.
O O no, she shall, first in a scarlet flood,
F Fight to the lips, with loss of dearest blood.
E Even as the day which first proclaimed his name,
N Never as yet did seem to make an end:
G Glorious with bon-fires pyl'd on stateliest frame,
L Looked like the morning, the Sun, the night: which did pretend
A A quiet reign, and happy to our King;
N Near ceasing Joys and his aeternizing.
D Do therefore England, marching in stately trains,
E Englands true Leige-lord, welcome bid (King James.)
God save King James.
THE COPY OF the K. Majesty's letter to the L. Mayor of the City of London,
and to the Aldermen and Commons of the same.
Trusty and well-beloved, We greet you heartily well. Being informed of your
great forwardness in that just and Honorable action of proclaiming us your
Sovereign Lord and King, immediately after the decease of our late dearest
sister the Queen, wherein you have given a singular good proof of your
ancient fidelity (a reputation hereditarie to that our City of London, being
the Chamber of our Jmperiall Crown, and ever free from all shadows of
tumultuous and unlawful courses:) We could not omit with all the speed we
might possible, to give you hereby a taste of our thankful mind for the
same: And withal, assurance that you cannot crave any thing of us fit for the
maintenance of you all in general, and every one of you in particular, but it
shall be most willingly performed by us, whose special care shall ever be to
provide for the continuance and increase of your present happiness: Desiring you
in the mean time to go constantly forward in doing all and whatsoever things
you shall find necessary or expedient for the good government of our said
City in execution of Justice, as you have been in use to do in our said
dearest Sisters time, till our pleasure be further known unto you.

Thus not doubting but you will do as ye may be fully assured of our gracious
favor toward you in the highest degree, we bid you heartily farewell.

Halirudhouse the 28. of March. 1603. James R.

To our trusty and well-beloved Robert Lee L. Mayor of our City of London, and
to our well-beloved the Aldermen and Commons of the same.
Englands vvelcome TO James by the grace of God, King of England, Scotland,
France and Ireland, defender of the faith, etc.
Canto. 1.
EVen as a widow having lost her spouse,
Does close her mourning thoughts in sable hew,
So was it with me when I lost my repose,
My sole defendresse having bid adieu;
My adamantine rock, which was so true.
For like a widow mourning for her mate,
I hung my head, my trembling sense did shake.
I was affraide, yet knew not what to fear,
A chilling tremor did possess my bones;
I l stned still, yet still I naught could hear,
Which did augment my mourning and my mones,
And made me sigh with many sorrowing groans.
Musing upon my state, I heard one sing,
Cheer up thy heart, for thou shall have a King.
This unexpected voice pierced through my ears,
And made a passage to my sorrowing heart:
Where it was mourning, circumcinct with fears,
Lamenting woefully his masters smart,
As one being smitten with a poisoned Dart.
The voice amazed it, it gazed on the voice,
The voice spoke thus, and bid my heart rejoice.
What though thy Prince, have had a prosperous reign,
Thou must not think for ever t'enioy one Prince:
What though in peace, she did thee long maintain,
(Peace-giuing God can give an other Prince,
And he shall be a Noble virtuous Prince,
Which shall in wealth, in love, in truth, and peace,
Increase thy joys, increasing still, increase.
Long may thou Joy, and he a Prince may be,
Whose Scepter swayes the glory of thy land:
Whose Sun-like beams, Europe shall shining see,
Upholding Englands good with happy hand,
Glorious adornment, of thy peaceful land;
His states most state-like each in his degree,
Shall graced be by his gracious Majesty.
And he himself, graced by the Gods above,
With learning by ( Jove's of spring richly dight:)
His mind has beautified, with wisdoms love,
Pa^las endu'd him: Joue whom all men dread,
(As all men ought that mighty King to dread.)
All other graces which could wished be,
Has dew'd in plenty on his majesty.
Cease to lament encounter grief with joy,
And thou shall quickly have the upper hand:
Joy in thy King and think it is a joy,
To have a virtuous Prince govern thy land:
Which shall against all foreign foes withstand:
This having said quite vanished was the voice,
I roused me up my heart begun t'reioyce.
Yet still I stayed, and feared it was a dream,
Me thought it was too pleasing to be true:
I looked about, (as gazing on a stream,
Ones eyes are dazzled with the sliding view,
Seeing the water here, was there but new)
So were my eyes, I naught distinct could see:
My eyes were in my mind, mind in my eye.
Long had I not thus looked with mixed dint,
When lo, I saw fast fixed on a poast
A long broad scroule, in Proclamation print,
And Nobles names upon it were imbost,
Which did adorn the paper, it the poast,
I started up thinking to read the names:
When underneath I saw, God save King James.
I trembling stood, as one was still in fear,
I gazed about as one was still amazed:
Until a wel-tun'd concord I might hear,
With one consent and still one name they praised,
And still made me in fear, which was amazed.
I drew me near to hear what they did sing,
I heard them sing King James, God save our King.
Then as the widow I reioyc't a fresh,
And quite forgot the sorrow I was in:
When she is tempt with frailty of the flesh,
To take new husband, new Joys to begin,
And having taine him being trick and trim,
As she is gladsome on her wedding day,
So I reioyc't hearing them thus to say.
No sooner had I with mind-casting counts,
Pondered his title, and his true descent,
His Noble virtues, each other to surmount:
In highest degree, in striving conflict bent,
His gracious wisdom and his government.
But as the Sun enseweth still the rain,
My heart did leap and so reioyc't again.
No sooner had my offspring heard it was true,
It had pleased God give them a gracious King,
When each in pomp, and each in public view,
His royal name which did this comfort bring:
With one assent concordingly did sing,
My greater powers in state, which state proclaims,
With caps up thrown, God save our King, King James.
Thus love and duty took each others parts,
They showed their duty in obedience,
Love showed it elfe within th ir joyful hearts,
(As when in love, with a self feeling sense,
The Lover gives his love pre-eminence.)
So did my people joyfully rejoice:
Lauding their King with one concording voice.
The little birds proud of this unity,
Begun to tune their chirping siluer'd notes,
The lofty trees glad of their harmony,
Did entertain them in their new green coats,
Sending forth music from melodious throats,
The tree's adorned the birds, the birds the trees,
Who flockt into them (as a swarm of Bees.)
Which lately having left their wonted hiue,
Partly for novelty, and part for love:
For love, to let the little yonglings thrive:
(Which does in Bees a kindly nature prove)
Themselves into some other place remove.
Where on some bushe, or clagging on some tree,
They do remain, till they new hyued be.
As flew the Bees in swarms, so did the birds,
For they came flocking to thee (all hail sing trees)
As flee the Bees, their hiue, so did the birds,
They left the easings, when past were cold degrees
Of snowy winter, and congealed freeze.
And singing set in trees, welcome thou spring:
The springing happiness of (James our King.)
Like trees, and Birds, so did Dame Tellus too,
For she put on her natural ornaments,
As when her lover comes her for to woo:
She decks her self in richest complements:
And does perfume her breath with sweetest sents,
So did she now, for this was in the spring,
And in her pride she went to meet our King.
I gladsome was to see her loyal roabe,
Her spangled garments, and her light-some cheer;
(As in a frostie night, within the globe
A glorious sight of bright-some stars appear,
Who with their twinkling stem now there, now here:
So was her kirtle all imbrodring set,
Here, with a primrose: there, a violet.
Her other ornaments be suited this,
For she was Prince-like in her chiefest prime;
Her sweet perfumes she still did seem to kiss,
As being glad they in so fit a time
Came to adorn her; that in pomp and prime,
With her delights, she might new pleasures bring,
And be a ioyance to ( King James our King.)
The modest Muses tended on her grace,
The Graces round about her seemed to sing;
The frisking Fayries daunc'd their rounds apace,
The melody was such the place did ring:
Their Song they sung was still (God save the King.)
Amongst the rest, I gladdest of the rest,
Tuned up my Lute, and sung amongst the best.
A Sonnet.
LEt Phoebus in his brightest rays.
Tune up Appollos voice,
Let mortals in these happy days
With gladsome hearts rejoice:
With one consent let us all say,
Of late there hap't a happy day;
Therefore rejoice, rejoice therefore, rejoice and sing,
For it has pleased God to give us a King.
Let all the true and noble hearts,
Wherewith England abounds:
Unto their King, of rarest parts,
Be loyal subjects found.
Sing they melodious harmony,
Sing welcome, welcome heartily,
Therefore rejoice, rejoice therefore, rejoice and sing,
For it has pleased God to give us a King.
The second Canto.
AS I was singing thus with cheerful voice,
The Anticke voice appears, which erst appeared,
England, quoth she, seeing thou have chiefest choice
Of true Nobility and gallant Peers,
Why do forget to recompense their cares;
Who with their wisdom and their policy,
Kept thee in peace, being in misery.
If that their wisdoms had not well foreseen,
Thy dangers eminent being in distress,
When thou had lost thy latest Sovereign Queen;
Plunging in woe, wayling in wretchedness,
Lamenting still thy late lost Gouernesse:
Thou might have fallen to some seditious hand,
Which would have rac'd thy name and spoiled thy land.
Perhaps thou may thus foolishly reply,
(They knew my King had right and title good:)
Therefore I might live in security,
Seeing that there was no fear of shedding blood;
The way to his succession plainly stood.
If thou say thus, thou proou'st thy self unwise,
For he that has least right will soonest rise.
For he whose title is direct and plain,
And needs no varnishing to set it out;
And has a spotless mind, free from disdain,
And lives secure, not having cause to doubt,
And fears no feare-full foes, nor rascal route;
He soonest is deceived, and soonest harmed:
For being set on, he is found unarmed.
When as the proud, set in ambitious throane,
Which by vnsurping have obtained a crown:
Are still in fear, never are left alone,
But are persu'd with dangers up and down,
Biting their lips for anger, then they frown;
Bending their brows, thinking't a hellish thing,
They cannot live as safe, as lawful King.
But these I say like to a watchful snake,
Never dare sleep but with one open eye:
For every doubt, does make their senses quake,
And fear does force them often t'vse cruelty,
And still persevere in their tyranie.
For every bud which may but danger bring,
They nip it off when it is in tender spring.
Thus fear at al times, armed is with force,
When sweet security, is still unarmed,
And tyrants seldom ever brook remorse,
When they may gain by others that are harmed,
They care not who be cold, so they be warmed.
And therefore England thou have cause to grace,
Those Noble Peers, which did this fear deface.
She having said, I looked, and turned me round,
When presently the voice that spoke was gone:
I called a Jury, and I guilty found
My self: which carelessly had left undone,
Those worthy praises, which I ought to have done.
Unto those worthyes, which proclaimed my King:
Then took my Lute, and thus again did sing.
A Sonnet.
ALL those which late were wrapped in woe,
With joyful hearts let them come sing:
Their passed grief, and care let go,
Let them rejoice they have a King.
Let them say with one joyful heart,
Virtue, and wisdom shines in Court.
Let them give praises to our Peers,
Which thus have sowed their wisdoms skill:
Which have abandoned ghastly fears,
And framed each thing even to our will.
Let them J say with joy and mirth,
Be gladsome of bright wisdoms birth.
Let them give praise to policy,
Which did forecast what should betide:
And let them in their iollicie,
And in the prime of all their pride,
Give chiefest praise to chiefest wit,
Let them annex judgment to it.
Let them give praise unto the old,
Whose grand experience makes them grave:
Whose noble virtues shine like gold,
Or sparkling Diamond glistring brave.
Let this be sung sans flattery,
For It longs to our Nobility.
Long had I not thus praised my happy state,
When I was interrupted once again;
I then grew angry, cursing cruel fate,
Which would not let me make my pleasures plain,
I looked about with furious disdain.
When I beheld (the voice) in angry wise,
Which crying said England thou art not wise.
Thou art as brutish now as beastly swine,
Which under the broad Beech eats up her mast:
Yet to the top their eyes do neu'r incline,
Looking from whence it falls; they eat so fast;
This similye before my eyes she cast.
England (says she) give but attentive ear,
And in an other tune thou shall me hear.
The third Canto in a differing verse.
THen grasping hard my conscience by the hand,
England (quoth she) tho'art now in happy case:
Thou have a virtuous King t'gouerne thy land,
And grauest wisdom flows in every place.
Thou do rejoice and to them praises sing,
Yet do forget the giver of thy King.
Gods Son, his fathers glorious shine, who reigns
In stately throne, earthes prop, heavens mighty stay;
Whom furies fear, and devils in dragging chains,
Whom men, and beasts, and Angels bright obey.
Twice borne, who as a Giant took his race,
From heaven; was borne for thee, in stable base.
He laid in cribbe newborn, thy state lamented,
He wept for thee, yfram'd of lumpish clay;
His head, which earth and haughty heaven invented,
In stable vile on stony pillow lay.
Thy King, heavens Queen, in homely cloutes did hold,
Not wrapped in roabes be-wrought with wouen gold.
According to the law the Octane day,
His tender flesh with knife of stone was shred:
The ancient ryte, he would not disobay;
For thee with pain his purple blood was shed.
He death of death, and conqueror of sin,
Thy saving health at first did thus begin.
Through tyrants rage he could not rest in manger,
Ambition powered out a bloody shower;
He fled through deserts wild, a wandering stranger,
Exylde to Aegipt in his tender flower,
From cribbe to cave he toiled to Nilus strand,
And thence with pain reiourn'd to Jewish land.
What did he here? his parents he obayes;
He wept for thee, he watched night and day:
With eyes and hands to heaven vp-throwne he prays
He sought no pomp, no rest, no earthly sway.
His light, his life, his deeds did others teach,
Until such time as he must go to preach.
Where is his home? where is a place of rest
Reposed for him wherein to lay his head?
The little bird can frame a quiet nest,
The wily Fox can haunt a resting stead.
From cribbe to cross, whiles breath in him remains,
He found no rest, but trouble, toil and pains.
This King, thy priest, and Prince of happy peace,
Through Iewries land did travel too and fro:
To cure both sick and sore, he did not cease,
No raging storm could hinder him to go.
Where he might work his fathers worthy will,
And with life's food might soul and body fill.
An Angels trumpe from heaven proclaimed his name
Jesus, who came lost Adams impes to save;
Whose wondrous acts deserves eternal fame,
He Lazarus revived from the grave.
Whose stinking coarse, and rotten carkas cold,
Four days and nights was covered in the molde.
What shall I speak of other dead, revived?
Or make rehearsal of such objects sere?
Of blind and lame, of sense and sight deprived,
He made the dumb to speak, and deaf to hear.
He, foul infected souls from sin did cure,
And ugly vlcer'd Leapers cleansed pure.
When waltring waves, and winds would overthrow,
The shaking ships amid the Seas ytost:
He caused the sturdie storms to stoop below,
And saved ships and men like to be lost.
He made the lame, in leaping bear his bed,
And with five loaves, two fish, five thousand fed.
He, water wan converted into wine,
He daunted devils, and furies put to flight,
He for thy sake did let them strangle swine,
He taught all sorts of men to follow light.
His works within no leaves can be enroul'd,
The ample world his wonders cannot hold.
Do what he could, his actions did displease,
His worthy words incurred spotless blame:
No Angel tongue their malice could appease,
They forged crimes, and fained lies did frame.
They merciless will kill their loving King,
Who came to shrowed them under mercies wing.
Lost child, hells slave, Devils guest, did him betray,
For thee, that Lamb was traterously sold:
The Ethnish dogs, and Jews haule him away,
They whip him bound unto a pillar cold.
The mighty maule of death, devil, hell and sin,
By coined lies, is falselie compast in.
His fathers wisdom, divine truth is taken,
God and man, heavens lamp and glorious light,
Is of his own deciples dear forsaken,
Is bound and led away as thief by night,
He whipped is and beat, till from the crown,
Tot'h ground red streams of blood distilled down.
Stout Gedons Trumpets kept the dreadful sound,
His brickle Lanthornes broken, shined bright:
But Christ his trumpe lay smothered in the ground,
The lamps of light and truth did lack their light.
When Jews their Master bound away had led,
The Apostles into hollow caves are fled.
Now Peter's lofty vants and braggs are known,
That mighty mount is rent and shaken sunder:
A maidens voice the fact has overthrown,
A Cocks third cry proclaims the rock brought under.
That silver bell has lost it sounding tung,
Which all abroad with praise the Gospel rung.
The Lamb of God to Pilats hall is brought,
His dome and judgment, most unjust to have:
Where fraud and false surmising witness sought,
His worthy words by wresting to deprave.
They spit through spighte upon his gracious face,
And they with blows and buffets him disgrace.
When Devils, hell snakes, foul fends and furyes fell,
Had filled blasphemous Jews with poison rank,
Then they with spite, contempt and malice swell,
Within their hearts mischeuous vennome sancke.
They sound these bloody words in Pilats hall,
We crave, nail him on cross before us all.
They scoff at him and laugh him unto scorn,
And him as King in purple roabe array,
They spit, they spite and crown his head with thorn,
In jesting wise on knees all hayle they say,
They force him also bear a heavy cross,
Tot'h place where he redeemed Adams loss.
They hoyse him up upon a filthy mount,
On cross both hand and foot they fixed sure:
Betwixt two thieves whose worse they him account,
Where he most bitter torments did endure,
If all the Martirs pains were put in one,
They all to this should be esteemed none.
He thirsting on the cross man's soul to save,
Did fainting seem, to them for drink to call:
They dreaming that indeed he drink would have,
In place thereof did proffer bitter gall.
Thus served they him, who suffered for thy sake,
The Lord of all who heaven and earth did make.
When this was done he yielded up the Ghost,
His soul he to his father did commend:
He offered up himself a sacred host,
And so his glorious passion made an end.
All this he did for thee, yet thou unkind,
Have almost rac'd him quite out of thy mind.
When as the voice ended her long discourse,
She gave me leave a little for to pause:
Then having stood a while, quite out of course
Was every thing and I the chiefest cause.
Nature quite out of course, to check my course,
Neglect her work, to work in me remorse.
Then like a child which having done amiss,
Does trembling stand in fear of Masters rod:
So did I then: and gladly seemed to kiss
The very path where I might praise my God.
And as the child does wish the deed undone,
So did I wish I had with him begun.
The voice which then did lately seem to chide,
Did change her chaunt, and did new comforts bring:
Saying oh England thou have time and tide,
As yet remaining for to praise heavens King
Take time by the bush that grows upon his brow
For that being past, thou can not take him now.
And if thou slip'st him now, farewell my hope,
Thou shall not have occasion like to this,
Not God knows when) wherein will be such scope,
And cause of comfort, where nothing is amiss.
Having wisdoms wealth virtues flourishing,
Which makes thee happy through thy grave wise King.
Therefore to God, which thus has been thy stay,
All honor give, praise him eternally:
With hands and heart vp-throwne see thou do pray,
Give tryple laud unto his Majesty.
Give praise to God the giver of thy King,
In glorying him, thou prayseth still thy King.
Then cease to praise, and pray an other space,
That God may grant him long and happy days:
And prosper all his virtues with his grace,
That all the world may testify his praise.
And that he will send such wisdom from above,
That thou may him in duty serve, he thee in love.
This having said, England (said she) adue,
Think on my words, be sure when I am gone:
Give God the praise, and thou shall never rue;
For all ensuing dangers coming on,
He of his mercy will keep from thy King,
If thou to him do only glory sing.
With that I heard caelestiall harmony,
The voice departed straight into the air;
To heaven I think, for it was heavenly,
Sweet of all sweets, and fairest of all fair.
Then I remembering what the voice had bod,
Sung these thankes-giuings to my living God.
A Song of thanksgiving.
GOds name be glorified,
who with his heavenly might:
Has hell, in chief and top of pride,
put to a shameful flight.
Who sent his only Son,
man's sinful soul to save:
Which here on earth a race did run,
(to sin) a serving slave.
All glory be to God,
which in my widdow-hood:
Sent me a husband and a King,
to cheer my sorrowing mood.
I humbly therefore pray,
with praises to thy name:
That he directly so may live,
his deeds may merit fame.
Power down thy heavenly deawe,
guard him with gifts of grace:
And triple all his former years,
to guide his Princely Mace.
Place truth amongst his train,
confound all traytrous minds:
Amongst the commons plant true zeal,
to do as duty binds.
And lastly on my knees,
J pray my heavenly God:
From worthy James and from his Realm,
to stay his wrathful rod.
God save King James.
FINIS.

