The dystruccyon of Iherusalem by Vaspazian and Tytus.

Vespasian, outside city walls, addressing Pilate and Archelaus, who are
looking out from within the city walls Pylate. Archylaus. Vaspasyan.

archers and footsoldiers besieging a city or citadel, one of them climbing a
ladder to it, with tents off to the left and a cannon in the foreground

FOrty year after that our lord Ihesu crist was put on the cross in
Iherusalem Vaspasyan that was then Emperor of Rome / of Almayne / and of all
Lombardye / and had and held Iheruralem and Iudee in great subgeccyon. And
Rome was chyef of all Spain / and therefore he held him at Rome always And
that same Emperor adoured and made to adoure the Ydoles. And also he was the
myghtyest of all the world / and had all the good of the world at his
pleasure. And he had one his sone holy and noble the which had to name Tytus.
And that same sone had great puyssaunce / so that he had great hope and delight
in the temporell of this world / and byleued much strongly in the Ydoles /
the which were maynteyned by the deuylles that spoke in them / by whom all the
people lost themself. So that Ihesu christ that had suffed death and passion
for to redeem the humayne lygna* And for to reknowlege and cast the Emperor
and his folk from that error yt they were in / god gave unto Vaspasian
Emperor such a cancre yt it ete al his throat and his lyppes till his tethe /
and his brows / and pylled his berde whereof the Emperor and all his men had
great sorrow. And made for to come the best physycyens and furgyens that they
thought were in the world. And the more that they handled him the more
increased his maladye / so yt the physycyens and surgyens habandonned him clean
/ saying that nothing might hele him save god alonely. And the sykenesse
increased so that Vaspasyan was al lepre yt he might not stand but lay night
and day in his bed.

ANd in that same time came a dyscyple of Ihesu crist to rome / that was called
Clemens / the which for the malice of the Emperor and of his folk durst not
speak nor make predycacion of Ihesu crist but if that it were secretly. It
happened one day that he preched of the passion of Ihesu christ / and of his
holy faith to some folks that he had converted / so that a good knight that
was called Gay which was Seneshall of the Emperor came to the sermon. And
when he had herd it / he converted him to ye faith of Ihesu christ. And
anon as he departed fro the sermon he went unto the Emperor / and saw him
much dysfygured lyenge in his bed. For the which he began for to weep much
strongly / and to make great dole for the great evil that his lord the
Emperor had.

THen the said Gay Seneshall said unto ye emperor. I believe not that your
gods nor your puyssaunces have any power to hele you. But I have herd say
in the temple of August caesar your fader yt there was in Iherusalem a holy
prophet / yt was called Ihesu christ / the which did many great miracles in
his life. For he guarysshed the lepres / and ryghted the crepylles and lame /
the paralytyques / and heled ye demonyacles / and raised the deed. And also he
heled all the maladyes of them that came unto him. And the Jews by envy that
they had upon him because that they saw him do such miracles / Iuged him to
death and crucefyed him on a cross. And Pylate your provost Iuged him to deye
on the cross. And also I have herd say that he rose up on the third day /
and after mounted up in to heaven as king and lord almighty. And yet I have
also herd say that who that may have some thing that has touched the body
of ye holy prophet / and that they have their faith in him that they shall be
anon heled. Wherefore sir I believe that and ye might have some thing that
has touched the holy prophet / that ye should be hole anon of your maladye
and sekenes.

SAy me said ye Emperor / know ye not if this holy prophet byleueth in our
gods. Sir said Gay the Seneshall how may ye think that this holy prophet
byleueth in your gods. For I have herd say that he is lord of gods /
king and souerayn of all the world / and also is god almighty that dyscended
from heaven unto the earth / for to take flesh humayn in the vyrgin Marye. And
also I have herd say when he went on the earth he had.lxxii. felawes
dyscyples yt went with him. And of the same he had.xii. that were more nerer
him than the other. And of these.xii. there was one that was called Judas
scaryot. And that same Judas sold him to the Jews for.xxx. pens. For even so
should it be after the saying of the scryptures of the Jews. And the dyscyple
repented him and returned to the Jews the.xxx. pens in saying that he had done
evil. But the Jews would never take them again / And he cast them in to the
temple of salamon / and dispayred and hanged himself. But leave we these words
said the Seneshall and send in to Iherusalem to se and there may be found any
thing of the holy prophet / or that has touched his blessed body / for and
if ye may find any thing / ye shall be heled anon.

How Vaspasyan sent Guy his Seneshall unto Iherusalem for to have some thing
of our lord Ihesu christ / and how Pylate refused him the trybute.
two figures conversing: Vespasian sending Guy his Seneschal to Jerusalem (?)

THen said the Emperor if it be so as you say I pray you that ye prolonge it
no more / but that incontinent you go theder / and if that ye find any thing
of the holy prophet bring it to me. And know that and the holy prophet hele
me I shall venge his death / and dystroye the Jews / so many that I shall
give.xxx. for a penye / right so as they gave.xxx pence for a holy prophet.
And also I will that ye say unto Pylate sith that ye goo theder / yt it
dyspleaseth me gretely of that / that he sends me not the truage that he
ought for to send me. The which he was accustomed for to send my fader. And
also he sent it me by the space of three year. But now he has faylled me by
seven year. And if that he quyte him not / pardon not. Sir said the Seneshall I
shall do well your will and commandment if it please god. And then Gay the
Seneshall made him ready honorably as unto a Seneshall apperteyned / and
embassatour of an Emperor. Notwithstondynge he led not with him many men / but
alonely four knights / and squyers and somtre horses / and pages at his will.
And after took money of the Emperor at his pleasure / and took leave at him and
mounted on horsbacke with his men / and went by land unto the port of
Vallette / And there they put themself upon ye see / and rowed so much upon
ye see by the pleasure of god that they arrived at the port of Darre. And when
they were in Arre they put themself upon the land and rode unto the cite of
Iherusalem. Where as they lodged them secretly in the house of a good holy man
/ ye which was called Jacob the sage fader of Mary and so: iourned there three
days.

ANd when the Seneshall Gay and his felawes had soiourned in the said house of
Jacob three days without making themself to be known what they were unto
any body. Jacob his host spoke unto him as follows and said. Sir me thyngeth
that you are a man puyssaunt and also dyscrete and noble I beseech you that ye
will tell me of what country you are / and what ye seek. For and if ye will
tell me I promise you for to help you with all my power.

THen ye Seneshall Gay answered to Jacob his host. By god host you seem me to
be a good man / and therefore I shall tell it you. Know yt I am ye Seneshal of
the Emperor of Rome / that is my lord and yours / and he trusts much in
me. And know yt Vaspazyan the Emperor by whom Rome and Iherusalem is
governed / is so taken in the vysage with maladye / and the body so evil
apparaylled with lepre yt he may not sustain himself / but behooves him to
lie night and day. And it is a right pyteous sight to se him Of the which he
and all his folk has great dole / and dyspleasure. For they can find no
surgyens that can hele him / and gothe ever in empayryng / for the which fair
host I am come hither. For I herd say and speak at Rome of a holy prophet
that was named Ihesus of Nazareth that the Jews had crucefyed in this cite /
and all by envy / because that he did many miracles in his life / at his
death / and after his death. And I have said unto my lord the Emperor that
and he might find any thing that had touched the body of the holy prophet /
that incontinent yt he should have it / he should anon be heled / in asmoche
as he had his trust in ye holy prophet. So that my lord has sent me hither
for to se if I might find any thing / and that if I might find any thing
for to bring it him. And therefore fair host I am come hither for that cause.
Wherefore I pray you that and ye can give me any cou^sayl that ye will give it
me / for ye shall have great good / and great honor of my lord the Emperor.
And I swear you that ye shall be for ever a great lord in his court. And I
pray you that ye hyde me nothing. For of a truth I shall not return toward
my lord till yt I have found some thing.

Sir said Jacob to ye Seneshal tell me if, it please you if my lord ye
Emperor believe not in the holy prophet / and if that he have not adoured hy^
as god of heaven that is almighty. And the Seneshal told him that he worshypped
the ydoles / and will not leave it for nothing. And then Jacob said to him Sir
return you again hardyly sith that he byleueth not in the holy prophet the
which suffered death and passion as I did se. And also I saw him dyscended
from the cross / and put in the monument of the good knight Joseph of Armathye
/ ye which was his friend. And sith I saw him when he was arysen from death
to life / preche to his appostles and said. Go your ways through the world
and preche the gospel unto all the world and to every creature. And say unto
them that who byleueth in the sone of the vyrgyn Marye / and shall be baptized
shall be saved. And who that will not believe shall be dampened. Wherefore I tell you
that and he believe not in the holy prophet / and worship as god almighty he
may not be heled. But and he would believe he shall be heled anon / as have
bengrete foyson of other. Sir I tell you an exemple. There was a lady that was
called Vernyque of the country of Galylee. And that same lady was so leprous yt
she durst not find herself among people / yet had she her faith that the
holy prophet Ihesu crist should hele her. And when she knew that the Jews
would put him on the cross / she had right great sorrow and came to the mount
of Caluary where as ye Jews put Ihesu christ on the cross. And she saw there
the vyrgyne Marye that beheld as they put her dear sone on the cross. And
there was his appostle that was called Johan the euangelyst with her. And
Veronyque durst not approach nere them / for because of her maladye / cried
and made great sorrow. And then when ye vyrgin Marye saw her weep so she made
her sign with her hand for to come unto her. And incontinent she came. And
then the vyrgyn Marye took a kerchyer yt Veronyque bare upon her heed and put
it on the face of Ihesu christ because that he swette. And incontinent the
semblaunce of ye face of Ihesu christ was portrayed in the said kerchyer. And
the vyrgyn Marye gave it unto Veronyque for to hele her.

HEre said Gay the Seneshal this I believe well But I pray you that ye will
send for the said woman. And yt she come with me unto Rome to my lord the
Emperor. For I wot well that he will believe in the holy prophet. And when he
shall be heled all crystendome shall be exalted by him. And also he shall venge
the death of the holy prophet.

ANd then Jacob sent for her by one of his servants / and a squire of Gayes.
When she was come Jacob told her how the Emperor had sent his Seneshall for
her / for to come and hele him at rome of his leprehode. And he said to her
these words to the end that the faith of Ihesu christ were exalted And also he
told her that she should bring the clothe and other things if she had any.
And Veronyque said to him yt she was well content to go theder / for she
byleued that the virtue of Ihesu christ should hele the Emperor. And if yt it
might be done all ye people would believe in Ihesu christ. And when the
Seneshall herd her speak so / he had right great Joy / and badde yt she
should apparayll her for to depart.

THen said Gay the Seneshall I must speak with Pylate. And Jacob answered him yt
he would go with him gladly. And they twain with their company went for to
speak with Pylate. So they found him before the temple of Salamon. Then gay
the seneshall salued him in saying. Sir Pylate I am messenger of the Emperor
of Rome my lord and yours And he mau^deth you by me yt ye send him the
trybute of seven year that you owe hy^. And know that he is evil content with
you / because ye have not sent hy^ the trybute every year as ye should.
Nevertheless if ye send it him by me he shall not be so evil content with you /
seeing you are so far of.

When Pylate herd Gay the Seneshall speak so / he made him right evil chere
and semblau^t And answered him right proudely in menasynge him / and said to
him yt he would have his cou^sayl And then an evil man that was of his
counsayll / and was his Seneshall / the which was called Barraba^ said before
them all. I counsayll that nothing nor ho^mage he reknowlege to the Emperor
/ but say yt he was lord himself of Iherusalem. For also ye people would
rather have Pylate to their lord than the Emperor / or any other. And that
the Emperor kept and were lord of Rome and of Lombardye. And said unto
Pylate that he neded not to fere of nothing / and that and the Emperor came
with all his men to Iherusalem for to make war / he might not live by defaute
of water / because yt there is no water nere this cite. And then Pylate held
his counsayll for good / and commanded that they should slay Gay the Seneshal
But barrabam said that it should be ill done. For messengers ought for to have
no harm for any thing yt they say / so that they have it by commandment.
And then Pylate badde him return and say unto the emperor that he held
nothing of him.

How Gay the Seneshal returned to the Emperor with Veronyse. And how the
Emperor was heled by the vernacle.
THen Gay departed from Pylate much angry / and thought him for to return
incontinent unto Rome / and took leave of Jacob his host and gave him fair
Iewelles / and of treasour great foyson. And departed from Iherusalem with
Veronyque and al his company / and messenger (Guy the Seneschal?) reporting to
king or emperor (Vespasian?); guards in background with spears, woman at right
behind messenger rode unto Cesarye / and into Acre. And there they took ship
and had good wind / so that they came to the port of Valette in right great
Joy euerychone to be landed in sauete. And above all Gay the Seneshall. For he
had hope that god should do him such honor that his trauayll should be his
salvation. And when they had soiourned there two days they mounted on
horsbacke and rode to Rome unto the Emperor which abode in right great pain
because of his malady that he had on him. And when the Emperor knew of the
coming of his Seneshall he had right great Joy and will for to speak with
him. And at yt same time that Gay was comen unto rome the Emperor had sent
for all the kings and princes of his Empire. Whether was come / kings / dukes
/ earls / and barons / knights / and all the nobles of his said Empire. For he
would croune his sone Tytus / because that he himself was so dysfygured and
might not walk to govern his Empire / for ye which he would crown him on
the morrow.

THen came Gay the Seneshall Ioyously before the Emperor his lord / and
salued him in making him reverence. And the Emperor said yt he was right
welcome. In demanding him if he had found any thing yt might hele him. And
Gaye said unto him. Sir make you glad and Joyous and yield graces unto god
Ihesu christ. For I have found a holy lady that has his figure in a clothe /
with the which clothe she was heled also sone as she had touched it. the
which lady was all leprous. And sir if ye will believe steadfastly in Ihesu
christ ye shall be heled anon / and else ye can never be heled.

THen the Emperor said unto Gay his Seneshall. I believe well all yt you have
said / wherefore if it please Ihesu christ for to give me hell the I shall venge
his death. Now make come to me that lady / and that she bring with her the
clothe also worthily as unto it apperteyneth to be brought.

Sir said Gay the Seneshall to morrow when all your baronnye is together I shall
make the lady to come before you in the presence of them all to the end that
every body se the miracle / and believe in Ihesu christ. And then ye may crown
your sone Tytus. And the Emperor said that it was well spoken And said that at
the pleasure of god be it done.

AFter Gay ye Seneshall returned unto his house / and the Emperor abode in his
palace. And when Gay was in his house he found Veronyque / and said to her.
Lady my lord the Emperor will that ye come before him to morrow in ye
morning. But make your prayers unto our lord Ihesu christ yt he will show of
his great miracles on the Emperor / that it will please him to guarysshe him
of al his maladyes to the end that all the people believe in him that he is
almighty god.

ANd when the lady herd it she put her in orayson and prayed our lord much
swetely for the guarysshynge of the Emperor. And even so as Veronyque was in
orayson a dyscyple of Ihesu christ passed for by the door / and she lift up her
eyes and saw him pass. And anon she knew him and called him by his name.
And said unto him. Brother Clemens our redemptour Ihesu christ be with you
always. And Incontinent the dyscyple was much meruaylled and had right great
Joy when he herd he was called by his propre name / and speak of Ihesu christ
in ye house of the Seneshall. And then Veronyque said to him. Be not aferde of
nothing for I tell the yt crystendome shall be exalted by ye. And for to give ye
in knowledge what I am. I am the woman that was lepre in Galyle / which was
heled by ye Vernacle. And I am comen in to this country for to hele the
Emperor by the grace of god. Wherefore I pray you that you come with me and
preche to him ye holy law and faith of Ihesu christ. And then the dyscyple
did know that it was the pleasure of Ihesu christ. And said at ye pleasure of
god be it done. I pray you said he tell me your name. And she told it him.

How Veronyque showed the Vernacle to the Emperor / and how he was heled of
his lepre.
vernicle (image of Christ's face on St. Veronica's kerchief)

VHen the dyscyple took leave of the lady and went his way. And when it came
on the morrow / the Emperor would not adoure the Ydoles / because that he had
no steadfast believe in them through his seneshall. And when it came to the hour
of tyers all the barons were assembled where as the Emperor was in a fair
bed. And then he made to come his Seneshall / clemence / and Veronyque /
which gave the vernacle to Clemens. And when they were before ye Emperor
Veronyque salued him and said to him. Sir understand ye sermon of this holy
man that is dyscyple of Ihesu christ. And after the sermon by the pleasure of
al mighty god you shall be heled. Then the Emperor made scylence to be made
all about. And he mounted on a scaffolde and preched the natyuyte and passion
of our lord Ihesu christ entyerly / and how he shall come at ye day of
Judgment to Judge the quycke and the deed When the sermon was done / Veronyque
and he put them in orayson / and prayed Ihesu christ almyghtye that it would
please him to show his miracle / and good virtue. And when they had adoured
him / they unfolded the holy clothe seeing all the baronny / and put it before
the Emperor / and made him adoure it. Incontinent that he had worshypped it /
he was hole and sound / so yt it seemed that he had never ben seek. Then he
arose and went all about / whereof his barons was right Ioyfuyll / and yielded
thanks and graces unto our lord Ihesu christ / as Clemens the dyscyple had
taught them.

How Vaspasyan crowned Tytus his sone Emperor.
Vespasian crowning his son Titus Emperor

AFter that the graces was yielded to god / ye Emperor crowned his sone Tytus
Emperor of Rome much honorably. And when it came on ye morrow in the
morning Clemens preched to the Emperor / to Tytus his sone and to all the
barons. And when he had fynysshed / he yielded graces unto god and unto ye
emperor / and to all his barons / and said Amen.

THen Clemens and Gay the Seneshal said unto the Emperor that since Ihesu christ
had heled him yt he should baptyse him for his love. For Ihesu christ ordained
the baptysme / without ye which no man can be saved / and also cause all your
barons to be baptized. Then the Emperor said I am much beholden unto this
woman that has trauayled so much for me / and took Veronyque by the hand
and said to her. Lady take of mine Empire as much as you will castelles or
towns / except Rome that is chyef of my^ Empire. And Veronyque answered. Sir
I thank Ihesu christ and you also. I pray you that and ye will give me any
thing give it to Clement that is dyscyple of Ihesu christ / for I have given me
unto him. and the Emperor answered her / lady yt which you will pleases me.
And Clement said unto the Emperor Sir I will have none other thing of you /
but that ye will be crystened and believe in the law of Ihesu christ / that
has done you so great grace / and cause your men to be crystened / for he is
god almighty.

THen answered the Emperor / friend I will that thou be appostoll and chief of
all crystendome / and make to preche the law of Ihesu christ thrughe all mine
Empire / and who yt will convert them it shall please me well. But know yt I
will not baptyse me till that I have venged the death of Ihesu christ / and then
I will be baptized / and al my men also / if he give me grace for to return in
saufte. Then the Emperor took up Clement / and made him appostoll. And made to
make a church of saint Symeon / and an auter. And upon the same auter he put
the clothe of ye vernacle where as was the semblaunce of the face of our lord
Ihesu christ / and put it upon two pyllers of fine gold. And made for to
ordeyne in the church fair vestymentes and copes. And he made make many fair
fontes for to baptyse all them that would be baptized And there saint Clemens
baptized Veronyque without chau^gynge her name. And then he preched by diverse
times in the said temple. And afterward there was baptized every day more and
more.

ANd then after this the Seneshal entered with Vaspasyan in to his chamber / and
said to hy^ Sir I have great Joy yt you are heled so well through the grace of
Ihesu christ. Now sir I will tell you of Pylate your provost how he spoke to me
when I demanded him your truage that he owes you. He made me right evil chere
/ in saying that he would send you nothing / nor that he knew not yt he
held any thing of you in ye cite of Iherusalem / nor therabout And yet I tell
you that and I had spoken any more he would have made me to have be slain
And when I saw that I would not make no long process for the great Joy
that I had to have found some of that that was necessary to you. But well I
told him from you that he should yet be dystroyed And as I told hy^ that a
Jew a holy man rose up and said before all / that within an.C. year after in
Iherusalem should be so great famyne that the mother should ete her child for
hongre. And another Jew yt was called Jacob said also that for a truth the
holy prophet said with his mouth that in short time should come the
dystruccyon and vengeance of Iherusalem / and that there should not abide one
stone upon another. And should be so great hongre in the cite that the mother
should ete her child. When Pylate herd yt he was much angrye / And said unto
them that and ever they spoke of that more / he should make them be hanged. Now
behold sir how Pylate your provost is true unto you.

How Vaspasyan and Tytus assembled their host for to go and dystroye the cite
of Iherusalem.
host armed with spears assembled outside city walls

When the Emperor herd that which Gay his Seneshall told him / he was
much angrye / and maunded anon through out his Empire / and on the other
parts that al men berynge arms / and other artyfycers to that necessary /
should come armed and apparaylled to Rome. And incontinent all they of his
empire and other came theder in fair ordinance after their estate. And theder
was come kings / dukes / earls / barons and knights / and diverse other
princes. And were well ordained and armed for to enter in to battle. And were
well in nombre.iii. C. M. knights / without the other folk. And the Emperor
had made to make what ships and other vessels.xxx. M In the which
vessels he and all his men put them upon the sea. And then made to sing /
cry / and blow with trompettes and clarons / and mynstrelles play on all
sides. And made to pulle up the saylles in such manner and guyse / that it
seemed yt heaven and earth should assemble together. And they had so good wind
and so fair weder that within.v. wekes they arrived at the port of Acre. So
that in a morning at the son rysynge they yt were within the town of Acre
came and yielded the keys to the Emperor. And he took them to mercy. And when
they had refresshed them there / Vaspasyan and Tytus his sone with all their
army went and assyeged a castle / that was between Iherusalem and acre / and
it was called Alcaffert. And when the Jews of the castle saw so many men
lodged about the castle. They would have yielded them gladly if they had
known they should have had mercy.

When all the host was in their tents our lord sent so great snowes / and so
great wind that with pain might any hold them in the host. And ye castle
was well stuffed and garnysshed of all things. For the lord of the castle
had fortefyed it / which was a holy man and a good knight of Joseph of
Armathies kynne that put our lord in sepulcre.

SOne after the Emperor took the castle and made to slay all ye Jews save
Iafet and.viii. other that were hid in a seller under the earth / and were
there three days. And when they saw they dyed for hongre they ete one after
another / except Iafet and one of his cosyns yt accorded not thereto. Then
Iafet said unto him. I was lord of this castle / and also I was holden for
noble and a holy man. Great folly shall it be to us if we dye here. Issue we out
for we may live no longer / and go we hardyly to the Emperor / and make us be
known to him / and I am sure he will take us to grace and mercy.

THen the Emperor made to beat down ye castle and fill the dytches. And
Iafet and his cosyn issued hut of the cave and went unto the Emperor and
kneled down before him. And Iafet said unto the emperor. Sir I was lord of
this castle yt you have made to beat down. And now I have understand yt you
are comen in to this country for to venge the death and the passion of our
lord Ihesu christ / that with wrong was crucefyed within the Cite of
Iherusalem.

And are comen for to take Pylate / for he consented ye foresaid death. And
know yt my cosyn Joseph of Armathye dyscended the holy prophet of ye cross /
and put him in sepulcre. And know that we may do you great ease if ye will
take Iherusalem / through counsayll So we pray you sir to have mercy on us.
And then ye Emperor took them to mercy. And Iafet prayed them to give them
some mete / in countynge them all their myseryes of hongre / and the Emperor
made them have mete / and demanded them if they byleued in Ihesu christ / and
they said ye. Then he made them of his preuy counsayll.

How Vaspasyan and Tytus took counsayll / and how they besyeged Iherusalem.
monarch on throne flanked by counselors

ANd after Vaspasyan and Tytus his sone had counsayll yt they should go before
Iherusalem with all their host. And it happened them that which saint Luke
recounteth yt said. When Ihesu christ approached nere Iherusalem he wept upon
it and said to the Cite if thou knew what shall happen the thou would weep.
For thou know not the day of thy vysytacyon for thou shalt be all
enuyronned / assyeged / and assaylled. And they shall not leave one stone upon
another / and the sons yt shall be with the shall be dystroyed.

PYlate knew not yet nothing of the coming of the emperor / nor of his men
yt came again him. For on such a day every year the Jews of all the land
theraboute made a great feast in the cite of Iherusalem. And also there was
comen ye grettest part of the Jews. And the sone of Herodes yt was crowned
king of Galylee ye which was called Archelaus was comen to the feast with all
his men. And whiles that the Jews was in Iherusalem / there belwe so great a
wind that none of the Jews would not issue out of the cite / nor return to
go in to their countres because of the wind that was so great and strong.

ANd then Vaspasyan the Emperor and Tytus his sone with all their host came
and asseged Iherusalem all about / by such manner that there ne might nothing
issue nor enter but that it passed by the host. And when Pylate and they that
were within the cite of Iherusalem saw the host and so many folk about the
town / they were much strongely abashed. And Pylate was then much abashed.
And then the king Archylaus was sore abashed and said to Pylate yt he should
doubt of nothing / for there was so much good chyualry in the cite of
Iherusalem / and that she was so well and so strongly garnysshed that they
neded not to fere of nothing / so that they armed them and went all assayll
and send back them that were in the host of the Emperor. To the end that
they of the said host did repent them of that they were comen. And also
that the host might not long endure by defaute of water. And the counsayl
pleased much Pylate / and made cry thrughe all the cite that every body should
arm him. And incontinent every body armed him. And when they were euerychone
armed they came before pylate at the palace. And when they would have issued
out of the cite of Iherusalem the Emperors men were so nere approached the
walls of the cite that they durst not issue / but had counsayll to shytte the
gates / and put a party to keep the walls / and the other dysarmed them to
bear stones upon the walls. And incontynente made to cry that every man
should bear stones upon the walls. Except them that kept the walls / and
that the cite should be well garnysshed. They were well.lx. thousand to be re
stones upon the walls. And Pylate and the king Archylaus were dyfarmed / and
each of them had on their mauntelles of grene / and Pylate held a white
staff in his hand. And Pylate and the king Archylaus sent word to the
Emperor that they would go and speak with him upon assurance / without any
fraud or gyle.

THen Vaspasyan the Emperor / Iafet / Gay the Seneshall with.xl. knights
came to the wall of the cite where as was Pylate and the king Archylaus. And
Tytus sone of the Emperor abode in the host. And then Vaspasyan demanded of
gay his Seneshall which was Pylate. And he said unto him that it was he yt
held the white staff in his hand. Then Vaspasyan began for to speak unto
Pylate and said. Pylate my noble Iulyus caesar gave ye Iherusalem in keeping /
and wylled that thou was his provost / and that thou governed this land. And
when you knew that he was deed thou sent me the truage that thou ought by three
year. And sith have ben seven year without sendynge it me. And when I sent to
the for it by Gay my Seneshall thou said unto him vyllany And said to him that
thou held nothing of me / and yet said to him that I should keep well Rome
and Lombardye / and that thou should keep well Iherusalem / and reknowledged no
homage nor truage. Wherefore I will yt thou make open the gates of this cite to
the end yt I may do my will with the and with all them that is en habytynge
there within.

How Vaspasyan spoke unto Pylate / and what answer Pylate gave him.
Vespasian, outside city walls, addressing Pilate and Archelaus, who are
looking out from within the city walls Pylate. Archylaus. Vaspasyan.



THen answered Pylate to Vaspasian the emperor and said that he should take
counsayll / and so departed and went and held his counsayll with all his
barons / and with the king Archylaus. And the said Archylaus spoke first and
said to him that he neded not to doubt the menaces of the Emperor. For you
may well defend you against him and resyste. For you have within this cite so
much good chyualry that I believe that in the third party of ye world there
is not so many good men. And it should be great shame to you if you defended
you not against the Emperor And myshappe take him that shall yield him to them
perour to do his will. And when ye king Archylaus had spoken so / the
Seneshall of Pylate that was called Barrabam said to Pylate. Sir the king
gives you good counsayll. For know certainly that ye need not to have fere of
the Emperor / for he has not the puyssaunce to abide with his host in this
country the space of two months / for they shall have no water but if they
go and fetch it right far at the lake of the devil. There where as
perysshed two cytees* that was called Sodom and Gomor. And that should be to
great pain for them. Wherefore I believe yt the emperor may not abide long
about us. And also we may well hold us.vii. year against him. Wherefore I
counsayll you that you defye him of yt that he has been so hardy to come on
this side the sea. And that he return the sonest that he may. And Pylate and
the king Archylaus and all ye baronny held it for good counsayll / and went
upon the wall where the Emperor with all his men abode him at ye foot of ye
said wall. And Pylate began to speak to the Emperor and said. Sir return
your way and keep well your land. For I shall keep this cite well from you /
and from all mine enemies. And know that I shall not yield you this cite. But
I counsayll you that you dystroye you not / and that you return.

THen the Emperor said to pylate. Do not speak to me to return / but tell me
if ye will yield me the Cite as to your sovereign lord temporell. For I
promise you that you nor no man within ye cite shall have no mercy of me. Then
said Pylate ye speak folysshely / for know yt I shall not yield you ye cite
nor reknowlege you not for lord / but defye you from hensforth. And wit yt I
shall do with you yt that ye would do with me.

How Vaspasyan returned all angrye in to his pauyllyons / and how his knights
complained unto him for water for their horses.
seated man (king or emperor?), at left, gesturing toward group of standing
people (nobles or courtiers?) in robes, at right; off to the left side, a view
of some buildings

THen the Emperor returned to his tents all angrye / and recounted all unto
his sone Tytus / the which thanked god yt it was so happened. Then came there
many knights and pages before the Emperor demanding him how they should
have water / for.xl. mile about the host they might find no water for to
water their horses. When the Emperor herd those complayntes he meruaylled /
and said to Iafet of Casset. How may we have water for our horses and other
beestes. And Iafet said. Sir and you have great foyson of beestes make many to
be flayne and salt the flesh for the men of the host / and make ye hydes to
be dressed and sewed together / and make bougettes of them for to carry the water
still from the lake of the devil in to the valeye of Iosephat till that it be
full / And when the Emperor and Tytus his sone had herd Iafet give such
cou^sayll they held it for good And anon they made to flee what oxen / what
kyen / gotes / camelles / and horses.lx. thousand. And sithe made to salt the
flesh / and corye the skynnes / and sewe them together / and stratched them in
the valeye of Iosaphat. And when ye valeye of Iosaphat was apparaylled ye
Emperor said to Iafet yt he should think to make come water from the lake of
ye devil / and to fill the valeye of Iosaphat.

IAphet made ready two thousand horses yt bare water every day incessauntly
from the lake of the devil / and made it to be put in ye valeye aforsayd as it
had been a ponde all full / so much that the valey was all full / and held
also well as it had been all of one piece And by the will of god the water was also
fair and clear / and also fresshe as the water that comes out of the roche.

How Pylate and king Archylaus put Jacob the fader of Mary Iacobe in prison /
and how an au^gel had him out of the cite. And how he recounted it to Vaspasyan
and Tytus.
Jacob addressing Vespasian and Titus Jacob. Vaspa. Tytus.



When Pylate and the king Archylaus / and the other folk of Iherusalem saw
that the valeye of Iosaphat was full of water / they meruaylled much / and
thought incontinent that Iafet had given that counsayll. For he was a holy man
Jew and of great engyn. And Pylate began to abasshe him right strongly / and
in his heart thought yt he would he were out of the cite in a field. And
repented him much of that he had not yielded the cite to the Emperor. And the
king Archylaus and Barrabam the Seneshal of Pylate that had given him that
counsayll comforted him much strongly and gretely / and said unto him Pylate
wherefore do you abasshe you / for if the emperor and all his host abide here
seven year / they shall have neither strength nor puyssaunce to have this cite
by force. And also he may not abide here long / by the which we shall acquyre
great honor.

ANd when Jacob fader of mary Iacobe herd this he held it for great folly /
and said to Pylate. Sir I meruayll me much how ye believe this yt these tell
you. For wit it certainly that you can not hold / nor we against the
Emperor. But and ye will believe me I shall give you good counsayl. And Pylate
would wete what counsayl he should give. And Jacob said to him / sir send
word to the Emperor yt ye will yield him the cite to do his pleasure. And I
believe he shall take you to mercy. And then Pylate said unto him / thou art
acursed / and also have renyed our law. So thou ought not to be byleued / nor
thy counsayl also. For if the Emperor had this cite thou would return and
believe in his law payen / and well it appears. For thou sent unto him
Veronyque yt is a false woman and a wytche / that has heled him by her
unhappy crafts and enchau^tementes. Thou have done that / and I shall take
vengeance on the. Then Pylate made him to be taken and fastened to a cheyne of
iron / and made him to be put in his prison in the dongeon of a great toure
that was under the palace of ye said cite.

How Jacob made his prayers unto our lord Ihesu christ in the prison.
at left, Jacob, in prison, kneeling in prayer; at right, a city or palace

ANd when Jacob was in that same prison the which was much obscure / he
reclamed ever our lord Ihesu christ / in saying that by his pity and swetnes
he would not let him deye there. And when his daughter Marye Iacobe herd
tell that her fader was in prison / and so trauaylled by Pylate / she put her
in orayson and prayed god much swetely in saying. / Fair lord god Ihesu
christ behold how thy friend my fader is in prison. I pray the that thou keep
him me that his enemies may not do him ill. Fair fader god that delivered
Joseph of Armathye from the prison of Pylate deliver my fader also. And
incontinent as she had fynysshed her prayer / the angel of god delivered her
fader / seeing all the kepers / the which ne might stere no more than they had been deed / and led him out of the cite before the Emperoures tente and there
left him.

When Jacob was at the enter of the tente of the Emperor they yt were there
wend that he had been a spy / and began for to take him. And when Gay the
Seneshal saw him / he knew him anon / and said that he had been his host.
And in kissing him led him before the Emperor / and said sir this man was
mine host that ensygned me to Vexonyque.

THen the Emperor demanded him how he was issued out of the cite / for he
had herd say that Pylate had made him to be put in prison And Jacob said
unto him that our lord Ihesu christ had sent unto him an angel that had
delivered him out of prison and had brought him theder. And when the emperor
had herd him he made him great chere / and retained him of his own court
/ with Iafet of Casset / and wylled that he were of his preuy counsayll / and
made to make him honor and great feast of all his men.

How Vaspasyan assembled his counsayl for to wit how he might assayll
Iherusalem / and how Jacob gave him counsayll for to make dytches about
Iherusalem.
archers and footsoldiers besieging a city or citadel, one of them climbing a
ladder to it, with tents off to the left and a cannon in the foreground

THen Vaspasyan the Emperor made come tytus his sone and drew him a part
with Iafet and Jacob / and had.lx. barons yt were of his counsayl secret / and
said to them. I have made you come heder to the end that we have counsayll how
we shall do with this cite. And I will that Jacob say first his oppynyon. For
god has done him the grace that he has sent him his angel for to take
him out of prison to the end that he tell us of Pylate and of king Archylaus
how they bear them wtin the cite / and what they say / and what they do / and
what is their entencyo^

Jacob said then unto ye Emperor. Sir I shall tell you of the deed. Know that
yonder within the cite is but little vytaylles / wherefore they can not hold
long. And also they are much abashed / for in all ye land with pain is
there abyden one Jew but that they are comen unto the feast yonder within. For
it was a custom every year to make ye feast And when you had laid the syege
none durst issue out / nor also none took no head of you. Wherefore I tell you
sir that they shall be sone dyscomfyted / for they are not garnysshed with
vytaylles / nevertheless they may issue out by diverse places. So I counsayll
that ye make to be made great pyttes / to the end that none issue out wtoute
your license. And when their vytaylles shall be spended they shall yield them
unto you / or else ye shall never win it.

THen the Emperor and the barons of the cou^sayll held it for good and well
spoken. And in contynent the Emperor made to cry thrughe all the host that
all they which meddled them with making of pyttes should come unto the Emperor
/ and incontinent it was done. And when they were come before the Emperor they
found them well together.v. M. werkemen. Then the Emperor commanded them
for to make deep pyttes about the cite of Iherusale^ And said unto Iafet and
Jacob that they should be ye admynystratours. And Iafet and Jacob beheld
between them both where they should begin the forsaid dytches. So they made
them be bego^ne where as the^ thought best / and led with them.xx. M. archers
well garnysshed for to keep them that made ye pyttes. And the work men made
them in the manner that Iafet and Jacob commanded them. So they made the
forsaid dytches.xxx. culdettes deep / and.xx. broad.

How Pylate assembled his men of arms for to fight with the Emperor.
enthroned figure with scepter (Pilate?) flanked by two pairs of men in armor
with spears and swords

When Pylate saw yt they made dytches in such wise / and that they kept them
so strayte. He demanded counsayl of ye king Archylaus / the which made send
for Joseph of Armathye to counsayll that said. Sir we may do none other thing
/ but I counsayll you that we arm us to morrow in the morning euerychone /
and that we go and assayll them. For the son shall smite them in the faces /
and we shall dystroye them all. And Pylate and the king Archylaus held that
counsayll for good. And made cry at night thrughe all the cite that on the
morrow at the point of the day they should be armed before the temple of
Salamon in a right fair place that was there And when it came on the morrow
they were well armed and apparaylled / and ordained their bataylles / and were
well.xx. M. knights / and.lx. M. squyers / and well lxx. M. archers and
sergeau^tes surely dressed. And pylate commanded that they should enter wisely
in to battle / and that none dysordred them / but kept them at the ordenaunce
of the capytaynes.

THen Pylate and the king Archilaus took the xx. M. knights and issued by the
great gate of the cite. And incontinent as one of the watch of the Emperor
saw them issue out all armed he mounted on horsbacke and ran and recounted it
unto the Emperor. And then the Emperor sent for Tytus his sone / and for
Iafet and Jacob / and said to them that in contynent they should make to cry
that every Capytayne should be armed with all their retynewe surely And
incontinent it was done / for of themself it was apparaylled from day to
day. And when they of the host knew wherefore they were issued / they had
right great Joy / and anon came all armed before the Emperor. And the
Emperor said unto them that they should have batayl. And told unto them how
pylate came against them with his men: and badde them for to ordeyne their
bataylles / and that every body were ready for to smite upon their enmyes. And
when they were ready and all armed / the Emperor / tytus his sone / and ye
other kings / dukes / earls / barons and knights and all other manner of
folks issued out there as they were lodged / and were men without nombre. And
when they were comen there as ye host of Pilate was it was about tyers. And
the men of Pylate were not yet all issued out of Iherusalem. When they were all
out the bataylles were ordained / and made the mynstrelles to play and to
blow up the trompettes / and entermedled them together in such manner / yt ye
should neither have seen nor herd heaven nor earth / and smote the one upon the
other so mighty strokes with speres upon their sheldes and other harneys that
at the first battle there deyed three thousand what of one what of other of
them of Pylate. And of them of the Emperor.viii. C. and the battle dured unto
ye hour of none.

AFter that the bataylles were ended / they put themself all aside and rested
them. And wha^ they had rested them on both parties they returned again unto
the field / and began the battle again / so sharply that there deyed on ye
part of Pylate three thousand and seven hundred men of arms. And on the
Emperors part a thousand and two hundred. And the battle dured unto the
sone setting.

How our lord showed a great miracle for Vaspasyan and his host at the
batayl. And how Pylates men were dyscomfyte.
knights on horseback charging with spears and swords, trampling broken bodies
and weapons

THen our lord Ihesu christ that would that his death were venged did a
miracle / for they of the battle wend yt the son would have rested / and
began to depart from the field. And the sone by the will of god turned
toward oryent / and arose up as it had been fair morning / and the night
was passed / and was a fair clear day unto the sone setting. And thus there
was no night between the two days. When the emperor and Tytus his sone had seen
ye great miracle that god had made / they thought that it was not gods will
that they should yet issue out of the field. And then they returned and began
to smite upon the host of Pylate / and Pylate on them / and the battle dured
unto myddaye. And there deyed upon the part of Pylate four thousand two
hundred and fyfty And on ye Emperors side a thousand and fyfty.

THen the batayles were much strongly chaffed one against another / and went
and rested them till even song time. And then they came again to ye field and
smote the one upon the other / and dured till night. And there was slain on
Pylates party three thousand and.l. persons. And of them of ye Emperor iij.
C. l. So that in all there deyed on Pylates part.x. M. men. And on the
Emperors.iij. M. iiij. C. And in that same battle the Emperor raised up the
field / and drove Pylates host unto the gates of the cite of Iherusalem. And
as they reculed them they herd a man that cried still Vaspasyan go in to
Iherusalem. Whereof every body was abashed / for they wend it had been
prophecye. And at that same enter was hurt Joseph of Armathye with a spear in
the thyes / but he was not much the wors. And when Pylate and the king
Archylaus were retrayed within the cite they were right sore trauayled / and
had great sorrow for the loss they had received in the battle. For they never
had so great sorrow before for nothing nor after. And the Emperor went and
lodged him in his tents / with his men / and there they refresshed them / for
they were right weary euerychone.

When the Emperor saw that Pylate issued not out of the cite. He said unto
Iafet and unto Jacob that they should thy^ke to make the pyttes / to the end
yt they might have sooner done. And they went and put to as many werkemen as was
before / for me^ ynowe put to their hands. And they were well.xv. M werkemen /
so that in little space they had made the said pyttes all about Iherusalem /
by such manner that no person ne might issue nor enter wtoute their license.
For the said pyttes were made deep and broad as ye have herd before.

When Pilate saw that no man ne might issue he and the other barons of the
cite assembled them / and dyscomforted them much / and all the oath people
also. And there cried and said ever a voice (Vaspasyan go) in Iherusalem is
deed. And it would say it by our blessed lord Ihesu christ. / but we shall
say yt this prophet was against us. Sir Pylate ye had evil counsayll when ye
would not yield this cite unto the Emperor our lord. Now may we well se that
ye time approaches that this voice gave that abode at the gate of the cite and
said. Go Vas pasyan in to Iherusalem for all ye people deyeth now in this cite
by the streets.

THen Pylate herd the cry of the people / and he went and counsaylled him
with king Archylaus and with his barons and other knights / and above all
other Joseph of Armathye spoke first and said to Pylate. Sir here can be no
remedy save that we make still these folk / and that there be made two great
pyttes for to put them that be deed in / for they are to nere the cite. And is
right peryllous for pestylence And also that there come no closing to the
cite. And also that we keep us wisely / and make the vytaylles to be well kept
/ for in veryte there is right little seeing that we are so many. For there is
well.xxx. thousand strangers that are comen for this feast. And none can put
them out. Wherefore it is of necessyte that euerichone keep well their vytaylles.

ANd when he had herd the counsayll of Joseph of Armathye he said yt it was
well said / And badde Joseph do it after his own pleasure. The which Joseph
made to make two great pyttes wherein they did put the deed bodies / yt was
well in nombre.xiii. thousand. And made to keep the vytaylles.

What great famyne was within the cite of Iherusalem / and how the people came
and complained unto Pylate.
Barrabas, Pilate, and King Archelaus Barrabam. Pylate. K. Archylaus.



AFter that there happened so great famyne within the cite of Iherusalem and
derthe / that there abode no wild herb to ete that might be had. And also ete
the deed beestes were they horses / dogs / cattes / or any other beestes. For
their hongre was so great that all yt they might get was sone gone.

VHen was more gretter cry in Iherusale^ than had be before / for the folk
deyed for hongre / and when they were deed they were borne in to the pyttes
where as was the other. And in deed there was found deed for one day for
hongre by the streets three hundred and forty persons / of the which Pylate
had great dole / much more than he had before.

THen Pylate had in his counsayll and made cry that what person had no mete
that he should take there as he might get it. And of this the poor folks
had great Joy / and went thrughe the streets by great hepes theder as they
thought to find any mete. And inco^tynent as they saw smoke / or smelled any
savor of mete in what someuer house it was they entered and who that might take
most had most / by such manner that they spylte all the vytaylles in short
time / so that there was found no mete within the cite of Iherusalem. And in
the end they went unto ye gates of the cite that were covered with boylled
leder and ete thereof for the great hongre that they had. And there was in
Iherusalem so great derthe that a little ferdynge lofe was worth.lx. pieces of
gold. And an apple was worth the weight of gold. And when all the vytayles
was eten so that there was none found no more to sell / they gnawed the wodde
and ete the earth. And then the folks deyed in the streets for pure hongre
innumerable.

NOw then happened that a lady that had to name Marye / the which had been wife
of ye king of Affrycke. The which deyed in the time yt Ihesu christ was
crucefyed. That same lady wylled not to be married any more / and she had a
daughter and a noble lady that was her fellow / ye which was called claryce
and she had a sone. These two ladies came in to Iherusalem and were converted
to the faith of Ihesu christ / and was baptized. And these two ladies was well
garnysshed of vytaylles so as it apperteyned unto a queen / unto the time that
the men of Pylate did stele it from them. And they were ever in orayson
toward Ihesu christ / for they had strongly their faith And as it is said
before the Jews had stolen their by taylles except herbs that they had in a
gardyne that was within their house / and of these herbs they lived When al
their herbs was eten the daughter of ye queen of Affryke was much feeble for
hongre / and deyed without any other sekenes / whereof the queen had right great
sorrow and wept much strongly. And also the sone of the felawe of the queen
deyed for great hongre / for the which his mother made right great dole / And
also for that that they had great hongre / also well as for their children that
were deed.

When the felawe of the queen saw and considered their great sorrow / she said
unto the queen. Lady leave we this sorrow / in peace / and take we my child and
cut a quarter / and roste we it since that we have none other thing for to ete
/ and that all is gone.

And when the queen herd that / of great sorrow and hydour that she had she
fell down unto the earth in a swowne.

How as the two ladies were in counsayll and the queen in swoune an angel
badde the queen roste and ete her child.
Clarice (left), the queen (right), and a group of other ladies (center,
smaller) Clarice

the queen.



ANd then as the queen Marye lay swounyng an angel came that took her up and
comforted her / and said unto her. Lady god sends you word by me that you
ete the child to the end that / yt which he has said shall be accomplysshed
and done. For Ihe su christ spoke it with his propre mouth in this Cite the
day of Palmesondaye when he entered mounted upon an ass. And that in yt
generacyon should be pestilence and famyne so great in Iherusalem that the
mother should ete her child / for the great hongre yt should be in the cite.
The which cite should be dystroyed in such manner that one stone should not
abide upon another / and so great dystruccyon of people. Wherefore said the
angel to the lady it behooves to be so done / and god will that it shall be
so accomplysshed. So the angel departed from her and went his way.

THen the ladies abode weeping and took ye child and cut of a quarter with the
sholder and laid it to roste. And in rostynge it there issued out a right
great and good odoure / in such wise that it smelled al about the street. And
Pylate and the king Archylaus went thrughe the cite thinking and aduysynge
how they might do. And when they were before the house of the queen Pylate
smelled the good odoure of ye roast / and had great lust to have thereof. So he
called a sergeaunt and said to him. Goo se where this roste is / and say unto
him that owes it yt he send me some / for I had never so great desire of
nothing of ye world nor never shall.

THen the sergeauntes that were.x. or.xij. went thrughe the street searching
where the roste might be. At the last they came in to the house of the Vas.
and Ty. good queen and called at the gate. And when they were within they
salued the ladies and said. Ladies my lord Pylate prays you that ye will
send him some of your good roste / for he says that never the days of his
life he had not so great desire of nothing.

THen said the queen's felawe / By god friends gladly / and she took the three
quarters that were left of her child / and took a knyfe and said to them /
Lords hold me there and I shall cut you some to bear to your master which
shall make it be dressed after his appetyte. And when the sergeauntes saw the
child cut / and that the lady would cut it yet again for to send to Pylate /
they were so aghast and had so great hydour yt they were almoost out of their
wit And returned all confused before Pylate. When Pylate saw them come he
said unto them / from whens come you so abashed / bring ye me no roste yt I
sent you fore. And the sergeauntes said unto him. Sir a lady has quartred her
child / and has made to roste a quarter that she will ete. And when we had
asked her / she took the child and would have sent you a quarter / and that
ye should make it to be roasted and dressed after your appetyte. The which when
we saw we had great horror and great sorrow / so that we had almoost
run out of our wits / and we did issue out of her house also soon as we
might for the great horror that we had to se her cut her own child and
roste it.

When Pylate herd the answer that the sergeau^tes brought him from ye ladies
of the child He had right great hydour and doubted him For the which he yede
in to his palace and laid him down in his bed of the great sorrow that he
had / and there he held him right dolent and dysconforted. And the ladies were
in their house / that wept and complained their children. Nevertheless they
began for to ete for the great hongre that they had / for god had commanded
them. And ever in etynge they wept right strongly. but it behooved that they ete
thereof / for god had spoken it with his own mouth. And when they had eten
the child of Claryce they began for to ete the daughter of the queen / but
there was the right great doloure when the queen began for to ete of her
daughter / for every body that saw her weep might not keep them from weeping
of the pity and great sorrow yt she had and demeaned.

ANd when Pylate had been three days in his bed sorrowful and dysconforted /
he rose up and went unto king Archylaus before the temple of Salamon where as
he was. And thither he made to come all his barons and all his counsayll / and
said unto them my lords I can not tell what counsayll we may take against
this Emperor / for we are in great dystresse by this that we have no vytaylles
/ and also I know certainly that there is happened in this cite a right great
sclaunder and a great mysauenture / horrible and right hydeous for to here and
to recounte. / That is that the moders ete their children for hongre So that I
counsayll that we yield this cite unto the Emperor / and if he will take me to
mercy that he do it / for I had lever deye alone than all the people should
deye. For the Emperor knows well that none is to blame but I alonely.

When Archylaus and all the other barons herd the counsayll that Pylate gave /
they were right sorry and much dolant and said all weeping. Ha god what shall
we do with our lord Pilate And then the great complayntes arose in the cite
so that they herd them in the host of the Emperor / and the cry was much
great seeing that it was no day but that there deyed in the cite.iiij. C.
persons of the great famyne that there was.

THen Pylate said that yt which he had said he would perform. And said unto
ye king Archylaus that he should arm him with.v. M. knights. And when they
were armed they went to the dytche there as the Emperor was. To the which
they maunded that they would speak with him in sauete. And incontinent the
Emperor / tytus his sone Iafet and Jacob and.xx. M. knights well armed came
where Pylate and the king Archylaus abode them And when the Emperor was come
Pylate began to speak to the Emperor and said. Sir Emperor have pity on me
and on all this people if it please you and take the cite and the treasoure and
all that there is / and let us goo in to strange lands exyled by the world.

How the Emperor spoke unto Pylate and the king Archylaus and what answer
they had.
Vespasian, outside city walls, addressing Pilate and Archelaus, who are
looking out from within the city walls Pylate. Archylaus. Vaspasyan.



THen the Emperor answered to Pylate and said. If thou will yield me the
cite / thyselfe and all them that are within for to do my pleasure I shall do
it gladly / and otherwise not / and I promise the that I shall have no mercy on
none within the cite no more than thou had on Ihesu christ.

ANd then the king Archylaus said unto the Emperor. Sir I am sone of king
Herod your great friend that was king of Galylee. And after his death I
succeeded the realm / Wherefore I beseech you that it will please you for to
take me to mercy For my fader nor I did never nothing against you nor against
your fader / and also we did never consent to the death of Ihesu christ. And
right dear lord my fader was right preuy of the court of your fader.

THen said the Emperor to the king Archylaus / art thou than the sone of
Herod yt made the persecucyon of the little children / and would have slain
Ihesu christ in his enfance. The man yt has no pity nor mercy ought not to
find no pity nor mercy. Thy fader would have slain Ihesu christ the prophet
when he was borne / and made to sle all the children that he might find under
the aege of two year / and had mercy on none And made sle in nombre.C. xliiij
M. And for this cause I shall never have mercy on ye and thou shall repare the
iniquytees of thy fader.

ANd when the king Archylaus herd yt he dyscended all in a rage / and unarmed
him. And after drew out his sword / and said unto the Emperor Never please
it the great god yt you or man paynym vaunt him of my death. And then he put
the point of his sword against his breast and thirst himself a foot through
the body / and so fell down deed in to the pytte. When Pylate and his men saw
ye king Archylaus so deed / they were right sorrowful and returned in to the
cite / and recounted to the people all the deed of king Archylaus / and the
answer of the Emperor. Then the men of the said king and all the other
people made great sorrow / and rent their gowns / and pulled their here /
and made so great sorrow that there was never none seen so great in the cite of
Iherusalem nor in no ne other place.

ON the morrow Pylate made to come Joseph of Armathye before him and Barrabam
his Seneshal and all the other people and demanded them cou^sayll And also
said to them. Lords you se well that we can hold no longer against this
Emperor / and that god has forgoten them. For never no cite was in so great
trybulacyon as this cite is / for we have no vytaylles but shall deye all for
hongre / counsayll what we shall do now.

THen Joseph of Armathye said. Sir we cannot give you no good counsayl sith yt
the Emperor will not take you to mercy. Evil were ye cou^saylled to be enemy
with the Emperor / for ye may well wete that we may not resyste against him
nor hold against his pussaunce long.

PYlate said I know well what we shall do. In this cite is much great
richesse of gold and silver and of precious stones / and the Emperor and his
men weneth well to have it / I know well how they shall have nothing / and
it shall be our profit / We shall make to grynde the precious stones and the
other treasour stamp in morters of brass / in such manner yt they may be eten
/ and thus we shall pass our life. And when the Emperor and his men shall
take the cite they shall not find the treasoure. For also great thank shall
we have without treasoure as with the treasoure.

How Pylate made his complaynt to the barons of Iherusalem / and how he yielded
up the cite unto the Emperor / which made Tytus enter in with.xx. M. knights.
men on horseback, one wearing a crown, approaching or entering a city (?)

ANd when Pylate had given and said this good counsayll / they said al yt it
was well spoken. And every body went unto their houses / and they that had
gold silver or precious stones they did so as he had said. And they that had
to much they gave unto them the which had none And of that same treasour they
lived well.xxi. days.

THen when the treasour was all eten / all ye people came before Pylate and
said unto him. Sir Pylate we have done that the which ye have counsaylled us
of the treasoure / but it is all spylte and consumed / what shall we do from
hens forth. And then Pylate was much pensyfe and sorrowful / and began for to
weep before them all and said. Lords you have made me your master / lord /
and gouernoure of you all in this cite / but from hens forth I can not govern
you. So I pray you and require for god pardon that and ever I did you any
hurt that you will pardon it me.

ANd when all ye Jews saw that Pylate dyscomforted him so / they began for to
weep / for they thought well that they should be all dystroyed / and there was
none but that they wept / and had so great sorrow that they might not answer
never a word unto him / but lamented much strongly.

ANd then Pilate said lords have we good hertes and put we us unto the will of
the great god and go we yield us to the Emperor to do with us his good will.
For it is better that we go unto him than we should let us deye for hongre /
for there is not one day with another but that there deyeth in this cite
threhondred persons. And parauenture it shall come in his mind to take us to
mercy / or ye most gretest party.

SOne after this Pylate issued out of the cite of Iherusalem with all the
people / and went unto the pyttes that the Emperor had made to make / And
Tytus the sone of the Emperor went then on sporting with his knights alonge
the pyttes side And Pylate knew him by his arms sygned with ye Egle / and
made him sign with his glove. And wha^ Tytus saw him he came thederwarde with
his said knights. And Pylate began for to speak unto Titus and said unto him.
Sir Tytus new Emperor we supplye you all that it please you to pray your
fader that he have mercy on us / and also yourselfe to have pity / and take
these poor people unto mercy which require you all weeping. And take no
regard unto our iniquytes / but of your bounte and gentylnes you take
compassyon on us.

When Tytus the sone of the Emperor herd yt he maunded it unto ye Emperor
his fader by two of his knights. The which two knights that Tytus had sent
toward the Emperor recounted unto him all the case. And when Vaspasyan had
herd that / he sent word thrughe all ye host that they should come al armed
before him. And he hy^ self went and armed him with his best harneys / and
the most rychest and went incontinent toward tytus with all his men of arms
that he had about Iherusalem / the which were without nombre.

Incontinent as Tytus saw his fader come he made him reverence and said unto
him. Sir se here Pylate the which is accorded for to yield you the cite / so
that it please you for to take him to mercy and all the people that is with him
/ the which does pray you for to do it weeping. And Vaspasyan ye emperor
said that it was not time / for it was by great force.

THen said Vaspasyan unto Pylate. If you will yield me the cite and all them yt
are within (with the) to my mercy and will / I am ready for to do it. But I tell
you yt I shall have also little pity on you as you had on Ihesu christ / for I
shall venge his death in you and upon you.

ANd when Pylate herd that answer of the emperor and all the other also that
was there / they were much sorrowful and angrye and made a cry much great
in weeping and lamenting / and knew not what they should do more but said to
vaspasyan. Sir take the cite and all that you shall find therein / and us al in
likewise and do your good pleasure there with as lord.

THen Vaspasyan the emperor made incontyuent to fill the dytches yt he had
made to make. And anon after he sent Tytus his sone Iafet and Jacob with.xxx.
thousand knights in to the cite / and said unto them that they should shytte
the gates to the end that none of the Jews should issue nor escape from their
hands.

ANd Tytus did anon that the which ye emperor his fader had commanded him
/ and entered in to the cite with the.xxx. thousand knights / and took Pylate
and gave him to keep to ten of his knights / and said unto them that they
should keep him well. And after he made to take and bind all the other Jews
old and young of the cite. Of the which there was withouten them that were
slain in the batayl that was done before / and without them that were deed for
hongre thrughe the cite.C. iij. M. And as he had done so he made to open the
gates.

THen the Emperor Vaspasyan and all his host sommyers / charettes and all the
other manner of men that watched about the walls of the cite of Iherusalem
because that none of the Jews should issue / did enter in to the said cite
and went al unto the temple of Salamon. And there the Emperor and all the
other yielded graces to god Ihesu christ of that he had given them so good
vyctory. They made great feestes and reioysed them and held them well at ease.
And theder ye should have seen come all manner of folks / except of Jews*
And there they had vytaylles enough / for it was brought unto them from al
parts.

How Vaspasyan the Emperor and Tytus his sone made for to sell.xxx. Jews for
a penye.
seated figure (monarch?), at left, addressing a standing man armed with sword
and long-handled hatchet, to whose right stands an unarmed figure

ANd when the Emperor Vaspasyan saw yt his men held so many Jews bound and
with holden / he said unto them. Lords sith that our savior Ihesu christ has
done unto us so great grace yt he has given us vyctorye I will avenge his
death as I have promised him. And will that these Jews which we have taken be
sold. And in like wise as they bought Ihesu christ for.xxx. pens / so will I
yt xxx. Jews be sold for a penny. And incontynente he made to cry al about
where his men of arms were lodged that who someuer would by any Jews that
they should come unto them yt were ordained for to sell them / and that they
should have xxx. Jews for a penye as said is. And the Emperor ordained.xv
knights for to selle them unto all comers.

THen when the cry was made there came a knight before ye forsaid Emperor
which said unto him. Sir I would have a penyworth of these Jews. And
incontinent the Emperor made to be delivered to hy^ a penyworth. When this
said knight had his.xxx. Jews he had his spear in his hand and came before
the said Jews yt he had bought and smote one of them in to the body so that he
fell down deed to the ground. Then as the knight drew out his spear there
issued out of his body a great streme of gold and silver. Of the which the
knight meruayled much And took another Jew and said to him. I will that thou
tell me if thou know what this is for to say / and in what wise this Jew
casts out blood in semblau^ce of gold and silver. And then that same Jew
said Sir if you will assure me fro death I shall tell you wtoute any fault what
it is for to say. And the knight swore and assured him of his life. And then
the jew told him by order how Pylate had made them for to ete their vessel
and money / and precious stones / and all the treasour of the cite / to the
end that ye Emperor nor his men should not find it / and that they should
have no Joy of nothing. And we have lived long thereby / for we had none other
mete.

FOrthwith that was known through the host wherefore every body bought of the
foresaid Jews. And the Emperor commanded that there should be delivered unto
every body that would bye for a penye. And when Iafet and Jacob saw that all
the Jews were almoost sold unto the knights. And yt they slew them up for
the treasoure yt they had eten / they said unto the Emperor. Sir one knight
amongst the other that is for to wete among the Jews / ought for to be /
which was friend unto Ihesu christ And the said knight is called Joseph of
Armathy / yt aided for to dyscende Ihesu christ of the cross / and put him in
to his sepulcre / and Nychodemus that was with him. Also there should be a lady
queen and her felawe and their two children. The which queen was called Marye
of Affrycke / and byleued much strongly in Ihesu christ. Wherefore we pray you
sir for to take them to mercy / for they were never consentyng to the death of
Ihesu christ.

How Iafet and Jacob found Joseph of Armathye and brought him before Vaspasyan
the Emperor and Tytus his sone / and how he took him to mercy.
depiction of Joseph of Arimathea, the emperor Vespasian, and his son Titus
Joseph. Vaspa. Tytus.


THen the emperor said unto them. Look and make to be looked if you can find
them / and make them come before me. And then Iafet and Jacob serched and made
to search al about / and they found none but Joseph of Armathye. And after
they went in to the house of the queen / for they had had often in her house
great consolacyons with her / and they found her deed and her felawe also.
Then they returned to ye Emperor with Joseph of Armathye. And when ye
Emperor saw him he demanded him if it was he that dyscended Ihesu christ of
the cross / and he said ye / wherefore the Emperor took him to mercy.

SO when ye Emperor saw yt the Jews was not all sold yet / he demanded of
the knights yt sold them how many penyworthes they had yet for to selle /
and they said that they had well.vi. penyworthes. And ye Emperor badde them yt
they should sell no mo / for he would keep those.vi. for to do his pleasure
with.

IN Iherusalem was made than so great slaughter of Jews yt no man might go by
the streets in Iherusalem but on deed bodies / so great nombre there was. And
it was by the cou^sayll that Pylate gave unto the Jews for to ete their
treasour. And know yt if they had not eten it they yt had bought them would
have taken many of them to mercy. But for ye love of the treasour there was
slain.lxxiij. M. and three hundred and fyfty.

THen when the mortalyte of the Jews was done the Emperor made ye bodies to
be borne unto ye walls of the cite / and after he made to beat down the
walls so that there abode not one stone upon another thrughe all the cite /
except ye temple of Salamon / and the toure of Syon / yt was Dauyds. For god
would not that the said temple nor the said toure were beten down. Then was
accomplysshed the propre words yt our lord spoke on palmesondaye when he
wept upon the cite of Iherusalem in entering in to it.

NOtwithstondynge Tytus the sone of the Emperor before that ye cite was beten
down he went in to every place and made to take the harneys wherewith the cite
was well garnysshed. And also took all the clothes of gold and other clothes
of sylke / that they might find. For as for the other treasoure the Jews had
eten it / for ye which they were all slain / except the six penyworthes
that the Emperor withelde / and Joseph of Armathy / and ye Jew that had told
how they had eten their treasours.

THen when the Emperor and Tytus his sone had done that / and had soiourned
them there and their men / they said unto Iafet and Jacob / and Joseph of
Armathy that they should led them there as Ihesu christ was put upon the
cross / and to flome Iordayne / and to the sepulcre / and there as he raised
up Lazarus. And to all the places where Ihesu christ had been and done miracles.
And they answered that they would do it with a good will. And when the Emperor
and Tytus his sone and all their men were vysytynge ye holy places / all in
weeping they yielded graces unto our lord Ihesu christ.

How the Emperor took shyppyng with all his army for to return to Rome.
ships sailing away from city

AFter this the Emperor and Tytus his sone with their army / and with Pylate
and with the six penyworthe of Jews took their ships and arrived at acres /
where ye Emperor put ye three penyworths in three ships without mete or
drink to goo where as it should please our lord Ihesu christ. And put in each
ship two penyworths of Jews / for our lord Ihesu christ would not that all
the Jews should be deed / but that there abode on the earth for a perpetual
remembrance and memory to all the crystyens. And it happened so as god would
that one of the ships arrived at Narbonne / the other at Bourdeaulx / and ye
other here in England. And the Jews that were wtin went that it had been done
by miracle / and that had had pity on them. But god did it because yt always
there should be remembrance of his death and passion.

THen the Emperor and his sone Tytus made to apparayll fair ships and great
/ and made great prouysyon of vytaylles / as well of whete / wine / water and
other vytaylles great foyson. And anon they put them within the ships that
were fair and great and well aourned with Iafet / Jacob Joseph of Armathye and
all their men. And god gave them so good wind and so good fortune and so good
port yt within ten days they arrived at valecte. And fro valecte they went
by land unto Rome well and in good health. And when clement the appostolle
knew that the Emperor and tytus his sone came / he went against them with
all his clergy well aourned and in great processyon.

How the emperor Vaspasian was received at Rome / and how he was crystened and
tytus his sone / with all their men.
meeting of monarchs on horseback with their entourages

When the Emperor and Tytus his sone saw Clement ye appostolle they
dyscended of their horses and kissed Clement with right great Joy / and made
great feast in the cite of Rome and thrughe all the other countrees for the love
and honor of the emperor / and in especyall for the vengeance of Ihesu christ
/ and of his death and passion that the said emperor and his sone Tytus had
made. And then ye appostolle put him for to preche every day the faith of
Ihesu christ. And the Emperor / tytus his sone / and all their men herd him
gladly. And when the appostolle had preched eight days / he went for to se
the Emperor in his palace and said unto him. Sir our lord has done you so
great grace and so great honor that he has made you to dyscomfite and have
vyctorye against your enemies / wherefore I am comen for to pray you that the
promesses that you have made to him yt you will accomplysshe it with good heart.
And what promise is it said the Emperor. Sir said the Appostolle yt you do
make you to be baptized. Then the Emperor answered I vttre it / and will that
it be done to the pleasure of god Ihesu christ with good will So make to make and
apparayll the font. And then the appostolle departed thanking god Ihesu
christ right ioyously. And anon the said Clement made to apparayll the font /
and at the end of three days he baptized the Emperor and Tytus his sone in ye
name of the fader / the sone / and ye holy ghost and changed not their names.
And after he baptized the Seneshal Gay / Iafet / Jacob / Joseph of Armathye /
and after the kings / dukes / earls / barons / princes / and other folks of
the Emperors and other.

ANd then when all the men of the Emperor and all the other multitude of
people yt was there was baptized / the other came unto the appostolle and made
them be baptized with good will. And clement had right great Joy / and yielded
graces unto our lord Ihesu christ / and unto them that were baptized. And when
the people saw ye miracles yt god showed in the baptysyng of the seek and lame
which were heled of all maladyes in yssuynge out of ye water / all the people
byleued in god / and in the holy law and faith of Ihesu christ / and bette
down all the temples of ye ydoles / and made chirches of them.

How the Emperor gave license unto his men of arms for to return in to
their countrees.
emperor with men of arms and some courtiers

THen when that was done ye Emperor gave license unto al his barons for to
return in to their countrees. And every baron had of ye appostolle their
believe in writing or they departed. Then after the Emperor and tytus his sone
assembled their counsayl and badde them Judge Pylate and gave them the cause. So
they held their counsayll and after returned to ye Emperor and said. Sir we
know well yt Pylate has deserved to deye / but your fader ye emperor
ordained yt all the strangers should dye at Vyenne. And therefore we Judge hy^
to deye thus there.

How Pilate was Iuged unto death and after was sent unto Vyenne for to have
execusyon.
several richly dressed men (at right) addressing a king or emperor seated on a
throne (at left); on the other side of the throne, a view of some buildings

First we ordeyne that the Iustycer make to be made in the mids of ye place
a great pyller of four cubettes of heyght with out the ground. And upon the
said pyller be put a polle of a fadom of heyght / so made that it may sustain
Pilate. And that he be put on the said pyller well bounden unto the pole upright
and all naked / and that he be oynted with honey and oil and written a hye over
his heed against the said pole This is Pylate that mysknewe Ihesu christ / and
renyed his ryghfull lord the Emperor. And that he have the vysage toward
the son. And when he has been there until night from tyers / let him be
dyscended / and cut of one of his eres. And then after put him in prison / and
that there be given unto him mete and drink enough / and that he have none
ill prison / to the end yt he may live.xxi. days in tourment As he made to
live himself and the other with the treasour.xxi. days that were in the cite
of Iherusalem: yt he and the other Jews ete when their vytaylles were faylled.
And the ere cut be put in such a place that Pylate may se it when he shall be
on ye said pyller* After upon the morrow that he have well to dyne / and that
he be led again upon the said pyller well oynted / and that he be there
until night / and that he have the other ere cut of / and that it be put with
ye other And that there be given unto him always mete and drink enough. And
the third day that there be taken from him his preuy membre. The fourth day
yt they cut of one of his hands. The.v. day that the other hand be cut of.
The.vi. day that they cut out a thonge from his neck unto his hand.
The.vii. day that they take as much on the other side. The.viij. day that
they make be taken from him one of the soles of his fete. The.ix. day that they
make to be taken of the other sole of his foot. The.x. day that they make to
be raised up a thonge from his members unto his foundement. The.xi. day that
they make to reyse up another thonge in the same place of cross / to ye end*
that he bear the cross as he made Ihesu christ do The.xij. day yt they make
to cut of one of his arms / The.xiij. day the other arm. The.xiiij. day one
of the sholders. The.xv. day the other sholder. The.xvj day that they flee
his berde. The.xvii. day that they cut of one of his fete. The.xviii. day
that they cut of the other foot. The.xix. day that they break one of his thyes
as he did unto the thieves that were hanged by Ihesu christ. The.xx. day the
other thyghe. The.xxi. day all the body with all the members be drawn / and
that they cut of his tongue / and after the heed. And yt they make him be
quartred / and hanged on the pyller in the same place to the end that there be
remembrance. And then.x. days after that he be burnt and put in ashes and
cast in to the river of Rosne. And se here how we Judge him to evil death and
cruel / because that he was traitor unto god Ihesu christ / and to your own
self. And because that he has made so much people to deye / and made
dystroye so many good places.

When the Emperor herd yt the senators of Rome had Iuged him so for to deye.
He said unto the knights that kept him that they should led him unto the
provost of Vyenne from hy^ And made to give them lettres sealed for to bear
unto the said provost / with the hole sentence. Then they departed and brought
Pylate unto the provost of Vyennne and delivered him to him with the sentence /
And when the bourgeyses of Vyenne knew that the knights were come from the
Emperor their lord they made them great chere and honor. when ye provost of
Vye^ne had read the lettres of the Emperor and the sentence of ye senators
of rome / incontinent he made to make a chair. And after made Pylate to be set
in it. And therein he did sytte at his ease / but he might not remeue him. And
sith the provost made ye chayer and Pylate to be put in to a well. And the
chayer was tied with great chains of iron above / so yt Pylate touched not
the water. And there he abode unto the time that the pyller was ready upon the
which he should be put. And they gave him always mete and drink enough
every day when that he demanded or called for it.

THen after the provost made to plant in ye place of Vyenne the pyller / and
held him well ioyously with the knights that had brought Pylate. For the said
Provost would not that they should return until the time that the Justice
were done of Pylate. And the bourgeyses and the other men of estate of the cite
of Vyenne made them always great chere for the love and honor of the
Emperor their sovereign lord.

ANd when the pyller was planted and all ordained the night before that the
Justice of Pylate should be done. The provost made him to be drawn out of ye
well. And when he was out he was so changed that he had no vysage of a man
(but of a devil) When the Provost saw that he made him to be put in to a
toure that was by the bridge of Vyenne in the river of Rosne / the which was
much deep. In that same profounde toure was three manner of stages or places.
And the river of Rosne went round about it And in the first stage he made to
put kepers and sergeauntes. And in the second he made to put Pylate to the
end that he were better at his ease. And in the third he made to put men of
arms.

How as ye provost of Vyenne would have taken pylate out of the toure for to
have made execusyon / the toure and Pylate founded in abysme.
two men armed with swords, wearing caps with feathers (?), leaning on a bench;
partly visible seated behind and to the right of them is the back of a
similarly dressed man; floral borders to right and left of illustration

When it came unto the morrow in ye morning / the provost / the knights / and
diverse other went in to the toure for to have had Pylate to have set him on the
pyller. And when they were in the tour they said unto the kepers that kept
Pylate that they should bring him out. And then all the bridge and the river
was charged with men that would se ye justice that they would do on Pylate. And
at the hour yt the kepers would have taken him for to have brought him in
Justice / all the toure was full of deuylles also well without as within that
said all with one voice. Pylate is ours / pylate is ours / leave him us. All the
toure trembled / whereof the Provost and all the other that were there with him
/ and the kepers also had right great fere / and right great horror / and
issued all out of the toure and mounted upon ye bridge. And when they were upon
it they beheld the toure / and saw on the turrettes about the toure a great
multitude of deuylles. And the toure entered with Pylate and all the deuylles
into the river of Rosne in abysme.

When the Provost / the knights / ye bourgeyses and all the other folk saw
that they meruaylled much strongly / and would wete and se if the toure were
entered deep in. So they said unto a maryner of the river that he should take a boat and goo se if it were deep there as the toure entered with Pilate. And the
maryner would not because of the peril. So they fastened a boat with cords
unto ye top of ye bridge and made it go unto the place where the toure was
entered / in ye which place ye water rored much strongly And after they
had.iiii. C. fadoms of cord for to length the other cord yt was to short.
And when the boat was there it entered in with all ye cord / so that they put
more thereto / and tied the end of it unto a vessel of cork / and let it go
softly / but all entered in and never herd tidings of the toure / nor of
Pylate not of nothing else. And yet dare none approach nere ye said place.
And the pyller is yet right up in Vyenne. The deuylles took Pylate in ye toure
/ because he should not convert him thrughe the cruel pain. Then when all
that was done the knights took their leave and rode unto the Emperor and
recounted to him all the deed. When the Emperor herd that he made Iafet Jacob
and Joseph of Armathye to write the dystruccyon and vengeance of Iherusalem /
for they knew it well. And also the death and Justice of Pylate as you have
herd word by word.

Thus ends the dystruccyon and vengeance of Iherusalem by Vaspasyan Emperor
of Rome.
Enprynted at London in Fleet street at the sign of the son by Wynkyn de
Word.

armed men on horseback

printer's device of Wynkyn de Word (McKerrow 23c): "Tripartite device with
the mark and initials of William Caxton in the central part. The sun over a
crescent moon with stars in the upper portion, and 'Wynkyn de word,' etc.,
below." W C

Wynkyn.de. Word.



