DIRECTIONS FOR THE WORTHY Receiving of the Lords SVPPER: With some few
Questions to the same purpose.

By ROBERT IENISON, Bachelor in Divinity, and Minister of Gods Word, at
New Castle upon Tine.

1 Cor. 11.28. Let a man examine himself,
and so let him eat, etc.
LONDON Printed for John Harrigat, and are to be sold at the Holy Lamb in
Paternoster Row. 1624.

TO MY CHRISTIAN Hearers, of the Parishes of S. Nicholas and All Saints, in
New Castle upon Tine, especially to the younger and ruder sort of them, R. I.
wishes a competent measure of the Spirit of Wisdom and understanding, of the
Spirit of Knowledge, and of the fear of the Lord.
WHat I now in heart, and ever in my hearty and daily Prayers unfeignedly wish
on your behalf, right dear beloved Brethren, I am not (as you know) neither
shall I ever, God assisting, be awanting to further by my daily and best
endeavors for you, whether it be by my Preaching, or by my Pen: (though this
latter finds enough to do, to prepare matter for your ears, not eyes.) To
which end, as also for the public good of many others, I have not been
unwilling at the requests of some, that these few directions following (which,
nigh seven years since, were, at the earnest entreaty of a near friend,
summed up in haste) should, after they had also sounded in your ears) see the
light, and pass, even rudely, as at first, (when there was no purpose of
publishing them) they were written, without any alteration, under the public
censure of the world; hoping, yea earnestly desiring, men would bring rather
humble and hungring hearts, than curious and catching heads to the reading of
them; that so they may indeed truly profit by them. As I shall understand
these ruder, older, and hastier Meditations are accepted of, I shall be
encouraged to greater, further, and fresher pains, in publishing soon after,
what, I hope, will not be unprofitable to the Church of GOD, whose Servant I
do profess my self, as also,

Yours, in the Lord, Robert Ienison.
From my House, in New Castle upon Tine: Ian. 12. 1623.
To the Christian and careful READER.
THou soule-sicke Christian, solace gather hence,
Who art exiled, in sense, from Cana'ns Land,
Lo, here is a Brief of that true Evidence,
Which God has penned with his most holy Hand;
And lest some doubt possess thy silly Soul,
That seale-lesse Blancks those Copies prove to be,
Take comfort; for the inspired, and sacred Roll
Of Gods great Book, is sealed unto thee,
With Graces rich enclosed, both more and less,
If thou, to practice This, thy self address.
Ad eundem.
Pacis Sacramenta licet signacula fiant,
Non; nisi sint sacra mente recepta simul.
C. F.

A BRIEF DIRECTION FOR THE WORTHY RECEIVING OF THE Lords Supper.
CHAP. I.
Three sorts of duties are to be performed of every worthy Communicant: and
three things especially are to be looked unto.
THere must be an antecedent disposition in the receiver, and

There must be a right behavior in

There are duties to be performed

CHAP. II.
Of such graces as are needful in every worthy Communicant.
THis Sacrament, being a most holy ordinance of God, belongs not of right
indifferently to all, but to such only as God does accept and account as
worthy in his Son Jesus Christ.

We are all of us in our selves, and by our corrupt nature, altogether unworthy
to partake of any mercy, and especially of that grace which is both offered and
sealed unto us in the Sacrament.

Yet God in his Son Christ our Savior is ready to accept us, if we come
clothed with the wedding garment of his righteousness, putting it on us by
faith.

Faith then of necessity is required in every worthy Communicant.

Now true Faith, as it is grounded upon sound and saving Knowledge; so it is,
and must be accompanied with true Repentance, and with the fruits thereof,
especially Charity.

These four graces then are necessary in every worthy Communicant.

1 Knowledge. 2 Faith. 3 Repentance. 4 Charity.
Neither must we only have them, but we must know so much: which knowledge is
got by examination.

CHAP. III.
Of Knowledge.
GOd would have us offer up to him reasonable service as an acceptable
sacrifice, Romans 12.1. And not like sheep each follow other without knowledge
and consideration what we do. Knowledge is the beginning of all grace, Prou.
19. 2. Acts 26.18. 1 Timothy 2.4. And Ignorance is highly displeasing unto God. In
this Sacrament knowledge is required, that we may examine our selves, 1 Cor.
11.28.

The Rule of examination is partly the Law of God, by which we are to examine
our selves, our repentance, and obedience; and partly the Gospel, by which we
must examine our faith.

These two, as being the rules of our trial, must therefore first be known.

We must then know (what the Law will tell us) that howsoever we were made at
the first, in our first parents, Adam and Eve, in righteousness and holiness,
according to Gods image, yet now we are all of us by our first birth corrupt
children, ouer-spred with the leprosy and leaven of sin, unapt to conceive
or do any thing truly good; prone and ready to do all evil; and that
accordingly we daily bring forth and multiply the bitter fruits of Sin by our
actual trangressions, not doing what good we should do, and doing the evil
we should not do: and that therefore in this regard, we are all naturally as
the slaves of Satan, who rules in our hearts by Sin; so the children of
death, and heirs of damnation. The just reward of our sin being the wrath
and curse of God, and death of body and soul everlastingly.

Yet we must further know (what the Gospel reueales, namely) that Gods will is
not (such is his love) that we all should perish, (as we most justly deserve)
but that we should be saved, and come unto the knowledge of the truth, 1. Tim.
2.4. That is, that all, of all sorts believing the Gospel, should be saved:
the tenor and substance of the Gospel being comprised in these words, John
3.16. God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that
whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have life everlasting. For
the confirmation of which promise to us, we must further know, that God has
annexed and added seals, which we call Sacraments, whereof it is fit also, we
should have some general knowledge.

Sacraments therefore are outward and visible signs and seals of some inward
invisible grace. Or, they are holy signs ordained of God, whereby the covenant
of grace between God and the party receiving these signs, is solemnly
sealed, confirmed, and ratified.

This covenant of grace is that, whereby on his part, First, promises to be
our God, that is, all in all unto us, Genesis 17.7. and that we shall not perish,
as we had deserved, but have everlasting life, through and by Christ Jesus,
which none of us deserves. But withal (as in requires on our part, faith,
Ioh. 3.16. with repentance and newness of life, according to the tenor of the
Gospel, Repent and believe, Mat. 3.2. Mark. 1.15. This being the covenant
fair drawn, and largely written in the word of God, God, thirdly, annexeth
his Seal hereunto, to ratify what he has promised, and to confirm and
strengthen our faith in his promise; as also he enioyneth unto us the use of
the Sacraments, whereby we for our first, showing our selves needful of his
mercies, both promise to to perform what he requires: that is, to repent bind
our selves in service God, lives end, in all holy obedience.

This is, first, done in Baptism, by which we have our admission into the
true Church of God sealed unto us, and where first this covenant is confirmed
and sealed on both parts, Gods and ours.

This same covenant is renewed in the Lords Supper, so often as we partake of
it: for God thereby nourishes and preserves us in the true Church after our
admission into it by Baptism, confirms and seals unto us the same promise of
the Gospel, and requires like conditions of faith and repentance from us. And
that we may better know the nature of this Sacrament, we must consider that
(each Sacrament being a sign) each thing, action, and circumstance is
appointed, to signify and bring to our mind some other spiritual thing or
action.

As therefore in Baptism the water signifies the blood and spirit of Christ,
whereby our sins are washed and purged; so in the Lords Supper;

1 The Bread and the Wine are now unto us the body and blood of our Savior
Christ.

setting these apart to this use, and consecrating them; signifies, how God the
Father, in his eternal Decree, has set apart Christ our Savior, for the
work of our redemption, and consecrated Him thereunto. breaking of the Bread,
and pouring out of the Wine, signify the death of our Savior, whereby his
Body was broken, and a separation made, for a while, of the soul from the
body, and the sheading of His precious blood; by which he satisfied Gods wrath
for believers, and paid our debt, which was death.

offers and gives the Bread and Wine, we must conceive, that God, to us that
believe, does offer and give (as he promised in his Word) Christ his Son,
with all the benefits of his death and Passion, which are forgiveness of
sin, reconciliation with God, and life eternal.

Our receiving of these from his hands, and feeding on them, signify our
Faith, which is as the hand, mouth, and stomach of our souls, whereby we
receive Christ, and all these benefits now offered unto us; and feed on him
spiritually, to life eternal: all which being done with others, put us in
mind of charity.

Now, all these we must well know and understand, before we come to the Lords
Table.

CHAP. 4.
Of Faith.
But moreover, it will not avail us only to know these things, but we must
also bring Faith with us, and believe the promise of the Gospel: the necessity
whereof appears from that which has been said. The promise is made only to
them that believe, Ioh. 3.16. Now this Sacrament is a seal of that promise,
and of the Covenant of Grace: and therefore can seal unto us no more, nor no
otherwise than is promised. Thee is nothing promised in the Word, to the
unfaithful and unbelievers, and therefore there is nothing sealed to them in
this Sacrament. Such then receiving this Sacrament, receive only a Seal set
to a blancke, or piece of white paper, wherein there is nothing written or
promised: and such men receive the Sacrament to their hurt, and not to their
good, because they profane the holy ordinance of God.

CHAP. 5.
Of Repentance.
GOD, besides our faith, does also look for our repentance, and newness of
life: For in this Sacrament we profess our selves, to forsake our sins and
lusts, and the Devil, and to become new men, and that we will hereafter walk
with God in new obedience: all our service and sacrifices else will not be
accepted of God: the Lord rejects all outward service and ceremonies (though
they were ordained by himself) when they are not accompanied with the
conversion of the heart, and innocence of life. See Esa, 1.13, 14, 15, 16. and
66.3. Therefore the Lord bids, when we appear before him, saying, Esa.
1.16, 17. Wash you, make you clean, take away the evil of your ways, cease
to do evil, learn to do well, etc And David says, Psalm. 26.6. I will wash
mine hands in innocence, and so I will compass thine Altar. This is
especially necessary in this Sacrament, wherein we show forth the Lords death
till he come. 1 Cor. 11.26. which we can do no better, then by dying unto
sin our selves, which is called mortification, which belongs to the first
part of repentance; and must be seconded with vivification, or newness of
life, which belongs to the second part of repentance.

The duties then here to be performed, are; First, diligently and seriously
to examine our own consciences, and to find out our sins, both original and
actual; against both Law and Gospel, that so we may return to God by
repentance: Psalm. 119.59. Lam. 3.39, 40. Without this sight of sin, we
cannot repent, as seeing nothing that has turned us from God; and repenting,
we shall not be accepted, without this turning first into our own hearts,
Deuteronomy. 30.1, 2. 1 King. 8.47. especially we must labor to find out our special
sins, unto which we are most of all inclined, and which most of all wound our
consciences; to this end, we are carefully, First, to observe the checks of
conscience; Secondly, to observe our thoughts, on what especially they run
most: Thirdly, to make use of some faithful friend, who may faithfully tell
us, wherein they observe us to offend, seeing we our selves are naturally
blinded with self-love: to this end, observe what sins GODS Word preached or
read condemns: yea, observe (because malice is quick-sighted) what thine
enemies observe in thee, and do cast in thy teeth. But above all, fourthly,
look thy self and thy face, in the Glass of Gods Law, and bring thy self to
the Balance and Touchstone of Gods Word, both Law and Gospel: examine thy
self by each Article of thy Creed, and by each Commandment apart, according
to the true meaning of each Commandment, which binds the inward man, and thine
affections, as well as thy words and works, and so thou may find thy sin:
(to this end) make use of that direction which is set down in Master Perkins
Book of Repentance, and in the Book called, the True Watch, first Part, and
also the second.

The second duty is, when we see our sin, to consider how hateful a thing
it is in it self, how abominable to God and all good men; that so we may know
it, with a feeling of the burden of it, and with true sorrow, that thereby we
should offend, and show our selves unthankful, to so loving a Father, and
bountiful a GOD.

Then must we humble our selves in hearty and earnest Prayer unto GOD,
confessing unto him our sins: our unknown sins generally, our known
sins particularly, and that freely, without any excuse, defense, or hiding
the least of them. So did David, Psalm. 32. and Psalm. 51. and withal, we must
make earnest entreaty, and deprecation to God, in the Name and mediation of
Christ Jesus, who died for our sins, that God would in mercy pardon them all,
and seal unto us the pardon of them by his Spirit: and here every one must
frame his confession according to his own need, at the least, in sighs and
sobs of the heart, and the secret desires thereof. To this end, (where and
whiles men cannot in private so well pray of themselves) may be used such
forms of prayer, as may be found in the Leitargie of the Church and in rivers
godly Books, framed for this particular occasion.

Lastly, there must be in our repentance, an holy and full purpose of heart,
and intendment of new obedience for time to come, and a resolution with Gods
help to withstand all sins, and to use care to prevent all occasions thereof.

CHAP. 6.
Of Charity.
BEsides all these, (which respect God) we must also be in love and perfect
charity with our neighbors; If they have offended us, we must be ready to
forgive them, especially upon their request and acknowledgement, even as God
for Christ's sake forgave us, who had offended him, and as we our selves in the
Lords Prayer desire to be forgiven as we our selves forgive others.

And if we have justly offended others, we must seek peace with them, and
their love, and not be ashamed to acknowledge our faults: This is so necessary,
that God will have his service stay till it be performed, and without it will
not accept our service and sacrifice: He would have us leave our offering; Go
thy way, and first be reconciled to thy brother, etc. Math. 5.24.

CHAP. VII.
Of Examination.
ALl the forenamed things are necessary in every Christian at all times: but
especially when we are to come to the holy Communion, we are to practice
these duties, and to renew our faith and our repentance, and to examine our
selves, whether these graces be in us in truth and synserity, or no; according
to 2. Cor. 13.5. and 1. Cor. 11.28. especially our Faith, and Repentance.

Our Faith is true, when, first, it is grounded namely on Gods Word, and not on
traditions or authority of men: When we find that Gods Word has been
effectual in us and our selves altered thereby, so that we remain not still
the same we were long since: and if therefore we have a love and desire to Gods
Word, that by it our Faith may be increased.

If our Faith be set on a right Object, that is, if it believe the same Word of
God, as well the threatenings of it, as the promises: especially, if it truly
rely upon the mercy of GOD, and merits of CHRIST.

By the fruits of it we may know it, if our Faith purify our heart, Act. 15
9. and if it work in us an endeavor is please God in all things: if we can
believe God and his Truth, even before experience, as did the Woman of Canaan,
Math. 15.22. and when we feel not his presence; yea, if with Job, we can
trust in God though he seem to kill us, and be our enemy. These may suffice
for the present.

Our repentance is then true, First, when we are sorry, not so much for
punishment or shame of our sin, as that thereby we have offended and
displeased our loving God and Father. Secondly, when we are sorry and repent of
all sin, and do not secretly desire to live in, or to enjoy still, any one
pleasant sin, but resolve to leave every sin for the love we owe to God.
Lastly, when we presently and without delay, so soon as we see and know our
sin, do repent: See Psalm. 119.59, 60. I made haste, and delayed not to keep
thy Commandments.

Our Charity and love to our brethren is then good and sound, when we love
them, not in by respects, for fear or profit and delight, but as they are
Christians, and because God loves them, they being his friends; yea, because we
love God: so, when we wish them the best things, as that they were partakers
with us, of Christ, and of life everlasting: when we can forget and forgive
private injuries, and hate not their persons, but their sins, etc.


Note, If after examination we find these graces in us, though but weak, yet
we may be comforted, and we must come: If we feel our selves unworthy;
know, that this sense and feeling of sin, (where there is no purpose to live
in sin) is an argument of grace: by our corrupt nature, we cannot discern of
our corruptions, but by grace only. This Supper is a remedy for our weakness
and corruption, Christ calling the weary, humble and contrite unto him, Matthew.
11.28. Luke 4.18. We must not look so much to come perfect, as to go from it
perfect, that is, more perfect and better then we came. If thou can but
desire that grace which thou want, assure thy self of it, God will give it;
nay, He accepts the desire for the grace it self: For, if lustful desire
after a woman, be in Gods account adultery, and the sin it self, Mat. 5.28.
much more is the desire of any Grace, in Gods acceptance, the Grace it self
desired: God inclining as much to mercy, as to justice, and as ready to take in
good worth our good desires, as to take the advantage of our evil desires.

CHAP. VIII.
Of duties to be performed in this holy Action.
Our behavior, during the time of the celebration of this holy Action, must be
decent, with all reverence to the high Majesty and presence of God, and to his
divine Ordinance. Now, whereas the benefits and grace we receive in this
Sacrament, are conuayed unto us, as on Gods part, by His Spirit, so on our
part, by a kind of reasoning in the mind, and an inference and vse-making from
the collation, or comparing and conferring the outward signs with the things
signified thereby: We are therefore, when we come to the Table of the Lord,
not to suffer our minds to wander after impertinent matters, but to apply our
hearts to diligent attention and consideration, reasoning with our selves, and
making use of every thing in this Sacrament which we behold: as thus:



That this Sacrament is ordained for bread of life, John 6.35.51. herein
differing from common bread, that it only preserues life where life is once
begun; but Christ begins life in us, being set before us in the preaching of
the Gospel, and called the childre^s bread, Mat. 15.26. And he is eaten by
faith spiritually, Ioh. 6.56. He also continues and preserues life in us, as
bread, eaten by the same faith, sacramentally.

Consider, bread and wine are also for comfort, and to make glad the heart of
man, Psalm. 104.14, 15. so also this Sacrament, and therefore in our faintings,
and in our afflictions, we are to have recourse hither: this bread being like
that meal which Elisha cast into the pot to make the pottage wholesome,
whereof it was said before, death is in the pot, 2. Kings 4.40. and 41.

When we see both bread and wine,

4 Consider hence also the necessity of this Sacrament, especially of the
thing signified by this bread and wine: for as without bread and wine (or other
moisture) we could not possibly live (whereas we may well spare many
unnecessary dainties) so, without this body and blood of Christ, and the merits
thereon depending, it is impossible for any either to live the life of grace
here, or of glory hereafter.

When we see the Minister set apart by prayer and consecration, these Elements
from a common to an holy use, which signifies Gods eternal decree in sealing
Christ to the work of our redemption and salvation, John 6.27. Then further
consider and meditate on God the Fathers exceeding great love, Who so loved the
world, that he gave his only begotten Son Christ, to redeem it, Ioh. 3.16.
Which love God sets forth, seeing that Romans 5.8. Oh wonderful love of God!
how did Abraham love God, when for his sake he was ready to offer in sacrifice
his only son Isaak? yet that was his duty, God so requiring it. How much
more does God love us, that freely, yea contrary to our deseruings, gives to
death his only Son Christ, one, ten thousand times better then Isaac? And
think, if God so loved me, how ought I to love him again? how ought I for his
sake to part with my dearest and darling sins? etc.

When we see the bread broken, and the powered out, then think on the death and
passion of Christ, and on those intolerable pains which he suffered both in
body, and also much more in soul, not for himself but for us: and here also
more specially meditate: First, on Christ's special Love to us, who would so
willingly become our surety, and pay our debt to God, which is death, which we
were never able to have endured: For greater love then this has no man, when
any man bestows his life on his friends, Ioh. 15.13. But Christ is that good
shepherd, who gives his life for (us) his sheep, Ioh. 10.11. How then (must
I meditate) should this inflame my heart with the love of this my Savior? etc.
And how may I now rest assured, that I shall be undoubtedly saved? for if when
I was a sinner Christ died for me, much more then being now justified by his
blood, shall I be saved from wrath through him, etc. Romans 5.8.9.10.

Secondly, considering his grievous suffering and pangs for us, his hands and
his feet boared, his side pierced with a spear, himself mocked, and now
sustaining in soul the wrath of his Father due to our sins; meditate, Did
thou, sweet Savior, suffer such torments for me, and shall not I endure an
evil word for thee, and for the profession of thy Name? Did thou on the
Cross taste Vinegar and Gall for me; and shall I live in pleasure and
delicacies, faring deliciously every day, and so please my palate with excess
in delicious meats and wines? Did thou die for me; and shall not I die to
sin, and thus show forth in my self thy death? Yea, did thou die for me,
and shall not I be ready to lay down my life for thy Names sake? etc.

Cor. 5.21. and think and say, Lord when I look upon thee whom my sins have
pierced, how should I lament for thee? as one that mourns for his only
Son, and be sorry for thee, as one is sorry for his first borne, Zach.
12.10. Nay how should I rather mourn for mine own sins, and hate them with
a deadly hatred, whereby I crucify thee again, so loving a Savior: my sins
being the spear that pierced thee, and the nails that lastened thee to the
Cross? How weighty are my sins, and how great the desert thereof, which
could not be borne by me, nor satisfied for by any thing I am able either to
do or suffer? but only by thy precious death and bloodshed of thee my dear
Savior and my God blessed for ever. Shall I now henceforth account any sin
light or little, which deserved such infinite punishment? Oh my Savior,
possess my heart with thy love, teach me to love thee perfectly, and to hate
all sin which cost thee so dear, etc.

When the Minister (representing the Centurion, Lord I am not worthy thou
should come under my roof, and as Elizabeth said to Mary, whence comes
this to me, that (not the mother of the Lord, but) the Lord himself should
come to me? Luke 1.14. And with the blessed Virgin, Luke 1.38. Behold the
servant of the Lord, be it unto thee according and here secondly, assure thy
self of Gods especial love to thee in particular, and take these signs as
special seals, and pledges of Gods special love toward thee; and here raise
up thy thoughts with this or the like meditation: Lord, whereas in thy Word
thou offerest Christ to all believers, though thou namest none, now I see thou
meanest even me, poor sinner, as well as any: thou appliest and assurest unto
me thy general promise, as if my name were recorded in thy Word, and written
in that deed of gift, whereby thou give and sealest unto all believers
eternal life; O Lord, now I may see, (and that without doubting) that indeed
my name is written in the Lambs book of life.

stir up our selves to take hold on Christ, ( Esa. 64.7.) and be put in mind
of the special act of faith, which is, to apply and bring Christ home, to the
inmost closet of our hearts, relying our selves, and putting our whole
affiance, wholly and only on him for salvation, stirring up our faith, and by
it feeding on our Savior more and more; crying also, Lord, I believe, help my
unbelief.

When we eat and drink, then also union O my blessed Savior, be thou unto me
Bread and water of life for evermore: let this union once made by thy Spirit
and my faith, never again be dissolved, but fasten me unto thee by the bond of
my faith, and fasten and unite thy self unto me by the bond of thy Spirit, and
that for evermore. Let nothing dissolve this knot, let not my sins ever
hereafter separate between thee and me Esa. 59.2. But O Lord, let thy most
precious, and pure, and holy body and blood, cleanse and sanctify my body and
my soul, and either keep them that they sin not against thee at any time
presumptuously, or if they sin, that by thy precious blood they may be
forthwith purged from sin, 1. Ioh. 1.7. Yea O Lord, let me walk on in the
strength of this spiritual food, this living Bread and Water of life, even to
eternal life, according to thy gracious promise and Word, whereby thou have
said; Whosoever eats my Flesh and drinks my Blood has eternal life, and
if any man eat of this Bread, he shall live for ever, Ioh. 6.51, 54. Let me
therefore hence be assured, that neither death nor life nor any thing else
shall be able to separate me from this love of thy Father, which is in thee
his son, my Savior Jesus Christ, Romans 8.38, 39. Here also must we think of
our participation of all the benefits of Christ, both by imputation concerning
our justification, and also by infusion concerning our sanctification, seeing
Christ never comes alone: but as the married wise, though she marry with the
man himself, and not with his lands or goods, yet being partaker of him, she
partakes of them too. Why then, O Lord, need I distrust thy goodness for any
blessing, spiritual or temporal, seeing thou have given me thy Son Christ,
and in him interest in all things, 1. Cor. 3.22, 23. If thou sparedst not thy
Son, but gave him for me to death, and now give and appliest him
spiritually unto me, how shall thou not with him give me all things also? Romans
8.32. I will henceforth therefore never distrust thy goodness.

Lastly, when thou see in this holy love and charity to all: we see where
men familiarly converse one with another, and live together in one house,
sitting and feeding at the same table, there is mutual love, knowledge, and
familiarity: else, it is very unusual and unnatural: yea very beasts by
drawing together in the same Yoke, grow familiar one with another, and show
love in their kind; what loving respect therefore owe I, even to the meanest
of my fellows and brethren, and to the least of the Saints of God, seeing we
all that are many, are one bread and one body, because we all are partakers of
one Bread? 1. Cor. 10.17. and we all have been made to drink into one
Spirit, 1. Cor. 12.13. Surely then because I see there is one body (and but
one) one Spirit, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism (yea one only communion of
Saints) one God and Father of all, I will therefore endeavor to keep the unity
of the Spirit in the bond of peace, and with all humbleness of mind, and
meekness with long suffering, support others through love, as the Apostle
exhorts me, Ephesians 4.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. And because I here see, my Savior makes
no difference, and has no respect of persons, so they fear God, Act. 10.34,
35. but alike admits all to his Table, of all sorts, rich and poor, noble and
ignoble, etc. and communicates himself to all, I will henceforth despise none
of GODS Saints, not the least member of Gods Church, whom God and Christ so
loves, and has done so much for, 1. Cor. 11.22. Mat. 18.10. With these or such
like meditations should our thoughts be taken up, during the time of the
celebration of the blessed Sacrament, at which time especially we are to make
conscience of our thoughts.

CHAP. 9.
Of duties to be performed after this action is ended.
AS before we should presume to this Table, we must set our selves and our
thoughts by meditations a part by times, some two or three days, that we may
come prepared (after the example of the Passover, Exodus 12.3, 6.) So after
this Sacrament is solemnly celebrated in the Church, each man and woman
particularly, should do well to set apart, some fit and convenient time; to
consider well what is done, what God has done for them, and what they have
promised, and ought to do for God.

First, each one for himself must in particular be thankful for the high
favor vouchsafed him, that God would admit him to his Table, being in himself
unworthy so much as to gather up the crumbs that fall from it. (The form of
thanks may either be performed, as it shall please God by his Spirit to help
our infirmities, Rom 8.26. or help may be had from the order of the Church and
from diverse good books of devotion in this kind.)

Now to this end, each for himself must well remember what he has made
promise and profession of. Here we have renewed our promise and vow made in
Baptism, to forsake the devil, and have taken the Sacrament upon it, and
received as it were presse-money from God, to fight valiantly, constantly, and
faithfully under his banner, against all his and our enemies, (after which, it
is high treason against his Majesty to revolt or give over) resolve therefore
now of constancy to hold out to the end, whatsoever come of it, whatsoever
opposition we find, from our traitorous and rebellious flesh, from the
scoffs of the world, from the assaults and sly suggestions of Satan. And as
thou look that God should make good, what he in his word has promised, and
in this Sacrament has sealed unto thee, so look that thou perform all thy
vows to God, else this Sacrament which thou have so often received, will be a
witness against thee, and help to seal thy damnation.

comfort, what joy, what increase of grace he has reaped by Chron. 30.18, 19.
and depend on him for a blessing, seeing God has not tied his grace to the
very time of receiving: Light may be sown for the righteous, and joy for the
upright in heart, as it is, Psalm. 97.11. and yet the harvest of that comfort
not reaped till afterwaad. So, the sickman feels not for the present, the
strength and nourishment of the meat he has taken, and yet is nourished: the
Word preached even by our Savior, does not always take effect for the
present, see Act. 11.16. Ioh. 12.16. And in Baptism we receive not the
comfortable assurance there made and sealed unto us, till afterward.

If we have felt any comfort, or God First, let us be more

First, pray with David (after he and his people had offered willingly for the
building of the Temple) Keep this, O Lord, for ever, in the purpose and in the
thoughts of the heart of thy people, and prepare their hearts unto thee, 1.
Chron. 29.18. And then having fed on this heavenly food, show forth the
goodness and strength of this thy food received, by yielding a plentiful
fleece in new obedience, like the Sheep which shows (not by her bleating,
but) by her fleece, how much, how well, how heartily she has eaten.

Otherwise this were both for the shame of our Master Christ, at whose table
we are so often and bountifully fed, if still like Pharaohes seven lean kine,
we remain lean and ill favored. Genes. 41.19, 20, 21. And also, does argue
some spiritual disease in us, which like a consumption hinders our growth and
increase, or that indeed for all the seeming comfort we found, we have not
truly received Christ, and have him not abiding in us, for he has said, John
15.5. I am the Vine, ye are the Branches: he that abides in me and I in him,
the If we have feltt any comfort, then let us hence be moved, the oftener to
frequent this Table. As good men oftener frequent those tables where their
friends consort.

Lastly, in case of temptation doubting, and unbelief, fly hither for thy
comfort, and for the conssimation and strengthening of thy faith: remember what
thou have once and often received: namely, signs and seals of the covenant of
grace, as certain tokens of Gods love in Christ, and particular assurances
thereof: therefore (...) Satan off to Christ, show him Gods general promise,
John 3.16. Sealed unto thee in particular, both in Baptism and in the
Eucharist, and let that be thy security and comfort.

FINIS.
Some few Questions to the same purpose, with their Answers, grounded on Romans
4.11. where it is said, Abraham received the sign of Circumcision, a seal of
the righteousness of Faith, etc.
Question. 1.

WHat are Sacraments?

Answ. Signs and seals of the righteousness of faith.

Quest. 2. What is the righteousness of faith?

Answ. It is the righteousness of Christ Jesus, which he wrought by his
obedience active and passive, which is promised in the Gospel, and laid hold
on, and received by faith, by which we become righteous. Ioh. 3.16. Romans 10.9,
10, 11. and Romans 24.22, 23, 4.

Qu. 3. Is this righteousness signified and sealed unto us in the Lords Supper?

Ans. It is in as much as Christ and all the benefits of his death, as pardon
of sin; or union with him, and communion one with another, as also our
communicating in all these benefits, are thereby signified and sealed to
believers, and to them only.

Quest. 4. How is this Sacrament a Sign?

Ans. In as much as it and all the elements and actions used in it, are
ordained of God, to signify and represent unto the faithful, what God has
done and does for us in Christ.

Quest. 5. What is required of each Communicant in this regard?

Ans. It is required that at, and near about the time of communicating, he,
coming prepared by faith and repentance, and having a right knowledge of the
meaning and mysteries of each thing and action, do accordingly make use
thereof, by a further holy meditation.

Quest. 6. What meditation is afforded from the bare elements of Bread and Wine?

Answ. These being appointed as signs to signify the body and blood of
Christ, we so conceiving of them, must hence further be put in mind; First, of
the nature of this Sacrament Wine, we must consider that Christ is to us
perfect nourishment, and a perfect Savior, both a perfect Prophet, and King.
Thirdly, we must hence think of the necessity of Christ signified by Bread and
Wine, being as necessary, in regard of our spiritual life, as bread and drink
are to our natural life.

Qu. 7. What are you to meditate on, when you see the Minister, by Consecration
and by Prayer, set apart these Elements from their common use, to an holy use?

Ans. This, signifying that God the Father in his eternal decree did set
apart, and seal Christ Jesus his Son in due time to finish the work of our
redemption, calls on me to consider his infinite love to mankind, and to me in
particular, in not sparing his only Son for my sake, and must also teach me
to love him again.

Qu. 8. What must you meditate on, when you see the Bread broken, and the Wine
powered out?

Ans. Seeing hereby is signified the painful and bloody death of Christ for
me, this must teach me to

Qu. 9. What meditation is affoorded from the Ministers coming toward us, his
offering and giving those Elements to each of us in particular?

A. This (signifying that God does offer and give in particular to every one of
us Christ, and all the benefits of his death, which he offered to all
generally in the Word preached) gives us to consider, that God would have us
every one to be particularly assured of his love and good will in Christ Jesus,
(neither out of any conceit of our unworthiness, excluding our selves from his
mercy, nor for want of special application, losing the benefits of Christ) and
in the consideration of this mercy, from the heart, to acknowledge with the
Centurion, saying, Lord, I am not worthy thou should come under my roof.

Q. 10. When thou take and applyest to thy self this bread and wine, what
must this put thee in mind of?

A. It, signifying my faith, which is as the hand, mouth, and stomach of my
soul, must put me in mind, that as God will have every man have faith for
himself (without which Christ profits no man of age:) so, to renew the act
of my faith, and at this time to stir up my self to take hold on Christ, and
to lean and rest my self on my Beloved, assuring my self by this my renewed
act of faith, that Christ and all his benefits are as certainly mine, as that
the bread is now truly received into my hand, and is become mine.

Q. 11. When thou eatest and drinkest Bread and Wine, which turn into the
substance of our bodies, what must here be thought on?

Ans. This signifying not only and simply our faith ( John 6.35) by which we
daily feed upon Christ in the Word spiritually, Ioh. 6.53, 54, 55, 63. but our
Union by faith, and nearer conjunction with Christ, must accordingly put us in
mind, and also assure us of our union with him; and that as truly as the Bread
and Wine we eat and drink, are turned into our substance, to repair strength
decayed, so assuredly are we changed, assimilated and made conformable unto
Christ ( Romans 8.29. Phil. 3.10.) and incorporated into him, and so fed,
refreshed, and inwardly strengthened by his Body and Blood.

Qu. 12. But are Sacraments also seals, and particularly this of the Lords
Supper?

Ans. They are, and that both on Gods behalf, to assure the believer that Gods
promises, and all these benefits of Christ do most certainly belong unto him;
and on our part, whereby we, by taking and receiving these signs, bind our
selves a new to keep our covenant with God, and to perform all those promises
of ours (as of new obedience and mortification) which we by our sureties made
to him in Baptism.

FINIS.

