Newcastles Call, To her Neighbor and Sister Towns and Cities throughout the
land, to take warning by her Sins and Sorrows.

Lest this overflowing scourge of Pestilence reach even unto them also.

As also a Direction, how to discover such Sins as are the procurers of Gods
judgments by diverse Methods.

By R. JENISON, Dr. of D.

Whereunto is added, the number of them that dyed weekly in Newcastle and
Garth-side, from May 6. to December 31. 1636.

(...).

LONDON, Printed for John Coleby, at the sign of the Unicorn near to Fleet
Bridge. 1637.

(...) and there told of the Means, both of the Safety; and also, Ruin of
Cities and whole Kingdoms.

Be ye pleased now to take in good part, a word or two, spoken, I hope, not
out of season, in the mournful and sad condition of this my Mother and Nurse,
-- Foelix ^uicumque ^olore, Al^erius dis^es posse ca^ere tuo.
in whose name I make bold to salute you all in the Lord, and to wish you the
happiness to be warned in time by that bittercup of ours, wherein God, by
Pestilence, seems to have begun to you all. The times require every ones
help to seek to quench this fire of wrath begun in the Land* I heartily wish
that many others of much abler parts, would in this kind of popular and
familiar Discourse and Exhortation put forth themselves, and stoop to such
necessary and edifying Arguments. For my part, as the case is, I, though the
meanest of most, expect not who shall begin. God has begun with us here: The
Lion has roared -- the Lord has spoken, I cannot (according to my ability,
setting aside all respect of credit with men of the world) but prophecy; and
that not by word here only, but by writing (such is my desire of the public
good, and such is the occasion here offered by Gods beginning in this fierce
manner with us.) The benefit you may, by Gods blessing, and your own good
endeavor, reap hereby, will be, either a prevention of and freedom to you,
from this spreading evil (which I chiefly by this Dedication do desire and
intend:) or a Direction how to carry your selves (and that with comfort) under
Gods hand, if it reach also unto you.

(...) 26.9, ^.
The truth is, When Gods judgments are in the earth, the inhabitants of the
world ^ill (at least should) learn ^^ghteousnesse. The wise and just will so
do, Who wait for God in the way of his judgments. Amos 4.12. opened.
They will prepare to meet God, and to prevent judgments, which otherwise are
threatened, and seem to make toward them. How we may prevent Gods judgments.
Which they do, or should do by these means:

1. By taking warning judgments inflicted on others, 1 Cor. 10.5, 6, 7-11.
Luke 13.3-5. The want whereof God takes special notice of, Ierem. 3.8, 9, 10,
11.

2. By doing that in our

(...) obtaining the pardon of Sin, upon Repentance. Sin once pardoned, is
never more remembered or punished, Isa. 43.25. Go^^ so forgives, as he als^
forgets.

mortifying such sins as reign in us, or among us, Romans 6.12. Coloss 3.5.
etc. Seeing such exemplary judgments; a Pestilence, war, etc. com^^ not for
smaller faylings but for sins against conscience, Romans 1.18. and for grosser
evils, Ephesians. 5.5.6.

By newness of life and by bringing forth fruit meet for repentance -- so w^
escape wrath to come, and cutting down, Math. 3.7. 8-10. By these means it
will concern you to prepare to meet God; whom ^o you will find to meet you in
mercy; as the father of the Prodigal ran to meet his son, and to welcome
him. Men have not heard -- neither has the eye seen, O God besides thee what
he has prepared for him that waits for him: Thou meetest him that rejoices
and works righteousness, those that remember thee in thy ways, Isa. 64.4, 5.

Now because men are apt to make ill use of Gods judgments on others, to
mis-judge them, and to harden themselves in their security, Four Con^usions ^ut
of Luke 13.4, 5. touching the use of Gods judgments on others.
consider we what our Savior teaches us, Luke 13.1, 2, 3, 4, 5- Think ye
that these were Sinners above all men that dwelt in Jerusalem? I tell you nay:
but except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish. Whence these Conclusions
do readily offer themselves.

Extraordinary, uncouth (yea and sudden) death does sometime befall such as are
not the greatest Sinners. I suppose those seventie thousand of David's Subjects
who died by Pestilence, among the other Tribes, were not greater Sinners than
Jerusalem it self; Upon which, the Angel stretched out his hand to destroy
it. Yea, the good King would make these (in that case especially) more
innocent than himself, saying -- Lo, I have sinned -- but these Sheep, what
have they done? when God showed his severitie against Samaria and Israel,
having removed them out of his sight; and when the Tribe of Judah only was
left and spared, 2 Kings 1^ 18, 19. Eze^ 16.51, ^.
yet says God to Judah, -- They are more righteous than thou.

2. On the other hand it in thee my power, and that my name may be declared in
all the earth.

^et. 2.9.
Howsoever, God Reserves the unjust unto the day of judgment to be punished:
^^^s 17. ^^ 31.
he has appointed a day of purpose for them.

his own Glory, more then men's deserts, and so spares them a while, though
unworthie. See Deuteronomy. 32.26. Ezekiel. 20.8, 9-13, 14-21, 22.

his covenant and promise, who will reserve to himself a Church on earth in
the greatest defections, provocations and destructions of his people: he will,
Ezekiel. 14.19, 20, 21
and does ever reserve a remnant (who otherwise deserve ill at his hand, Ezekiel.
16.59, with 60.) See Isa. 6.13. Romans 3.3. What if some did not believe? shall
their unbelief make the faith of God of none effect? Si quoties peccant
homines, and
If God in general defections and judgments thereupon, should consume in his
wrath, all that deserve it, where should he have a Church on earth to serve
him? he must and will have some, in whom he will magnify his mercy. It is of
the Lords mercies (said Jeremy in the time of the captivity, when so many had
perished) that we are not (all) consumed, because his compassions fa^le not.
^et. 2.^
Here is no merit to be pleaded in such case. ^om. 2.4.
Gods sparing mercies lead the way to his pardoning mercies. He often spares
the unworthy, that they, overcome with his kindness, and 9, 6.
might relent, repent, seek and find mercy, and that so his covenant and word
might take effect in that remnant which is according to the Election of Grace.
and 11.5.
Hence it is, that even among those in Jerusalem, on whom Gods irrevocable
sentence of famine, Ezekiel. 14.19, 20, 21, 22.
noisome beasts, sword and pestilence had passed, yet a remnant was reserved,
in whom God magnified his mercy, and for example of others. It were a happy
thing, if such among us, as are either thus far spared, or have escaped, could
see and make use of the mercy. This has been done by others, why not now by
us?

We read concerning Waldus (from whom the Waldensis took their name) Acts
and M^^um.
that making merry with many of his rich neighbors, one of the company,
suddenly fell down dead: whereupon, he apprehending Gods displeasure, took
warning, gave himself to Reading, Alms, Prayer; and exhorted others to the
like.

The like might be observed in Mr. Gee, escaping in that deadly downfall of
near an hundred Papists in the Blackfriars in London.

In case of Gods judgments on others, and our own sparing, we are neither
rashly to censure them, nor hastily to justify our selves as innocent. Christ
himself, Isa. 53.3, ^
because of his sufferings, was esteemed stricken, smitten of God, and
afflicted, and thereupon despised. Acts 28.4*
So was Paul mis-judged, because of the Viper; And the blind man, in that he
was borne blind. But Christ, though he forbid not a wise consideration of Gods
judgment on Sinners, yet corrects such rash censures as men readily use, and
prescribes an Order, rather to begin at home, and not to secure our selves,
knowing that God often judges some, 1 Cor. 11.^ 32.
that they may not be condemned with the world. 1 Pet. 4.18.
Judgment usually begins at Gods own house, that others thence may learn, not
to justify themselves, but rather, not repenting, to expect like, or greater
wrath.

God warnes and calls all (careless Livers) to repentance, by his corrections
and judgments on some, or else he so summons them to like, or greater wrath.
Except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish.

1. Its a mercy when God makes others examples to us. The end of examples and
History, is to make us wise and watchful, lest we be made Examples and
Histories to others. And among men, Executions are done for the living, not for
the dead, who cannot be bettered by Example or Admonition, as the living may be.

2. Certain destruction will befall such as take no warning by others. See
Levit. 18.3-24.27.28. 2. King. 17.6.7.8-18.
God looks we should profit by the example of his displeasure, even on
enemies, much more on friends, both Forefathers, Ierm. 7.12.13.14. Dan.
5.20.21. 22.23-30.31. 2 Kings 21.9-12.13.
and neighbors and equals. Not to take warning by such (especially after so
many other warnings, wherein God is not wanting to any of us now) is a sign
and forerunner of speedy vengeance. So God looked that Judah should have taken
warning by Isreal's captivity -- but his complaint is -- yet her treacherous
sister Judah feared not, Ier. 3.7.8.9.10.
but went and played the Harlot also: -- and yet for all this her treacherous
sister Judah has not turned unto me with her whole heart, but fainedly. What
hereupon followed? King. 17.15.
Because Judah (which tribe only now was left) walked in the statutes of
Israel which they made; Therefore says God, I will cast you out of my sight,
Ier. 75.
as I have cast out all your brethren, 2 King 21.13.
even the whole seed of Ephraim. And I will stretch over Jerusalem the line of
Samaria, and the plummet of the house of Ahab. The like complaint of not
profiting by others evils is made, Revel. 9.20.21. and threatened, Amos 4.11.12.
I have overthrown some of you, as God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah, and ye
were as a firebrand plucked out of the burning, yet have ye not returned unto
me, says the Lord. Therefore thus will I do unto thee: that is, even
overthrow thee, as Sodom was overthrown: Now this accordingly came to pass
for not taking warning in time, Lament. 4.
as Jeremy lamenting, does bewail. What then remains, but as it follows in
Amos, and as we have already directed, that we in time prepare to meet God.
To which end, and for our further warning and wisdom, I refer you as to the
example of Gods displeasure, against this place of From May 6. till December 31.
1636. there have died of the plague within liberties 5027. without, some 500.
ours, so to the ensuing treatise it self, now published as for our own, so
also chiefly for your spiritual good, which is most heartily wished, and shall
be still sought of God by him, who professes himself at this time the
Interpreter of New-castles good meaning toward you, and

Yours, and the Churches servant, R. I.
New Castle, the 2. of January 1636.
The Contents.
CHAP. I. An Introduction to the maine Observation, with the occasion, and also
cure of the Plague spoken of in the Text. Page 1. CHAP. II. The maine Doctrine
propounded. The parts and particulars of the Text. Gods wrath against sinners
showed. Men's sen^^lesnesse thereof bewa^led. 1^ CHAP. III. That the wrath
spoken (...) was Pestilence. That p^^stilence is an effect (...) Gods wrath,
and the^^ not to be dallied witha^ yet Gods displeasure m^^ to be looked unto
and pra^ed against, then the ^^stilence it self. CHAP. IV. That pestilence is
from Go^ Justice and Wisdom, a^^ not to be ascribed to another Author or
Instrument, neither much to be feared of the godly, to whom it may be a
mercy. 52 CHAP. V. Pestilence is yet the fruit of man's sin. The sin of these
Israelites here. All evil being for sin, we are to justify God, his truth
and people, and to take all blame to our selves. 69 CHAP. VI. The maine Duty
concerning our speedy using of Means to pacify Gods present wrath, urged and
pressed by diverse Motives in the Text. A^^ first because this Pest^lence is
wrath. 11 CHAP. VII. This Pestilence is senci^^ wrath, wrath gone o^^ and
manifested, to t^^ end that taking notice^ Gods displeasure, we might with good
hope, (...) submission, seek to paci^^^ the same. 13 CHAP. VIII. In that wrath
is but go^^ out, and this plague b^ begun (which therefore (...) it may be
stayed from pr^ceeding, if we time^ meet God in the way his judgments, so it
will prove but the beginning of greater evils if we rerepent not) we have cause
speedily to run in with our Censers, and to prevent our own ruin. 144 CHAP.
IX. This wrath and pestilence is from the Lord, and therefore howsoever his
Prophets may be despised, yet God himself is not to be dallied withal, whose
greatness and terror should cause us seek peace with him in time. 183 CHAP. X.
The Conclusion of the Motives urging a speedy performance of the duty of
Humiliation both publicly and privately, and that from the practice of the
Heathen in case of Pestilence. 203 CHAP. XI. A Direction concerning the Means
of pacifying Gods wrath: and that both Negatively, showing what means we are
not, either to use at all, or not to rest in; as also affirmatively, what are
the true and only means and duties to be performed at such times. 219
Newcastles Call, To her Neighbor and Sister Towns and Cities throughout the
Land, to take warning by her Sins and Sorrows.
NVMB. 16.46. -- For there is wrath gone out from the Lord; the Plague is begun.


CHAP. I.
An Introduction to the maine Observation.
I Need not tell you why at this time I make choice of these words to treat on.
This Argument had not bin out of season, The occasion of this Argument.
if we had handled it before ever this plague of pestilence arrived our
coasts, and when we only heard how it raged in Holland, and in other parts
beyond the Seas. They there of the reformed Churches especially, are our
brethren, and we members with them of the same body mystical. And as we should
have sympathized more with them than we did, We should have taken warning by
others, and our selves formerly.
so we should have taken warning by Gods heavy hand upon them when first the
plague began with them, and wrath was gone out from the Lord. For this
judgment of plague, as an Overflowing scourge of the Lord, (as other like
judgments are) ends not commonly where it begins: neither should we have made
a covenant with death (as if we had bin at agreement with hell) to say in our
security (and it skils not whether we say it in word or in deed. Esaias 28.15-18.
) When the overflowing scourge shall pass through, it shall not come unto us.
At the first going out of wrath it concerned us to have bin warned, and to have
prepared to meet our God by true repentance, Amos 4.12.
and entreaties of peace: and when his judgments once began to be in the
earth, ^say 26.8, 9
to have learned righteousness. How much more now, when Gods bow is further
bent, and his arrowe of Pestilence has reached even unto us, shall I say of
this nation only, nay to us of this sinful place and Town where we live, and
where (after a pretty warning and summons given us a few months ago when it
arrived our At the North Shields in October. 1635.
Port, and made its abode there a while chiefly, yet so as that it sent up the
river to us some few messengers of death) where I say, after some few months
intermission, it has broken out fearfully, May 6. 1636.
and begins to spread like wildfire, mo perishing by it this first fortnight
since it began, or was discovered amongst us, Namely, 114 persons.
then either formerly with us, or yet with the great and mother-citie of
London, in the first three months after it began with them some 11. years ago
(though for number of parishes the disproportion be thirty to one:) When God
makes such speed at the first going out of his wrath here amongst us, (...)
others us now,
will it not concern us also to make speed and to hasten our repentance, yea
not us only, but our neighboring towns and cities, yea generally all towns
and cities in these his Majesty's kingdoms? Who must ^ot be se^ure.
For if yet we will be secure, that will concern us which long since was spoken
to Jerusalem and Ephraim and to the scornful men who ruled that people: Esaias
28.1.3, 4.
first, woe to the crown of pride, to the drunkards of Ephraim: The crown of
pride, the drunkards of Epharim shall be trodden under feet: Verse 14.
And the glorious beauty which is on the head of the fat valley shall be a
fading flower. Then, for their security thus they are threatened, (and why not
we now, of this place especially, being as proud, sensual, scornful and secure
as they?) your covenant with death shall be disanulled, 18.
and your agreement with hell shall not stand; when the overflowing scourge
shall pass through, then ye shall be trodden down by it. 19.
From the time that it goes forth, it shall take you: for morning by morning
shall it pass over, (...) whereupon the Lord showing himself strong on the
behalf of his servants, was ready to have consumed the whole congregation all
at once as in a moment, but that they who were injuried interceded for them;
the effect of whose intercession was a Direction from God to the Means by
which he would be pacified, which Moses receiving from God gives in charge to
Aaron, (herein a type of Christ) that he would take a censer, 1 Thessalonians. 1 10.
and go quickly to the Congregation, and make an atonement for them: and why?
And the means used to stay it.
was it not high time? Yes assuredly; for there was wrath already gone out from
the Lord, the plague was begun: and ere he could get into the midst of them
and perform his office, there died of the Plague fourteen thousand and seven
hundred; Verse. 49.
which means if it had not bin used in time, the whole Congregation had bin
consumed.

CHAP. II.
The maine Doctrine propounded. The particulars of the Text laid open. Gods
wrath against sinners showed. Men's sencelessenesse thereof bewailed.
THese words are for our present use at this time, and chiefly teach us this
maine Lesson:

When God manifests his displeasure against us for our sins, whether it be
by plague and pestilence or otherwise, we are spedily to use the means which
he has appointed to stay and pacify his wrath.

So it was here: Wrath is gone out, How it is raised.
therefore run in: or go quickly to the Congregation, and make an atonement
for them; for wrath is gone out, etc. Which duty, though it then properly
belonged to Aaron, a type as is said of Christ, who only turns away wrath, 1
These. 1.10.
and delivers us from wrath (as present so) to come; and now in great part to
the Ministers of the new Testament, who especially at such times as these must
weep between the porch and the Altar, ^oel. 2.16.^7.
and say, Spare thy people o^ Lord, etc.

Yet it belongs to others also, as to Christian Magistrates, and generally to
all and every one who in CHRIST professes himself to be a Spiritual Priest.
This point I shall press and urge by arguments fetched especially from the
Text; Therefore as Preparatorie thereunto, let us first (but very briefly) no^e
and lay open some particulars of the Text.

The parts of the text.
In which we have both a Maledy and a Remedy, Fire and Water, a Plague, and a
Plaster; 1. Malady.
a Lump, boil, rising and swelling of the Plague, and a lump of Figgs as a
plaster for the same. 2. Remedy.


The former expressed by wrath and plague, is an effect both of their sin as
the cause, and of Gods justice as the Author and inflicter of the same, it
being said, wrath is gone out from the Lord: the latter is implied in the first
word For: for wrath is gone out, therefore take a censer, and use the means to
quench it. So that now we have here 1. a Doctrine, concerning the just wrath
of God against sinners: 2. Causes, reasons and grounds of it: and 3. The use of
all, by way of Inference, which we must chiefly insist upon, though the former
have their special reasons and uses also.

1 The Malady.
The evil is here called with respect to God, Wrath or hot anger; with respect
to man, a Plague.

1 Wrath.
First, by wrath here we understand some judgment and effect of such anger and
displeasure as is in God himself, What is meant by wrath.
whereby being truly and inwardly displeased within himself with sinners, and
alienated in his love from them for their sin, he manifests so much by some
real tokens of the same.

Quest. 1. How is wrath in God.
How is wrath in God?

Answ. Not properly as an affection: though even so it was in Christ, God --
Man; yet without sin or perturbation, and as pure water put into a pure and
clean glass, which being jogged and moved retains its clearenesse still, and
not as commonly it is with us, who sin in our anger, through the muddinesse
which i^ in us through natural corruption. It is said to be i^ God, in regard
of that tru^ displeasure and dislike o^ our sin, whereby he truly hates it, and
is contrary to it and to sinners, ready to extirpate both sin and sinners, yet
without any perturbation, grief, or disquiet within himself* howsoever, what
God speaks after the manner of men, we must understand so as becomes the high
and holy majesty of God.

Quest. 2. How goes wrath out from God?

Ans. How goes wrath forth from God.
When he manifests this his inward dislike of sin, and contrariety against
sinners, by some outward token of his wrath, whereby he would be known to be
displeased; as on the other hand, Luke 8.46.
virtue was said to be gone out of Christ, when his power and mercy was
manifested in healing the woman (which had the bloody issue) of her plague,
Mar. 5.30 33.
which thing immediately upon her touching of him was made known unto her. So
here; therefore as men being angry, show their anger by some evil looks, words
or blows, and deed^ so God is said to be ^^gry, and wrath to go o^ from him,
when especialy he inflicts some punishment or calamity, wher^by he shows his
dislike our sin. So Math. 3. Romans 3.5. and 4.15. and 5.^

God is truly displeased with sin and sinners: why?
Now this may teacht^ that sin is truly displeasi^^ unto God, he neither
approoves of it, nor of us (...) our sin. The Reason is impuritie and
uncleanness, and therefore (...) that regard both sin and sinners are most
contrar^ to his most holy nature^ (...) disobedience, and so op^^seth and
withstandeth his holy will which is Sovereign: no marvel then if God oppose
and resist such proud sinners, and walk contrary to them that walk contrary
to him. (...) Sin, especially in these unthankfulnes, and therefore justly
hated of him. 4. In a dishonor to him, especially such sins as now are
sinned, when all our sins are in a manner against all his attributes of
goodness, mercy, grace, justice, and against his works and manifestation of his
attributes, as also again the light of his Gospel^ of our consciences etc.
(...) regard whereof, no m^^^vell if he both threa^^^ sin in his Law, Gal.
3.10.
annexin^ curse to the breach of (...) and daily, even in this li^^^ plague and
punish sin a^^ sinners.

To see what we get by sin.
Use. See then what (...) do when we sin again God: see what we gai^^ by
doing our own wi^^ and following our ow^ counsels contrary to God we being
our selves under his displeasure, we^^ provoke a gracious Go^ yea the great and
drea^full Majesty of Heaven, and that to the confusion of our own faces. At
this time he manifests much wrath against us of this p^ace, as also in part,
the whole kingdom; for wrath is gone out from him against as, the plague is
begun, and renewed, Ann. 1625.
after such havoc as it has formerly, not many years ago, made amongst us,
especially in the Mother city, but never the like with us to that it is like
to do now. But oh the stupidity, grosness, 2. To bewail men's senselesnes
under wrath.
and senselessness of our hearts! here I may take up Moses his complaint in
like case, Who knows the power of thine anger? Psalm. 90.11
eve^^ according to thy fear, so^^ thy wrath. Whose heart^^ smitten with fear
answerable to the terriblenes (...) thy wrath, and by occasion of thy fearful
judgment as yet they should be who so fears thee fo^^ this thy wrath, Deuteronomy.
13.11 Psalm. 119.120. Ion. 1.16. Prove. 16.6.
as by it (...) depart from evil? for (...) the fear of the Lord (where it is
indeed) men depart (...) evil: oh that this terro^ of the Lord, (whereby (...)
are even at this time? some regard made to appear before the judgment of the
Lord, 3. To learn true wisdom and the fear of God from it.
wh^ now sets our iniquities before him, Psalm. 90.7.8. 2. Cor. 5.10.11.
our secret sins in the light of his countenance, who are now consumed by his
anger, and troubled by his wrath; oh I say that this terror of the Lord) could
drive every one of us to our duty, as the terror of the last judgment did
Paul; and could bring us in time to true repentance and humiliation of soul!
And here let us take up Moses his Prayer also, (oh that we did it with like
heart and true desire! Psalm. 90.12.
) So teach us to number our days, that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom:
For indeed it is God only who by his Spirit accompaniing his Word and
Judgments, can free us from this stupiditie, and bring us to a due
consideration of our ways, and repentance for the same: then and not till
then, Verse. 8.
may we with comfort, hope and good confidence make that his next petition;
Verse. 13.
Return, O Lord his long? and let it repe^^ thee concerning thy servants (and
so on as the^^ it follows.)

CHAP. 3.
That this Wrath was Pestilence. That Pestilence is an effect of Gods wrath,
and therefore not to be dallied withal: yet Gods displeasure more to be looked
unto, and prayed against, then the Pestilence it self.
NOw this Wrath in particular, 2. It is a Plague which generally is a stroke.
and with respect to man is here called a Plague, or a Stroke, from a word
which signifies to smite, and that to death: and so it signifies generally
any judgment of God which is to death: as a slaughter by the sword, and by
hanging, Josh. 22.17. with Numb. 25.3.4.5. And generally of Aegypts plagues it
is said; Exodus 9.14.
I will send all my Plagues upon thine heart. or
Origin turns the word Confraction or breaking: Confraction.
and so the Greek here, he has begun to break, that is to destroy: whence
Orige^ notes that the wicked a^^ as earthen vessels of dishonor to be broken.
An^ doubtless the Lord by his judgments breaks i^ upon his people like the
sea, and makes a brea^^ among them as now by Pestilence, by which he^ scatters
us one from another, etc. But especially here Pestilence.
And of this Plague by Pestilence we understand the word here. This same word
is used also by Moses, when he speaks of the last Plague of Egypt, Exodus
12.23.27.
the death of the first borne, wherewith God is said (by his Angel) to smite
them. And that Angel is called a Destroyer: For as God by an Angel delivered
his people out of Egypt, Numb. 20.16.
so by an Angel he destroyed their enemies, Hebr. 11.28. So that it is very
likely that those first borne were destroyed by Pestilence, to which I I
conceive the Lord in Amos has reference, when he says, I have sent among you
the Pestilence after the manner of Egypt. Amos 4.10.
Even so in the Pestilence which was in King David's time, he is called the
Angel that destroyed the people. 2. Sam. 24.16.
Moreover, these Murmurers were threatened to be smitten with the Pestilence,
Numb. 14.12.
I will smite them, says the Lord, with the Pestilence: now when (after this
threatening) were they so smitten unless at this time It is not much material
to our maine scope, whether this Plague here were the Pestilence, or no; yet so
we now take it, the Pestilence is Wrath, Pestilence is an effect and sign of
wrath in God.
or a sign and effect of Wrath, and of Gods displeasure: Here we see the one
is explanied and expressed by the other: and this is the Observation hence to
be made: yet it is not so much a sign of Gods wrathful displeasure, to each
and every particular person smitten by it (seeing a child of God may both be
smitten and die of it) as to the Communaltie, to the Kingdom, City, To whom
Town or place where it is, in which a breach is made, as in David's case. Yet
here in my text, they were all guilty; and for the most part the Pestilence, as
well as the Sword, coming to avenge the quarrel of Gods covenant, ^ev. 26.25.
and to punish the disobedient and obstinate, its maine business is with those
against whom God has the greatest quarrel.

It is no ordinary death.
The Plague then is, and must be taken to be a fearful sign of Gods
displeasure and wrath: as it was said of the Egyptians, H^^ (that is God) cast
upon them the fierceness of his anger, Psalm. 78.49.^0.51.
wrath and indignation, and trouble, by sending evil angels among them. -- He
gave their life over to the Pestilence: and smote all the firstborn in
Egypt, etc. So Numb. 25.3, 4, -8.

This is not an ordinary death, or death barelie, Why?
or a debt we owe to God and Nature, as an effect of original Sin, or of Sin
generally; but this, as the like deaths by Sword and Famine, is an effect of
some great, special, spreading, and reigning Sins. In it is wrath; and the
face of an angry God, may, and ought be seen in it.

For 1. 1. Gods hand is specially in it.
Gods hand is more seen (or to be seen) in it. God is said To fall upon, or to
meet men with Pestilence. ^xod. 5.3. ^am. 24.
And its A falling into the hands of the Lord. In the place, Exodus 5.3. as
elsewhere, I know the Greek and Chaldee translate the word there used (Deber)
Death: yet that death is Pestilence; for so the Holy Ghost puts it for
Pestilence in Revel. 6.8. from Ezekiel. 14.21. So the Murraine or Pestilence on
the cattle is said to be from the hand of the Lord. Exodus 9.3.


2. Its full of woeful evil. Psalm. ^1.3.
2. Commonly it is a grievous death (as that a grievous Murraine, Exodus 9.3.)
And the Psalmist calls it noisome, or rather woeful Pestilence, or Pest of
woeful miseries or evils. Now what these evils are, who knows not? Through the
noysomnesse and contagion of it, it makes a man a stranger to his own house, to
his dearest friends; yea, as it were an enemy to them, and an instrument of
death to wife, children, friends; and it deprives a man of comforters in his
greatest agony and need; and at length, of life, and of an Honorable burial.
Its an enemy of trading and civil commerce: its commonly accompanied with
Famine, and followed (where it works not reformation) with (...) (...) stung
(by Gods wise providence) with this deadly disease, so the whole point it
self affords unto us a double instruction. Not to be secure in time of
pestilence.
1. Not to dally with God, at such times especially as these: God is in good
earnest with us, truly displeased with us, and with our ways, and would have
us know so much, whilst he manifests his wrath from heaven against us by
Plague and Pestilence, which is one of his four sore Judgments, Ezekiel. 14.21.
whereby he powers out his fury upon us in blood to cut off man and beast (as
we have great cause to fear) Verse 29.
and which he would have us take not for an ordinary death, but for a true
sign of his Wrath, which he would have us see in it, and accordingly fear
and tremble, and so work out our Salvation, breaking off our Sins by
Repentance and amendment of life, not making light thereof when his hand is so
heavy upon us for the same. When Pestilence finds us in our Sin, it is a
fearful sign of heavy wrath from God; but if it leave us in our Sin, then is
it yet a more fearful sign of Gods hot displeasure, for so it leaves us
either to the Sword of merciless (...) and everlasting destruction of soul
and body, as the just and full desert and reward of our sins. Alas! what is
the plague, or any bodily evil to this, that we should be so much troubled
with it, and use such means and care to prevent, or fly from it, and yet the
mean while, be no whit at all, or very little touched with a sense or fear of
the other? And to seek Gods favor more then health or life.
whereas a man may escape the danger of the Pestilence, and be free from it, and
other bodily evils, and yet be and remain under Gods heavy and sore
displeasure, and so be liable to all plagues and punishments which his sins
deserve to be inflicted on him in this life, and in hell for ever; as on the
contrary one may be smitten in body by plague and pestilence, as we conceive
King Hezekiah was, or by some sore, Isay 34.1-21. Psalm. 6.1, 1 3. and. 9. and
38, 1, 2, and.
deadly or dangerous disease and sickness, as David was, and yet be in happy
and blessed estate and condition, as being in love and favor with God, though
it may be not always in that fresh sense and feeling of it which he desires.

This made holy David in his sickness pray in this manner, and after this
method: O Lord rebuke me not in thine anger, neither chasten me in thy hot
displeasure. Have mercy upon me O Lord, for I am weak: O Lord heal me, for my
bones are vexed. Where though in the second place he prays for healing, yet
firstly and chiefly he prays both against Gods hot displeasure, and for his
mercy and favor. He by occasion of his sickness apprehends Gods displeasure
and heavy wrath, as the just desert of his sin, if God should deal with him
in rigor, and accordingly is more affected in soul through a sense of Gods
wrath, then in body, through the feeling of his disease or affliction: and
therefore he prays not so much against the sickness or evil which troubled him
in body, which he took only as a fatherly chastisement, and which he could
well endure, according to that of Christ, As many as I love, Revel 3.19.
I rebuke and chasten; as against Gods wrath caused by his sin, which he well
knew to be intolerable, it being such, as when it lay upon Christ the eternal
Son of God in our nature, who as our surety, and in our stead took it upon
him, made him cry out, My God, why have thou forsaken me? Many of us never
look so far as to the inward affection of anger in God (though it be not
properly in him:) if they had but the outward evil removed (as now this of
Plague) they little regard Gods wrath and displeasure from whence it comes, or
how contrary God is unto them, though they should utterly in soul and
eternally be consumed by it; for they would return presently to, yea do still
continue in those sins which bring them under his curse and wrathful
displeasure, making light account thereof, with Pharao sometimes desiring a
removal of the evil which was upon him and his people, but never of the
displeasure of God, or of the hardness of his heart and sin provoking God,
unto which he presently returned. Such may have the plague kept or removed from
the^ now, and yet remain under, and perish in Gods wrath and hot Displeasure
temoprally and eternally, as did Pharao.

Here we may try our selves, Trial of our selves hence.
whether at this time the Pestilence and outward evil which is amongst us, or
Gods displeasure trouble us most. To make light of Sin, to continue in it now
without due search and examination of our ways, or otherwise to justify our
selves in apparent evils, and not to reform them to the uttermost of our
power, is to make light of Gods wrath and not to fear it, but to procure new
wrath, or at least, the con^inuance of the old. But how many such now have we?
Oh, say they, the Plague and the evils accompanying it, are intolerable; and oh
that this fire were once quenched! But in the mean time, the Sins which have
provoked God to displeasure are loved, pleaded for; at least, not forsaken, or
put away, so much as in purpose of heart. Do such men fear Gods displeasure?
does his wrath trouble them? or do they see and groan under his wrath,
whilst they complain of the outward evils, and pray for healing? no alas!
this Plague is not seen as an effect and token of Gods wrath, but only as
cross and contrary to us in our health, life, friends, goods; to our sinful
associations and companying one with another; whereas we should look more to
Gods wrath in the Plague, than to the Plague it self, or in any other respect:
and in our prayers, and by our endeavors pray against wrath, and beg, and
seek mercy and forgivenes of our Sins more than life it self, craving still,
and crying for mercy; Mercy, mercy good Lord, nothing but mercy; give and
show m^ mercy, or else I die: what will health, freedom from pestilence, what
will wealth or life it self avail me, (...) for want of mercy I peri^^
eternally? Nay, I may have these and perish, Psam. 92.6, 7.
yea these may be given me, i^ I still persist in my old sin that I may (more
certainly) perish. Now o holy God, in wrath remember mercy: and give us thy
servants, first aright to apprehend thy wrath now gone out against us, whilst
the Plague is begun; that we may be fitted and prepared, both to beg and to
receive mercy, that thou may be glorified by showing mercy, whilst we are
ashamed, abashed, and truly humbled in the apprehension and acknowledgment of
thy just wrath gone out against us, and manifested thus by Plague and
Pestilence. Amen.

CHAP. IV.
That Pestilence is from Gods Justice and Wisdom, and not to b^^ ascribed to
any other author or instrument; neither much to be feared^ the Godly, to whom
(...) may be a mercy.
Pestilence is only from the Lord as Author. Exodus 4.11. Isa. 45.7. Amos 3.6.
NExt we have to consider that this wrath and this Pestilence is go^ out from
the Lord.

The Lord then both and will be known to be the author and inflicter of the (as
of all other like) evil

1. Threatening.
It is the Lord who threaneth it, as we may se^ Exodus 9.16. Numb. 14.12. and
Levit. 26.25. Deuteronomy. 28.21. When ye are gathered together within your Cities, I
will send the Pestilence among you. And says Moses to the disobedient, The
Lord shall make the Pestilence cleave unto thee until he have consumed thee.

It is the Lord also who sends it and inflicts it: 2. Inflicting it.
as of David's people it is said, So the Lord sent Pestilence upon Israel; 1 Chronicles. 21.24.
and there fell of Israel seventie thousand men. And King Hezekiah being so
smitten (as most think) says He has both spoken unto me (when he said --
Thou shall die, Isa. 38.1-14.
and not live) and himself has done it. So Amos 4.10. I have sent among you
the Pestilence, etc. And Psalm. 78.50, 51. This is one of the four sore
judgments which God specially sends, Eze. 14.19, 21. It is one of Gods arrows,
of which he says, I will spend mine arrows upon the^; Deuteronomy. 32.23, 24. Psa.
91.5.
that arrow which flies by day: -- That flies both swiftly, and fetches, or
reaches those that would fly (in their Sins) farthest from it. The Chaldee
calls it, The arrow of the Angel of death. Yea, Homer, Iliad. 1.
the Poet Homer (an Heathen) calls it an Evil arrow: And Euripides tells us that
it is a Plague, (...).
calamity or destruction sent of God. The Prophet Habakkuck trembling at Gods
Majesty, says, Before him went the pestilence, Habak. 3.5.
and burning coals (or burning diseases) went forth at his feet. Yea, little
children, and profane cursers will tell you this plague is from God, whilst in
the streets and elsewhere, you may hear them curse and bid the plague of (or
from) God, yea the hot plague of God, go with such as they wish ill unto.

Now this is 1. It is from his 1. Justice.
from his Justice, who as he punishes all sin, even original alone, with
Death, so some sins with more grievous and remarkable death, and with
exemplary judgments. Howsoever God does not inflict, either this or any of
those other his sore judgments without cause, and so he would be
acknowledged, whilst he concludes the mention of these inevitable sentences,
Ezekiel. 14.21 23.
saying: And ye shall know that I have not done without cause all that I have
done. Of which cause in us more in the next point.

2 Wisdom.
2. This is also from his wisdom, punishing sin with suitable punishments:
we infect one an other by evil example, Retaliating sins with semblable
punishments.
communication, Company-keeping, though we call it good fellowship, by tempting
and enticing one another to sin, by unprofitablenesse in company, whereby we
edify not one an other in the best things: so by excess and abuse of Gods
good creatures; by Pride in apparel, and garishnesse, whereby we ensnare and
tempt others to sin; so by covetousness, and abuse of trading and such like:
How wisely then, as well as justly does God meet with us by such a judgment,
as whereby we infect one another in body, by our breathing, touching, and
accompanying with them, and whereby he breaks those cursed knots of good
fellows: so whereby our very clothes in which we pride our selves do infect
our selves and others, to the apparent danger of life it self; and whereby,
through famine and poverty, which commonly accompany the Plague, our excess,
and abuse, both of Gods good creatures, and of trading by oaths, cousenage,
false wares, at least covetousness; and our pride and confidence in regard of
our wealth, are justly met withal.

This consideration concerning Author of Pestilence, To look chiefly to God.
is of Use to us, 1. to acknowledge Gods hand and providence in it, and not to
ascribe it either to Chance, (as the Philistines were ready to have ascribed
the disease of Emerods, 1. Sam. 6.9
and that great death that did befall them) or to second causes or instruments
(so as to rest in them, or to expect help from them:) these are but
instruments in Gods hand, And not (...) the Instr^ment,
whether they be Angels, by whom God often smites with Pestilence, Or occasion.
as in the first borne of Egypt, and in David's people; or whether it be the
Air which is infected, or any other Person or thing, which we occasionally
received infected, or by whom, or who it at first was brought to our Town or
place; or whether the unseasonablenesse of the weather, help to continue or
increase it. In all these and the like we are chiefly to look to God, and not
either to complain or cry out on, and curse such as by whom it might seem
first to be brought unto us, (though wilful or rash spreaders of this
infection, It is his hand which both wounds and must heal.
should and ought both be inquired after, and severely punished;) or much to
hope that when the dog-dayes end, or cold weather or winter approaches, then
we shall hear no more of it, or at least have it to abate: no, no, we must
both look higher, and expect help from an higher hand then all these: It is
Gods hand that smites (whosoever, or whatsoever be the rod, as Exodus 7.17.
compared with 19. and Esaias, 10.5.6.7. (unto this hand we must chiefly look.
This is the hand which is now stretched out against us, and which will be
stretched out still, whilst we turn not to him that smites, Isay, 9.12.13.
neither seek the Lord of hosts.

Comfort to Gods people in covenant with God.
and is sent by him as the Author of it, may be for the Comfort of all such,
as whose God is the Lord, and generally of all such, as by true sorrow and
penitencie by faith, by hearty confession of sin, prayer and sacrifice shall
seek unto him, as did David: this being, even in this respect, one of Gods
gentlest judgments; such as holy David did choose before sword and famine, 2 Samuel 24.14.
saying, Let us fall now into the hand of the Lord (for his mercies are great)
and let me not fall into the hand of man. Oh beloved, we have yet to deal
with God, and not with merciless men, who have so long waited their time, and
sought what by open violence (as in their Spanish Navy and Forces in Ireland)
what by secret underminings, Pestilence is often a mercy to them.
(as in their Popish Powder Plot and secret workings) to bring us under their
tyranny, and to judge us with their judgments. Great are the mercies of the
Lord, that we are not as yet given into their hands, as too justly we deserve.
Dying by it, as freeing them from greater evils.
Now if God have a purpose to bring this extremest of evils upon us of this
place or nation (and why should we secure our selves in these our defections
from him?) will it not then be a mercy to such as are in Christ, to be taken
away by this more gentle correction, and hand of a merciful God from greater
wrath to come? The Lord in mercy took away good King Josiah, even by the
sword, which he made use of to remove him from those greater and more spreading
evils, which by the sword also were to befall his people and posterity; for no
sooner was he so taken away by the sword of Pharao Necho, but his successors
and sons, and Judah, after some bondage under Necho, were destroyed (many of
them) by the bands of the Chaldees, of the Syrians, 2 King. 24.2.
Moabites, and Ammonites, but the land was wholly overrun, destroyed and
captived by King Nebuchadnezzar. How much rather may he remove his chosen from
the raging evils of the sword, and fury of the oppressor, by withdrawing them
with his own hand, and fetching them home to himself by this messenger of
Death the plague? 2 Chronicles. 7.13.
for what is pestilence else but a messenger of Gods sending? now if God please
to call home any of his children by it, why should they be afraid or too much
dismayed? true, it is a messenger of a grim countenance, and knocks at the
door somewhat fiercely, and so, before it be acknowledged, or well considered
of, it may terrify a beloved heir: but when he shall perceive it is no other
but his fathers servant to fetch him home, and that from greater dangers where
he is, the fear abates, and he goes with him cheerfully. In this case our
chief business will be, to see that God be ours in Christ, and to make our
peace with him. This once done, we need not fear what kind of death we die,
seeing it befalls us by the providence, appointment, yea, hand of our merciful
father: That which is sent in wrath to others, shall befall us in mercy; as
the same Red Sea which swallowed up the Egyptians, And also 2 Living.
afforded a safe passage to the Israelites toward the land of Canaan. Yea, for
the present, Gods people find themselves more safe under his merciful hand,
than they can well hope to be under man's hand, when Gods hand shall be wholly
removed.

CHAP. V.
Pestilence is yet the fruit of Man's Sin. The Sin of these Israelites here. All
evil being for Sin, we are to justify God, his truth and people; and to take
all blame to our selves.
Quest. But is not God a God of mercy, grace, and goodness? Our sin the cause
of our sorrow.
Whence then is it that wrath, and hot anger is said to go out from the Lord,
and particularly this of Plague or Pestilence? We must therefore conceive, and
may easily imagine, that in case of gods wrath, and of the breaking out of
Pestilence there is some great cause provoking him thereunto; seeing he does
not afflict willingly, or from his heart, Lament. 3.33.
nor grieve the children of men. The great God herein is like the little Be,
which yields honey of its self, but stings not till it be angered or provoked.

The first in this Text, provoking the Lord to this great wrath, was the
peoples murmuring against Moses and Aaron, Psalm. 41.42.
charging them with the death of those rebels, whom God destroyed justly for
their sins, and their rising accordingly against them: which as it is in its
own nature highly displeasing to God who cannot endure his officers and
faithful servants should either be envied and maligned, as these two were by
Corah, etc. or repined at, when for their sake the Lord does punish such as
wrong them. So for the Circumstances of it, it became exceeding great; for it
is said, But on the morrow (after Corah was swallowed up, and they were spared
and escaped) all the Congregation of the children of Israel murmured against
Moses, The sin of these Israelites here, aggravated.
and against Aaron, etc. Where 1. for time, it was on the morrow immediately
after their 1. former sin. 2. God wrath executed on others 3. their own
sparing. 4 their former and but yesterdayes show of repentance, or forsaking
the tents of the wicked. 2. For the persons who sinned, they were 1. for
quality, the children of Israel, from who^ God had cause to have expected
better things. 2. For number, All the congregation of them, it was a general
sin and conspiracy. 3. For persons against whom; it was against Mos^^ and
Aaron: against Moses a Prophet and Prince, against Aaron the Priest of the
Lord, both which had lately, yea and now made intercession for them: they were
neither afraid to meddle with such dear servants of the Lord, who prooved
edge-tooles to them; nor ashamed so ill to requite them for their love.

This was their sin. Our like Sins causes of our Judgments now.
And when our sins become like either for nature or for circumstances, we have
great cause to look for like wrath: nay if such sins, as envying, hating, and
rising against Gods Ministers and faithful servants, and if such circumstances
of sin, 2.4^
as to sin upon sin, and to multiply transgressions to sin after examples of
Gods wrath on others, after our own sparing and deliverances, and after
former shows of repentance: If for men in covenant with God to sin against
him, and to sin as it were by conspiracy and consent; and if unthankfulness
against God and his Messengers and Servants deserve wrath, and be followed with
Pestilence, then no marvel if wrath be gone out from the Lord against us of
this place, yea, and Nation, and if the Plague be already begun amongst us,
and so far proceeded as it is. But of the Sins more particularly for which
wrath goes out from God, and for which Pestilence is sent, I shall speak
hereafter on some other Grounds of Scripture.

Here we may observe in the general, Sin procures wrath
That man's Sin is the cause of his Sorrow. Love to Sin procures Gods anger
against the Sinner: And as here, The Plague of the heart and soul brings Gods
Plague upon the body. 1 Kings, 8.38.
Remarkable examples hereof we have in the Angels cast 2 Pet. 2.4^
out of heaven for ever because of their Pride: in Adam cast out of Paradise
(and with him all Mankind) for disobedience: Genesis 3.17.
in a whole world of men, Genesis 6.
for violence, sensuality and security: Math. 24.38, 39.
in Sodom and other Cities, destroyed suddenly for Pride, Ezekiel. 16.49, 50.
abuse of Gods good creatures, Idleness, and abominable Lusts: Lamen. 1.5.
in the Jews, both in their first Captivity, when the Lord (so grievouslie)
afflicted them for the multitude of their Transgressions: 2 Chro. 36.14, 15,
16, with 17, etc.
and in this their so fearful dispersion and scattering whereby they are
broken off, Isa. 50.1.
Romans 11.20.
because of unbelief.

But leaving other evils, Specially Pestilence, which is both threatened,
consider we, that God does 1, Threaten pestilence for Sin, as Levit. 26.14,
15, 16-24, 25. Deuteronomy. 28.15-21, 22. Ezekiel. 6.11, 12. Alas for all the evil
abominations of the house of Israel: for they shall fall by the Sword, by the
Famine, and by Pestilence. So here, these Murmurers were first threatened with
Pestilence for their unbelief: Numb. 14.11, 12.
and here in my Text, it was inflicted for their Sin, which is already
mentioned. So then 2, God does also send, And inflicted for sin^
and Inflict Pestilence for Sin: as see Exodus 12.29. Psalm. 78.50, 51. Amos
4.10. So David was met with for his pride, 2 Samuel 24.10. And so now must we
take this Pestilence, and other like Sicknesses to be justly sent for our Sins:
and why not the same, or like to the Sin of Irreverence among the Corinthians;
who, because they came to the Lords Table, and returned also from it, in their
Sins, in their contentions, contempt one of another, dis-respect of their
Teacher, Saint Paul, their ignorance, and other Sins, it is said, 1 Cor. 11.30.
For this cause many among you are sick and weak, and many sleep. Now this
Sickness and death among them is not improbably, by some, thought to be that
of Pestilence.

Whence is this? 1. This is from
Such is the nature of Sin, The nature of Sin.
as that Genesis 4.13.
can bring forth nothing but evil: therefore does one and the same word in the
original include in the signification of it, both Sin and Punishment. So that
he that will sin, does but hatch the cockatrice egg, and nourish a viper in
his own bosom, which will be his destruction.

2. From God holiness.
Such again is the Holiness and Justice of God, that he cannot spare
obstinate Sinners without impeachment to his Justice, Man himself being the
Judge to whom God seems to appeal, saying, How shall I pardon thee for this?
Ierem. 5.7.
Seeing thou will neither seek pardon, nor forsake thy Sin. Tell me, would
thou that I should violate my Justice to spare thee in thy Sins? How can thou
in reason expect it? Will ye infect one another with your evil examples, and
company-keeping; by tempting and enticing one another to Sin, to my dishonor,
and shall I still fit still and do nothing? shall not I send my plagues among
you, to make you afraid one of another, and to sever you one from another?
Shall I not multiply my plagues till you, each of you see the plague of your
own heart, and seek unto me for mercy, and for healing? If otherwise, Ierem.
5.9
Shall I not visit for these things?

Use. In our sufferings to justify God, his truth and people.
Now that Gods hand is so heavy upon us, we 1. See whom to thank; none but
our selves, our pride, our unfruitfulnesse, our sensuality, our security, our
manifold defections from God, both in his truth and holiness, have procured
these to us. The evils we do, (...).
and that willingly, are the cause of all the evils we suffer unwillingly.
Howsoever, let us in this (as in other evils) ever justify God, ^ament. 1.18.
take blame to our selves, and accept of the punishment of our Sins: which
Lesson we may learn of holy David, Psalm. 119.^5.
who having by pride, vainglory, and selfe-confidence, provoked God to smite
his people with Pestilence, And to blame our selves.
is yet soon touched in conscience; and being tenderhearted, he shows
himself also wise, to see the cause in himself, and unpartiall to judge
himself, taking the whole blame and shame only to himself, saying, I have
sinned. 2 Samuel 2.10-17.
-- Is it not I that commanded the people to be numbered? But these Sheep,
what have they done? I have sinned greatly in that I have done. -- I have done
very foolishly. O worthy King! O most worthy example, even for Kings and
Magistrates to imitate.

It becoms us at this time every man to search and look into his own heart, to
find out that Achan which troubles the camp, that Jonah, who troubles the
sea, and causes such storms of wrath, that Sheba for whose cause God lays
siege to our towns and cities. How this may be done, or how we may find out
our sins, as causes of present judgments, I shall endeavor hereafter to show
more fully. Only now take we heed that we do not so far go about to
justify our selves, as to translate the cause of our sufferings from our
selves to other men, whether forefathers, Ezekiel. 18.2.
superiors, (we being in a rank of inferioritie) Inferiors, (if we be
governors and Magistrates, who are ready to account and call the people
accursed: David did not so, as we have heard:) Exemplarie judgments on a
place befall chiefly for the sins of exemplary persons: neither does God show
himself Judge from heaven, till his Vicegerents here on earth, too much and
too long neglect to execute his righteous judgments: or lastly, to the holy
Prophets of God, 1 Kings 17.18. Numb. 41.
as King Ahab laid the famine upon Elias, and the rebellious Israelites here
the death of the conspirators upon Moses and Aaron. Neither let us blame Gods
truth and religion as causes of our sufferings, as did the idolatrous women of
old, Ier. 44.18. and as did the heathen in primitive times of the Christian
church, Si coelum stetit, si terra movit, si fames, si lues, statim Christianos
ad leonem acclamatur. Tertul. Apolog. cap. 39.
proclaiming the innocent Christians guilty of death, as often as therwas either
drought, famine, earthquake, or plague: yea, as some I doubt are ready now to
charge the truth we maintain against outlandish (...) novelties with these
present evils, and to threaten the state and kingdom with ruin: though neither
state nor Church were ever blessed with more peace, plenty and prosperity,
then when the ancient truth of God, and doctrine of our Church was more
unanimously taught and maintained then now it is. We may rather retort upon
them, Ierm. 4.21.22.23.
as Jeremy did upon those women: do not such things rather now come into
remembrance with the Lord?

Howsoever, be we sure we do not at unawares charge Gods justice in these our
sufferings, whilst we go about to justify either our Church and nation as
innocent, guiltles, and never in better condition; or our selves and persons,
whilst we will see and acknowledge no sin (at least by name or in
particular) by our selves: being ready to ask, Ier. 16.10.
Wherefore has the Lord pronounced (and done) all this great evil against us?
or what is our iniquity? etc. The Lord in no wise can endure such pride: for
this lays the blame on God himself, and amounts to no less then horrible
blasphemy: for in case of such common and remarkable judgments, either God or
man must be acknowledged unjust: but proud man will rather have God to be
thought unjust, then himself the sinner, and so going from one to one, we may
find sin, it may be, in gross confessed the cause of this and like judgments,
but every man for his particular will be without fault, and will be ready to
justify himself in his place, rank and calling. Now then where must the
fault lie, but in God himself? what blasphemy is this against God? when may
we once expect an end?

2. We hence see how and all other evils, as we shall see hereafter.



CHAP. VI.
The main Duty, concerning our speedy using of means to pacify Gods present
Wrath, urged and pressed by diverse Motives in the Text: And first because this
Pestilence is Wrath.
NOw all I aim at from these several points handled, and from this text, is
by way of general use, to infer and enforce upon us the use of the Remedy,
which we are taught from the first word For: wrath is gone out, the Plague is
begun; therefore run in with thy Censer, etc. Or take a Censer -- and go
quickly, and make an atonement; For there is wrath gone out from the Lord, the
Plague is begun.

The maine duty of the Text has been named already in the beginning, which
now must be prosecuted: and it is, The maine duty repeated, and urged.
when God once manifests his wrath, (whether it be by Pestilence or
otherwise) all lawful means are speedily to be used for the pacifying of the
same. Means are speedily to be used, for the pacifying of Gods wrath.
Aaron there, receiving his Injunction, presently obeyed and ran into the
Congregation and made the atonement. The like did Moses (not only here with
Aaron, who perceiving God ready to destroy them all in a moment, presently fell
upon their faces, and obtained this answer and direction; an^ consequently
sparing, for the present to the most o^ the Congregation, bu^ else where) when
once h^ perceived the Lords anger was kindled against the people for the golden
Calfe, which they made and worshipped whilst he was absent from them, with the
Lord in the Mount, Exodus 32.8.9 10.11-14.
he presently (as it were) caught hold on the Lords hand, which was lifted up
against them, to consume them; and besought the Lord, urging him with many
arguments, 2. Sam. 24.16.17-25. Isa. 38.1.2.3-21.
so that he repented him of the evil which he thought to do unto his
people. King David smitten in his people by Pestilence, did likewise: so did
King Hezekiah, smitten therewith, as is probably thought, in his own person.

Now why we at this time should do likewise I shall endeavor to show by such
arguments, Why?
as the Text will afford; and after that I shall direct generally to the Means
and Remedies, which more particularly and severally I shall handle on other
grounds of Scripture.

1. Why we are speedily and carefully to use all lawful means to pacify Gods
wrath now gon^ out by Pestilence against us of this place and nation, Four
motives from the text.
the text will afford us four Arguments, whilst we shall consider that this
Pestilence is 1. Wrath or a sign of Gods displeasure. 2. Wrath gone ^ut or
manifested. 3. Wrath gone out, and as yet, but gone out and begun; and
therefore such as, first by speedy and timely repen^ance, and reformation may
be stayed from proceeding farther, or secondly, being not so stayed, will
prove but the beginning of wrath, and will not end where it begins.

4. It is wrath begun and gone out from the Lord, and therefore such as can no
way be withstood, unless the Lord be ^acified.

1. Because Pestilence is a sign of Gods wrath.
1. Plague here is made an effect and sign of Gods wrath and anger: which
therefore is not to be neglected, but to be laid to heart and apprehended, yea
and pacified in time lest we perish by it. Here I may say, Be wise O ye^
Kings; be instructed ye^ Judges of the earth, serve the Lord with fear, and
rejoice with trembling: Psalm. 2.10.11.12.
kiss the Son lest he be angry, and ye perish from the way, when his wrath
is kindled but a little, blessed are all they that put their trust in him. How
unhappy dismal, dangerous at least and fearful is the case and condition of
such, as under such wrath remain secure and continue unhumbled? Is it not high
time to look out when wrath is gone out? to look about us, when the sparks of
Gods vengeance fly so about our ears? in a word to look to our selves and to
our own safety, when Gods heavy wrath is like to meet us at every turn? why
then do we not in time humble our selves? Which is as the sword of the Angel.
Is not the destroying Angel gone out, and do we not hear morning by
morning, concerning this house and that; yea, those many houses, where not a
night or day passes, Smiting in every house almost.
but some one at least or more are struck dead in it? and will we yet be
secure? what are we doing? what will we do? here I may say as Pharaoh his
servants to him, Exodus 10.7.
know we not yet that New Castle, that England, that such and such a City,
(now undervvrath) is destroyed? how long shall this svvord of the Angel
devour? And calling for our sins.
How long shall our sins be a snare unto us? how long will it be er^ we
let our sins go, tha^ we may serve the Lord our God acceptably? For God
now sends this Pestilence to us (as formerly both the like and other
judgments) with this message; Let your sins go, that you may serve me and
not sin: For otherwise, I will at this time send all my Plagues upon thy
heart, and upon thy servants, and for now I will stretch out mine hand that I
may smite thee and thy people with Pestilence, Exodus 9.13.14.15. and 10.3.
and thou shall be cut off from the earth. How long will thou refuse to humble
thy self before me? even thus may God speak to Pride within us, to
Self-love: let thy beloved sin go, or I will fall upon thee with Pestilence,
or with the sword. And now beloved, tha^ this wrath is gone out already, why
do we not part with, and send away our sins, as at length Pharaoh was
forced to let go the people, and the Philistines the Arc: of whom (to our
shame) we may learn what to do for being forced by judgments to send back
the Arc, their Priests advised not to send it away empty, but in any wise to
return God a trespass offering, that so they might be healed, 2. Sam. 6.3.
and that it might be made known unto them, why his hand was not removed from
them: Thus, say they, which words are also appliable to us) ye shall give
glory to the God of Israel: peradventure he will lighten his hand from off
you, and from off your land. Verse. 4. and 5.
Wherefore then do you har^en your hearts, as the Egyptians and Pharao hardened
their hearts? when he had wrought wonderfully among them, did they not let the
people go, and they departed? And is it not time for us to do likewise (even
to give glory to God, by taking shame to our selves, and by offering our sin
offering, no longer hardening our hearts, but letting our sins go) when the
destroying Angel thus lays about him? And it is as a Messenger from God.
Here again I may say our Enemy is gone out to seek us, (and who a greater
enemy to sinners then God him self?) and will we cast to meet him in our
sins? here are Gods Messengers, And as a storm.
as it were Pursevants sent out with warrant to arrest us, and will we not
hide our selves? here is Judgment laid to the Line and Righteousness to the
Plummet, Esaias 28.17 From which we should hide our selves.
and hail threatened to sweep away the refuge of lies, and waters to overflow
all our own hiding places (whereby we secure our selves against the
overflowing scourge) and will we not be so wise as most of Pharaoh his
servants were, who being told of storms, Exodus 9.19.20.
of great hail in the field feared the word of the Lord, and made their
servants and their cattle flee into the houses? And shall we so little regard
the word and wrath of the Lord (now gone out against us) as not to renounce all
vain confidences and refuges of our own, and to seek forthwith by faith and
Humiliation, Isa. 32.2.
to hide our selves under the wings of Christ, as under the shadow of a great
rock from the wind, Zephan. 2.1, 2, 3. As a roaring Lion.
and as under a covert from the tempest, that so we may be hid in this day of
the Lords anger, and prevent greater and fiercer wrath to come? The Lion also
has now roared after his prey, Amos 3.1.
and will we not be afraid? will we not prostrate and humble our selves
before him? Prove. 19.12. and 16.14.
The Kings wrath (...) as the roaring of a Lion; yea, it is as a messenger of
death, which yet wise men will pacify: and will we neither fear the wrath of
God, nor go about to pacify it? How shall he not be unto us, (as once to
Ephraim) as a Lion, Hos. 5.14.
and a young Lion (which is more fierce) to tear and go away, to take away,
and none shall rescue us? Thus therefore speaks this Lion to us in mercy,
Now consider this, Psalm. 50.22.
ye that forget God, least I tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver.

Lastly, And as fire kindled.
let us consider that this wrath of God is as Fire, and that we now are under
it, and that it is already kindled against us. Now who would set the Briars or
Thorns against God (who is this fire) in battle? I would, says God, Esaias
27.4.
even go through them, I would burn them together. From which we should
withdraw fuel,
Fire, we know, is of a catching nature, and it lickes up every thing it meets
withal, which is of a combustible nature, and grows more fierce where it
finds such fuel to feed it. Now Sin and Sinners in their impenitencie afford
matter and fuel to this fire of Gods wrath (which therefore in hell burns for
ever.) And will we still by adding Sin to Sin, Seeking to quench it by tears
of repentance.
seek to make this fire greater and fiercer? Is it not yet big enough? Will
we needs perish, and be devoured by it? Why do we not rather draw buckets of
water, and run in therewith to quench this fire, by shedding unfeigned, 1 Samuel
7.6. Judge. 2.4.^ Ier. 9.1, ^.
and abundant tears of Godly sorrow and repentance for our Sins, and become
weepers, and true mourners, still wishing we could weep more. Why do we not
take hold on Gods strength (even on Christ by faith in him, Esaias 27.4, 5.
who was signified by the Arc of Gods strength) that we may make peace with
him? seeing he has both told us that Fury is not in him; and promised, that
thus seeking to make peace with him, We shall make peace with him, and he
will be reconciled unto us.

Now would we see the proof of this promise by and in Examples? Examples of
such as have turned away wrath.
Learn we then to avoid Gods wrath by faith, and humbling of our selves from
the practice of good King Hezekiah, K. Hezekiah.
who having offended by unthankfulness and pride, for which cause there was
wrath upon him, 2 Chronicles. 32.25, 26.
and upon Judah and Jerusalem, did yet humble himself for the pride of his
heart, both he and the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, so that the wrath of the Lord
came not upon them in the ^^ies of Hezekiab. The ^^^e we learn from the
example of Gods mercy to King Josiah, K. Josiah.
because his heart was tender, 2 Kings 22.11-13, 19, 20.
and be humbled himself before the Lord (when he apprehended the greatness of
his wrath, which was kindled against him and his people) and wept before him:
The Lord hereupon heard his prayer, and ^^ewed him mercy. Yea, see how
graciously God dealt with King Rehoboam (one, K. Rehoboa^.
none of the very best) who, 2. Chron. 12.6, 7.
being punished by Shishak King of Egypt, for forsaking the Lord, repented
(both he and his Princes) at the pre^ching of Shemaiah; a^ humbled themselves,
saying, The Lord is righteo^^ Whereupon they were delivered (though not from the
spoil, yet) from destruction: for thus said the Lord, They have humble
themselves, therefore I (...) not destroy them, but I (...) grant them some
deliverance, and my wrath sha^^ not be powered out upon Jerusalem by the hand of
Shishak. and 12.
So when he humble himself, the w^ath of the Lord turned from him, the he
would not destroy him altogether: and also in Judah things went well.

Now why should not the present sense of Gods wrath, which is now gone out
against us by Pestilence, work like effects, and like humiliation in us?
which, doubtless if it do not, we must look to perish in his wrath. And thus
for the first Motive taken from the consideration of Gods wrath.

CHAP. VII.
This Festilence is sensible wrath, wrath gone out and manifested, to the end
that taking notice of Gods displeasure, we might with good hope by submission
seek to pacify the same.
We are now in the next place to consider that this Pestilence in it own
nature is an outward and sensible evil, God, in this Pestilence would be
known to be angry; that we might seek to appease him.
and therefore such as by which God calls us to repentance with hope of mercy,
letting us know that he is angry, that so we might search into our selves, and
take notice of such sins as have proved provocations of his wrath, might
humble our selves before him for the same, and seek his face and favor in the
pardon of them, and so be brought to know whom we have offended, to fear and
to do no more any such wickedness. It is such (...) evil, as whereof the Lord
would have us take special notice, for the prevention of greater evils and
calamities: whereas if the Lord had a purpose presently or yet finally to
destroy us all and every one, he would leave us in our sins without any
further warning, give us over to our own lusts without control, He might
give us over to hardness of heart, and to insensible judgments.
and so deliver us up to the hardness of our own hearts; which is a greater
judgment then to be delivered up to satan, which some have bin, and yet ha^^
come to repentance, as the incestuous Corinthian: 1 Cor. 5.5. with 2 Cor. 2.6,
7.
b^ such as God delivers upon hardness of heart, are left^ final impenitencie,
Prove. 5.
in the insensible chains and coa^^ of their own sins, reseru^ (like the evil
angels whi^^ fell) in everlasting chain^ under darkness, (not as t^^ former, 1
Cor. 5.5.
who are deliver^^ to Satan for the destruction of the flesh, that the spir^^
may be saved in the day (...) the Lord Jesus, but to be brought forth) Jude,
ver. 6.
unto t^^ judgment of the great d^^

When our sins (...) grown so full and so ri^^ that God intends no me^cie
for them, As he does such as he hates, and will no longer show mercy unto.
then he ^^aseth to punish sensibly, and leaves men to please themselves in
their own ways, without any show of displeasure, and to dally with their own
death and destruction.

This Silence in God (whilst he forbeares outward and sensible punishment) is
to the impenitent a Sign of the greatest anger that may be; (...). Arist.
Rhet. 2.
even as it is amongst men, where such as are soon angry, and by anger do
show their displeasure, are soo^est pleased and appeased; whereas such as whose
anger is turned into hatred, and who intend revenge, are (like the sulle^ curre
which gives no warning by barking) silent threaten little, conceal their
hatred, but secretly and silently purpose and contrive mischief, and the utter
ruin of the party with whom they are displeased: Difference between Anger
and Hatred.
neither do they care for being known to be the authors of such revenge:
because they seek not the party his good, or bettering, but his utter ruin
and destruction whereas such as are only angry, and do not truly hate, will
show their anger; as when a Father or ^aster, chides, threatens ^^corrects his
Son or Ser^^nt, he would have his child or servant know that he is
displeased, and for what, that so he might be feared, sought unto, and more
respected afterward, being ever ready, upon submission or amendment, to show
favor and friendlinesse. This difference the philosopher puts between Anger
and Hatred. Arist. ut supra
And God himself seems to do somewhat like, (yet without all Sin in himself,
or wrong done any:) Whom he loves, and intends good to, he chastens, namely,
by some outward and sensible evils and corrections, as a loving father, ready
to show mercy upon submission and repentance; he will not let them go on
securely in sin without correction: (though he also sensibly punish the wicked
who receive no correction, neither will he suffer them to go to hell without
warning and correction) But for such as long contemn warnings, and will not
be reformed by the word, or by sensible strokes, and lesser judgments, the
Lord in greater wrath both gives them over, to do their own wicked wills, and
when so they do, he will no longer show his anger, by using the rod sensibly
(though he be never more angry indeed then at such times: God never is more
angry with Sinners then when he shows it least.
) thus leaving them insensibly under his heavy wrath, and reserving them to
certain and inevitable destruction both temporal and eternal: one text and
instance for many. In the Prophecy of Hosea thus we read, Hos. 4.12, 13, 14.
My people ask counsel at their stocks, -- for the spirit of whordomes have
caused the^ to err, and they have gone a whoring (by Idolatry) from under
their God etc. Therefore your daughters shall commit whoredom, and your spouses
shall commit adultery: I will not punish your daughters when they commit
whoredom, nor your spouses when they commit adultery. Thus they were left in
their sins to final impenitency, and to final destruction both in this
life, and for ever after.

This sensible evil is a mercy to us.
How justly might God even thus have dealt with us of this place and nation,
having especially so often before fairly and sensibly warned us; and that, as
by other corrections, so by this of plague and pestilence, but in vain, in
regard of any amendment or reformation: oh what a mercy is it then for him yet
once more to put us in mind of his displeasure and anger conceived against us,
And should lead us to repentance.
and not wholly to leave us in our sins, to perish in them through our
security, but, if it be possible, to awaken us to use the means by which we may
prevent greater wrath, and without speedy amendment, inevitable destruction.
And certainly, if this prevail not with us to the amendment of our lives, we
must take it as a near forerunner of much heavier wrath: God will not always
dally with us, or yet be dallied withal: which we are further to consider in
the next Motive.

CHAP. VIII.
In that this wrath is but gone out, and this plague but begun (which therefore
as it may be staid from proceeding, if we timely meet God in the way of his
judgme^ts; so it will prove but the beginning of greter evils if we repent not)
we have cause speedily to run in with our Censers, and to prevent our own
ruin.
LEt us now consider what cause we have to hasten our repentance from this that
is he^ (...) is gone out, (...) ^^^tance
the pl^g^^^ (...) ^^gun. Consider we (...) that this wrath is but go (...)
out, this plague is but begun: it is not yet gone on so far, as it may and
will, if it be not stayed in time: it is not yet consummate or ended: where it
will end, or what the end of it will be, who knows? This affords us a double
consideration, Seeing this Plague is but begun.
first of Mercy, secondly of Justice and Security, if we meet not God by times.

1. Wrath is but gone out, 1. Gods mercy should move us in that it is but begun.
the Plague is but begun: and therefore may be stayed if means be used in time.
God in his wrath does not (yet) destroy us all at once, as not these rebels
here, though he threatened to consume them as in a moment. Verse ^5.
Moses and Aaron falling on their faces, And therefore may be stayed.
obtained some respite for them then, as doubtless, Gods faithful servants
obtain like mercy for us now. From this mercy and long-suffering in God it
is, that we are not all consumed, that we perish not all at once, that the
punishment of our Sin is not like to that of Sodom that was overthrown as in a
moment, Lament 4.6.
and no hands stayed on her. The truth is, God (some thirty years ago) in the
powder Furn^ce prepared by the Papists for us, God destroys us not in a moment
all at once, as once he threatened.
did let us see both the extremity of their rage and wicked intentions toward
us, as also the greatness of our guiltiness, and how justly he might have
given us then so long since into their hands, to have been swallowed up quick
by them, when their wrath was kindled against us. Psalm. 124.3.
He was near then to have consumed us all at once, when the fire like that of
Sodom, should not have begun in some remote place (as when it takes in some
one or few houses, in a town or city) by which others farther off might have
been awakened, taken warning, and have provided for their own safety at
least, if not also have stayed the farther spreading and raging of it: no, it
should have begun and ended all at once, and at once made an end of all. Thus
he then might have dealt with us, even destroyed us by that their merciless
fire and sword, or by some other sudden vengeance, such as fell upon the host
of the Assyrians, And as he dealt with others.
when the Angel of the Lord in one night destroyed an hundred fourscore and
five thousand of the chief of them; or as he did the old World by water, or
as he destroyed Pharaoh and his whole Army at once in the red Sea, or as it
shall be at the last Judgment. But see, instead of such sudden and universal
destruction (which being formerly so near, may seem in regard of our deserts,
and for our great unthankefulnesse, and forgetfulness of that and other
mercies, at this time to be much nearer:) The Lord did not only then respite
us, but now (when he might justly give us over to their merciless hands, to
be judged with their judgment, that is, to be consumed at once in their
boundless rage) he keeps the rod in his own hand, and begins as it were at
an end of us, smites some few (in comparison of all) and so gives warning to
the rest, hovering as it were, He expects we should meet him a far off.
and standing at our gates, at our neighboring towns and cities, expecting
what we will do to stay his wrath, harkening and listening, as it were, to
hear what we will do, what we will say to him, whether we will repent us of
our wickedness, saying, What have we done? As he meets us in our ways of
sin.
or whether we will turn to our course, as the Horse into the battle, without
all fear of his wrath; as once he did with the Jews: Ier. 8.6.
in effect telling us it is much what in our power (and so asking us) whether
he shall proceed in wrath against us, or no; whether this Plague now begun
shall presently end, or else proceed and make an end of us also;
notwithstanding our present seeming safety, in places remote from the
infection, or whilst we have removed and fled bodily from the same.

This is a mercy then not to be neglected, that God gives us space and time to
consider what we will do, that he gives us warning of his approach, letting us
know that he our Judge has begun to ride his circuit, As he met with Balaam.
and is on his way already, and has sent out the destroying Angel before him,
with a sword of Pestilence in his hand, to meet us in our sinful ways,
standing in our way for an adversary against us, as once against Balaam in his
way of ambition and covetousness being gone out to withstand us (as once him)
Numb. 22.22.32.
because our way is perverse before him. Oh that we were not in this case more
stupid and blind then Balaams Ass! which saw the Angel of the Lord standing
in the way, and his sword drawn in his hand, and turned out of that way, or
would not go on but fall down to the ground under Balaam. Oh that the Lord
would at length open our eyes, as he did Balaams, to see the Angel of the Lord
standing in our way; whatsoever it be, whether that of Covetousness, or
whether it be Pride, Ambition, Malice, hatred of the good, defection from the
goodwayes of God, wearying of his yoke and Gospel, sensuality and love of
pleasure, selfe-confidence, and carnal security, feeding and feasting without
fear, profanation of Gods name. Assuredly God by his sword and judgment is
coming toward us, and threatens us (who once were as a firebrand plucked out
of the burning) to overthrow us, Amos 4.11.12.
as he overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah (that is all at once and suddenly:) And
shall we not take that spoken unto us (seeing we yet have not returned unto
him) which he graciously spoke to Israel, Because I will do this unto thee,
prepare to meet thy God o Israel, o England, O sinful town, city, or place,
will we yet sit still, and settle on our lees through security, and suffer the
Destroyer to enter into our windows, our houses, our bed-chambers; yea our
beds and bosoms? will we not run out with entreaty of peace, fall down
before him, and make supplication to our Judge? Let us not at least come behind
Balaam, who at length seeing the Angel and his sword drawn in his hand, bowed
down his head, Numb. 22.31.34.
and fell flat on his face-saying, I have sinned; now therefore if it displease
thee, I will get me back again. This he said, but it was not altogether in
that sincerity, seeing his heart still went after his covetousnes; which his
hypocrisy we must take heed of: but be ashamed to come behind him and his
Ass (which also fell down before the Angel) in humility, whilst we neither
(upon this occasion) do or profess half so much. Now that the Angel
discovered himself unto Balaam, and he hereupon humbled himself, it was a
mercy to him; for otherwise, Verse 33.
the Angel had slain him. And as he met with Jonah. Jonah 1.1.2.3. etc.
So the Lord in like mercy (and with an intent to bring to repentance and
reformation) met with Jonah by storms and tempests at Sea in the way of his
disobedience, and (as I may call it) non-residence: with Moses in the Inn, With
Moses.
in the way of Neglect, whom by the way in the Inn, the Lord met and sought
to kill him, for not circumcising (through too much respect to his wife) his
son in time. And doubtless, And the Jews.
this is a mercy if we could see it, when God by any judgment stands in our
sinful ways, and as the Prophet speaks, Hedgeth up our way, Hos. 2.5, 6, 7.
that we should not find our paths, etc. As Beasts are kept within their own
Pastures by sharp and thornie hedges, least they break out and lose
themselves: so the Lord, when we are ready to go astray from him, proves, in
regard of some afflictions which he sends, as a thornie hedge to us, so that
we cannot offer to go on in sinful ways, or to break our bounds, but we
run upon the thorns, And with Paul. Act. 9.5.
and kick against the pricks, as it was told to Saul (or Paul) when Christ met
with him in his way of Persecution, and struck him to the earth. It was happy
for Saul that God went out thus and me him. And so it will be our happiness,
if whilst God meets us by Pestilence in our evil ways, as once he met King
David in the way of his Pride, and selfe-confidence, and vainglory, we would
consider our ways, which prove thus bitter and cross to us, and speedily
turn from them, lest we meet with destruction in the same, or go on therein
to perdition.

We may say, and that truly, that God now meets with us (by this sword, o^
arrow of pestilence) in ou^ way of Sinful companying one with another, whereby
we infect one another i^ soul by good fellowship, (...) we call it, by
potting, b^zeling, gossiping, excess i^ feasting, excess of wine^ revellings,
banquetings etc. So he now meet with us in the way of ou^ Idle discourses, and
unsavourie communication, an^ unprofitablenesse in company, of unclean
behavior and adulteries, of unlawful marriages, of needless intertaining of
Gods enemies and unnecessarie acquantance and familiarity wit^ ^^em. So, in
our way of ^orldliness, covetousness, and abuse of trading, de^arring us of
free and safe ^^ading or commerce one with another: and so in ^he way of our
other Sins. And will we yet Go on ^owardly every one of us in ^he way of his
own heart? Will it not now concern ^s to consider every one ^is own Sin,
seeing we cannot go on therein, but we must meet with the Destroyer, It will
concern us to meet him in time, as the forenamed did;
and he with ^s, and so We perish in the way, one of his Pride, another of
his Uncleanness, a third, of his Profaneness, Superstition, Disobedience,
Perjurie, or other S^n.

Were it not better for us with Balaam to say (b^^ with better sincerity) If
(...) (my way) displease thee, Balaam.
will get me back again* with Jonah, Jonah.
to set ou^ selves to our charge with out fear of man, Moses.
or lo^ of ease: with Moses, to obey Gods command and ordinance, not caring
whom we displease whilst we please him; and to Circumcise (as he his Son* so
we) our hearts: The Israelites.
with the Israelites to say, I will go and return to my first Husband, for
then was a better for me than now: (...) will go no more a who^ng after the
world, no ^ot for a world, etc. And ^^stly with Paul, trem^ling and astonished to
say, lord, what will thou have ^ee do? and accordingly ^esolve to do it. Or
should ^ot we (so many of us ^s seem, as yet furthest from danger) while this
^reat King is gone forth ^o make wa^ against us, ^eeing we are not able to
^eet him in our Sins that ^ommeth against us, And ^hile he is yet a great ^ay
off, -- send an Embas^age, and desire Conditions ^f Peace of him, as the
^ounsell is given in another case? This Embassage is our Prayers and Tears,
Luke 14.31, 32.
and the Sacrifice of a broken, contrite, an^ also new heart; herein also
imitating the wisedom^ of Jacob, And as Jacob,
who knowing h^ Brother was offended (...) him, as he was on h^^ way, Genesis
32.3-6-9-13, etc.
sent Messengers t^ Esau, and also presents, (...) soon as ever he hear^ that
his Brother was coming against him, to mee^ him, and four hundre^ men with
him: but first he earnestly prays un^^ God for his deliverance all which was
done with good success. And Abigail.
Even (...) wise Abigail no soon ^nderstood that evil was ^etermined by David
against her Husband Nabal and all his household, 1 Samuel 26.17, 18, 19-23, 24,
etc.
but he made haste and took (...) present, and sent it away before her -- and
when she ^aw David, She hasted, and lighted off the Ass, and fell before him
on her ^ace, and bowed her self to ^he ground, and by good words and
entreaties she ^acified his wrath for the present, and found that favor with
him, that not ^ong after he made her his wife. Oh happy we, Prove. 22.3.
if we could be so wise, as foreseeing the evil, to hide our selves in time;
to acknowledge Gods mercy, in giving us such fair warning a far off, and t^
make use of it.

But (which is the second consideration) where th^^ mercy is neglected,
Otherwise fear wrath.
and tha^ no man speaks aright, saying, Ier. 8.6.
What have I done? (...) man repents him of hi^ wickedness, This plague is but
begun.
but every ^n turns to his course, as the barred horse rusheth (without all
fear) into the battle; where men go on frowardly in the way of their own
hearts; Esa. 57.17.
there they run upon their own ruin, as it is said, the simple pass on and
are punished. Prove. 22.3.
In this case then (of our impenitencie and obstinacy in sin) we must know
again, And will prove but a beginning and harbinger to greater evils.
That wrath is but gone out, the plague is but begun; that is, what we suffer
now, is but the least part of that which we may and must expect, as elsewhere
it is said, Math. 24.7, 8.
There shall be famines, and pestilences, and earthquakes in diverse places: all
these are (but) the beginning of sorrows. Esaias 28.15-18.
This overflowing scourge will not here stay, (...) shall pass through, and
^ome even unto us, and we shall be trodden down by it, though we secure
ourselvs ^ever so much, and make ^ur covenant with death, and ^ake lies our
refuge, and under falsehood hide our selves, that is, though we trust to our
vain confidences, and secure our selves from such things (as our wit, wealth,
friends, confederates, places of refuge, etc.) which will all fail us in our
greatest need, and prove rods of reed unto us; the plague is yet but begun and
gone out (especially in regard of the whole nation) and we who will not now
be warned when we hear of it a far off, shall have this arrow of God to
reach even to us, and to smite us thorovv the liver: there shall be yet greater
wrath, and the later the greater (when repentance intercedes not) as we are
told of seven Angels having the seven last plagues, Revel. 15.1.
in which is filled up the wrath of God. Where we take no warning by
beginnings, there the lesser judgment is but a presage of much greater, As to
Famine.
whether in the same kind or some other. Famine commonly accompanies the
Pestilence, Anno 1630.
as it did but of late years most grievously in Cambridge, and as it should
much more have prevailed with multitudes of the poorer sort among Of Newcastle.
1636
us, were it not that by Gods blessing and ^he care of our Magistrates in
disposing the revenues of our Chamber weekly, in great sums for their
relief; as also by their and other Inhabitants free loanes, and some good help
and assistance made freely by kind neighbors, they were competently provided
for; not the sick or infected only, but such as are impoverished through want of
employment in their manual Crafts and Calings; yea, after pestilence, where it
does no good neither works any reformation, there follovve^ commonly some
greate^ judgment and destruction^ As we see in Pharaoh an^ his people, against
whom God came, as by diverse lesser plagues, so at length by the death of the
Firstborn, But especially to the Sword.
which we showed (probably at least) to have been by Pestilence: but when
after that stroke, Pharaoh still hardened his heart, and pursued Gods people,
the Lord met with him in the Sea, which swallowed him and his whole army up
all at once most fearfully. So it was with Jerusalem of old, as God did
foretell, and threaten them by Jeremy, (and it is good for us to observe Gods
method in his dealing with others, and to take warning thereby: Ier. 21.6, 7.
) I will smite the inhabitants of this city, both man and beast; they shall dye
of a great pestilence: And afterward, says the Lord, I will deliver Zedekiah
King of Judah and his servants, and his people, and such as are left in this
city, from the pestilence, from the sword, (that is, some lesser hurt by it
from the king of Egypt) and from the famine, into the hand of Nebuchadrezzar
king of Babylon, and into the hand of their enemies, and into the hand of those
that seek their life, and he shall smite them with the edge of the sword; he
shall not spare them, neither have pity, nor have mercy. Pestilence is the
last of Gods merciful rods.
And thus I may call Pestilence the last of Gods merciful rods, which if it be
neglected, it serves for our further conviction, and to make way for merciless
judgments, and for the justification of his severitie in them; seeing we take
no warning by this his last trial of us: Which neglected, is for conviction.
For what may we expect, if when God himself comes apparently against us,
and stands in our way, we submit not to him by humbling our selves, but
will on as it were in despite of him: as we resist him, he will resist us,
and become a consuming fire unto us, as he says, Esa. 27.4.
who would set the briars and thorns against me in battle? I would go
through them, I would burn them together: but of this more in the last motive.
Only now consider, And foreruns greater evils,
we that where beginnings of wrath (as of fire) and former and lesser
strokes and judgments are neglected, there at length a heavier weight of
wrath follows, yea utter destruction: lesser judgments neglected, are but
threatenings and fore runners of greater, and as the laying of the Axe to the
root of the trees; or as the lopping of them and digging at the roots of them;
after which if they continue still barren and unfruitful, then follows that
irrevocable sentence, Luke 13.7.
cut it down. Whatsoever judgments have gone before, they are all as nothing,
and make way for greater to follovv, as the lesser wedge for the greater.
Thus said the Lord to Israel of old; Isa 9.12, 13, 14.
The Syrians before, and tho Philistines behind, and they shall devour Israel
with open mouth: for all this his anger is not turned away, but his hand is
stretched out still; for the people turns not unto him that smites them,
neither do they seek the Lord of hosts: Therefore will the Lord cut off from
Israel head and tail, branch and rush in one day. So he had almost done with
us, as is said in the Powder Furnace, And so calls on us in time to turn to
the Lord.
yet has been graciously pleased both to respite us then, and since to come
toward us leisurely by slow paces, and approaches. Now seeing we will not
seek to pacify him at the first going out of wrath, and when the Plague is,
as yet but only begun, what may we expect but that, having already sent the
Pestilence into the land, Ezekiel. 14.19, 20.
he pour out his fury upon it in blood, to cut off from it man and beast, as
he threatened his people, and when no Intercessor should be accepted for them.

Let us of this place especially think of this now, On us especially of this
place.
when God at the first going out of his wrath among us, makes greater speed
then ordinarily he has done here, yea or else where in our land formerly in
any one place: Anno 1624. 1625.
so that in the mother city eleven years ago, there died not so many of the
Pestilence in their 120. parishes within and without the liberties, for the
first 3. months (though before all was done, it became the greatest that any
man living could remember, and greater I take then their general bill, for the
year would make it, unless you will allow above eighteen thousand to die,
(in plague-time) of ordinary diseases in one year.) I say there died then not
so many there in the first three months (by their bills) as with us in our
four parishes, within the space of fourteen or fifteen days, S. 114.
and that only within liberties. And considering how since it increases,
rages rather, runs and spreads like wildfire, will ^it not concern us then
to use speed? which if Aaron had not done here, (who being commanded to go
quickly unto the Congregation, did run into it) what had become of the whole
Congregation (consisting of diverse hundred thousands) which God threatened to
consume as in a moment, when for all his haste, running in at the first going
out of wrath, and at the very beginning of the Plague, before he got to do his
office, and make the atonement, there were dead fourteen thousand and seven
hundred? how soon, yea how justly might God make a speedy riddance of us all,
by this or some other worse plague, if his patience were not much, yea
infinitely more then our haste? Let us therefore take that (or the like in
effect) spoken to us, which was spoken by the Lord to his people of old, when
for their sin he justly plagued them: Exodus 32.35.
Ye are a stiff-necked people, I will come up into the midst of thee in a
moment, and consume thee: therefore now put off thy ornaments from thee (that
is, betake thy self to fasting and to ^rayer) that I may know that to do unto
thee: This was accordingly, and ^orthvvith done by them. Now for us I advise,
that what we do, it be done ^peedily, yea and diligently, Ezra 7.2^-23.
as King Artaxerxes decreed in a like case, for why (says he, though an
heathen) should there be wrath against the Realm of the King and his Sons?

Doubtless, this motion and pace of Gods justice being natural to him, (as
well as that of mercy) is swifter at the later end tha^ at the beginning, and I
am afraid we shall so find it (...) we take not our time out (...) hand for
prevention. Nearer sudden destruction w^ of this nation cannot be (to escape)
then we were: Novem. 5.160 5.
suffer we once his long patience to turn into fury, and then expect we no
after-warnings: some one blas^ of hellish, popish sulphurous malice, or some
one stroke of divine justice some other way, shall do the deed, and dispatch
us all at once. But of this point of doctrine, and of the proceeding of Gods
wrath against obstinate, obdurate and impenitent sinners, even till he utterly
destroy and consume them, I have selfwhere treated largely. Prognostics
Divine: or Treat: on Esaias 9.12.13.
My conclusion here shall be ^y wish, The Lord in mer^ie avert and turn such
^eavie wrath from us, by converting and turning us, by the power of his grace,
unto himself. Amen.

CHAP. IX.
This wrath and pestilence is from the Lord, and therefore, howsoever his
Prophets may be despised, yet God himself is not to be dallyed withal, whose
greatness and terror should cause us seek peace wit^ him in time.
A fourth Motive to speedy repentance, is to consider God the Author of this
plague.
THe fourth and last Motive from the text, i^ briefly to be considere^ from the
Author of the wrath, which is here sai^ to be gone forth from the Lord. It
is the Lord the^ we have to deal withal and who now has to de^^ with us:
therefore it is no^ to dally with him. We may perhaps presume o^ impunity from
men, whe^^ we offend them, and hope by gifts, friends, flatteries, and fained
submission to assuage their displeasure, or it may be when Gods faithful
servants discover ^ur sins, Who confirms the word of his Servants.
and denounce judg^ents against us for the ^^me (though they do it according
to Gods word, ^et) we can count their ^ords but wind, and ^^e^selves lying
Prophets, ^r otherwise to speak as ^et on by those we alike ^^ate: or we
threaten and ^ome even with them for their boldness and sauciness, ^^r at least
we can with^raw our selves from them, and hear them no more, and so at once
seek their ^isgrace, as not worthy ^o be heard, and keep our ^elves (as we
think) out ^f the lash of their words. But what? can we thus d^ with the Lord
himself when he comes to perform the word of his servants, Psalm. 149.7, 8, 9.
(...) execute vengeance upon the heathen, and punishmen^ upon the people, to
bind the^^ Kings with chains, an^ their Nobles with fetters (...) iron: to
execute upon the^^ the judgment written? who as he will do nothing (in the
kind) but he reveals h^ secret unto his servants t^^ Prophets; Amos 3.7.
so he confirme^^ the word of his servan^^ (both in good and evil) a^^
performs the counsel (...) his Messengers. Men man then belie the Lord, Isa.
44.26.
an^ say it is not he, neither sh^^^ evil come upon us, neither ^^all we see
sword nor fa^ine: Ier. 5.12, 13, 14.
And the Prophets (...) all become wind, and the lord is not in them -- But
what says the Lord for the ^ncouragement of his ser^ant Jeremy: And will be
acknowledged to be the author, as of other evils.
Because ye ^^eake this word, behold I ^ill make my words in thy ^outh fire,
and this people ^ood, and it shall devour them. Lo I will bring a na^ion upon
you, etc. It is good for us then (if we ^ave neglected the word of Gods
servants former^y) not to neglect the performance of it by God himself, but to
become wise for after times: who among you will give ears this? Isay 42.23,
24, 25.
who will hearken a^^ hear for the time to come^^ who gave Jacob for a spoile^
and Israel to the robbers? did not the Lord, he against whom we have sinned?
Therefore he has poured upon him the fury of his anger etc. Oh let it not be
sai^ of us as there it follows* And it has set him on fire round about, So
of Pestilence.
yet he knew not; and it burned him, ye^ he la^d it not to heart. Far be
this stupidity from u^ at this time. Let us consider then that this wrath i^
gone out from the Lord. (...) is he against whom we have sinned, and whom
we have provoked, and ^^erefore there is no dal^ing with him, as is said:
(...) is he himself that ^^mes against us; Habak. 3.5.
Before ^m goes the Pestilence, and ^^^rning coals (or diseases) ^^e forth at
his feet. Now ^^e we stronger then he? ^^e we able in our sins (...) stand
in his way? he ^^th already, often before ^^d now also sent the Pe^^lence
among us after the ^anner of Egypt -- yea he ^^th overthrown some of (...), as
God overthrew So^om and Gomorrah, and ^ee were as a firebrand ^uckt out of the
burning: ^t have ye not returned to me, Who is mighty in strength, and not to
be dallied withal, or withstood.
says the Lord: No^ hear what God says us as once to Israel: The^^fore thus
will I do un^^ thee, O Israel, O Englan^ o city, o town: (how even as unto
Sodom, the was overthrown as in moment) and because I wi^^ do this unto thee,
Amos 4.10, 11, 12, 13.
prepare^ meet thy God O Israel. Th^^ is our duty then, of vvhic^ we also
formerly heard but why are we thus t^ prepare? that follows For lo, he
that forms the mountains, and create^ the wind (or spirit) and d^clareth
unto man what is h^ thought, that makes the morning darkness, an^ treads
upon the high places of the earth, the Lord, the God of hosts is his name.
Where he invests himself with many titles of greatness, power, yea and
terror, and all to enforce the aforesaid duty of repentance and humiliation
upon us, letting us know who it is that ^hreatens us, who it is that ^s gone
out against us; no ^ther then this mighty God, this Lord of hosts, who has all
creatures in ^eaven and earth at his ^ommand, and ready to ^xecute his
vengeance, and righteous judgments ^n all impenitent sinners; so that when
once he shows his displeasure, its in vain either to seek shelter or help
from them, or not to fear vengeance from them, as instruments of his wrath,
whose are the mountains, the wind, and all other creatures: so that the
mountains shall no^ save nor hide from hi^ wrath, when it is on^^ gone forth
in fury; as i^ Noah his flood, Neither is there any fleeing from him.
when the highest hills, and mo^^ towering mountains could not shelter them that
fle^ thither for refuge, but th^^ the waters of his wra^^ did overtake and
swee^ them all away: and (...) wind, which God sent out shall meet with
disobedient Jonas, who would have fled from Gods presence, and the storm shall
teach him obedience. Nay, we know God can, and often does arm base and weak
creatures, against proud and impenitent sinners, yea their own friends and
confederates (in whose help and assistance they trust) nay sometimes their
own selves against themselves, as On Amos 4.12.13 p. ^26. etc. and 156. etc.
In l. 3. Job. 9.4.
elsewhere I show more largely.

He is mighty in strength; who has hardened himself against him and has
prospered? And it would be observed, God to humble us shows his power.
that when God calls men to humiliation for their sins, he often shows his
power and terriblenesse by some, not only description of it (as when he
humbled Job, by asking him, Job 40.6.7-9
-- Have thou an arm like God? can thou thunder with a voice like him? and
by showing him his great power in the Behemoth and Leviathan, Both by words and
works.
or in the Elephant and Whale: the effect whereof in Job was an humble
submission of himself unto God; Job 42.1.2.3.4, 5, 6.
) but by works o^ his power, as by sending thunder, storms, and great rain,
by which he^ brought his people of old to confess their sin in asking them a
King, in distrust, and with rejection of Gods government: 1. Sam 1^.16.17.18.19.
so by a great rain which he sent, the better to prepare the people to
repentance, and reformation of their ways, Esia 10.9.
when Esra had assembled them to that end. It is said, -- All the people sat
in the street of the house of God trembling because of this matter, and for the
great rain. Yea, God would so have prepared us of this nation, as may be
remembered, by sending very July 16. being Saturday, 1625.
fearful thunder and rain, a little before the July 20.
first day of that solemn humiliation enjoined some eleven years ago. And
what may we think God would have had us do, as then, so when before that he
met with us (or was making toward us) in our way of Security by the Spanish
Armado, Ann. 1588.
and mighty Navy by sea, and by the popish and hellish Plot of powder: Ann.
1605.
and so in our way of excess by scarcity and famine: and in the way of our
other many sins by this heavy judgment of Pestilence, both formerly and
now. Shall we yet prooceed on in our former security, excess, and all our
other provocations of the divine Majesty? will we needs try our strength with
him? Behold, says God, the flight shall perish from the swift, Amos 2.14 15.16.
and the strong shall not strengthen his force, neither shall the mighty
deliver himself, neither shall he stand that handles the Bow -- And he that
is courageous among the mighty, shall flee away naked in that day, says the
Lord. The like may the Lord now say to us, concerning whatsoever it is we
place our confidence in, whether we harden our selves against him in our pride
and obstinacy, or whether we hope to escape this his hand by fleeing from
places infected; Instead of fleeing from him.
no, there is no flying from him in our sins, neither any resistance of him,
whither shall we flee from him? he is a consuming fire to sinners, Hebr. 10.
Isa. 42 25.
yea a fire round about circling you in: which way soever you run, it is
still into the fire, and your name shall be as Pashurs was, Ier. 20.1.2.3
Magormissabib, Fear round about: And how shall we withstand or resist his
power? And of resisting him.
Shall we not perish by his hand? Is he not the Lord of Hosts? Who would set
the Briars and Thorns against him in battle? Isa. 27.4.
would he not go through them, and burn them together? What then is to be
done? We are in time to seek to appeaze him.
Let us not with Adam, think to flee from God, but to him by humble
submission: If we flee, let it be from his Justice to his Mercy: If we flee
not to his Mercy, go whither we will, we fall upon his Justice: Appeal we
then from God, just to the same God, merciful and gracious in Christ: By the
examples of
for it is the same God that smites in his wrath, and who must heal in his
mercy. Shim^i*
Or if not this; then let us consider whether we be able to meet this great
King coming against us in blood, and in fury; if we be not (and who is?)
then, as has been already said, Luke 14.31.32.
while he is yet a great way off, let us send an Embassage before us, and
desire conditions of Peace, and make peace with him, for which we have his
gracious promise; Isa 27.5.
and herein follow we the wisdom (as of Jacob and Abigail, 2 Samuel 19.1^-19.
etc.
so) of Shemei meeting David with a present, and humble entreaties and
confessions, after he saw him returned as reinvested in his Kingdom: And so
of Rahab, Rahab.
who hearing of Gods mighty works in Egypt, Hebr. 11.
sought peace long before with Gods people: which in her was a work of Faith:
The Gibeonites.
as in the Gibeonites, of Wisdom, who hearing of the fame of the God of
Israel, and of that he did in Egypt, sought peace with Joshua, had it, Josh.
9.3.4-6-9.10.11-15. Josh. 11.19 20.
and so saved their lives; which all the rest refusing to do, as hardening
themselves in their own strength, they all perished. And a like fearful sign
and presage of destruction it is now to so many of us, as, when Gods Wrath is
gone out against us, and the Plague is begun, do neither seek peace with God,
nor yet will accept of it, being offered to us: Surely it is of the Lord to
harden such men's hearts, that they should (as it were by their obstinacy in
Sin) come in battle against him, that he might destroy them utterly, and that
they might have no favor, but that he might destroy them, as was said of those
Kings of Canaan, who neither sought, Deuteronomy. 20.10.11.12.13. and 17.
nor accepted such conditions of Peace as were offered them.

CHAP. X.
The Conclusion of the Motives, urging a speedy performance of the duty of
Humiliation, both publicly and privately; and that from the practice of the
Heathen, in case of Pestilence.
What now remains (the Premises considered) but that we, every one in his
place, set our selves to our duty. The Authors wish, that all would seek to
appeaze this wrath.
It is our case now: our Sins have provoked God, and he is ready to consume us
all as in a moment: yea, wrath is gone forth from the Lord, the Plague is begun
among us. We have the Lords direction already what to do, (which we shall
consider hereafter) as Moses here had. How then is it to be wished that Moses
did command Aaron to run in with his Censer, that Authority, and the supreme
Magistrat^ did injoyne the Priests of the Lord, Aaron and his Sons, speedily,
without any longer delay, to run in; and that they, and all other, whether
Magistrates or other, that have any Incense or other Sacrifice to offer, would
accordingly, speedily perform their Office, and use all possible means, with
like haste, to stay the further proceeding of this great wrath of God: Both
Magistrates.
The Magistrate by speedy execution of Gods righteous judgments on the wicked,
with noble Phineas (which, Psalm. 106.30.
if it either had been universally and unpartially performed; or yet were so
done, we never needed to fear such wrath from God, or the continuance of it:
Ministers.
) The Priest, and Ministers of the Lord, with Prayers and solemn
Supplications in the public Assemblies, and with godly Instructions,
Admonitions, and Directions given the people; yea, and the people, and
generally all, by unfeigned Humiliation of themselves, And others
and Reformation, in some good measure, of things amiss, and by such means as
shall, upon other Texts and Grounds of Scripture more particularly and fully be
named, if God will.

Such things should be done I know, during the time of Gods patience, for the
prevention of his judgments: As the Israelites in Egypt, having cause to fear
Gods plagues for their Idolatry in Egypt, Ezekiel. 20.7, 8. sought to turn them
away, namely Sword and Pestilence, and to prevent them by Humiliation and
Sacrifice (though not within the land of Egypt for special reason, Exodus 5.3.
Exodus 8.25, 26, 27.) Yet if the Plague, and breaking out of wrath prevent our
Humiliation, And that speedily.
we must defer our Humiliation no longer: otherwise, how soon may this
spreading evil, and overflovving Scourge, or some other judgment sent to back
it, in Gods just wrath make an end of all (save that God will have a remnant in
whom he will glorify his Mercy, and preserve his Church.) This is as the
breaking out of fire: or overflowing of waters, unto which, way and passage is
not long to be given, least the evil, which at the first, by a timely care,
might have been prevented, grow so great, that it exceed the power and
strength of man, to withstand or resist it.

Whatsoever we then do in this kind, Lest we come too late.
it would be done speedily, and in time, otherwise we may come too late, even
when neither our own, nor other men's prayers (though never so holy) will be
accepted for us, and when God will not be entreated for ^s. See this in Gods
dea^ing with the Jews: Pray ^ot for this people for their ^ood, Ier. 14.11.12.
said the Lord to Jeremy. When they fast, I will not hear their cry, and when
they offer a burnt offering, and an oblation, I will not accept them: But I
will consume them by the Sword, and by the Famine, and by the Pestilence. Ezekiel.
14.19.20.
So in Ezekiel: If I send a Pestilence into that land, and power out my fury
upon it in blood, to cut off from it man and beast: Though Noah, Daniel and Job
were in it, as I live, says the Lord God, they shall deliver neither (...)
cleave unto the Lord according to his word in a perpetual covenant. This the
Lord expects from the whole nation, when his wrath is but toward them: Zephan.
2.1, 2,
Gather your selue together, yea gather together O nation not desired before
the decree bring forth, before the day pass (...) the chafe, and 3.
before the fierce anger of the Lord come upon you, before the day of the Lords
anger come upon you. Howsoever, if this be no^ done publicly, it must no^ be
neglected in private by the meek of the earth Seek ye the Lord all y^^ meek
of the earth which have wrought his judgments: seek righteousness, seek
meekness: it may be ye shall be hid in the day of the Lords anger.

It is a wonderful thing, Examples to move us,
that now when Gods anger is so manifested, and his wrath revealed from heaven,
men should so little seek to pacify his wrath, and should show themselves so
little touched with these evident tokens of his displeasure, never much seeking
the means by which the cause of his wrath against us might be made known unto
us, nay wholly impatient of such discovery when by Gods faithful messengers it
is in some good measure made. Both of the Godly,


Shall I send such to the godly examples of good and holy King David, 2 Samuel
21.1, 2, etc.
who in a famine of three years enquired of the Lord for what and whose sin
it was sent, which, when it was told him, he punished, and so put away the
evil? or of tenderhearted Josiah, who conceiving by the book of the Law,
that wrath was due to his people, and toward them, presently dispatched
honorable messengers to Huldah, 2 Chronicles. 34.19, 20, etc.
(...) prophetess to enquire o^ the Lord for him and the people, concerning
the words of the book which he caused to be read in a solemn assembly, and
renewed his Covenant with God? If such examples prevail not with us, let us
receive reproof and shame (in this our sloth and negligence) from the example
of the very heathen. And of the Heathen.
Illiad. 1.
Homer the Poet brings in Achilles advising the Greeks, Who have, in case of
Pestilence, sought to their Gods by solemn Supplications.
in a time of a sore Pestilence, to enquire the cause thereof from God by some
Prophet, or Priest, or Dreamer of dreams. (These being footsteps of those three
ways, by which Israel of old had Oracles, or answers from God; namely by
Dreams, by Vrim, that is the Priest, with Vrim and Thummim, Numb. 27.21. and
by Prophets, see 1 Samuel 28.6, 7.

Live. l. 3.
And Livie tells us, that in case of common plague (or other danger) the Romans
were by public authority called out, -- Ad id quod sua mala quemque coge^ant.
and commanded with their wives and children, to make supplication to their
gods, for, and according to that, which their own proper sins and evils
compelled them: and thus filling all their Temples, Stratae passim matres
criminibus Templa verrentes, v^^ niam Irarum coelestium, (...) nemque pesti
exposcunt; their Matrons prostrate on the ground, and sweeping their Temples
with the hair of their head, sought pardon, And Sacrifices of their children.
and the favor of their offended and angry gods, and an end to be put unto the
Pestilence. Many such like things has Livie concerning their Supplications,
even for many days together, upon occasion of war, and public evils and
dangers, as I show A word in Season or Englands Summons, on Josh. 7. ver. 8, 9.
Virgil: Aeneid. lib. 4. and lib. 3.
elsewhere. So Virgil: -- Principio de^ubra adeunt pacemque per a^as exquirunt.
And elsewhere, -- Exorant pacem Divum: id est, inquit No^ius, propitiationem.

The first thing they use to do, is to frequent their Temples, and from Altar
to Altar to seek Peace, that is Propitiation. So Plautus. Plaut. in Mercator:
Act. 4. sc. 1.
So the Carthaginians, when they were plagued with Pestilence Aris impuberes
admoveru^ pacem Deorum sanguine c^rum exposcentes, Justin: lib. 18.
as Iusti^ relates; That is, as the Scripture expresses the like practice of
the degenerate Jews, Psalm. 106.37.
They sacrif^ced their sons and daughter unto devils, seeking atonement with
these their go^ by the blood of their chi^dren: of which practice (...) the
Heathen, in sacrifici^^ their children to the devil; (in case especially of
distress) more Isreal's Idolatry, in sacrificing their children, etc. on Psalm.
106.37.
elsewhere.

Now shall the Heathen ^n case of Pestilence, desire to know from God the true
cause thereof, that they might offer him acceptable Sacrifice, and shall they
accordingly by solemn Supplications, and all expressions of sorrow and
humility, seek the favor of their gods, and that with the blood of their
only children; and shall we Christians, in like case of Pestilence, be so far
from searching into the true causes of the same, as to take it ill, and not
willingly (...) of his wrath, and averting of his judgments. If now we ask
what these Means or Remedies are (as it is most needful we be aright
directed herein) I shall endeavor at this time, at least in the general, to
show. And because we are all of us apt to use such such means as most agree
with our own liking and fancies, I shall strive to give satisfaction in this
point, both negatively and affirmatively.

1. Let us generally know that the means of pacifying Gods wrath, Difference
of means.
are no means of our own prescribing, or which man's wisdom directs unto.
There are means I know which may and ought be used, in case of Pestilence (as
of other public evils) but ought not to be rested in: there are again Means
which are merely of man's devising; and therefore such as may neither be rested
in, nor so much as used, especially so as man prescribes them, being in that
regard less or more sinful and unlawful. Lastly, there are means of
pacifying Gods wrath, and of avoiding his judgments, or at least of escaping
the evil, sting or hurt of them, which may and ought be used, yea and being
rightly used may be rested in, so far as a blessing, by virtue of Gods promise,
may be expected from God one way or other.

1. Some means may be used but not rested in.
1. The common rule of the world, as also of Physicians in case of Pestilence,
is to flee, or to withdraw a man's self quickly from places infected, Pestis
tempore fuge cito, procul, ^arde revertaris. Marsil. Ficin. Epidem. antidot.
cap. 1.
yea to remove far off, and not to return hastily, but at leisure. This I
deny not to be lawful, yea necessary, where, and so far as men's callings,
especially public, will permit them. How far public persons, especially
Ministers, who take themselves charged with cure of souls, whether from God
alone, or from man also, may withdraw themselves in case of grievous and raging
Pestilence, Flight o^ removal from pla^^ infected.
I rather leave to casuists and their own consciences to determine. Conscience
I suppose will not so far, and so soon dispense with some in this case as
man will. Yet how far God and conscience will dispense with humane fears,
where he either denies such a measure of faith, or would overcome al fears
and yet not presume, or where he both opens a way, ^^w far a ^^ister ^^ing
^eerly a Lecturer) may flee.
and some other way calls a man out, and restraines him for a season, from the
ordinary and appointed place of Gods worship and exercise of his function; or
how far such an one having otherwise no pastoral charge, may both with faith
and a good conscience, during apparent hazard to his person, withdraw himself,
and so reserve himself to better times, merely out of respect to their good,
who for the present seem a while neglected; I leave this also to others
judgment, least in mine own case I may seem too partial, who hitherto have
been as much, if not more guided by the judgment, yea importunity also of
many godly and unpartial Christians (and so, I take, by direction from God)
then by mine own, either judgment, or will at the first. Only David's case is
made by many here considerable of all Christians, whether Teachers or others;
who, in time of pestilence was directed by God to purchase Ornans threshing
floor, 1 Chronicles. 21.14-18, 19,-26-28, 29, 30.
and there to build an Altar, and there to sacrifice (for the present) and that
acceptably (...) whilst that hedge or breach is not made up, its in vain to
think, by bodily flight, to escape or flee from Gods wrath, when it is once
gone out. We must either humble our selves for our Sins, Which is, to leave
their Sins behind them.
or never account our selves safe by fleeing. Pestilence is sent for our sins,
to separate between us and them: therefore, if ye will flee, either leave
your Sin behind you as a Sacrifice to that destroying Nemesis, or to Gods
vengeance, or look not to escape. Redeem the life both of body and soul by
parting with your Sins, even such as are dearest most delightsome, most
gainefull, or otherwise advantageous to you in worldly respects. And imitate
herein the wisdom of the Beaver, which, hunted for his stones (which formerly
have been accounted of more price than his skin or wool now) and finding
himself hotly pursued, bites off the same, and leaves them to the Huntsman, as
a ransom of his life. Now it is not our life which this Nimrod and pursuer,
the Pestilence, comes for; it is only our right eye of offense, or our right
hand or foot, that is, some sin or lust yet unmortified, which is as dear to us
as our right eye, or as gainefull as our right hand, or as useful otherwise in
our sinful aims, as our right foot. Let us but mortify these, and utterly,
in purpose of heart, resolution of will, and in a true hatred, abandon them,
then may we with more comfort and confidence flee from the contagion of
pestilence, and more securely cast our selves into the arms of Gods
providence; but not till then. It will little avayle us to be spared and
respited a while, seeing God, when we think all perils past, Otherwise there
is no fleeing from Gods wrath.
can either call us to an after reckoning in the same kind, or in some other.
Look we into the same Chapter, and we shall see this verified. The whole
Congregation of the children of Israel had made themselves some way guilty in
the rebellion of Korah, insomuch as God was ready to have consumed then in a
moment, Numb. 16.21, 22,
had not Moses and Aaron interceded and prevailed for many of them; Well, the
Congregation (according to Gods appointment) get them up from about the
Tabernacle of Korah, 24, 26,
Dathan and Abiram, 27,
on every side: after which the earth opened her mouth and swallowed these up
-- who perished from among the Congregation. 32, 33,
34,
Now all Israel that were round about them fled at the cry of them: for they
said, lest the earth swallow us up also. Thus they flee further off, and seem
more safe then before. Yea, but they repented not of their sin, by which they
had deserved like destruction: they left not their rebellion behind them when
they fled: and therefore though thus far they were safe, yet observe what
presently follows; And there came out a fire from the Lord, 35,
and consumed the two hundred and fifty men (who were Princes of the assembly
-- men of renown) that offered incense. verse 2.
Lo these gained but little (but even a little time) by their fleeing from the
former judgment: And what did many of the rest of them, who also fled from the
opening of the earth, and escaped this fire? first it is said, verse 41.
On the morrow all the Congregation murmured against Moses and Aaron: Lo, they
carry their old sin of murmuring with them, and this brought new wrath upon
many of them (al deserving it) even the Plague in my text, 45,
in which there died fourteen thousand and seven hundred, 49.
after which, the rest returning to their murmurings and other sins, were all
destroyed in the wilderness, Number. 21.6.
what by fiery Serpents, what by other plagues. and chapter 25.9.
God has variety of plagues to meet with sinners, with whom it shall be, As if
a man should flee from a Lion, Amos 5.19.
and a Bear met him, or went into the house and leaned his hand on the wall,
and a Serpent bit him, concerning whom the Lord thus threatens: I will slay the
last of them with the sword: and 9.1.2.3.4.
he that flees of them shall not flee away; and he that escapes of them
shall not be delivered: though they dig into hell, thence shall mine hand take
them: though they climb up to heaven, thence will I bring them down: And
though they hide themselves in the top of Carmel, I will search and take them
out thence, and so on. Thus says the Lord by Isaiah: Isa. 24.17.18.
Fear, and the pit and the snare are upon thee, O Inhabitant of the earth: And
it shall come to pass, that he who flees from the noise of the fear shall
fall into the pit, and he that comes up out of the midst of the pit, shall
be taken in the snare. The truth is, when God will accomplish his fury, (as
certainly he will o^ all obstinate and impenitent sinners:) It is not
farnesse off from places o^ danger which will secure a man: Ezekiel. 6.12. and
7.15.
He that is far of shall die of the Pestilence and he that is near shall
fa^^ by the sword, and he that remains and is besieged shall die by the
famine.

Thus we see, whils^ men by occasion of God judgments, as now this e^
Pestilence, do not humble themselves for the^^ sins, there is no safety to
them by fleeing: which I have the more largely handled, because this is that we
most usually, both flee to, and also rest in. The like I may, and do say
concerning Antidotes, Preservatives.
Powders, Drinks, and whatsoever other outward and lawful means are used as
Preservatiues against the Pestilence; and so concerning the diligence and ^are
of Magistrates, As also the care of Magistrates in outward things.
in keeping the unclean from the ^leane, in providing for ^he relief of the
poorer ^ort, of such as are infe^ted or so suspected, and the ^ike. This,
though otherwise commendably practiced, yet is not enough, it is not to be
rested in, unless withal, and in the first place or chiefly other means
(such as shall be named) be used. Care in the one is not so commendable, as
negligence in the other is represensible and blame worthy. All such outward
means used, i^ but a beginning at the wrong end, and from effecting perfect
and sound cure, especially if men care rest there, and nothing else be done for
the pac^fying of Gods wrath.

4. Riches are of little use here.
4. To tell rich men the world, that the wealth will not secure them from Gods
wrath, whilst they live in sin, in oppression, in riotous courses, or the
like, without repentance, I hold it needless. I suppose their own consciences
tell them so much (unless wholly besotted:) man perhaps by gifts and bribes
may be pacified, as Esau toward Jacob, etc. but not God: when God has to do
with rich men; Ezekiel. 7.19.
They shall cast their silver in the streets, and their gold shall be removed
(or be for a separation or uncleanness:) their silver and their gold shall not
be able to deliver them in the day of the wrath of the Lord. Great men then,
in their sins are no more secure or safe from wrath then others.

2. 2. Some means are neither to be rested in nor used.
Of the second sort of means, the popish manner of pacifying Gods wrath, is
first briefly to be noted, and to be taken heed of. They seek to pacify the
wrath of God by works of penance of their own devising, as by whipping of
themselves, ^. As pop^sh works of penance
going barefoot, or on bare knees, by wearing hairy shirts, going on pilgrimage
and the like. So by offering sums of money at such or such religious places,
etc. of some of which their Council of Trent says, Sess. 14. cap. 8.9.
that there was never any safer way found out in the Church for the averting of
Gods vengeance; as I find observed also by an other on this my text.

2. 2. Heathenish sacrif^ces of chi^dren.
Much less will heathenish practices (too much imitated of old by Gods people)
stay Gods hand when it is stretched out. For we heard how the heathen in case
of Pestilence, and of Gods displeasure, did betake themselves to their Idol
gods, not with prayers only and supplications, prostrating themselves, and with
other sacrifices, but with the sacrificing of their own children.

But of this later sort of means, the Lord may, and doubtless will say to
hypocrites, When ye come to appear before me, Isa 1 12. Ier. 7.21.20.23.
who has required this at your hand to tread my courts? And -- put your burnt
offerings unto your sacrifices, and eat flesh: for I spoke not unto your
fathers, nor commanded them, concerning burnt offerings and sacrifices: no? who
did then? but this thing commanded I them (that is, this thing chiefly without
which, the other was but as a dead carcass) saying, Obey my voice -- and walk
ye in all the ways, that I have commanded you, that it may be well unto you.

3. 3. Means to be used on which we may expect a blessing.
If then indeed we would be aright directed what to do at such times, when
wrath is gone out against us, let us receive our direction from God himself,
and from his word, where he makes his mind known unto us, for otherwise, Romans
11.34.
Who has known his mind? Such is our blindness and ignorance, that we cannot
know what service is pleasing to him, unless he himself make his will known
unto us. As then we cannot see the light of the Sun by any other light than
that which the Sun it self affords us; no more can we know what will please
or appease him being angry, further than he has been pleased to make it known
unto us. And this is but reason: for we expect the like from our own
Servants, that they do what service we appoint them, and as we will have them
do it, and not what, and as they please themselves.

These are such as God himself directs unto.
Now God, partly by Precept, and by way of Condition, partly by way of Reproof,
whilst he complains of the neglect of what he expects, (besides the examples
and practice of his Saints on earth in like case) lets us know what we should
do when his hand is gone out against us, whether by Pestilence, as now with
us, or otherwise. To which end I shall set before you some pregnant places of
Scripture scatteringly, out of which we will bring the chief duties to a
Method, Here propounded, 1. Sea^^^r^^ly
which here we will only propound, (not lading this Text with more then it
will naturally bear) but prosecute, if God will, on more proper and particular
Grounds of Scripture.

Hear then, first how God answers hypocrites, According to several texts of
Scripture.
and such as pretend themselves to be vvilling to be at any cost, and to do
any thing to please and appease him when he is angry. Michah. 6.^.7.
Wherewith shall I come before the Lord, and bow my self before the high God?
Shall I come before him with burnt offerings, with calves of a year old? Will
the Lord be pleased with thousands of rams, or with ten thousands of rivers
of oil? Shall I give my first borne for my transgression, the fruit of my
body for the Sin of my soul? Now hear Gods answer: He has showed thee O
man what is good, Verse 8.
and what does the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy,
and to walk humbly with thy God; (or to humble thy self to walk with thy
God.) And then it follows, (showing this was to be done especially when God
showed his displeasure against them.) The Lords voice cries unto the City,
Verse 9.
and the man of wisdom shall see thy name: hear ye the rod, and who has
appointed it.

See again what God requires of us in such case of his judgments, whether
threatened or inflicted. -- I will reprove thee says God, etc. Psalm. 50.21.22.
Now consider this, yet that forget God, lest I tear you in pieces, Hagg. 1
5.6.
etc. And elsewhere, Consider your ways: ye have sown much, and bring in
little; ye eat, but ye have not enough, etc. thus says the Lord of hosts
(again) consider your ways. Mich 6.7.


Consider again, upon what condition God promises mercy, and deliverance
from captivity: If they shall confess their iniquity, Levit. 26.40.41.42.
and the iniquity of their fathers, etc. And that also they have walked
contrary unto me, and that (...) also have walked contrary unto them, and have
brought the^ into the land of their enemies: If then their uncircumcised hearts
be humbled, and they the^ accept of the punishment of their iniquity: then
will I remember my cocovena^t with Jacob, etc. and I will remember the land.

Now, upon consideration, and confession of sin, the Lord looks also, we should
turn to him, by true and hearty Sorrow and Repentance, according to that his
exhortation by his Prophet Joel; Therefore also now, Joel 2.12.13
says the Lord, turn you even to me with all your heart, and with fasting, and
with weeping, and with mourning: and rent your heart and not your garment, and
turn unto the Lord your God. The want hereof, in time of Gods judgments, the
Lord both complains of, and also further threatens: -- For all this, Isa.
9.12, 13.
his anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still: for the
people turns not unto him that smites them, neither do they seek the Lord
of Hosts. Amos 4.10, 11,
So elsewhere, I have sent the Pestilence among you, after the manner of Egypt,
your young men have I slain with the Sword, etc. yet have ye not returned unto
me says the Lord -- and 12.
Therefore thus I will do unto thee, O Israel: and because I will do this
unto thee, prepare to meet thy God, O Israel.

In turning to God, he would have us turn from our wicked ways, and seek
his face and favor, not returning again to our former evil ways, but
renewing, and also keeping our Covenant of Faith, Obedience, and a more holy
walking with him than formerly, taking it ill when it is otherwise. Ier. 8.6.
I hearkened and heard, but they spoke not aright: no man repented him of his
wickedness, saying, What have I done? Every one turned to his course, as the
horse rusheth into the battle. Therefore, that he may show us mercy, he
will first have us Cast away from us all our transgressions, Ezekiel. 18.31.
whereby we have transgressed, and make us a new heart, and a new spirit.
Otherwise, he should seem to favor us in our Sins: Therefore, when God meant
to deliver his people out of the hand of the Philistines, he thus speaks to
them by Samuel the Prophet, If ye do return unto the Lord with all your
hearts, 1 Samuel 7.3,
then put away the strange gods, and verse 4, 5, 6,
and Ashtaroth from among you; and prepare your hearts unto the Lord, and serve
him only: and he will deliver you out of the hand of the Philistines. This
they did, and withal, wept abundantly, fasted, and prayed, and confessed their
Sins, and were accepted. So before the Lord would grant de^iverance by Gideon,
he would have him Destroy Baals altar which his father had, Judge. 6.25, 26.
and cut down the ^rove that was by it, and ^uild an altar to the Lord.

The reason is, God will show mercy, favor and ^eliverance to none in their
Sins. He hears not ^inners; Yet he also looks, that in our afflictions we
do call upon him; Psalm. 50.15.
Call upon me in the day of trouble; I will deliver thee. And, Iam 5.13.
Is any among you afflicted? Let him pray.

Now with our prayers, and purposes of reformation we must renew Covenant with
God, and be careful for ever after to perform it. This we are taught by the
godly example of Nehemiah and the Jews; who, by the mouth of the Levites,
having made a religious confession, as of Gods goodness, so of their
wickedness; and having in the^^ own persons separate^ themselves from all
strangers, Nehem. 9.1, 2, 3-
and confessed their Sins, they conclude all by ^ntring into solemn co^enant
with God, saying ^n their great distress in which they were, and 38.
And because of all this, we make a sure Covenant, and write it, and our
Princes, Levites and Priests seal unto it. And the rest of the people -- who
had understanding, and chap. 10.28, 29, 30, etc.
separated themselves from the people of the lands, unto the Law of God, clave
to their Brethren, their Nobles, and ^ntred into a curse, and into ^n oath, to
walk in Gods Law -- and to observe and ^oe all the Commandments of the lord.
Now the points of their Covenant were* Not to join in marriage with the people
of the land, not to buy ware or victual on the Sabbath day, and to charge
themselves yearly with the third part of a sh^kell for the service of the
house of God, and concerning first fruits and other offerings.

Thus King Hezekiah when the wrath of the Lord was upon Judah an^ Jerusalem,
and that he ha^ delivered their fathers (...) trouble, 2 Chronicles. 29.8, 9, 10.
etc. Now, says he it is in mine heart to make covenant with the Lo^^ God of
Israel, that his fier^^ wrath may turn away from ^s. Oh worthy example, See
also c^ 30.6, 7, 8.
^ven for the best and grea^est Christian Kings, in ^^ke case to imitate.

But what? does God ^ooke that, in case of evils (...) troubles of the Church
and Commonwealth, we ^nly mind our own good and safety? no: he will ^ave us
also, according to ^ur several places, cal^^ngs, gifts, to become In^^rcessors
to him for others ^lso, and to help to turn ^way wrath from others, and our
selves. This God ^^oked for (though in ^^aine) of his people, and ^his he
looks for from us now: Ezekiel. 22.30.
And I sought for (...) man among them (says the Lord) that should make (...)
the hedge, and stand in the gap before me for the land that I should not
destroy it but I found none: therefore have I poured out mine indignation upon
them, 31.
I ha^ consumed them with t^^ fire of my wrath,

2. According to Method.
From these places (...) Scripture we see wh^^ kind of duties the Lo^^ expects
from us, when ^vill is upon, or yet but ^^wards us; and what he (...) this time
of Pestilen^ expects more especial from us of this place; y^^ and nation
generally, eve^ from such as being otherwise of the same body of our Church and
nation, are yet free from the infection of this noisome disease. Which duties I
may, The means appointed of God to be u^ed in case of Pestilence, etc. are by
God himself brought to four duties.
for method and memories sake, reduce unto those four which God expects from
us in case of Pestilence as necessary conditions, without which severally and
jointly in some good manner performed, we can expect no hearing of our prayers,
nor healing either of our souls in and by the pardon of our sins, or of our
land and place (in mercy at least) by taking away this plague. The words run
thus, which God utters by way of answer to King Solomon's godly and wise
prayer, at the dedication of the Temple (which was a type of Christ in our
nature, in whom only and for whom all prayers are savingly heard. 2. Chron.
7.13.14.
) If I send Pestilence among my people: if my people which are called by my
name, shall humble themselves and pray, and seek my face, and turn from their
wicked ways; then will I hear from Heaven, and will forgive their sin, and
will heal their land.

The duties here are four: 1. Selfe-humbling. 2. Prayer. 3. Seeking of Gods
face and favor, in and by prayer, more then any thing else: seeing many pray
against the outward evil of plague, who not caring much for Gods displeasure,
otherwise never seek his face. 4. Turning from sin. Unto these four all (or
most of) the forenamed duties are reducible: which four also may be reduced
to these two heads: Turning first to God, secondly from sin. In one word
there is required Turning or Conversion, which according to the two terms or
points, 1. to what or whom, and 2. from what or whom, is a conversion or
turning, first, to God and his ways, secondly, from our own sinful ways.

The first three Duties belong to our turning unto God. 1. Selfe-humbling.
1. Selfe-humbling: Now to selfe-humbling, there are three things required, if
they may not be called parts thereof.

Unto which belong 1. Conviction.
First, Conviction upon a due Consideration: 1. Of Gods Judgments upon us, in
the 1. Author. 2. End. 3. Nature. 4. Cause, which is our sin: and so 2.
Consideration of our sin, or sins, as Causes of the evil which is
incumben^ upon us: which is a very large, useful, and fundamental point to
consider of.

2. Confession of sin found out.

3. Contrition, 2. Confession.
or true inward and hearty Sorrow expressed outwardly by all fit and lively
signs of it, as by fasting, weeping, Outwardly expressed, by all signs of
Humiliation.
prostration of the body, vile apparel, and the like, which may testify
truly without dissimulation, the inward condition and state of the soul,
which not excluding the former two, may more properly come under the name of
Selfe-humbling.

2. Prayer.
2. The second duty is Prayer, and Invocation of Gods name.

3. Reconciliation with God.
3. The third is, Seeking of the face of God, and Reconciliation with him.

4. Turning from our wicked ways, which implies, 1. Reformation of life.
4. The fourth duty is a Turning from our wicked ways: which implies, 1.
Reformation of our lives and of things amiss and out of order, by bringing all
right again, both in matter of Doctrine, and of life, according to the only
rule of Gods word. 2. Renewing of covenant.
2. Renewing of our Covenant with God by solemn promise, vow, 3. Keeping of
covenant.
why not Oath? at least serious purpose and protestation. 3. Ratifying and
confirming of the same by a speedy and also constant performance of Covenant,
without returning to our former evil ways and provocations again.

With all these we must all of us, (as God may require it at our hands,
according to our several places and abilities, or as we are in favor with his
heavenly Majesty) labor to become Intercessours, To which add 5. Intercession
for others, or a standing in the gap, which must be done, 1. By Magistrates.
and to stand in the gap for the land, or place where we live, to turn away
wrath from it: which must be done

1. By Magistrates, chief and subordinate, who must both inquire into offenses
and punish the same. Good Magistrates have a chief stroke in keeping off, or
in removing of wrath from a people. God never publicly judges by Pestilence
or otherwise, but Magistrates first neglect their duty in judging. If they did
unpartially execute Gods judgments, God would not so immediately with his own
hand judge us, or give us into the hand of merciless men, to be judged with
their judgments.

2. By Ministers.
2. By the Ministers of the word: who must stand in the gap, by a right
discovery of sin and danger, and many other ways, and not be like the
Prophets of Israel, which were like the Foxes in the deserts: ye have not,
says the Lord, Ezekiel. 13.4^.5.
gone up into the gapps, neither made up the hedge for the house of Israel, to
stand in the battle in the day of the Lord: yet thus much the Lord requires of
his Ministers.

3. By All: 3. By all How?
which we must all strive to do, making up the hedge (for our selves and
others. 1. By rightteousnesse.
)

1. By becoming righteous our selves, Job 22.30. Genesis 18.32. and by seeking
righteousness, Zeph. 2.3.

2. Mourning.
2. By mourning for and bewayling the sins and dangers of the time and place
where we live, Ezekiel. 9.4.

3. Prayer.
3. By earnest prayer and intercession: so Abraham prevaled for Lot, Genesis 18.
Lot for Zoar, Moses for the Israelites often, Job for his friends, and David
and his Elders for Jerusalem; the destruction of which, after the death of
seventy thousand else where, was by his repentance and intercession prevented,
1. Chron 21.14.15. etc.

These particulars are large, and must be handled, God assisting, on their
several and more proper grounds of Scripture: I will not farther burden this
short text with them, contenting my self only here to point unto them, seeing
the text it self implies the use of such means as God has appointed for the
pacifying and averting of his wrath. Now the Lord give us hearts, wisdom and
grace to make use of these means in time, both for his glory, and our own
safety, bodily and spiri^uall. Amen.

FINIS.
The number of those that died at New Castle, within the liberties, from the 7.
of May, till December, 31. of the Plague, as follows. 1636.
MAy 7. to 14. 59. May 14. to 21. 55. May 21. to 28. 99. May 28. to June 4. 122
June 4. to 11. 99. June 11. to 18. 162. June 18. to 25. 133. June 25. to 2. of
July. 172. July 2. to 9. 184. July 9. to 16. 212. July 16. to 23. 270. July 23.
to 30. 366. Aug. 30. to 7. 337. Aug. 7. to 14. 422. Aug. 14. to 21. 346. Aug.
21. to 28. 246. September. 4. 520. September. 4. to 11. 325. September. 11. to the
last of December. 908. The total is, 5027.

Buried in Garth-side in New Castle this present year, 1636. as follows.
May 30 to June 6 10 June 6 to 13 24 June 13 to 20. 19 June 20 to 27 34 June 27
to July 4 40 July 4 to 11 75 July 11 to 18 66 July 18 to 25 60 July 25 to
August 1 60 Aug. 1 to 8 29 Aug. 8 to 15 17 Aug. 15 to 22 18 Aug. 22 to 29 13
Aug. 29 to Septem. 5 14 September. 5 to 12 11 September. 12 to 19 7 September. 19 to
26 4 September. 26 to October. 3 6 October 3 to 10 2 October 10 to 17 ^ October 17
^ The total is 515.


