The Height of ISREAL'S HEATHENISH IDOLATRY, In sacrificing their children to
the Devil; Divided into three Sections: WHERE IS SHOWED

In the first, The growth and degrees of this, and generally of other Sins
and Idolatries.

In the second, That the Devil was the god of the Heathen; with the means by
which he obtained that honor.

With a large Application to our times, against Popery, showing the Pride
thereof, and Malice both against soul and body; Together with the Means,
Sleights, and Policies by which it seduceth, kills, and in the person of the
Pope, raises it self to its present height.

In the third, The blind zeal of Idolaters.

Delivered generally in two Sermons preached at S. Mary's in CAMBRIDGE: The
first whereof is much enlarged: By ROBERT IENISON Bachelor of Divinity, and
late Fellow of S. John's College in Cambridge.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Mylbourne, and are to be sold at his shop, at the
great South-doore of Paul's, 1621.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL Mr. HENRY CHAPMAN Mayor, Sir George Selby, Sir Henry
Anderson, Sir Thomas Riddel, Sir Peter Riddel, Knights and Aldermen, and to the
rest of the Aldermen; as also the Worshipful Master Nicolas Tempest Sheriff,
and the other late Sheriffs, and to the whole common Council of the Town and
County of Newcastle upon Tine; R.I. dedicateth the two former Sections of this
present Treatise, wishing you in Christ all the blessings of this life and a
better.
Right Worshipful and worthy Sirs,
I Cannot but often consider, and also solace my self in the consideration of,
Gods special providence in calling me to the exercise of my Ministry in this
Town, the native place of my birth and breeding. He it was, whom I ever found
since my first approach to the University, secretly to incline my will and
affections, to desire the Ministry with a competency of gifts for it, and in
his time imploiment in it, especially if he thought fit, in or near about the
place of my nativity. And he it is whom I have now found to effect what
himself first taught me to affect. For having given me some trial of my gifts
with experience of his assistance, in an Honorable family; and when, by the
decease of that Right Honorable and every way Noble Henry Earl of Kent, in
Bedfordsh. who dyed Ian. 1614.
Earl, I was to resolve what course to take; Lo, when I thought not on
Newcastle (but inclined toward my fellowship for my better furnishing)
Newcastle thought on me, and by the letters of your late worthy, learned and
reverend Mr. Morton Archdeacon of Durham.
Pastor, as also of others well affected to the Gospel of Christ (wholly
ignorant of that liberty I then inioyed) gave me a call to come unto it. Unto
which call, considering the Premises, how could I be disobedient? It was not
for me now to think or hope for better preferment elsewhere (the way thereunto
lying more open in the South) nor much to fear (having such a call from God)
the experimenting of that often approved true saying of our Savior, Mark 6.4.
A Prophet is not without honor but in his own Country, and among his own
kin, and in his own house. As I suffered not these respects to sway me, so I
complain not in either kind; but acknowledge my self to have found from you
both respect and recompense beyond my deseruings, especially in regard of that
liberal yearly stipend which lately your Worships appointed me out of the
common Treasury.

This is the cause why I have prefixed your names to the greatest part of this
ensuing Treatise; which, for the public good and yours, I thought good, as my
weekly pains would give leave, to publish as an Argument, if not so plausibly
penned for the manner, yet at the least, more strange and unusual (yet not
unprofitable) for the matter. As it is, I present it to your Worships as the
best testimony which I can publicly give of my thankfulness to you, and of
my duty and love to the Town for all the free favors of it. And indeed this,
as other your bounties, is the more kindly taken by how much the less it was
either deserved or desired by me.

Yet I dare not simply condemn all, who (especially in these days when virtue
and learning is not duly respected and rewarded) desire preferment and a place
in the Church of God, if so be they, enabled with competent gifts, desire it
rather as it is Onus a place of burden, then Honos of honor; rather Prodesse
to profit others, 3. Epist. of John verse 9.
then Praeesse, with Diotrophes to have the Preeminence, propounding as their
end Gods glory and the edification of the people more then their own
maintenance: for it is a true saying, in this sense, 1. Tim. 3.1.
if any desire the office of a Bishop, he desires a good work.

But, because in such suites men's desires are commonly inordinate, and their
means indirect, as briberie, flattery, or the like; my judgment and also
practice (which I presume you account no fault in me) has hitherto been
otherwise, namely, not so much to seek means of living from man, as only to
desire employment from God, both which hitherto, without my seeking I have
found. Yet, as I approve not of men's immodestie in this kind of putting
themselves forward (which argues either too high a conceit of themselves and of
their own sufficiency, or too mean a conceit of the weight and burden of
that high calling, or otherwise too base a desire of Eminency or wealth) so
do I also as much hate Ingratitude, where and when, by the religious and
vigilant care of such as are men of place, wisdom, means, any godly, able
and modest mind shall without his seeking receive encouragement, competent
means and maintenance in his ministerial pains and employment.

This your godly care, Right Worshipful, I shall be always ready both
thankfully to acknowledge as it concerns my self, and also to witness it to
the world (inuiting others with me to bless God for it) so far as it bends
it self to the advancement any ways of the glory of God in the furtherance of
the Gospel of Christ, true religion and learning, or otherwise proves helpefull
to the relief of the poor, fatherless or distressed.

And here I cannot but remember and record how that, as it has pleased God to
bless your Town with ample and rich revenues yearly, so he has also given
you a second and greater gift, which is Power and Grace in the yearly good
employment thereof, Eccles. 5.19.
to eat the fruit of it, and to take your portion, inasmuch as the employment
of your temporal wealth in that manner brings in to your selves and to the
Corporation generally a better and spiritual interest, increase and harvest,
whiles thus so many Preachers are competently provided for, so many poor
people weekly relieved, such care had for the trayning up of youth in Grammar
learning, wherein, by your care and bounty, your School, through the vigilant
pains of the present Master, Master Robert Fowbery.
is not behind many at the least in the land; such yearly maintenance allowed
so many young students of your own Town (whose need may require it) for the
ease of their charge in the Universities till seven years study have enabled
them to provide and care for themselves; so that you have at this hour (by the
help of this and other encouragements) now living, of such as are bred and
borne in this your Town eight Preachers of gifts competent at the least, all
whom you well approve of. Besides your other yearly pensions allowed, as to
diverse officers both chief and subordinate, so to other Masters in their
several kinds, as for the securing your estates by the counsel and direction
of Law, for the curing of your bodies by the help and means of Physic, for
the trayning of youth to handle the pen by fair writing, and the Pyke and
Piece for the service of your Prince and Country: not to speak of such yearly
reparations as prove most necessary; all which together keep the waters of
your cisterne (though it have a good feeder) low and near the bottom.

Well then, and truly is Money said to be one of the sinews of the
Commonwealth: Sure, it with Gods blessing is so here, as also in part of the
Church too. Long then may that flourish by which both our Church here and
Commonwealth flourishes. Pray ye, (with me then) for the Peace (yea also
plenty) of (this our) Jerusalem: Psalm. 122.6.7.8.9.
they shall prosper that love thee, peace be within thy walls and prosperity
within thy Palaces: for my brethren and companions sake I will now say, peace
be within thee; because of the house of the Lord our God, I will seek thy good.

This care, Right Worshipful, of seeking the prosperous estate of this Town,
lies chiefly upon you, into whose hands God has subordinately put the sword
of Justice for the due, equal, and impartial execution both of his own, and
also of those many good Laws of this Land, which most wisely and respectively
have been made for the advancement of religion and all virtue and godliness
both in Church and Commonweal, as also for the extirpating of whatsoever is
contrary thereunto.

Each Kingdom, Commonwealth, City, Town, Corporation, is only and so far
safe and settled, as it rests it self by weldoing upon God by a continual
reliance and dependence on him. Otherwise sin where it reigns and is
suffered in any kind whatsoever, is that only thing which weakens, and at the
length ruins both Church and Commonweal, howsoever in outward respects,
Prou. 28.2.
seemingly most strong and flourishing. For the transgressions of a land, many
are the Princes thereof. Sin makes both private men of strong weak, as
Sampson, and Cain; Judges 16.19.20. Genesis 14.14. So David calls him. (...). 2.
Sam. 22.19. Isa. 2.7.8.
and also weakens whole Commonweals, Cities and Towns, whilst it makes God
(who only is our strength and stay) depart from us, and give us over to our
selves and the will of others.

Israel was many ways strong in Isaiahs time: their Land was full of silver
and gold etc. (but it was also full of Idols.) Israel was well furnished of all
things needful for an established state both of Church and Commonwealth: they
had stays of all kinds: As 1. Plenty of food, and yearly provision of all
things needful for life, as also abundance of wealth. 2. Military strength,
provision and munition. 3. Magistrates and wise Senators, and the knowledge
how to rule the people, with all other parts of Political regiment. 4.
Prophets, Gal. 2.9. 2. Kings 2.12.
who were not only as Pillars next to Christ in the Church, but as the
horsemen and charets of Israel: Who were stays to them (as godly Ministers are
now) not only by establishing them in grace and goodness, (which they did by
soundness of Doctrine, sharpness of reproof, example of life, living and
dying in and for the truth) but also by their prayers, by which they stayed
Gods hand, as did Moses, and often stood in the gappe. 5. Mechanical Arts,
which also are necessary. 6. But above all, God himself was their strength, so
called, 1. Sam. 15.29. The strength of Israel. Yet because they trusted in the
other more then in God, therefore see how they are threatened: Behold, the Lord,
Isa. 3.1.2.3.
the Lord of hosts does take away from Jerusalem and from Judah, the stay and
the staff, the whole stay of bread, and the whole stay of water, The mighty
man and the man of war, the Judge and the Prophet, and the prudent and the
Ancient, the Captain of fifty, and the honorable man, and the Counselor,
and the cunning Artificer, and the eloquent Orator. And this God has now
accordingly brought to pass.

Even thus must we persuade our selves. God has blessed this our Town, in a
competency, with most of these stays. Now it is not any of these, neither yet
our strong walls, or our mines of coal (by which our Town has hitherto
been as the Hearth to warm most places of this our Island) nor all these
together that can afford us any security, Vt munitum muro tibi visum est
oppidum? Si Incolae been sint morati, pulchre munitum arbitror. Perfidia and
peculatus ex vrbe and auaritia si exulant: quarta inuidia, quinta Ambitio:
sexta Obtrectatio: septima Periurium: Octaua indiligentia: Nona iniuria: Decima
quod pessimum aggressu, Scelus. Haec nisi inde aberunt, centuplex murus rebus
seruandis parum est. Plaut: in Pers.
if at any time vice, superstition, profanesse etc. be suffered to take root
and spread among us. For each City, says one, is better fenced with the good
manners of the Ciuitas non ta^muris quam moribus munitur.
Citizens, then with the walls of the City. To which purpose, Plautus, though
an heathen, gives this fit answer to a tempting question which he propounds in
the person of Sagaristio, to a virgin concerning Athens. How think you? is not
the Town well fenced with a wall? If the Inhabitants be well nurtured (said
the wise maid) I esteem it excellently fenced. If perfidiousnesse, and
Interuerting or stealing from the Prince and common treasury, together with
Avarice be banished the City: if fourthly Ambition, fifthly Envy, sixthly
Detraction, seventhly Perjury, eighthly Idleness, ninthly Injuries and wrongs,
tenthly (which worst is) mischief and villainy. These unless they be
abandoned and expelled the City, a hundred walls are nothing to the safety of
it.

In like manner; Psm. 125.1.2.
As the mountains are about Jerusalem, so the Lord is round about his people,
namely such as trust in him: so that in stead of other walls, he himself will
be unto Jerusalem, a wall of fire round about, Zachar. 2.4.5.
and will be the glory in the midst of her. But this is meant whilst they rest
only on him: otherwise, if the Vineyard which even Gods right hand it self
has planted, which is the house of Israel, and which he has fenced, shall
bring forth wild grapes; Isa. 5.2.5.7.
then will God take away the hedge thereof, and it shall be eaten up, and
break down the wall thereof, and it shall be trodden down: So, the Boar out
of the wood shall wast it, Psalm. 80.12.13.
and the wild beast of the field devour it. In which case no walls nor
munition, no abundance of wealth nor strength and wisdom of men, can keep
out the wrath of the Lord, if he their defense once depart from them. Sin
then generally, See and compare Numb. 13.27.28. with Numb. 14.9.
and more specially our trusting to man and to our means more then to God, if
this sin shall ever reign among us, will make our strength, that is, God
himself depart from us. See and compare 2. Chron. 14.9.10.11. with 2 Chronicles.
16.7.8.9. Joel 3.10.
Whereas the Lord shows himself strong in the behalf of them whose heart is
perfect toward him, and who rest and rely upon him. So that the weakest of such
may say, I am strong.

Besides this trusting on means, there are other three maine exorbitancies for
which God usually sends changes by his judgments, not only in whole Kingdoms
and States, Pucer. in epist. praefix. Carionis Chron.
but also in particular Cities, Towns and Corporations. The first is (...),
impiety and ungodliness: The second, (...) injustice: The third, (...)
Luxury and wantonness; whereof the first troubles the state of the Church;
the second, of the Commonwealth; the third, of private families. And each of
these, helps and furthers the rest: so that want of domestical discipline in
Parents and Masters of families tends to disorder in the body of the
Commonwealth; as contrariwise evil government and disorder in the State
rebounds back again to the further hurt and disordering of private families.
And the contagion of both these infects the Church of God, and makes the
Ministry of the word less available. On the other side where Religion is
either polluted or not duly respected, there the rest fall; for,
perfidiousnesse, injustice, doing wrongs, as also lust and luxury, depend on
irreligion and ungodliness, See Romans 1. from verse 23. to the end.
and also on idolatry, as both in the ancient and modern Romanists may be
seen.

Where these or any of these through the negligence of Magistrates are
suffered, and not mowed down by the sword of Justice, there ere long we may
look for changes.

1. Religion has three enemies; Heretics, Schismatickes, Hypocrites, with
whom I will join in this business, profane livers. The first sort opposes
the Truth and verity of Religion; the second, the unity; the third, the
sincerity and sanctity of it: without which three neither Religion nor any
State can long stand.

Not Religion, and that through these inward weaknesses and the forenamed wants
of Truth, Unity, and Sincerity.

1. Truth in it self is most ancient, and is also eternal: for standing upon
its own (that is a sure) foundation, which is God, it is impregnable, and able
to bear out it self against all assaults. Great is Truth and mighty above all
things: 1 Esd. 4.
it endures and is always strong, and it lives and conquereth for evermore.
It is founded upon God, who is immovable and a sure anchor. The man that has
it is by it (...) and (...) immovable and invincible, and (...) firm and
stable even like the rock in the Sea, which though assaulted by boisterous
winds and waves, yet neither moves nor remoues; for his faith is built on the
rock Christ Jesus, and on the foundation of Gods eternal election, so that
the gates of hell shall not prevail against him, neither, though others who
might seem pillars fall away to Heresy and Apostasy, See 2. Tim. 2.17.18.
with 19.
shall he, because he never depended on man. But he that wants truth, is as a
wave of the Sea, Ephesians. 4.14.
driven with the wind and tossed, carried about with every wind of Doctrine by
the sleight of men, etc.

Secondly, Unity is conseruatiue, so that things whose nature is to be united,
continue firm by continuing united. Nature it self teaches each creature to
preserve it self by preserving unity: The drop falling from the Eues of the
house, as long as it can, holds unity with it self by gathering round, till
the ponderositie of it prevail: So, the same drop falling on the dry ground
keeps together, else severed it is soon dried up. The fencer lies as close as
he can to keep himself the safer; yea the poor worm and vrchin in danger
gather themselves into a lump lest distraction and distention of the parts of
their bodies make them more subject to division and separation. Thus each
element holds together with its own kind, and all of them keep the unity of
the world by their continuitie one with another, so that rather then any
vacuitie or discontinuitie fall out in nature (which indeed would threaten the
dissolution of the fabric of the world) they will move not only besides, but
even contrary to their own proper motion, and will forsake their own place
and condition for the preservation of the whole: as water will ascend upward.
Even thus is it among men, Christians especially, who (of all other sorts of
men) have the least interest in themselves, so living (when they live as they
should) as given to others, lent only to themselves. These being linked
together in a spiritual society, by breaking the unity which ought to be
among all, endanger themselves as being members of the same body.

Thirdly, Sincerity is a sure band of continuance; for where Religion seasons
the heart, there Grace is as water in the fountain, and as sap in the root,
which makes the streams perpetual, and the branches ever green. The single
heart in all things aims at Gods glory, and makes the sincere Christian ever
like himself, upon all occasions in all estates and companies, as it did
Joseph vnum habebat propositum placere Deo; hoc nulla varietate temporis
immutatum est, nec fratrum inuidia, nec condition seruitutis, nec aetatis
illecebris, nec dominae repromissis, nec squalore carceris, nec postea tumore
Aegyptiae potestatis, sed semper vnus fuit, etc. Hieron. comment. in ep. ad
Ephesians. l. 3. c. 4. Hoc idem (inquit) de Job sentiendum est etc.
Joseph and Job. Whereas insinceritie and a cloven heart, or a heart and a
heart, causes instabilitie and inconstancy, and a falling away. Thus James
1.8. (...) etc. A double minded man is unstable in all his ways. So of the
Israelites it is said, Ps. 78.35, 36, 37
Their heart was not right with God, neither were they steadfast in his covenant.

Where Religion, by any of the foresaid defects, or yet by open profaneness,
grows to a languishing and decay, there without speedy redress and
reformation, Gods just judgments usually break in upon those persons, upon
that State and Commonwealth, and lays all waste. Thus were the Israelites by
their Idolatry made naked among their enemies, that is, Exodus 32.25, 27 28.
destitute and deprived of God and his help, and 3000. of them were slain.
Thus were Corah and his accomplices for their sedition and schism swallowed up
of the earth, yea whole Israel for their profaneness and contempt of God and
his Prophets (added to their Idolatries) suffered a fearful slaughter, and a
long captivity of 70. years, 2 Chronicles. 36.16. etc.
because they mocked the messengers of God, and despised his words, and misused
his Prophets, until the wrath of the Lord arose against his people, till there
was no remedy.

2. And so where Sensuality, filthy lusts and pollutions, Drunkenness and
Gluttony are suffered without controlment and condign punishment, there
destruction and vengeance hangs over the head of such a City. For what brought
fire and brimstone upon Sodom and the cities about it, but their sins of
Pride, fullness of bread, Ezekiel. 16.49.
and abundance of idleness? which as mother-sinnes brought forth unnatural
lusts, and these (being finished) brought forth death; which Cities giving
themselves over to fornication, and going after strange flesh, are set forth
for an example, Jude verse 7.
suffering the vengeance of eternal fire.

3. Lastly, Injustice, whether universal by violence, tyranny, rapacity,
fraud, deceits, wrongs, contumelies; or yet particular, as when Magistrates do
not render to every man according to his deserts, or otherwise neglect to do
their duty, brings all to ruin at the length. August. de Ciuit. Dei, lib. 5.
cap. 12
Thus Saint * Augustine notes concerning the ancient Romans, who were once
Lords of the world: The more they gave themselves to the exercise of justice
etc. the less they gave themselves to their pleasures, and to the increasing
of their private estates. The exercise whereof was according to Virgils Tu
regere imperio populos Roman memento, Hae tibi erunt arts, p^cique imponere
morem, Parcere subiectis and debellare superbos. Virg.
memento, Parcere subiectis and debellare superbos, namely, to spare, yea to
favor and encourage the good and humble subject, and to destroy and cut off
the proud. And then, says he, the Commonwealth flourished, when there was
domi industria, foris iustum imperium, etc. Industry at home, just and
impartial government abroad, etc. But when that Commonwealth decayed, the
causes of it are noted in Catoes complaint. Pro his nos habemus luxuriam, atque
auaritiam, public egestate^, priuatim opulentiam. Laudamus diuitias, sequimur
inertiam: inter bonos and malos discrimen nullum, omnia virtutis praemia
ambitio possidet; neque mirum, vbi vos separatim sibi quisque consilia capitis,
vbi domi voluptatibus, hic pecuniae ac gratiae seruitis. Eo fit, vt impetus
fiat in vacuam Rempub. Postquam, Luxu atque desidia, ciuitas corrupta est
rursus Resp. magnitudine su^ Jmperatorum atque Magistratuu^ vitia sustentabat.
In stead of the forenamed things (says he) we have luxury and covetousness,
a poor Common treasury, but richly laden chests at home. We commend riches,
and follow idleness: no difference is made between the good and the bad,
ambition inioyes all the rewards due to virtue. And no marvel, seeing you,
every one of you take counsel for your selves apart, seeing you give your
selves slauishly to your pleasures, and do all for money or favor. Hence it
falls out, that every one makes a prey, and violently ceazeth on the poor and
desolate Commonwealth. And after he adds, When once the City (of Rome) was
corrupted with luxury and sloth, then did the Commonwealth with her greatness
sustain and maintain all the vices of the Empeorors and Magistrates.

Saint Austen concludes, that God gave so large an Empire to the Romans,
inasmuch as they sought the good of their Country, and made that their glory,
preferring the good and safety of the Commonwealth before their own. And
that, then that Commonwealth flourished, when virtue and industry flourished,
Cum Aerarium esset opulentum, tenues res priuatae. Aug vt supr.
when the Common-treasurie was rich, but each private man's estate mean.

That all the forenamed virtues may receive encouragement and furtherance, and
the contrary vices so far as they are, be weeded out in this town, it belongs
to your care, Right Worshipful, who must still take your selves bound to use
your sword and authority against two sorts of men especially: Enemies 1. of
Truth, 2. of Holiness.

1. Zeal for the truth of God is required in each Magistrate, who must first,
truly and sincerely embrace the truth of Religion himself in his own heart
and bosom. This may be known where it is: for it will make such an one seek
by all means to further Religion in others, and to seek Gods glory. Such a
Magistrate (of Gods more immediate appointing) was Joshua; Josh. 27.16.17.18. 2 Samuel 6.20. etc.
such an one was David, who brought back the Arc, and danced before it. That
indeed is the best music and pipe to dance after, and the Magistrate the
fittest man to lead the dance: and such were all the godly Kings of Judah.
Secondly, he must set himself accordingly to abolish all idolatry, 1 Kings
15.1^.13.
as did King Asa, who remoud even his mother from being Queen because she had
made an idol in a grove, which he also destroyed. 2 Kings 18 4.5. and 23 4.5.6.
And such an one was Hezekiah and Josias. Thirdly, he must draw out the sword
of justice against Seducers, as is commanded, Deuteronomy. 13.6.7. etc. as did Iehu, ^
Kings 20.25.
who slew all the Priests of Ball. At the least he must restrain them, and
keep them from entering into the Lords Sanctuary and Inheritance. Here the
Magistrate must draw out his sword, Genesis 3.24.
and play the part of the Angel set at the door of Paradise, to keep the way
of the tree of life, Psalm. 80.13.
to keep the wild Boar from entering Gods Vineyard. As we therefore Gods
Ministers do oppose our selves by teaching, and as the Lords dogs and
housekeepers by barking tell you of the approach of enemies; so surely, you
must also awake and not suffer the house of God to be broken and dug through
by thieves and robbers, John 10.10.
who come not but to steal and kill and to destroy. Either then shut your
gates against such, or expel them, or bring the seduced to the curse, Nehem.
10.^2.
and to the oath of allegiance both to God and to the Kings Majesty. You have
many very good laws to this end. Oh how much good service might you do both
to God and his Majesty if you did wholly set your selves duly and impartially
to execute the same! at the least, you might weary many of them out by
c^ntinuall mulcts levied diligently and constantly on them according to statute
for each absence, if not bring them to Church, and, with Gods blessing, save
their souls: they want but rousing.

2. There are also enemies of holiness and goodness, such as being wicked
themselves and by their wickedness daily giving evil example to others, hate
all goodness in others, Isa. 59.15.
so that he that departs from evil makes himself a prey unto them. Now good
Magistrates, whose office is to be keepers of both Tables, should, by their
office and place, be zealous on Gods behalf, both to defend the oppressed,
and also to use severity in punishing offenders. They must therefore first
maintain the innocence of the righteous: else it is a thing highly displeasing
unto God, when in this kind, there is no judgment, Isa. 59.14.15. Secondly,
they must execute judgment with severity, not only on the forenamed, but on
all sorts of offenders whatsoever, so far as Gods laws and the Kings, command
or will permit, whether it be to death or to banishment, Esra. 7.^^.
or to confiscation of goods, or to imprisonment. Thus by Gods law witches must
die, and inchanters, wizards, Deuteronomy. 18 11. etc.
necromancers must not be suffered. Others according to their faults must
receive forty stripes. And 25.1, 2, 3. And 19.18, 19, 20, 21. Psalm. 106.30
Psalm. 101.8.
False-witnesses must be dealt with as they intended to deal with others. This
zeal in Phinees was commended, and David professes so zealous he would be.

Thus to do, is an acceptable Sacrifice to God, which Magistrates should make:
Romans 13.6.
for they are (...), Gods Ministers, and their faithful service in this kind
is to God an acceptable sacrifice. Kings have been Priests in former times,
and so must now be in this kind, as also inferior Magistrates: this is a
work of their calling, and not against the Law which says, Thou shall not
kill, which binds only private men, and public in their private occasions. So
that they killing do not kill, but sacrifice: Aug de ciuit. Dei lib. 1. c. 2^.
Non enim ille occidit qui ministerium debet iubenti; He kills not, who in
slaying obeys Gods command. This severity, so far as your authority
stretches, you must use, else foolish pity marrs the city, and will lay it
open to Gods judgments. No private or sinister respects must withhold you from
doing your duty in this, or in any of the forenamed parts of it. Which if you
do, you may expect the continuance of Gods blessed protection and favor to
this your Town. And that you may so do, consider how wonderfully zealous
Idolaters in all times have been and are, when in any kind they think they
do service to God. This ensuing Treatise will tell you, they spared not their
own bowels, but sacrificed their sons and daughters to the devil, their
supposed god.

Thus commending it to your diligent view and reading, my self to your love,
and your Worships all, with the state of the whole Town, to Gods blessed and
merciful protection, I here end, and humbly take my leave.

From my Study in Newcastle upon Tine, this 30. of Ian. 1620. Your Worships in
all bonds and offices of Christian love and duty, ROBERT IENISON.

THE HEIGHT of ISREAL'S Heathenish Jdolatrie.
PSALM. 106.37. Yea, they sacrificed their sons and their daughters unto
Devils.


SECTION I.
CHAP. I. Containing the degrees of ISREAL'S Idolatry.
THe Jews, either under Antiochus his tyranny, as some think, or rather in
the captivity of Babylon, had this Psalm of praise, The contents of the
Psalm.
prayer and acknowledgement of sin penned for them, as appears by verse 47.
Save us, O Lord our God, and gather us from among the Heathen. Wherein, looking
back to their first deliverance out of Egypt, they first acknowledge Gods
wonderful mercies and goodness in preventing them with his favor, desiring a
taste and experiment of the like favor in this their greatest need, verse 4.
acknowledging also thankfully throughout this Psalm his continued and renewed
mercies in their many deliverances. Secondly, they yield him the praise of his
Justice, acknowledging the effects of it from time to time in their manifold
afflictions and scourgings; but especially in this their last and greatest,
which was their dispersion among the heathen. Thirdly, here is also an humble
confession of their sins, with the sins of their forefathers; which daily
increasing more and more, caused these judgments of God, and now being grown
to an height, have brought upon them this great captivity.

All which three, Mercies, Judgments Sins, are in this Psalm
interchangeably and intermixedly mentioned, to signify the inseparable
connection between sin and punishment, and yet the sweet mixture of Gods
mercy with his justice. Each again either amplifying, aggravating or
justifying another, and all of them conspiring to set forth the glory of God.

First, their sins justify his judgments, and amplify his mercies, so that
he must needs be acknowledged both just in punishing, and merciful in
remitting. Secondly, his judgments do condemn their sins, and commend his
mercies: for God never strikes without just cause in us, and therefore never
remoues the Rod but of mere mercy in himself. Thirdly, Gods mercies and many
deliverances do aggrauate their sins, and justify his judgments; for, to
sin again after mercy is once showed, doubles the fault, and stops the mouth
of the faulty for complaining of after judgments.

To leave the rest, let us take a view and consideration of their sins, as my
Text occasions us. And first, the first word Yea bids us look back, or rather
down to number the steps and stayres by which sin has mounted to this
height, The steps and growth of Isreal's sins.
and ascended this Tower of Babell. Secondly, the following words will occasion
a consideration of this particular sin it self.

This growth of sin and of men in sin must be conceived to be, not so much
personal in regard of the same men, as national in regard of men of the same
Country, whereby the Children exceed the Fathers in wickedness, till their
sins come to an height, fullness and ripeness, as did the sins of the
Amorites after more then 400. Genesis 15.16.
years growth; and of these Israelites from the time of their bondage in
Egypt till their bondage in Babylon. Whence it is said of the wicked Kings of
Israel, 1 King. 16.25.30. etc.
that they did evil above all, and worse then all that were before them And of
the Jews generally That they did worse then their Fathers. Ier. 7.26.
Here we may see it by their own confession in this Psalm, where we have
their sins first of Omission set down negatiuely: Secondly, of Commission,
affirmatively.

First, of omission; where we may observe these degrees. 1. Of omission, verse
7.


First, They understood not his Wonders. This may be humane frailty and
blindness. Secondly, They remembered not his mercies, but forgot his Works.
verse 13.21.
This is negligence joined with weakness. Thirdly, They forgot God their
Savior. And this is unthankfulness added to the former. Fourthly, They waited
not for his counsel. This is pride and security, 13.24.
it seems they needed him not. Fifthly, They believed not his Word. This is
unbelief worse then all the former. Sixthly, They hearkened not unto his voice.
25.
What Is this but plain obstinacy and contempt? so much a greater sin then the
rest, as it is more wilful then the rest. And lastly, comes the fruit of all,
34.
They destroyed not the Nations as the Lord commanded them. This as it was
disobedience to God, so was it moreover most of all pernicious to themselves.
They could go no higher or rather lower by omissions.

Secondly, 2. Of commission
their sins of commission have their degrees too. First generally
acknowledged, verse 6. We have sinned with our Fathers, we have committed
iniquity, we have done wickedly. Where the first word (...) to sin or to err
and swerue from the mark, is not so much as the second (...), which is to do
peruersely; nor that so much as the third word (...) which is to do wickedly,
and that with great pains taking and disquiet as the word properly signifies;
according to which sense some expound the word, Eccles. 7.17 which we read. Be
not overmuch wicked. Ne occupes te medium, sz. In negotus mun^^mis ne inqui^^^
te: That is, Busy not thy self too much in worldly affairs, disquiet not thy
self. The same gradation is, Dan. 9.5.

Or, following the words in the English, they committed iniquity, and sinned:
this notes the act of sinning; and so do just men sometimes sin actually:
but moreover these did wickedly; this notes an habit and customarie practice of
sin, with delight, willingness, and wilfulness, for they sinned both
actually and habitually. These two are distinct, as Aristotle teaches. Arist
Ethic.
Its one thing facere injustum, to do an unjust and wicked act; another,
facere injuste, to do it unjustly and wickedly.

But more particularly, observe these degrees out of this Psalm. They sin
first in thought and affection; secondly, in word; thirdly, in work.

1. In affection.
Verse 14.
1. In affection, and that by degrees: 1. They lusted a lust in the wilderness.
This is an humane (though as they lusted a sinful) affection. 16.
2. They envied Moses also in the camp, and Aaron the chosen of God. This is
deuillish. Yea says the text, 24.
Thirdly, They despised the pleasant Land, as if this were more then both the
other.

2. In word.
25.
2. In word: They murmured in their Tents.

3. In work. 19, 20.
3. In work. The degrees are these: First, They made a calfe in Horeb.
Secondly, They worshipped the molten Image. Thirdly, They joined themselves to
Baal Peor, namely, in the same yoke, which is more then bare worshipping: they
partake at the table of Devils, for they ate the sacrifices of the dead. ^8.
Fourthly, not only this, but thus being mingled with the Heathen they learned
their works. The former might have been through constraint or ignorance, but
this was willingly and with their choice. But what works? the forenamed, Verse
36.
They served their Idols. And not simply so, but in the most hard, strict and
slavish manner of service; for it follows in my text: Yea, they sacrificed
their Sons and Daughters unto Devils: and verse 38. Shed innocent blood, even
the blood of their Sons and of their Daughters, whom they sacrificed unto the
Idols of Canaan.

Whither now? Surely they are at a height of impiety, they can go no further
then from God to the Devil, from serving of God to serve the Devil: from
serving God with all the heart, soul, mind, strength, to serve the Devil
with all these; yea, in a stricter service then God himself does require at
our hands.

Thus their sins being full, and Idolatries ripe, Gods patience can no longer
expect, but must needs thrust in his sicle: the Regions are white, and yet this
fruit (you may rather call it chafe) is not so white for the floor as dry for
the flame: and therefore their sins being come to an extremity, God also
proceeds to an extremity of punishing (if I may so call it) that is, to his
last and greatest judgment so often threatened, he casts them off, and
disperseth them among the Heathen. God punishes by degrees.
Yet (which was his great mercy) he comes to it by degrees: he proceeds not to
cutting off till the member be quite rotten and dead: mercy moderates his
justice so long as there is hope: and therefore at the first he punishes more
gently, according to their own mind, for, He gave them their request: yet with
a curse, Verse 15.
he gave the^ Quails, But he sent leanness into their souls. Verse 17.18.
And after by a more apparent judgment, the earth swallowed some of them, The
flame burnt up the wicked For the rest that remained, he proceeds by these
degrees: First, He said, 23.
he would destroy them, or minded to destroy them. Secondly, which more is,
26.27.
He lifted up his hand against them -- to scatter them among the Nations.
Thirdly, as if God before had but dallied, now in good earnest, upon their most
grievous transgression, and after this sin mentioned in my text, it is said,
Therefore was the wrath of the Lord kindled against his people: Verse 40.41.
in so much that he abhorred his own inheritance, and gave them into the hand
of the Heathen, and they that hated them ruled over them, etc.

This now is the nature of sin and sinners, never to make an end till they
have brought themselves to destruction. And thus are these same Jews
elsewhere described: First, by their turning away from God, Ezekiel. 23.35. Ier.
2.27. Hos. 7.13. Secondly, by their turning to Idols, Hos. 9.10. Ezekiel. 20.24.
and 6.9. In a word, after a large description of their unthankfulness, and of
their idolatries with Images, this sin mentioned in my Text, comes in the
last place, as the height and complement of all, Ezekiel. 16.20. Moreover, thou
have taken thy sons and thy daughters whom thou have borne unto me, and
these have thou sacrificed unto them, (that is, to Images) to be devoured; is
this thy whoredom a small matter? etc. Lastly, the Prophet, 2 Kings 17.6.7.
etc. to 17. giving a reason of Isreal's captivity, after a long enumeration and
catalogue of their transgressions, rests himself in this, saying, And they
caused their sons and their daughters to pass through the fire. Yea, sold
themselves to do evil in the sight of God: therefore the Lord was angry with
Israel, and removed them out of his sight.

The spreading of their idolatry.
Now that they can go no higher, see yet how this sin spreads it self into
breadth. First, in regard of the sinners themselves, 1 In regard of the Sinners.
not some one, or some few, but they, indefinitly, the children of Israel: it
seems it was a general sin and far spreading. 2 Of the multiplying of Sin.
Secondly, in regard of the multiplication and re^terations of their sins,
according to the number of Idols in the City and out of it. Thus Manasseh shed
innocent blood very much, till he filled Jerusalem from one end to another, 2
Kings 21.16. Thus is Jerusalem said to have built her an high place in every
street, and at every head of the way, -- to have multiplied her whoredoms --
with the Egyptians -- Assyrians -- Canaanites, -- yea, says the Lord, thou
have plated the harlot with them, and yet could not be satisfied, 3 Of the
faculties of soul and body.
Ezekiel. 16.23.24. etc. Thirdly, in regard of all the faculties of soul and
body, Ier. 8.2. all which have been carried to their imagined gods and host
of heaven, whom they have loved, whom they have served, after whom they have
walked, and whom they have sought, and whom they have worshipped. 4 Of the
intention of each faculty.
Fourthly, in regard of the utmost extent and intention of each faculty. Thus
was Samaria set on fire with her lovers, Ezekiel. 23.5. And the Israelites
inflamed, or inflaming themselves with Idols, slaying the children in the
valleys under the clifts of the rocks. Esa. 57.5. O height of impiety! This is
it, by little and little to fall from God, from his only will and worship, and
to give the reins to little beginnings: for thus often God in his lust
judgment gives men over to extremities, punishing coldness in our holy
profession, by giving men over to a superstitious zeal, 2 Thessalonians. 2.10.11.12.
Sending strong delusion, that they should believe and love lies, who believe
and love not the truth.

This is also the nature of sin unresisted: for so one sin causes another.
First, as the efficient cause, one being a bait to another, and a step
thereunto, even as the lesser wedge makes way for the greater. Secondly as the
matter thereof, as drunkenness of lust. Thirdly, as the end thereof, as when
whoredom is the end of theft, increasing of wealth immoderately the end of
false dealing. Fourthly, as the meritorious cause thereof, God often, as is
said, punishing one sin with another. Where these causes concur, especially
when God leaves men to themselves, and to their own corruption, (which being
capable of all forms, may receive the very stamp, print, and image of the
devil himself,) what marvel if from little springs there grow a sea of
wickedness?

We have seen it in these Jews, and may further see it by this gradation: for
we may not think they became suddenly thus extremely evil, but by these
degrees.

Whereas there is a double power to overcome sin, first, the power of Nature,
or of our own free will, such as was in Adam before his fall; and secondly,
the power of Grace by Jesus Christ: These Jews, First, even now since Malach.
4.2.
they began to neglect Christ their promised Messiah, and the only true
Physician. And whereas from this power of Nature and of Grace, Righteousness
is double, Christ's and our own, they, Secondly, proceeded to a mixture of
their Thirdly, from that to their Christ to Moses, from the Gospel to the Law.
Now whereas their own righteousness and obedience is either inward or
outward, they, Fourthly, fell from the inward to the outward only: from the
lips and hand, witness the fifth of Matthew. Now again, this outward obedience
being either in regard of Moral Fifthly, fell from the Moral to an external
Ceremonial holiness, and a looking for of righteousness from their
sacrifices, observation of days, and other Ceremonies, which they preferred
before Mercy, Faith, Obedience. Now Ceremonies are either prescribed by God
himself, or they are only of men's devising: they Sixthly, proceeded to seek
righteousness from ceremonies of their own devising, and from will worship.
Again, these ceremonies and practices are either less impious and
abominable, as the washing of hands, cups, Lastly, fell, namely, to most
wicked practices and superstitions of their own, and such as Gods Law most
plainly condemns, as the prostitution of their daughters, and the sacrificing
of their children to devils; for says my text, Yea, they sacrificed their
sons and their daughters unto devils.

CHAP. II. Containing an Application of the former Chapter.
WAs it thus with the Jews Gods own peculiar people, Romans 3.2. and ^.4.
to whom were committed the Oracles of God, to whom belonged the adoption, and
the glory, and the covenants, and the giving of the Law, and the Service of
God, and the Promises? and may it not be so with us Christians? What better or
greater privileges, promises, or exemptions from possibility of erring have we
then they, further forth then we and they hold our selves to the heavenly
pattern, the only rule of Gods word? Nay, is it not so already with us
Christians? and has not the mystery of iniquity and Idolatry grown to its
height by like degrees? Popery grows on by degrees.
See it in these particulars (not to apply to Papists what was lastly observed
concerning the Jews, which any diligent eye, comparing the one with the other,
1 Worshipping of Images.
may easily do.) First, In the worshipping of Images, many doubt whence this
had its beginning: I doubt not to affirm, from (corrupt) nature, for we see
men naturally delighted with pictures and Images, we see what love and respect
children give to their puppets, how they prefer the resemblance of a Dove or
Dog made into a cake, before the lump or loaf it self; some picture or
puppet made out of silver before the lump or mass of silver: Though with
Plutarch, Plutarch Sympos. 5. qu. ^.
I easily grant that Art and imitation of nature, draw on our affection and
liking to them without any other master; yet I think that is rather in men
grown then in children, who have no judgment of the works either of nature
or Art: but men both upon the former ground, and also naturally delight in
making and beholding pictures, as resemblances of the works of God and nature:
which workmanship of his, seeing they cannot make, they yet imitate and delight
in it. These then are the degrees grounded partly on Nature, partly on Art:
First, Delight. Secondly, Ornament, for so also are they used. Thirdly, they
had also an historical use. But fourthly, honor and respect given to deceased
friends and benefactours, have caused statues to be made and erected, pictures
to be hanged up, first, only in the houses and porches of private friends, but
at the length, in Churches also and Oratories, and that both without and within
the Christian Church. Thus have Emperors and Kings erected their own images,
that they might be worshipped in their images both alive and dead, Dan. 3.1.
as Nebuchadnezzar, and Caius Caligula, in whose Statue was this inscription,
Caius Caligula Caesar Deus. Caius Caligula Emperor and God. These and the like
might be helped forward by fear in men or flattery; or some conceit that these
images were fallen from heaven, as men thought of the image of Diana, Acts
19.35. So within the Church. Thus about the year 705. Polydor. Virgil. de
Invent. lib. 6. cap. 13.
the sixth Synod held at Constantinople ordained that images of Saints should
be in the Church: the pretense was that they might be laymens books. Well,
this once a foot was helped forward by the Devils insinuating himself into
them, speaking and giving answers by them, and working Miracles at them: So
that the honor gained unto them, is by degrees grown so great, that the images
are worshipped and reverenced with the same worship which is given to the
Saints themselves, yea, with greater adoration then ever the Saints living
durst have arrogated to themselves, or do now assume. So that I conclude this
instance about images, as the holy Ghost does the like idolatry, who after a
large description -- says, The workman -- heweth himself down Cedars -- he
will take thereof and warm himself, yea, he kindles it and makes bread;
yea, he makes a god and worshippeth it: he makes it a graven Image and
falls down thereto, Isay 44.15.

2 Invocation of Saints
Secondly, see this also in their Adoration, Invocation, and honoring of the
Saints themselves, which from an anniuersary commemoration without invocation,
is crept up to a superstitious worship and invocation, which invocation at the
first was used only oratorically, by way of Apostrophe, or turning the speech
to the parties deceased: after, men used to commend themselves to the prayers
of their friends, being about to depart this life. Thirdly, after that, to pray
unto them being dead. Fourthly, moreover to honor them also with divine
titles: yea, to honor their very relics, and at length to invoke not only
true Saints, but damned spirits, and such as have justly suffered for treason,
etc. yea, chimaeraes of their own, which of emblematicall pictures have crept
into the Popes Kallender, as Saint George, Saint Christopher, etc.

^ Sacrifice of the Mass.
And is it not thus also in the pretended Sacrifice of the Mass? First, our
forefathers, the better to draw on the Heathen, who were scandalized at the
abolishing of external sacrifices by Christ, taught that the Christian Church
wanted not her sacrifices, but had the sacrifice of Christ; the memory whereof
was celebrated in the Eucharist. Hence, after many years, superstition
increasing, this spiritual sacrifice began to be conceived of grossly, as an
external one: hence transubstantiation, without which the sacrifice could not
be external. From thence Adoration, and an opinion of meriting heaven, even by
the work wrought.

Lastly, 4 Supremacy of the Pope.
the like degrees and ascent we may observe in the whole mystery of iniquity,
and rising of Antichrist. First, all Bishops at the first being ejusdem meriti,
and ejusdem Sacerdotij, of the same merit and of the same order of Priesthood,
the dignity that was in any one above another, was either in regard of more
excellent gifts, or at the most, in regard of place and seat, so was Rome
preferred in regard of the Emperors residence there. Afterward, to avoid
Schism, one had superiority, though no authority over the rest. Then thirdly
crept in Ambition, from whence fourthly, abuse of authority, in Victor, by
unjust excommunication. Then, as a fruit of ambition, and after the appointing
of four Metropolitan Bishops, and the Emperors remouall to Constantinople,
flamed forth Contention; the end and conclusion of which was, that Boniface the
third, should be called (and so after him other Roman Bishops) Oecumenicus,
caput Ecclesiae, and summus Pontifex, that is, Universal Bishop, head of the
Church, and chief Priest. After this, the Popes usurped authority, first over
all other Churches; then, withdrawing the shoulder by little and little from
the Emperor, They are in this form invested: I inuest thee in the Popedom,
Vt praesis V^bi and Orbi.
and refusing to be created by him, they usurped authority over them also, as
did Gregory 7. and took all temporal authority from the Senate and Consuls of
Rome, whom Nicholas the third put down. At length, they now challenge
sovereignty and authority over and above the whole Church, general Councels,
yea, the whole world.

CHAP. III. Containing further Application, concerning the spreading and growth
of sin.
NOw as we have seen the growth, and I hope the height of iniquity in the
Roman Church, so, for all other kinds of sin, if we look over all mankind,
we shall find sin to be of the same spreading and ouerflowing nature, and
that this Serpentine and viperous brood and body of sin winds it self by
little and little, first a finger, then the head, next the body, and lastly the
tail, by which it stings to death: So that where it is not resisted at the
first, like a flood, it breaks the banks, ouerflowes, and lays all wast, as
we may see it both generally and particularly also in regard of each man, in
whom, without good heed taking, sin by degrees grows to an height. For the
general ouerflowing and increase of sin, The spreading and growth of ^^n
generally.
we shall find it in Scripture described all by extremities, as if all
iniquity were now ripe and the world ready to be reaped. First, by an extreme
depth in regard of omissions. Secondly, by an extreme height in regard of
commissions. We shall find a no of omission answering a yea of commission, ^.
Of Omission, ^n regard (...) of persons. ^ sins
and contrariwise. First, by way of Omission: and that whether we consider
first, the persons: thus Ps. 14.3. There is none that does good, no not one: or
secondly, the iniquity of the person, Ezekiel. 5.7. No, ye have not done, says
the Lord, according to the judgment of the nations that are round about you.
No, nor yet as the brute creatures, the Storke, Turtle, Crane, Swallow, which
know their appointed times: but my people, says God, know not the judgment of
the Lord, Ier. 8.7. Resolution
. Or thirdly, the resolution of the person, Ier. 2.25. But thou said
desperately, No, for I have loved strangers, and them will I follow.

^. Of commission, in regard (...) of persons.
Secondly, by way of commission, and that also in regard first of the persons,
Dan. 9.11. Yea, all Israel have transgressed thy law, in so much that death
has passed on all men, for that all have sinned, ^. Of their sins. ^. Number.
Romans 5.12. Secondly, the sins of the persons, and that first for number and
repetition, not once but often committed: Psalm. 78.40.41. How often did they
provoke him in the wilderness, and grieve him in the desert! yea, they turned
back and tempted God. 2. Measure.
Secondly, for quality, manner, degree, and measure of sin: thus Hebr. 11.36.
Others have been tried by mockings and scourgings (of wicked men) yea,
moreover by bonds and prisonment. For this is such a sin for height, Luke 3.20.
3. Impudency.
as Herod added above all his sins when he shut up John in prison. Thirdly,
for impudency, Esaias 3.9. Yea, they declare their sins as Sodom, they hide
them not. Fourthly, for defense and justification of them, 4. Defense.
whereby in a manner merit is ascribed to them, John 16, 2. Yea, the time
comes, that whosoever kills you shall think he does God service. Fifthly,
for delight in sin, Isay 66.3. Yea, 5. Delight.
they have chosen their own ways, and their soul delights in their
abominations. Lastly, for resolution, Zach. 7.12. Yea, 3. Of resolution.
they made their hearts as an Adamant stone, lest they should hear the law.

Now surely if such was the general ouer-flowing of sin, when these things
were written, what may we think is it now in these last days of the world,
wherein Saint Paul has told us, Perilous times shall come, 2 Timothy 3.1.2.3.4.5.
for men shall be lovers of themselves, covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers,
etc. We need not seek far to find many amongst us on whom we might instance
all the former complaints of God and his Prophets, which we might justly take
up against the profane miscreants of our times.

But leaving this general consideration: who feels not in himself, and sees
not in others, each sin without timely resistance made, growing to an height
by the same degrees that man himself from nothing grows to his perfection?
This resemblance I follow the rather, because it is used by S. James, chapter 1. v.
14.15. and Saint Paul, Romans 7.4.5. For sin is a bastardly brood, having the
Devil to its father, and our corruption to the mother, which is the Devils
concubine.

First, Lust, Eleven degrees by which each sin grows to its height.
concupiscence and the corruption of our nature, is as the prostitution of the
soul by which it lies open to the Devils suggestions. Secondly, wicked
thoughts, whether steaming up thence or cast in by Satan, are as the seed in
the womb. Then, sudden delight, is as the retention of the seed in the womb.
Fourthly, Consent is the conception of sin. Fifthly, a more permanent and
enduring delight upon consent, is as the fashioning and articulation of it.
Then Sixthly, purpose to commit sin, is as the springing of the child in the
womb, hastening the birth and egresse. Then seventhly, follows the act it
self, as the birth of sin. These are the degrees about the breeding and
hatching of sin: Yet four more there are about the growth of it, to be
gathered out of Hebr. 3.8.12. which are as the increase, perfect stature,
decaying, and death of man. First, by iteration of the act of sinning, the
heart is hardened: Secondly, it becomes an evil heart: then, an unfaithful
heart: And Lastly, it departs from the living God, by utter falling away from
God, grace, and goodness. Now that which will follow upon all these, is, that
one sin perfited, will draw on and make way for other greater sins, so that
without repentance, men shall proceed from evil to worse, till at the length,
they be tied and bound in infinite chains, and therein kept for the day of
destruction.

Oh therefore that men out of the former considerations, would but lay to heart
this mystical working of sin, that with fear they might either watch
against the first motions of sin, or with speedy repentance but wind
themselves out of the snares of the Devil, as knowing that otherwise God will
one day wound the hairy scalpe of him that goes on in his sin.

We must resist sin at the beginning.
What is then to be done? Surely this should cause us earnestly to entreat, by
daily and unfeigned prayer, that we be not lead into tentation, seeing there is
no sin so great, into which we may not in time fall, especially if God leave
us to our own corruption and Satan's politic stratagems, or otherwise in his
justice give us over from one degree of sin to another. This we may justly
fear, when we are not careful to resist sin at the first. If we give
entertainment to evil thoughts, and lodge them (...) our hearts, Satan seeing
how kindly we receive and entreat his harbingers, will come himself, attended
with legions, and take up the best room in our hearts, out of which he will
not be dislodged, till we seek to, and give welcome to Christ and his spirit,
a stronger then Satan. Here then is use and need of our diligence,
watchfulness and wisdom. Oh that we could be but as wise in this kind as
others are wicked. Harlots which prostitute their bodies to filthy lusts,
labor by all means they can, either to hinder the conception, or to kill the
child in the womb, or to drown it, or otherwise to make away with it
afterward, that so they may avoid the shame of the world, and charge of
bringing it up. When Pharaoh would hinder the multiplying of the children of
Israel in Egypt, Come on, Exodus 1.10.16.22.
says he to his people, let us deal wisely with them, lest they multiply.
Hereupon, as he set hard Taske-masters over them, so he commanded the Hebrew
Midwiues, when they did the office of a Midwife to the Hebrew women, to kill
all the males. Which when it took not effect, he then charged all his people,
saying, Every son that is borne, ye shall cast into the river. Happy we, if
we were so wise in dealing thus with the children and fruit of our
concupiscence, either to hinder the conception of them by not consenting, or
the birth by not committing sin, or being borne, to dash these little ones,
the children of confusion, against the stones, Psalm. 137.9.
or rock Christ Jesus.

But alas! sin and Satan are too wily for us, and our own hearts too
treacherous, and our nature weak; so that in this state of mortality, we
cannot possibly hope to be free of sin: Humanum est labi, errare, decipi.
we must cease to be men before we can hope to cease from sinning. To sin, is
inseparable from man's nature; and that man does sin, it must be ascribed to
humane frailty, as its said of Ephraim and Judah, Hos. 6.7.
But they like men have transgressed the covenant. What then? Seeing we cannot
but sin, shall we delight in sin? God forbid. Thus of men we should become
beasts, namely filthy dogs and swine, 2 Pet. 2.22.
whose property it is to return to the vomit, and to wallow in the mire. Much
less then must we become devils, by defending known sin, or being enemies
of righteousness, or resisting the good motions of Gods Spirit, or the truth;
for which Elymas deserved the name of child of the devil. Act. 13.8.10.


Our only way then is, to be as zealous in good, We must show a proportionable
zeal against sin.
as ever we have been forward in evil: and (whereas perfection in this life
is to be measured rather by our desires, affections, resolutions, and
endeavors, then by performance) to show our zeal, first, by our hatred of
evil, 1 By our confession.
and our confessing and bewailing of sin, aggravating it against our selves,
by the same degrees by which we trespassed against God, Dan. ^5 and 7.
saying with Daniel for himself and the people in captivity, We have sinned,
and have committed iniquity, and have done wickedly, yea, we have rebelled and
departed from thy precepts, etc.

2 In our new obedience and willingness
Secondly, by being ready and willing to our power, yea beyond our power, to
yield obedience to Gods Commandments; that so, for our readiness and
resolution to obey, we may say with David, Psalm 40.8 Psalm. 11^.34
I delight to do thy will, O my God, yea, thy law is within my heart: and pray
with him, Give me understanding, and I shall keep thy law, yea, I shall
observe it with my whole heart: that so it may be said of us generally in
respect of all good duties, what Paul said of the Macedonians in the matter of
alms, 2 Cor. ^ 2
To their power, I bear record, yea, beyond their power they were willing.
This resolution to obey God, even in his hardest commands, whether by obedience
active or passive, our Savior Christ would have to be in us all, Luke 14 20.
saying, If any man come to me, and hate not his father and mother, and wife,
and children, and brethren, and sisters, yea and his own life also, he cannot
be my disciple. This affection was in S. Paul, and should be in us, when for
Christ's sake and the Gospels, he said to the Philippians, Yea, Philip. 2.^^.
and if I be offered upon the sacrifice and service of your faith, I joy and
rejoice with you all.

3. In our sorrow for sin.
Thirdly, by our sorrow for sin committed, and by the fruits thereof, that so
also it may be said of us, as S. Paul said of the Corinthians, 2 Cor. ^ ^^
Behold this selfsame thing that ye sorrowed after a godly sort, what
carfulness it wrought in you, yea, what clearing of your selves, yea, what
indignation, yea, what fear, yea, what vehement desire, yea, what zeal, yea,
what revenge. Such Yeaes as these would echo well to this Yea in my text,
where it is said, Yea, they sacrificed their sons and their daughters unto
Devils.

THE HEIGHT of ISREAL'S Heathenish Jdolatrie.
PSALM. 106.37. Yea, they sacrificed their sons and their daughters unto
Devils.


SECTION II.
CHAP. I. Wherein is proved that the gods of the Heathen were Devils.
NOw let us consider this sin in particular: and because it is a sin of
this nature, belonging to Idolatry and false worship, Of the Idol gods of the
Jews and Heathen.
let us first take a view of these Idol gods: Secondly, of the sacrifices and
service done unto them.

Its here said, They sacrificed (...) to devils, or to destroyers and spoilers,
so called from the effect: not to any Platonicall or good Demon, but to the
devil himself our malicious adversary. If we compare this place with Deuteronomy.
12.31. we shall see that these devils were the gods of the Heathen. There the
Lord forbids his people to do unto him as the Heathen did to their gods, for
they, says the text, have even burnt in the fire their Sons and Daughters to
their gods: and Deuteronomy. 32.17. Moses in his Song complains of the Israelites,
that they sacrificed unto devils, not to God, to gods whom they knew not; to
new gods that came newly up. These gods were the Idols of Canaan, verse 38. of
this Psalm: and the Idol Moloch, whereof in particular God gave his people
caveat, Leuit. 18 21. which Idol was the Image of a Calfe, vast and hollow,
having seven chambers or rooms in it, according to the variety of several
gifts and sacrifices which were to be consumed in it: whereof one was appointed
for a sheep, another for a lamb, a third for a calfe, but the last was for
children, who by their parents were cast in and burnt quick.

that they were Devils. ^^oued. ^ From Scrip^^^^
Here we will show, first, that the gods of the Heathen were indeed Devils.
Secondly, How Devils came to be acknowledged and worshipped for gods. That
they were Devils, will plainly appear, if first we consult with the Oracles of
God: Saint Paul tells us, 1. Cor. 10.20. that the things which the Gentiles
sacrifice, they sacrifice to Devils, and not to God. (...). Where (...)
signifies evil spirits and the very Devils, according to the use of Scripture,
which by (...) understands diabolos, Devils, as 1. Tim. 4.1. where mention is
made of doctrines of Devils, (...), Thus Leuit. 17.17. God charge his people
that they shall no more offer their offerings unto Devils, after whom they
(that is the Gentiles) have gone a whoring. And so is Rehoboam said, 2 Chronicles,
11.15. to have ordained him Priests for the high places, and for the Devils,
and for the Calves, which he made: and my text is plain, which says, They
sacrificed their Sons and Daughters unto Devils.

^ From their accepting of sacrifice. See Baruch. chap. 6.
A further proof hereof is, that they were neither the true God, for Saint Paul
tells the Galathians, chapter 4.8. that when they knew not God, they did service to
them which by nature are no gods: neither good Angels; for they both require
and accept sacrifices, which good Angels, know to be due to the true God only:
and so indeed they are, for, says Saint Augustine, August de Civit. Dei. lib.
10. cap. 19.
As when we pray to or praise God, we direct our words to him only to whom we
offer in our hearts the thing signified by our words: so, in our sacrifices, we
offer not any visible sacrifice, but to him Non altere quam illi, cuius in
cordibus nostris, invisibile sacrificium nosipsi^sse debemus.
only to whom we owe the invisible sacrifice of our own hearts and selves.
Therefore, the good Angels being perfect in charity both toward God and man,
will neither, by accepting any sacrifice, dishonor God; which even good men,
Paul and Barnabas, Acts 14.14.15.
refused to do; nor, seeing they love us as themselves, will they have us to
attain happiness by other means then they themselves do: so that, seeing,
as the same Father says, August. ut supr. lib. 10. cap. b. 4.7.19.25.26.
The sum of both Tables is fulfilled in this, that we should Et a quibus
diligimur duci, and quos diligimus ducere.
both be gained to God our selves by such as love us, and gain and draw
others, whom we truly love, to God: therefore, good Angels truly loving us,
will accept Nolunt nos sibi sacrificare, sed ei, cuius and ipsi nobiscum
sacrificium esse noverunt.
no sacrifice from us to themselves, as knowing it is to be offered to him
only, to whom both they and we jointly, do owe our selves in sacrifice.
Therefore I conclude, Daemonum est haec arrogantia superboru^, etc. It is only
the Devils pride against God, and malice against man, which dares presume to
require or accept any sacrifice to it self from man.

If this be not proof enough, 3. From their inioyning and accepting sacrifices
of men.
we need no better argument to discover the nature of these gods, then this
very service in my text, accepted of them: for both by the record of sacred
writ, and relation of heathen Authors and other writers, we know, that nothing
was so usually commanded nor gratefully accepted by these heathenish gods, as
was the shedding of man's blood, Orosius lib. 4. cap. 6. Trogus, Lactantius lib.
1. etc.
and the sacrificing of men, maids, and children unto them, as appears by the
usual practice of men in former times.

To the testimonies of Scripture mentioned formerly, I add only the example
of the King of Moab, Sacrifices of men.
mentioned 2. Kings 3.27. where it is said, that being in some straits, he
took his eldest son that should have reigned in his stead, Among the Heathen.
and offered him for a burnt offering upon the wall.

The stories likewise of the Heathen are full of like examples: when the Oracle
of Apollo was asked by the Athenians how they might make amends for their
killing of Androgeus, it willed them to send yearly to King Minos, seven
bodies of each sex to appease the wrath of god. Now this kind of yearly
sacrifice continued still in Athens in the time of Socrates. Thus the
Carthagineans, being vanquished by Agathocles King of Sicilie, and supposing
their god to be displeased, to appease him, did sacrifice two hundred noble
men's children. This custom was ancient even before the Troyan war, for then
was Iphigenia sacrificed. Thus we read that the Latins sacrificed the tenth
of their own children to Jupiter: that men and children were usually
sacrificed to Saturn in many places, in Candy, Rhodomene, Phenice, Afric;
and those commonly the choice and dearest of their children, and most nobly
descended. The manner of sacrificing their children to Saturn, Diodorus
Bibliothec. lib. 20. Ludouicus Vi^es ad August. de ciuit Dei. lib. 7. cap. 19.
Diodorus relates to be this: Bringing their children to the statue or image
of Saturn, which was of huge greatness, they gave them into his hands, which
were made so hollow and winding, that the children offered, slipped and fell
down through, into a cave and furnace of fire. These sacrifices continued in
use, till the birth and death of our Savior Christ, who came to destroy the
works of the Devil: for such sacrifices were first forbidden by Augustus
Caesar; after, more generally by Tiberius, (in whose reign our Savior
suffered) who, as Tertullian writes, so straitely forbade them, that he
crucified the Priests who offered them: howbeit, even in Tertullians time, and
after in Eusebius and Lactantius times, such sacrifices were offered, (but
closely) to Jupiter Latialis.

Who can now doubt, seeing such exceeding superstitious cruelty, but that the
gods commanding such sacrifices, were very Devils and enemies to mankind? God
commands no such thing, but forbids it, and threatens plagues to his people,
Ier. 19.5.
because they had forsaken him, and built the high places of Baal, to burnt
their sons with fire, for burnt offerings unto Baal, which, says God, I
commanded. not, neither spoke it, neither came it into my mind. Most infallibly
then we may conclude, that none but Satan that Arch-deuill with his Angels,
were the commanders of such service, for this agrees right well with his
nature, who has been a murderer from the beginning. John 8.^4.
Nothing delights him more then the shedding and spilling of Quia omnium
sem^^^m optimum est genus h^manum, Aug. de Ciuit. ^ei, lib. 7 c^^. 19.
man's blood, in so much, that if but a bond be to be sealed to him by his
devoted slave (his bondslaue) it must be written with his blood. If it please
some French R^sort I. bauiu^si^^g. lartum p^rte ^ecunda c^sser at. 5.
Lord to write a book of Magic, it must be done with the blood of some
twenty children It is ordinary with our late Jews, for and in their ex^^tions,
to use the Vide Crusium lib. 7. partis 3. annalium and Langium lib. 7. ep. 71.
blood of christian Infanes which has cost many of them their lines. Thus we
read that Nicephorus and Socrates.
Julian the Aposta^e Emperor did celebrate with manslaughter his
magicke-sacrifices; who also, in imitation of as good a master, Heli gabalus,
sacrificed many men, only for the inspection of their intralls, thereby to
make conjecture of future events.

From which premises, we may further conclude, that the gods, Sacrifices of
men among the Americans.
whom the poor Americans of the West Indies have, and in part do yet serve
with such bloody sacrifices of men, are no other, then the same devils, who
there especially bear sway, where Christ and the Gospel is not heard of.
Joseph. Acosta his natural and moral history of the Indies, lib. 5. cap.
19.20.
We read in their histories of infinite sacrifices of this kind: of a certain
number sacrificed in their feasts, which were monthly, yearly, and every 52.
year: where, in some 5. in some 10. in some 100. and in some 1000. were
sacrificed. Other set times for such sacrifices were at the sprouting and
increase of their corn, in the beginning and in their undertaking of war; at
the Coronation of their Kings, at the death of their Kings and great men, when
sometimes 200. sometimes 1000. of all sorts died in sacrifice with them,
according to the custom of the ancient Romans, whose servants used to be
slain at their masters funeral; in stead whereof, Of which Infra
Sword players were appointed from among such as were guilty and condemned
persons, who were also set to fight with wild beasts, especially with bulls:
which custom is still in use in Spain, as witnesses their own Mariana The
number of men thus sacrificed by these barbarous nations must needs be
exceeding great, Mariana lib. de spectaculis, fine.
as appears by what we read of the practice of Motecuma, last Emperor of
Mexico, who sending one of his Nobles to entertain Ferdinando Cortez, the
first conqueror of these parts, and to relate unto him his greatness; his
greatest argument thereof was, that he sacrificed yearly to his gods 20000.
men, yea some years 50000. For which cause he reserved the Province of
Tlascalla unsubdued, that from thence as occasion served, he might have
captives for the sacrifices of his gods, for such especially they used to
sacrifice, as were taken in war: herein following the custom of the ancient
Romans, who hereupon, as is thought, called their sacrifice Victima, as of a
thing conquered; and Hostia, quasi ab host, it being an offering made of their
enemies.

The manner used by them in their sacrificing was this: Their Priests did open
their breasts, take out their hearts, and cast them at the Idols face.
Ludouicus Viues on S. August De Ciuit. Dei, lib. 7. c. 19
It seems elsewhere it was by burning also: for Ludouicus Viues tells us of an
Island found out in his time by French Mariners, who called it from their Kings
name Carolina, wherein they saw many images of their gods made of brass, and
hollow, wherein children were most cruelly burnt and sacrificed; sacrificed I
say, even to the same gods, to whom the heathen, and these Jews in imitation
of the heathen, sacrificed, to wit, to devils, for they sacrificed their sons
and their daughters unto devils.

CHAP. II. How the Devil became the god of the Heathen.
How Satan came to be worshipped as God among the Heathen. Grounds laid.
NOw in the next place we come to inquire how and by what means these wicked
Fiends attained to be acknowledged and worshipped for gods. Here these
following Grounds must be taken for granted.

First, Man cannot, nay will not be without a God. This

for his sin; and therefore is man naturally ignorant of Gods will, and how
he will be served.

Thirdly and chiefly, God (that he might be acknowledged faith we believe what
he promises, and receive what he offers; which we do in the word and
Sacraments: Secondly, that by obedience inward and outward we both promise and
perform what he requires in his laws both moral and ceremonial, by giving
him the inward sacrifice of the heart, as also outward oblations and
sacrifices, and by the celebration of Feasts by way of thankfulness to him.

Yet more, for the further manifestation of his sovereignty and Godhead, and
for the confirmation of our faith in his promises, he (yet long since more then
now) wrought many miracles, and foretold us of things to come, whereunto he
requires our assent and belief.

These things granted: we further presuppose, the suttleties and sleights of
Satan, that he is able (by Gods permission, which we also presuppose, as
without which he can do nothing) to seduce and mislead man's ignorance, to the
acknowledging and worshipping of false gods, and of himself. Further, that as
by his suttletie he can do this, so his pride against God and malice against
us is such, that he will do it, and which indeed he does accordingly. Now
let us see how.

He knowing that it is a principle left in man's nature, to acknowledge a God,
which he cannot extinguish, therefore takes the advantage of man's natural
knowledge, and where it is wanting of it self, and not able to discern of the
true God, he takes upon him to direct it, and so sets it on that which is no
God, namely on himself. But how is this done? By imitating Gods dealings with
his Church.
In one word, by transforming himself into an Angel of light, and by
imitating the true God, and by counterfetting his dealings with his Church: for
he knowing how hateful he is to all mankind, and how little like to prevail,
Mali nitas daemonum, nisi alicubi se transfiguret in Angelum ^^ci, non im^let
negotium e^^ptionis. August. De Ciuit. De^, lib. 2. cap. 26.
if in his own name he should do any thing, therefore by imitating God and
his works, he winnes that credit to himself which otherwise he might de^paire
of.

Therefore first, as God made a covenant with his people, that he would be
their God: so Satan ioynes in league with the world, laboring thus to bind
men to himself, which he does either implicitly or explicitly, either openly
or covertly. 1. In p^omising.


2. Sealing.
Secondly, as God has his word and Sacraments as seals of his covenant unto
believers: so the devil has his words, and certain outward signs to ratify
the same to his instruments; and in imitation of the Sacrament of Circumcision,
he imprints some secret mark or other in the bodies of such as more specially
deuote themselves unto him, as in the mouth, or under the hair of the body.

3. Requiring
Thirdly, as God requiring our service, obedience, and faith, requires also the
testifications thereof, by Invocation, Thanksgiving, and Sacrifices: so does
the devil.

1. Invocation,
First, he also will be inuocated, and he hears them that call upon him
according to his will, when God permits him.

2 Thanksgiving
Secondly, for Thanksgiving: As God had his yearly Feasts among the Jews for
their remembrance of former benefits received: By Feasts.
so had the devil his among the Gentiles; some of them answering in the time
of the year, and in other circumstances, to the Feasts ordained of God. I will
instance only in the Feast of Tabernacles, which, as we may read Leuit. 23.33.
etc. was kept on the fifteenth day of the seventh month, which fell in Autumn
in the time of vintage, for the celebrating of which feast they had certain
Psalms fitted, to wit, as Saint Hierome observes, three; the 8.80. and 83.
whose titles, says he, make mention of wine-presies, by an elegant trope
intimating the month of September, namely the time of gathering grapes. Now
the Heathen at the same time, in the vintage, and with imitation of the manner,
did celebrate the feast of their drunken god Bacchus, namely with filthy songs,
wanton motions, lascivious dauncings, with the like.

Thirdly, 3. Sacrifices and offerings.
we know God had his sacrifices as exercises to keep his people in his
service and worship, and them performed with diverse ceremonies: so likewise,
the gods of the Heathen, because they would needs play the apes with God in all
things, required this service also after the example of the old Testament; and
that with observation of many like circumstances, which the rather they used,
as to deceive the Heathen; so, in likelihood, in time to come, the more easily
to draw on the Jews to heathenish superstition, when they should see the same
or like services to their own: as indeed the event proved.

Now God required the firstlings of their fruits and cattle, 1. Of fruits and
beasts.
that they should acknowledge themselves beholding to him for them; on the
contrary, these gods require the acknowledgement of such things to be made to
themselves, and to their Images. And as God, so did the ancient heathenish
gods inioyne the sacrifice of brute beasts, where we know that among the
Jews, Lambs especially, and more ordinarily were used in sacrifice, as in the
daily sacrifice morning and evening, and in their most celebrated ^^^st and
sacrament of the Passover, Exodus 12.3. etc.
used to signify and typifie Jesus Christ, who is called, the Lamb slain
from the beginning of the world: In which sacrifices then, and now in Christ,
1. John 2.2.
they and we find reconciliation with God through his blood. So did the
Gentiles also, in case of reconciliation with their gods, sacrifice Lambs:
thence comes the word (...) from (...) or (...) a Lamb, which is all one in
signification with (...), consiliare, to reconcile: and from thence is (...)
pugno, decerto, etc. (...), signifying to hate irreconciliably, and (...).

Particularly men
But God moreover commanded Abraham to sacrifice his son: in which, as in all
others, Christ in his humane nature was signified; wherein he should be
sacrificed and dye for the sins of the world. Hereupon the Devil must needs
put this also into the heads of the Heathen, namely, to sacrifice men, and so
to lay the sins of a whole City or Country, upon the back of some one poor
wretch, to make an atonement for the rest. To give but one instance: ^
The Leucades, as Strabo reports, yearly made choice of some notorious
malefactor, and sacrificed him for the whole.

^
If we cast our eyes on diverse circumstances about the sacrifices of the Jews,
we shall find the like among the Heathen

A^ ^^^^^ing.
First, the Priests were commanded to wash themselves with Water before they
executed the Priests office in the Temple. (...) Satur^ (...)
So the Heathen being to sacrifice, Dijs superis, to the higher and superior
gods, they did corpus abluere aqua, wash their whole body with water: but if,
Dijs inferis, (...). 13. O^ Sa^t. ^in. lib. 3^ (...) 7, and lib. ^1. (...) 18.
Nec (...) propit^^ ^^am dii mola (...) a supplicanti^^^, imo vera p^a^atio^e
Lucret. lib. 1. ^^am fundere Bacchum Coepe^^t, obliquoque molas inducere ^^^ro.
(...) ro^^ E^log. 8 ^arge molam.
to the lower gods, then did they only aspergere, besprinkle themselves.

Secondly, we know the meat offerings must be seasoned with Salt, and that upon
all oblations salt should be offered. Now that this was an accustomed thing in
the sacrifices offered to false gods, Pliny witnesses, saying, Sacra nulla
perficiuntur sine mola salsa: that is, no offerings nor sacrifices were made
without a cake made of meal and salt Hence came the Latin word Immolatio,
which signifies a sacrificing, from the putting or placing of this salt cake
upon the beasts head, for the custom of the Romans was, that when the beast
was brought to the Altar, after the^r prayers and other ceremonies were
finished, the priest either laid this cake on the beasts head with
frankincense, or breaking and crumming it, sprinkled it on the offering.

Thirdly, 3. Of Fire.
again we know that God sent Fire from heaven, which consumed the sacrifices
of Moses, Elias, and Solomon: this though the devil cannot do, yet would he
seem to do, and therefore (to content my self with one only example) when
Seleucus was sacrificing at Pella, the wood on the Altar turned it self (as it
seemed) to Jupiters image, and so took fire. And as God commanded that the
fire which he sent down to consume the first burnt offering that Moses made
on the Altar, Leuit. 9.24.
should burn continually on the Altar, and never be put out, Leuit. 6.12.13.
See Laps. de Vestae and vestalibu^.
so we know that both the Romans had their Temple and vestall virgins for the
continual keeping in of their fire, which at the first was, and should after
(if by any occasion it went out) be kindled at the Sunbeams only; as also
the Persians, Medes, Chaldaeans, Assyrians* Graecians, had their peculiar
Temples for it, and indeed made a god of it, sacrificed to it, kept solemn
feasts in honor of it: only because they had such a conceit that the fire
from heaven which God sent to consume the sacrifices of the Jews, should be
God himself appearing in likeness of fire, which their custom no doubt, was
derived from the Jews, as appears by the Latin and Greek names of fire,
Vesta, and (...) in neither tongue signifying any thing, but being indeed
Hebrew words compounded of Esh and Iah, which signify fire of God. So the
Persians called their fire Orimasda, corruptly from the Jewish language, and so
the Egyptians their Seraphim.

These were the apish toys of Satan among the Heathen concerning sacrifices,
not that he was so much delighted with them, as with that which he gained by
them. What was that? honor to himself, hurt to us. Aug^^t C^^^^. Dei, (...).
cap. 1^ Nec (...) aliud ^^laces (...)
Non enim reuera, says Saint Augustine, cadauerinis nidoribus, sed diuinis
honoribus gaudent: they delight not so much in the savor of the dead
sacrifices, as in the favor and divine honors given them by the sacrificers.
They require sacrifice, because they know it is due to the true God only, and
also because it is hurtful for man to give it: for as says the same Father,
Their delight is in having the affection of the ^^^^ificers through their
deceit subjected to them, ^
that so our (...) b^ no acceptable sacrifice to God, nor ought we can (...) we
(...) to any (...) to the true God only.

Now to proceed: we may ye^ note that in nothing more has (...) Devil
imitated God, then in such things as cannot proceed but from infinite Power and
Wisdom, which are peculiar properties to the only true God: and these are
especially, the certain foreshewing of things to come, and the working of
Miracles, or the doing of good and evil: by the counterfetting of which two,
the heathenish gods, or devils, so far prevailed, that God is in a manner
forced to vindicate his own honor, whereof they robbed him, bidd^ng them
produce their cause, ^
and bring forth their strong ^ea^on^: what were they? Show, says the Lord,
the things that are to come hereafter, that we may know that ye are gods: yea
(...) good or do evil, that we may be dismayed and behold it (...). Where we
see, that howsoever these heathenish gods could not maintain their own cause
and godhead with God, but that they should be convinced, confuted and
confounded by their own weapons; (...) G^^^
yet we cannot deny but by these two they bewitched the Heathen, and withdrew
their service, faith, and devotions, from God to themselves. Let us see the
truth hereof in each severally, and in both jointly.

^
First, for Predictions: God, for the better accomplishment of his promise made
to Adam in Paradise, for the instructing of his people, and the showing of his
providence, did reveal many things to come, to our forefathers, and that by
diverse ways and means: herein has Satan imitated God, and robbed him of his
honor, namely by foretelling strange events, by promises and by threatenings:
wherein, besides Gods just permission, he had many helps, whereby he is
furnished with knowledge sufficient to de^^ide our ignorance, and to draw on
simple men, who naturally are curiously inquisitiue after novelties and future
events, and as credulous to believe whatsoever shall be told them.

CHAP. III. A digression (neither unnecessary nor impertinent) concerning the
knowledge of Devils, and the means thereof, whereby they become furnished with
matter of prediction.
SAtan has ever been (as now he also is) the great Witch of the world: be the
instruments what they will, he was the first mouer. The parts or kinds of
witchcraft are two: for it is either Divining, consisting in matter of
prediction and conjecture; or Working, consisting in matter of practice By both
these Satan bewitched the heathen, and Gods people so far as they hearkened
unto him. In which regard, God jealous of his own honor, and zealous of his
peoples good, challenged the gods of the heathen (indeed devils) concerning
both these, in the place formerly alleged, Isa. 41.23. We are to speak of
them both, but first of Prediction.

By the warrant of the forenamed place, God only p^^p^^l^ can (...) show
things (...).
we may set down this conclusion: It is the property of God only to show the
things that are to come hereafter; that is, to foreshew, first, things in
themselves considered, without respect to their

Let us then consider of Diabolical Prediction and Divination, what, how far
forth and in what manner Satan can foretell any thing. And whereas all
prediction and fore-shewing of any thing does necessarily include and
presuppose Prescience or foreknowledge at the least, in the first Author of
prediction, (for else we know that Satan's prophets often spoke they knew not
what themselves) my purpose is to speak somewhat of the knowledge of devils,
in this chapter; and after of the ways and means whereby they used to
manifest to men this their knowledge.

Now for our better conceiving what knowledge they have, let us first briefly
see what knowledge they had before their fall: secondly, what after; and that
either retained and old (as I may call it) or else new and attained unto by
other means.

1. What knowledge the Devil had before his fall.
For the first. The very names given unto them, as well by profane Writers as
divine, does sufficiently euince their great and wonderful knowledge. The
heathen, though ignorant of the creation and fall of Angels, yet seem to
acknowledge very great natural knowledge to be in them, when they call them by
the general name of (...), common as well to good as bad spirits. The word
(...) signifies so much as (...), sciens, or one endued with knowledge:
insomuch that Aristotle, in regard of his great knowledge, is called by some
(...), and so is Plato called by Plutarch: and Homer of Dionysius is called
(...). Yea Plato calls God himself magnum (...), in regard of his
omnisciencie. Which yet we must take with this difference: God is (...) or
sciens, knows what he knows ipsa essentia by his essence; others in
comparison, as Angels, who are (...), scientes sua natura, endued with
knowledge naturally; and men, who are habitu scientes, and attain to the habit
of knowledge. This name of (...) or demon, is by Christians given only to
wicked fiends, in regard both of their knowledge in which they were created, as
also of that which in part they still retain. The Scripture calls the Angels
indifferently at their creation, in regard of their knowledge, (...) stars of
light, ^ob 38.7.
or morning stars: and thus is Satan called Lucifer, or morning star, Isa.
14.12. where the King of Babylons fall and ruin is resembled by Satan's fall
from heaven. (...) 10.18.
And thus said our Savior, I saw Satan like lightning fall down from heaven.
But in particular: The knowledge which was common to all the Angels before
their fall, was either natural, or supernatural: Natural, which was given
them of God at their creation, whereby, as S. Augustine says, they saw and
knew God the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, and also the creatures, and that
either in the Word or Son of God, by whom all things were made, and in whom
are the Ideaes and Images of all things: this knowledge, of S. Augustine is
called scientia matutina and diurna, morning and day-knowledge: Or secondly, in
the proper natures of the things themselves; and this is called vespertina,
euening-knowledge, as being more obscure then the former: Or thirdly, as
Aquinas says, per species in suis mentibus innatas, by the images and
impressions of things connate, inbred, and naturally in their minds.
Supernatural knowledge is that whereby they knew diverse supernatural things
only by a supernatural gift of knowledge, which is double: The first, simply
to know any supernatural thing, as that God is just, good, of infinite power,
etc. but without all love or trust in God. The second, which is joined with
love of God, with fear, and affiance in him; which some distinguishing, call
divine knowledge, and the former only supernatural. This knowledge, howsoever
it was most excellent in them before the fall, yet even then was it infinitely
inferior to Gods omniscience: so that they were ignorant of their own fall
and rebellion, of the mystery of man's salvation, of casual and contingent
effects not yet in act, of the turnings and windings, and secret thoughts of
man's heart, unto which their eyesight could not attain, unless God did open
their eyes to see them.

Now being fallen, if the question be, 2. What knowledge the Devil lost by the
fall, and what knowledge he still retains.
what knowledge they have lost by their fall, and what they still retain; I
answer, that no question but their knowledge is much blemished and darkened, so
that whereas formerly they were bright morning-starres, and lightning, in
regard of their clear knowledge, now they are said to be in darkness, yea
darkness it self, cast out headlong from heaven a place of light, 2 Pet. 2 4.
Jude verse ^
to hell a black dungeon of darkness, being delivered into chains of
darkness, to be kept unto damnation, and all because they abode not in the
truth, which is a good can eat for us. More particularly I answer, first, for
their natural knowledge, none doubts but that now they know the same things
for substance, both divine and angelical, humane and terrestrial, which they
knew before, yet more obscurely then before, as man by his fall had his mind
much obscured, Gods justice required so much.

Secondly, their supernatural knowledge is wonderfully obscured, for they are
ignorant of very many things, which if they had not fallen they should have
known: yet is it not quite none, seeing we read in Scripture that they knew
and confessed Christ to be the Son of God, and that he was come to dissolve
their wicked works, to torment and to condemn them; that the Apostles were
the servants of the most high God, and consequently that Christ was the most
high God, whose servants the Apostles were. But because such knowledge of
Christ and of the Gospel, though fruitless and dead, cannot proceed from
flesh and blood, but only from divine revelation, either by good Angels, or by
the effects of Gods power and providence, manifested to them, therefore we
cease further to speak of it till we come to the third branch of their
knowledge, which we observed and called attained, or new knowledge.

Now lastly, for saving knowledge joined with love and confidence in God, they
have no part at all in it, though no doubt but the good Angels have it both
much increased, and most strongly and immutably confirmed in them. And this was
the shrewdest and forest blow of all the rest, whereby they were deprived of
this saving and true knowledge, because they abode not in the truth.

But yet, you may say, this lets nor but that their knowledge may be sufficient
enough to foresee such things as Oracles have foretold, and which far
surpass the reach of man's foresight. Therefore let us consider these two
points, which are very pertinent. The first is, what things they can certainly
know and foretell, and what not. The second more particular, whether and how
far forth they knew the secret thoughts and affections of man's heart.

For the first, 1. Whether Satan can certainly know and foretell future
contingents.
we must briefly know that things to come may be known two ways, either in
themselves, or in their causes and signs. In themselves, when things not yet
existing are as certainly foreseen as if they were present and laid open in
our sight: which is done either by the proper motion and spirit of the
foreseer, and this is Gods property alone; or by inspiration from God, and so
Gods Prophets both saw many things in themselves by illumination from God, and
also told them before they were. In their causes are future things foreseen,
when by the viewing and beholding of their causes, we gather that such or such
effects will follow. Now because effects flow from their causes either
necessarily, the causes being such as cannot be hindered, as is the eclipse of
the Sun or Moon; or, though not of mere necessity, nor of mere chance, yet
for the most part and most commonly they follow their causes, which yet may
sometimes be hindered in their operations, as seed sown, by diverse occasions
is hindered that it does not always sprout out, spindle and become corn: or
lastly, wholly casually and contingently, their causes being altogether
indeterminate and indifferent. Hence it is that Satan and his instruments may
certainly know the first kind of effects, which even men can certainly see
and foretell. And for the second kind, howsoever men cannot certainly, but
only coniecturally and probably foresee the events of things; yet Satan may,
at the least more certainly then men, foresee them, as more exquisitely
knowing the nature of their causes, and whether or no there be any impediment
which may hinder their actual existence; yet because such impediments often are
sent from God immediately, whose secret will they are ignorant of, hence we
also safely conclude, that even such effects cannot infallibly be known by
the Devil beforehand, for God has said, Isay. 44.25.
I destroy the tokens of the Southsayers, and make them that conjecture fools.
But concerning the third and last kind, where the question is, whether devils
know things merely contingent or no, without special revelation, as that
Judas was to betray Christ, and the like; I answer, that to know such things
certainly belongs only to the true Jehovah, and cannot be known precisely
either by man or Angel, good or bad, unless God reveal the same. As for
example, to know beforehand the time and kind of a man's death, is contingent,
of which the good Angel professes himself to be ignorant when he was asked
by Esdras concerning that mattter. (...)
So likewise many things were to befall the Church after Saint John's time,
which the Angel could not foretell but by revelation from Christ, yea Christ
himself revealed such things only to John, which he as man, received from
his Father and from his own divinity. Much less then can any wicked spirit
naturally foreknow any such contingent effect, howsoever they may conjecture
better of these things then we men. Therefore, seeing we speak not of a
coniecturall but of a certain and infallible knowledge of future contingents,
we conclude that no such thing can be foreknowne or foretold by devils
certainly without revelation.

2. Whether and how ta^^^ Satan (...) man's (...).
Now for the second question, whether and how farreforth they know the secrets
and thoughts of man's heart; (for if it be granted that they do know them, then
doubtless they may foreshew many things which they see a plotting and
contriuing, to diverse who are ignorant of other men's secret plots and
practices) to this I answer, that Devils cannot know any man's thoughts
certainly and of themselves, unless they be made known by some outward
sign or effect in the body, or by divine revelation, or the like.

To make this plain: we may consider our thoughts either as yet future and not
actually in our understandings, or else as present. Now what shall be our
thoughts a week, month, or year hence, no Devil, yea not our selves can
aforehand understand and know; this belongs only to him who knows aforehand
all kinds of impediments, whereby the will, being of it self most inconstant
and variable, may be hindered from effecting this or that: Pro^e^^ (...)
The heart of the King is in the hand of the Lord, and he turns it
whithersoeuer it pleases him: and so are all our hearts in Gods hand. To whom
now can this hand of God and his inclining of our wills be known aforehand, but
to himself alone? Again, what Angel or Devil can certainly foresee the
alteration of man's body, what passions shall possess him, what good counsel,
precepts and admonishments shall be given him? all which may be lets and
hindrances of the will.

Now secondly, concerning our thoughts as they are actually present in our
understandings, we may consider the object and the act. The object is the
species, as we call it, phantasme or representation and image of any thing made
in the imagination and fantasy about which our mind is busied. This I will
not deny but that absolutely and simply in it self considered, it may be
seen and known by the Devil or an Angel, who can either penetrate into our
fantasy, or dart such an object thereinto but for the act of thinking, which
always goes accompanied with an affirmation or negation, with approbation or
refusal, or perhaps with a resolution and a conclusion of some thing to be
done or not done; this is only known to God and to the party whose thought it
is: to God, being the mouer of the heart to embrace or refuse such an object,
and who only is (...), the knower of our hearts and witness of our thoughts,
by whom therefore (and by none other) we swear. To the man himself; 1. Cor. ^^
for what (either Angel or) man knows the things of a man, save the spirit
of a man which is within him?

Yet consider these our actual cogitations with this difference, either alone,
without all respect or relation to any effect wrought, or to any sign
concomitant in the body, and so they yet remain unknown to any Devil or
Angel: or secondly, with reference to some effect, sign, or note in the body,
and so we grant that even one man may know the inclination and affection of
another man's heart, and therefore much rather the Devil. Thus did Eristratus a
Physician come to know that incestuous affection and love which Antiochus bare
to his mother in law Stratonices, whilst, sitting by him, and with no such
pretense, feeling and holding his pulses, he perceived at her approaching and
presence, his pulses to be very quick and to beat nimbly, and his color to be
ruddy; but when she departed, his pulses to be more dull and dead, and his face
to wax palish: so that we may conclude, that while the act of understanding is
immanent, it is known to God only and to our selves; but being transient and
bewraying it self in the body, it may be known of Devils, yea of men: yet
not so certainly of Devils, as either of God or of the man himself.

From all this generally, which has been said concerning the lost and
retained knowledge of Devils, we may in some measure see that blindness and
darkness wherewith Satan and his Angels are ouershadowed, and so maintain
Gods cause and plea against them, Isa 41.23. But yet, if we compare their
knowledge with ours, it will appear both that we are exceedingly inferior to
them, and therefore have no cause to be secure, or much to magnify our selves;
and that the Heathen might in great probability be easily misled and seduced by
their Oracles and predictions. ^
Yet I will not here with Cardane take upon me to define and say that man's
understanding comes as far short of that of the Devils, yea much shorter then
does the sense wherewith a dog is endued, come short of humane understanding,
making the difference to be in the same proportion which is in the numbers 3.
6. 12. so that as there is double distance between 12. and 6. and between 6.
and 3 so the understanding of Devils is double to that knowledge whereby a man
excels a dog. Neither will I here dispute whether Devils by discourse and
reasoning, as we do, or whether by inbred species or general images and
representations of things, understand all things which they know. It shall
suffice us to know that their knowledge is great, and that howsoever of
themselves they know not the secrets of man's heart, or such things to come as
are merely contingent, yet that they both know and can foretell even such
things also, but by other means. So that now we are come to consider in the
third place of a third kind of knowledge which they have, 3. Of the Devils
attained and acquired knowledge.
which I may call acquired, attained, or new, and of the means and ways by
which it is attained.

Where we make no question but their knowledge may be increased: Gods knowledge
only, as is himself, is infinite, and can receive no addition. Again, Devils
have foretold things passing the reach of their natural understanding: neither
is their knowledge more absolute and perfect then the knowledge of good Angels,
which yet (excepting only their sight of God, in which consists their
happiness) receives Ephesians. 3.1^. Scalig. exe^^^t. 359. Sect. 11.
increase from the Church on earth. Nay did our Savior himself as man
increase in Luke 2.52.
wisdom, who yet as man is much more Hebr. 1.4.
excellent then the Angels, and is he yet as man ignorant of the Mark 13.32.
day and hour of the last judgment? how then may not Satan's knowledge be
increased? Yet this I think, this new knowledge in Devils is not lost again
by oblivion, but is now become, as Scalig. vt supra, accidens proprium propter
naturam aptam ad retinendum.
one says of good Angels knowledge, a proper accident in regard of their
nature which is fit and apt to keep and hold what once it has received:
unless we will say, God does immediately deprive them thereof, for which yet
we have no warrant.

Let us therefore consider the ways and means of this increase. I find a
threefold means of knowledge: 1. Thom. Aquin. Of the means thereof.
Medium in quo vt speculum: such a mean as wherein we behold things as in a
glass. 2. Medium per quod, vt demonstratio: such a mean as whereby we come to
knowledge, as by demonstration and proof. 3. Medium sub quo, vt lumen: such a
mean as is light and illumination, under and in the beams whereof we see
light. The first, some make the glass of the Trinity, which, they say, Saints
and men glorified beholding, does represent to them (and to good Angels) Quod,
quantum, quale, quando, cui placitum est, Scal. ut supr.
what and how much knowledge, both for quantity and measure, and for quality
and nature, when, and to whom in particular God pleases. But taking for
granted that Devils behold not at any time Gods essence, which is meant by this
glass, we leave it, and come to the second means whereby knowledge is had
and increased, which is Medium per quod, or demonstration; such as being
known, brings the knowledge of some thing formerly unknown.

The Devils knowledge receives increase.
This for distinctions sake, is had either from the effects and particular
instances of experience, or from the causes of things. Now the knowledge of
Devils may receive increase both these ways.

1 From experience.
And first from experience, which here I take in a large sense, as it may agree
likewise to devils. Now experience being a particular observation of many the
like effects or signs, no question but devils by reason of their long
continuance (being as old as the world) and of their excellent natural
understanding and sagacitie, may both more cunningly and exquisitely take
notice of such signs and effects, as also from thence infer some conclusion
and consequent, better then we men who are destitute of these helps, yea
better then themselves considered at diverse times and in diverse ages. Thus, of
themselves not knowing our thoughts (as is proved) yet by some outward action,
sign, motion, or gesture, they may divine what a man thinks and is a
plotting, because (as says S. Augustine) they know by long experience that all
men almost, August. de diuinat. daemonum.
in whom formerly they have observed the like signs, motions, or gestures,
have done and practiced the same things. Thus, for things contingent, by
observation they have found forth and foretold the periods and translations of
Empires and Kingdoms, the continuance of which is ordinarily determined at
500. Pucerus li. de ditanat. generibus (...).
years, or not much under or over, as Pucerus does instance.

Thus again, from the present state and carriage of things in the world, by
observing the manners and inclinations of men, with what care and industry, or
with what slothfulness and negligence they go about their affairs, by
observing men's consultations and practices, from these I say, they can easily
divine concerning the event of any business in hand, and that better then the
men themselves that have the managing of any such affairs. For of old they
know that such proceedings, and such affections in men, of pride, vainglory,
emulation, wrath, and headlong impatience, will have answerable and suitable
events, and the same ends which formerly and in other men of like affections
they have had.

Now to make their prediction of any such thing more certain; when God
permits, they by temptations and continual persuasions cease not to provoke
men to put in practice and execution some wicked thought or other. Thus was he
bent and forward enough to stir up the Sabaeans and Chaldaeans to spoil Job
of his substance. And thus especially he intermeddles with matters of State, so
that he may presume to foretell such things as himself for the greatest part
is the author of. And yet that agilitie whereby almost in a moment he can be
present in most places, is a help to him herein; for thus when he sees things
a practicing or already effected in one place, he can speedily in another show
them to his prophets as things to come. And thus he foretold to his prophets in
Noua Francia, the coming of the French, long before they approached.

Now secondly, 2. From the knowledge of the causes of things.
having by experience of effects attained to the knowledge of their causes,
they can now from this knowledge more certainly then before behold the
necessary dependence of effects on their causes. Thus they know the natures,
qualities, and proper works of the Stars, even upon man's body, with what
celestial qualities and virtue the air which does enclose us is affected and
possessed at the instant of our birth: insomuch that if Astrologers can but
guess from hence the future state and fate of men's both lives and deaths, much
more are devils able to foretell the same. And so likewise in other causes.

But to leave this point: The third and last way to attain knowledge, or the
increase thereof, is Medium sub quo vt lumen, that is, Illumination. And thus
Satan's knowledge may be and is augmented. This light of knowledge being either
natural or supernatural, we leave the former, and for the latter, to wit,
supernatural illumination, we say, That devils know many new things from
divine revelation, 3. From divine revelation.
and that either more immediate from God or good Angels, or else by means of
the Scriptures, the revealed will and word of God.

And that Either more immediately by himself and good Angels:
First, from God and good Angels; which I the rather join, because some think
that no revelation is made to man or other creature, no not to Gods Prophets,
but by the means of good Angels. But howsoever, we may say it is from God, and
that more immediately then the knowledge which is had from Scripture. Therefore
when it pleases Gods justice to take vengeance on the wicked, or by affliction
to exercise his children, as he did Job, then often he uses Satan as his
instrument and executioner, Thus for diverse ends he revealed himself to false
prophets. 1 Samuel 28.17.19
manifesting unto him what he will have done, where, when, and how. And thus
might he foreknow and foretell to Saul the time of his and his sons death,
and the translation of the kingdom to David.

Now God does by other ways and to other ends reveal things to come, and
sometimes speak by the mouth of Satan's instruments: sometimes, to prove his
people, and to know whether they love the Lord their God with all their heart,
and with all their soul, as it is Deuteronomy. 13.1.2.3. sometimes, God will have
Satan strongly to delude wicked men, with pretense of truth, that they should
believe lies and be damned, which believe not the truth of God, 2 Thessalonians. 2.12.
but had rather hear it from the devil. Ezekiel. 14.9.
Thus the Lord put a lying spirit in the mouth of all Ahabs prophets, as it is
1 Kings 22.23. Causam praescientiae daemoni^ alibi quam in eorum natura
quaerere conuenit. Sic olim Deus fallacij instruens impios doctores, seclera
populi sui vltus est: non quod illi praecellerent d^no intelligentiae, sed
quatenus in hunc vsi^n ap^ati er^t, grassati sunt, permissa sibi licentia.
Calvin. in Isaiam, c. 41.23. Of the Sibyls.
And thus says reverend Calvin, We are to inquire the cause of Satan's
praescience elsewhere then in their nature. So of old, God to punish the sins
of his people, furnished them with false teachers, etc. Sometimes, to show the
immutablenesse of his mercies toward his chosen people, and to show that none
can curse them whom he will bless. Thus he did put his spirit of prophecy
upon the wicked Sorcerer and Witch Balaam, and spoke unto him to bless his
people, being indeed hired to curse them, Numb. 23.16.19. and 24 2.

Otherwhiles we know that the Sibyls the prophetesses of the Gentiles, did
foretell and prophecy many true things concerning Christ. Of whom worthy
Zanchie says, Ea non nisi ex asslatu diuino praedixerunt: They foretold such
things only by divine inspiration. And S. Ambrose his speech is known: Omne
verum, a quocunque dicatur, a spiritu sancto est: All truth, whosoever be the
speaker of it, is from the holy Ghost. The reason why God spoke by them, is
diversely rendered. Thomas Aquinas says he did it, the more to illustrate and
make credible his truth, which should receive testimony even from the enemies
thereof. Or secondly, by this means to instruct and teach the Heathen, who
would give ear and credence to their own Prophets, which they would deny unto
Gods true Prophets. But I approve rather their judgment that say, the end of
such true prophesies by these heathenish Prophetesses was, that the Gentiles
afterward, who should not believe Christ nor our Scriptures, testifying and
prophesying of him, might by their own Prophets be convinced of the truth, and
made the more inexcusable in the day of judgment. And to this end many verses
and oracles of the Sibyls are alleged against the Heathen by Justin Martyr,
Clemens Alexandrinus, Lactantius, Eusebius, and others, as appears by their
books.

But secondly, 2. Or by means of the Scriptures.
the Devil knows many things out of Scripture, which in diverse things he
better understands then we men, by reason of his quick sight, and also because
he can, in regard of his long experience, lay the state of all things together,
which we cannot do: neither is this in him so strange, seeing that as Porphyry
relates, Porphyry as he is cited by Monaeus de v^rit. Christianae relig. cap.
25. fine.
the religious sect of the Essens among the Jews, by reason that they occupied
themselves in the prophesies of Scripture, made a profession of prophesying and
seldom missed; which I think Master Calvin aims at when he says, writing on
Esa. 41.23. and having spoken of Gods goodness to the Jews out of Amos 3.7.
who hid nothing from them which was behoouefull to be known: Hac praerogativa
ind^g^^ and ^ccles^^al^ si sunt Iudai, qui ex friuolis suis praedictionibus
quaestum passim inter gentes s^cerunt. The Jews intolera^ly and s^^l^rously
abused this prerogative, who from their ^^iuolo^^ predictions picked out a
living among the Gentiles: as do now many running rogues with us by telling of
for^unes.

But if the Essens or Jews were so cunning, Satan is much more cunning: and
therefore his Oracle being demanded by King Alexander the great, before he
warred with Darius King of Persia, what should be the event and issue of his
enterprise, ^
might well answer him as it did: Inuictus er^s Alexander. Thou shall be
unconquerable o Alexander: and indeed the success was answerable, which was
yet f^rther signified by an Eagle, which in the conflict with Darius, houered
and fluttered over Alexanders head, gliding, and glauncing, and darting it
self toward his enemies. This knowledge the Devil had out of the prophesies
of Isai^ and Daniel, who do expressly point at Alexander. In the 11. chapter
of Daniel verse ^. it is said, A mighty King shall stand up, and shall rule
with great dominion, and do according to his pleasure: The circumstances of
the ^ext are plain and clear for Alexander, and so taken by Iaddus the
High Priest of Jerusalem, who when Alexander had subdued the Persians and was
now come to Jerusalem, ^et him in his priestly attire, ^
as Josephus records, carried him up to the Temple, and showed him the book of
Daniel, wherein it was prophesied certain hundred years before, that a
certain Greek should come and conquer the Persians, which now fell out to be
himself. Thus he knew the destruction also of Tire by Alexander, out of Isay
23.1. where by the land of Cethim or Cittim is plainly understood Macedonia
(whereof Alexander was King) (...) many do interpret it: and accordingly did
foretell that he (Satan, under the name of Apollo) would leave the City, as we
read in Quintus Curtius. And thus might he know the translation of the
Assyrian Monarchy unto the Medes and Persians, and that by Cyrus, whose name
long before his birth is expressly recorded, Isa. 45.1. and so many the like,
as Tortullian reckons them.

Now concerning Christ's nativity, life and death, the Sibyls have foretold in
ve^s^ many things, and ^
Virgil from them. In their books we find, (...), and being smitten he shall
be silent, out of Esaias chap. 53.7. where it is said, he was oppressed and
afflicted, yet opened he not his mouth: and this, (...), and he shall wear a
crown of thorns: And again, (...), most plainly out of Psalm. 69.21. They
gave me gall in my meat, and in my thirst they gave me vinegar to drink. With
many the like.

Now lastly, see how the gods of the Heathen, Deuile indeed, foresaw and
foretold the ceasing or Oracles, and their own silencing, as out of many other
place, ^^^^cially out of Zachary 13.2. where, In (...) Lord of Hosts, I will
cut off the names of the (...) out of the land, and they shall no more be
remembered: and I will (...) the Prophets and the unclean spirit to (...). So
that when Christ was at hand, to whom they knew they must needs yield, yet that
they might still keep their credit, and seem to be ignorant of nothing, they
foretold the same Hence that prophecy, (...), foreteling that the place where
Apollo gave his answers should be made obscure: and hence to add no more
examples, when Augustus C^sa^ in whose reign our Savior was borne, ^
did demand of T^^chia Prophece^^e to Apollo who after him should succeed and
be Monarch of the whole world, he had his answer in diverse Greek verses, which
in sense sound thus much, that an E^^^w child greater then the gods of the
Heathen; had commanded him to leave that place, and to betake him to his
infernal den^^ therefore says he, be gone, and from henceforth ask me no more
questions. The verses run thus: (...)
(...)
(...).


But to conclude this point, Satan's aim in giving forth such true Oracles
which accord with our Scriptures, is not the same with Gods ends, of which
formerly: but first, that by the truth of these Oracles he might win credit
to his lies and deuillish doctrines concerning the worshipping of idols.
Secondly, that thus he might get to himself the name and estimation of God
himself, whose property alone it is to speak truth. And thus says
Tertullian of Devils, Hinc sumentes temporum quasdam sorts, diuinitatem
aemulantur dum furantur diuinationem: that is, They hence, that is, from the
preachings of Gods true Prophets, taking the observation of the lots and
conditions of times, emulate and imitate Gods divinity, while they steal from
him their divination and skill to foretell future events.

CHAP. IIII. Of the diverse ways and means whereby Satan imitated the true God
in his predictions, and miracles.
BY the forenamed means Satan became furnished with knowledge, whereby he was
able to give such answers to the Heathen as he did: not but he also foretold
through his impudency such things as whereof he had no certainty: for such is
the presumption of wicked Fiends, that they dare foretell what they certainly
do not know, foreshewing diverse things, as Thomas Aquinas says, only, quoad
superbiam and temerariam praesumptionem: through pride, rashness and
presumption.

Now see how Satan mocks God in the manner and means of the manifestation of
his knowledge, and how (to win himself credit) he would seem to have all
things answerable. Satan imitated God in his predictions. 1. By giving forth
Oracles. Exodus 25 22. Numb. 7.89.
God diverse ways revealed himself and his will: sometimes by voice, either
his own immediately, or of his Prophets: sometimes without voice, as by lots,
and by the Vrim and Thummim: So the Devil. And therefore, first, as God
himself immediately gave answers and Oracles from the propitiatory; so Satan
endeavored to give answers by Oracles also, whereof there were many among the
Heathen; and also by Images, which we read have sometime spoken, or rather he
himself in and by them. For the winning of credit unto which, the Heathen in
their dedication of Images, used to anoint them with holy oil, as they called
it, supposing hereby to bind the power of God unto them: herein imitating the
Patriarch Jacob, who anointed the stone he rested on; and Moses, Pet. Martyr
in loc. com.
who anointed all the instruments almost about the Tabernacle.

Secondly, as God had his Prophets, so had the devil his, 2. By inspiring his
Prophets.
whom he either really possessed, or otherwise inspired, who yet had the
glorious name of (...), Prophets of God. For as Gods Prophets gained authority
to their sermons by delivering all in the name of God, (saying ever and anon,
Thus says the Lord) and as from God and from peculiar revelation, as did
Moses, who was for many days alone with God in the Mount: so in imitation
hereof, Minos, Zoroastes, Zamolxis, Charondas, Licurgus, Pompilius, and Solon,
to win estimation to their laws, pretended to have conferences and
consultations with Jupiter, Horomasis, Vesta, Saturn, Apollo, Minerua, and the
goddess Aegeria. Hermes also (surnamed (...), Hermes dial. 1.
thrice-great) before he could instruct Esclepius, Tatius, and others in the
principles of his profound philosophy, bears them in hand, that himself was
first instructed and inspired by one Pymander, whom he calls the Word, the
Son of God.

Thirdly, 3 By revealing himself in visions and dreams.
God often inspired his Prophets with the knowledge of things to come, by
visions and dreams: so did the Devil his. Therefore Apollo or the Devil did
cast his Priests into a sleep in the den by the Oracle. And whosoever came to
consult with the Oracle of Mopsus, used to sleep in his Temple, as Plutarch
relates. Plutarch. de defectu oraculorum.
So we read that Aesculapius had his Temple at Epidaurus a city of Achaia, to
which a great multitude of sick persons did resort, and some in their sleep
had showed unto them that medicine by which they might be cured.

4. By manifesting his will by V^im and T^^r^m^^
Fourthly, God often manifested himself by the judgment of Vrim and Thummim.
Answerable hereunto the Heathen had their Chrystallomantia, and Hydromantia,
where, water being put into a violl of glass, a child was set to view it, who
had somewhat therein showed him, namely (as Psellus says) devils in some
appearance were seen creeping in the bottom, and heard to utter some obscure
and whispering sound, yet nothing distinctly, that so whatsoever the event
should be, it might seem to have been foretold by them. So Pausanias tells us
of the Temple of Ceres in Achaia, by which was a fountain (and as some relate,
^^^lot^. V^^^^ad Alig^ll de (...). Dei, lib. ^ cap. 5.
a glass in it) into which sick folks after sacrifice offered, looked, and
by the resemblance of a face which appeared either of a dead or living m^^, saw
what should become of themselves.

So we might instance in their divination by Lots, by their foresight of danger
from Thunders, strange cracks, and the like, which God often also makes
forerunners of judgments. So also, in their foreshewing of the conditions and
future state, course and fate of men, by names given them and imposed at their
birth, G^^eoctus M^^tius de promisiua doctrina, cap. 1.
and in die lustrico, as of Tantalus, Aristoteles, etc. for so God gave names
to the Prophet Isaiahs children, as signs of somewhat to follow, Isa. 7.3. and
8 3. so to Joshua, Jesus, Matthew. 1.21. But let that suffice which has been
said. And thus much for Predictions.

^. The Devil Gods Ape^^^ miracle^.
Now secondly, more briefly for Miracles, (by which also Satan bewitched the
minds of the Heathen) and for the doing of good or evil. God we know did
often great miracles for the manifestation of his truth and Godhead, and for
other ends: as in Egypt by Moses; and since, by the Prophets of old, our
Savior, and his Apostles. So also the devil in his instruments would at the
least seem to do the like by the Magicians in Egypt. And therefore seeing our
Savior Christ to do such wonders in healing the sick, lame, blind, and men
hereupon to believe in him, and in God whom he preached; he must likewise take
upon him to ease men of their torments, and to free Cities from the pestilence,
as once he is said to do Rome whither he was brought, being fetched from
Epidaurus in his own likeness, namely in the form of a great Dragon or
Serpent, yet under the name of Aesculapius, as Liuy, Valerius, and Lactantius
relate, who expounds it of the Prince of Devils himself, that old Serpent, and
great red Dragon, as he calls him, Ipse (...). So for the manner of working, he
being a spirit incorporeall, can easily wind himself into men's bodies, corrupt
their health, cause sickness, blindness, etc by these means causing men to
fly to him for help: well, being inuocated, he remoues the malady which
himself inflicted, and cease to hurt: ceasing to hurt, he is thought to
help and to do good, whereby men are confirmed in their service of him.

Thus he would seem to imitate Gods greatest works and miracles and his
manner of working: And in the manner of working them.
and therefore as God by his only Word, made the world of nothing, Christ and
his Apostles gave life to the dead, limbs to the lame etc. so the Devil in
imitation hereof has persuaded silly credulous men and women that there is in
words and speeches, if rightly rehearsed, a certain natural and effectual
power of working strangely upon things and persons over which they shall be
uttered So nothing can fall out extraordinarily, as strange births, monsters,
and such like things as are wrought by the hidden and secret operation of
natural causes, August. de Ciuit. Dei. lib. 10. cap. 16.
(not without Gods special hand of providence) but by his craft he will seem
to be the author of them.

And thus, to speak jointly both of his predictions and miracles, of his words
and works, when he perceiues beforehand, by the means formerly mentioned, Gods
will or purpose concerning any thing, he foretells it and intermeddles in it,
whereby it might seem not only to be foretold, but also effected by him,
hereby winning the praise and credit of it if it be good; if otherwise, yet
comes he to be feared and reverenced. Whereunto the practice of Columbus, the
first discouerer of America, seems not unlike; who being in the Island of
Iamaica, sick and in want, the barbarous inhabitants denied him food, commerce
and traffic: whereupon, he, foreseeing an Eclips of the Sun, which they
worshipped as God, threatened to be revenged on their god shortly, unless they
did relieve him, telling them the time when: which being observed and the Sun
eclipsed, they forthwith supplied his wants, feared and reverenced him
exceedingly. Dae^^one, ^ene^^ntur homines quasi terrestr^s d^os, and depalsores
malorum quae ipsi faciunt and arrogant: coli se volunt ne noceant, La^tant.
Instit. lib. 2. cap. 15. Hinc Febris culta fuit and Pallor, and a Babyloniis
Draco apud Danielem ne mal^m inferant, N^stus Bethul. ad Lactant. Instit. lib.
2. cap. 16. August. de ciuit. Dei. lib 10. cap. 32.
So Satan, if any good thing be to befall any according to Gods appointment,
this he promises in his own name to do for them, but on a condition, they
must dedicate temples and sacrifice unto him; but now let any danger be
toward, then (for some frivolous cause or other) he is exceeding angry, and
therefore pronounces some direful sentence or other upon them, which indeed
he knows that God will execute: yet this he does that it might seem to come
upon them for some contempt of him: suppose it come not, then will he seem to
have been appeased with their sacrifices; so that indeed they must needs both
fear him in regard of evil, and sue to him for good things, and for the
remouall of evil.

Now by these means have these wicked spirits attained their end, which was as
Saint Augustine says, Vt sibi jus quodammodo vendicent in materia infirma
fragilitatis humanae, to domineere over man's frailty. And thus for a general
conclusion of this point, we say with a certain Father, Satan hominum
credulitatem mentita diuinitate deludit, that Satan's suttlety through man's
credulity has won himself the name and credit of a god upon earth: and that
not only among the Heathen, but with Gods own people also. But what says my
Text for all this? Is the Devil so indeed, or does God so acknowledge him? No:
for, they sacrificed their sons and their daughters unto Devils.

CHAP. V. Diverse uses and inferences from the former Considerations.
Inferences from the former considerations.
THese former considerations being of such weight, are not thus to be left and
passed over without our further meditation on them: what may we then gain by
the former discourse?

First, let us thus reason: 1. Hypocrites in time shall be discovered
were these goodly gods then of the Heathen but devils, and has God now
unmasked them, and discovered them to us his servants so to be? Then surely,
God likewise in his good and appointed time will bring to light all such things
as now lie hid in darkness, and take from all hypocrites the veil of their
hypocrisy. Now perhaps men strout it out and live as little gods here upon
earth, or like the children of the most high, both in their own and others
estimation, but yet the time comes, when, as the Lord says, they shall die
like men, Psalm. 82.6.7. Ezekiel. 28.2. and 7.8.9.
and fall as one of the Princes. Thus says the Lord God to the prince of
Tyrus, because thine heart is lifted up, and thou have said, I am a god, I sit
in the seat of god in the midst of the Seas, yet thou art a man and not God,
though thou set thine heart as the heart of God. -- Behold I will bring
strangers upon thee, -- they shall bring thee down to the pit, and thou shall
die the deaths of them that are slain in the midst of the Seas: will thou yet
say before him that slays thee, I am God? but thou shall be a man, and no God
in the hand of him that slays thee, Ezekiel. 28.2. etc.

We read in the histories of the West Indies, Joseph. Acosta in his natural
and moral history of the East and West Indies, in English, lib. 5. cap. 10.21
and 30.
that the Mexicans had a yearly sacrifice, for the which, in some feasts, six
months, in others, a whole year before, they took a Captive, to whom, before
they did sacrifice him to their idol, they gave the name of the idol to whom
he should be sacrificed, and apparrelled him with like ornaments to those of
the idol; during which time he was reverenced and worshipped in the same
manner as the idol it self: he had the most honorable lodging in all the
Temple, where he did eat and drink what he would and was merry, but yet he had
always with him twelve men for his guard, lest he should fly, and to this
end, at night he was put into a strong prison or cage: well, the feast being
come and he grown fat, they disrobed him, killed him, opened him, eat him,
making thus a solemn feast and sacrifice of him.

^
The application is easy: what one man is that in the Church or yet on earth,
that has given unto him and takes unto himself the name of God? invested in
the titles and properties of God, exalting himself against all that is called
God or worshipped; that sits as God in the temple of God, showing himself that
he is God? If you know not, the Apostle will tell you, ^
2 Thessalonians. 2. namely he it is, who, when that (...) withholdeth shall be taken
out of the way, shall be revealed in his time: whom the Lord shall consume with
the spirit of ^^s worth, and destroy with the brightness of his coming: in
the mean time, ^
Pride is as a chain unto him, (not to beautify him only, but to bind him)
and his own iniquities have taken him, and he shall be holden with the cords
of his sin: then shall the time be fulfilled spoken of Revel. 19. ^
when all the fowls of heaven shall be gathered to the supper of the great
God, that they may eat the flesh of Kings, and the flesh of Captains, etc. ^
Then shall the ten horns hate the Whore, and make her desolate and naked,
eat her flesh and burn her with fire. Thus must Antichrist, that man of sin
the Pope of Rome, be dealt with in Gods good time, and so must all other such
like petty gods upon earth be dealt with also.

Why then should the outward pomp and seeming prosperity of the wicked dismay
any true Christian? Why do thou then holy David fret at the foolish, ^
when thou see the prosperity of the wicked, that they are lusty and strong,
that their eyes stand out for fatness? should thou therefore prefer their
estate before thine own, and say, Surely I have cleansed mine heart in vain?
And why, blessed Job, art thou afraid, and why does fear take hold on thy
flesh to see the wicked live, ^
wax old, and grow in wealth? etc. And why should any be afraid when one is
made rich, and when the glory of his house is increased? Stay but a little
while and the wicked shall not appear. Yea, they shall appear indeed, but in
their own colors; they shall not appear what before they appeared.

Go now therefore better advised into the sanctuary of God, and then thou
shall understand their end: that when they dye they shall carry nothing away,
their glory shall not descend after them. Judge not then of them by the false
gloze of outward appearance, for so they may be gods; stay but Gods leisure,
and of gods they shall prove men wretched and miserable; as in my text,
according to the Heathens conceit and outward view, Devils were taken and
worshipped for gods; yet now God has uncased them, and they are known Devils.

So that now in the second place if these Heathen and Jews had been asked
whether they knew that they were Devils indeed whom thus they served, surely
they would have mainely denied it, and as strongly affirmed that they were
gods: and verily we may believe them; for we cannot imagine that they should be
so wittingly impious as to worship the Devil with any such intention: verily
they thought they worshipped the true God, or at the least, some good spirits,
and yet says my text, They sacrificed their sons and their daughters unto
Devils.

Whence we observe, 2. Our good intentions in Gods ^eruice will not excuse us.
that our own good meanings and intentions in matters of Gods service, without
certain and true knowledge of Gods will, are no rule to be followed: which if
we do follow, we cannot be excused from serving of Devils. Intention, being
an act of the will, presupposes the understanding and knowledge; it again
tending to a supposed good end in the use of some means must be directed by
knowledge, which first gives judgment both of end and means. That therefore
is a good intention which tends to a good end by good means, which divine and
true knowledge has judged and warranted so to be: where then the understanding
judges amiss either of the end or means, there the intention is naught. He
then that would serve God aright and have his intentions rightly directed, must
take the light of Gods word and revealed will in his hand, and follow that
direction. For it is meet if we would serve God acceptably in regard of him,
and profitably in regard of ourselves that we do it aright and according to
his will: but how shall this be known unless he make it known unto us? we
cannot see the Sun but by the light and help of the Sun, how well lighted
soever we be: much less can we know God aright without the help and light of
God himself, which is his Word. Whosoever then does any thing tending to the
service of God without certain knowledge of Gods will, whether his service be
acceptable or no, whatsoever his intention and good meaning is in his own
conceit, yet to God it is no other then will worship at the best, if not
worshipping of devils; how much more if it be a service forbidden of God? and
most of all, if also commanded by the Devil.

Without warrant from Gods word.
If any then, following the devises of his own brain, or yet the examples of
men, yea the teaching of Fathers, nay the injunctions of Popes and Councels,
do any thing as an acceptable service of God without direction and warrant
from God, he comes within the compass of a Praemunire of rebellion and
disobedience to God, who has said, You shall not do every man what seems
him good in his own eyes: Deuteronomy 12.8. Ezekiel. 20.18.
and, Walk you not in the statutes of your Fathers, neither observe their
judgments, nor defile your selves with their idols: that is, Verse 16.
as is expounded in the former verses, when they despise Gods judgments,
Proverb. 16.25.
and walk not in his Statutes. If we do the peril is our own: the wise man
telling us, There is a way which seems right unto man, but the issues thereof
are the ways of death. Coloss. 2.22.23.
Let these ways then have their show of wisdom in will worship and humility,
and in neglecting (punishing or not sparing) the body, yet all these shall
perish with the using, as being after the commandments and doctrines of men.

Much less if against Gods word Exodus ^0 4^.
How much more then when they are also against the commandments of God? God
has expressly forbidden the making of graven images, our bowing down unto
them, and serving of them: how then is it that any dare worship him at or
before an image or crucifixe? shall their good meaning excuse them? indeed they
say they worship not the image, but God in the image: yet, though that be most
false especially in common Papists, when they have said all they can say, it is
no other then the heathenish idolaters of formertimes said, Arnob. contra
Gen^es. lib. 6.
as Arnobius relates; which is, that they worship not the stone, but Gods
presence there exhibited, and such essential properties in God, as by the
stone, wood, or metal were signified. So Papists, who herein yet come short
of the Heathen, in as much as they say and defend that if it be an image of
somewhat truly existing in nature, and no imaginary Chimaera, they are no
idolaters to worship God in it: nay though it be the very Devil himself,
before whom, they say, we may bow down, and worship God in him. Vasquius lib.
3. number. 31.7. as he is cited in Tortura Torti, page 312.313.
Thus their Vasquius teaches, which in all likelihood the Heathen would never
have done. For though indeed they sacrificed to devils, yet these Devils were
gods in their conceit: but I say, if Gods commandment expressly forbid it,
what pretense, excuse or intention of man can make it good?

But yet moreover, Least of all, if also according to the doctrines of Devils.
if in this and the like they not only do against Gods commandment, but also
according to the commandments and doctrines of devils, how shall they not do
service to the devil for all their good intentions? God has said, Heb. 13.4.
Heb. 13.4.
Marriage is honorable in all, and the bed undefiled. And elsewhere: 1 Cor. 7.9.
It is better to marry then to burn. Again: Tit. 1.15.
Unto the pure all things are pure. And 1 Timothy 4.4.
, Every creature of God is good, and nothing to be refused, if it be received
with thanksgiving. This is the doctrine of God. But says the Apostle, or
rather by the Apostle, The spirit speaks expressly, 1 Timothy 4.1-3.
that in the latter times some shall depart from the faith, giving heed to
seducing spirits, and doctrines of Devils, -- forbidding to marry, (and
commanding) to abstain from meats which God has created to be received with
thanksgiving of them which believe and know the truth. And this is the
doctrine of Devils. But now these are the latter days wherein we live, and
these selfsame doctrines are both maintained and practiced by Papists. I
would now know whom in these they obey, and to whom they do service, to God or
the Devil. The unchaste and impure life of their Priests, Monks, and Nuns,
wherein they burn in lust because they will not marry, to whom is this a
sacrifice and service but to the Devil? And may not I truly say, speaking of
popish parents, as in my text, They sacrifice their sons and daughters unto
devils? Well, the Lord open their eyes, and give us to beware of such doctrines
and practices, and to judge of things good and lawful, by that rule which only
cannot deceive us, and which yet can sufficiently instruct us. Pretenses and
good ^^en ^ons may well blind our eyes, but Gods they cannot, who judges of
things according to that they are indeed, and not according to that they are to
us. Wisdom says, Prou 8^
(...) that hate me, love death: yet no sinner will say he e^ther hates God and
wisdom, or loves death, yet in Gods account it is otherwise. So, He that
spares the ro^, ^ates the child, though with no such intention. So says God
of Idolaters, ^
that they say to a stock, Thou art my ^at^^e^; and to a stone, Thou have
brought me forth: not that any (as I conceive) either said or thought so of the
stone, but in effect they did both.

But the spite is, that whereas indeed such services deifie the Devil, yet
they must be thought to be service acceptable to God. (...)
They shall excommunicate you, says our Savior to us his disciples in this
last age of the world, yea the time comes (and I may say now is) that
whosoever kills you, will (...) that he does God service. Nay some have
thought (the Schoolmen) that such good intentions do make (...) actions
meritorious, and that of life eternal.

Yet for all this we have said, we deny not, but affirm that our good
meanings and intentions are most necessary in actions good, lawful, or
indifferent, without which they could not be good. But yet, as in things simply
evil, no^ the best intention can make them good; so in things ne^e^ so well
intended, there is more required then the intention, to wit, that for matter
they be also good and commanded.

To conclude: how necessary then is it for all Christians w^o would serve God
acceptably, that they both labor to know what is the whole will of God, and
wholly sub^^^ themselves and only thereunto? ^
Where this sound knowledge and care is wan^ing, the^e will follow these
sequ^^es. First, we shall use had means to all (...) to (supposed) good ends.
So the vncons^ionable Tradesman and the ^acking Landslord, under pretense of
providing for their families, will use deceit and fraud, griping and grinding
the faces of the poor. So the Papist and Church of Rome, to fray simple people
from reading our books, will agree that a he may be invented against
Heretics. And thus to bring the simpler sort amongst them, in detestation of
us and of our religion here in ENGLAND, they misinforme the simpler sort of
Papists at Rome, of us. There may be seen in some of their Churches,
Dall^ngton (...) Inference (...) Gu^^^tr^^^ digression
Tables hung up to pourtray and express to the life and eye, the several
persecutions of Catholics here in ENGLAND, in the late Queens time; some
worried to death in beasts skins by mastiffes, others pricked under the nails
with sharp needles, others drawn in pieces with wild horses, and almost all
the several sorts of torture represented unto us in history out of the ten
first persecutions of the Primitive Church. So by leasing and insinuation, the
Jesuits bring the simpler sort here into admiration, or rather adoration of
their Pope. And to provoke the people to devotion toward their Saints, they
will allow the faining of tales, fables, miracles, legends, which therefore
they call their pias frauds, holy deceits.

Secondly, if we be given too much to follow our own Bodinus de Rep. (...), 5.
ex Herodo^.
From hence (says Bodin) it comes to pass that in Thracia, men under pretense
of piety and love to their parents, being now very old, used to slay them and
eat them, lest they should languish too long in the sickness of old age, and
after become meat for base and filthy worms. Let that relation be as true, as
the Authors are of credit. Surely we see on the contrary, by authority
undeniable, that upon as weak grounds parents became unmerciful, and
unnaturally affected toward their own children, for they killed and
sacrificed them, and that to their enemies, for, such my text, they sacrificed
their sons and their daughters unto Devils.

From the former considerations we further observe in the third place, 3. The
misery of Pagans, and generally of Idolaters. Their God is the Devil.
the woeful and wretched estate and condition of all Pagans and Heathens out of
the Church, yea and of all Idolaters in the Church. Their whole misery is
reduced to this sum, Their God is the Devil. Seeing then they are without
the true and only God, we conclude that all their best services and devotions,
though never so strict, never so hard, are neither acceptable to the true God,
nor yet rewardable but with eternal punishment. They belong to another
kingdom, and are in truth, as we are all by nature, devoted slaves to the
devil, having him to rule and reign in their hearts as their god. They must
needs then serve a hard master that serve him, more cruel and tyrannical then
ever Pharao was to the Israelites, yea requiring harder service then that
whereby the devils themselves serve him their prince great Beelzebub, of
Lactantius called (...): for he uses them as the members of his own body, he
being their head; we never heard or read of any selfe-sacrifice or
selfe-killing among them, in honor and service to their prince: but men he
uses as his beasts and horses, not only laying on them hard and heavy burdens,
but also riding them himself, having their wills subiugated under him, holding
and guiding the reins of their affections whither he will, spurring them to
death, and violently driving them to their destruction, as he did the heard of
swine, which (he having them once in his power) was carried with violence from
a steep down place into a lake and was drowned. Luke 8.33.
With like violence, but more insensibly, he hailes his servants to such
slavish service and obedience, as whereby they are drawn to the undoing of
themselves and others: for we see how he did tyrannize over the poor Heathen,
what bloody service he required of them, and also obtained, for they did even
sacrifice themselves and others to him: so that in this regard their condition
was worse then the condition of beasts. Augustus tauntingly said of Herod, who
in the slaughter of infants killed also his own son, but spared his swine,
as unclean to eat, I had rather be Herod's hog then his son. This wish
might truly have been made by these Heathen.

Lactantius says, speaking of this argument, Nonne satius est pecudum more
viuere, quam deos tam impios, tam profanos, tam sanguinarios colere? Were it
not better to live after the manner of beasts then to serve gods so wicked, so
profane, so bloody? Surely better it had been for them not only so to have
lived, but to have been beasts, then to have performed such beastlike service;
For what shall the reward of this their strict and burden some service be?
Surely if with the Ass in the Emblem, which on the day time carried the
goddess Isis, they should be turned out with galled backs to feed on hay, it
were well: but instead of an everlasting reward, they must share with their
prince, and be damned with the Devil and his Angels for ever: reward they
cannot look for from him who now himself is to receive the reward and wages
of sin.

This slavish condition of theirs well thought on would on the one side move
pity and true compassion in us, in regard of all such as at this day have the
Devil for their only God: and so I account all them whether Turks or
Infidels, who live out of the true Christian Church, as being without God, and
without hope: Ephesians. 2.
on the other side it should teach us with all thankfulness humbly to
acknowledge Gods special grace and mercy to us living now in these places and
times, whom he has made choice of to reveal himself (the only true God)
unto, to free us from Satan's raging tyranny, and to give us hope of a better
life after our service of him here to be out and ended. Yet may not we
Christians hence be secure because we make profession of the only true God,
and serve not the Devil so manifestly as did the Heathen, by such abominable
and bloody service; for if our English proverb be true, as experience makes
it too true, that Where God has his Church there the Devil will have his
Chapel: Ezekiel. 43.7 8.
and idolaters will set their threshold by Gods threshold, and their posts by
his posts: then may we justly fear lest we find the Devil sitting and ruling
as God in the hearts of many Christians, though perhaps in another habit then
among the Heathen.

CHAP. VI. The last (...) of the former maine doctrine, whereby is manifested
(...) Malice, Pride, and Sle^ghts of Satan in himself and (...) and first his
Malice.
I (...) then see if we cannot find Satan even among (...) selves: we may
know a Lion by his paws, and (...) Devil by three essential special notes
and marks, which now we come in the fourth place to observe by way of
inference from our former discourse: ^
and they are these; (...) h^s M^^^e against us men. Secondly, his Pride
against God. Thirdly, his deuillish Sleights and Suttleti^s as helps to
accomplish the other two: where we find any of these, there we may say is a
deuillish quality, there the Devil reigns as God.

^
First, we may take notice of his extreme malice against mankind; and it has
showed it self to be bent both against the ^oules and bodies of men. First,
against their souls by seducing them, by withdrawing them from the service of
the true God, and by requiring service and sacrifice to be performed to the
creature, to themselves Gods utter enemies: this service no good Angel, no
good man will accept from us, because they truly love us, as is proved: the
Devil accepts it because he truly hates us.

^
Secondly, against their bodies by his strange cruelty, which was such, that
nothing pleased him better then the shedding of man's blood, and that in
abundance, and the more noble the blood was, the more accceptable to him (...)
the spilling of it: so that not contented with the blood of the Gentiles, he
coueted much also, and especially after the blood of Gods people the Jews, who
had God more especially for their Father, and the true Church for their mother;
and he also prevailed, as in my text: by this means he diminished the Kingdom
of God, and enlarged his own.

This murtherous affection which he bears against us men, and especially
against the true Church and Saints of God is as ancient as man himself is: for
no sooner were our first parents placed in Paradise, in a place and estate of
happiness, which they should have transmitted unto us their posterity but
Satan envious of our good, maliciously depriues them and us of it, John 2 (...)
being to this respect a murderer from the beginning. Now that which is bred
in the bone (we use to say) will hardly ever out of the flesh* so it is with
Satan; for since that time he never cease but goes about diligently like a
roaring Lion seeking whom he may devour.

Now we must not look to find and epsy this devouring beast in his Lions
skin he is wiser then so: we shall find him then often in the habit and skin
of a Lamb, ^ffecting his malicious purposes by men like our selves, And (...)
whom he uses as his instruments. Where then, and in whom we find any such
cruelties, there we may conclude ^^an instrument of Satan, or there is the
Devil himself incarnate, there he sits as God. As for example: When in the
time of the ten persecutions, the godly Christians by heathenish Emperors and
their officers were cast into prison, there we may safely say, with our Savior
Christ, ^
the Devil has cast them into prison: for we may judge of the Devil ^^ of
false Prophets, you shall know them, says our Savior, by their fruits.

Thus our Savior himself concludes against the Jews who daily went about to
kill him, thinking and alleging that otherwise their kingdom could not stand,
thus seeking by his ruin to establish their own kingdom, saying, ^
If we let him thus alone all men will be e^n^ in him, and the Romans will
come and take away both our place and the Nation. Hereupon they sought to kill
him, both they and the Devil by them. But our Savior concludes, that even in
this regard, they were the sons and children of the Devil, saying, ^
If ye were Abraham's childr^n (as ye pretend) y^ ^oul^ do the works of
Abraham: But now ye seek to kill me, ^a man that has told you the truth
which I have heard of God* this did not Abraham: ye do the ^eed of your
father, -- ye are of your father the Devil, and the lusts of your father ye
will do, he was a murderer from the beginning, etc. And surely we may as
firmly conclude against all such, as upon like grounds go about to establish
and uphold their kingdom of Antichrist, by shedding the innocent blood of
harmless Protestants, and especially of religious Kings: thinking that both
Kingdoms cannot stand together, theirs and Christ's. Practicing (...)
Hereupon they most deuilishly practice and most shamelessely, by writing,
excuse, yea warrant and give allowance to the murdering of Christian Kings and
Princes: witness that bloody butchery not long since practiced upon the
persons of two Kings of France successively, Henry the third, and Henry the
fourth, (who both being popish, were not thought popish enough) and their
Apologies written in excuse of John Chastel who attempted to kill Henry the
fourth, which after, villainous Rauiliac performed. Instances of Popish
practices, cruelties and attempts in this kind, there might be given many, not
only in foreign nations, but even in our own; witness their Spanish navy
which in the year 1588. was sent to subdue the whole nation, and came provided
of all cruel instruments of death and dolor which could be imagined. Witness
also their many attempts upon the person of the late Queen Elizabeth of happy
memory, as also of our gracious Sovereign King James. But that which swallows
up the mention and remembrance of all the rest, was the Pouder-plot, such a
strange and malicious plot, as for strangeness could never have by any Poets
feigned invention been imagined; and for maliciousness never have proceeded
from any man's soft, harmless, and relenting heart. From whence then but from
that subtle Serpent, and devouring Lion, great Beelzebub, our utter enemy,
their great god? for so we may conclude against them, as our Savior before
against the Jews in like case, that herein they do not the works of Jesus,
whose name they take upon them, but the works of their father, that is, of him
whose lusts they do, and who has bin a murderer (of the Saints) from the
beginning, that is, the Devil, whose instruments herein they were: in which
regard I may say and conclude of the first inuenter of that plot (which was
Catesby) in regard of his design and attempt, that which Socrates writes of
Nestorius, that he was, Socrat. lib. 7. cap. 29.
totius diabolicae nequitiae capax instrumentum, vereque totius Ecclesiae
(Anglicanae) incendium: a large receptacle and instrument of all deuilish
wickedness, and the very firebrand of the whole (English) Church.

And thus have we seen how Satan is still himself, and cannot forget to be
cruel, and that now he reigns as god also in this regard, as well as in
former times. Heretofore indeed he by Oracle publicly commanded the killing of
men, and was obeyed; but God be thanked, our Savior Christ by his coming has
put him to silence in his person: yet now he teaches the same lesson, and is
also obeyed in this, as in many things else. For we know there are doctrines of
devils, whereof these last times are in danger, and there are Doctors of
devils, which say they are Christians, and Jesus his disciples, calling
themselves Jesuits, yet are they not, but the Synagogue of Satan. These are
they by whom especially Satan exercises his malice, both against men's souls
by seducing, and their bodies by killing them: by both Satan goes about seeking
whom he may devour, and that not only in his own person, but in the person of
his instruments, especially Jesuits, and generally the popish faction. These
seek first to seduce, and where they speed not so, they proceed to the second.
They first compass sea and land to make proselytes, to withdraw men from their
obedience and loyalty to God and their lawful Kings: if they prevail not
thus, then presently they proceed either to fire and faggot, if power and
authority be in themselves, or else to secret practices, tending to no less
then death and destruction. And here we may observe the rage and zeal of the
wicked, which is not zealous enough unless it end in blood. Thus the Jews
dealt with our Savior Christ, who not content that he should be whipped by
Pilate, and mocked by themselves, they must needs cry, Away with him, and
again, away with him, John 19.1-6-15.
crucify him, and again, crucify him. So they dealt with Saint Paul, Philip
3 6. Acts 21.4.
who himself while he was a blind Pharisie persecuted the Church, yea unto the
death; but being once a true convert, he was persecuted himself, and
oftentimes whipped. Yet this being not enough, see the rage of the Jews against
him: Acts 22 ^
for more then forty men bound themselves with a solemn oath, that they would
neither eat nor drink till they killed Paul. So now adays cursing with Bell,
Book, and Candle, disgraces, wrongs, injuries, and excommunications are not
enough; our enemies cry still for fire and faggot. This our Savior has
foretold us of, John 16.2. They call presently with the rashly zealous
disciples of Christ, for fire from heaven, to consume us at once, and when our
Savior denies them this, they will fetch it from the vaults of hell it self
but they will have it. Herein plainly manifesting whose children they are; for
even so does their father and master: for whom he has any hand over, he
labors to serve as he did that Lunatic whom he possessed, whom often times he
cast into the fire, Ma^^^ ^^
and into the water to destroy him. And as he did with the Heathen and
Israelites in my text, nothing could please him unless they made away with,
and sacrificed themselves and children to him.

From this raging and furious malice of the Devil in his own person and in
his instruments, we may yet make further use.

first, if the Devil be now so maliciously bent against mankind, (...) Satan
(...)
and with such savage cruelty use them now that even profess his service (as
did the Heathen and these Jews) what shall we then think will be his furious
rage when in hell he shall have full power over the damned: when his fury shall
be exasperated with the present sense of Gods horrible judgments on himself?
Oh then, let this at least make us fear all our ways we tread in, with Job.
lest we set our feet in those broad paths of sin and ungodliness, which
lead to such horrible slavery, as from which there is no redemption, and lest
thus we fall into the paws of this enraged Lion.

again, we may see how little reason we have to be secure, having such a
watchful and a spiteful adversary, we have no security but in God only, and
no hope to prevent his malice but as in God so in the use of such ^^eane^ as
God would have us use to this purpose, which are our spiritual armor,
described Eph^s 6 13.14. etc. where we may note, God would have us resist and
not turn our backs, inasmuch as he has appointed no defense for our back
parts if we fly, but for our fore parts if we resist; he tells us of a Breast
plate of righteousness, of a Shield of faith, Helmet of salvation, Sword of
the spirit.

Thirdly, bears the Devil such hatred against us? what reason then have we
to love him? let us then bear him and his instruments like hatred, yet with
this difference, he hates us in our persons, let us hate him and them in their
practices and professions. David could say, Do not I hate them that hate thee?
yea, I hate them with a perfect hatred Yet surely David's hatred of them was
holy, and so should ours be. We are said in Scripture, to love God when we
keep his commandments, and to hate him when either we hate what he loves,
or when we do not what he commands, but the contrary which he forbids. Let
us thus hate the Devil and wicked men, that is, let us hate what he and they
so much love, namely sin, and be contrary unto them in their commands,
prohibitions, persuasions, and allurements.

CHAP. VII. Satan's Pride against God in his own person, and in his instruments.
WE may from our former discourse take notice of another essential and
inseparable quality of Satan, which both discouers his nature unto us, 2 Satan's
pride against God.
and also gives us to judge of such as resemble him in it; and it is his
notorious pride against God, In himself in (...).
whereby he usurped among the Heathen, the honor and glory, title and name of
God himself.

Now this Pride he showed in these particulars: first, in his desire, whereby
being but a creature, yea a wicked Fiend, yet he desired not only an equality
with God, but a superiority over him, namely, that he might be worshipped for
God, and not God himself. This made him require divine honor and service to
be done unto him.

Secondly, in abusing such gifts of God as he had, to the open dishonor of
God, and deifying of himself. These gifts were especially his power and his
knowledge.

Thirdly, in that being often employed as an instrument only of God, and under
God, yet he referred all to his own honor, and not to Gods, doing all as of
himself, and in his own name.

Fourthly and lastly, in accepting divine honor of sacrifice and other
religious worship when it was given.

Now it skils not that this honor was often done to images of men both living
and dead, and not unto Satan always immediately; for whatsoever honor was
given, none received it properly but Satan, who abused the names of men
deceased, August. de Ciuit. Dei, lib. 18. cap. 18.
qui nec cum viuerent vere vixerunt: who were but dead while they lived,
persuading men that they were gods; hereupon getting them once consecrated, he
also got their names to be changed, Lactant. instit. lib. 1. cap. 21.
Credo, says Lactantius, ne quis putet eos homines fuisse; quem enim Serapin
and Serapidem vulgus appellat, Osyris dicitur: Romulus post mortem Quirinus
dictus est, and Leda, Nemesis: To wit, as I deem, says that Father, lest any
should think they were men: for he whom the vulgar calls Serapis and Serapides,
is indeed called Osyris: Romulus after his death is called Quirinus, and Leda
is now named Nemesis. Satan thus abused not only the names of the deceased,
but the affections of the living, who for love to their private friends, were
more easily drawn to honor their memory and images, especially when by
Satan's false miracles and apparitions they were esteemed gods: here Satan was
the god, not they.

Now this pride in Satan is so natural, that though for his sin in aspiring
against God he was thrown down headlong from heaven to hell, yet it still
puffes him up even now as much as ever; and he breathes the like spirit of
pride into the souls of such, as in whose hearts he sits and rules as God.
Satan has said it in his heart, and has instilled into the hearts of his
instruments, to think and say, I will ascend into heaven, Isa. 14.13.^^
I will exalt my throne above the stars of God: I will sit also upon the
mount of the congregation in the sides of the North, I will ascend above the
heights of the clouds, I will be like the most High. This was his first
temptation whereby he made our first parents in Paradise sin, by making them
believe they should be as gods. This ambitious desire of being like unto God,
has made both them and us now like unto the Devil. This lesson thus learned
in Paradise, shall never wholly be unlearned, till we enter into Paradise
again. If Satan then prevailed by it with our first parents in that estate of
innocence, how much more with us? he thus by pride brought them down, and by
like pride he makes us lift our selves so high, that at the length we fall as
low as hell it self. Pride in us is that by which he works his malice on us,
and procures our destruction.

Let us then look about if we cannot find out by his footsteps where this
proud Lucifer haunts, walks and reigns. Where we find any of the forenamed
specialties to reign, there we may say, Behold a devil incarnate, or behold
one (at the least for the time) puffed up with the spirit of Satan.

We may find him walking and ruling in the hearts of proud, ambitious,
aspiring men and women, 2. In his instrument, proud men.
whom we consider either as without the limits of the Church, or as within:
both which as they extol themselves into the place of God, inuesting
themselves with his titles, so they challenge to themselves the privileges of
God.

First, without the Church, 1. Without the Church.
how many ambitious Kings have we read of, that never thought they were high
enough till both alive and dead they were worshipped and adored as gods. We
have seen it in Caius Caligula, S^pr page ^.
and may see it in the King of Tyrus, Ezekiel. 28.2 So Alexander the Great after
his conquests must needs be honored and esteemed as a god, till faintness in
bleeding of a wound, and the necessity of sleep and eating, did otherwise
convict him, or he by these did convict his flatterers who would needs so
persuade him. But indeed such is the nature of man's ambitious desires, that (as
one says) the whole round world cannot content and fill his heart, for still
the corners of it would remain empty.

Others imitating their father the devil, being used of God either as his
instruments only, or as his stewards, sacrifice all to their own nets: and
therefore you shall have them speaking of themselves, in the first person,
using always that pronounce. ^
Thus Esaias 10. though the King of e^^^s^ur was only the rod of Gods wrath, and
his instrument to punish the Israelites, yet thus he brags: By the power of my
hand have I done it, and by my wisdom, for I am prudent: and I have removed
the bounds of the people: -- and my hand has found as a nest the riches of the
people. -- Thus Nebuchadnezzar crows on the top of his royal Palace, ^
Is not this great Babel, that I have built for the house of the kingdom, by
the might of my power, and for the honor of my Majesty? By which examples we
see the nature of pride, which is, first, to attribute the good things we have
received from God, unto our selves, our own wits, power and policy: and
secondly, to use them for our own credit, estimation and glory.

^
But I would this pride were only found among the Heathen, whom it best
beseemes. But this horrible and deuillish pride has been found, and may be
seen in the visible Church of God both Jewish and Christian.

^
For first, we read that about the time when Christ our Messiah was expected to
come into the world, many rose up and made themselves Christ: ^
as Thewdas and Judas of Galilee. So a certain Egyptian, and one Barcozba in
the ^^^e of Agrippa, and another of that name about forty years after the
destruction of the Temple. All these took upon them to be the promised
Messiah, which if truly they ^ad been, they must have been gods, though they
intended only to have become temporal Princes, according to the common error
of the Jews. Thus also Herod was made believe by some courtiour-Rabbines that
he was the promised Messiah, Man ^^ ^6. Ma^^ ^3.6. and ^3.
of whom proceeded (as is thought) the Herodians, who so often came to entrap
our Savior in his talk. But of all other Simon Magus his example is notable,
of whom Saint Augustine writes, Aug^st (...)
that he affirmed of himself that he was Christ: he would also have men
believe he was Jupiter, Simon M^^^^
and that he gave the Law in mount Sina in the person of God the Father: and
that in the reign of Tiberius he appeared in the person of the Son, but
putatiue: and after that, he came upon the Apostles in the person of the holy
Ghost in fiery tongues. This man had his queen and harlot with him, whose name
was Selene or Helena, for whose sake he descended down from heaven to seek
and find her being a lost sheep, whom yet he called a goddess and the holy
Ghost, of whom he begot Angels. He caused both their images to be made, and got
them afterward by public authority to be set up and worshipped in Rome as the
images of the gods. Tertul ^n A^^^ g^^. cap. 13
Tertullian tells us that this sorcerer living at Rome, had an image dedicated
to him with this inscription, Simoni sancto deo, to Simon the holy god. After
him succeeded his chief scholar Menander a Samaritane, and baptized as was
Simon, Menand^^
who after the death of Simon, affirmed of himself whatsoever Simon had
formerly affirmed concerning himself. He gave himself forth to be the
Savior of the whole world, (and not of Helena only) affirming that none could
be saved, unless they were baptized in his name, which if they were, their
dignity and power was above that of the Angels, and that they should live
immortally here on earth. Thus we see no sooner came our Savior into the
world, but the Devil stirred up ambitious spirits to stain his glory; in
which regard it was necessary our Savior should so timely admonish his
disciples not to believe such as should make themselves christ's. Matthew ^^ ^ and
^^. etc.


But this height of pride has also overtaken such as in word at the least
profess themselves servants of Christ* yea servants of the servants of Christ,
2. Christian.
being indeed mere Antichrists, and enemies unto him: I mean especially that
man of sin, The Pope (...)
who is an adversary to God exalting himself against all that is called God,
so that he does sit as God, in the Temple of God, showing himself that he is
God. This Antichrist of Rome patien^ly hears and suffers his clawbackes to
call him by the name of Semi god, and of Vice god, yea and of God himself.
Thus, the gloss of the extrauagant Cum inter of John the 22. has these words,
To think that our Lord God the Pope, the author of the foresaid Decretall, and
of this, had no power to decree as he has decreed, would be judged an heresy.
Which gloss remains untouched, even after the correction of many other
glosses appointed by Pope Gregory the 13. One of the Secretaries of the Popes
chamber, in the last Council of Lateran, ^
speaks thus to Leo the 10. The ^^kes of your divine Majesty, etc. The said
Pope Leo, after the said Council was written out, approved of it In Italy upon
the gate of Tolentum there is this inscription, To Paul the 3 the most high and
mighty God upon earth. Now it is a vain excuse to say the Pope is no otherwise
called God, then the Scripture calls Kings gods; for the word, gods, being
attributed to Princes in the plural, was never but in a blasphemous arrogance
by any in the singular ascribed to himself: in which regard, the Scripture
calls Satan, the god of this world. ^
Now the Pope vsurps the name of God exclusiuely from all other Princes unto
himself, and out of this rule gathers by consequence that he should be
adored, even of Princes, and that he therefore cannot be judged of men; ^
if any temporal King deny to be judged by him, because Kings are called
gods, the Pope will not take this well answerably hereunto he calls his Decrees
and Canons by the name of Oracles, ^
and his decretall Epistles, Canonical Scriptures. He usurps also upon the
titles and ^aines of our Savior Christ, calling himself often in his Canons
and Decrees, the Spouse of the universal Church, ^^^m Christo se^luso, ^
even Christ set apart, says Bellarmine, though Saint Paul make the husband of
the Church to be ou^ one And Leo the 10. in the Council of Lateran is called
the Lion of the tribe of Judah, the root of David, the Savior of Sion. With
like modesty and humility, he takes upon him to make a new Creed, and to add
twelve more Articles to the Creed, and to bind men by oath and confession to
receive them; which even the people of his own Church were never bound to,
before the late Council of Trent. This Creed may be seen and read as it lies
in the Popes Bull, which calls it, B^ll^ (...) ^^rma ^^r^men^^ prof^ssions
(...) See (...) in (...) ^ay to the true Church, ^n he Pr^^a^^. T^ ^ncellari^
A^^st fol ^
The public profession of the orthodoxall faith, to be uniformly observed and
professed. Thus as he imposes new laws upon men's consciences, so does he take
upon him to dispense with the breach of Gods commandments, by suffering and
dispensing with shows, and all manner of sins for his own advantage. For
he sets his absolutions from sin, and dispensations for all doing, at a
certain price of money, and causes express books to be made thereof.

But leaving the Popes pride, we have others in our Christian Church whose
pride has been notorious: not to speak of our own countrima^ Hacket, with his
two prophets of Mercy and Justice, who most audaciously usurped that
incommunicable name of the Messiah. Manes.
We read of Manes an arch-hereticke, from whom the Manichees had their name,
who took to him twelve whom he called his Apostles, and called himself the
comforter of Israel. Acost. ^^suit (...) Temp^^ou^s^^^ (...) Re^ated by Doctor
(...) his first sermon on Reu. ^.20.
Likewise of later time, a famous Doctor in Divinity, a Roman Catholic, and
in his time the Oracle of India being in his right wit, seriously affirmed of
himself, that he was more holy then the Angels or Apostles, yea that God made
a proffer unto him of Hypostaticall-vnion, and to assume him into the
fellowship of the Deity, but that he in modesty refused it: that he also was
the worlds redeemer effi^^^cio^s^^, which Christ only performed sufficiently.

All these show themselves sufficiently whose Scholars they are, and whose
b^dge they wear, The^^^ (...) Satan and his instruments (...) with (...)
Christ and his followers. The (...) of Christ. Romans ^.5.
by which also they may be known: which will better appear if we compare the
pride of Satan and his followers, with the great humility of Christ and his
Disciples. Satan first in his own person says, as Isa. 14. I will ^^^en^ into
heaven, I will exact my throne above the stars of God -- and -- I will be
like the most High. Our Savior Christ contrariwise, who is God blessed for
ever, in effect says, I will descend down unto the earth and become man for
the salvation of man: herein did our Savior give us all a perfect pattern of
humility, bidding us by his Apostle Saint Paul, Phil. 2.5.6.7.8.
have the same mind, thoughts, and affections herein with himself. Satan and
his followers do patiently endure, and willingly accept divine honor when it
is done unto them: but Christ's disciples utterly abhor and reject such honor
as whereby men would make them gods, acknowledging themselves men as they are.
Of Peter. Acts 10 26.
Thus Peter when Cornelius fell down and worshipped him, could both take him
up and say, Stand up, for even I my self am a man. Satan's Apostles can make
themselves christ's, being indeed wicked Antichrists and enemies to him: Of John
Baptist. John 1.20.
but John Baptist, when he might easily have abused the credulity of the Jews
in this point, yet confessed, and denied not, but said plainly, I am not the
Christ. Wicked men, if as Gods instruments and by his power they do any thing
of note, are ready to ascribe the honor of it to themselves, and to accept it
being given of others. But Saint Peter and John, Of Peter and John together.
Act. 3.12.16.
when upon their healing of a Creeple, the people flocked abundantly to them,
ready to make them gods, answered, Why look ye so earnestly on us, as though
by our own power or holiness we had made this man walk? The God of Abraham,
etc. has glorified his Son Jesus -- his name through faith in his name has
made this man strong. -- Lastly, whereas Satan wound himself into credit with
the Heathen, and both sought and got himself adored as God, especially by his
seeming miracles, and by his predictions of things to come, and revelation of
secrets: Saint Paul on the contrary, Of S. Paul.
when by both these means he might have received like honor, utterly refused
it, and in much humility contented himself with what he was, yea to be
respected only according to that meannesse which his outward and modest
carriage in word and gesture made show of. Thus when for Miracles he and
Barnabas were accounted and confessed to be gods, and when answerably they
might have had sacrifice done unto them, they rent their clothes, Act.
14.14.15-8.
and cried, why do ye those things? we also are men of like passions with
you, etc. and much ado they had to stay the people that they had not
sacrificed unto them. So likewise when Saint Paul for his visions and
revelations (after he had been taken up to the third heaven) might by speaking
and uttering of them, have been thought to be more then a man, yet says he,
2 Cor. 12.6.
I forbear (to glory) lest any man should think of me above that which he
sees me to be, or that he hears of me.

To conclude this point, I say of Humility and Pride particularly, what Saint
John said generally of doing and not doing of righteousness and of love: In
this are the children of God known, and the children of the Devil. Whosoever
is not humble, but proud, self pleasing, self honoring, is not of God:
neither he that does all to his own honor, and not to the honor of God only
or chiefly. For as one says, The humble man is like unto God, Basil.
but the proud man being hateful to God, is like the Devil. Cyprian. -non de
Christi magisterio, qui humilitatem docet, sed de Antichristi spiritu nascitur,
etc.
All exalting of a man's self, says another, all swelling, arrogant and proud
boasting, is not of Christ's teaching, whose lesson was humility, but from the
spirit of Antichrist, whom God vpbraideth by his Prophet, saying, But thou have
said in thine heart, I will ascend into heaven, etc.

Let this be thought on of us all, and from the consideration of this pride,
which originally is in Satan, deriuatiuely in his members and instruments,
whereby they would make themselves gods, let us make this double use, neither
to give to others, or take to our selves any part of Gods honor.

First, Use 1. not to give Gods honor to the Devil.

Which is done when we give divine honor either to him more directly,


let not us by any means deifie the Devil or make him our God, or yet give
him or his instruments such honor as they are ready to take.

Yet thus men do, not only by deuoting themselves to the Devil upon terms
and conditions, as do Witches, Necromancers, and the like, which is directly
to make him their god; but even when in their lives they obey him more then
God, bestowing their best affections on the basest objects, Ephe. 2.2.
and walk in sins and trespasses according to the course of the world, and
after the prince that rules in the air, even the spirit that now works in
the children of disobedience. For in this sense he is called the god of the
world. 2 Cor. 4.4. Or more indirectly, when we give it first to Saints.
Moreover, men deifie the Devil, when they give divine honor to any creature.
This I say, first, even in regard of the Saints themselves and their images;
for hereby the Devil only is indeed honored, who often abuses their names,
and appears in and at their images. The Saints themselves neither do nor dare
take that honor which idolaters would give them: they dare neither take it on
earth, nor now in heaven, though we should grant they see and take notice of
our prayers and devotions done unto them. Do we think that the blessed
Virgin, now in the presence of Christ and of God, dares arrogate such titles to
her self, as superstitious Papists give unto her? who in their Rosaries and
Letanies call her Queen of heaven, Gate of Paradise, Mother of mercy, our
salvation, she that bruised the Serpents head: which last property in the
vulgar translation of their Bibles, is attributed to the woman, Genesis 3.15. who
also in their Ladies Psalter, called Saint Bonauentures Psalter, which is
nothing else but the 150. Psalms of David, take away the name of God, and in
its room put the name of Mary. Yea, in their other Psalter of our Lady, which
is digested into 15 demands, she is called the first cause of our salvation,
and one who at the last day shall moderate the sentence of the Judge. Yea, so
far have they proceeded, as to place her before Jesus Christ in these words,
Glory be to you o Virgin, and to Jesus Christ, etc. The like honor they give
to other Saints: but do they accept it? no: they are all chaste Virgins, chaste
Matrons, and know that by accepting such honors, they should consent to
spiritual adul^ery, which is idolatry. Thus the Saints are abused by Papists,
who yet themselves are not excused from spiritual adultery, though the Saints
partake not with them in it: as it is said, Matthew. 5.28.
He that looks on a woman to lust after her, has committed adultery already
with her in his heart; Duo fuerunt, and adulterium vnus admisit, Aug. de ciuit.
Dei, l. 1. c 19
though she be only a mere passive object and not consenting: of whom as also
of the Saints and idolaters, we may say as Saint Augustine said of Lucretia,
being ravished and forced by Tarquinius, they indeed were two, yet one
committed the adultery. And yet seeing idolatry as adultery, is properly
between two or more, we conclude that the idol here thus pleased and honored,
is the Devil and none other.

Secondly, 2. To the Pope.
if we give like honor to the Pope as is due to God, we thus both deifie the
Devil in him, and him in himself, who herein is an instrument of the Devil,
or else he durst never approve of such honor as is given him, when texts of
Scripture, which are properly and truly meant of Christ and the holy Ghost, are
applied to him; as in the vacancy of the Popedom, when to obtain a new Pope,
Cerem. Romans lib. ^ sect. 15.
they sing that tract out of the Prophet, which they read, Erit dux ejus ex eo
(sz. Israele) and princeps de medio ejus producetur: Thus in English, Ier.
30.21.
And their nobles (or noble ruler) shall be of themselves, and their governor
shall proceed from the midst of them. Which words are meant of our Savior
Christ. So, when they apply to the Pope that speech of our Savior Christ which
is true only of the holy Ghost, I will not leave you comfortless, John
14.16.18.
I will pray the Father and he shall give you another Comforter. Consonant to
which when he is chosen he is set on high upon the Altar, which is the seat of
their god, and there he is adored.

By these and the like honors done the Pope, they show what god they worship,
namely their god-pope, or which they are not aware of, the Devil in the Pope:
they may say what they will, but their intentions will not excuse them.

Thirdly, the like in effect is done, when we fear, love, 3. To other men whom
we honor more then God.
respect, honor any thing or person more then we do God himself.

Question. Must none be honored but God only? Answer. No, all superiors must
be honored, according to the fifth Commandment: whether they be superiors
with authority over us, as are Magistrates, though evil, as Samuel honored
Saul, 1 Samuel 15.30.
(which popish Jesuits will not do, who otherwise are not behind any in
giving honor where they should not:) or without authority, as are the aged,
learned, noble, etc. whom we must honor, by acknowledging and approving their
gifts, and that order in which God has placed them: so by our love and
thankfulness: yea, all must be honored of us, (though our inferiors in other
respects) in whom any grace of God appears, and that according to that measure
of grace and goodness we epsy in them. For honoring them so, we in them
honor God.

Secondly Use: Not to take Gods honor to ourselves.
Secondly, it concerns us, unless we will show our selves ^^ps and
instruments of Satan, by no means to appropriate Gods honor to our selves.
The very pride of the heart is a thing hateful to God, and the inordinate
desire of honor, is, as Saint Paul said of the desire of money, the root of
all evil: A^g^^t. de (...). Dei, ^ib. 1^. cap. ^3
as elsewhere, Initium omnis peccati superbia, The beginning of all sin is
Pride; nay it is the height of all sin, whereby man peruersly affecting
highness, forsakes God, who should be the beginning and end of all his
desires, and becomes a god to himself. Thus we offend, when we seek honor to
our selves from any thing we either receive or do. in any thing we either
receive or d^e.
He that considers and ponders duly how naked both in soul and body he came
into the world, how miserable and disabled he is by sin, how destitute of all
good, without the grace of God in Jesus Christ, will see he has but little
cause to be proud of any thing, and that he owes all honor and respect to God
for whatsoever good thing he either has or does: which if he ascribe to
himself, he sets himself in Gods stead, and exalts himself against God.
Thus do they who have their hearts lifted up, and are proud of their riches,
which they ascribe to their own means, as in Hezechia^, 2. King 20.13.
and especially in that proud Prince of Tyrus, Ezechiel 28.1-4.5. So if any be
proud of their wit and learning, either making themselves wiser then God
himself, as did that proud King of Spain, Alphonsus the tenth.
who vaunted that if he had been present with God when he made the world, he
would have advised him to have disposed better of things then they are disposed
of; or else, vainly referring their wit and knowledge to make themselves
known and famous, as if they said to themselves what the Poet floutingly sings
to such, Scire tuum nihil est nisi te scire hoc sciat alter.
that their knowledge is nothing unless others also know that they have
knowledge. So, if any conceive better of themselves, or expect like respect of
others from their gay and fine apparel, of which sort especially are our
artificial women, which will be better then God made them, and therefore
disliking his handiworke, die their hair, paint their faces, disguise
themselves in their attirings, bringing their hips up to their shoulders,
baring their necks to the nauill, and otherwise making themselves peacocke-like
by their periwigges and other haire-coronets and topgallants. As they now know
not themselves; so, without speedy repentance, they may fear, lest God when he
visits them, do not acknowledge them for his own, but reject them, saying, I
gave you other faces, other complexions, other hair, other bones, other
bodies, other breasts, other bellies, depart from me, I know you not. The like
crime are both Magistrates and Ministers guilty of, when, being but Ministers
of Gods Justice and his Truth, they refer what authority and power they have
to the advancing of their own honor, to the enriching of their own persons,
to the revenging of their own quarrels. Thus generally offend they who any
ways break the bounds of modesty, either in conceiving highly of themselves,
or in speaking proudly and arrogantly, or in showing pride by their works,
looks, gestures, or the like: thus men rob God of his honor, and deifie
themselves.

Thus also, if in any thing we do, we seek honor to our selves from it, or
if when honor is given us, we let it rest with us, we thus also make gods of
our selves, and pervert the order of nature, not working as the creatures of
God, who made us to glorify him, but as Satan's instruments, whom we serve
herein, by perverting the order set by God in nature, and making a new
ordination of things quite contrary. But we must write after the copy of the
four and twenty Elders, Revel. 4 10.
who cast down their crowns before the Throne at the feet of the Lamb: else
the very heathen shall condemn us. The Romans by that ceremony they used in
their triumphs, teach us that the success of things, and honor thence due, is
to be attributed, not to our selves but to God. For the Laurel crowns which
they carried when they ascended into the Capitol and sacrificed to Jupiter,
Plin. lib. 15. cap. 30. and lib 16.4.
they laid down in the lap of Jupiter, as Pliny records. Wherefore it was a
profane thing in Nebuchadnezzar, Habak. 1.15.16.
when he had taken the Jews as fishes in a net, to sacrifice to his not, and
to offer incense unto his yarn: as it should have been in Peter, if when after
he had enclosed so many fishes in his net, Luke 5.5.6 8.
he had not acknowledged Christ's power, by falling down at Jesus knees.

How far a man may praise himself.
I answer, a man is bound to acknowledge Gods grace in him, and goodness to
him, yea in some cases he may (and must) speak of them. So did Samuel, 1. Sam.
12.5. etc. so S Paul, Act. 23.1. 2. Tim. 1.12.13.14. But then it first, in
great humility without all boasting, and with a double acknowledgement: first,
of the good done by us, that is by the blessing only of God, and that our
abilities are the gifts of God, ^ Cor. 3.3.4.5.6.
bestowed on us for the good as well of others as our own. Secondly, of the
imperfections of our best actions, and that by all we can do or have done, we
cannot satisfy the law of God, or stand in judgment with him, but that we
stand need of his mercy, Nehem. 13.22. Again, it may be done in case of
detraction, or when our authority is called into question: then we may say with
Paul, -- ye have compelled me: and speak Cor. 11.22.23. Thirdly, to give good
example and instruction to others, we may speak of Gods graces in us, 2. These.
3.7.8.9. so we may speak to the younger sort especially, of such things as God
has done for us, by delivering us, and the like, that they also by our example
may trust in God, Psalm. 66.16. and Psalm. 40.1.2.3. These and such like
circumstances observed, we break not Salomons rule, Let another mouth commend
thee: neither dishonor we God, but rather honor him and his gifts in us.

accept it when it is given us? I answer, first, How far a man may desire
honor or accept it.
for the desire of it: we may not desire honor, through vain glory,
hypocrisy by seeming only religious, or by unlawful means, as by bribery,
simony, etc. yet we may and must seek that honor that comes from God, which
is attained by virtuous and godly deeds; John 5.44.
we may desire and must seek a good name, especially if we be Magistrates or
Ministers, according to Philip. 4.8. and that first for Gods glory, Matthew.
5.16. 2. Sam. 12.14. Secondly, for the good of others and our own, for thus
our authority increases with our honor, which August in Soliloquiis lib. 1.
cap. 11.
Aut^ oritas cum ex honoribus crescat, eaque multum faciat ad persuadenda
honesta, and pellicien os homines, cum ad verae dogmata tum ad vitae
sanctitatem, sunt optandi.
makes much for the drawing on of others, both to receive the truth from us,
and to imitate our virtues. Answerably, if honor be given us, we may accept of
it, it is justice in them that give it, and according to Gods will in the fifth
Commandment; yet with these cautions. First, not to let it rest with us, but
to return it to God wholly. Secondly, not to rest in it as in a sufficient
reward of our virtues; we must look for our full reward hereafter. Now the
reason of all I have said, is because God only and in all things is to be
honored and glorified according to the tenor of the first Commandment, and
Psalm. 148.13. Matthew. 4.10. Isa. 42.8 and 48.11. 1. Tim. 1.17.

I conclude all briefly saying that as on the one side there is nothing more
amiable and excellent Haec enim est praecipua conseruatrix and quasi custos
virtutum omnium: nihilque est quod nos ita and hominibus gratos and Deo faciat,
quae si vitae merito magni, humilitate infimissimus, Hieron. Ep. 14. ad Celant.
then humility; so on the other side there is nothing more hateful to God, and
more grievously punished of God then is pride: for as by it men most directly
sin against him in the breach of the first Commandment, so does he most
directly oppose and set himself against such, according to Iam. 4.6. God
resists the proud, Tanquam dicat, meus iste aduersarius est, qui me lacessit,
mihi debetur ista congressio, Ambros. in Psalm. 118. and Ser. 7.
as if God had undertaken a special combat with such. See this, and seeing let
us fear, in the examples of Lucifer and his angels, for their pride thrown
down from heaven: in the builders of the Tower of Babel, who when they had
said -- let us make us a name -- then God himself is said to come down, Genesis
11.4.5.8.
and to have scattered them abroad from thence upon the face of all the earth.
Look also upon Nebuchadnezzar, and as you hear him thus crowing upon the top
of his royal Palace, Dan. 4.30.31.32
Is not this great Babylon that I have built for the house of the Kingdom, by
the might of my power, and for the honor of my Majesty? so hearken again and
you shall hear while the word is in his mouth, a voice from heaven, saying, O
King -- the Kingdom is departed from thee, and they shall drive thee from men,
and thy dwelling shall be with the beasts of the field, Numb. 16.
etc. So Corah and his accomplices, not content with their Leuiticall function,
sought the office of the Priest also; and when in like presumption they came
with their Censors to try the matter before the Lord, he visited them himself,
-- making a new thing, the earth opened her mouth and swallowed up (or rather
down) Corah and his company, so low as before they had exalted themselves high.

Lastly, look upon Herod in his pride smitten by an Angel of the Lord, and
eaten up of worms, because he took Gods honor to himself, when upon an
Oration made, the people shouted, Act. 12.22.23.
saying, The voice of God and not of man.

Each of these examples calls to us, and in effect says as Senacheribs image
(one who was destroyed for like pride) which was set up in Egypt with this
inscription, (...), Learn at the sight of me to fear God, and in his fear
to be humble. And thus much for Satan's pride.

CHAP. VIII. Satan's Sleights and Suttleties in himself and by his instruments,
and that first for the seducing of the souls of men, by blinding and deluding
the understanding.
3. Satan's sleights and policies. 1. In himself.
FRom the former discourse we are further to take notice of a third quality of
Satan, which is, that to effect the former two ends, namely to wreake his
malice upon man, and to advance his own honor, he used diverse suttleties,
policies, tricks, and devises; which even now also he uses, (though perhaps
more covertly) in his wicked instruments, of whom, by their resembling of Satan
in their deuillish policies, we may give judgment. Deuillish policies I call
them, that so I might not be thought simply to condemn all policy: for there
is an allowable policy, practiced by such as never were scholars either to
Satan or to Machiauel. Joshua used a politic stratagem in besieging of the
City Ai, and that with direction from God himself. Saint Paul, for his own
safety, acknowledged himself a Pharisie, though withal he concealed part of
the truth. But that policy I call deuillish, when men (as the Devil) in
policy, say, do, intend, contriue and plot any thing, which is either against
the honor and glory of God, or against the good, either spiritual or
temporal of man; or which is to prejudice the Truth of God, especially the
Gospel. But such were Satan's policies among the Heathen: for, all his far
shows, and transformations, and apish imitations of God, and his dealings with
his Church, whither tended they? First, to the hurt of mankind; which hurt was
intended first and chiefly against the soul, which thus he labored to seduce
by withdrawing it from the service of God to the service of himself. Secondly,
also against the body, over which he did cruelly tyrannize, by being blindly
obeyed of men in voluntary selfe-sacrifices.

Secondly, they tended to the manifest dishonor of God and his truth, namely
to the seating of himself in the place of God. These were his ends: but to
effect them he had his reaches, his fetches, his heights and his depths. Revel
2.2^. 2 Cor. 2.^^ 2. Cor 4.4^ 2. Cor. ^^.3.
The Scripture tells us of the depths of Satan, (...), and of his devises, his
(...), which he has for our (...) or minds, by which he blindes (...), the
minds of them which believe not, and corrupts men's minds. He had also his
(...), and his (...), his policies and his sophismes, which yet he has, and in
which he is now far more exercised then before. Of whom therefore we may say
as was once said of the Lacedaemonians, The hurts he does are fresh and new,
(...),
his tricks and sophismes by which he does them are old and ancient: without
which his colors and angelical apparitions and tricks, his malice could have
effected nothing, as is said. Hence it is, that to seduce men in their minds,
he took the advantage of their natural ignorance, and used probable
persuasions. To get them to yield sacrifices of men to him, he persuaded them
it was service acceptable to him, that is, as they thought to God, thus also
bewitching them with a conceit of high desert and merit hereby. To get them to
do honor to himself, he drew them on partly by fair promises and partly by
threatenings, so, by imitating of God, seeming to be the author of good and
evil. Thus he Formas se vertit in omnes, hostiliter insequens, falaciter
sub^eniens, vtrobique nocens, August. de Ciu. Dei. lib. 10. cap. 10.
turned himself into al forms showing himself sometimes as a friend,
sometimes as an enemy, but proving always a deceiuer, and one that intended
hurt. Thus in his first deceit, when there were but two in the world, he
deceived the one by the other; his suttlety appeared in that he tempted Adam by
Eve, beginning with the weaker and more credulous and curious, he took the
advantage of her husbands absence; he veiled and masked the danger by making
use of the Serpent as his instrument; he pretended nothing but love,
friendship, honor and happiness to them; he promised nothing but what might
seem pleasant to the flesh; he detracted from Gods word, and lastly he
withdrew their obedience and loyalty from God. Thus he beguiled Eve. 2. Cor.
11.3. 2. King. 22.10 34
Thus to Ahab he promised nothing but good, yet being a lying spirit in the
mouth of his prophets, he intended nothing but hurt to him; and so to others.
Ierem 27 10.
Neither intended he any good to King Philip of Macedon, when by his
Prophetess Pythia, as Demosthenes said, he did (...). Satan ab initio mundi
fallax se per and menda^: mentitur vt fallat, blanditur vt noceat: bona
promittit vt mala tribuat, vitam pollicitur vt perimat. Cyprian. lib. 1 Ep. 8.
1. Cor. 11.13.14.15.
flatter and seem to speak as King Philip would have him. And thus to be
worshipped of our Savior Christ he promised no less then all the kingdoms of
the world. But what he obtained not of him, he easily obtained among the
Heathen; especially when by seeming miracles, revelations and predictions, he
confirmed and authorized whatsoever he taught, commanded and required.

From these premises, we will now urge the Apostles argument, which in effect
is this: Satan himself is transformed into an Angel of light, therefore no
marvel if false Apostles be deceitful workers, Secondly, in his instruments.
and transform themselves into the Apostles of Christ; it is no great thing if
Satan's ministers be transformed as the ministers of righteousness. No marvel
indeed: for seeing Satan is still the same he was, and also has like advantage
of our weakness, we may easily imagine, he will stir up instruments like
himself, by whom he may effect all his forenamed ends, which are three: First,
to seduce our souls; secondly, to kill our bodies; thirdly, to become our God;
who also themselves have like ends.

For the first, namely the seducing of our souls, 1. To seduce the Soul.
and the corrupting of our minds, before we speak of his tricks and policies
by his instruments in these our days, it will not be amiss to show what
advantage is afforded unto them from man's natural frailty, Their advantage
first from man's frailty and readiness to be deceived. Showed first in Eve.
and readiness to be deceived, that so we may not wonder to see so many
seduced by error in these our days in comparison of sound and sincere
professors. This frailty we may first see and observe in our great grandmother
Eve, who herein is a lively type of the Church of God on earth, both before her
fall and after. She may signify the spotless spouse of Christ, (the true
Catholic Church) which, as she was taken out of Adams side while he slept, and
after brought and espoused to Adam, so, sprang of the water and blood which
issued out of the side of our Savior the second Adam, while he slept the
sleep of death, which two are the matter of our regeneration, and is thus
espoused spotless to Christ her only husband being that Jerusalem from above
which is the mother of us all. Gal. 4.26.
But the sly Serpent seduced the woman to disobedience, from the simplicity of
Gods word and her obedience thereunto, in which consisted her safety and
felicity: and herein she is a type of the visible Church, and of such as fall
from outward grace through disobedience, and from the simplicity which is in
Christ Jesus. If therefore the Serpent had then craft enough to deceive her
being in perfect innocence, how much more may he deceive us, whose frailty,
even the best, is such in all the parts and faculties of soul, as whereof
Satan can easily, 2. In the parts and faculties of each m^s soul. ^^a^^. 19.20.
yea does ordinarily take too great advantage? He is the father of lies and
errors, and a master seducer: our flesh and concupiscence is the mother
thereof: Idolatry, variance, seditions, heresies, are made the works of the
flesh: which is Satan's concubine, who therefore while we sleep and are secure,
Matthew. 13.2^.
sowes his seed, his tares: from whence issues this bastard and unholy brood.
And this mother, now Satan's concubine, (...) Ephesians. 4.22 1. In the understanding.
is that old man, which is corrupt according to the deceitful lusts: where
within our selves we have both corruption and deceit.

First, in the understanding, naturally is ignorance, accompanied with a
deprauation, yea a natural incapability of receiving divine truth: (...) 1
Cor. 2.14.
The natural man perceiues not -- he cannot know the things of the spirit of
God. Nay the Devil takes advantage of our ignorance even of good arts and
sciences, as Logic, Philosophy, and of the tongues, and so deceiues us with
sophistry and paralogismes, as he did Seruetus and other heretics: how much
more then of our ignorance of Scripture, which is made the maine cause of
error, Matthew. 22.29.
which therefore Satan labors to deprive us of.

2. In the will. Act. 7.51.
Secondly, our wills afford him like advantage: which first, Quoad
specificationem and quoad exercitium.
though the understanding does, for the exercise of it, as to think or not to
think.) Secondly, will, affecting a liberty, makes choice of her religion and
opinions, Coloss 2.20-23. Isa 66.3. (...).
whence proceeds all will worship, and cultus electitij, whereby men choose their
gods: which properly, according to the word, is an heresy. Thirdly, obstinacy
in error, and consequently heresy, especially in women, Ierem. 44 10.17
who hold fast the conclusion with this band, they will because they will.

2 In the con^ience. Tit 1.15.^6. 1. ^^m. 1 19. (...)
Thirdly, our conscience being naturally impure, causes shipwreck of faith:
and being also erroneous. (as it must needs be when divine truth guides it not)
both misleads to error, and holds men in error, who commonly have naught to
say for themselves, but their consciences: and this the Devil knows well
enough.

Fourthly, our affections also naturally being corrupt, 4 In the affections.
help to corrupt the judgment; which this Serpent knowing, makes use, First,
fleshly pleasures as his snares to hold and lead captive silly women
(especially) laden with sins and led with diverse lusts. Secondly, pride, 2 Timothy
2.26. and 2. Tim 3 6
which Saint Augustine makes the mother of all heresies: this causes first
Schism, through self-conceit and singularity of opinion, secondly, heresy,
through obstinacy and stiffenesse in defending that opinion. Thirdly, These. 2.
verse 3.4.5.6.7.) of covetousness in men, and of their love of money, which,
says the Apostle, 1. Tim 6 ^^
while some covet after, they err, and are seduced from the faith. And
therefore Mammonists are the greatest Satanists.

And now, I pray you, Second advantage from Gods providence. 2 These. 2.9. 10
11. Deuteronomy. 13.1.2.3. Dan. 11.3^. 1. Cor. 11 1^ Third, from their own
suttleties. Revel. 7.7.8-10.11.
has not Satan men at great advantage? especially further considering, first
that God gives him some and liberty, and that first, to work with all power
and lying wonders -- with all deceiueablenesse -- and strong delusion -- in
such as receive not the love of the truth: secondly thus to prove, and so to
approve and manifest the love, the faith, sincerity and constancy of the
faithful. Secondly, considering, that as Satan in deceiving Eve, had, and
abused, the Serpent as his instrument, so has he now some of Serpentine
disposition, who yet, the more easily to abuse our simplicity, have their
faces, as ours, the faces of men, and their hair as the hair of women -- but
yet they are Serpents, and their tails are like unto Scorpions: and these are
heretics and seducers of all times. Eusebius. Eccles. hist. lib. 4. cap. 1^ ex
Jren
Whence Policarpe the ancient Martyr called Marcion the heretic, Primogenitum
diaboli, the first borne of the Devil; and yet some were borne a little before
him, even in S. Paul's time, (...). 2. Cor. 11.13.14 Act. 20 29.30. 2. Pet.
2.1.2.3.
of whom he says, they are false Apostles, and deceitful workers,
transforming themselves into the Apostles of Christ. Such as these he also
prophesied of; whom he describes by the name of grievous Wolves -- who speak
perverse things to draw disciples after them: of false teachers who privily
shall bring in damnable heresies -- speaking evil of the way of truth, and
through covetousness with fained words making merchandise of men. And these
are they who being deceived themselves, deceive others also, Jude 10.
who being corrupt themselves, yea corrupting themselves like bruit beasts in
what they know naturally, corrupt others also; as does their mistress, that
whore, which did, Revel. 19.2.
(and now does) corrupt the earth with her fornication. Now all these sleights,
this guile and deceitfulness to delude and seduce, are foretold us of
Antichrist, of whom it is said, 2 Thessalonians 2.9.10.11.
His coming is after the working of Sataen, with all power and signs, and
lying wonders, and with all deceiuablenesse of unrighteousness in them that
perish, because they received not the love of the truth that they might be
saved, and for this cause (it is added) God shall send them strong delusion,
that they should believe a lie, etc. Where we see that the son of perdition
must use all guile and deceitfulness to delude and seduce men from the truth
of God: how needful then is it for us to fear, what Saint Paul feared on the
behalf of the Corinthians, Cor. 11.3.
saying, But I fear lest by any means, as the Serpent beguiled Eve through
his subtilty, so your minds should be corrupted from the simplicity that is in
Christ: especially when we see and feel in our selves both in Court and
Country the stinging effects of this serpentine Romish brood, who take and make
use of all the forenamed advantages; especially in these our Northren parts,
where our peoples eyes are put out, Revel. 9.2.
and our Sun in great part darkened by the smoke of the bottomless pit, out
of which come these Locusts to us. Qui cauet ne decipiatur, vix cauet cum etiam
cau^t^etiam cum cauisse ratus est, saepe is cautor ceptus est, Plaut. captiu.
Proverbs 17.
Therefore there is scarce any humane caution sufficient against them, who want
neither will nor skill to hurt by deceiving: so that the most wary is not so
wary, but for all his wariness he may be warred and foiled. Moderate fear
may here be commended unto us by that commendation which the wisdom of God
gives to the fear of God, It is the beginning of wisdom. For, as also says
even natural wisdom in Aristotle, Fear causes consultation, Arist. in Rhet.
and consultation causes wisdom. Who then are easiliest misled and seduced
but the simple, (...). Minime mali.
and such as are least of all distrustful? The Scripture calls such simple, I
would they were not also unwise children. (...) Proverb. 1.4. Proverb. 8.5.
Matthew. 10.10.
It is said of seducers, causers of sects and offenses, that by good words and
fair speeches they deceive the hearts of the simple, Romans 16.18. What then
ought wisdoms work to be in us? she tells us her self, to give suttlety to
the simple: and her counsel is, O ye simple understand wisdom. There is
wisdom then required in the children of light to epsy and prevent the
wisdom of the children of the world: and therefore we are bid be wise as
Serpents: wise, not to do evil, but to prevent evil; and this our wisdom
consists in cautelousnesse. As the Apostle has foretold us of grievous wolves,
so he bids also, have an eye to, Philip. 3.2.
and beware of dogs, beware of evil workers. Now I need not much beware of
that dog that gives me warning by his barking: but I will have an eye to the
close sullen Cur, that will pinch me by the heel ere I be aware. If our
adversaries were all of hasty dispositions, (...).
and free spirited to express themselves boldly, then by Aristotle's rule I
need not much fear them: but being still and close fellows, dissemblers,
(...). Arist. Rhet lib. 3. (...).
deceivers, and as Saint Paul said, deceitful workers, there is too just cause
of fearing such. These says Aristotle, are to be feared, and so are, as he
calls them, (...), such impostors as can (...), imponere, that is, put a trick
upon a man finely.

Concerning all which Saint Paul warnes us, (...), 2. These. 2.3. 2. Cor. 113.
(...).

Popish policies for the corrupting of men's souls.


beginning his discourse concerning Antichrist, with this caveat, Let no man
deceive you by any means: wherefore not doubting but the Pope of Rome (and
that succession) is Antichrist, his (...) and means of deceiving and
corrupting men's minds are now to be considered, which, being both for the
supplanting of truth, and planting of error, we may reduce with the Apostle,
to our minds, that is, partly to the understanding, on which the will much-what
depends, partly to the affections and senses, all which these seducers seek
to corrupt. 1. For the corrupting the understanding. 1. Which they do 1. By
blinding it


First, for the understanding: It they go about to blind and to delude.

Their first trick is to put out the light, and with Ulysses to put out
Poliphemus his eye, while the people are secure, so that the hurt is done, And
that 1. By denying the Scriptures to the people.
and Vtis, Nobody has done it. This is done first by wresting the Scriptures
out of the peoples hands, not suffering them ordinarily to be read or known in
any vulgar language. Perhaps it will be said, The Bible is translated into
English by Papists, the new Testament by the Rhemists, and the Old by the
Dowists. To which I answer, Popish translations of the Bible in vulgar
languages.
this indeed is done to bleare men's eyes: they are driven to this shift
necessarily to save their credits, to seem to satisfy the people, and that
they might not be thought to be so terribly afraid of the Scriptures. But to
what good purpose is this done? 1. Obscure.
It is first done obscurely, See Valles. de sacra philos. p. 73.
whereby in the English they retain diverse Greek words, as azymes, etc.

2. Corrupt.
Secondly, it is done in many places corruptly, and as it seems, seeing they
cannot be so ignorant of the original, of purpose to establish popish
opinions, as John 1.12. and Luke 2.14 to establish freedom of will, where in
the first place, (...), or power, signifies not any power or ability of man,
but the right or privilege to become the sons of God. And in the second it
is not, as they read it, to men of good will, but good will toward men, which
(...), is that good pleasure of God whereby he freely accepts men to life by
Christ. The like might be showed in other places, as Psalm. 19.4. to prove the
visibility of the Church; but especially Genesis 3.15. where they render it, She,
not It, or He, as does Saint Jerome, referring it to the blessed Virgin, not to
Christ the promised seed: which shows their blasphemy in corrupting the text
and fountain in maine fundamental points.

3. Called in.
Thirdly, they have indeed translated the Bible (and yet I say not for all
popish places) and also for a while let some number of copies to be saleable at
the beginning, yet having by that means hushed that former clamor -- they
have called all vulgar Bibles straightly in again, Relation Sect. 34.
yea the very Psalms of David, though translated by their own Preacher
Pangorola, as doubting else it seems, that their own Bibles if ordinarily and
by every one read, would make men heretics, as some blasphemously have
uttered. Oh but have you never heard of a book entitled An Anchor of Christian
doctrine, Anno 1618
newly published by Th. Wr. wherein (as he would have us believe) the most
principal points of Catholic (that is in his sense, Romish) Religion are
proved by the only written word of God? Yes, the first part concerning the
Creed I have seen, where, of 53. Articles, few in express terms contain
matter of controversy, others prosecute controuersall points, which in the
general, but not in the application, we also acknowledge. This Book will be
of this use, not to clear, but to bleare the eyes of the simple, while they
(for the most part of them) only hear of such a book, not knowing or able to
judge how his promise is performed. This way of trial as their last (which
should have been their first) refuge they are now driven to, to prove Popery
by Scripture. Yet the Author very wisely for himself, abandons not other
proofs by traditions etc. and indeed it concerns him so to do, that so when
he shall find Scripture to fail him, he may have recourse to these again
from Scripture; which in effect he does while he pretends the contrary: for as
other Papists herein contrary themselves, while they endeavor to prove by
Scripture the same things, they hold tradition, Doctor Field of the Chapter lib. 4.
chap. 20.
as our writers show against them, so he undertaking to prove by the express
written word of God, that other proofs are both necessary and authentical,
(which are his own words in the preface, page 7) when he comes to prove it in
the place pointed to in his margin, namely in the third Article, he tells us
there in the beginning that indeed the controversy of tradition may not be
omitted in this place, because not only some other points of Christian faith,
namely that our usual Creed is authentical doctrine, but also the assurance
which we have of the whole sacred Bible depends especially upon tradition,
etc. What is this but to run himself giddy in a circle, to fly from
tradition to Scripture, and from Scripture again to prove tradition, which
tradition must testify of Scriptures, and so round, etc. The maine weight of
al his proofs then rests not on Scripture, as he by his title pretends, but on
tradition, into which man's faith must lastly be resolved.

But to return: for all this late pretense of Scriptures made by one man, the
rest dare not trust their cause to the trial of Scripture only, unless it be
only in their exposition and application of it, which yet the very evidence of
the words and truth in them, will soon refell in any man of common
understanding, who shall not be blinded through prejudice, but judge even by
common reason, (and not by any private spirit.) For, though reason cannot reach
to the things contained in Scripture without a superior illustration, yet it
can judge of consequences and dependancies of points, and whether such a point
be rightly deduced or no, from such or such a place. This they know well enough,
and accordingly fear: wherefore their very common service among them, as
containing many sentences and passages of Scripture, must be read only in a
strange tongue: yea all of all sorts, even women and children, must pray in
Latin. Nay in Italy it has been observed that in their Sermons, though they
preach commonly on the Gospel of the day, they do not read or any ways recite
the text, but discourse only of such points as they think fittest, that so no
sound of Scripture might possess the people.

Papists write and speak disgracefully of the Scripture.
To this purpose they also speak and write disgracefully of the Scripture,
saying it contains not all things necessary to salvation, charging it with
imperfection, saying, it is but a piece of a rule; and with obscurity, calling
it a nose of wax. Which they do to make the people more willing to part with
this treasure, and to admit of their trash of tradition, under the name of
unwritten truths delivered by the Church by speech only, which Church now has
declared her mind in the Council of Trent, whereunto all those that are
solemnly made Doctors in Italy must subscribe. Thus they deal with the
learneder and more curious sort, who else, looking into the fountain of truth,
should find but little agreement between it and the Romish doctrine. As for
the simpler sort, they deal with them as wise men do with children, who get
some precious or good thing from them, and give them in stead thereof a counter
or some toy: so they in stead of Scripture give them images as their books,
with many outward ceremonies and ornaments to gaze upon, as knowing the peoples
brains must and will be busied about some thing or other: like to women, which
having no children, are much delighted to play and sport themselves with little
dogs and puppets. By this means they would avoid danger from the written word
with which we urge them, and which would show them the vanity of their
traditionall doctrine, as that the worshipping of images is expressly forbidden,
with the rest, and that their Church is strangely infected.

Seeing thus they deal with Scripture, 2. By prohibiting the reading or having
of our books.
we may not hope that our books should ordinarily be read of the vulgar
Papist: for which they have taken order by a general condemning of them, and
prohibition: which if it were only to the vulgar, it had some show of
fitness: but they are denied even to the learned, both young and old. In the
Colleges of Jesuits are diverse of our books (though in a mourning weed of
black leather) which if any younger Student desire to see, Lib. de studiis
Jesuit. abstrus.
he must first in some Satyricall verse rail on the author he desires to read.
Neither must their ancients and Fathers use any of them, without the priuity
of their Regent. Nay their learnedest and greatest Bishops may not be suffered
to see the naked face of their adversary, as witnesses that most reverend
Archbishop, Marcus Antonius.
who in his own experience so found it. Who also tells us that no Auditour
under pain of excommunication, must read the treatises out of which their
professors of divinity in their public reading allege the opinion of the
adversaries, but must take all on their word. Nay, See Doct. James corruption
of Fathers, fourth part.
Bellarmine and Baronius are feign to become suitors to the Inquisitours to
read any strange book, whether manuscript or other: yea these very writers
last named, as also Gregory de Valentia, who have employed themselves wholly in
refuting from point to point the Protestants doctrine and arguments, are so
rare in Italy, as that by ordinary inquiry, Relation, Sect. 35.
they are not to be found in any shop, but in stead of them an infinite number
of inuectiues etc. so loath are they, it seems, our positions should be
known, and our arguments, though related and confuted (to their power) by
themselves. But we may not marvel that our books and arguments should be
prohibited to be read, seeing their own writers are also forbidden to be read
in the old Editions, before they be corrected, as some parts of Ferus, Stella,
Espensaeus. Thus the inquisition has effaced that excellent digression out of
the fourth book of Guicciardine: which worthy historian yet was a Catholic,
as they call themselves, no man more. The reason is, it shows by good record
how the government of the Church of Rome was at first merely spiritual, and
withal lays open her ambitious purchase of greatness, and the means how she
got it. Thus ashamed of her pedigree, as one notes, she razeth the memory of
her ancestors out of history, and would have none to look into the
unlawfulness of her usurpation. To conclude, the same Pope, Paulus 4. suffered
his own book, in the writing of which his own hand was before he was Pope,
See their Index ^ibrorum prohibit. in lit. C. 2. By deluding it.
to be prohibited and damned, namely the book called Consilium delectorum
Cardinalium.

But for all this, curious spirits will be inquisitiue, and man's nature is to
covet what is forbidden: these impostors therefore, seeing they cannot wholly
blind the judgment, they go about to delude it: Many ways.
and this they do many ways.

1. With false Fathers and Authorities.
Their first trick is to abuse the names and authorities of such as for
holiness and learning are highly respected and accounted of, and under their
names to sow error, and to disperse the corrupt leaven of their own doctrine.
And herein they use Jacobs deceit, in counterfetting the voice and habit of
Esau, and yet they delude none thus but the blind, 1. King. 3.19.20.
as Isaac then was; and the Harlots deceit, thrusting a dead child in place of
the living; yet wise Solomon could give the true mother her own child. This is
an old fetch of heretics. Thus the Manichees would seem to bring to light
books never heard of before, the Ascension of Moses, the Revelation of Elias,
the Gospels of Thomas, Philip, Bartholomew, the Acts of Peter, Andrew, etc. So
the Macedonian heretics put forth a little book smelling of their heresy
under the blessed man and martyr Saint Cyprians name. The like fraud is now
used by the Impostours of this later age, Monks, Friars, Jesuits, from whose
shops we have not only new sects broached under the names of Saint Augustine,
Bernard, etc. but new authors also, as Dionysius Areopagita; new Policarpes,
new Ignatius etc. yea new Gospels, Euangelia imo Proteuangelia, new
Apostolical constitutions, new Letanies also and Church Service, new fathers,
but yet bastard and false fathers, some whereof to the number of 187. some
Papists themselves, not only suspect but plainly convict of forgerie; there
being twice as many besides, which our best Protestants have challenged of
corruption: yet these books are still urged to the people by Priests and
Jesuits for sound proofs of the chief points of popery, as Doctor James in
his book of that argument, shows at large, who names the books, and shows
what Papists censure them, and what Papists again allege them. And thus are
the simpler sort most strongly deluded, receiving bitter pills under gold, and
poison under show of honey. These yet their (...), and false inscriptions, they
call their Pias frauds, godly deceits, agreeably whereunto they allow the
faining of tales, fables, miracles and legends to provoke the people to
devotion.

Of like nature and to like end, 2. With corrupting of true Fathers.
is their corrupting of true fathers and of the best learned of all ages, not
sparing their own Authors, as is noted, no, not altogether the Bible it self.
All which they corrupt by leaving out, adding, altering what they please, as
may be most for their purpose and advantage. And this they most shamelesly
practice under show and pretense of purging the world from the infection of
corrupt books, and of correcting the faults of the print. For this purpose
they have their Indices Expurgatorii, that is, Indices expurgatorii.
tables and Registers of such places and passages as they mean to purge the
books of, which they use as deletory Sponges to wipe out of such books all
such things as make any ways against them Diverse whereof are now come to
light, and are in our hands, to their eternal reproach. The first which was
printed at Antwarpe, Anno 1571.
by the command and direction of Ferdinand Duke D'Alua under Philip 2. of
Spain, lay hid in the hands of a few Censors appointed to view and correct
books, for 15. years together, and after came to light, and was by Iunius
left as a gift and monument of their shame, in the study of the Count Palatine
of Rheine. The Spanish Index was found first and discovered by our English in
the taking of Cales. Now by the direction of these Indices, the ancient Fathers
and first Authors are made to speak not their own words and meaning, but
what the late Council of Trent has delivered. The books thus purged, (or
rather polluted) are often reprinted, and these latter Editions only
authorized, all other are disallowed, called in, consumed, with threats added
against all such as shall presume to keep them. And as thus they deal with
the printed books, so in likelihood they have an Index for the purging of the
manuscripts also: for in the Vatican library at Rome, James appendix to the
advertisement prefixed to his book of the Corruption, etc.
certain men being maintained only to transcribe the Acts of Councels, or
Copies of the Fathers works, they have been seen in transcribing to imitate
the letters of the ancient Copies, as near as can be expressed. In which
copying out of books it is to be feared, they add, alter, and take away at the
pleasure of their Lord the Pope. The event may prove it so; herein dealing with
and deluding the world, as the Gibeonites did Joshua, with old sacks, old
bottles, old shoes and garments, wherein they are said to work wilily. (...)
in^statia. I^sh. 9.4.5.
Now by all these means the trial of a questionable point in religion is like
that trial of a Nisi prius at the common law, where for witnesses are brought
not good Freeholders, Probi and legales homines, but base wanderers, burnt in
the ear for Rogues, who know neither father nor mother, ^. With corrupting
even the Bible at self. Corruption of Fathers, part 3.
or at the best bribed and corrupted.

But what if these bold bauds go about to corrupt the Bible it self, by
adding, detracting, altering? To make a little further use of Doctor James,
this easily appears by the infinite varieties, contradictions and oppositions
which may be seen of any that shall compare two Bibles set forth by two Popes,
Sixth. 5. and Clem. 8. and that within 2. years. 1590. 1592.


The second Commandment is also quite discarded out of their vulgar
Catechismes which they communicate with the people, and to keep the number of
ten, the last is made two. Now whereas both the shame of the world and also the
power of God keeps them from daring to attempt upon the text of the Bible it
self; yet see how near they come it by corrupting the gloss and marginall
note. In the Bible of Robert Stephens, upon Genes. 15.6. where the words are,
And he (Abraham) believed in the Lord, and he counted it to him for
righteousness; the note in the margent is, Abraham fide iustus, Abraham is
justified by faith: yet these words which are all one with the words of the
text, even as the Dowists read and translate them, namely, Abraham believed
God, and it was reputed to him unto Justice: yet I say, these words are
commanded to be put our, deleatur illud, Abraham fide iustus. Index Romans page
48. Romans 4.3. Galat. 3.6. James 2.23. Index Romans ibid
And yet the authority of that place is urged thrice in the new Testament. So
on Leuit. 26.1. they have expunged the gloss or marginall note, deleatur
illud, sculptilia prohibet fieri: let this be put out, say they, God forbids
the making of graven images: and yet God in the text forbids the making of
them. Lastly, 1. Sam. 7.3. Samuel says, Prepare your hearts unto the Lord and
serve him only: the gloss says in the margent, Seruiendum soli Deo, God only
must be served; now says the Roman Index, deleantur illa verba, Seruiendu^
soli Deo, Index Romans page 50.
let these words be blotted out, God only must be served. Hence judge what they
would do to the Scriptures if they durst.

And thus we have seen, how by prohibiting and corrupting these divine and
ancient monuments, they corrupt men's understandings. Yet this is not all: To
plant their errors they furthe^ delude men's minds.
they have other tricks of deceit and delusion whereby they not only supplant
the truth, but also plant their own errors and make them passable.

Their next trick then is to dazzle the eyes of the simpler 4. With
protestations of truth
sort with Protestations of truth and swelling words of vanity; so that under
pretense of preaching the Truth, they supplant the truth: Hilarie
Antichrist, says a Father, under color (...) preaching the Gospel, shall be
contrary to Christ. Even so S Ambrose describes false teachers, to be such as
under the name of Christ, Qu^ (...) nonum, (...)
preach against Christ; so that the Lord Jesus is denied, whilst men think he
is preached. And as the Devils prophets of old took upon them the glorious
name of Prophets of God; so seducers will be prophets of God, and prophecy in
the name of God, though they so prophecy a lie, and can with the true Prophets
of God say, Thus says the Lord. ^
Thus Nestorius though he were an Heretic yet could he cover himself under
the veil and show of the Orthodoxe faith, ^
as said Theodoret of him, and generally false prophets can use the name of
Christ to deceive others thereby: Man (...)
concerning whom, our Savior has given us a caveat, saying, Take heed that no
man deceive you, for many shall come in my name and shall deceive many. In my
name: Some making themselves Christ's and Saviors; some bearing my name not
only of Christ but of Jesus; some presuming to be my Vicars on earth; some
teaching lies and falsehoods in my Name, and as my Doctrine. Thus Jesuits,
yea, the Pope himself, shroud themselves under the name of the Lamb, Mat
(...) 1 Ti^ (...)
but inwardly are ravening Wolves, and spear ^i^ the Dragon, teaching indeed
doctrines of Devils.

This Whore of Rome, gives out her false doctrines in a cup of gold; Re^^. (...)
she has in her hand, Poculum Aureum Plenum Abominationum, a cup of Gold full
of Abominations: where behold a Mystery; the initiall or capital letters of
these words, written in the language of the Church of Rome, whether casually or
by special providence, being put together, are observed to make up the word
Papa, or Pope.

We may well compare the Devil and all his instruments to crafty Pirates, who
will hang out the same colors; they will seem to be what indeed they are not.
Thus the Arrian Heretics of old, bragd they only were Catholics, as for all
the rest, they called them sometime Ambrosianos, sometime Athanasianos,
sometime Ioannitas. So the Mahumetanes now, though they derive their pedigree
from Agar the bondwoman, yet will be called not Agarens, but Saracens, from
Sara the freewoman. Even so the Jews bragd they were Abraham's sons, seed
and blood; yet says our Savior to them, John 3.39.^^
You are of your father the Devil. So Papists now: who but they? they only
must be the true Catholics, the true Church: for us, we are Lutherans,
Caluinists, Schismatikes, Heretics, with such swelling words of vanity, they
bewitch and corrupt the minds of the simpler sort from the simplicity which
is in Christ Jesus, even as the Serpent beguiled Eve through his suttletie. 2
Cor. 1^.3. 2 Pet. 2.17, 18, 19.
Of these we read in the 2. Pet. 2. who though indeed they be but Wels without
water, promising refreshing to the thirsty, but leaving their souls empty;
promising to others liberty, but are themselves the servants of corruption, yet
in speaking great swelling words of vanity they beguile (or allure and catch
like fishes) -- them that were clean escaped from them which are wrapped in
error. Hitherto refer we their great brags and vauntings, whereby they
astonish men, and dazzle their eyes with the name and report of the Church of
Rome, with Antiquity of her doctrine, with her Universality, Succession of
Bishops, Miracles, Authorities of Fathers, and lastly with the great rumor and
report they give of the learning of Papists. Who doubts but many are bewitched
with these sorceries? who have not the spirit of discerning to put difference
between the empty name of a Church and the Faith professed in a Church,
between Antiquity and Nouelitie of Doctrine, between true Universality and
a number of men given over to believe lies, between Succession of Bishops and
Succession of Doctrine, between true Miracles and lying wonders, such as is
said Antichrist should work, between Authorities of Fathers and Scripture
truly alleged, and the same wrested, if not falsified and forged; lastly,
between true and saving Knowledge, and a general and swimming knowledge in
the brain, without obedience, or without sufficient warrant and ground from
Scripture: for seeing they speak not always according to this word, Isa. 8.20.
It is, because there is no light in them.

5. With shows of Holiness.
Besides the advantage from their vaunting and shows of truth, we may observe
how they can daube on artificial colors of a holy profession and life, thus
Iesabel-and harlot-like, to draw the eyes of men to look upon them, love and
like them: under which color, doubtless, they beguile the simple, and
prevail much. Do we not see how the Pope insinuates himself through deceit
and under the show of sanctity? In the Pope.
He is therefore called abstractiuely His Holiness: but how far from
communicating therein later Popes have bin, might easily and plentifully be
showed, if I thought fit to rake in that dunghill. He styles himself in a show
of greatest humility, With Canaan, Genesis 9.25.
Seruus seruorum Dei, the Servant of the Servants of God: yet indeed takes upon
him as Dominus Dominorum, Lord of Lords, suffering himself to be called and
honored by the name of God in the singular number. We read of Pope Martin the
fourth, that having excommunicated the Sicilians, Morn. Myster. Progress. 53.
Of this Pope was this Epitaph made: Hic iacet ante chorum submersor
Toutonicorum, Pastor Martinus extra qui totus ouinus, Et lupus introrsus, etc.
and Peter of Arragon in favor of Charles King of Sicilie, they in the midst
of their troubles had recourse unto him; and so prostrate upon the earth, they
were enjoined to cry out aloud far off from him: Agnus Dei qui tollis peccata
mundi, dona nobis pacem: O Lamb of God that take away the sins of the
world, grant unto us peace. Which blasphemy he no ways put back. Thus while
he showed the horns of the meek Lamb Christ, a Dragon spoke out of his
mouth: for even so he is described, Revel. 13.11.

Of this rank generally are all false Prophets, who come to us in sheep
clothing, perhaps with the name of Jesus, who is the Lamb of God, upon them,
but inwardly are ravening Wolves: Mat. 7.15.
who under color of long Prayers, and more then ordinary holiness, Mat. 23.14.
devour Widows houses. Such are our Jesuits, In Jesuits.
who deceive not more eyes through their dissembled apparel, whereby they iet
up and down unknown, in the habit of Gentlemen, Noblemen, etc. then they do
hearts and minds of the simple through their seeming devotion, whom you may
behold now folding their hands, now looking up toward heaven, now sighing, now
leaving the highway, when they meet women, from whom they turn their eyes;
yet these men in secret do such things as is not meet to name; painted
Tombs, etc. inwardly full of faction, hatred of the truth, cruelty, etc.

Such also is the holiness of their Monks, In Monks.
who brag so of singular perfection, good Works, Prayers, Fastings, voluntary
Poverty, contempt of the World, forbearing the very touch of Money, Virginity,
etc. The outward austeritie in the habits and outward show of some of them
preuailes much in this kind with well-meaning souls, which being simple and
plain dealing themselves, conceive of others by themselves; who yet, with the
false prophets of old, do wear a rough garment to deceive. Zach. 13.4.
Justin. Hist. lib. 1. fine.
I cannot fitlier compare these then to Zopyrus, who caused himself to be
whipped and filthily mangled, his nose, cares, and lips to be cut away, yet all
in hypocrisy, to the end he might betray the Babylonians, to whom he fled,
into the hands of his Master King Darius, as he also did: So these whip and
scourge themselves, etc. that so by seeming to avoid hypocrisy, and to mean
sincerely, they might become guides to the people; which they no sooner
obtain, but presently they betray them into the hands of their god Pope.

Herein also they resemble the Scribes of old, who adorned themselves with
large and broad Phylacteries, that is, Mat. 23.5. ex Deuteronomy. 6.8.
as S Jerome notes, with parchments, in which the Law of God was written,
namely the Decalogue, which folding up, they bound to their foreheads in
fashion of a coronet, that they might be still before their eyes. Now they that
would seem more zealously obseruant of Gods Laws then others, made their
Phylacteries brother then ordinary, that they might therein write more sentences
of the Law. These, that they might be known to differ from the common sort,
carried Gods Laws more beautifully decyphered on their garments. Thus they
seemed to be clad with holiness, having it written in their foreheads, as had
Aaron, Holiness to the Lord. Thus certainly they got what they looked for,
estimation in the world, and won credit in the hearts and thoughts of the
people. But what were they in our Saviors account? Matthew. 23.3.5.
what were they in truth? Hypocrites, doing all to be seen of men, none
greater transgressors of the Law then they. Thus were they, and thus are the
Scribes of our times, like to our Alehouses, which on the wall have some goodly
sentences of Scripture, as Fear God, honor the King, etc. yet in the house is
nothing but swearing, drinking, whoring, and in no place, either God or the
King more dishonored and disobeyed.

They then that look only on the outward profession and behavior of such as
voluntarily seem to relinquish all for Christ his sake, to observe truly
their canonical hours of prayer, to live an austere life, etc. and see no
further, may easily be drawn on to a liking of that Religion which these
profess, and be hardened in it; but they that have better judgment, and the
spirit of discerning, can easily put difference between a vizor and a true
face, between Iesabels painting and natural beauty, between painted fire,
which only has the resemblance of fire, and true fire which has also the
virtue and efficacy of fire; lastly between flowers which are only painted or
wrought with the needle, though never so accurately and elegantly, which send
forth no sweet savor, and those which having deep root in the ground, and
being inwardly watered with the dew of heaven, exhale forth most comfortable
and refreshing smells.

6. By Insinuations.

Whereby, they would,


Further, these deceivers would creep into men, and obtain their purpose by a
kind of Insinuation, whereby partly they would seem to come near unto us, or
at the least, not to be so far off us in many things as we too harshly
conceive of them, partly they would have us come near unto them.

First, seem to come near unto us in some things.
First, they come near unto us for words oftentimes in diverse points,
pretending thus and thus they hold; yet this is but to delude the simple; for
what they build with their words they destroy and pull down again, indeed,
holding otherwise, and beguile the ignorant by shrouding themselves under the
covert of words.

First, whereas it might seem to us, as indeed it is, but Bellarmine
delivers, Bellarm. de great. and lib. arb. lib. 6. cap. vlt.
namely, that man, before all grace, has freewill, not only, to things moral
and natural, but even to the works of piety, and to things supernatural; as
Biel 2. d. 28. lit. K. Bellarm. de great. and lib. arbit. lib. 5. cap. 7.
to avoid sin when he is tempted to it, to know Bellar. ibid. lib. 5. cap. 14.
and do that which is morally good, and wherein there is no sin, yea Refert
Greg. Arim. 2. d. 29. art. 2.
to love God above all, and to keep his Commandments; the more easily to
deceive the ignorant, they very warily in words seem to join Gods grace with
our will to help it, as if without it they would grant it could do nothing:
so Bellarmine says, De great. and lib. arbit. lib. 6. c. 4. in titulo
Man's will in things appertaining to piety and salvation, can will nothing
without the assistance of Gods grace, yea, Ibid. Sect. nos tres.
the special assistance. Yea and some now revile us for charging them with the
contrary. This yet is but a fetch to deceive the ignorant, and, as one White,
way to the true Church. Sect. 40. nu. 57.
says, a dram of their wit to make their Pelagianisme go down the easilier.
For many require no such assisting grace. Besides, they maintain the merit of
congruity, wherein it is confessed there is the influence of no special grace,
it only consisting in doing that which is in our own power. But here,
Secondly, mark another fetch Hosius says See White, vt supra, Sect. 40 nu. 62.
the Council of Trent chose rather to call good works going before
Justification, Dispositions, or Preparations to grace, then merits of any sort.
Thus they are content to lay by the name, but the thing they hold as fast as
ever they did.

Thirdly, they say, and will persuade men they hold that the prayers of the
Saints, but also for their merits, as might easily Lastly, not to be infinite,
(my purpose being but to give a taste of their dealings) they protest, and that
by writing, that they allow not of the murdering of Kings, or that a subject
should rebel against his Sovereign; yet in deed not only practice otherwise,
but teach, that a King having the sentence of deposition or excommunication
pronounced against him by the Pope, is no longer King, and that his subject is
then loosed from his oath of allegiance; and maintain, that to kill such an
one, is not to kill a King, but as they say, a man masked under that title, etc.

2. Have us to come near them.
Now on the other side, see how they would insinuate themselves by drawing us on
by degrees to yield unto them. For whereas it is true as well in matter of
doctrine as of practice, Nemo repent fit pessimus, no man becomes suddenly
notoriously evil or heretical, but that error and idolatry creep in by
stealth, by little and little; Seducers would seem modest at the first, and
not to ouer-charge our stomachs with harder meat then they conceive will
easily be digested: they know how to begin with the spoon. Therefore you
shall not have them first to urge you to believe the infallibility of their
god the Pope, and that he cannot err in Peter's Chair how wicked soever he be:
or that you may buy off your sins as familiarly as you may buy wares in the
market, etc. No, but meeting with a young nouice, By yielding in something.
they will know of him whether he think that a Catholic so living and dying
may be saved: if he stand at it, he shall be urged with our confession, and
with the charitablenesse of that judgment. Next he shall be told, their Church
is a true Church, and that it were too unreasonable to deny them so much: and
then, that there is but one Church, as but one Christ, out of which no
salvation; That this one Church is more like to be their Church then any other,
as being so universal, so ancient, etc. And thus if the hearer suffer
himself, through his ungrounded judgment, to be hood-winkt with this veyle of
the Church, time shall lead him into those hatefuller absurdities. And this is
a right serpentine trick, which does serpere, creep on and in by littles, as
error has evermore done.

Thus again, if seducers can but get men at the first to see their monasteries
and other religious places, which are gloriously and resplendently beautified
with images, lights, etc. (which are able to dazzle the eyes of the simple, and
to win from them a kind of reverence, who naturally are inclined to idolatry)
they will hope well for the future, especially if they can but win them to be
present at their idolatrous service. If Alipius, in Saint Augustine, August.
lib. confess. 6. cap. 8. Of which infra Sect. 3.
by the importunity of his companions can be ouer-intreated to go to the
bloody spectacles of the gladiatory combatants, though he resolve to shut his
eyes and so to be absent, according to his own inclination, whiles he is
present, according to his friends desire, it is enough; some sudden fall of the
wounded, some outcrie of the people, shall make him open his eyes, and what he
sees shall breed in him an itch to return again with the foremost. It is
enough for Papists, if the sluices be once opened, the waters must then needs
run in a^daine.

Of this sort are such as desire only a toleration of their Religion, as if
this would content them: and such as would be Reconcilers of us and the
Romanists: they would have us yield in some things unto them. But we dare not,
lest they at the length obtain what they aim at. If error get but once into
the belfrey, as said a Doctor of our own, D. Fulke. See also that worthy and
useful book called the Deceitfulness of man's heart, hap. 15.2. Deceit.
it will never leave till it be in the chancell: if it may be suffered to be
in the porch, it will not be long but you shall see it possessed of the Church
it self, and setting it in the Pulpit.

This trick of insinuation, according to both the branches of it, they
particularly make use of in their intangling of young Gentlemen, who travel
beyond the seas, as may be seen worthily and elegantly handled by that grave
and judicious Divine Doctor Hall in his Censure of Travel, Quo vadis? Sect.
16.17.
to whom I remit the Reader.

In the next place, 7. By imitation.
Popish seducers use an apish kind of Imitation, even as we have showed the
Devil was Gods Ape among the Heathen: for look what were the chief means by
which the reformers of Religion prevailed in all places, all those courses have
the popish sort made use of with no little advantage to their side. These were,
First, diligence and assiduitie in preaching, together with their publishing of
diverse treatises of piety and spiritual exercises and devotions: Secondly,
education and catechizing of Youth in the principles of Christian Religion:
Thirdly, offers of disputation: Fourthly, writing of Histories and
Martyrologies, and other such like. In all these now they have affronted us,
and for diligence in diverse of these quite gone beyond us. But I mean not to
insist, as I might, on these particularly, especially seeing it is already in a
better manner performed, Relation of the state of Religion, Sect. 27.28. to 32.
then I am able, by the relater of the Religion used in the West parts of the
World; to whom I refer the Reader.

8. By Probabilities.
Lastly, these men we speak of, come with plausible persuasions, and with
probabilities; which being indeed merely Sophismes, yet the rather prevail
with the most, because of man's natural ignorance and corruption of nature, who
has in him by nature the seeds of all error, with an inclination thereunto.
Truth in it self and own nature is far more probable then falsehood, yet
with natural men, for the most part, Truth is thought falsehood, and falsehood
Truth. Seducing Sophisters therefore having the advantage of men's ignorance and
want of true judgment, by their art make falsehood it self very probable;
wherein they make humane eloquence, (wherewith commonly false teachers excel
the true) very serviceable to their purposes, who bear it out and would bear
all down with boldness, with probabilities and show of words. Thus they will
persuade the common people, we are heretics, scismatiks, at the least, as
having departed from the unity of the Catholic Church, and made a rent in
it: this seems very probable to unskillful and unstable souls, yet is it most
false, for we have not gone away, as heretics use to do, from the true Church
of Christ, but, which all that love their souls ought to do, Paralogismes.
from the company and contagion of wicked hypocrites and idolaters; so that
when they have said all they can, they can yet never say, that we have departed
from the word of God, from the Apostles, or from the Primative Church and the
faith thereof. But thus deal crafty deceivers in all ages, who catch men with
shadows, who are not able to see or discern the substance and truth it self.
Tertul. in Apolog. cap. 7.8.9.
Thus Tertullian apologizing for the Christians of primative times, tells us,
that whereas it was their doctrine that in respect of the spiritual and
eternal life, men must only feed on the flesh and blood of our Savior Christ
that immaculate Lamb, yet there were some enemies to the Cross of Christ that
made the people believe that the Christians were wicked and bloody men, that
they did kill men in sacrifice, eat their flesh and drink their blood. And
whereas they taught that with God there was neither male nor female, Gal. 3.28.
Act. 10.34.35.
and in respect of justification, no distinction of persons, but all were
brothers and sisters in Christ; there wanted not who calumniated them, and
said, Idem ca. 39.
that Christians made no difference either of age or kindred, but like brute
beasts promiscuously lay together, and accompanied one with another. And when,
according to the necessity of those times of persecution, Iuel. Apol.
Christians often met together into retired places to pray and to hear the
Gospel, the rumor was they conspired together among themselves and consulted
to kill the Magistrates, or to overthrow the Commonweal: this was made more
probable, because factious rebels in like manner meet together in secret
places. And S. Augustine relates, that, because they in the blessed Sacrament
of the Lords Supper used Bread and Wine, they were therefore thought to worship
not Christ, but Bacchus and Ceres, whom the Heathen, with the like rites of
Bread and Wine, did worship. These things were believed, (as no doubt the like
now, whereby true Religion and the professors thereof are blemished and blamed)
not because they were true, but because they were probable, and had some show
of truth. Thus would Sauballat make men believe Nehemiah meant to rebel
against the King, Nehem. 6.6.
because he fortified Jerusalem. Genesis 39.18.19.
Thus, Joseph's mistress easily persuaded her husband concerning good Joseph's
unchaste attempt, by showing him Joseph's garment; as formerly his brethren
persuaded their father Jacob of the truth of their false relation, Genesis
37.32.33.
by showing him the partie-coloured coat of Joseph all besmeared with blood,
and torn. From such probabilities and little grounds, simple men conclude,
what others would, and not what the premises, well sifted and examined, afford.

These deluders creep into men also by Rhetorical insinuations, and deceive
by Sophistical quirkes; not teaching and showing the fundamental points of
Religion to instruct men, And persuasions.
but using probable persuasions to induce and seduce to error. Thus the Friars
even in France, but more in Italy, Relation of Religion. Sect. 35.
says the Relator, in their endeavors to convert others, will say it is
lawful to persuade them, but not to dispute with them. Tertul. adu. Valent.
But what says Tertullian? Veritas docendo persuadet, non suadendo docet* the
truth persuades by teaching, and does nor teach by persuading. It seems
heathenish idolatours followed this art of persuading, and left the true art
and method of teaching, as appears by Procedant in medium pontifices --
conuocent nos ad conscionem -- distringant aciem ingeniorum suorum: si ratio
eorum vera est, afferatur. Parati sumus audire si doceant -- imitentur nos --
nos enim non illicimus -- sed docemus, probamus, ostendimus, Lact. lib. 5. de
Iustitia. cap. 20.
Lactantius. But certainly the popish doctrine and practice suit well together,
as tending to the same end. They teach that an implicit faith is as much as is
required in ordinary Christians, who therefore must not try the spirits by
which men speak: hereupon they are taught to believe without understanding,
(and what lies then may they not believe?) they are told that the grounds of
Christianity, and the proofs that the Scriptures are the word of God, are
only credible and probable, but cannot be demonstrated; that the chief proof
is the testimony of the Church, which is further guided by the spirit of God,
the work whereof is faith; which faith searches not the particular necessity
of the truth of things delivered, but relieth in general upon the approved
wisdom, truth and virtue of him that does deliver it: that therefore he that
will have necessary proof of the several articles of Religion, does but
wittily deceive himself; that the high virtue of Christianity is in the
humility of understanding, and the merit in the readiness of obedience to
embrace it. What madness then were it for any man to waste his spirits in
tracing the controversies of these days, and not rather to betake himself to
the true Church, whereunto the custody of heavenly truth has been committed,
and to receive faithfully and obediently without question making whatsoever it
delivers, etc. This method being as well plausible as probable, This method
and art of persuading may be seen more largely in the wise-obseruer himself,
in his Relation of Religion, Sect. 12.
is used as the chief means and course of their persuading at this day,
whereby, finding themselves not able to keep the laity-wholly and grossly
ignorant, as informer times, they cunningly endeavor so to lead them out of
the briars as to enter them withal into a second kind of ignorance; that being
not content to see utterly nothing, at leastwise they may be persuaded to
resign up their own eyesight and to look through such spectacles as they
temper for them. For they find by certain experience that the ignorance of
the Laity was ever the greatest and surest sinew of their greatness and glory.

But we are taught, and must teach, otherwise, first to know and then to
believe: at the least, faith must not be without knowledge. Christ's sheep
follow him, John 10.4.
for they know his voice. Wherein all other sheep are herein sheep indeed,
which blindly follow their guide though it be to break their bones by falling
and following from some high rock or other downfall. Our Savior says of
his, John 17.8.
they have known surely that I came out from thee, and they have believed that
thou did send me. And, as if the Lord meant purposely to meet with Papists in
this point, and to let us know that error in judgment and practice depended on
an ignorant belief, he instanceth in a point of popery, namely, abstaining
from meats (which is also a doctrine of Devils) and tells us, 1 Timothy 4.3.
that God has created meats to be received with thanksgiving of them which
believe and know the truth. Which from hence we may conclude, Papists do not.
And thus much for the understanding, as by other means, so also by
Paralogismes: but this, to speak with the Apostle, Coloss. 2.4.
I say, (...).
and have said, lest any man should beguile you with entising words.

CHAP. IX. Deuillish and Popish Policies for the corrupting of the will,
affections and outward senses.
2. Popish policies for the corrupting the affections of men.
But now see further how this advantage is followed by Heretical and Popish
Seducers, which they have from the corruption of our nature. For as formerly
they more directly set upon the understanding with Paralogismes and other
delusions; so they would also woo the Mistress by the Maid, they would deceive
Adam by his wife Eve, and with the Philistims, politickely get and hire Dalilah
to lull Sampson asleep that he might be taken captive; that is, by the
affections and outward senses of the body they seek to corrupt and blind, yea
to captiuate and bind the judgment. This was the Devils policy when he indeed
bewitched the first Adam by his wife Eve, whose eyes he first pleased, Genesis
3.5.6.
whose affections he first tickled before he either, by himself prevailed over
her, or by her over her husband. And this was his deuillish and politic
attempt, when he set upon the second Adam, our blessed Savior Jesus Christ.
First, he speaks to our Saviors eyes, Matthew. 4.8.9.
for he taking him up into an exceeding high mountain, showed him all the
kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them. And by this sight presented to
the eye, he would tickle his affections, saying, All these will I give thee;
thus does he flatter him with fair promises, before he tells him what he
desires of him; for his fetch was, thus to get our Savior to fall down and
worship him. Which is done
But particularly the popish practice herein and imitation of their father
appears in their, first, abusing; secondly, polluting; thirdly, pleasing the
affections and senses of men.

1. By abusing them.
First, how do they abuse men's affections, when in their persuasions to popery,
they lay the groundwork thereof on that natural love and affection which men
bear to their kindred, fathers and forefathers? for hereon they ground a most
pestilent persuasion to entertain the love of their errors for and with the
love of their persons. What say they, do you think that all your forefathers
who lived and died in popery, are damned? have ye not more charitable conceits
of them then so? if then you have, why do you not follow their steps? Thus
have some Popish parents upon their deathbed, charged their childrens love
with an obedience to their last command, which was, that they should also live
and die in the same religion, and this is the chief reason which some of them
can give of their faith, as in experience I have found.

Thus also, he is no Gentleman that is no Papist, whereas God knows, men, how
noble soever, never cease to be Gentlemen in Gods account till then: for then
indeed do they cease also to be men See Lactant. Instit. lib. 2. de Orig.
erroris cap. 1. fine. Ipsi ergo sibi renunciant, seque hominum nomine abdicant,
qui non sursum aspiciant, sed deorsum. and cap. 2. fine.
, when they begin so slauishly to subject themselves to man, yea to cast
themselves down before and under Images of earth and metal, whereas God and
Nature has given unto man an erected face and countenance to look in his
devotions to heaven the place and seat of Gods glory.

Upon the like ground, when they find any intractable through too much
prejudice, they labor to temper him with their plausible conversation, winding
themselves into credit, reputation, love, etc. thus to gain some interest and
possession in the hearts and affections of such as they would seduce. All this
while not a word must be spoken of Religion, as if that were no part of the
errand. Even thus, says a worthy Obseruer, D. Hall in his Quo vadis? Sect. 16.
have we seen an Hawke cast off at an Heron-shaw, to look and fly a quite
other way, and after many careless and ouerly fetches, to tower up unto the
prey intended. All this is, that at least for love of their persons, the poison
of their after-perswasions may be loved, taken and digested. For now having got
themselves the reputation of a sweet ingenuitie, and delightful sociablenesse,
opportunity is found to bestow some witty scoffs upon those parts of our
Religion which lie most open to advantage, and so from them with many
protestations of love warily and by degrees, to other points.

Thus especially are our English Gentlemen who cross the seas, wooed and dealt
withal by their insinuating countrymen smooth Papists, who, upon notice
formerly given them, expect and wait their coming.

Now contrariwise, especially among their own, and with others also, the
Teachers and Lovers of the Truth, are both secretly, and also openly and
impudently traduced, calumniated, and evil spoken of, that so the truth they
preach and profess may be distasted, by reason of that prejudice, which men's
naughty affections have conceived against their persons. Even thus did the
false apostles of old deal, ^ Cor. 10.10.12
who vainly vaunting, and commending themselves, did withal vilify S. Paul,
and speak of him to the people, as of a bragging fellow, who seemed terrible a
far off by his letters, but yet being present, was but weak, and his speech
contemptible. It were infinite to relate particularly what slanders and vile
imputations are laid upon Protestants and true professors; so that
calumniations, lies, slanders, falsehood, are now one chief pillar of Popery,
on which it stands. It is the Popish practice (if not doctrine) Calumniare
audacter, semper aliquid haerebit; lay on load, wound them in their good names,
calumniate and charge them falsely: for what though the wound be closed and
cured, yet some scarre will ever remain, there will be some or other to
believe it. Relation of Religion, Sect. 30.
Thus, as is observed, they suborne post-men to write the Legends of
Protestants, that afterward they might cite them as approved authors and
histories, as is evident in the lives of Calvin and Beza, written by their
sworn enemy Bolseck (the twice banished and thrice runnagate Friar and
Physician) who being by their side requested to write thus, is in their
writings alleged as Canonical. Now this they gain by such slanders, they
put the party slaundered to justify and prove the negative, which in Logic
is made always very difficult, and often impossible; which yet if he be
notable directly to do, the other triumphs, as in a matter of infallible truth
and victory. But as bare denial does not always clear a man, so should not a
bare accusation, especially of an enemy, be taken as sufficient to condemn
him: for then, as Julian answered Delphidius, who shall be found guiltless?
Surely few that have enemies, as all good men have.

Again, whereas corrupt affections and manners, 2 By polluting the affections.
partly of their own nature, partly by Gods just judgment, cause error in
mind and understanding, so that where the will is inclined to evil, there the
mind is bent to falsehood: behold how Satan's bawds go about to bewitch men's
affections, and pollute them, by corrupting and inclining them to sin, that
so the judgment may conceive of things, not as they are in themselves, but as
they appear through the false glass of affections, which not only raise up
fogges and mists to blind the judgment, but also plead mightily for what they
affect.

It is observed by some, that so many books of bawdry and ribaldry, as are by
Popish factors of purpose translated out of Italian into English, do turn
more from the truth at home, then their contentious books abroad. For our
English becoming once Italionated, are by that means effeminated, and
consequently Satanized. Such books in what language soever, must needs prove
exceeding prejudicial to the chastity both of body and of mind, and of the
mind because of the body.

I wonder what sound judgment in religion could that Archbishop of Beneuentum
Bartholomaeus de la Casa, and the Popes Nuncio at Venice be of, who wrote and
published that book which he entitles, De art diuina, Of the divine Art, yet
being indeed, De art Sodomitica, of the art of Sodomie, being written in the
commendation of that most unnatural sin. And what sound minds can they have
that delight either in that book, or in that sin, or any other of like
nature? Romans 1.27.28.
Surely we cannot imagine but God gives such over to a reprobate mind, so that
it is no hard conquest to make myriads of such to be Romish prosylites and
conuerts: and such indeed are the greatest part of their conuerts, none or few
of very good affections, but such as either take or, from that religion, seek
liberty to the flesh. Howsoever if they find them not such, there shall not
sometimes want their endeavor to make them such, by the means aforesaid, or
otherwise.

We read our own times prophesied of, and we see the truth of the Prophecy
with our eyes, whereby we are told of a sort of men which creep into houses,
2 Timothy 3.6.7.
and lead captive silly women laded with sins, and led away with diverse
lusts, ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the Out of
which words for our purpose we note, first, that corrupt and sinful affections
are enemies and hindrances secondly, we note a double fetch of politic
seducers. The first, to take the advantage of the wills corruption, and of our
muddy affections, thereby to dim and obscure the clear sight of the
judgment: which they do, not in women only, but in men also of womanish
affections. The second is, that they begin with women the weaker sex, and
with the weakest of that sex, silly and simple women, whom as they seduce, so
do they use as instruments to seduce men by them. Now this is a deuillish fetch
first practiced by the devil, who in deceiving Adam by his wife Eve, has thus
set a copy to such his scholars as are of the School and Synagogue of Satan.
See how it was sampled by Balaam, who not able to bewitch the Israelites by his
sorceries, yet by his wicked counsel he did. Numb. 31.16. Much evil by women.
For as Moses tells us, Women (namely the women of Moab,) caused the Children of
Israel, through the counsel of Balaam, to commit trespass against the Lord in
the matter of Peor, that is, by entising them to carnal copulation, they drew
them on to spiritual fornication, to Idolatry, Psalm. 106.28.
and to join themselves unto Baal Peor, and to eat the sacrifices of the
dead. Numb. 25.1.2.
This lesson it seems was all taken out by some in the Church of Pergamus,
Reu. 2.14.
that held the doctrine of Balaam, who taught Balac to cast a stumbling block
before the children of Israel, to eat things sacrificed unto Idols, and to
commit fornication. 1 King. 11.3.4.
Even thus did Salomons wives turn away his heart after other gods. For as
Nehemiah told the Jews that had married wives of Ammon, Nehem. 13.26.
and of Moab, strange women caused him to sin.

And certainly there was a mystery in it, that women were the Devils
prophetesses among the Heathen, by whom also, as by Pythia, he gave forth his
Oracles. Yea in all ages of the Christian Church we shall find women
strongliest infected with error, and the greatest abetters thereof; so that
deprauation of religion has often been hatched in and by their marriages, and
errors and heresies have grown strong in their nurseries. Constantia widow of
Licinius, and sister to Constantine the great, being corrupted with the
blasphemy of Arrius, got her brother to call home Arrius from banishment. So
Iustinia mother to the Emperor Valentinian got the Arrians a Temple at Millan.
So Eudoxia persuaded her husband Theodosius to favor Eutiches his faction
against the Orthodoxe teachers: and so was Arcadius seduced by his sister
Eudoxia. And had not Simon Magus his Helena, and Apelles his Philumena? and
have not other heretics their several women, whom first of all they animated
with the spirit of error?

Instances and particular examples in our own times and neighbor Nations
would be odious. Yet this we may say safely, and experience shows us as much,
that many are hooked in to embrace Popery, by unfortunate marriages with women
popishly affected: there is seldom any marrying of such, unless men be first
married to their Religion, and the Whore of Rome. Howsoever, though they be no
Papists before, yet doubtless curtain Sermons prevail much with many to make
them so.

If it be asked why especially the Devil and his factors make so much use of
women in this kind, and why they choose them as apter for their purpose and end:
the answer is, Because that sex being carried more by affection then by
judgment, is First, easy to be deluded, through the first, of judgment and
wisdom to see and avoid the sleights of Satan; secondly, of power to resist,
and as it is the easilier misled, so the hardlier reclaimed; as the weaker to
resist by reason, so the stronger to persist in wilfulness: new fangled in
their opinions as in their attire, loving nothing that is vulgar, Dallington in
his Inference upon Guicciardines Digression.
no not the truth, as one pithily notes. Secondly, because that sex is more
fit and apt to delude, by moving, persuading, and intising of men, who the more
willingly often suffer themselves to become their spoil, for their judgments,
that they might be masters of the others affections. Besides, women rule more
in the hearts of Children in diverse regards, then the fathers; which the popish
sort of seducers are wise enough to observe and make use of: Idem ibid.
for they know that fathers do but provide for them, but mothers feed them;
fathers are austere, the mother indulgent; fathers have the awe, mothers the
love; fathers have the eye, but mothers the heart; from whom with their milk
they suck this veriuice, wherewith the teeth of many great families are set on
edge, and whereby within these few years their number is increased here among
us exceedingly, especially in these Northren parts of England. This being the
danger, (though I know godly Matrons should instruct their children in
godliness and Religion, as also Christianly advise their husbands with all
humility, yet) God by his Apostle, will not suffer a woman to teach, 1 Timothy
2.11.12.
(I suppose publicly) nor to usurp authority over the man, but to be in
silence, and to learn in silence with all subjection. And he reproues the
Church of Thyatira for suffering the woman Iesabel, Revel. 2.20.
which called her self a Prophetess, to teach and to seduce his servants to
commit fornication, and to eat things sacrificed unto idols.

To conclude, in a word, the whole body of popery (as it is popery) is in the
respect last spoken of, a Seducer, and a forcible, though a silent, solicitor
of man's will and affections to sin, and consequently to error, while their
whole doctrine almost opens a window thereunto. For, to give an instance, when
men may have absolutions from any sin whatsoever for a certain, and that a
very small price and piece of money, (as all sins are valued and rated in
their books of taxes) who then that is of unmortified and unregenerate
affections, (as we are all naturally) would not, yea does not, take liberty to
sin securely, as knowing beforehand how and at what price he may redeem it;
or at the worst, that his satisfaction is to be but temporary either in this
life, or in their imagined Purgatory? This doubtless is, though an inward and
not acknowledged, yet a powerful motive with many lustful young men and
women, and with many who love liberty, to become Papists, and so to captiuate
their judgments in matters of religion to the wills of others, when they see
that popery for the practice of it is but a very outside of Christianity, and a
mere formality of devotion, which they can easily perform, by saying over
their beads, etc. And when they see that not the deuoutest Papist, yea not a
Papist in Christendom ever prays daily with his family, or sings but a
Psalm at home, (as not taking themselves so strictly tied) yea when they see,
that the Lords day is no where under the jurisdiction of Rome duly kept, nor
scarce any Commandment; the breach of which being made up, and amends made
with a cross, a drop of holy water, or a little money, as is said: Certainly
this religion must needs be pleasing to a carnal man, and the way of outward
fashionablenesse in religion and inward liberty of heart cannot but seem fair
to nature, and win many to walk in it.

In the third place therefore, 3. By pleasing them.
popish religion being thus most agreeable to our corrupt nature, and so
inclining to sensual, see what variety of baits this Church of Rome has to
please men, and to solicit the affections and wills of all sorts of men, of
what affection, condition, or age soever. Here we shall find a play-fellow for
every sense, Church-musicke for the ear, fine pictures and glorious shows for
the eyes, and so forth. Here is for the ambitious and aspiring, pomp and
magnificence waiting on the Cardinals and Prelates; for base and sordid
spirits, the orders of Friars Capuchins and Feuillants inuiting to their
fellowship. Loves any man ease and belly-cheare? this may be hoped for, if
turning popish, he can get into the Popes kitchen, into an Abbay or Priorie, or
such other place which is richly endued with lands and revenues. But if any
shall rather like to live as a Beggar, he has four orders of begging Friars
to join himself unto (where yet under color of being poor, he may possess
all things) If you affect solitariness, you have the Hermites; if to keep
company, the conuentuall Monks: if you be desirous of knowledge, you have the
Jesuits that profess it; if of ignorance, you have the ignorant Friars which
have made a virtue of ignorance. Does austerity and show of mortification like
any man? at Rome you have couents of cloistered Monks wonderful for their
austerity; if lasciviousness and reuelling, you have the common Stews hard
by; on the one side of the street, a cloister of Virgins, on the other, a stie
of Curtezans with public permission. And thus, in effect, are these varieties
of recreations, exercises and professions, (which all of purpose are so sorted
to ravish all men's affections, and to fit and please each humor) decyphered by
a worthy writer of our times, Peter du Moulin. See also, Relation of Religion,
Sect. 13.
and in our common cause, who though he love our Nation, yet is he not of it.
Who yet adds, that there are none in popery, even to little children of 6. or
7. years old, but shall have some thing or other which shall content them.
There are certain feasts of purpose for them, as the feasts of S. Catherin,
and S. Nicholas, when they are clad in gay apparel, when they are led about in
procession, and have little painted images given them to bear in their hands.
A pretty device, betimes to bind the affections of children to them.

Thus again for discontented minds they have their preferments; and for the
buying of men's consciences, rewards are proposed to such as shall relinquish
the Protestant profession, and turn to theirs, as in Ausburie, where they say
there is a known price for it of ten Florens a year. Their religious orders
are made to serve for this purpose, among others. Such as in their discontented
humors, either through crosses in their estate, or some notable disgrace, or
other miscarriage of themselves, can find no other place of repose, resolve
then to go Friars, as they term it; Yea, Relation of Religion, Sect. 10.
whosoever by his monstrous blasphemy, or other like villainy, has deserved
all the tortures and deaths in the world, says mine Author, if, (before the
hand of justice lay hold upon him) he voluntarily profess himself a Capuchin
or Hermit, or of such like strict order, the Pope forbids any further
pursuit, as thinking his voluntary perpetual penance sufficient, and in this
manner is the greatest sort of their gentry Capuchins, for so are the most of
the order by birth.

What notable policy is this, of this wise, though viperous generation, by
these varieties of baits, to draw fish of all sorts to their nets! These must
not be thought to be among them, as it may be in other places of the world,
by casualty, without order or of necessity; but more purposely* as being sorted
into great parts, into several professions, countenanced and honored many
ways. Now certainly this also is policy learned from Satan, whom we may
observe to have made use of men's inclinations, whether of nature and
complexion, or through the current and sway of the times, to frame Religion
among them in time according to their inclinations.

Thus the Chaldeans, who gave themselves much to the inquisition of Nature, and
view of the heavens, Peucerus de diuinationum gen^ribus.
turned their religion into Philosophy and worshipping of the creatures. The
Egyptians being by nature or custom superstitiously affected, (...) and (...)*
and given to the search of mysteries, fell at the length to most gross
superstition, and to Magical Arts. The Grecians who naturally are witty, (...).
inuectiue and contentious, turned their religion into vain disputations and
allegories. Thus the Romans, who naturally are ambitious and aspiring, framed
and formed their religion (both before and now also since our Saviors time)
according to their political Empire and Monarchy. The Germans now (as indeed
generally all men) loving liberty, if not license, Philip. Melan^^. in locis
Manl^^.
turn their religion accordingly into liberty, licentiousness, and carnal
security. The Schoolmen having addicted themselves much to the study of
Philosophy, have tempered their religion and their judgments accordingly, and
framed them much what according to Aristotle's Ethickes.

And thus has Religion been swayed in all ages, (Satan taking his advantage
from men's natural corruption and inclinations) according to men's humors and
affections: which being observed by the disciples of Satan, is more purposely
made use of, that each inclination and humor might receive content in Popery.
And herein their policy passes, for whereas in the former instances, religion
degenerated only, or chiefly, according to the particular inclinations of each
country and nation, it is otherwise in Popery, which is compacted of infinite
contrarieties, all tending to entertain the several humors of men, that so
finding what may please their own private humors, they may like better of
Popery which affords them that content. For here is multitude of ceremonies for
the superstitious; high honor from the Cardinals hat and Popes triple crown,
for the ambitious and aspiring; voluptuousness, for the dissolute; knowledge,
professed by the Jesuits, for the lovers of it; prayer, for the devout; works
of piety, for the charitable, and other like varieties formerly named. This
pleasing then of men's affections, is one politic means, besides all the
former, whereby Popery is even yet in many places daily increased.

To these others might be added, which they cannot hide from the eyes and
observation of the wise; but because this depth of Satan is bottomless, as
reaching to hell it self, we cease to search further into it, as having
already been drawn on further then at the first we intended.

These are the deuillish policies of such as would seduce the souls of men
from the truth of God, whereby yet, as they deceive, so are they deceived,
being those very deceivers which S. Paul so long since has warned us of. 2 Timothy 2.13.
For behold, while they are playing their feats, you may, as it were, see
Satan looking over their shoulders, setting them also, and heartning them on,
and by them working his own purposes: he being the grand-deceiuer deceiues
both, and laughes to see the deceiuer deceived by himself. Yet if you please
to look up higher, you may see God the Great Master of this game and
tragicke-comedy, who by his infinite wisdom (being as it were the Poet)
contrived, purposed the being of each thing, and from eternity disposed of
them, you may, I say, see him ruling, ouer-ruling, and disposing the actions of
them all; so that while every one works for himself and for his own end, he
makes use of all for his own glory, either in the just condemnation of them
that perish, whether they be deceivers or deceived, or the salvation of his
chosen, Ezekiel. 14.9, 10, 11 1 Cor 11 19.
who thus are proved and approved. On him then and on his only word we are to
depend for direction. Yet are we also wisely to observe and take notice of the
policies of enemies, which when we know, we are to take heed of, lest Satan
should get an advantage against us, for, says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 2.11.
we are not ignorant of his devices. The same Apostle says of seducers. They
shall proceed no further, 2 Timothy 3.9.
for their folly shall be manifest to all men. Where we may note, the reason
why seducers so long and so much prevail, is from men's ignorance of their
folly, madness and plots. We may justly then bewail the estate of the
commoner sort of Papists, (for others, they are justly hardened) whose eyes are
blinded so that they can neither see the sophismes and tricks by which they
are deluded, nor yet the evidence and only rule to judge both of truth and
falsehood, Gods sacred word in the Scriptures, which word tells us what Pastors
and Teachers we are to hearken unto, namely to such as Christ gave at his
ascension, and still gives, to make us perfect men in him, and that we
henceforth should be no more children, Ephesians. 4.1^.
tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of doctrine by the
sleight of men, and cunning craftiness whereby they lie in wait to deceive.
The remedy he gives us is double in the next verse; the first is, to speak or
follow the truth in love, And ^^.
otherwise we may fear to be given over to strong delusion, 2 Thessalonians 2.10.11
and to have our portion with them that perish, because they received not the
love of the truth that they might be saved. This love of God and his truth, is
made a note of a true professor, whom God by false prophets does prove whether
he love the Lord with all his heart or no. The second is, Deuteronomy. 13.2.3.
to grow up into him in all things which is the head, even Christ. For, as it
is in the same chapter said, by him and by his ministry, we may become
perfect men, Verse 13.
and attain to the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ. In Christ
then there is a fullness, and from him we have a fullness. Therefore I conclude
with the Apostle S. Paul, Coloss. 2.3 4. And verses 8.9.10.
that in Christ are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge: And this I
say, lest any man should beguile you with entising words.

CHAP. X. Satan's policies in himself and by his Instruments the Popish sort,
for the killing the bodies of the Saints.
2. Popish plots and policies for the effecting of their second end.

Namely, For the killing the bodies of the Saints.


LEt us now in the next place see if we cannot also find like deuillish
sleights and policies used for and in the killing of the bodies of the Saints.
Satan, to animate the Heathen to the voluntary murdering and killing
themselves and children in sacrifice to him, wanted not his tricks of deceit
and delusion, his religious pretext of most acceptable service, when our
dearest things are not spared for Gods sake, his plausible persuasions, as of a
thing most reasonable, viz. that man who sins, should also by his blood
expiate sin, especially the innocent (as are children) die for the nocent, In
the 3. Sect.
and the like, of which more hereafter. In like manner we may now find him, by
his instruments, plotting and politiquely practicing the death of Gods dearest
servants on earth. I do not speak of that Popish bewitching the minds of
their own, whereby men are persuaded and made willing to undergo an
imaginary and false martyrdom; but of those pretenses, grounds, colors and
devices, which are used by them for the animating of others to attempt and
practice the murdering of Christ's harmless sheep. Our Savior has foretold
us, that whosoever kills his servants, Ioh. 16.2.
will think that he does God service. So now the time indeed is come, when the
doctrine and practice of killing Gods Saints, especially of Christian Kings, is
made passable and approved, under pretense of pleasing God. All now is shrouded
under the habit of Catholic zeal, and the Catholic cause, Let us in
particular see upon what grounds and pretenses they go, and by what degrees
they proceed.

First, Pharaoh king of Egypt (who knew not Joseph nor Gods people and
children with him) seeing the Children of Israel to increase abundantly, and
fearing hereupon the weakening of his kingdom, called a Convocation, and said
to his people, Come on, Exodus 1.10 1^.22.
let us deal wisely with them, lest they multiply, etc. Hereupon, when hard
taskes could not keep them under, he commanded the Hebrew midwiues to kill
all the males as soon as they were borne, and (that not taking effect) his
own people to cast them into the river and drown them. Now this was a
Deuillish Policy, and fit for him to practice who is a devouring Dragon, which
accordingly he did: for fearing what now he feels, namely, the weakening of
his kingdom by the birth of Christ, Revel. 12.2.
He stood before the woman which was ready to be delivered, for to devour her
child as soon as it was borne. Mat. 2.13.16.
Even so did Herod seek to destroy and kill our Savior so soon as he was
borne, whose Kingdom he imagined would be contrary to his, and consequently
ruinate it. The very same, the Jews (his own people to whom he came)
afterward went about, and also practiced upon like ground. For they being
enraged against our Savior Christ, sought by all means to kill him, yet some
pretense (to satisfy the people) they must have, (which yet was a true ground
in them.) It was this: they seeing what miracles he did, and that hereupon many
believed in him, the high Priests and Pharisees gathered a Council, and said,
John 11.47.48.
If we let him thus alone, all men will believe on him, and the Romans shall
come and take away both our place and nation. They therefore thought, if Jesus
lived their kingdom could not stand, and hereupon they sought means to kill
him.

This lesson is taken out by Antichrist and his members, who in like manner go
about to uphold and establish their kingdom by shedding the innocent blood of
Protestants, of the members of Christ, Nolite tangere Christos meo^. Psalm.
105.15.
especially of Kings and Princes, of whom God has said, Touch not mine
anointed, and do my Prophets no harm. Their ground is, they know that their
kingdom of Antichrist and the Kingdom of Christ cannot stand together. If
then the life of any Christian King, though in profession not a Protestant, but
only a remiss Catholic, as Henry 3. of France; or a supposed Protestant in
heart, as Henry 4. (whom both within few years they therefore have murdered;)
or yet if the life of any zealous Protestant shall be judged to be any
hinderance to the spiritual good, or to the proceedings of the Roman Church,
there is then cause sufficient with them, to rid him out of the way: and it is
warrant enough to any bloody practiser whosoever; for so he helps to seat and
settle the Pope in his throne.

Secondly, to back this, and to give encouragement to unnatural and bloody
attempters, behold another cousenage and delusion. They make this practice a
thing highly meritorious; so that now the trampling down and treading upon the
backs of Emperors and Kings, is not only made a step and footstool whereby
the Popes of Rome mount and ascend upon the back of that Scarlet-colored
Beast, the seat and sea of Rome, but also used as a ladder, whereby base and
desperate spirits, who dare but attempt such villainies, are thought to ascend
to heaven it self. For now to murder Kings is the next way to be canonized
for Saints in heaven, and to receive the glorious Crown of Martyrdom. And
thus, among others, is Garnet, one of our Powder-traytors, both made a saint
and prayed to.

Lactant. Jnstit. lib. 1. cap. 18.
Lactantius an ancient Father, tells us of some, who by cruelty and slaughter
thought they not only merited a place in heaven, Si fas caedendo
coelestiascandere cuiquam est, Mi soli, coeli maxima porta patet.
but even to be gods in heaven. Hereupon he alleges out of Ennius, the speech
of Scipio Africanus, famous for his great slaughters of men, who thought, said,
and assured himself, that if men were admitted to heaven for their slaughters,
the greatest gate of heaven should be set open for him. No marvel then if
blinded Papists upon hope of so great reward as heaven it self, strive to put
such practices in execution, seeing they have no better means of their own to
come thither.

Thirdly, men thus once heartned and hardened, see under Judas betrayed his
master with a kiss, and so did Ioab Abner. Herod intending and seeking to
destroy Christ, yet that he might the better know where he was, and so kill
him, he pretended to worship him. So these men often by like shows of love and
friendship gain the advantage of practicing their plots. Sleidan. c^nte^t.
Thus Alphonsus Diazius, a Spaniard, but a wicked dissembling Papist, after
show made of his distaste of Romish superstition, by a friendly and brotherly
letter sent to his natural brother Johannes Diazius a zealous Protestant, he
got the opportunity to have his brother most barbarously murdered early in
the morning in his chamber, having on him only his shirt and nightcap, by the
villain who carried the letter. Thus was that bloody Massacre in France of
30000. Protestants, practiced under pretense of friendship, Anno 1572.
being shadowed by the marriage of the Kings sister to a Christian Prince, Henry
4. one who was conceived in heart to favor the Protestants. Nay, holy places,
holy actions, holy things, are by them profaned, and must be made accessory to
their villainies. Thus Pope Gregory 7. hired one to have brained the Emperor
Henry 4. with a stone in the Church, but the mischief was prevented by the
breaking of the beam, and falling both of the stone and of the murderer. And
Clemens 5. poisoned Henry 7. Count of Lucelburge, then Emperor, in and by a
consecrated Host. And under pretense of a promise solemnly made by the Emperor
Sigismund, was John Hus put to death, who upon that faithful, or rather
faithless promise made, was imboldned to go to their Council under the safe
conduct of the Emperor, but contrary thereunto he never returned. And this is
according to their new doctrine, that promises made to Heretics, as they call
us, are not to be kept. So that our complaint may justly be as David's once was,
Psalm. 12.1. Tides exulat^ regnat fra^s.
The faithful fail from among the children of men, -- with flattering lips
and with a double heart do they speak. Such conquests though they seem
aduantageous to Papists, yet the manner thereof (besides the heinousness of
the crime it self) brands them with a perpetual note of perjury and reproach.
(...) supera se iuvat, si super^^sse pude^. Al^^^. Emblem. 123.


Fourtly, see one fetch more whereby Heretics may be finely fetched over the
coals, and brought to the stake. For when they can find no true and just cause
against us, which yet they seek as did the chief Priests and Scribes against
our Savior, Luke 20.1^, 20, 21, 22, 23
(who watching him an evil turn, craftily sent forth spies, which should
feign themselves just men, that they might take hold of his words, that so they
might deliver him unto the power and authority of the Governor) they then
betake themselves to another course, much like to that which wicked Iesabel
took with Naboth who would not part with his Vineyard and inheritance to Ahab:
she writes letters in Ahabs name, and seals them with his seal, which she
sent to the Elders and Nobles that were in the City dwelling with Naboth,
commanding them to proclaim a fast, to set Naboth on high among the people,
and to set two wicked men, ^ King. ^ ^.
false and suborned witnesses, to charge him with blaspheming both God and the
King, and so to carry him out and stone him that he may die. Which was
accordingly done. Or the trick is the same that to like purpose was put upon
the Prophet Daniel, Dan. ^.4. etc.
who being preferred above all the Rulers and Governors in the spacious
kingdom of Darius, was hereupon envied and maligned by these Rulers, who
seeking an occasion against him concerning the kingdom, (...). Ariest. Rhet.
lib. 1.
and finding none, they made a decree, and got the Kings seal to it, that
whosoever should ask a petition of any God or man for 30. days, save of King
Darius, should be cast into the Lions den. Thus good Daniel, continuing for all
that, his wonted practice of praying three times a day to his God, was fetched
in and cast to the Lions, though God miraculously delivered him. The like
consultation in effect, and upon like grounds of envy, is made by Papists
against us Protestants, in whom, when with Festus, Act. 25.25.
they can find nothing worthy of death that we have committed, as living
according to the laws of Christ, Come, say they, let us gather a Council at
Trent, and make new Constitutions, let us add twelve more Articles to the
Christian Faith, and whosoever will not subscribe to them with us, let him be
accounted an heretic, let him be accursed, let him be burned, as a rebellious
person to the Triple Crown, and as a disobedient son to his Mother the
Church. And here indeed they have us at advantage; for we, still persisting to
obey God more then man, are therefore accounted and accused for heretics, and
so, when they have power, they have also their wills on us, and yet go smoothly
away with it.

These are their deuillish policies and plots against us, by which they may be
known whose children they are. For if where Antipas was slain, there, and in
that regard, Revel 2.1^
Satan reigned, we may likewise conclude, that where the Saints are killed,
which is in and under the present Roman tyranny, there is Satan's throne.

CHAP. XI. Satan's subtle devices and policies in himself and by his
Instruments for the reestablishing of his kingdom in the Christian world, and
for the advancement of the Papacy to that height of temporal dignity in
which now it stands.
But behold yet further, 3. Popish policies for the effecting of their third
end,

Namely, For the advancing of the Pope and Papacy.


and in the third and last place see, how in imitation of this their master, or
rather as his instruments, (he (Satan) being the secret contriuer of this
whole mystery of iniquity) I say, how and by what policies they would, yea
have advanced the kingdom of Antichrist, the seat and sea of Rome. Their
policies are diverse, their end honor, their ground pride.

The pride of Popes, though indeed it be wonderful, as is formerly showed,
Above Chap. 7.
yet must it politiquely be covered with the greatest shows of humility.
What greater pride then to make Princes and Kings, in their public ceremonies
and also feasts, underlings not only to them, but to their Cardinals; as also
at the Mass to serve the Pope upon their knees? and yet what humility (in
show) greater then his shrining himself daily upon his knees to an ordinary
priest? What pride equal to his making the greatest Emperors and Kings to
kiss his pantofles and feet? what greater humility then for the Pope himself
on Maunday-Thursday to stoop to the washing of poor men's feet? What pride
like to his usurping and taking to himself the privileges and titles even of
the only true God, and of Christ, styled God upon earth in the singular
number, Spouse of the Church? and yet what greater humility, S^^^^ sc^^^^m Dei.
then to call and write himself, Servant of the Servants of God? But the world
sees well enough through these nets, though the eyes of his vassals are blinded
therewith.

Let us then as far as we can, look into this deep mystery of iniquity,
consider by what Art the Devil has gotten again in the Church, as formerly
among the Heathen, to sit as God, and to reign and rule in the hearts and
persons of the late Popes.

These politic practices and tricks have been used by the Popes of Rome, to
wind themselves up to the height first of spiritual, then of temporal
dignity.

^. (...) messengers, and (...) the (...)
1. Whereas it were in vain for the Pope ever to hope thus to Lord it in the
Church, House and Flock of Christ, if Christ himself the true and only Head
and Husband of the Church, by his lawful pastors and truest Substitutes, did
indeed rule in and among his flock and inheritance: he therefore, when he
began first to put forth his head and horns in the Church, did by the means
lastly named, to wit, by cruelty, and does to this day, labor, by killing and
murdering the bodies of true pastors, the only true messengers of Christ,
Mat. 2^ (...) ^8.
with the husband men in the Parable, to rid them out of the way, that so by
killing them, and consequently Christ himself the only true Heir, in them,
he with his Church and Clergy might sieze on Christ's inheritance.

Now these Impostors, lest their villainy and craft should be espied, and
themselves, thereby made odious to the world, have set up one in the place of
Christ, and in his stead, who may seem like unto him, that is, the Pope.

Even as that Persian wiseman or Magus, of whom we read in Iustine, Iust^n
hist. lib. 5.
who closely slew Merges who should have succeeded Cambyses in his Kingdom,
and set up his Brother Oropasta in his stead, who was very like to Merges: Even
so these bloody and treacherous Inglers, being made drunken with the blood of
Saints and Martyrs, in whom they kill and persecute even Christ himself to
their powers, and in Acts 9.^
his account (or howsoever, he being now bodily absent) do advance the Beast
of Rome into his place, as having two horns like the Lamb, and so like, P^^.
1^.1^.
that the bewitched eyes of the simple cannot easily discern him.

And herein also is their fraud like unto theirs, who being of aspiring
spirits, take the advantage of the death of some prince or King, and of their
own resemblance of them in face, age, wit, and the like, and so after some few
years, give themselves out for the very parties themselves, whom they would
make the world believe with fair and probable relations, were not indeed
slain or dead, as they were supposed, but that they only either retired
themselves upon some special considerations, or otherwise were only taken
prisoners and held captives when they were supposed to be slain. Diverse
examples of this kind are related unto us by Lipsius. Lips. Moni^ and Exemel.
Polit. lib. 2. cap. 5.
Among others he tells us of one Alexander a Jew who adopted himself into
Herod's family, as being in face very like another Alexander whom Herod slew:
which Alexander so soon as Herod dyed, presently revived in this other, who
made his tale so probable, that the wisest among them were deceived, being made
believe that he the true Alexander was closely conveyed, and another slain in
his room: and thus coming for his establishment to Rome, at the length
Augustus Caesar found him out, and condemned him to the Galleys. Thus also he
relates a more remarkable story of one Bernardus Rainsus a Frenchman, but a
religious Anachoret, who some twenty years after the death of Balduinus
Octauus, Earl of Flanders and Emperor of Constantinople, Anno 1225.
who was slain in warring against the Bulgarians, gave himself out to be the
said Balduinus, who was not slain, but carried captive and kept prisoner, till
at length by some Dutch Merchants passing that ways, to whom he revealed
himself, he was redeemed by ransom. Thus he comes into Flanders, and being
for his age, looks, and face, and craft, like to the true Balduin, he is taken
to be him indeed, and Ioanna daughter to Balduinus, which then ruled Flanders,
is driven away: thus for a good while being saluted both Earl and Emperor, he
is deprehended and taken for an Impostor, and at the last hanged by the
foresaid Ioanna; which yet escaped not the censures of the people, who reported
that she a wicked and unnatural daughter had hanged her own father. The
application is easy: Christ being ascended into the Heavens, and so, for his
bodily presence, being absent, the ambitious Popes of Rome, being in comparison
of their affected greatness, but of ordinary breeding and beginning, by fraud
now give themselves out, to be, if not Christ's, yet at the least the true and
only Successors of him and of Saint Peter, indeed showing themselves to the
ignorant and bewitched multitude in diverse things not unlike, each of them
usurping his titles, 2 Thessalonians. 2.4.
and making himself like Christ in his offices, as God, sitting in the Temple
of God, showing himself that he is God. But this man of sin is already
revealed in good part to be a deceiuer, and Antichrist, and is rejected by them
whose eyes are enlightened with Gods word, and not so much as accounted a true
Pastor of Christ, or to have any rule and authority of right, over Gods
inheritance, but only by usurpation, violence, and deceit; though in the mean
time, we, who so think and know, and accordingly reject him, by the blinded
and seduced company of Iesuitized Papists, are thought sacrilegious and
undutiful sons and subjects to his Holiness.

^. The Popes appropriating (...) titles to his Clergy and himself.
2. Another thing herein considerable, is that Appropriating of rights and
titles, which is used in the Roman Church. To which end they make privileges,
where our Savior never made any, as in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper: the
Lord makes no difference of men, but accounts all true believers and penitents
alike worthy to partake of all the pledges of his love: There is a time, as
says S. Chrysostom, when there is no difference between Priest and people,
the King and his meanest subject, As, (...) the Sacrament.
namely when we partake of the mysteries of our Religion. But what do Papists?
they take away the cup in the Communion from the common people, and Laity,
whom they call Bellarm. de exemp. Cleri^.
profane, and reserve that privilege only for the Clergy, and for Kings; and
why? let them pretend what inconveniences they will, yet the true cause is,
that thus they might advance themselves, even in the fruit on of holy
mysteries, above the ordinary sort of men, yea, and become companions even of
Kings, as sharing with them in the same privilege. Yet his Holiness for
greater Majesty, must have a way peculiar to himself, and receive the wine, or
blood of Christ, as they account it, by a quill. Even as in other particulars
might be showed, where common rights are turned into privileges and made
proper to their persons, for further reverence; besides their cases reserved,
which none other must presume to decide. Of which nature also is their
appropriating of titles, as of the name Papa, or Pope, And the name or word
Papa.
which signifies as much as Father; which yet in former times was promiscuously
given to all Ministers, as Saint Austen gives it to Alipius: and even now the
Grecians call their Priest Papaous, the Germans Pfaffen, the Flemings Papen.
But the Pope wresteth it from them and deuoureth and glutteth all to himself,
in which regard, Vilera in the lives of Popes.
the word Papa best agrees with him, which of some late writers is also taken
pro ingluuie, for gluttony, or the gullet. Thus his members the Jesuits, call
themselves by the name of Jesus challenging that sacred name as proper to
themselves; as if none else had interest in Jesus but they. And the Friars call
themselves Fratres, as if none were brethren one to another in Christ, but only
they that are of their fraternities. But, for Popes, what marvel if they rob
their brethren and equals of the Clergy of titles, when they rob God himself
of his honor, and assume the very name, titles, and privileges of God
himself, and of Christ, for the advancement of their own persons?

^
3. To like end, the Roman tongue is imposed upon the Popes votarties and
disciples, in which only their Service and prayers both public and private,
must be said. For the rece^^^ng of a new Language is a note and mark, and
indeed a bond of subjection. Thus the ancient Romans did pl^nt their language,
the Latin tongue, in the countries which they conquered; and the King of
Spain uses the (...) to speak Spanish, by this means endeavoring to make
them more his own. In this very Land, William the (...) King of England,
surnamed the Conqueror, when he had ^eated himself here, labored by all
means to reduce the whole Nation to the French Language; to which end (...)
^^^yned the children here to use no other language with the^r Grammar in
Schools, to have the laws prac^^sed in Fren^h, and all petitions and
businesses of court in French, no man graced but he that spoke French; yet this
w^^^ not in the power of the Conqueror to do; ^
so that soon after his death all returns natural English again, but Law:
^o^ have we n^w any mark of our subjection and inuassa^^ge ^^om N^rman^y, but
only that, and that still speaks (...) to us ^n England. Even thus the Pope
has made all Ch^rches which are under him glad to yield their necks to (...),
and has given them the Roman tongue for a (...) ^^biection to the Bishop of
Rome; for besides (...) Canon laws both are and are practiced in the (...) and
all Decrees and Sentences, Acts and (...) in the Court of Parliament, and seats
(...) were not long since set down in Latin: his (...) and Indulgences, and
Letters of Absolution, are all (...) the holy Scriptures not allowed to be
(...) Latin, and the Latin Translation preferred (...) Original, which in
comparison of the Greek and Hebrew the only Original Tongues in which the
^es were written) they make like to our Savior C^^^^ hanging between the two
thieves on the Cross. In which regard most fitly and rightly is the number of
the Popes (and Popedomes) name (signified by that second Beast, ^
which shall begin to heal the wound of the first Beast or ancient Empire)
which number the Scripture makes to be 666. found in the word (...), Latinus, l
30 a 1 t 300 (...) 5 (...) 10 (...) 50 (...) 70 (...) ^0 6(...)6


or Latin, which is the ordinary name by which the Greek Church does call
those of the Roman Church, though otherwise by nation they be Frenchmen or
Germans. And the rather because by an admirable concurrence the same number of
666. six hundred sixty six, does admonish us that 666 years after the
revealing of the prophecy, this second beast, to wit the Pope, shall begin to
heal the wound of the ancient Empire, and place the Roman Empire again in its
former seat, as he also did, See M^^^ns ^ccomp^. (...) o^ Pop^ (...) cap 4
(...)
becoming just then an earthly Monarch, namely, in the year of Christ 755.
Saint John writing his Revelation in the I^^ Pathmos, toward the end of
Domitians reign, in the year 89.

4. Let us further consider what use they make of Transubstantiation to this
very purpose. 4. The Pope makes a^^^on of the bre^d in the Sacrament, and then
preferres himself before it.
They have made a god of the Bread in the Sacrament, which accordingly they
worship and adore. By this means they challenge (and reason will give it) an
equality with God, yea an eminency and superiority over him. They say that
Priests have power to make God, and to create their Creator by the words of
consecration, and that the Priesthood and the Godhead are like, and have the
same greatness since they have the same power. Then, say I, if the cause in
dignity be before the effect, if the Creator be before the creature, that is,
the Priest before the sacrifice which he offers, then also is the Priest, but
especially the Pope the chief Priest, grea^er then the Masse-god, and
therefore the very same, who is pointed at by the Apostle Saint Paul, namely, ^ Thessalonians. 2.4.
he who exalts himself, not only above all that is called God, that is,
Magistrates, Kings and Emperors, but above that which is worshipped as God, as
is the Bread in the Sacrament. And may not this be a notable point of policy in
him, for the honoring of himself, first to give a deity to the Bread, and
then to prefer himself before it? as indeed he does.

We read that the Kings of Persia reverenced and adored Fire as a god, and
that when any King went any whither in Pomp, he, to the end he might be
jointly worshipped with his god, had going before him a horse, carrying a
little Altar upon him, whereupon among a few ashes did shine a small flame of
holy Fire, which they called Orimasdu or Orismada. (...) 1. Sect. cap. 3. and
Sect. 12. cap. 10* and 4.
Even thus also the Pope, as we read in their book of holy Ceremonies, going
some great journey, sends before him (and that sometimes a day or two days
journey) his Sacrament upon a horse, carrying at his neck a little bell,
accompanied with the scumme and scullery, bag and baggage of the Roman Court.
And when the Pope approaches near the place which he intends, it returns
and goes forth to meet him and receive him.

And thus if he be not worshipped with it, yet he makes himself the Master,
and the Masse-god his servant, and, seeing men fall down before it as they
meet it, he must needs get himself who follows after in greater pomp,
exceedingly reverenced, and in the thoughts of the ignorant people, at the
least half deified.

5. The Popes incroaching and usurping the rights and Temporalities of Princes.
5. This last spoken of, may gain him some respect and reverence in the hearts
of the people; but it adds little to his power. Let us now then consider how
he has advanced himself for power and strength, by incroaching and usurping
upon the temporalities and rights of Christian Kings and Princes.

Now here are diverse particulars obseruable. 1. Look as King Cyrus obtained a
victory against the Scythians, with like policy gets the Pope a hand over
Christian Kings and Princes. Cyrus faining himself to fly, left his Tents
well furnished of wine and bellicheare, Pr^u^ S^ythae (...) quam b^ll^
v^^^^^tur, (...). 1.
to the end, that the Scythian^ being first overcome with wine, might more
easily be overcome by war; and so indeed they were. Just so the woman and
whore which sits on seven hills, and which has in her hand a golden cup,
full of abominations and filthiness of her fornication, having bewitched the
Kings and inhabitants of the earth with her sorceries and seducements, Reu. 1^
3.4 5.^3.17.18
she has cast them into a deep slumber, having made them drunken with the
wine of her fornication. And so, as Delilah dealt with Sampson, she clips them
short and takes their power from them; yea thus they themselves give their
power and strength unto the beast.

2. They have hereupon got cases about marriage and

3. To wind themselves a little higher, they have used Appeals to be made to
the Church of Rome, and under pretense of the dignity of the City, to draw to
them the cause of their neighbors there to be heard. They have herein carried
themselves like Absalom when he aspired to his fathers kingdom, of whom the
Scripture notes, 2 Samuel 15.2.3 4.
that when any man had a controversy and came to the King for judgment, then
Absalom called unto him, and so intercepts him, and by fair speeches,
courtesies and vsages, 5.6.
steals away his heart; approving of all matters, how bad soever, saying, See,
thy matters are good and right; but withal wronging the King his Father, and
calumniating him, saying, there is no man deputed of the King to hear thee:
But what follows? what aimed he at? Absalom said moreover, oh that I were made
Judge in the land, that every man which has any suite or cause might come unto
me, and I would do him justice. And has not the Pope in a manner
proportionable, thus done and behaved himself? It was an ancient custom for
the Churches of God in doubtful cases to consult with the Apostles by Letters,
Pet Martyr ad 1. Cor. 7.1.
as 1. Cor. 7.1. and after their decease, with the Doctors and Bishops of the
Church: but this laudable custom the Popes ambition and tyranny abused; for
being often, of men's free accords consulted withal, he began at length, to
usurp dominion, as if nothing were firm or to be ratified without his priuity
and approbation. And yet to get the chief saying and stroke in the deciding
matters of doubt and controversy, bad matters were made good by his
dispensations with unlawful marriages, and the breach of lawful and religious
oaths, and the like iustifications of evil, both in regard of doctrine and of
the practice of life. By such usurpations he has at length so far derogated
from the authority even of General Councels, that he has gotten himself
preferred before them.

right of homage. Thus have they also abused the favor and liberality of
Princes (who in their devotion thought nothing enough they did for the Church)
to their own lusts and ambition, thus at last shouldring them out and stealing
their Scepters.

2 These. 2.7.8.
that the destruction of the old Roman Empire must go before the
manifestation of Antichrist, who was then to put out his head, and to be
revealed, when he which withholdeth or lets should be taken out of the way.

The Roman Empire therefore falling to ruin, partly by inward diseases, but
chiefly by sundry irruptions of the Northren people; the Bishops of Rome
began to build on those ruins, and to abuse the absence and weakness of the
Emperors, whom they expelled out of Italy by the arms of the Lumbards, and
confined them to Greece.

Heraclius, by the Solauonians, Persians, Saracens, Lib. 1.
as Nicholas Machiauel observes in his Florentine History, which he dedicateth
to Pope Clement the seventh. Thus might they offend the Emperor being poor
and weak without much danger, especially the Pope and the Romans having at
that time entered a league of friendship with the Lumbards.

Lumbards, and not able to have any from the Emperor, the Pope seeks to the
Kings of France for aid, who were the only means to exalt him, as they did
also themselves, who by this means running to the wrack of the ruinated
Empire, advanced themselves to imperial dignity, withal giving the Pope
whatsoever he holds in Italy. Thus the Popes of Rome of spiritual Bishops
being made also temporal Kings, began now to think how they might hold
their own. They have therefore wrought the new Emperor of Rome to keep his
residence far off from Rome; first in France, as did Charles the Great; then,
and now in Germany, as his Successors. Now this was no little policy in them:
for the Popes did not love to have such a strong neighbor so near, who might
at his pleasure chastise or depose them. Thus as formerly the Pope of Rome, by
occasion of the place and Emperors residence at Rome, took advantage of
preferring himself in spiritual dignity before other Bishops, so now by
occasion of the Emperors absence, he gains opportunity to advance himself
in temporal power above the Emperors themselves.

8 Therefore, when the Germans went about to settle Italy, the Popes stirred
up factions against them in Germany, causing the sons, by breaking the bonds of
duty both natural and civil, to rise up in arms against their fathers; yet
all under pretense of Heresy. Yea at the length they constrained the Emperors
themselves, before they were received into Rome (their own ancient house and
home) in conceived words to swear unto them quamcunque fidelitatem, all
fidelity whatsoever, and truly and openly to declare that they had no right in
Rome, and that they would stay there so long only, as the Pope should please.
And this is the pass they have brought it to now, that howsoever they suffer
the Emperor of Germany to hold the name of King of the Romans, yet he
holds nothing either in Rome or in Italy, and though he be created and
elected by the seven Prince Electors, yet he is made basely to demand the
Imperial Crown of the Pope, and in sign of tribute to cast a mass of gold
at his feet. What remains there more, but as the Wisemen to Christ, Incense
and myrrh?

exemptions to the Princes thereof; who now are free states and Princes of
themselves, not tied necessarily to aid him in his wars, but only with a few
thousands of foot and horse, for the large proportion of Germany: so that he is
rather an Emperor in name, then in deed.

Divide and impera, First set men by the ears, and then rule them as you list:
Or else to send them to war against the Turk, and to recover the holy Land,
that so also they might take advantage from the others absence to strengthen
themselves, or else might live more secure. I read that when the Emperor
Frederick with a great host, Valor. in vita Alexan.
came into Italy to curb the insolency and obstinacy of Alexander the third,
Anno 1159.
and to settle the Popedom in the midst of a great Schism; being come to
Brixia, Harman Bishop of that City, by the counsel of Alexander, persuaded him
to pass with his great Host into the holy Land, there to make war with the
Turk, which accordingly he did, and gained many Cities, and among them,
Jerusalem. But the Pope used all means to cause him to be slain: and
therefore sent the lively portraite of the Emperor to the Souldan, with
Letters, aduising to kill him by deceit whom the picture represented. Now the
Emperor was by this means taken, yet not slain, but only ransomed.





12. Lastly, to the same purpose, they have made use of their absolutions after
confession, to the usurping of a temporal dominion over Kings and Princes. The
Pope will absolve a King, but it must be upon some tyrannical condition, to
wit, if he will go in Pilgrimage, or make his Land tributary to the Pope,
holding it as from Saint Peter, or if he will send so many Soldiers to such or
such a Country, for the service of his Holiness.

6. Now lastly, 6. The Popes oblige others unto them:
as these were advantages politiquely taken and devised for the raising of the
Popedom to the height of Papal dignity and sovereignty, so has not the
Papacy wanted art and cunning for the perpetuating of its Greatness, and for
the further strenghtning of it self. And this has been, and is practiced
especially by obliging and binding others unto them, partly through love,
partly through fear.

1 By Offices of love and kindness, 1. In love.
Popes have obliged to themselves and to the Papacy men of all sorts, both of
the Laity and of the Clergy, and of meaner rank, And that both of the
Temporality,
as well as great ones.

1. First, Kings and great personages, and that diverse

First, for their own advantage, they have aided and helped them, yea not
spared sometimes to countenance even Rebels and Traitors. Thus Boniface the
third, having an eye to his own advancement, gratified that perfidious and
traiterous murderer Phocas, who being odious to all, was yet by the favor and
furtherance of the said Bonifaco, acknowledged as lawful Emperor. In
requital of which kindness he got what he looked for, to wit, to be called
and accounted Bishop of Bishops. So, to advance his temporalities, the like was
practiced by Pope Clemens 4. a Frenchman, who called into Italy Charles Earl
of Aniou, against Manfred King of Cicilia, which Manfred being vanquished and
slain, the said Charles was made King of Sicilia and Jerusalem, but with
condition to pay the Pope yearly forty thousand du^kats by way of tribute.
Thus again, Michael Pale logus Emperor of Greece, upon hope to be succored
by Gregory 10. promised in the Council of Lion in France, to make the
Patriarch of Constantinople consent to the primary of the Bishop of Rome, and
that whosoever would, might appeal thither.

Again, by their Dispensations with Oaths of Princes, they have labored to
strengthen themselves with the favor and support of the said Princes; whiles
such popish Princes as for their own security for the present, have by
solemn Oaths entered into Leagues of friendship with Protestant Princes, shall
by dispensation from the Pope, or from popish doctrine, be allowed to break
Oaths when it may be either for the disadvantage of the Popes enemies, or
advantage of themselves, his friends and favorites. Thus is a Religious Oath
made a snare to entrap the Innocent and conscionable, whiles the other are
warranted, either by the Popes special dispensation, or by the authority of
his example (they assuming to themselves by imitation what he has done to
others by his authority) to break their leagues; which liberty of dispensing
with their own oaths (without any special dispensation from the Pope) they
the more readily take, because it is not only the popish practice, but also
doctrine, that faith given to Heretics (as they account us) is not to be kept.
And is not this fair advantage against us, whiles they will have us tied, and
themselves left free, while they can play Fast or Loose at their own pleasure?

great Families share with them in their honors and dignities, so that espying
some great Princes house ouercharged with children, or some other noble and
potent Family, they will labor to bind the whole family and kindred to
themselves, by bestowing a Cardinals Hat on some of the family, thus placing
him in the next step to the top of their glory, or otherwise by making a
younger brother an Abbat or a Prior, or receiving the daughters of such into
some religious order Thus moreover, to strengthen their state, they make civil
Magistrates capable of holding benefices, bestowing Church-liuings on the
Laity, or else assign to them yearly pensions out of their revenues: which
must needs prove a strong prop to the Papacy, whiles so many men's wits,
tongues, swords, shall be ready to maintain them by whom they are mnintained.

2. Now secondly, And also the Clergy
they want not their means to bind and tie their Clergy unto them; which they
do partly through the multitude of exemptions and prerogatives, which these
enjoy securely under the Popes protection: for they have obtained of Princes,
that the Clergy should be exempt from all temporal Jurisdiction, under
pretense that they are the Lords lot and inheritance; by which pretense they
have lessened the number of Princes Subjects: partly through abundance of
maintenance and multitude of Church-liuings, whereby the Pope is able to
gratify the Clergy, more then any Prince in Europe. More particularly, they
have got the Archbishops to their side, Archbishops.
partly by alluring the ambitious with Commissions and Offices, partly by an
artificial binding of them to the Pope by a Pall, which at the first were sent
freely, as a token of love and good will, but afterward by ordinance were made
necessary for each to have, and a badge of subjection; and now at the length,
they cannot be had but at an exceeding high price, and with great sums of
money.

They have had advantage also in regard of that multitude of religious Orders,
Religious Orders.
which are made as receptacles of all sorts of men, such especially as wanting
better means, betake themselves to these orders, where is competent and good
provision for them, thus being put off by their parents at an easier and lower
rate, then they could have been maintained at home; they serve also for such,
as having some natural blemish in their bodies, stain of some heinous offense
in their souls, disgrace attending their persons, cross in their estate, in
their love, or otherways; who weary of their lives, or unwilling to be seen
of the world, consecrate themselves to some religious order or other. The ease
and benefit they hence find in their estates, must needs bind them fast to the
Papacy, which maintains both these orders and them.

But the swarming and excessive multitude of Friars is first, in regard that
being dispersed in most Countries, they are able to deal with the multitude,
not only in public assemblies, but also in private at single hand with men,
women and children, by particular persuasions, instructions, and exhortations;
the Art whereof many of them have; which together with their hypocritical
shows of holiness or austerity of life, prevail much to the Secondly, in
regard they are found to be most ready instruments of all bloody executions,
as daily experience approves; especially in those attempts and also murders
practiced by them, and effected in the persons of the two last Kings and
Henry's of France. Thirdly, in case of war, and that the Pope should be
driven to it as to his last refuge and sacred anchor; the half of them (whose
whole number may not well be thought less then a Million of men) might
perhaps be thought not unfit to be employed in warlike service. As these things
are wisely observed, and more largely handled by the worthy Author of the
Relation of Religion, etc. whose book being not so commonly in every ones
hand, I thought good here and there generally to touch some of his
observations, and by my pen to communicate them to the more.

Jesuits.
Lastly, in a mysterious policy, the order of Jesuits in these last days have
been invented to shoulder up the tottering Tower of Babel. These are bound to
the General of their order, and so to the Pope in a special vow of blind
obedience, to be ready to do and execute whatsoever shall be inioined them,
without inquiring and asking why or wherefore. These have special commissions,
and are licenced, as the Popes Apostles, to trauerse Sea and Land, to run
over the whole earth, even to the farthest Indies, to gather new Subjects for
the Pope; having also special faculties granted unto them, and permission to
go in laymens apparel, to equivocate, to hatch and conceal treasons, and the
like.

2. Now secondly, where fair, 2. By Fear.
hopeful and contentfull means will not serve, there they go about to hold
men bound to them by Fear.

And for this purpose, the device of auricular Confession is made to serve;
Scire volunt secreta domus atque inde timeri.
for by this they come to know men's counsels and designs, men's sins and
secrets, and so to be feared. The like fear they strike into the hearts of
Christians by the thunderclaps of Excommunication and Church censures; and also
by the power of deposition of Princes, pretending authority to excommunicate
and depose Princes, and to discharge their subjects of all oaths and bonds of
obedience, and to bind them in pain of damnation to rise against them. So
especially by the terror of the Inquisition, which is the greatest slavery that
ever the Christian world endured. The tyranny whereof is such as would require
a large book to describe it. The care of it being committed to the most
zealous, painful and rigorous Friars that can be found, the least suspicion
of heresy, affinity or any commerce with Heretics (as they call us) yea the
bare reproving the lives of their own Clergy, is enough to bring men within
the compass of it; which if once it seize on them, and they in the least
manner be taken tardy, they had better suffer the most cruel death in any
reasonable time, then to endure so many deaths before they can be suffered to
dye: for death shall be accounted a favor. By this, as also by their other
cruelties and butcheries on the bodies of their enemies, where and when it is
in their power, they bind their own most strongly, though slauishly to them.
Even thus has the beast of Rome engaged all sorts of men, Revel. ^3.16.
by making them receive a mark from it. And even thus also got the Devil
among the Heathen to be worshipped and adored as God, partly by more fair,
loving and plausible means, partly also by fear, and by doing hurt, as is
proved.

What other politic fetches are used by them to advance the seat of
Antichrist, were infinite to recite, nay they pass the ordinary reach of men.
Satan the contriuer and author of them, best, under God, knows the depth and
number of them. Of him they have learned by all manner of wickedness to
advance themselves, and, as we see in the former instances, never to inquire,
what is honest, what is holy, what agreeing to charity and religion, what is
honorable or dishonorable to God; but to consider what may any ways make for
the furthering of their own designs, and to put that presently in practice.
Swering, forswearing, lying, dissembling, equiuocating, forging, and such like,
are the Pillars of Popery. It is a firm maxim with them, Qui nescit
dissi^^late nescit regnare Ad annu^; 1572.
He that knows not how to dissemble, is no fit man to be a King; This was the
saying of one Jews King of France, commended by Thuanus, where he writes of
Charles 9. by whose authority, says he, the massacring of Protestants was
performed, contrary to that which he had in his Letters signified to other
Princes. So, that the hands of all that are with aspiring Absalom may be
strong, Ahithophels wicked counsel shall be followed, and Absalom will go in
to his fathers concubines in the sight of all Israel: so, rather then Rome
shall be left empty of Cardinals, (I had almost said, Carnals) which may
strengthen the hand of the Pope; the Curtezans, which in an honest zeal were
banished out of Rome, shall be restored, and the public Stews again
permitted.

CHAP. XII. Popish imitation of Satan in Miracles and Visions, for the
furthering and effecting the forenamed three ends.
THus now at the length we have found the Court removed, and the god of the
Heathen to bear rule, The former three ends furthered by Miracles and
Apparitions.
though more covertly, in the person of the late Popes, each of whom we may
find sitting in the Temple of God, showing himself that he is God. We have
discovered him, by his pride against God, by his seducing the souls, and
killing the bodies of men, even of the Saints; and we have traced him in part
by his footsteps. Yet see, how to effect the former three ends, and to win
authority and credit to his person, to his practices, to his doctrine, the
Pope and popish Church has also made use of, or rather abused, such divine
Miracles and Revelations as were in use in the primitive times of the Church,
abused, I say, by an apish imitation, even of Satan, Sup. Chap 2 sine Chap. 3.
and 4.
whom we have showed to have especially prevailed with the Heathen, by his
imitation of God in his works of power and prescience.

Not to speak any thing in special of the heresies of the Mirabiliarij, and
Enthousiastae; we say, See Danaeus on August. de^aeres. cap 94.
that the popish Church would advance it self, and also has, by Miracles and
Apparitions, which yet all of them, are (not true, as done by the power of God,
for the confirmation of the truth of God, but) false, Vel a fals^, ve^ ad
falsiam.
as being either from a false worker, or to a false end. We say not that all
popish miracles are fained by themselves, but that, as many of them are fained
to delude others, so, many also have the devil, who is false and a lier, for
the chief author of them; by which, the supposed miracle-workers his
instruments, do not only delude others, but are deluded themselves. And so we
say of Apparitions. For thus it is foretold of Antichrist, that his coming is
after the working of Satan, 2 These. 2.9.10.11.
with all power and signs, and lying wonders, and with all deceiueablenesse of
unrighteousness in them that perish, because they received not the love of the
truth, that they might be saved: and for this cause God shall send them strong
delusion, that they should believe a lie. So that whereas Papists require of us
such things now, and challenge us to be no true Church because we work no
miracles, but from miracles would approve themselves for the only true Church
of God upon earth; we, contenting our selves with that establishment of our
doctrine which we have from the Miracles and Revelation of Christ and his
Apostles, whose doctrine we hold and profess, do rest herein secure,
assuring our selves we are thus far no part of the Church of Antichrist,
whose property it must be, in the latter days, to work miracles; wishing
them of the Church of Rome, seriously to consider, whether they or we, or yet
any other Church in the world, be liker to be the Church of Antichrist, seeing
they brag and stand so much on Miracles and Visions, as to justify their
Church thereby, especially considering that the consciences of many among them
are convinced of the falsehood and forgerie of many of their Miracles, and that
some of themselves allow the faining of tales, fables, and Legends, and
Miracles of Saints, for the provoking of the common people to devotion toward
their Saints, which therefore they call their pias frauds, godly and holy
deceits.

We hear and read of many strange Miracles and Visions in Popery, on which it
is, for many (if not most) chief points founded, and by which it stands We
had once here in England, a holy maid of Kent, Elizabeth Barton, a Nun, which
by the device of certain Monks and Friars could seem only to be fed by
Angels, strangely to alter her countenance and other parts of her body, and so
lying in a trance, to speak many things in commendation of Popery, and
particularly in disallowance of King Henry's divorce from the Lady Catharine.
But the knauerie being found, it cost them all their lives. A like holy Nun
we read of, Mary de la Visitation in Spain, about the year 1588, Prioresse
of a Monastery in Lisbon, of whose Miracles, Wounds, Visions, a Dominican
Friar wrote in French, dedicating his book to the Queen of France. This Mary,
says he, our Lord Jesus took to wife, often appearing to her, granting her
many particular graces and favors, conuersing and speaking as familiarly with
her, as ever God did with Moses, he oftentimes being accompanied with He and
She Saints. The Instructions drawn by that Friar from her Miracles and
Visions, were, That it is needful to honor Images, That Saints in Paradise
are Intercessours for us, That it is needful to acknowledge the truth of the
Sacrament of the Altar. The like fountains of Miracles are opened in the
houses of our Lady of Lauretto (of which there is a special book written, and
translated into English) of Hales, of which Lipsius makes relation.

But we may observe that all of them tend, either to seduce from truth to
falsehood, or to give allowance to treachery and murder, or lastly to exalt
the Pope.

For the first, it might easily be showed how that the end Purgatory, a maine
prop of Popery, for which our adversaries themselves confess they have no
express Scripture, has no better ground then visions and apparitions of the
dead. So is the Mass confirmed by many Miracles which the consecrated Host
has done. So Garnet a traitor, is now made a canonized Saint, by an
artificial face upon a straw taken up (being first cast down) at the place of
his execution. Thus their advancing of Images, their making the blessed Virgin
to have been wholly without sin, and so the Feast of her Immaculate
Conception, the making of her also more merciful then Christ, and many the
like points of Popery, receive strength from visions and dreams of their own,
the which might with ease very plentifully be showed, but that I take, none of
themselves can or will deny it. I will content my self (having already
exceeded the bounds which at the first I set to my self) to instance in their
doctrine of Invocation of Saints, which having no express testimony of
Scripture, by their own confession, has no better ground then apparitions of
Satan in and under the likeness and names of deceased Saints, a thing wherein
they may be very easily deluded. For if Satan can take upon him the person of
an Angel of light, if he also among the Heathen could take upon him the names
of Jupiter, Juno, and the like, who we ^^en, and get himself worshipped under
their names, how may he not also by Gods just permission usurp the names of
deceased men or women, whether indeed Saints or no, and show himself under the
names of Valentinus, or Anasta^ius, or Barbara, etc. And does he not so,
especially when he meets with the credulous? Eusebius. (...).
Eusebius tells us that one Potamiaena, some three days after her martyrdom,
by night stood by Basilides her tormenter, put a crown upon his head, and told
him she made request to God for him. Bonfin (...).
So Bonfinius tells us that one Conrade a Germane was enjoined this penance by
Hildebrand the Pope, that carrying with him a catalogue of his sins sealed up
in letters, he should seek remission of them by going a Pilgrimage to all holy
places of the world; and that praying at the grave of Emmericke son to
Stephen King of Hungary, his letters were open and his sins quite blotted out
of the paper. Hereupon, to this Chapel concourse was made from the remotest
countries. Now here to this purpose one fetch of the Papists is remarkable.

To confirm the doctrine and practice of Invocation, they take the advantage
of sovereign baths and waters, and where they epsy any fountain good against
the stone, or other diseases, presently there is the Statue of Image of some
Saint or other sent and erected by it, by whose virtue the cure and miracle
must seem to be done; or some Chapel is erected to this or that Saint, unto
whom prayers before, and thanks after washing, must be offered.

2 For the next points, I will give but one instance for each of them. When in
the year 1588. Philip the 2. King of Spain intended the conquest and
subversion of England, the forenamed Prioresse gave encouragement to the
enterprise, blessed his Standard Royal, and delivering it to the chief
General the Duke of Medina Sedonia, openly pronounced and promised good
success and victory to him. This Standard was after carried in solemn
Procession. For all this the event proved her a false Prophetess.

3 See one trick of legerdemaine in this kind, used by an ambitious spirit
aspiring to the Popedom. When Celestine the 5. poped it, and had made himself
odious and hated for his humility in riding on an Ass by our Saviors example,
especially for beginning reformation of manners in the Clergy at Rome; see a
pretty politic deceit practiced by Benedict a Cardinal, by which he
attained the Popedom under the name of Boniface the eight. He suborned diverse,
who privily in the night by a reed or trunk conveyed to the ear of Celestine,
admonished him, saying, Celestine, Celestine, renounce the Papacy, give it over
if thou meanest to be saved, the burden is beyond thy strength. Hereupon the
simple deluded man, taking it for the voice of God which many nights thus spoke
unto him, by no entreaty, could be persuaded to retain the Popedom. Thus an
Angel of Satan transforming himself into an Angel of light and of God,
seated himself in the Papacy: who as he entered like a Fox, so he ruled like
a Lion, and at the length died like a Dog.

CHAP. XIII. The Conclusion of the former Discourse and Use concerning Satan's
Sleights.
ALL our former discourse gives us easily to judge of Popery, and shows us
also, Conclusion.
contrary to Popish doctrine, the necessity of Saint John's admonition, 1 John
4.1.
not to believe every spirit, but to try the spirits whether they are of God,
because many false prophets are gone out into the world. This was the just
commendation which our Savior gave to the Chuch of Ephesus, Revel. 2.2.
that she had tried them which say they are Apostles and are not, and had found
them liars. Necessity of trying the Spirits.
And do not we now see cause why we should do so likewise? surely, if we be
so wise as not to receive into our bodies an unknown dainty before we have
approved it by smell or taste; why should we be so foolish, as hand over head
to entertain into our souls any strange or yet questioned doctrine, which
without trial may prove the bane of our souls? especially considering we have
an adversary that labors to put poison into our drink, and offers
delightsome baits, but sliely couers a deceitful and pernicious hook. We are
also wise enough to try suspected coin by the touchstone and balance before
we receive it for good or current, and weight. The like wisdom should
appear in our trial of doctrine; 1 Thessalonians. 5.21.
to try all things, but to keep that which is good; and like good
mony-changers to reject all adulterate coin if it have not Caesar's image on
it, if it be not circled about with Caesar's posie. But if once we spy the face
of Christ shining in it, then to purse it up in the close receptacles of our
heart. The Scriptures the only rule of trial. Isa 8.20. Act. 17.11.
Now Gods word written is our only Touchstone, the one true balance, the
only true Light, so that If any speak not according to this word, it is
because there is no light in them. By this those noble Beraeans tried what they
heard, receiving the word with all readiness of mind, and searching the
Scriptures daily whether those things were so. Mat. 4.
By Scripture our Savior repelled all Satan's suggestions: and this is a sound
way of trial, seeing this is that only truth which is from Heaven, all other
doctrines being either of men or of the devil. 1 Timothy 3.16.
The Spirit by which the Scriptures were inspired, is but one, and therefore
called the Spirit of Truth, John 16.13.
whereas for spirits of error, there are many And because the truth of Christ
is but one and always like it self, ^ Tim. 4.1.
we make this a firm kind of reasoning against all Seducers, This doctrine is
not according to Christ, not according to his doctrine, but such as draws us
from him, therefore we will none of it. Thus the Apostle himself teaches us
to reason, Coloss. 2.8. We therefore reject all trial of doctrine by Miracles
and Visions now in these days: and we will now judge of Miracles by doctrine,
Luke 16.29.30.31.
not of doctrine by Miracles. We must hear Moses and the Prophets, and not
hearken after any that shall rise from the dead. We are taught to judge of
Signs and Miracles, Dreams and Visions by their end, which if it be to
withdraw us to false deities or doctrines, we reject and renounce, for so we
are warned, Deuteronomy. 13. Verse. 1.2.3. And we are assured, that howsoever thus
Seducers prevail with others, yet with Gods children so long as they hold them
to Gods only word, they shall not prevail, though perhaps they think, with
the false prophets of old, Ierem. 23.27.
To cause Gods people to forget his name by their Dreams which they tell every
man to his neighbor. Therefore, as by this note of trial, we reject the
Miracles of the Heathen, because they tended either to establish false gods,
(for thus, some were made gods for their driving away of Grassehoppers, for
killing of Frogs, Crickets and Flies, whence it came that the Canaanites called
their Beelzebub by the name of Scar^^ly, and the Greeks their Jupiter (...))
or to justify the wicked in their wickedness, (thus the justly suspected
^^s^all Virgin carried water in a Sieue, and another with her only Girdle
hailed that Ship, which formerly the strength of men and oxen could not move:)
So, by this word of God we reject all Popish Miracles, as being brought to
confirm such points of doctrine, as the Scriptures allow not of, and as we
formerly instanced in; yea, all such doctrine howsoever confirmed by Popish
Miracles, as tends to exalt the Pope against God, or yet into the seat of God.
I read in Maximus Tyrius of one Psapho in Lybia, who desirous to be worshipped
as God, taught a sort of prating Birds to sing, Magnus deus Psapho, Psapho is a
great god: and so let them fly into the woods, where other birds learned the
same lesson, by which fraud the country people began to worship him. Just so,
the Pope of Rome desirous to withdraw the people of this Land from their
allegiance due to his Majesty their lawful Sovereign, and to get himself
acknowledged as their head and God, maintains a sort of discontented fugitives
in his Seminaries as in so many cages, where he easily teaches them what tune
he pleases. These being sent home again teach other birds which are (...).
of the same feather, the same ditty. But we being taught the former lesson and
note, will not admit of any such strange god or doctrine; Galat. 1.8.9.
but, with the Apostle Saint Paul, If any man, though an Angel from heaven
should preach any other Gospel unto us then that we have received, we hold him
accursed.

Means to come to the knowledge of the truth. Prouer. 2. verse. 3.4.5.
To conclude: If any be desirous in the midst of such variety of doctrine, to
know what doctrine is true, let him use but diligence, and let him not
despair. For if thou cryest after knowledge and liftest up thy voice for
understanding, if thou seek her as silver, and searchest for her as for hid
treasures; then shall thou understand the fear of the Lord, and The means
then are; first, a diligent searching and digging in the mines of the
Scriptures. But this must be done with humility and prayer, without curiosity,
and with desire of saving knowledge, and with purpose of reformation of life
according to that Prayer, by which we obtain the Holy Ghost, as is promised,
Luke 11.13. John 16.13. Revel. 3.18. 1 John. 2, 27.
which is the Spirit of truth, and will lead us into all truth. This is that
eye-salue by which our blind eyes receive sight. Which anointing if once we
receive, then need we not that any man teach us, for it teaches us all things.
If then, Psalm. 143.10.
with David, we can pray, Let thy good Spirit lead me unto the Land of
righteousness, we shall hear the still voice of Gods Spirit behind us, Isa.
30.21.
saying, as is promised, This is the way, walk ye in it: which way (by the
way) is not Popery, 22.
which reserues and worships Relics, for it follows, ye shall defile also
the covering of thy graven images of to name no other, Obedience to Gods will,
and a care to live according to the measure of knowledge received, has a
promise to be guided by true knowledge: for, as says our Savior, John 7.17.
If any man will do his (that is, the Fathers) will, he shall know of the
doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I speak of my self. And thus says
David, I understand more then the ancients, because I keep thy precepts.
Knowledge is a talent, and where any talent is rightly used and employed, it
has a promise, Mat. 25.29.
to him that has it shall be given. Look then how good huswiues deal with
their servants, they give their maids their pensa, towe on their rocks, and
set them other taskes, which when they be performed, more is given unto them;
so God reueales himself to us by degrees, and where he sees any to endeavor
himself according to his knowledge, using it well, God will not let him want a
greater measure of further knowledge, whereby himself is so much honored.

And thus much of these idol gods in my text, who were Devils, and of the
means how Satan became the god of the Heathen, and of the Application thereof.

FINIS.
SECTION III.

IDOLATERS BLIND ZEAL, In sacrificing their Children to the Devil; As also
in many other particulars: To the provoking, or else shaming, of CHRISTIANS.

Delivered in a Sermon preached at Saint Mary's in CAMBRIDGE, March 5. 1614.

Newly published By R. I. Bachelour of Divinity, and late Fellow of Saint John's
College in Cambridge.

LONDON, Printed by G. Eld for Robert Mylbourne, 1621.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL AND Reverend Mr. Doctor Ward, Archdeacon of Taunton,
and Vice-chancelor of the University of Cambridge, and Master of Sidney-Sussex
College: R.I. wishes all attainable happiness in this life, and hereafter.
Right Worshipful Sir, and Euer-honored Tutor:
WHEN I look back and consider (as duty binds me,) in what age of the
world, in what ripeness of the Gospel, in what Climate and Region, I was
brought forth, together with the means of my education and trayning; Then do I
find my self for ever bound in soul and body to the mercy and goodness of
the Almighty Lord God, who thus gave me my life, being, and motion, and all
other my abilities, with the blessed opportunity of place, time, and means of
the Gospel, with a call to the preaching of it, for the eternal salvation of
mine own poor soul and others: Yet so, that my Parents, Friends, Kindred and
Country, as also my Instructors and Tutors, may justly under God, and
according to his will claim a share and interest in me. My desire is, in some
acceptable measure to be answerable to my duty in all the parts of it. Now my
whole life and strength is, and ever shall be consecrated to the Honor and
Service of my Lord and Master JESUS CHRIST: to whose glory, I have, by his
grace, spared time from mine ordinary ministerial pains, to publish this
present Treatise, for the behoof, information, and inciting of my Christian
Brethren to glorify God by a zealous walking with him. And for my kindred and
Country, among other parts of my duty daily performed on their behalf; I
thought good to express my thankfulness to the whole State of the Town and
County of Newcastle, by dedicating to them the two former Sections of this
Treatise, in respect not only of my breeding among them, but chiefly of that
encouragement which from their bounty my studies and Ministerial labors do
find.

Now, good Sir, I should much forget my duty and respect to you, who under God,
were the only Tutor and formor of my studies in the University, if remembering
my thankfulness to others, I should pass by your self. (Though I forget not
my mother the University, nor the Colleges, Saint John's and Immanuel: the
latter whereof gave me entertainment and lodged me with you six years, the
other nourished and helped to maintain me twelve years. Other requital then
this thankful acknowledgement, for them I have not at this present.) Give me
leave then thus publicly to express my dutiful respect and thankfulness to
you also, by dedicating to your name this third Section, containing a Sermon
preached in your hearing, March 5. 1614.
at a solemn Assembly in Saint Mary's in Cambridge. Your right to it, as to
all other my abilities in this kind, is the greatest of any man's.

I spare to speak what further right you have in me, and how much I am
beholding (in my particular) to the example of your integrity and conscionable
course of life, of your great and continual pains, humility, and modesty
every way, you being as eminent in and for humility, as humble in eminency of
gifts. But I dare not presume to press these while I praise them: I know you
had rather so be, then be known to be, further then Gods glory and the
necessity of the Church requires; and so you neither are nor can be unknown. I
will conclude, propounding the example of your wonderful diligence and
constant pains, as also modesty, to such as in the Ministry seek their own
ease, and follow their pleasures, and by the Ministry seek dignities and
preferments to themselves. Doubtless laboring with like singleness of heart
and modesty of mind, they should find little cause to doubt so much of Gods
Providence, as to despair of Provision proportionable to their gifts. You have
found it unsought for, but shall find the fruit and reward much more
hereafter. (...). I will not presume to stir up you, but my self, and other
sluggards, in and with the words of Ignatius, Ignat. epist. 1.
to one Mary, (...). And thus I end.

Newcastle upon Tine, April 19. 1621. Yours ever in the Lord, ROBERT IENISON.

IDOLATERS BLIND ZEAL.
PSALM. 106.37. Yea, they sacrificed their sons and their daughters unto
Devils.


SECTION III.
CHAP. I.
Having dispatched our former Consideration of these idol gods, who were
Devils; we now come to take view of the Service and Sacrifice done unto them:
Isreal's sacrificing of their children unto Devils.
which being also a sin of an high nature, we will consider together with the
zeal of their service, the height of their Sin; that so their zeal through
sin proving fruitless, may as deter us from the like, so yet at once both
condemn our coldness and expel it, by provoking to a zealous offering of
acceptable sacrifice. You have heard the sum of what you must hear.

Which was a most grievous sin in diverse regards.
Their sin from diverse circumstances becomes exceeding great. It is first a
sin above many sins, added above the rest, here brought in with a yea;
elsewhere thus aggrauated Is this thy whoredom a small matter? Ezekiel 16 20.
small though it seemed to them, and nothing, yet this nothing being added to
their other sins unrepented of, (and let Sinners note it) makes the sum of
their sin proportionably to rise to the adding of Ciphers in Arithmeticke.

Secondly, it was a sin, as high, so spreading: being at height, it falls like
a mist, spreads and pollutes the whole Land with bloods in the plural, 2 Kings
21.16.
verse 38. and Jerusalem is A sin thirdly not simply sinned, Isa. 57.5.
but sinfully: for being inflamed with idols, says Esaias, they slow the
children in the valleys. Thus fourthly, was Gods temple, that holy Land (which
Abraham had sanctified by the blood of Isaac, who herein was a type of Christ
in that Land to be offered in sacrifice) turned to a butchery and shop of
cruelty, and the God of Israel made to delight in the effusion of innocent
blood.

Four more circumstances in the text, aggravating their sin. 1. W^^ off^^ed
their children.
Yet see their sin through four more circumstances in the text, and it will
appear in it own colors and greatness. 1. Who. 2. Whom. 3. What. 4. To whom.

1. Who? They, though not all, yet not a few: the indefinite seems to incline
to the universal.

But who? First, not the rejected Heathen who knew not God, 1. The Ie^^^.
and whom this best beseemed, but they, the accepted Israelites Gods own
people and peculiar. Nor Israel only, but Judah also, though God had said,
Though thou Israel play the Harlot, Hos. 4.15. Ezekiel. ^^.47.51. And ^.5.6.
yet let not Judah sin. And yet has Jerusalem justified her sisters Sodom
and Samaria. And, This is Jerusalem, says the Lord in Ezekiel, which has
changed my judgments into wickedness more then the Nations: and The iniquity
of the daughter of my people, I^^m. 4.6.
says Jeremy lamenting is become greater then the sin of Sodom: and, her
Na^arites once purer then the snow, And 8.
and whiter then the milk, now their visage is blacker then a cole. Blacker,
both in regard of sin and of answerable suffering. Happy then were these
Jews, yet not so happy as to hold their happiness. Alia felicitate ad tuendam
felicitatem est opus. Senec. c. 17. de br^uii. vitae. Outward privileges exempt
nothom error


And what prerogative then, save that of saving grace, can yield security from
falling foully, whether in matters of doctrine or manners of life? nay this
example tells us, That the greater the dignity, the greater is the danger both
of sin and punishment, because the greater is the duty. Here, Corruption
optimi pessima, that is, The corruption of the best things is always the
worst, is no truer in nature then in grace. The sweetest wine, Optima cito
vitidutur, and in pessima abeunt. Laurent. Anat. l. 8. qu. 8.
by corruption turns to sowrest vinegar, and the most generous degenerates
furthest. Man's body of all other most exquisitely tempered, proves therefore
most distempered and annoyed with diseases while it lives, and when it is dead,
most noisome and annoying. Good wits often prove if not exceeding good, then,
as Iulians, extremely wicked. So, Pliny complains that man only is given to
superstition, and it to him; yet let him not marvel, for man only is
religious. The greater measure of spiritual light reprobates have, the greater
is their danger of sinning that sin which is to death. And Lucifer got the
greatest fall, because he fell from such an height: the nearest heaven and
happiness then, now the furthest off.

Then, brag not Rome of exemption from error; nor trust we Protestants in
the outward privileges of the Gospel, nor rest we, fathers and brethren, (of
the Clergy) secure in our knowledge and gifts above others. As are our gifts,
so are our sins, if our gifts be either not used or abused. And as are our
sins, so shall be our sufferings. To each degree of created excellency, All
dignity draws with it answerable danger.
there answers in proportion its degree of misery. Things that have being are
subject to not-being, and because advanced from Nihil negatiuum, nothing a
negative, they are therefore in danger of returning to Nihil priuatinum,
nothing a privative, to be deprived of that being they had. Things living only
die, (a stone dies not) if the life of nature, then the death of nature only,
as in beasts: if also the life of grace, as Adam and we in him, then also the
death of grace, as now we feel. If life have sense, then death is also felt
and sensible; Nec s^^re licet ^antu^ mihi mo^^ de^^e; Sed (...) Deum, etc
I^^chus apud O^id. Me^^. lib. 1.
plants die, but feel no pain. The quicker sense, as in our Savior, the
sorer pain. Our souls immortality adds to our misery, for our death dies not.

Christians shall dye, not a longer, yet a sorer death then Infidels: Tire and
Sydons condition at the day of judgment shall be more tolerable then ours, not
repenting. And for thee, Mat^. ^ 2^ ^^.
o Capernaum, which art exalted unto heaven, because heaven had its motion, and
the God of heaven more familiarly conuersed with thee, thou shall be brought
down to hell. In a word, God will be no loser by us. He will be sanctified
either of all or on all that come near unto him. The more we receive, and the
greater prerogatives whether Christian or Civil (let Nobles also note it) the
greater proves our unthankfulness and sin, as in these Jews; and sin has
always her reward proportionable.

(...) offered their own children. Se^e^. ep.
Now secondly, who? They, Parents. Use Parents thus to be unnatural? do not
even wild beasts of the Forest, as Seneca observes, so love their young ones,
that for their safety they often run themselves to death upon the hunters
Iauelin? 1 King 3.25.26.
This love of Parents did wise Solomon take for a ground and rule to discover
the true mother by it. And it has strangely showed it self even to immeriting
Children. Absoloms unnatural rebellion could not quench the flames of David's
love, but that he both charged upon his Captains gentle usage of him while he
lived, 2 Samuel 18.31, 32, 33.
and when he died, surcharged himself with too much passion. Bodines
observation affords us three instances out of France. ^^lia de Rep. l. 1. cap.
4.
The first of a father, who reaching forth a blow to a graceless Son, The
unnaturalness of their sin.
had his Sons sword presently sheathed in his bowels; yet what little breath
was left, was spent and breathed out in crying to his son to fly and save
himself from the hand of Justice. The second also of a Father, who for grief
hanged himself, for killing that Son whom he intended only to correct. The
third of a Mother, whom, none of so many strange contumelies as she endured
from an ungracious Son, could ever move publicly to make complaint. And when
the Magistrates themselves taking notice of his villainies, gave sentence of
death against him, she grievously complained of their cruelty. Isa. 49.15.
And can a mother then forget her child and have no compassion of the Son of
her womb? yes, says Jeremy, The Daughter of my people is become cruel,
Lament 4.3. and 10.
like the Ostriches in the wilderness -- for the hands of the pitiful women
have sodden their own children. But then hunger compelled them. Deuteronomy. 13.6, 7,
8. and ch 21.18.19, 20, 21.
Some Fathers have stoned their rebellious or seducing Sons to death. But
then their obedience to the laws of God did thus punish their childrens
disobedience thereunto. 2 Machab. 7.2^.
The Mother in the Machabees hartned on her Sons to death; but it was lest
Gods law should be transgressed. Lastly, Solimanni in prolem immanitatem, vide
apud Lips. lib. 3. antiquarum lection^ epist. 22.
L. Torquatus having first suffered his Son to ride in triumph for killing an
enemy, yet after slew him for doing it against the law of Arms. But here was a
trespass.

Yet look to these Jews, and you find no such cause, which makes their sin
the more unnatural. It was a Fathers voice, (...); what thou my Son? will thou rise in arms against me? but if love descend rather then ascend, iustlier
might the child inuert it, (...); what, will thou my father be my deathsman?

For, whom thus slew they? their sons and daughters. 2. Whom offered they?
Their own children. 1. Not servants or captives.
Whom? first, little ones not able to resist. Secondly, Sons, not servants, not
captives, such as the Romans bought and gave for Gladiatours or Sword players,
they were no such hostiae or victimae, quasi ab host victo, sacrifices of
their enemies; nor yet the children of the poorer sort, such as the
Carthagineans often bought for sacrifice having none of their own: but their
own and often also their only children. And yet thirdly, not simply their
own, but such, Yet not simply their own, but Gods. Ezekiel. 16.20. De Rep. l. 1.
c. 4.2. Not malefactors. Strabo lib. 10.
as, says the Lord to Jerusalem, thou have borne unto me, and these have thou
sacrificed. They indeed under God gave them life, but to take it from them
(which is Bodines error) is not in their power, till it be forfaited to God who
gave it. Yet fourthly, whom? not malefactors, such as the Leucades made choice
of, or as were commonly among the Romans their (...).
Bestiarij and Bustuarij, or as Lipsius, malo ingenio serui, ill disposed
servants, but harmless innocents. verse 38. Ezekiel. 18.1.2. See Morn. de verit.
Christian. Relig. cap. 12.
Innocents, in regard of the Fathers who had eaten the sour grapes, yet
Nocents in regard of God, who thus justly suffered the childrens teeth to be
set on edge. As this both iustifies and cleares Gods providence, so does the
former aggrauate these Parents wickedness. And so does that they did unto them.

3 What did they to them? They burnt them;
What? not consecrate them simply to the service of Satan, but sacrifice them
to his honor; not as some think, making them pass only through the fire
without hurt, receiving them again as new men from the dead, and in their
rooms burning beasts, Iun. in Ezekiel. 23.37.
(as once the Romans for their depontanisenes, in stead of old men indeed,
threw men of rushes into the river Tyber, which yet held the name of (their)
Sexagenarij) but also truly burnt them, whole, and that most cruelly and
unnaturally. Cruelly,
First cruelly: for Phalaris-like they cast them to their idol Moloch, which
was, though not a bull, Lyra in Deuteronomy. 12. fine.
yet a calfe as large, of metal, vast and hollow, as Lyra tells us, with 7.
several rooms for so many several offerings, whether lambs, sheep, calves, or
children. Even such was Saturnes image of brass at Carthage, Diodor. lib. 20.
Biblioth. The like Images elsewhere also. Ludou. Viues ad August. de ciuit. Dei
l. 7. c. 19. And unnaturally. Topheth.
whose hands made hollow, wide and winding, received the child or
viuicomburium, through which it tumbled down into a fiery furnace. Oh cruelty!
And yet must fathers, yea also mothers, with their own hands unnaturally also
practice it. Nor must they bewray any grief or compassion, which yet lest
their childrens skriking should stir up in them, by awaking their natural
(...) or affection, the noise of drums must be much louder. Whence Topheth,
that place of torment, has its name of Toph, tympanum, in Hebrew signifying a
drum. So subtle is the Devil to damme up this little light of nature, and to
stop the ears of natural affection, whereby his deuillishnesse might have
been discovered. For these were the gods who thus were honored, God and man's
maine enemies, 4. To whom? to the devil*
Devils; whom therefore with this strictest service, thus to honor with
forsaking God, is to be superlatiuely idolatrous and in extremity. Of which
supra sect. 2. chap. 1.
But this last circumstance has long since been dispatched.

CHAP. II.
THis now being both the height of their sin, How came they to this height of
sin?
and zeal of their devotion: first, how came they to this height? and then,
how was their zeal accepted?

To the first I answer: The Jews are drawn on by the Heathen, whom says
this Psalm, they spared, 1 Verses 34, 35, 36. The Jews learnt it of the
Heathen. Deuteronomy. 12.30, 31. and 7.3.4. Exodus 34.16. The danger of evil company.
Dum spectant laesos oculi laeduntur and ipsi Quid. Ezekiel. 19.3-6.
with whom they were mingled, whose works they learned, whose Idols they
served, yea even with this service, contrary to Gods both caveat and command.
So, tolerate once Idolaters, (and if you will, Papists) and next look to have
them our Masters. Justly become the wicked sworn scholars to men, when once
they reject the teaching of God. Idolatry is a Witch, and has sore eyes
bewitching and infectious. If Iehoahaz and Iehoiakim be nourished and go up
and down among the Lions, (for they I take are meant in that 19. of Ezekiel,)
that is, consult and walk in counsel with the kings of Babylon and Egypt,
they shall also become young Lions, and learn to catch the prey, and devour
men. Thus shall our familiarity with the wicked either find or make us like
unto them.

Yet might these Jews perhaps have heard their fathers tell them how God was
well pleased with Abraham's will-offering, and would be appeased with the blood
of a man. But we seek a general Master both for Jew and Gentile, Satan the
teacher of it both to Jew and Gentile. Yet by degrees.
which was Satan with his suttleties, whose will we doubt not of, his wit we
observe to have wrought by degrees. For at the first to have persuaded to such
bloody sacrifices, had been to have dissuaded from them: but religions respect
and pretense set all on foot. He first winds himself into credit by his
oracles, giving answers to delight the curious, Of which above sect. 2. chap. 4.
by his miracles working wonders to bewitch the credulous. With this credit by
littles he lead them to what himself listed. For now who doubts of his deity,
who dares disobey it? His pretense was also fair: And by religious pretexts.
what more just or agreeing with nature, then that God should be honored with
service and sacrifice outward as well as inward? Here is an advantage gotten
from man's natural but rude knowledge; now see how it is followed. Man
naturally has also some conscience of sin, and some shame for it, and
therefore sees his misery in regard of sin and of death deserved by it. This
guilt lets him see the necessity, but not the means of expiation: yet he sees
it possible, and the means thus far that it must be made by blood. He is
loath to spend his own, and therefore easily drawn on to shed the blood of
beasts. Imputation of the fault to the sacrifice, and of the sacrifice and its
death to the faulty, is in part acknowledged necessary. Yet hence is built an
after-consideration, in show more wise, in issue more wicked. Shall man sin,
and is it equity any else should die? Hence sacrifices of men became so
frequent. But they were for the most part malefactors, and their death was
before deserved. Let then the innocent give the ransom for the nocent. And who
more innocent then children? and if children, why not your own and only ones?
Our dearest, proper, and most precious things please God the best, and purchase
greatest favor: let him have them therefore.

And thus have pretexts of piety excluded pity, and strong delusion abated the
force of natural affection. In which respect one says, ^od^^ de Rep ^.5
Tanta vis est opinionis daprauatae, vt legis habeat authoritatem, ac natura
potentius dominetur: False persuasion by Gods just judgment often puts out the
eye of grace, reason, yea, nature it self.

Yet might this practice once a foot, be furthered partly by that good success
which might seem to follow it, as in the King of Moah: 1 King. ^.27. Pet.
Ma^tyr in loc.
partly, upon a lewd and harlot-like affection in the parents, who might make
use of so holy a pretense and practice as this was thought, unnaturally to ease
and rid themselves of their Children. And thus has Religion brought forth
Superstition, and the mother is devoured up by the daughter.

A like instance in the Gladiatorie Combatants among the Romans.
Even thus, (that by way of digression, I may parallel this practice and example
with a like,) had those streams of blood of the Gladiatory-Combatants or
Sword-players among the Romans, their springhead and beginning. They derived
their course from like religious pretext, Ex Lips. lib. 1. and 2. Sa^urnal.
seeming perhaps to run another way, yet at the length falling into the same
Sea and Ocean of blood. Which custom had also a religious pretext,
The first occasion was taken from funerals. They religiously believed the
souls of the deceased were pleased with man's blood and made propitious. Hence
in their funerals were captives bought and sacrificed. But a while after,
Delight and Pleasure altered the manner, and to make others sport, they must
fight themselves to death. This first was done privately in their Parlours
where they feasted, but after, And grew on by deg^ee.
in the open markets of Rome, and in their public feasts, but as yet upon
occasion only of funerals; first of great personages, then of the meaner sort,
lastly of women. But the peoples eyes must be oftener fed with these their
deliciae and cibus oculorum, as they were called, the delight and food of their
eyes. Which was accordingly done by popular and ambitious Magistrates and all
others, Qui gratiam a populo exambire vellent aut honorem, who would curry
favor with the people, and stood for some place of honor. From Rome the
custom spread it self into the provinces, yea even to Iewrie, where, says
Josephus, Agrippa, Joseph. l. 19.
at one only solemnity furnished forth 700. couples of Combatants. At the
first, slaves only and captives were given; after, the better sort and
freeborne gave themselves, Neque ob^^^^ generis humines, sed clari
illust^^sque: and (...) lant^^ a omnis grat^^taque opera pugnantium fait. Liu.
lib. 18. Ter^^ll.
partly for a price, partly for praise. Of whom Tertullian, Quot otiosos
affectatio armorum ad gladium locat? certe ad feras ipsas adfectatione armorum
descendunt, and de morsibus and cicatricibus formosiores sibi videntur. How
many idle fellows does the affectation of arms cause take the sword in hand
to fight their prizes? surely through affectation of valor men encounter and
enter the Lists even with savage beasts, and account themselves beautified by
the prints of teeth, and scarres which they show in their faces. Yea their
Nobles often, Knights and Senators came in play, and for nouelty also came
Pigmees, Dwarfes, and also women with swords upon the Stage. This Play cost
Europe, in some one Month no less then twenty, if not thirty thousand men, or
else, mine author Meant. (...) v^us (...) ^ensis Europae sicu^ vicenis ^a^^^um
millibus a^^ ^rice^ts (...) S. ta^nal (...)
Lipsius will be content to take the lie. O Satanicall bewitchings! and how to
be watched against by such as love their souls!

How was their ^eale accepted?
But to return to our former example, was God herewith so well pleased as the
Jews imagined? The gods in my text, no doubt were pleased very well, they
required this service, and to them it was meat and drink, for they feed on
blood. Pleased I say, yet never appeased. For this hungry Devil never has
enough His malice to us now is great and greater then ever. And may not this
make us listen to Saint Gregory his lesson, Greg. (...)
which is, Iniustum est seruire diabolo qui nullo placatur obsequio. We have no
reason to do the Devil service when nothing we do can make him propitious.
He then that thus seeks heaven shall come as short of it, as did those
Carpocratian heretics, of whom Saint Austen, August. de haeres. cap 7.
who professedly taught the practice of all filthiness, that so by pleasing
wicked Fiends in whose power they were, they might be suffered to pass quietly
without disturbance through their aerie regions to the celestial. But for the
true God, God was much displeased therewith. Deuteronomy. 12.31. Ier. 29.5.
this kind of service could neither please him nor appease him: he condemns it
here and elsewhere, and his wrath was kindled against them for it, verse 40.
Yet might they say they intended nothing but well by it, and if they erred, it
was an error of love, not love of error, seeing for his sake they spared not
their dearest children. Truth; if Intentions without or against Gods word would
excuse But will worship with disobedience is no plea at Gods bar. Abraham's
example does not justify it.
Yet Abraham's zeal was commended: true, because it was commanded. But
Agamemnons was condemned, because by the law, Thou shall not kill, it was
forbidden. And was not Abraham's? Yet is not the others zeal hereby warranted.
God who is above his Law tried Abraham by a special command, dispensing with
the general, unto which the other still stood bound, as having no special.
Abraham obeyed while he disobeied (if disobeyed) not so the other. Abraham was
not blamed for his butchery, but praised for his piety, A cult de ciuit.
(...). 2^
says S. Augustine, Quod voluit filiu^ nequaquam scelerate sed obedienter
occidere; Inasmuch as he was ready to have slain his Son not scelerously, but
in obedience. Abraham's readiness being from divine instinct, is imitable of
none who have not the like. Heroici motus non sunt imitandi: Divine and
extraordinary motions are not to be imitated. We are bound to the common rule,
but these divine instincts are far above it. One particular, Heroici motus
sunt suprare^ulam.
says Logic, is inferred, proved, or warranted by another only where the
cause and reason is alike in both: but here, the facts were not more like then
the causes different.

But the truth is, Abraham's obedience pleased God and not his sacrifice; or
rather his obedience was his sacrifice. God is not delighted simply in our
blood, no not of Martyrs, but in our obedience whether active or passive. In
Abraham we see it: Nam Deus qui iusserat vt id fieret, Pet. Martyr in locis.
ne fieret prohibuit; God who commanded the act, yet forbade the acting of it.
Even so, though without injury, yea also justly, he might require our blood in
ordinary sacrifice, yet did he require only of the Jews for it, the blood of
beasts. Thus, both showing them and us our sins and death deserved by them,
and yet his readiness to receive an atonement, yea the atonement of another
for us. Yet could not these outward sacrifices simply, either appease his
wrath, as holding no proportion with the infiniteness thereof, or of our guilt;
or yet so much as please him without some better (and more pleasing) sacrifice.
August. de ciuit. Dei lib. 10. ca. Thus even the Heathen: Non boue mactato
coelestia numina gaudent, Sed, quae praestanda est, and sine test, Fide. Ovid.
ep. 19.
Sacrificium enim visibile, says Saint Austen, invisibilis sacrificij
sacramentum, hoc est, sacrum signum est: For the outward visible sacrifice is a
sacrament, that is, a holy sign of an invisible sacrifice. If God then from
thence smelled a Genesis 8.20. Act. 20.28.
Savor of rest, it was from the sacrifice of our Savior Christ. For as it by
the rest was typified, so the rest by it were sanctified and accepted. This
has so sufficiently alone reconciled God to us, and satisfied his justice (as
being the shedding of the blood of God) that to offer any other either
sacrifice or service, or yet this again to that end, were, as to derogate from
the sufficiency thereof, so, to make God as implacable as we have showed the
Devil to be.

CHAP. III.
An application of the former point.
THus have we seen Idolatry zealous, though it reap no acceptance, nor yet
good fruit of its zeal. Though it lose, yet may we gain from it this
profitable and useful consideration; Idolaters more zealous in their kind
then the children of light.
That the children of this world are not only more wise, but more zealous also
in their generation, then the children of light. Whose zeal therefore, if it
expel not our coldness, shall condemn both it and us.

Religion sails and holds her course between two dangerous rocks, of
Superstition and Impiety. On the one side says Plutarch, In Camillo.
there is (...), Superstitious vanity: on the other, (...), Negligence and
contempt of heavenly things. And such, says he, is man's infirmity, that
keeping no bounds, it is hurried sometime to the one, and sometime to the
other. Both are evil, but yet the second iustifies the first, as Jerusalem did
Sodom: Superstition (at the least in show and pretense) bordering nearer to
true piety.

We may see (and yet shame to see our selves so far behind,) the zealous
affections and practices of Heathen, Heretics, Idolaters, and generally of the
wicked. We may see in Scripture Samaria doting on her lovers, Ezekiel. 23.5. Isa.
57.5.
or set on fire with them: and the Jews inflamed or inflaming themselves with
Idols: and yet our selves, like Moah (through our ease and long peace) settled
on our lees, Ier. 48.11. Zeph. 1.12.
and like Jerusalem, curded and frozen in our dregs. In my Text we have seen
children sacrificed by their Parents to the devil, and yet see professed
Christians, unwillingly (if at all) either to chastise their children doing
amiss, or to consecrate them to the service and honor of God, or their
Country; yea, impatiently to take their death when God himself calls them away.
Anno 1293. Apud Laps. Monit. and Exe. polit.
Yet we read of one Alphonsus Peresius Gusmanus a Spaniard, who holding the
City Tariffa for the King his Master, was threatened by the enemies, that
unless he yielded up the Town, his only son whom they had taken, should
be miserably mangled in his sight. No, said he, betray my trust I will not,
for an hundred sons of mine if you had them: and if you will needs do it,
lo here is a sword; and so casting his own sword unto them, his son
therewith was barbarously murdered, himself nothing appalled thereat.

Strange also it is, Idolaters zeal in not sparing themselves. 1 Kings 18.28.
what butchery men have executed on themselves, for the pleasing, pacifying,
and honoring of their Idols. You shall see Baals priests (to move their god to
hear them,) usually to cut themselves with knives and launcers, till the blood
gush out upon them: some popish penitentiaries also in great austerity and
severity to lash and whip themselves: of a like stamp to that sect of
penitentiary whippers, who, like Pans priests, naked from the nauill upwards,
went to and fro through Saxony and Bohemia, yea at the length walked London
streets, with whips in their hands, whereby they bloudyed one another on the
back, thus thinking they purged themselves by a baptism of blood. And if we
hearken to the Relators, among whom Lipsius is one, our King Henry the second,
is reported, Lips. Monit. and Exemp. polit. Anno 1174.
of mere conscience to get him to Canterbury, to the sepulcher of Saint
Thomas, whom he caused to be put to death; whence, after pardon asked with
tears, going full penitently to a Covent of Monks, with much entreaty he
obtained of each severally to be lashed and whipped with rods.

This was much in a King, but it was (as he thought,) for a better kingdom:
for the obtaining of which we read that the Valesian Heretics usually
gelded themselves and their disciples; August. de haeres. cap. 37.
herein perhaps following Saint Origens example, who, allegorizing almost all
other Scripture, Matthew. 19.12.
yet literally misinterpreted the place in Saint Matthew concerning voluntary
Eunuchs, to the gelding of himself. The misconstruing of which place mislead
also diverse Christians of primitive times to the same practice, whom therefore
the first Nicene Council thought good to condemn. Danaeus ad Aug. de haeres.
cap. 37.


What blinded zeal caused them to do, desire of selling themselves dearer to
merchants moved some Ethnickes to, as the People Abasgi, Euagrius lib. 4. c. 21.
who (as says Euagrius) to that end generally gelt themselves. Ulysses is said
to tear his own flesh with whip-coard to deceive his enemies: and Zopyrus in
Iustine could filthily mangle and deface himself, Justin. hist. lib. 1. fine.
by cutting off his own nose, ears and lips, that so with less suspicion he
might betray Babylon into the hands of King Darius.

But religious respects have carried men yet further, even to the voluntary
killing of themselves, as may be instanced with variety of examples, fetched
especially from the East Indies. These few shall supply the room of many.

Purchase his Pilgrimage, Asia.
In the Eastern Islands of Iapon men cast themselves from rocks, put themselves
into strait holes of the earth, receiving breath by a reed, and so continue
fasting and praying till death, and all in honor to their Idols.

In the Kingdom of Narsinga, where is the City Maliapur, where Saint Thomas
the Apostle is voyced to be martyred, pilgrims by troops do put themselves
under the Chariot-wheeles of their golden Idol, which yearly is carried in
Procession, and so are chrushed to death. Others are brought forth by their
parents, each with five sharp knives about his neck, where cutting his flesh,
he cries, Linschot. lib. 1. cap. 44. cited by M. Purchase.
For the worship of my God do I this: And so proceeding, says, Now do I
yield my life to death in the behalf of my God. This selfe-sacrificing is
witnessed by diverse, and as Linschoten affirms, is still in use.

Lips.
In the Regions of Malabar, in their feasts, tela inter se spargunt, they throw
darts one at another, and who so dies is thought presently to flit to a place
of happiness. Near thereabout in the City Quilacare, (in the King of Coulams
Dominion) every twelfth year the King himself ascending a scaffold, cuts his
own throat in sacrifice to his Idols, his Successor standing by, who after his
twelve years Iubilee must do the like.

Where are now our voluptuous livers, who for the kingdom of God will not
mortify any one of their earthly members, nor withdraw their bodies from
hurtful pleasures? If these examples now shame them not, they will confound
them at the day of Judgment.

And so shall that Reverence, Reverence of Idolaters.
honor and religious respect given by the blindly zealous to the things they
reverence, condemn the want thereof in Professors. At this day the Turks so
much respect Paper, Given to Paper Lips. Monit. and exe. polit. lib. 1. c. 3.
exe. 5.
that they hold it wickedness in any to cast it away, trample it under foot,
or otherwise to employ it to base uses. And why? Because their Alcoran, that
is, their law and rules of Religion, is written in Paper. Surely then a piece
of that Paper is much more respected. Where was this reverence when the French
Bishop of Aix and other Bishops condemned a Bookeseller to be burnt with two
Bibles about his neck? Acts and Monum. In the Merindolian persecution. Ibid.
in sine Hen. 8.
yea when one Style an English martyr was burnt in Smithfield with the
Revelation of S. John about his neck (whereon he used to read) which yet he
then reverenced, counting himself happy and honored by it. Thus do Papists
reverence Scripture, who yet out of an ungrounded and pretended reverence to it
debar the Lay sort of the use thereof, threatening terribly such as shall dare
to have or read the Scriptures, forsooth lest such holy things should be cast
to and polluted by dogs. They further call us scornefully Scripturarios,
Scripture-men, Bible-men, and our Divinity which we build only on Scripture,
Theologiam atramentariam, Inkie divinity. But among our selves it may be feared
there are too many who reverence and respect more the goodness of the Paper or
Print, the washing, ruling, gilding of their Bibles, then the sense and
Scripture it self, which they seldom peruse. King Alexanders example shall
condemn such, who so much respected (...). Plutarch. in Alexand.
Homers verses, that laying them under his pillow he slept on them. And when
among the spoils of King Darius there was found a most precious casket for
Jewels, and doubt made to what special use it should be employed, Imo, says
he, Homeri carminibus reseruetur, Let it be kept for Homers verses. And all
this he did that having them ready at hand, he might at all times read them at
home and abroad, What respect we owe to Scripture.
by day and by night. What respect then is justly due to the Scriptures of God?
how are they to be treasured up in our best caskets, namely in the sure
closets of our hearts, and, as it were to be transcribed, by often reading and
remembering, from the tables of the Law and Gospel into our hearts, that so we
may approve our selves such as to whom God has promised to put his Law in
their inward parts, and to write it in their hearts.

Again, the Peruuian Priests coming to their gods, lift not up their eyes,
Respect given to Idol gods. Lips. vt supr. l. 1. c. 3.
but often either bind them up, or quite pluck them out, which is thought more
holy. But so do not such among us as having eyes full of adultery and
hypocrisy, can with the proud Pharisie look God in the face in his Temple,
See Ier. 7.9.10.
and yet spare to pull out the right eye, or to mortify their darling sins.

The Egyptians who give divine worship to Cats, Crocodiles and Dogs, To
Dogs,
says he that saw it, Diodorus Siculus, in a concourse of people when their
King Ptolomie was by the Senate pronounced a friend and consederate, And Catts.
yet even then did they tear into a thousand pieces with their hands a Roman
Soldier, Diodorus Siculus lib. 1. page 53. A. ^^pf. vt supra exe. 1.
only for killing a Cat, and that by chance. Give me an example of like zeal
in Christian Magistrates, in vindicating the dishonours done to God, when
Christ by abominable oaths is again crucified and rent in pieces by the
wicked.

Some heretics in the Church can swallow the Bread in the Sacrament though it
be mixed with man's blood, To the bread in (...) Sacrament.
as though the Cataphriges and Pepuziani: yea with man's seed and sperme, (...)
^^^d Aug. (...).
as the Gnostics and Manichees, who as also the Nicolaitans, Semen and
menstrua mulierum excipiunt and lingunt And Godarenus a Papist can with great
courage and zeal swallow down the host or wafer which a filthy Leper had
vomited and cast up. And the popish Council of Colen has taken order for such
chances; that the whole pieces be given to some faithful man to eat: and all
this in reverence to the Sacrament. What dainty and queazy stomachs then have
many Protestants who if once a year they eat this holy bread, it is more
against stomach in them, then in the forenamed heretics to lick up the
vomit. Yet do not all Papists show like reverence to this Sacrament. Not that
Subdeacon who poisoned Pope Victor the third in the Chalice. Nor that Friar
Dominicke who in like manner poisoned the Emperor Henry 7. Not Pope Sixtus the
fourth his Legate, who gave the elevation of the host for a sign of murder.
Nor lastly that Pope himself Gregory 7. who did cast (says Cardinal Benon)
the consecrated host into the fire and burnt it, because demanding of it a
revelation against the Emperor, it answered him not.

It is further considerable at what Cost blinded zeal can be. The Heathen and
Idolaters spare for no cost.
Yea also heathenisme about the things which they effect. Some Emperors, and
they not always of the best, to countenance even humane learning, have largely
contributed. Vespasian made the Poet Saleius Bassus with one gift in revenue
equal to their Knights. Antoninus Caracalla delighted with Oppians elegant
verses dedicated to him, (and which now we may both read and reckon) caused to
be given him for every verse a crown in gold, each of which was double to
ours. The number of verses makes the gift almost stupendous.

At this day the Turks at Constantinople, Lips. vt supr.
though they worship not dogs, cats and birds, yet so far do they respect
them, that at set hours they constantly feed them, not with the offals, but
with the best both roast and boyed. And so did the Egyptians, who as Diodorus
Siculus relates, extremely pinched with famine, fell to eat one another, and
yet spared the foresaid creatures. Spared said I? yea fed them, and that with
man's flesh.

Some Christians also have been so lavish in this kind both in building and
indowing of Churches, that a restraint was thought necessary. Even now also may
be seen some Popish images on high days as sumptuously bedecked with
precious ornaments as is almost any Queen of Europe: no cost is spared.

In vain then shall Aaron think to turn the people from Idolatry, Exodus
32.1, 2, 3.
by requiring their earings of Gold, and dearest ornaments, they will nor
stick with him for them, though thus he was said to rob the people, And 25
and to have made them naked to their shame among their enemies, which yet they
suffered. Yet in our days Aaron himself is robbed by the people, and his
golden beard and garments by sacrilegious hands are taken from him, and out of
their wisdoms and charity he has his linsie-woolsie clothes fitted for him,
as warmer for Winter then those of Gold, and lighter for Summer. This is far
from the charity of former times, and zeal even of Idolaters, when
sacrilegious Appropriators shall turn their Patronage to pillage, and through
their sacrilegious affections occasion Simonie and sharing between the Patron
and Presented. Yea, make modest minds hide their talents unwillingly, wax
old, and dye, even at their mothers breasts in the Universities, who yet
themselves have breasts full fraught with milk to feed many hunger-starued
souls. Let such take this caveat with them, Prou. 20.25.
It is a snare if not destruction to the man who deuoureth that which is holy:
And so they will find it to themselves, seed, or both. If with the Eagle in
the Emblem, they will needs be snatching from Gods Altar, any part of the
Sacrifice which there burns sweetly to God, and carry it to feed their young,
let them beware lest some unseen coal or spark at unawares taken with them,
set nest and all on fi^e. For, whom so do they spoil but God? and Our God is
even a consuming fire.

We may wish then that authority would see Tobias dislodged out of his Chamber
where formerly lay meat offerings, Tithes, and Incense; and that our zeal to
Gods House, Council. Trident. less. 22. de reformat cap. 11.
came not short of Antichristian zeal for Popery, which in the Council of
Trent took order for the removing of idle Monks from those Livings and
Tithes, whereby Pastors formerly were maintained; Sess. 24. de reformat. c. 18
and sess. 5. c. 1. and 23 c. 18
for the restoring of the goods of Benefices, setting learned Priests in them;
for erecting Lectures, and maintayning Teachers.

I might further stir up loose Protestants to put their necks into Christ's
easy yoke, by instancing on Papists the truth of what Saint Paul vpbraides
the Corinthians withal, They suffer if a man bring them into bondage, 2 Cor.
11.^0.
if a man devour them, if a man exalt himself, if a man smite them on the
face, as witness those two heavy yoakes, (to name no more, Papists blind
obedience.
) The first of blind and absolute Obedience, whereby men make themselves
slaves, their Superiors gods, (to whom this properly belongs,) whom they
simply obey, without consulting with God whether he will give them leave or
no. The yoke of Confession.
The other of Confession, imposed upon the necks even of Kings, whereby they
are brought upon their knees to confess, Council. Trident. sess. 4. c. 5. can.
6.7
Omnia and singula peccata, etiam turpia, etiam occulta, etiam circumstantias,
all and singular their sins, how filthy or close soever, yea all delinquences
even against the last Commandment.

But I would conclude my instancing, The pains and diligence of the wicked.
with the proposing of the great pains and diligence of the wicked generally,
and more specially of Heretics.

The wicked are said to weary themselves to do wickedly, to be wearyed in the
multitude of their counsels. Ier. 9.5. Isa 47.^^.
Harlots spend much time daily in tricking themselves to please the world.
Which when Nonnus Bishop of Edessa observed in Pelagia, he made this use of it
for himself and for us, to bewail his own sluggishnesse, and to resolve to
use greater care in the adorning of his soul, that he might please God.

Idolatrous Judah is said, And of Idolaters. Isa. 57.9.^^
to send her messengers far off, and to weary her self in the greatness of
her way, or in her many iourneyes. And now we want not some, on like stamp,
who can undertake tedious Pilgrimages, to visit the shrines of supposed Saints,
yea compass sea and land to make Proselytes: for even now in the remotest
parts of the world are diverse Colleges of Jesuits; by name in the Philippine
Islands, (which take their name from Philip 2. of Spain) there are seven,
besides other religious persons. Neither are they less busy, though less
authorized nearer home. ^
Job says, The murderer rises early and kills the poor and needy, and in
the night he is a thief. And even so the Poet, ^
Vt iugulent homines surgunt de nocte latrones. Thieves rise at midnight to
murder men. And may not I infer with the same Poet, Vt teipsum serves non
expergisceris? To save thy life wilt not thou (whosoever) awake from sleep? ^
Yea, add with Saint Paul, Teipsum and eos qui te audierint? That thou may
both save thy self and them that hear thee?

Themistocles who took his liberty in his youth, at length growing emulous of
Miltiades his victories, his more serious thoughts would not suffer him to
sleep: The cause asked, his answer was, Miltiadae se trophaeis e somno
excitari, that Miltiades his Trophies and honors kept him waking.

It is no time now with Salomons sluggard to sleep securely and say, Yet a
little slumber, but rather to do as his good Huswife does, ^
which rises while it is night, and gives meat to her household, and a
portion unto her maidens. While the Seeds-man snorts, the enemy sowes his
Tares, and many fall to Popery and prophanenes. To such I say, not as the Poet,
Nate Dea, but ^^rg^^ ^uci^. 4.
Nate Deo, potes hoc sub casu ducere somnos? Can thou sleep securely, when
others through thy negligence fall dangerously.

CHAP. IIII.
WHither all these Instances tend you have now seen: not to lead us like
sheep without reason after them, over such dangerous rocks and downe-fals:
(...), says Plato: If a man will follow others, let him do it with reason and
with good consideration. And says Saint Paul, Romans 12 ^.
our service must be reasonable: and say I, so must our imitation also be. The
zeal of Idolaters should pro^^^^ Christians
Let shame teach us to follow their zeal, let sanctified Reason, in the
general only; but let Religion guide and direct ours for the particulars.

Shame then be it to Christians to seek excuses, when they sought none; to
account ought hard for us, when nothing was too hard for them. God lays not on
us such heavy burdens, but more easy and profitable service, calling us to
Feasting, Come eat of my meat, Proverb. 9.^ I^a 55.1.
and drink of my wine, and that freely, Buy wine and milk without silver: To
Refreshing, Come unto me and I will ease you. Matthew. 11 2^.
Yea he comes to us, not sending us beyond the seas to seek his Word, and
knockes at our doors by his Word and Spirit, crying, Open and I will enter,
Revel. 3.20. Isa. 55.3, 6, ^ Ioh 3.16. Zech. 13.1.
Hearken and your soul shall live, Only believe and thou shall be saved. And
opening a fountain to us for sin and uncleanness, he says, Only wash and
be clean, Step into Bethesda with the first and be healed, Wash in the Poole
Siloam and see.

What can God require less at our hands? Shall we now, (and this may be
feared) with Naaman (...). Nazian. orat. 2.
refuse to be cleansed because our healing may be had so easily? Or shall we
with that accursed Arrian not very long since executed at Norwich, reject and
defy Christ Jesus, because he is so easy to be entreated? Greenhams (...).
on Prou. 18.14.
Shall we with Papists refuse to be justified, (the end will so prove it)
because Christ will do it freely by faith only without our fastings,
whippings, pilgrimages and satisfactions? Shall the institution of the Lords
Supper be contemned because it wants the pomp and pride of the Mass? In a
word, shall the simplicity of the Gospel be any prejudice to the profession or
professors of the Gospel?

But what if God should require of us as hard service as ever Idolaters by
selfe-will-deuotion performed, as to pluck out our right eyes, cut off our
right hands when they offend us: Luk 14.26.
yea for Christ his sake to forsake father, mother, son and self? Yet must
we, yea we may do it, if we have any of these three graces (as each
Christian should have all, Christians should stir up, 1. their Faith. Mark
9.23. 1 Thessalonians. 1.3. 1 Ioh. 5.3 4. 1 Pet. 5.9. Heb. 11.17.18. and 33.34. etc.
) Faith, Hope, or Charity. What can be hard to any of these? (...), All things
are possible to him that believes. If ought be hard, then has Faith (...),
her work of Faith, whereby it overcomes the world, and makes the Devil
himself flee by resisting. See her Trophies Heb. 11. where Abraham by faith
offered up Isaac, of whom it was said, In Isaac shall thy seed be called.
Therefore says Calvin. in Genesis 22.
one, In eius persona perire videbatur tota mundi salus: In his person the
salvation of the world seemed to perish. A sore trial, which yet his Faith
overcame, and so should ours the like.

2. Their Hope. 1 Thessalonians. 1.3. Heb. 11.26.
So has Hope her (...), her Patience, and patience can bear and forbear any
thing. Hopes eye fastened on the recompense of reward, made Moses do and suffer
what else without hope would have broken his heart. Therefore I say with the
Poet Verinus, Quem potes aeterno pro munere far laborem?
Mercedi an tantae par labor esse potest?
What Nullus labor durus, nullum tempus videri longum debet, quo gloria
aeternitatis acquinrtur. Hierom. in ep. 3. Their Love. 1 Thessalonians. 1 3.
pains of thine can be answerable to thy hopes and promised reward?

And lastly, Love has her (...), Labor of Love, and Labor improbus omnia
vincit, The importunity of labor will overcome all things. (...). Theocr. 2
Cor. 5.14. Ioh. 21.16. Ovid. Ioh. 14.15.
Love is strong as death, and will compel us, you know to what, to seed
Christ's sheep: Love, either of God, others, or our selves.

Qui non vult fieri desidiosus, amet. He that will not be slothful in the
work of the Lord, let him love the Lord. If these three be in you, (as they
were all in the Thessalonians, as you may see in one Verse, Probatio
dilectionis exhibitio est operis.
1 Thessalonians. 1.3.) They will make you that ye shall neither be barren nor
vnfruifull.

But wherein must our Diligence appear? Operatur enim magna si est, si vero
operari renuit, amor non est. Greg. in homil. 2. Pet. 1.8.
My Text directs us. In offering sacrifices even of men and children, but not
unto the Devil. Here we had need have wisdom lest with these Jews while we
intend greatest service to God by such sacrifices, we most of all dishonor
him by pleasing his enemy.

Such in our days are they who first in great zeal pretending special
service to God, What sacrifices of men must we offer? Not as Papists.
vow their children to that Profession which takes upon it a yoke of
perpetual chastity. Most of whom wanting this special gift, must needs
Balaeus in prefat. lib. de vitis Pontificum.
was by exact survey taken and presented to that stout Prince, containing the
names of such as in their several Abbeyes were found to be Fornicators,
Adulterers, yea filthy and unnatural Sodomites, abusers of themselves with
mankind. Now this burning in lust, to whom is it an acceptable sacrifice but to
him whose doctrine it is to forbid to marry? 1. Tim. 4.1.3.


The fruit of which is another sacrifice of children too, Gregory the first his
time was found to have been made, when in a Fish pond were found the heads of
six hundred young children that there had been drowned.

Again, the Lord is said to have a sacrifice in Bosrah, Isa. 34.6. Ier. 46.10.
Such a sacrifice is now made of the silly and brutish Americans, where while
their conversion to God is pretended, Popish cruelty has made a supply of
those ceased sacrifices of men, which were there formerly in great abundance.

John. 16.2.
wherein such as kill Gods Children think they do God service. The service is
a sacrifice, and is made especially by Fire. This sacrifice, as it is
acceptable to God in regard of the sufferers willing subjection to this fiery
trial, so also to Satan, who both delights to suck the blood of such
sacrifices, and so gains the hearts and devotions of the Sacrificers: some of
which spare not their own children when once they become Gods Children. As
that King who gave his own and only Heir and Son to the Inquisition for
his holy profession. How shall they then spare others?

Anno 1605. Nouemb. 5.
The time was, and is yet fresh in memory, when these sacrificing Priests had
almost gotten the neck of this whole State on the block and altar; and when a
Holocaust or whole burnt-offering was intended to be made thereof, of head and
body, and all together; when the House of Parliament was appointed the Altar,
Popish Gunpowder treason
and the vaults of Hell where their zeal was kindled, should have vomited up
fire to have consumed the sacrifice. It went for a jest of Julian, A^^m^ ^n.
Mar^^^^ l. 25.
that if he had returned victor in his last encounter with the Parthians, that
the whole kind and race of Bulls and beasts should have failed, by means of
his monstrous excess in sacrificing. So with us, if the fire had taken, the
whole number of Christ's sheep in this Land should have been brought to a
small sum. And fire is that by which they hope to prevail against us. See
their fiery spirits. But according to our callings special and general.


But such sacrifices must not we make: ours must be within the Compass of
our calling general or particular. Each Christian is a Priest in common,
Ministers must sacrifice others to the Lord.
and some are so by special deputation, yet Christian only, not Mosaicall:
Priests first with Jeremy, to present before the Lord the Secondly, Priests,
to consecrate as holy to Hieron. lib. 3. contr. Pelag.
Thirdly, (Ille haereticum interficit, qui haereticum non patitur, says S.
Jerome, He kills an heretic, that suffers him no longer to be an
heretic.) Especially Priests should we be to destroy the adulterous seed and
doctrines of that idolatrous whore of Rome. These are children of the daughter
of Babel, of whom it may be said, Psalm. 137.9.
Happy shall he be that takes and dasheth thy little ones against the stones.
The chief foundation stone being Christ Jesus, upon whom whatsoever falls
shall be broken. Here to be cruel is both piety and also pity to them and
to our selves, Ier. 48.10.
for cursed is he that keeps back his sword from blood. This sword is the
word of God, by which and by the spirit of God we bring others for an offering
unto Isaiah) which offering up of them by our word and ministry is acceptable
to God, Isa. 66.20. Romans 15.16.
being sanctified by the holy Ghost. Act. 10.13.
Of this sacrifice Acts 10. Rise Peter, kill and eat, (...). First must these
wild and foure-footed beasts be knocked down with the hammer of the Law, and
slain with the sacrificing knife thereof, Ier. 23.29.
that is, by zealous and by powerful preaching of it: for by preaching
plausibilia, things pleasing, men are bolstered up and fatted for another
sacrifice. Then must a spirit of life be put into them by a diligent preaching
of the Gospel, whereby Christ's sacrifice takes place in them, as thus being
daily crucified (and sacrificed) before our eyes. Gal. 3.1.
For thus are men sprinkled with his blood, and as S. Chrysostom says, 1 Pet.
1.2. Chrysostom. l. 3. de Sacerdotio.
they are (...), intincti quasi purpura, died with his purple blood, as if his
blood had been but newly shed for them. Herein is the honor of our priesthood,
that we are (...), Romans 15.16.
ministering Priests of Jesus Christ, and do (...), even sacrifice the Gospel
of God, Epiph. haeres. 79.
as Epiphanius and others use the phrase: Act. 13.2.
and so is the phrase Act. 13. (...), rendered by S. Chrysostom and the Greek
Scholies, by (...), that which we render ministering they expound by preaching.
And this is that daily sacrifice which Antichrist is foretold to take away, Dan
8.11.12. and 9.27.
casting down the truth to the ground.

Oh then that the fire of Gods spirit were such in all us, as to cause this
sacrifice to burn still more and more, and that if any being called have said
with Jeremy, (...). 20.9.
I will not make mention of him (the Lord) nor speak any more in his name, yet
he might find like cause with him again to say, But his word was in my heart
as a burning fire shut up in my bones, and I was weary with forbearing, and I
could not stay: Or that he burned in the spirit with S. Paul, Act. 18.5.
for then could he not but testify that Jesus is the Christ. This zeal would
be an acceptable sacrifice to God: for as Gregory says, Nullum omnipotenti Deo
tale est sacrificium quale est zelus animarum. Greg. in Ezekiel. hom. 12.
It is a sacrifice it self, it would sacrifice others, yea it would make us of
S. Paul's resolution concerning the another sacrifice (whereof without this
zeal there is small hope) namely, Philip. 2.17.
ready and rejoicing to be offered upon the sacrifice and service of the
peoples faith. To be offered, or as the word (...) signifies, Calvin. ibid.
to be poured out as a drink offering, ^lu. Illyr. Clau^^. ^arte in voce Sac^^f
by shedding our blood, upon the sacrifice of their faith, who are thus
consecrated through faith to God by our service, for the confirmation of their
faith: for so (...) properly signifies such a sacrifice as whereby covenants
were ratified. This readiness was in S. Ambrose, who could say to the Emperor
Valentinian, Ambros
Quam meipsum pro tua obtulissem fide? How joyfully would I have offered my
self for thy faith? Where God loses the foresaid sacrifice of zeal, there
yet will he not lose all sacrifice, for rather shall the Priests themselves be
sacrificed, if not to God, yet to the great Leuiathan of the sea. Remember we
what befell Jonah, when being sent to preach at Nineueh, he shipped himself
for Tarsus. Now Tarsus (and it may be noted) was not only, as says S. Paul, a
famous city, but as Strabo, a famous University in Cilicia, Strabo lib. 14.
Geogr. Jonah 1.3.
in some respects preferred before Athens. And yet fled Jonah flying thither
from Gods presence. Evil Stewards who feed themselves and neglect the Lords
household must be cut in twain. Luke 12 4^. A. G^llius.
So by the Roman law of twelve tables, were evil debtors to be dealt withal,
and limb-meale to be dealt among the creditors. Now we owe such souls to God,
as being once betrusted to us, perish through our fault, and may therefore
fear (while with Damocles we eat and drink and fare daintily) the fall of
that fatal axe which by a small thread is let down, and hangs over our
heads and necks. But God turn it from us, by turning us to him.

I might here speak of the Magistrates sacrifice, The Magistrate Sacrifice.
They are (...). Romans 13.6. 1 Samuel 2.29. 1 Samuel 15.23. 2 Samuel 21.1. etc. 1 Kings
20.42. etc. Genesis 4.10. Apoc. 6.10. 1 Kings 2.34. Number. 35.16-33* Magistrates, as
public persons, killing, do not kill, but sacrifice. Non enim ille occidit,
qui ministerium debet iubenti. August. de ciuit. l. 1. c. 21. Psalm. 106.29-31
Each Christian also must be zealous in sacrificing. In offering, 1. Christ.
which is to mow down and cut off by the sword of Justice, malefactors
deserving death. That this is an acceptable sacrifice appears by the contrary:
we may see it in Ely who was punished for sparing his sons. In Saul, sparing
Agag. In David, etc. sparing Saul's sons. In Ahabs foolish pity. For innocent
blood unrevenged calls for vengeance on the Land. Not only blood spilt, but
spared. There is no Sanctuary for wilful murderers, but Ioab must be slain
though he have hold on the horns of the Altar. God priuiledgeth no wilful
murderers, as do Papists who afford safety to such, flying to their temples.
So in other sins, as idolatry and adultery. Where these and such like sins
are not punished, God is displeased, and his wrath breaks in, but where they
are punished, Gods wrath is stayed, as in Phinehas. So that where sin is
wincked at, and malefactors either not discovered or spared, we can look for
no blessing from God.

But that which may concern us all is, That each Christian deriues a
prerogative of Priesthood from Christ his high Priest: and our first sacrifice,
which sanctifies all the rest, is Christ our Priest, Sine quo nec grata sunt
sacerdotia, nec rata sacrificia, without whom neither do our priestly
performances please God, nor our sacrifices appease him. Him we offer First,
in the Supper, not really, bodily, bloudily, but First by a representation in
the signs and ceremonies, 1. In the Sacrament. How?
which carry the name of what they resemble, even as a Secondly, by a
commemoration, whereby we offer the memory of Christ's death. Lombard. 4. did.
12. lit. G.
So, as Lombard, Quotidie immolatur (Christus) in Sacramento, quia in
Sacramento recordatio sit illius quod factum est semel: Christ is daily offered
in the Sacrament, because in the Sacrament there is a commemoration and
remembrance of that which was but once performed.

2 In and by Prayer.
Secondly, in our prayers we also offer him, and must offer him to God the
Father, expecting what we pray for, for his Sacrifice only. Thus do we
offer him for remission of sin, though not for expiation? Thus we say with
Saint Augustine, of Christ and the Church, Tam Ipsa per Ipsum, August. lib. 10.
de ciuit. Dei cap. 20.

2 In giving him 1 Our Love.

Et s^crificamus hostiam humilitatis and laudis in ara cordis, igne seruidae
charitatis. Aug vt supr. c. 4. and 5. August ibid. Et suauissimum adolemus
incensum, ^^m in eius conspectus pio sanctoque amore flagramus. 2 Our Thanks.
Psalm 50.14. 3 Our Obedience, 1 Active, 2. Cor. 8.5. Romans 12.1.2. By Alms,
Philip 4.18. And other good works. August. de ciuit. l. 10. cap. 1. As by
works of mortification.


quam Ipse per Ipsam suctus offerri: As well It by Him, as He by It is usually
offered unto God.

All other Sacrifices are then offered, when we can offer either Love,
Thankfulness, or Obedience,

Love is as fire from heaven, which kindles all Sacrifices, and is virtually
every Sacrifice. By loving God in the duties of the first Table we sacrifice
our selves; by loving others in the duties of the second, we sacrifice them to
God. Therefore I say with Saint Austen. Ad hoc Bonum (Deum) debemus and a
quibus diligimur duci, and quos diligimus ducere. Our duty is both to be drawn
to God by such as love us, and to bring such to God as we our selves love.

Thanks also are the Calves of our lips, and must be offered; Sacrifica Deo
laudem, says the Psalmist, Sacrifice unto God praise.

But Obedience is better then Sacrifice. Where it is, there will we give our
selves unto the Lord with the Macedonians, and also as Paul prays us, present
our bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is our
reasonable service. Where it is, there it will, and there it must show it self
by its fruits both inward and outward, as by alms, which are to God (...), an
acceptable sacrifice: and by like good works, of which Saint Austen, Ea sibi
Deus vel pro sacrificiis, vel prae sacrificijs placere testatur: God accepts
them either for or before all sacrifices. And in Obedience both active and
passive, these following sacrifices must be offered.

First, Psalm. 51.17.
A broken spirit and a contrite heart is a sacrifice which God both looks for
and will like. Secondly, there is also an old man in us, See August de ciuit
Dei, lib. 10. cap. 6.
and he must be thrown into the River Tyber. Old Adam must be sacrificed
which brings forth fruit unto death. Yea, and this fruit also the brood and
children of this old Sire: for so in effect are our lusts and sinful
cogitations called, Romans 7. Romans 7.5.
These are children begotten by the Devil of his concubine our corruption, and
therefore by the Law both of God and Nations ought to dye. These are as so many
unclean beasts in us, and make us so. Unclean beasts in the Law might not be
sacrificed: in the Gospel none more acceptable. Isa. 66.3.
To cut off a dogs neck was an abominable sacrifice, and so was it to offer
Swines blood: but to cut the throat of our doglike appetites, by putting to the
knife of temperance, Prou. 23.2.
and to mortify our filthy and swinish affections is nothing so.

Lastly, if God call us to a bloody sacrifice, 2. Passive.
we by yielding patiently thereunto, do him also acceptable service. Deo
cruentas victimas caedimus quando vsque ad sanguinem pro eius veritate
certamus: August. de ciuit. Dei. lib. 10. cap. 4.
Then do we offer to God bloody sacrifices, when for his truth we strive even
to blood.

This affection should be in us all, to be ready to suffer reproach or loss,
to forsake all, Luke 14.26.
yea our lives for Christ his sake.

What though some Nero should sow us in the skins of wild beasts and cast us
to dogs to be devoured; or tie us to stakes, and so burn us in the night for
lights, Tacitus lib. 15. cap. 10.
as were used the Christians of primitive time, as even Tacitus relates, and
that so frequently, that the name of A stipite cui astringebantur.
Semaxij should in a prouerbiall scoff be put upon us, as it was upon them, or
of A Sarmentis quibus vrebantur.
Sarmentitij, as if we were nothing else but stakes and faggots for the fire?
For Polycarpe and other Martyrs being fastened to wooden crosses, were so
either choked with smoke, their heads downward, and leysurely consumed by
fire and faggot put under: Lips. de cruce lib. 3. cap. 10.11.
or else so tied, were thrown to be devoured of wild beasts. Yea, what though
Nero himself, 2. Tim. 4.17. Sueton. in Ne^^ne.
whom Saint Paul calls a Lion, should inwrap himself in a wild beasts skin,
and in that habit break out of his cave upon us, and invade us as he did
them? yet should our sufferings be most acceptable to God. Which that they may
be when they come, and now also in the mean time all our services, God grant,
and give us grace to be prepared even for the fiery trial, and that whether
living or dying, we may still intend his glory, whose is all honor, glory,
and power, and whose be it both now and evermore. Amen.

FINIS.

