PIETAS IN PATREM, OR A FEVV TEARS UPON THE LAMENTED DEATH OF HIS MOST DEAR,
AND LOVING Father RICHARD BARLOW, late of Langill in VVestmooreland, who dyed
December 29. Ann. 1636. By THOMAS BARLOW Master of Arts, Fellow of Queens
Coll. in OXON* and eldest son of his deceased father.

-- Sed and lachrymae pondera vocis habent. OXFORD, Printed by William Turner.
Ann. Dom. 1637.

(...).
(...),
(...).
(...)
(...).
Upon the lamented death of his most dear, and loving father Richard Barlow,
late of Langill in VVestmooreland.
MY Father dead? stay, stay report, and tell
This heavy news by parcells; say the bell
Toules for my dearest father, say that he
Is very sick, yet his recovery
Is not impossible: pause here, until
We have digested this; for so it will
Make way for more: and if it must be so
Say then he is dead; for by this means the woe
Divided may be overcome, which all
At once, might cause another funeral,
And kill us too. Such undivided fears
Might even overwhelme, and drown with (...) tears
Us, now poor Orphans: who can only say
We had a father. But this kind delay
I could not have; for it was my hard fate
To hear of's death, (in this unfortunate)
Before his sickness: So that all the woe
Which I could either fear, or undergo,
Seas'd me at once; that I have cause to be
Overwhelmed with tears, and melt with Elegy.
Yet pardon this my sorrow, thou that hears
I lost a father, who deserved the tears
Of more then is children: Such a father he
As many wish, though few enjoy: to me
So dear and tender, that I cannot say
What gratitude requires, much less repay.
Well, he is gone, and in him we may see
Our humane frailty, and mortality.
Death knows no difference; Kings and Subjects have
Their periods, and Exit in the grave.
This lif's a sea wherein we all do sail,
Some tos'd with waves, some with a gentler gale
Come calmely to the shore: some find that sea
Which we Pacifique (...)
call; yet all must be
Hurried at last into the fatal waves
Of the dead sea (...)
, and so unto their graves
With tears transported. For my father he
By no untimely dath, no cruelty
Came to his grave; this blessing he did find,
Where he received his breath, there he resigned
It willingly to heaven: nor in the spring,
And morning of his life, nor withering
With too much age, but in those years which he
A blessing found, and not a misery.
Thus died my father; nay he is not dead,
Although he be entombed, and buried
Deep in the grave, so that we need not weep,
He is but go^* and sweetly fallen asleep,
" And will again awake: no good man dies,
" But as the day star sets again to rise.
It Is truth; nay 'twas impossible that he
Should dye in that blessed time, the Nativity
Of life it self ^ 6.
: no, no that was an hour,
Which put a period to all the power
Of death, and the grave; this did my father see,
With joy of heart; and then desired to be
Freed from those troubles, and the many woes,
Which sin begets; and then did thirst for those,
Those better joys. And having got release
From all those miseries, he went in peace
To his long long-desired home, where he
Finds sweetest peace, and immortality.
Tho. Barlow.

Upon my dream at OXON: which was this.
I being at Oxon: and not knowing that my father was either dead, or sick,
near about the time he dyed, dreamed he was dead; and the impression was so
violent, that it awoke me; and being awake, I found that, that dreamed-sorrow
had caused real tears, which had strangely wet even the pillow where my head
lay.
IT was 'ith' night, when the earth's gloomy shade
Involved had our hemisphere, and made
Deep silence to the world; when did appear
Those many glorious lamps, which in that sphere
Are firmly fixed for ever, that which we
Do justly call the worlds rich canopie.
Then in the dead of night, when sleep did close
My weary eyes, and nature did compose
My outward limbs to rest, then did I see
Strange apparitions, and a Tragedy
In which my father acted: I did joy
To see my dear, dear father, though a toy,
A dream did represent him. But anon
The scene was changed, and amid the throng
My father was to die: it was his fate
(As I conceived) only to personate
And act a funeral; only to die
In show, and in a seeming Tragedy.
But this soon altered, and methought I see
My dearest father dead, cold dead, and we
All mourning by him; when anon they call
Away, away, come to the funeral.
And then o'rwhelm'd with woe, a thousand fears
And griefs possess my troubled soul, and tears
Gush from my sleeping eyes; not only dreamed
And phansi'd tears, but real; such as streamed
From true, not fained sorrow; though to me
The ground was only dream, and fantasy.
All this I dreamed, and near about that day,
Wherein my father entered on his way
To blessed Elysium; where for ever he
Finds sweetest peace, and immortality.
Say now profound Philosopher, and you
That ferret natures mysteries; say how
It was but possible my fathers fall
Should so possess my soul; how is funeral
Should cause such violence of grief in me,
Who neither heard, nor saw his obsequie?
Can things at such a distance move? can fears
Arise from unknown danger? or can tears
Such real tears spring from a cause so small
As bare imagination? can all
Your speculations this knot unty
And give a cause from true Philosophy?
Or was it from higher cause, those powers divine,
Which rule the universe, who do untwine
The thread of life they visted? was it that I
Might really partake in Elegy
And tears, as well as loss? was it to fulfill
(At least in part) my dying fathers will;
Who often wished me there? for thus my heart
Was present at his grave, and bore a part,
In that sad funeral? no, no, so high
We need not go, as sacred ecstasy,
Or any raptures, to unfold a cause
Of this dream'd-reall sorrow, when the laws
Of nature will afford one: we do see,
In well affected bodies, the misery
Of any part affects the whole; we know,
In trees the highest part suffers, if below
The root be perished; when any pain
Torments our head, how suddenly each vein
Each part partakes in sorrow, 'cause from thence
As from a fountain comes that influence
Which animates the whole. And can he die
Which gave me life, and being, and yet I
Be unaffected still? unless from thence
I have a post, or some intelligence
To say he is dead? oh no, it was in me
Natures just law, and inbred sympathy,
Anticipating knowledge, caused those tears
Which did not come from known, though real fears.
Tho: Barlow.

To his most loving Brother R. Barlow upon his Fathers death.
YOur father's gone, and you are left behind
Heir of his fortunes, may you of his mind,
And virtues too be heir; that men may ^^e
Him still alive in his posterity.
For while the branches spring, while they do thrive,
And flourish, we do know the root's alive,
From whence they sprung; although perhaps it be
Deeply enclosed in the earth: so we
Who have our father lost, and in the grave
Enclosed him with sorrow; yet we have
This happy consolation, that he
Cannot be wholly dead, while's progeny
Survives in health: oh may those branches small
Which yet remain after his funeral,
Be evidence he lives! he lives! may he
Blessed in himself, be so in's progeny.
Tho: Barlow.

Apostrophe ad Patrem defunctum.
REst, rest blessed soul in happiness, and be
Secured from troubles, which mortality
In this frail life does undergo: thy mind
Shall those sweet joys, and speculations find
Which do transcend expression: thou shall know
And feel that happiness, which we below
Cannot conceive: There Is that Elysian grove
Where crowned with joys, and honor, thou may rove
With Kings, and Emperors for ever: there
No awful distance is observed, where
Even all are Kings. Can any one be bound,
To bow to others, whereas all are crowned
Heirs of a Kingdom, where the subjects be
Borne unto diadems, and majesty
Imperial; there even thousands* all
Are first borne to a Monarchy; and shall
Each one inherit all; strange tenure here,
And such a Gavel-kind* as other where
Is quite impossible: heirs all shall be,
Yet no division, no posterity
Shall e're succeed unto themselves, but they
Shall be immortal, and for ever stay
Eternal heirs of that blessed land; no wave
Shall their calm sea inrage; no, they shall have
A gentle gale; no dusky cloud their sphere
Shall e're o'recast, there heaven shall be clear
For ever: to them that blessed Sun shall be
Cause of perpetual serenity.
Say now poor soul, who art afraid to die,
And tread this way to immortality,
And happiness; say, say, who would not have
A speedy funeral, and wish a grave
Where he might sleep? for death does not annoy*
But is the happy preface to our joy.
This way's my father gone; upon the shore
Of that blessed Canaan now, where he no more
Shall any tears or troubles find; but be
Perpetual heir of true felicity.
Sleep then blessed soul, I will not wrong thee so,
As wish thee here again with us in woe.
Enjoy that bliss, which we with weary mind
And watery eyes may seek, but never shall find,
Do what we can, nor may we hope, till we
Dismissed from earth do come to heaven, and thee.
Tho: Barlow.

To his worthy friend Mr Thomas Barlow, son of the truly pious and lately
deceased Richard Barlow.
ON whom shall I these blubbered lines bestow,
But you good Sir, where such respect I owe?
And on you chiefly, for your secret woe
The burden of our grief does undergo.
We but as strangers on the shore lament
A common shipwreck: you that vessel rent,
To whom such love and duty you did owe,
What wonder if your griefs do overflow?
But spare your tears, though you have cause to moan,
Yet to persist in sorrow you have none.
You see beneath the circuit of the sun,
All that is made best is instantly undone.
Perhaps the greater is your happiness,
Because to you it seems to be less.
It Is ill to be too well, ease is disease,
And deadly too, in parts that death does seize.
Then when in any part of us we joy
More then we should; lest that might us destroy,
Heaven takes it quickly off (as 'twere by stealth)
And by the want supplies our want of health.
Wipe off those tears, sing Hallelujahs rather,
Greive that you lost, joy that so good, a father.
So good said I? stay muse and that rehearse,
Here is a subject fitting for thy verse.
Too good for us, with graces so inspired,
Such heavenly mould the Angels long desired,
And therefore they so quickly did transport
His Saint-like soul, to their celestial Court.
There was no copper in this mineral,
Not counterfeit, nor hypocritical:
With friends or strangers he used no disguise,
His words, his thoughts, his deeds did symbolize.
No harder iron did his temper mar,
Malice to none, no envy, hatred, jarre.
Friendly he was, soft, mild to all; and more
Unkind unto himself, then to the poor.
So just, so wise, s'upright in every thing,
As stopped the venom of foul envies sting.
A husband dear, a father tender, kind,
Though not in gifts, yet in a bounteous mind
Exceeding most, nay all of his estate,
A pattern most complete to imitate
For parents all, who usually bestow
To children that can drive the cart and plow,
More then to those that set themselves apart,
By study for to gain some liberal art;
More to those that feed sheep, or hew a block,
Then those that labor for to feed Christ's flock.
No disposition such in this rare piece,
Not land, nor corn was spared, not ox, nor fleece,
Nor other thing: whereby he might advance
His sons unto a learned inheritance.
Heaven with success has blessed his care; the same
Your self, though silent, do aloud proclaim.
With Saints above he lives blessed now,
Below in virtuous deeds, in's fame, in you.
Matthew Wilkinson, Artium Magist. e Coll. Reginae.

Upon the death of his dear and very loving Uncle, Rich: Barlow.
I Cannot weep in verse: one thought of thee
(Dear friend) put's me quite past all Poetry:
That language suites not well with grief; our cries
Flow not (me thinks) from pens, so well, as eyes.
No sooner is one word writ, but on it
Down falls a tear, and drownes thy name halfe-writ.
Let such as never did know thee, or thy worth,
Go make themselves known thus, and copy forth
Their own names to their Reader, who may see
Their nimble wit, and riming faculty:
Such merry to yes they best know to bequeath,
Who have no cause to sorrow for thy death.
Here then my dumbe-strucke muse begg's silence; she
For want of words, thus weeps an Elegy.
[ He Is dead.] Nay say not so; oh do not wound
Our ears with that sad tale: that killing sound
Must by degrees sink gently into our hearts:
Speak it not all at once: let us have't by parts,
Say he is not well: stop there; let us first try
To hear the Prologue, then the Tragedy:
Tell us not yet, [ he is dead:] or if he be,
Tell't in a whisper, or uncertaintie:
We Will not believe it else: we needs must stick
To think him dead, till first we hear he is sick.
Oh! but it is too true; only we do
Faigne the report false, 'cause we wish it so.
It was thy pious policy, to steal
A close departure; Least our prayers and zeal
Might have prevailed with heaven; and so have gained
Thy term of days enlarged; and thee detained
From bliss: thus thus our too too, officious tongue
Out of fond kindness might have done thee wrong.
Let us then chide thy goodness: this was it
Took thee from us: had thou not been more fit
For that celestial Quire of Angels, then
The further company of sinful men,
Thou had alas --. Alas my mazed woe
Begin's again to wish thee here below.
Nay rest, (blessed soul) 'twill be the better way,
That we strive to come to thee, and thou stay:
Herein thy death us benefit's, that we
Now long the more for heaven to be with thee.
Tho: Smith Artium Bac. and Coll. Reginae Oxon: Alumnus.

To the sad memory of his late deceased dear father, Richard Barlow.
WHere shall I first begin? or, if I lend
My grief a tongue, where shall I make an end?
Mee-thinkes those farewell-teares, which lately I
Spied trickling from your eyes, teach me to cry;
Mee-thinkes even that last blessing which you gave,
Seems a curse, 'cause the last that I must have.
Had I been present, when your fever came,
And burning fits, my tears had quenched that flame;
Had I been present --. Oh let me here pause
TO expostulate: tell me, what was the cause
That (...)
then I was dismissed? was it that I
Might practice here to write an Elegy?
To pen your Epitaph? nay, was it not rather
'Cause thus you would provide me of a father?
Oh but such tokens of your providence,
Whiles they should cure my wound, renew the sense.
Grief strikes me dumb: for want of words and art,
I Will teach my eyes to speak the other part.
George Barlow youngest son of his deceased father.

Upon the much lamented death of R. B.
He Is dead! and must we therefore grieve and mourn*
'Twere to repine that ever he was borne.
When weak old age does gently fall asleep,
It Is foul ingratitude to cry and weep.
Let tender withered plants deserve our tears;
Which dead our forward hopes of fruitful years:
Which quickly taken off, and only known,
Are in a minute lopt, as soon as shown.
Here it is not so; full distance sure and meet
His swathings sunders from his winding sheet.
Oh not on thy dear hearse, or thy fresh dust,
Power we these tears! As if here death unjust
Had wronged thee, in exalting thee; and bin
Unmercifull, that from these times of sin
Has freed thy longing soul. Alas we know
'Twas time for thee, for heaven long ago.
It Is for our sakes we weep; for whom God stayed
And held thy soul off; and this burden laid
Of a long life upon thee, that so we
Might by thy stay be drawn for company,
That now are punished in thy bliss, and see
Gods wrath to us in being good to thee.
To us thou still dyest young, and this thy slight
Seems early taken, though not taken till night.
To our desires alas! what is one short span
Whole natures date, for want of thee good man?
Whom many days and years, yea no time could
Make tedious to us; whom no age make old.
But is he dead then? true, nay false it is,
He did not dye, that in eternal bliss
For life of comfort, changed but life's annoy,
And thus he dyed, and thus he lives in joy.
He dyed in show then; but yet lives indeed
In heaven, and hearts of good men. Died, to speed
Of glory here: and in that surer place
To wear a crown of ever living grace.
Then dye he never can while virtue lives,
For He and She are still correlatives.
Sic deflevit Thomas Cleburne, Art. Bac. Coll. Reg. Alumnus.

Upon the much lamented death of the truly religious Richard Barlow.
Is It you most dreadful powers, ye sisters three,
That do unlace each mortal artery?
That shiver sinews, rending every vein,
Divorcing soul and body, cut in twain
This Microcosme? yea; brag not tho; one can
Rebuild (o bliss) that curious frame of man,
And raise from out our common mothers lap,
Our drowsy corpse, after a winters nap.
Let Us wade with pen, or in a watrish ray,
Or at least sigh a word, he is dead; the day
Is shut up in a shade, whose brightest beams
Did shine on many, hence now flow these streams
Of brackish water to put out our light,
And spreades the curtains of the darkesome night,
Let Us rest content, he heavenly joys does gain,
He lived to dye, and died to live again:
Farewell (blessed Saint) crowned with eternal fame,
Though rapt by death; we will honor still thy name*
Lancelot Dawes. Coll. Reginae Alumnus.

An Elegy upon the lamented death of Richard Barlow, late of Langill in
VVestmooreland.
WHat? have not yet your daily cries
Melted the clouds, and caused the skies,
To bear a sympathy? hard rocks would split
To smallest atoms, hearing us
To sing our doleful mittimus.
When virtue for a crown, a tomb does get.
But it is not sighs will serve the turn,
Come, pay thy rites unto an urne
Sad muse: let echo tell each wall,
He clipped thy wings, nor blush to hear
That heaven lies above thy sphere,
'Twill prove a prejudice to rise, then fall.
Sleep on (blessed soul) eternity
Shall strain thy sweetest lullabie:
Let envy, with her brood near cease to fret,
Triumph in peace: no gnawing care
Can with such glory bear a share;
Look down (and laugh) how far above you are set.
Mee-thinkes I view the wreathes of bay,
Thy endless conquest to display,
And how those dazzling coronets fit a head
So well deserving: but -- I fail
To lend thy name a swifter gale
For (what needs more?) thou liv'st for ever, dead.
Another, that he died a little after Christmasse-day.
WHen Simeon saw his Savior, he cries
Lord, it is enough, shut up my weary eyes:
When our (late) Simeon got a fuller view
Of his transcendent light, he bade, adieu.
Amoric and officii ergo, Tho: Tullius. Coll. Reg. Alumnus.

Upon the lamented death of Richard Barlow, late of Langill in VVestmooreland,
who dyed December 29. 1636. his sickness beginning with a cold, and shortly
after he, and it ending with a fever.
WIthin the bowels of this sacred earth
Lies one, as of no high, so no vile birth.
His fortunes like to virtue, kept the mean,
Not puffed with this, nor pinched with that extreme.
When he in peace had threescore years drawn breath,
(Beloved as far as known) nature, not death
With solemn joy ceased on him as a price,
Glad she for heaven had such a sacrifice.
Flames are to others tortures, but they come
To him as triumph, or a martyrdom.
He (like Elias) round begirt with fire,
Ascended heaven; flames must needs aspire.
His fever had not heat from surfeit, passion,
Or lust, the three inflamers now in fashion,
But (as the purest fire the Chimicks hold
Is forced from ice) was kindled with a cold.
Had it been rage of common heat, no doubt
But his dear childrens tears had put it out.
Although he do in six * fair Emblems stand
Transcribed to future ages: yet this land
(The heat of his death generating) shall
See that he multiplied at's funeral;
The good example of his life and fate
Shall happ'ly all the virtues propagate.
L. N. (...)

To the Reader.
I Am no Poet, nor ever sent I verse
Unto the press; this only to the hearse
Of my dear father; not to show my skill
Or vein in Poetry, but to express a will
Prone to my fathers honor, though to me,
Nothing redound, but shame, and infamy.
I fear no censure; nay, some may approve
If not my slender Poetry, my love
To my dear father: whom the muses shall
Preserve alive, in spite of's funeral,
And all deaths cruelty: by them shall he
Live in the hearts, and dearest memo^^
Of all his friends; this blessing he^ shall have
To free him from forgetfulness, and the grave.
Sic flevit THOMAS BARLOW charissimi Patris defuncti filius aetate, and dolor
maximus.

FINIS.

