A TREATISE Concerning A CHRISTIANS CAREFUL ABstinence from all appearance of
Evil: Gathered FOR THE MOST part out of the Schoolmen, and Casuists:

Wherein The Questions and Cases of Conscience belonging unto the difficult
matter of Scandal are briefly resolved:

By HENRY JEANES, Mr of Arts, lately of Hart-Hall in OXON, and Rector of the
Church of Beere-Crocombe in Somersetshire.

OXFORD, Printed by W. TURNER for H. CURTEINE 1640.

HONORATISSIMO PHILIPPO Comiti Pembrochiae, and Montgom: Illustrissimi Ordinis
periscelidis Equiti: Regiae Familiae Archicamerario: nec non Maj^stau Regiae a
secretioribus Consiliis, etc.
Honoratissime Comes,
IGnoscar, precor, laesus honor, tam solenni tanti nominis convicio, and impune
liceat augustam illam and praenobilem titulorum seriem vili huic, and alioqui
periturae, chartulae praefigere. Ea siquidem obscura est Authoris simul and
Operis infirmitas, ut prorsus metuat sine validiore praesidio in publicum
prodire, and perenni gaudeat lucis fuga, ni precario and praepotente potiatur
favoris radio: vestro sc, qui malignos quoscunque Criticorum halitus cohibere
valet, and praetenues hasce studiorum Primitias Laetiori mess secundare.
Aggreditur, sat scio, parvulus hic Liber, materiam lubricam and ancipitem, de
abstinentia ab omni specie mali, seu de fuga scandali, verendumq, est, ne apud
Censores duriusculos scandalu^ sibi creet, and fastidium. Attamen qualis,
qualis est, tuo stipatus patrocinio secure prodit, nec iniqua moratur
malevolorum scandala, modo ne sit dignitati vestrae justo of fendiculo.

Amplitudini tuae Sacellanus, and Servus omni officii genere obstrictus, HEN:
JEANES.

1 Thessalonians: 22. Abstain from all appearance of Evil.
OUR Apostle directs us, in the Verse immediately preceding this Text,
concerning Good, in this Text concerning Evil. Toward Good he exacts a
prudent wariness* toward Evil, a scrupulous fearfulness: toward good, a
prudent wariness; Prove all things, and then, hold fast that which is good.
Nothing, how colorable soever is to be received hand over head, before trial
and examination by the balance of the Sanctuary: for, Vitia virtutes
mentiuntur, (says Gregory) vice is mask't under the skin of virtue, falsehood
disguised under the face of truth: so that the one is often mistaken for the
other. The grossest enormities have been glast and colored over with the
names, and face of virtues; the most poisonous heresies have often gained the
esteem and applause of Orthodoxe Tenants: and therefore as we must sted fastly
retain that which is truly true and good; so must we prudently discern and
carefully distinguish between that which is sown deed, and in truth, and that
which is so only in show, and color; this we must reject, that keep, and hold
fast. Prove all things, hold fast that which is good. But he requires now
toward evil a far different carriage: there he looks for a scrupulous
fearfulness. Though we must not hold fast any thing that has but the
appearance of good, yet we must abstain from but the appearance of evil.

Abstain from all appearance of evil; Cor. Alapide.
or from every evil appearance: the words are and may be rendered
indifferently, either way, both rendrings being equally consonant to the truth,
and original.

In the words our Apostle meets with a cavil, rise among the Libertines of
our and former times, who when their scandalous courses are charged upon them,
baffle of all with this plea; that they are not intrinsecally sinful. Could I
(will the profanest Libertine say) but once fee such and such things proved in
themselves to be unlawful: why, I would make no more words of the matter, but
soon forbeate them. I, but have they the blush, the appearance of evil? that
should be motive enough to shun them.

Abstain from all, etc.

But are we sure this is the Apostles meaning? are not the words capable of
another interpretation? First, some mislike our translation of (...), species,
by appearance, and rather think it should be meant logically, for sort or
kind, and so the words thus rendered: Abstain from every sort, or kind of
evil. That it may be so, Mat. Flac. Illiricus determines that it is so, the
Syriacke interpreter, and after him Faber, and Beza resolve. But I would feign
know upon what ground they are thus singular against the current of both
Ancient, and Modern Expositors. Setting aside this place, the word occurres
(as I think) in the whole new Testament but four times, In Luke 3.22.9.29.
John 5.37.2 Cor. 5.7. and in none of these places is it, can it be taken in a
Logical notion. If not elsewhere, why here? especially seeing such an
exception is not enforced by the scope, coherence, any other circumstance of
the Text, or any absurdity otherwise unavoidable.

But some dream of a foul absurdity, that would ensue upon translating
(...), species, appearance. If every appearance of evil should be abstained
from, then should good things, the best things be eschewed, for they commonly
appear to be evil unto sense, and carnal reason^, that discern not the
things of the spirit of God. How easily may an acute wit set false faces upon
them, and work a bad conceit of them into either ill or weak apprehensions*

This fear will quickly vanish and be discovered to be idle, and vain, when
anon we shall explain that distinction of appearance of evil, into real and
imaginary; for the present therefore, leaving these men, proceed we secondly,
to others, who agree with us in interpreting (...) in a vulgar, familiar, and
common sense, for appearance: but then their exposition is not so general, as
ours; for they restrain the place to matters of doctrine* and will not allow
it to be extended to matters of practice; and countenance they think the
context gives their gloss, for the Apostle having at the 19. verse exhorted
not to quench the spirit, in verse 20. prescribes a means for cherishing the
Spirit, viz: a reverent demeanor toward the Word of God. If ye will not
quench the Spirit, despise not prophesying: and next: least that some should
except: are we thus reverently to receive promiscuously all prophecyings, and
doctrines preached unto us, Heming^^^ in locum.
and not to beware of some, of false prophesying and doctrines, the Apostle,
say they, more distinctly directs, how we should demean our selves. First,
toward all prophesying in general: how, secondly, toward true; how, thirdly,
toward false. First, all prophecyings, and doctrines whatsoever must be
diligently examined. Prove all things. Secondly, all true prophecyings, sound,
and orthoxe doctrines are to be embraced with a firm, and unremoveable assent.
Hold fast that which is good. Lastly, as for false prophecyings and doctrines
even their very appearance is to be shunned. Thus they, etc.

But first, I propose unto the consideration of the learned, whether or no an
exact and accurate coherence be to be looked for in most of those precepts
delivered by the Apostle, from verse 13. usque ad verse. 23. the loose and
abrupt manner of heaping them together persuade, (me thinks) that there is
little depe^dance of many of the^ upon either the foregoing or following
precepts, as is to be expected between Solomon's Proverbs, or Bede's Axioms.
Hence is it that Estius Neque necesse* est hanc partem interpreta^^ (ut qu^dam
f^c^unt)* ut connexionem habeat (...) it is, quae proxime precedunt: nam po^^us
videtur Apostolus r^f^^care memoriam ejus, quod pracepi^ cap. sup^riors; ut
h^nests ambulent ad eos, que foris sun^* etc. Estius^*
holds it not necessary to interpret the place so, as that it should have
connection with those duties that immediately precede; rather (thinks he) the
Apostle seems to rub up the memory of what he commanded in the former
chapter, at verse. 12. That ye may walk honestly toward them that are without.

Secondly, suppose a coherence of the words with the former, must it needs be
that which they obtrude. The words may sit under our interpretation, and yet
the Analysis of the Context run smoothly, as thus:

The Apostle having at verse. 19. dehorted from quenching the Spirit, next
advises use of means, tending to the preservation of its gracious and
glorious residence in the Soul: Which means are either negative, or positive;
he assigns but one negative means, viz* a removal of a maine bar, and
powerful obstacle unto the presence of the Spirit, contempt of preaching.
Despise not prophesying, verse 20. of the positive means, two concern good,
one evil: the two concerning good, Aquinas in locum.
are boni diligens examinatio, constans electio: Prove all things, hold fast
that which is good. This respecting evil, est universalissima ejus rejectio,
an abstinence not only from all kinds, but even from all appearance of evil.

Lastly, suppose the primarie scope and intention of the Apostle be limited
unto matters of doctrine: yet because the maine reason, for which they
themseves conceive appearances of evil, even in matters of doctrine to be
interdicted, is avoidance of Scandal, the precept of which is juris Naturalis,
and not only doctrines but also actions are scandalous; justly therefore unto
these, as well as those, is the text appliable, and applied too, by all
Schoolmen, or others that ever I met with purposely treating on the point of
Scandal. Should we then against the more generally received opinion of either
former or later times, admit of their narrow, and curtailed interpretation for
the clear, and indubitate sense of the Apostle? Yet to make the words more
instructive, their use more general, we might warrantably put an enlargement
Logicians call it an ampliation*) upon them, and extend them ad mores, as well
as ad dogmata; ad agenda, as well as ad credenda; to the decalogue, as well as
creed, not only to doctrinall truths, but moral duties also.

Use of a division here is none, but to bewray Logic: and therefore without
more ado we will roundly betake our selves to Limitation, Confirmation, and
Application of the plain point here commended to us: we are to abstain not
only from things intrinsecally sinful, but from all shows, and appearances of
sin.

For limitation, Limitation.
appearance of evil is either in positions, or actions.

First then, it is questioned, whether or no we are to abstain from all
positions, which have an appearance of evil: of falsehood.

For resolution we must distinguish.

1 Concerning appearance of evil in positions.

2 Concerning abstinence from such an appearance.

Appearance of Evil in Positions is twofold,

1 Either in regard of their matter and substance.

2 Or else in the terms, and expressions used in their proposal.

That which is in regard of their matter and substance, is, either to our
selves, or others.

Secondly, to distinguish concerning abstinence from the appearance of Evil,
or falshoud in Positions: we may be said to abstain from doctrines false in
appearance, two manner^ of ways: either

1 When we abstain from assenting to them.

2 Or when we abstain from publishing of them*

We abstain from assenting to them, either Positively, or Negatively.

Positively, when by a positive and real act of the understanding we dissent
from, we reject them. Now dissent from them is twofold.

1 Either absolute and peremptory.

2 Or else but conditional, and cautionary.

Negatively, when we do not dissent from them, but only not assent unto them:
when (...) suspend our assent.

To apply these distinctions.

Note first, that though the substance or matter of doctrines appear to be
false unto our selves, our own judgments, yet are we not bound to abstain
positively from assenting to them, to dissent from them, to reject them; for
this appearance may not be true and real, grounded upon the doctrines
themselves, which perhaps may not send forth the least color or shadow for
suspicion, but only put and fastened upon them by means of the error,
ignorance, and darkness of our understandings that perhaps not with due care
and circumspection, but rather with much precipitancie have given their censure
of them; and therefore however at first blush they seem false, yet when once
the light of our reason is cleared from mists, and clouds, they may upon due
examination prove true; and to dissent from, and reject a truth would be a
foul error of, and blemish to our understanding.

Obliged we are then, to abstain, not positively, but negatively, from
assenting to them; that is, not to dissent from them, but only not to assent
unto the^, to stay our assent, to demurre a while, before we give in our
judgment least we receive any thing with a doubtful, entangled, and perplexed
consoience. Of this Calvin gives us an hint in his exposition on this place,
Speci^m* mali interpretor, cum nondum it a comperta est doctrinae falsitas, at
merito rejici quent, sed tamen aliqua haeret sinistra^ suspicio, and timetur,
we quid veneni lateat: ergo ab eo genere doctrinae, quod malum, etiamsinon sit,
apparet, abstinere praecipit, non quod in totum rejici permittat, sed quia
recipi, aut fidem obtinere non debet. Cur enim prius quod bonum est teneri
jussit, nu^oabstinere vult, no^ simpliciter a malo, sed a mali specie? quia ubi
dijudicatione in luce^ prod^cta fuerit veritas, tunc demum ^i fide^ haberi
decet; ubi aute^subest falsi metus, aut men's dubitatione est implicita, pedem
refer, vel grad^^ suspendere co^venit, ne quid dubia perplexaque co^sc^^ntia
amplectamur. By the appearance of evil I understand (faith he) when as the
falsehood of a doctrine is not yet so thoroughly detected, that it may be
deservedly rejected, but yet there sticks some bad suspicion of it, and it is
feared, least poison lurk under it: therefore he comma^ds us to abstain from
that hind of doctrine, which though it be not evil* yet appears so* not as
though it ought altogether to be rejected but because it ought not to be
received, to be believed. For why does he before command us to hold fast only
that which is good, and here he wills us to abstain not barely from evil, but
from its appearance? because when after a thorough sifting a truth is cleared,
it is fitting it should forthwith be believed: but when as the falsehood of it is
feared, or the mind with doubting is entangled, we must for a while withdraw
our assent, least we embrace any thing with a doubting and perplexed
conscience.

But suppose I for mine own part am firmly persuaded of the truth of such, or
such a Tenent, or at least unconvinced, unperswaded of its falsehood, and yet it
appear generally unto unto others to be false the judgments, of the godly
learned, of most of the ancient Fathers, unto either general or provincial
Councels: in such a case what course must I take, because it has appearance of
falsehood unto others understa^dings, must I therefore dissent from it, or
stop mine assent unto it?

For answer, take these four following rules.

First, we owe so reverent and humble an esteem of, and submission unto the
Spirits of the Prophets, to the judgment of learned, sober, and pious Divines,
unto the writings of the ancient godly Fathers, unto the Canons, and decrees
of Occumenicall, and Provincial Councels, at that whatsoever Tenants the whole
Church representative, to wit, a general Council, or the greatest and
cheifest part of the Church most of the Fathers and Divines too, of later and
present times, have rejected, and condemned for false, and erroneous, we should
abstain negatively from assenting to, that is, though not change, yet suspend
our belief of them, and not fully pass over our full and absolute assent unto
them, until by diligent inquisition, fervent prayer, imploring the guidance of
Gods holy Spirit, and use of all other good means, either their consonancie
with, or dissonancie from the truth, be clearly discerned, fully confirmed, and
manifested unto our consciences.

But Christian modesty stays not here, but goes one step further, and in a
second place exacts of us a conditional, probable, Dr Jackson
and cautionary dissent from all doctrines thus generally suspected, and
censured: For upon general dislike of a doctrine, as upon a prudentiall
motive, we may ground a strong presumption, an high and probable conjecture of
the falsehood of it; so that hereupon we may reject it, though not in an
absolute and irrevocable way, yet with this limitation and caution; so the
apparent verity therein of it self do not force us to embrace it. So sottish
I am not, as to measure truth by multitude of voices: for errors I know that
have grated upon the foundation, nay heresies, that have razed the foundation,
have had their cloud of witnesses; yet I should so far honor a public
testimony, as to suspect mine own and others private bare opinions, (not
backed by plain Scripture, with evident sense, or a full demonstrative
argument,) rather than a general suffrage: For, n^mo omnes, neminem omnes
fefellere, improbable as for one to deceive all, so for all to deceive one: Nec
dubitamus, coeteris quidem paribus, etc. Rivett: Isag. ad Scrip. Sact. cap. 19.
Rivet is a man bred up in such a Church, as it is not likely that he should
ascribe overmuch to Church Councels, or Ministers, and yet he makes no doubt,
but coeter is paribus, that is, if parts, prayer, diligence of study after the
truth, be equal, that then a greater and fuller measure of the gift of
expounding the Scripture, and deciding controversies thereabouts, is
communicated to the public Ministers of the Church, (whether they execute
their function severally, and apart in some one particular Church, or else
jointly confer, and discourse among themselves concerning the true and
genuine sense of the Scriptures in some assemblies called lawfully, and in the
name of Christ) than unto several private men, who were neither endowed with
so many gifts, nor see with so many eyes, nor by their private and single
meditation can equal the united consultations and enquiries after truth of
many. And thus you see how far Christian modesty requires us to abstain
from assenting to doctrines upon the appearance of evil, of falsehood, which
they carry unto those, who in interpreting Scripture, and deciding
controversies, have committed to them the public office of direction, and
instruction of others: but yet it takes not from us the judgment of private
discretion; for Christian liberty allows us such a freedom of dissenting
unto what the Church, or her chief, and public Ministers say, as it is to be
specified in the next two following rules.

In a third place therefore, although the Church, or the greatest and chiefest
part of her, charge error and falsehood upon such a doctrine; yet this bare and
single testimony, not seconded by any Scripture or reason, is not to gain so
far upon our belief, as that thereupon we should presently reject, and
dissent from the doctrine thus generally censured with an absolute and
peremptory dissent. This were to give unto the Churches decisions as high an
overruling a suffrage in our hearts, as is only due to divine revelations: to
receive them, not as they are indeed the word of men, but as if they were the
word of God: to yield unto them an absolute divine faith, and credence. This
were a mere Vassallage of our souls, understandings, faiths, unto the
authority of an human testimony: a thing utterly unworthy the generositie
and freedom of Christian Spirits. If God has indulged to any the exercise of
such dominion over men's faiths, and consciences: alas! then to what purpose
has he placed that glorious lamp of reason in our bosoms? of what use are
our intellectualls? what place is there left for St Paul's proving of all
things, St John's trial of the Spirits? Joh. 4.1.
but the truth is, that God is so far from enslaving our understandings, or
captivating our belief unto the judgment of any mortal, as that he approves
not only of a forbearance from a flat, and absolute dissent from doubtful
doctrines thus publickely, and generally disliked, but also of a full and
peremptory assent unto doctrines manifestly true, though condemned in a
general Council, as is apparent from the fourth and last rule, which is:

If a doctrine be as true in it self, so also clearly, and evidently by me
apprehended to be so, and yet appear generally to be false unto others, of
what degree, order, or condition soever: nevertheless it commands absolute
subscription and assent of the mind without contradiction, without hesitancie,
nay without so much as suspense of judgment. If the verity then of a Doctrine
be apparent, it must overruled the assent of the understanding against the
testimony of the whole world. For the testimony of men, of the wisest, holiest
men considered either apart, or as assembled in a Council, admits as allwaies
of examination, and trial by the balance of the Sanctuary, and rules of
right reason, so likewise of contradiction and denial, when in it there is an
express, and evident variation from either reason, or divine authority. In
such a case we may lawfully, and safely dissent from it; always provided,
that it be not in an insolent manner, but with a reverent, child-like, and
respectfull bashfulnesse.

But to go on, if I am not to abstain from assenting to a doctrine minifestly
true, because it appears generally to others to be false, must I not yet
abstain from publishing, from spreading of it, either by writing or preaching?

For answer, thou must consider the general nature, and quality of the
doctrine, thus wrongly either accused, or suspected of falsehood, and also of
what use and importance it is in regard of the present times and places,
wherein thou live, and if it prove to be a doctrine fundamental, of absolute
necessity to faith or manners, then that of Gregory may take place: Si de
veritate scandalum sumatur. (says Gregory) melius est, Sept. Hom. in Eze:
ut scandalum oriatur, quam ut veritas relinquatur. As also that of Calvin:
Quemadmodum enim (faith Calvin) Charitati subjicienda est nostra libertas, Call.
lib. 3. Inst. c. 12. sect. 13.
ita sub fidei puritate subsidere vicissim charitas ipsa debet: as our liberty
is to be subjected to charity, so also our very charity it self to faiths
purity.

But now if it be a Doctrine, either not fundamental, but of a lower rank and
quality, wherein both orthodoxe writers, and preachers may vary and abound in
their own sense without prejudice to the foundation; or if it be of so small
use, that upon its divulgement, it is not probable there will arise so much
honor to God, and edification of the Church, as may preponderate those
mischiefs, that hurly-burly, those tumults, and contentions in the Church,
which in all likelihood will ensue thereby, thou must then forbear to vent it,
either from Press, or Pulpit; so shall thou best consult for thine own
private quiet, and public peace. And we must follow after things that make
for peace, and edification: Romans 14.19. About such matters to be contentious
we have no custom, nor the Churches of God: and indeed about them to be
contentious were the right pranke of a Schismaticke; for not only he is a
Schismaticke (says Non enim schismaticus eo agnoscitur, quod fovet perversum
dogma, imo contingit aliqua^do, ut sente^tia schismatic^ ho^ minis verissima
si^; tame^ quia eam neque loco, neque te^pore debit^s, nullaque necessitate
urget schismaticus est, et scandalum objecit Des populo; cu^ en^m non agatur
salus Ecclesia, ostendit se non adductu^ studio gloria Christ's, sed suae pottus
ex^st^mationis Ecclesia^ turbasse. Cameron in sel^ctiora quaedam N. T. loca
Tom. 2. in Mat. c. 18. v. 7.
Cameron) who maintains a perverse Tenent; a man may hold a very true opinion,
and yet play the Schismaticke, and give scandal unto the people of God by
delivering it in a rash, unpeaceable, and unseasonable manner, neither in fit
place, nor due time, no necessity urging thereunto; for seeing in determining
of his opinion the glory of God, and weal of the Church lie not at the stake,
he plainly shows, that he has troubled the Church, lead with desire of not
Christ's glory, but his own credit. I confess indeed, that a controverted, and
suspected truth even of this low quality may be peaceably, and modestly
professed, and debated too in private, but a public promulgation thereof is
at any hand to be forborne, non sub intuitu mali, sed minoris boni, not under
the apprehension of any evil in the truth, but only as a lesser good, which
will not consist with a greater, the tranquillity of the Church; or if you
will, the public promulgation of such a truth is to be forborne, sub Intuitu
Mali, etsi non Simpliciter, tamen per Accidens talis: under the apprehension of
evil, not in the controverted truth, but in the promulgation thereof, which
though it be not simply evil, yet becomes accidentally so, to wit, by
comparison, in respect of a greater good then required, preservation of the
general quiet; with which for the present it cannot stand, unto the care of
which it is opposed though not primo and per se, yet ex consequenti conne xione
virtutum, as Suarez upon another occasion acutely phraseth it. But I digress.

To go on to that appearance of evil in doctrines, which is in the
expressions used in their proposal, a thing I could wish it were not too rife
amongst many, who like no truth, unless delivered in heretical teaermes; men
wonderfully taken with the language of Ashdod, the Romish dialect. In rebus
fidei verba debent esse casta, and exacta, and quae rem ipsam proprie
exprimant, and haereticis non praeste^t occasionem calumn^onds. Pet. Martinez:
But let it be our care to refrain all words and phrases, which carry an
appeara^ce of either heresy or schism; for though they may, and are by us
meant in an orthodoxe sense, yet carry they a shrewd show of evil, make others
jealous, and suspicious of our soundness. And therefore Lib. 12. de locis cap.
9. ad tertium.
Canus although he will by no means assent, absolutely to that usual saying;
ex verbis inordinate pro^atis fit haresis; yet he is content to approve of it,
if it be moderated with this caution, secundn^ prasumptionem audientium, and
judicum, qui per exteriora signa debent judicare de haeresi: if it be
understood according to the supposall of hearers, and judges, who ought and
indeed can judge of heresy only by outward signs. Between a Minister and
Popery let there be a great Chasma, a distance as wide as between heaven,
and earth, nay heaven and hell: yet if his phrase do but smell of Popery, if
his words, though not his meaning, trench near upon it, men will presently
exclaim that he has a Pope in his belly, at least that he sounds for a
Parley, and thinks upon conditions of peace with the Romish harlot. And
besides, as this suspicious complying in phrase, and language with the known
errors of Popelings, or other novellers and corrupt teachers grieves the
settled and judicious, so farther it staggers weaklings, confirms and hardens
aliens, and apostates, rather opens than stops the mouths of gaine-saying
carpers, and sooner disadvantageth the truth, than converts an adversary. So
far is it from effecting the usually pretended end, reconciliation; as that
to use the similitude of our Savior, quis loquitur, suam, v. 16. like the
putting of a new p^ece of cloth unto an old garment, it makes the rent worse,
and wider. There goes a manuscript from hand to hand, said to be penned by a
learned Dr of this Church, wherein (that amidst and notwithstanding all the
variety of opinions there may be yet preserved in the Church the unity both of
faith, and charity) private men are advised in their own writings to observe
forma^ sanorum verborum, and to abstain not only from suspected opinions, but
as much as may be also from phrases and speeches obnoxious to misconstruction,
and exception.

For first, it is not enough, much less a thing to be gloried in, for a man to
be able by subtlety of wit, to find loop-holes, how to evade, and by
colorable pretenses, to make that, which through heat of passion, or violence
of opposition has fallen from him unadvisedly, to seem howsoever defensible.
But he should have a care to suffer nothing to pass from him whereat an
ingenious, and dispassionate adversary (though dissenting from him in opinion,)
might yet have cause to take distaste, or exception.

And besides it were a thing of dangerous consequence in the Church, if every
man should be suffered to publish freely whatsoever might by some strain of
wit be made capable of a good construction, if of it self it sounded ill or
suspiciously. For so many erroneous, unhappy notions implicitly and vertually
serving to the patronage and protection of schism or heresy, might be
cunningly conveyed into the minds of men, and impressions thereof insensibly
wrought in their hearts, to the great damage and distraction of the Church.

This last reason for the substance you may meet with in Aquinas 2.2 dae q.
11. a. 2. where (having told us out of Hierome, ex verbis inordinate prolatis
fit haeresis: that by unwary irregular expressions, by words disorderly spoken,
the most dangerous heresies have often taken their first rise, and original,)
he afterward gives us the reason hereof: Similiter enim per verba quae quis
loquitur, suam, fidem profitetur: est enim confessio actus fidei: and ideo si
sit inordinata locutio circa ea quae sunt fidei sequi potest ex hoc corruption
fidei: Vnde Leo Papa quadam epistola ad Proterium Episcopum Alexandrinum,
dicit, quod inimici crucis Christi omnibus and verbis nostris insidiantur et
syllabis, si ullam illis vel tenue^ occasione^ demus, qua Nestoriano sensuinos
co^gruere mentiantur. Likewise a man professes his faith by words, which he
speaks, for confession is an outward act of faith, and therefore, if there be
but an inordinate speech about matters of faith, the corruption of faith may
hereupo^ ensue. Whence Leo the Pope in a certain epistle unto Proterius bishop
of Alexandria says, that the enemies of Christ's Cross lie in wait for all our
words and syllables, if in them we give any the least occasion upon which they
may feign that we comply with Nestorianisme. Hence is it, that, Aquinas
himself having proposed this question, whether or no this proposition be true,
Christ is a creature, in his answer thereunto tells us, first in general, cum
haereticis nec nomina debemus habere communia, ne little errori favere videamur,
then more particularly, unto the question that the Arrian heretics have said
that Christ is a creature, and less than the Father, in regard not only of the
humane nature, but also divine person; and therefore resolves, that least we
should seem to countenance their error, we must not say absolutely, that
Christ is a Creature, and less than his Father, but only with this limitatio^,
according to the humane nature.

Ariani autem haeretici Christum dixerunt esse creaturam, and minorem Patre,
non solum ratione humanae naturae, sed etiam ratione divinae personae, and ideo
non est absolute dicendum, quod Christus sit creatura, vel minor Patre, sed cum
determinatione, scilicet secundum humanam naturam. Nay not only Aquinas, but
generally all the Schoolmen, and Civilians too, are so precise in this
particular, as that among the degrees of damnable propositions are ranked by
them not only propositions downerightly heretical, or erroneous, but also
Propositio scandalosa qua etiam male sonans, seu piarum aurium offensiva,
appellatur, quae praber occasionem ruina auditor. bus, hoc est, facilitatem
cadend^ in haeresim, ^t sunt multa propositiones, qualicet cum modificatione
ad^^n^^a, sunt verae, per se tamen and abs^lute sine modificatione prolata
videntur favere propositionibus hareticalib^^. Vt si quis assereret simpliciter
Patrem majorem Filio, and Deum in incarnatione factum creaturam and similes,
qua magis sunt exponenda, quam extendenda. Arnoldus Alb^^tinus de agnoscendis
assertionibus Catholicis and haeteticis, quaest. 60. Proposi^^o haresin
saptens, aut male circaea, quae ad fidem pertinent, sonans, est illa quae in
prima significatione, quam verba prima fac^e os^endunt, sensum habet
haereticum, quam^^s p^e intellecta sensum aliquem habet verum. Alphonsus a
Castrode just a haereticorum punitione: cap. 3.
Propositio sapiens haeresin, Propositio male sonans, every proposition, that
does but smell, that has but a smacke of heresy, that sounds but ill or
suspiciously; and such are all propositions, that in the first signification,
which their words at first blush seem to import, have an heretical sense; all
propositions, that of themselves, that is, uttered absolutely without any
explanation, or qualification, seem to favor or countenance heretical
propositions, although they be capable of a good construction, and with many
cautious limitations, and restrictions might pass for current. And therefore
was it, that the Council of Basil condemned this proposition, Christ sins
daily, because taken properly it is false, and against the faith, although
perhaps it may be freed from error, if expounded in an unproper sense, thus;
Christ sins daily, not in himself, but his members, Expl^c^ turoptime,
modosupra tacto de propositione aequivoca, quae in proprio aliquo sensu potest
esse haretica, and in alto ettam proprie Catholica, nam illa absolute, et sine
distinctione vel declaratione prolaetameri^o dicitur male sonans, in quo
distinctio alia adhiberipotest. Nam quadam propositio dicitur ab extrinseco
male sonans, alia ab intrinseco. Ab extrinseco vocatur, quando suspitio, vel
maliu sonu^ non expropositione nude sumpta, sed cum circumstantiis personae,
loci, aut temporis oritur. Suarez de triplic^ virtute Theologica tract. de
F.de. Disp. 19. Sect. 7. Dicendum igitur est, quod propositio sapiens haeresin
illa est, qua quam vis no^ appareat haresis manifesta, quin potius aliquando
poterit habere aliquem bonum sensum, tamen ex quibusdam circumstant^is, Vel ex
part ass entis, vel ex tempor^m calamitate saporem quendam habet haresis, and
suspic^onis, judicio prudentum and sapientum, id est, suspicionem quandam
majorem vel minorem pro qualitate circumstantiarum. Bannes.
Suarez says, that if an equivocall proposition having two proper senses, one
Catholic, another Heretical be delivered absolutely without any distinction
or declaration, in which sense it is meant, it is then deservedly said to be
propositio male sonans. The same author goes on, and tells us, that a
proposition is said to be male sonans not only ab intrinseco, but also ab
extrinseco, when the suspicion or ill sound thereof arises not from the
proposition taken nakedly as it is in it self, but considered jointly with the
circumstances either of the person delivering, of the time or place, in which
it is delivered. Omitting his instance, I will give you others more true, and
savory. The word Sacrament with the ancient founded no other, than an holy
significant rite: in those times, than to have called Matrimony, Orders etc.
Sacraments, had been (it may be without all manner of offense. But now, since
the Church of Rome has peremptorily determined, that there be seven
Sacraments properly, and strictly so called, seven outward and sensible
signs, which by divine institution have annexed unto them the promise of
justifying grace. He that shall now term any thing a Sacrament, besides
Baptism* and the Lords Supper, renders himself thereby somewhat suspected.

In the writings of the Fathers the words of Satisfaction, and Merit have been
of large use. Satisfaction signified every bitter, afflictive acknowledgement,
or penitential mortification of our sins, whereby we prevent, and turn
away Gods hand and punishments for them. Merit denoted only obtaining
procurement, impetration, and according to this acception of the words, a man
might safely have heretofore affirmed, that our prayers, alms, and other good
works are satisfactorie and meritorious. But now since some of the Romanists
have wrested these sayings of the Fathers unto a worse sense, than they were
uttered in: and hereupon taught that works are properly satisfactory, just
compensations for our sins, wherein we make recompense unto Gods wronged
justice, and redeem our selves at least from temporal punishments; that
works are strictly and properly meritorious of eternal life, deserving and
earning it ex c^ndigno, in the way of condign wages; as if there were an
equality of due proportion between it and them, without all regard unto Gods
gracious acceptance of them; he that shall now aver these propositions, may
without breach of charity be justly thought to embrace them in that false, and
erroneous sense, which our adversaries the Papists take them in.

Hitherto concerning doctrinall appearance of evil in Doctrines. Practical
appearance of evil in manners, Dr Solater in locum.
or matters of practice next follows; and that may again be divided into
Real or Imaginary. The distinction is the same with that of others, Aliquid
habet speciom mali, vel per se ex condition operis, Forbesius lien c. page 4^8.
vel per accidens ex aliorum interpretatione.

The difference between these must be well weighed, else we may as fowlely be
mistaken, as once the Pontickes were, who as Florus tells us, fighting in a
night with the Romans, per errorem longius cadentes umbras fuas quasi hostium
corpora petebant: mistaking their own shadows projected long as at the going
down of the Moon, laid at them as at the very bodies of their enemies; or as
the Romans themselves, were, unto whom when Tiberius Gracchus touched his head
with his hand to exliort the people as by a sign to stand upon their guard for
their lives, it seemed as if he demanded a diadem. Cum plebem ad defensionem
salutis sua manu caput tangens, hortaretur, praebuit speciem regni sibi, and
diadema poscentis. Flor. lib. 3. cap. 14.

To distinguish them then; a real appearance of evil flows per se ex natura
operis, from the nature and condition of the fact it self; when that of it
self, and in its own nature is a very probable sign of evil, and so it is,
although it be not intrinsecally sinful, when it is per se, an occasion of
sin in our selves, and of scandal unto others, it must be occasio data, non
accepta.

First, when naturally, and not only casually it may prove, and ordinarily
does prove an occasion of an incentive to sin in our selves.

Secondly, when it becomes an occasion of scandal or offense: of scandal
tending unto sin in the weak, of scandal tending unto sorrow and vexation
in the strong and discreet.

Talis sc. materialis us^^ circumcisionis semper hab^t speciem mali non ex
accidenti ta^tum, sed quasi per se, supposito Eccle siae statu. Suar. de
Legibus lib. 9. cap. 14.
Such an appearance of Judaisme, (than which few greater evils) is there in the
Circumcision of those Ethiopian Christians, that live under Prester John. Such
was the appearance of evil in Christians sitting at meat in the Temples of
Paganish Idols, in Naamans bowing himself in the house of Rimmon; however
Cajetan excuse him with a pretty distinction, inter genuflexionem imitativam,
and genuflexionem obsequii. And such also is that appearance of evil in a good
man's intimate fellowship with bad ones, in a true and formal compliancie with
aliens in the signs of profession. As in a Protestants presence at the
superstitious, and Idolatrous worship of Papists, or in any other
complementings with them in the expression of that worship

Now no actions that have this real appearance of evil, are upon any pretext
whatsoever to be ventured upon, because in them there is always a scandal
given, an active scandal, as is plain from Aquinas his definition of
scandal, 2. 2dae. qu. 43. art. 1. Scandalum (says he) understand it of an
active Scandal) est dictum vel sactum minus rectum, praebens alter^ occasionem
ruinae. For first, a fact is minus rectum, some way, or other irregular, not
only when it is a sin, but also when it has a manifest show of sin: and
secondly the bare, and naked show of sin may praebere alteri occasionem ruinae;
morally lead another to sin, as well as sin it self. For this I could
muster up the suffrages of all the Schoolmen, a generation of divines that are
none of the precisest, either in positions or practice. But I will not trouble
my reader with the testimonies of above two of them. Opus malum (says Suarez)
vel habens speciem mali, quod de se inductivum est ad peccandum, vitandum est,
nam illud est vere scandalum activum, ut patet ex definitione ejus, moraliter
enim inducit hominem ad malum. Quod vero non oporteat esse vere malum, sed
satis sit apparere, patet, 2 Thessalonians. c. 5.22. 1 Cor. 12. Ratio est, quia tenemur
recte operari, non solum coram Deo, sed etiam coram hominibus. Secundo, quia
cum opus habet speciem mali, inducitur proximus ad malum opus, non solum sua
malitia sed etiam ex vi mei operis, and ex quadam fragilitate. Suarez, op. de
triplici virtute tract. 2. disp. 10. sect. 3. Quotiescunque datur occasio
scandali (says Vasquez) malo opere, aut habente speciem mali, semper imputatur
scandalum tribuenti occasionem, five scandalum sequatur ex malitia, five
infirmitate, aut ignorantia. Tunc enim qui praebet occasionem scandali, peccat
peccata scandali activi: quod nullaratione licet. Ratio vero est quia nulla
justa aut rationabili causa excusari potest aliquis a peccato, qui coram alio
peccat, vel exercet opus habens speciem mali; and ideo jure optimo dicitur
tribuere occasionem peccandi, quia tale opus ex se occasio est peccandi.
Vasquez opusculis Moralibus, tract. de Scandalo.

That appearance of evil in an action which is but imaginary, is only
ascribed thereunto by extrinsecall denomination, from our own or others
misconceits and censures thereupon.

First, from our own. And here, if a man be in his own conscience steadfastly,
fully, and firmly persuaded that such an action is evil and unlawful, which
yet in truth is not so, See Dr Sanderson on Romans 14.23.
but lawful: what ought he to do?

Why, we must take into our consideration the nature of the action, and the
condition of the person, that harbors this misperswasion of the action.

If the action in its nature be not necessary, but indifferent, and arbitrary,
and the person misjudging it, be in respect thereof sui juris, not determined
therein by the command of any superior power. Why then he is bound in
conscience during this his opinion, to abstain from the action. For we
suppose it indifferent, and a man may lawfully forbear action where there is
no necessity of doing. We suppose it, although indifferent, yet against
Conscience: and whatsoever is done repugnante conscientia, with a settled
reluctancie of a man's own judgment, and conscience against it, cannot be of
faith, and whatsoever is not of faith is sin. Romans 14.24. That is, whatsoever
action is done with a firm persuasion of the lawfulness thereof, let it be
quoad rem, and essentially, in it* self lawful, nay necessary, yet it becomes
quoad hominem, and accidentally evil, unto him it is sin. Now that action
may lawfully, must necessarily be forborne, that can be omitted, but cannot be
committed without sin.

But now on the contrary, if either the action be in its nature necessary, or
the person entertaining this misprision thereof be enjoined performance of it
by some superior power, that can lawfully challenge obedience from him, and so
the action too, (though indifferent) for its nature, be yet in its use, and
unto him become necessary. Why then this misperswasion of its unlawfulness
cannot bind to abstain from it, for so it should oblige unto either omission
of a necessary duty, or else disobedience unto lawful authority, both great
sins. And nulla est obligatio ad illicita. There is no obligation unto things
unlawful can lie upon us.

But yet although this erroneous conceit of the unlawfulness of this action,
supposed to be necessary either in its nature, or at least in its use, because
commanded by authority, does not obligaere, that is, so bind, as that I must
follow it, yet it does ligare, so entangle and perplexe, as that I cannot
without sin oppose it, because whosoever goes against his Conscience,
(whether ill or well informed it matters not) goes against the will of God,
although not for the thing he does, yet for the manner of doing it, although
not materially, Ames. de Conscientia. l. 1, c. 4.
yet formally, and interpretatively, because whatsoever the Conscience dictates
a man takes for the will of God, each man's conscience being a Deputy God to
inform and direct him. Look as, he who reviles, wounds, kills a private man,
mistaking him for the King, is guilty of high treason against the King
himself: so, he that thwarts the judgment of even an erroneous conscience,
fights against God, wars against heaven, because what his conscience says,
he thinks to be the voice of heaven.

The only way then for a man to rescue himself out of these difficulties is to
rectify his conscience; to depose and correct the error thereof, so he shall
escape contempt of the judgment of his own conscience on the one hand, and
breach of either Gods or man's laws on the other.

An imaginary appearance of evil issues, secondly, from the supposalls of, not
only our selves, but others that censure it, whose judgments are either misled
by ignorance and weakness, or else blinded through pride and prejudice, such
was that in the moving of Hannah's lips, not afforded by her fact, but only
fastened on it by old Eli his hasty censoriousnesse, nor other appearance of
evil was there in our Saviors healing the diseased, his Disciples plucking
and eating of the ears of corn on the Sabbath Day, 'twas not grounded on
their actions, but only fancied by the Pharisees swelling uncharitableness*
what other is that appearance of evil with which some unjustly charge our
ceremonies? it is only conceived by their uncharitable prjudice, not really
given by them.

This imaginary appearance of evil proceeds from either supposalls of proud,
or weak ones.

The censures or supposals of proud ones we may slight, our warrant is our
Saviors President, when his Disciples told him, that the Pharisees took
offense at his speech, he made no reckoning thereof, but answered, Scandala
Pharisaeorum prorsus conte^nenda, na^ qui non ex ignor ant^^ aut infirmitaete,
sed ex malitia scandalizatur: Non laborat tali altqua necessitate spirituali,
cui non possit ipse sine ^pe alteri^^ proximi facile prospirere, mut andoprauam
suam voluntatem: erg^ alter non tenetur, tunccum aliquo suo detrimento
pros^icere Gregor. de Valentia. Quoties scandalum pass^vum alterius futurum
est, ex m^litia nu^l^^ debet omit^ere opus, quod nec est malum, nec habe^
speciem malipropter malitiam alterius, quando opus illud utile est
temporaliter, vel spiritualiter operants, quia non postulat ratio, ut malitia
alterius cum dam no nostro succurramus, alias quilibet malitia sua possit nobis
nocere, ut omitteremus opus nobis utile: malitia autem alterius nobis nocerenon
debet. Luissius Tunianus.
let them alone. Mat. 12.13.14. and we warranted by his example, may then be
secure and regardlesse of many calumnies and groundless exceptions against the
government, discipline, and ceremonies of our Church: for there has been so
much spoken and written concerning these subjects, as that the pretense of
weakness may seem to be taken; away from those that are capable of
information.

But what if this imaginary appearance of evil flow from the supposall of a
weak one, yet an holy one.

Why then it must be omitted, but with this caution, so it may be without
sin, or as the ordinary gloss upon that 15. of Matthew v. 12.13.14 resolves
it, Salvatriplici veritate vitae, justitiae, doctrinae, so the threefold verity
of life, justice, and doctrine be preserved safe: Nam per hanc triplicem
veritatem (says Gregory de Valentia) intelligitur omnis rectitudo and
immunitas a peccato in actionibus humanis. Veritas namque vit^ continetur in
actionibus rectis, quas quis in seipso excrcet convenienter rectae rationi and
appetitui recto atque adeo vere veritate quadam practica: Veritas autem
justitiae rectis actionibus quae exercentur erga alterum similiter,
convenienter rectae rationi, prout vere and absque peccato oportet: veritas
denique doctrinae continetur fide vera, and minime erronea: By this triple
verity is understood all the rectitude and freedom from sin, that is in
humaneactions, for the verity of life is contained in those regular actions;
which any one exercises in. and toward himself agreeable to right reason,
and a well governed appetite, etc. The verity of justice consists in those
regular actions, which are performed toward another, likewise sutably to right
reason, as it behooves, truly, and without sin.

And to conclude, the verity of dostrine consists in a true, regal, and
unerring faith: if these three verities be kept inviolate, every thing must be
abstained from, upon which follows scandalum pusillorum, a scandal springing
from either the ignorance; or weakness of our brother, but because this
resolution may be thought both too general, and obscure the Schoolmen
themselves, sumbling much about its explication, we will therefore go to
work more distinctly and particularly.

Consider whether or no the action, in which this appearance of evil is
imagined to be, is necessary, or indifferent.

If it be necessary, and commanded by God, it must not be omitted though all
the world should be offended: For evil must not be done that good may come
thereof Call. l. 3. Inst. c. 19. Sect. 13.

Scandalu^ quod oritur ex rebus per se bonis, and necessariis, non licet
evitare; qu^a non est faciendum malu^, ut eveniat bonum Bonum enim est expete^
dum, quatenus bonu^ est; non expetitur aurem quaten^s bonum est, si malu^ simul
expetitur. Nam qui expetit bonum, abhorre^ a malo: qui aute^ abhorret a malo,
qua malu^ est, is nullo malo quodc^nque sit non potest allics. Jam vero nulla
sunt resplane necessariae pratereas qua su^t in se bonae, atque ejusmodi, ut
nisi volunt as illas expe^at, a suo vero, and proprio objecto abhorret: it aq^
ut maxime^ tumul tuetur mund^^, tamen omnia, etiam ex^rem a quaeque subeunda
sunt, ut sie^ illsbata De^ gloria. Cameron in electiora quaeda^ N Test.loca,
Tom. 2. in Mat. 18.7.


; Calvin telling us, regard ought to be had of charity limits, how far, usque
ad aras, that is, so for our brothers sake we offend not God: I may add, so
for our brothers sake we endanger not our own souls. To prevent scandal and
sin in our brethren, we may not run upon sin our selves: for a well
ordered Charity, as Aquinas gives the reason, 2, 2 ae. q. 43 a. 7. begins
ever at home, making a man chiefly desire and endeavor the salvation of his
own soul, and consequently more sollicitous to avoid sin in himself, than
to prevent it in other: I may not then omit or neglect necessary duties,
because to some they seem but needless niceties, I must not fly true
holiness, and the power of godliness, because unto the world it appears but
brainesicke peevishness, and an irrational preciseness: others error may
not be seconded, and countenanced with mine impiety, and disobedience.

Of this matter none speak so fully, and clearly as the Schoolmen in 2 dam, 2
da, q. 43. a. 7. where Thomas and all his interpreters debate this question. An
bona spiritualia sint propter scandalum dimittenda. Not to mention their rotten
distinction between matters of Council, and matters of precept, we will only
out of them take notice, that there is a difference between transgression of a
precept, and a temporary, partial, or occasional forbearance of the matter
commanded by a precept.

No precept whatsoever, whether of the law of nature, or else but positive, is
for eschewing the scandal of any whether weak or malicious, to be truly
broken and transgressed. And a precept is transgressed whenever what is
enjoined in it is omitted at such a time, and in such a case, when all the
particular circumstances which we ought to regard being considered we are tied
to performance of it.

Opera divine praecepti affirmativi, quoth non pro semper obligat, debent
aliquando deferri pro aliquo tempore quando causarent pusillis scandalum, don^^
illi sint melius instructi, sed circumstantia illius scandalisint mutatae, ita
ut contingat praeceptum affirmativum etiam juris ^uasi naturalis, aliquando
hic, and nunc non obligare propter concursum negativi praecepti de non ponendo
offendiculo pusillis. Johannes Wiggers.
But yet however upon emergencie of scandal, that which is commanded by some
precepts may pro hic and nunc, in some times* and at some places, be omitted,
may for a while be forborne, until the scandal taken thereby can be removed
by information, or instruction, or until the circumstances of the scandal be
some way or other changed. Promulgation of a truth, and Christian reproof are
duties commanded by God, and yet are to be sometimes abstained from, for
scandalls taken by not only the weak, but also malicious. Reprove not a
scorner lest he hate thee. Prove. 9.8. Speak not in the ^ares of a fool for
he will despise the wisdom of thy words. Prove. 23.9. Give not that which is
holy unto the dogs, neither cast ye your pearls before swine, lest they
trample them under their feet, and turn again, and rent you, Mat. 7.6.

To explain this farther, recourse must be had unto that old and golden rule,
Affirmativa praecepta semper obligant, non ad semper. Affirmative precepts do
always bind, but not to always: so that we are not bound to perform always
what they enjoyne, but only loco and tempore debitis, when we have due time
and place. Now as by the intercurrencie of other circumstances, so especially
by occurrence of the scandal of weak brethren, there may not be opportunity
and seasonablenesse of doing what we are urged unto by some affirmative
precepts* and so those precepts may pro hic and nunc cease to be obligatory:
For when the obligations of two precepts seem to meet together at the very
same time, that which is of greater obligation tieth us, and so consequently
we are for the present freed from the obligation of the other. Now the
negative precept of eschewing the scandal of the weak is more obligatory,
than many affirmative precepts, and therefore to use the words of Malderus,
Contingit aliquando praeceptum natural affirmativum, hic and nunc non
obligare, propter concursum negativi praecepti naturalis de vitando scandalo
pusillorum: For example, vindicative justice binds a Magistrate to execute
wrath upon him that does evil; Charity on the other side obliges him to
hinder as much as he can the scandal of the weak; now Charity is a virtue,
of an higher note and nature than vindicative justice: the precept belonging
unto charity, [hinder as much as you can the scandal of the weake], does more
strictly tie us, than that appertaining unto vindicative justice, [punish the
guilty.] And therefore, if it be probable that a great and spreading scandal
will be taken at the punishing of delinquents: a Magistrate may not transgress
against justice, and yet defer the execution thereof.

But so manifold and different are the degrees of obligation in affirmative
precepts: such is the variety of circumstances appertaining unto the matters
commanded by those precepts, and inconstancy of alterations about those
circumstances, as that I do not see how any unvariable rules, or constant
directions can be given for Christian carriage in this case. For particulars
then, every man is to be left unto the guidance of his spiritual prudence, and
wisdom, which is to direct him in a right apprehension and discretion of
circumstances; to define the opportunity and seasonablenesse of practicing what
is commanded by affirmative precepts: and to compare them, and the precept of
eschewing the scandal of the weak together, and thereupon to determine which
is Hic and Nunc most obligatory, or does most strictly tie us to the obedience
of it, as being of greater moment. Only in the general we may safely say
thus much; that whereas we have said, that for shunning the scandal of the
weak, we may forbear the practice of things commanded by affirmative
precepts, Hic and Nunc, in some places, and at some times, it must always be
taken with this proviso, that there be not incurred a greater and more perilous
scandal, by forbearance, than would probably be occasioned by practice of the
thing commanded, which is done, when either first, more are scandalized by the
forbearance, than in all likelihood would be at the practice: or else secondly,
when the body, in general, the Church and Common wealth, or the greatest and
chiefest part of either is justly scandalized at the forbearance, and only
some few particular private persons stumble at the practice: or else thirdly,
when others take occasion by this partial and temporary forbearance of what
is commanded by affirmative precepts, to contemn the precepts themselves, as
being by this our carriage induced to believe, that we verily despise them, and
do not so much, for a while forbear, as utterly disclaim the practice of what
they command.

But now, if the action, in which this appearance of evil is supposed to be,
be but indifferent, then these two following things must be pondered. First,
whether, or no it be annexed with a necessary duty, or not. Secondly, whether
or no it be undetermined, left to our own liberty, and choice, or else
determined by authority either Oeconomicall, Political, or Ecclesiastical.

If it be annexed to a necessary duty, we must not omit this, to abstain from
that. So to fly the shadow of sin, we should embrace the body of sin, a
sin really, so a sin of omission; for what is not good, if to omit a duty be
not bad? Good must not be left undone, though evil per accidens come from it;
much more, when only an appearance of evil is joined to it. We must not then
shun the Lords Table, because some weaker judgments have imagined in the act
of kneeling, a show of idolatry. So to avoid but an imaginary appearance of
evil unto men, we shall appear indeed unto God to be evil. A Minister must
not neglect the discharge of his duty, because some have supposed a show of
superstition in some harmless ceremonies annexed to its performance. So, to
avoid men's unjust censures, he should incur a just woe and curse from God:
Woe be to me (says the Apostle) if I preach not the Gospel.

If we are not, secondly, nostri juris; but restrained, and determined by
authority, we must not disobey that, to satisfy a Brother; transgress duty,
to express Charity: So to please men, we should displease God. So we should do
evil, that good might come thereof. When the obligation of two preceps
seemingly lies upon us at the same time, and impossible for both to be at
once obeyed, in such a case, because there is no clashing between Gods
precepts, neither does God by them impose upon his creatures any necessity of
sinning, therefore one of these precepts must give place unto the other; to
wit, that which enjoyneth a less duty, unto that which prescribes a more
weighty, and pressing one. Now the duties of justice (as a learned
Inconformitant, even Amesius himself, Med. Theol. lib. 2. cap. 16.. 62, 63.
will tell us) are of stricter obligation, than those of charity. We are more
bound to pay our debts, than to distribute alms. He that has trespassed
against another, is more strictly tied to sue for reconciliation, than the
party who has received the injury. Now to hinder the scandal of the weak is
a duty of charity, to obey the lawful commands of authority a duty of
justice, and therefore of the greater obligation, and moment. Unto it then the
other must give place. I would have traveled farther in this argument, but
that I am anticipated by the learned, and reverend Professors of Aberdene in
their Duplies to the second answers of the Covenanting Ministers, who from page
65. unto 75. have purposely discussed this very question, whether the precept
of obedience to superiors, or the precept of eschewing scandal be more
obligatory, and have there proved by many unanswerable arguments, that the
former precept, that of obedience to superiors is of the twain more
obligatory. Those the^ that desire larger satisfaction concerning this matter,
I shall refer unto the perusal of the^. However in the mean while let it
not be thought troublesome, if I insert, what I judge in them, if not most,
yet very remarkable. It Is this, Debitum obedientiae, the debt of obedience,
which we owe unto superiors, is (say they, page 74.) not only debitum morale,
a debt or duty, unto which we are tied by moral honesty, and Gods
commandment, but also debitum legale, or debitum justitiae, (quod viz:
fundatur in proprio jure alterius) a debt grounded upon the true, and proper
right which our Superiors have to exact this duty of us; so that they may
accuse us of injury, and censure us, if we perform it not. There is a great
difference betwixt these two sorts of debts and the last is far more
obligatorie than the first: as for example: A man owes money to the poor by a
moral debt, but to his creditour he owes them by legal debt, or debt of
justice; and therefore he is more strictly obliged to pay his creditour, than
to give alms. So by moral honesty, and Gods precept also, a man owes to his
neighbor a pious carfulness to hinder sin in him, by admonition,
instruction, good example, and by omission, even of things lawful, when he
foreseeth that his neighbor, in respect of his weakness, will be scandalized
by them. But his neighbor has not such a right to exact these things of him,
neither can he have action against him for not performing of them, as our
lawful superiors have, for our due obedience. Thus they.

Hence then may we shape an answer unto that same frequent clamor of some
tumultuous spirits, that our conformity forsooth, is wondrous offensive to many
of our weak brethren.

First suppose it be so, better they without thy fault be offended,
scandalized at thee, than that the Magistrate be with thy fault disobeyed by
thee. It is no safe course to provide for the peace of thy brothers conscience,
by wounding thine own with the sin of disobedience against authority, to
which for conscience sake thou art to yield subjection: we must not to comply
with men's humors resist the Ordinance of God, despise the voice of the Church,
rather than a weak brother should be offended, scandalized, we may, and
sometimes must part with our own right: but we ought not to rob the Church of
hers by bereaving her of her power, by denying her our obedience. Nay farther,
I confess that rather than a weak brother should be scandalized, we may pro
Hic and Nunc, in some particular times and places, pretermit what superiors
prescribe, provided they take no distaste thereat, and others by our example be
not encouraged to contemn their persons, callings, commands; for so a greater,
and more pernicious scandal will be incurred, tha^ was declined. But we are
not upon occurrence of any scandal whatsoever, taken by whomsoever, either
absolutely to deny, and utterly refuse obedience to the lawful in junctions of
our public governors, whether temporal or ecclesiastical; or so much as
contemptuously and scandalously for a while omit the practice of what they
injoyne. And omission of what they require, is than contemptuous, when they
peremptorily urge the practice of it, than scandalous when it hartens others to
a contempt of their authority. To grant any of these lawful, what were it?
alas! but to license confusion both in Church, and commonwealth.

Secondly, I demand whether or no, the offense given to, or taken by a
Magistrate, who is a brother, and withal a Magistrate, be not greater than
that which is given to or taken by one, who is only a brother? An impartial
judge will soon determine, that the double relation of brother and magistrate,
weighs down the single and naked relation of a brother. Howsoever I am sure,
that the whole exceeds the parts severally considered: the relation of mother
exacts more at our hands than that of brother, and therefore, in warding a blow
from my brother, I am to take care, that thereby the same stroke light not
upon the head of my mother the Church. Whereupon, as Paul exhorts to give none
offense, neither to Jew, nor Gentile, so he adds in a farther specialtie, more
to the Church of God, 1. Cor. 10.37. Bishop Morton.
The Jews and Gentiles were but parts, the Church of God the whole, they but
brethren, she the mother. Si nefas sit vel pusillum que piam Scandalizare, and
praestiterit alligata colla mola asinaria demergi quempiam in profundum maris,
quam scandal^zare unum ex pusillis Christian^s: quam est horrendum flagitium,
and quam atroci suppl^c^o vindicandum scandalizare ^os, quorum un^us ^ffensio
^agis per^culo^a, quam al^orum mul^^rum, etc. Forbesius Irenic. page 40^.
If then it were better to be thrown into the bottom of the sea, with a
millstone about ones neck, than to offend a little one, a poor and illiterate
artizan, what expression shall we then find answerable to the haynousnesse of
a scandal, given to a pious magistrate, to a religious Prince, to a
Parliament, and Convocation, to a whole Church, and Common wealth?

But suppose the action indifferent, not annexed to a necessary duty, we also
left to the use of our liberty, what then?

Two things are here especially to be considered. 1. The quality of the actio^
excepted at. 2. The difference of times and places.

To begin with the first. The action so quarell'd at by thy brother, is
either of none, or great importance to thee.

If it be none importance, as affording thee either none, or but small pleasure
and profit, offend not thy brother by an unseasonable exercise of thy liberty.
Know, that as authority, so charity should also restrain it, consider that by
this undue use of thy liberty thou sinnest against thy brother, and by sinning
against him thou sinnest against Christ, 1. Cor. 8.12.

But now, if it be of some weight and moment, as yielding thee some great
profit and pleasure, why thou must a while forbear it, until thy brother may
be better informed; and to inform him that the action is lawful which
offends him, thou must take care too; otherwise thou will prejudice the truth
through thy regardlesse silence, as also continue his weakness, and foment in
him a negative superstition. Let every one of us, says the Apostle, Romans 15.2.
please his neighbor for his good unto edification, And for a man to humor his
neighbor in an erroneous and superstitious opinion, however it may please him,
yet not for his good unto aedification. Upon which ground I take it that the
Apostle Paul, as he refused maintenance at Corinth, to avoid appearance of a
covetous intention, and mercenary affection in preaching; so also his just
title and unquestionable right thereunto he at large both professes, and
proves. But now if thy brother refuse and contemn information: Tunc desinit
esse scandalum pusilli ex infirmitate, aut simplici ignorantia, and incipit
esse scandalum. Pharisaei ex pura malitia, aut ignorantia affectata, and
crassa. The shelter of weakness is thereby taken from him, his judgment
being now overshadowed no longer with a mere weakness arising out of simple
ignorance, but with a proud and wayward, if not envious, and malicious
perverseness, that is accompanied with a gross, wilful, and affected
ignorance. He is no longer then to be accounted a weak one, but a proud and
wilful one, and for his peevishness thou may choose whether thou will
forgo thy liberty. However yet information does not always alter the nature
of scandal. For the scandal of the weak, as Vb^dicitur articulo 7. de
scandalo pusillorum, si autem post redditam rationem hujusmodi scandalum duret,
jam videtur ex mal^tia esse; adverto quod author non assertivo verbo utitur,
sed opinativo, dic^ndo, jam videtur ex malitia esse. potest siquidem
cont^ngere, quod ^usill^ non s^n^ capaces rationis redd^ta, vel propter
pr^stinam consu^tudinem, qua facit apparere dissonum, quod veritati consonat,
vel propter rationem apud cos magis app^rentem, vel aliqu^d h^j^smodi^ and tunc
quia mal^tia non facit scandalum, sed ^gnorantia, vel ^nfirm^t^^, quam vis
reddita sit ratio, cessandum est ab hujusmodi spir^tualibus non necessariis.
Cajetan. in 2.2.^.43. etc.
Cajetan, and after him Petrus de Lorica observes, may sometimes last, Postquam
reddita est ratio facti, after a reason of the fact, whereat they are
scandalized, is rendered to them. For by reason of their extreme ignorance and
slownesse of understanding, they may be utterly incapable of information and
instruction, or else some opinion, or practice whereunto they have been long
accustomed may cast such a mist before their weak judgments, as that they may
not be able presently to apprehend the reason that is given of the action, at
which they stumble. And we should so far pity the simplicity of such poor
souls, as to abstain from that which scandalizeth them, if by such abstinence
there accrue not to us any great loss, or inconvenience. Petrus de Lorica does
roundly, and fully express this matter. Veru^ est (says he) quod Cajetanus
advertit, scandalum pusillorum perseverare posse adhuc, post quam reddita est
ratio facti, vel quia rationem non capiunt ob mentis tarditatem, vel ob
consuetudinem diu firmatam: in quo casu docet Cajetanus omittendam esse
actionem, ex qua scandalum accipiunt; vel differendam, donec ad saniorem mentem
venerint. Quod solum verum, si actio omitti potest sine jactura nostrae
utilitatis. Si enim magna uti. tilitas temporalis vel spiritualis interveniat,
contemni potest scandalum pusillorum, post quam sufficienter admoniti sint.

I will but recite a limitation of Gregory de Valentia, that comes under this
head, and proceed. Having laid down a rule, that for avoiding the scandal of
our neighbor, which sp^ingeth either from his ignorance, or weakness, it
behooveth us, by the obligation of Charity, to do or omit that which may be
done, or left undone without sin. he afterward puts this exception. Est
autem animadvertendum han^ regulam intelligi debere de omni ^o, quod sine
peccato fieri, aut omitti possit, non quomodo^unque, sed moraliter, attenta
suavitate, quae est in jugo legum, divinarum: id est, quod sine pe^cato fieri
aut omitti possit, sine maxima etiam aliqua, and pene intolerabili
difficultate, spectata quoque in hac condition personae, etc. And indeed (me
thinks) he speaks reasonably. For improbable seems it, that the sweet
moderation which is in the yoke of divine laws, should consist with so great a
rigor, as in all matters whatsoever, not simply unlawful to exact, not only a
brotherly, but also a fervile compliancy with every suppo^'d weak one, whose
weakness may be but pretended by those that are willing to speak favorably
of the^. For the humouring and co^tenting of every supposed weakling in all
matters at which he takes offense, I conceive not my self bound to endanger my
life, to hazard my estate, and fortunes, or to incur any other great, or
notable inconvenience: for that would truly be durus sermo, an hard saying;
who are able to bear it?

Secondly, we must put a difference between times, and places; for however
they be but circumstances of actions, and therefore extrinsecall to them, so
that they cannot cause any such essential variation in them, as to make those
actions materially good, or sinful, which are of themselves, in their own
nature indifferent; yet notwithstanding the public, and ordinary abuse of an
action at such a time, or in such a place, may make it then and there, in that
place and for that time appear to be evil; although the same action at
another time, and in the same place, or in another place at the same time, may
not be obnoxious to any such censure.

First then, time may alter this imaginary appearance of evil in an action.
Reservation of the brazen serpent, as for other ends and purposes, so for
commemoration of that miraculous deliverance of the Israelites thereby, from
the stings of fiery Serpents, was for a while free from all suspicion, either
of idolatry, or superstition: but when once it became the general, ordinary,
nay daily occasion, and object of idolatry, of the grossest, and most palpable
kind of idolatry that can be, when incense was offered to it: then if the
public Magistrate had not demolished it, he might justly have been thought
to favor that Idolatry wherewith it was polluted. And therefore commendable
was Hezekiah his zeal in breaking it in pieces. 2. Kings. c. 18. v. 4. and yet
the same Hezekiah did not destroy the high places which Solomon had built for
Ashtoreth, the abomination of the Sidonians; and for Chemosh, the abomination
of the Moabites; and for Milchom, the abomination of the children of Ammon; and
yet was never taxed for countenancing of idolatry. For in his days the Idols
there erected, were disregarded, no man worshipping them, and therefore might
safely be suffered to stand; but when afterward they were generally, and
usually adored, then the good King Josiah justly demolished them; and indeed,
should he have permitted them then, when the Idolatry, wherewith they were
defiled, was flagrant at the height, he might justly be suspected to be a
favourer of that Idolatry. Kings. c. 23. v. 13, 14.
Some ceremonies used by us now, might have perhaps to the weaker sort an
appearance of Idolatry, and superstition before the reformation^, when the
public and professed use of them was imployd in supersticious services: but
now after the reformation, since all such use of them is by our Church
disavowed, and another quite contrary professed, there is no color for
fastening any such imputation on them.

Secondly, we must distinguish of places. That which in some place carries a
show of evil, elsewhere perhaps is not suspected thereof. Of the custom of
thrice dipping in baptism, an heretical constructio^ was made in Spain and
Africa, but for ought we read, not any where else. The Saturday Fast in the
Eastern Church, was severely forbidden, because thought to give countenance to
the damnable and blasphemous opinion of some heretics, who esteemed God who
made the world, to be the author of evil, and therefore in dishonor of the
memory of his creation, pressed fasting on Saturday, upon which the Jews
feasted, in memory of the Creation finished. But then the Saturday Fast was in
the Western Church as strictly enjoined, because there feasting on that day
would have countenenced the Jewish Solemn observation of the old Sabbath as
Festival. Bringing of Cakes and Wine into the Church was in Africa usual, and
inoffensive, but yet in Millaine by Ambrose prohibited Monica, because there it
was esteemed to have much resemblance of the Parentalia, offerings of the
Pagans, which were made at the tombs of their Parents, Ad quamcunque Ecclesiam
veneritis, inquit, ejus morem servate, sipati scandalum non vultis, aut facere.
August. e*.86.
and to their Ghosts. According to places therefore, in indifferent matters we
may vary our practice. It was the advice of Ambrose unto Austin, and Monica
respected by Austin, as if it had been the answer of an heavenly Oracle; into
whatsoever Church ye shall come observe the manner, or custom thereof, if ye
will neither give nor take scandal. And besides, we have Paul's precept, and
president for it; his precept, 1. Cor. c. 10. v. 32. Give none offense neither
to Jew nor Gentile, which could not be done, but by complying with them in
indifferencies. His president also answers his precept; to the Jews he
became a Jew, to them that were under the law, as under the law; to them that
were without the law, as without the law; to the weak, as weak, 1 Cor. c. 9.
v. 20, 21, 22. Amongst the Jews he shaved his head, made a vow, Acts. c. 18.
v. 18. and circumcised Timothy, Acts. c. 16. v. 3. And yet amongst the Gentiles
where these actions bore an appearance of Judaisme, ^e withstood Peter for them
even to his face. Galat. chap. 2. verse 11.

After these limitations of the duty of abstinence from all appearance of
evil; I cannot but wonder at our irregulars misapplication of it. They hence
eagerly cry down the laudable discipline, and lawful ceremonies of our
Church. What fearful outcries do they make concerning their appearance of
idolatry, superstition, will worship, and Popery? Terms you see by the
exceptions put to this precept, as much too big for our innocent and
harmless ceremonies, as Hercules shoe for a child's foot. Indeed our
ceremonies, for example, the Surplisse, Cross in Baptism, kneeling at the
Lords Supper, may have a material semblance with those that in Popery have
been abused to idolatie, and superstition, and so consequently taken
materially, in respect of their materials may have an outward show of Popish
idolatry, or superstition; but consider them as imposed by our Church, and
generally used by her members, so they are formally differenced from those
which Papists have applied to idolatrous ends, and purposes. For our Church
publickely professes a quite contrary use, or application, end, or intention
of them. And external actions have their specification, and consequently
distinction from their end and intention, from it they take their species, or
kind, and accordingly are distinguished. Now since all Popish, whether
superstitious or idolatrous abuses of our ceremonies, are publicly disclamed,
and their right use explained; who can justly imagine any show of Popery in
them? An Israelite was not to be smitten for an Egiptian, because for a while
he once sojourned into Egypt, if afterward he had his constant abode in
Canaan. The garment spotted with the flesh was no longer to be hated, than
spotted; being once washed, it might again be used. Our ceremonies were
defiled in Egypt, in Popery with superstition, and idolatry; but our Church
(God be praised,) has washed them from both in her public, and professed use
of them. And therefore now they stand above either calumny, or superstition.

But I pass on to the second thing I proposed, Confirmation.
the Confirmation of the point. First see it backed by consonant places of
Scripture. Solomon advises his young man to walk caute, as well as cast, not
to come nigh the door of the strange-womans house, Prove. c. 5. v. 8. This had
not evilnesse real, but only the appearance of evil, as being in a corrupt
mind, an incentive to uncleanenesse, and in beholders an occasion of
jealousies, and suspicions. Now from Solomon's interdicting this appearance of
evil in special, we may by way of Analogy and proportion infer a fitness
of forbearing all in general. Unto this is analogically applied the Nazarites
precise abstinence from wine, Number. c. 6. v. 3, 4. Gutier de Tr^io upon my Text.
The Nazarite, as you may see there, was to abstain from wine, from vinegar of
wine, from any liquor of grapes, from the materials of wine grapes, from moist
grapes, from dried grapes, from all that is made of the vine tree, from not
only the kernel, but even the husk of the grape. The Jews have added, they
were not to come nigh a vineyard. With a semblable strictness are we to
separate from sin, from all sins, small as well as great; from all of
sin, not only from the kernel of sin, from a sin really so, but also
from the husk, the appearance of sin. The children of Israel were charged not
to do like the heathen that were round about them, 2 King. chap. 17. verse 15.
where they are interdicted not only samenesse with, Exodus 23.13.
but also likeness unto to their fashions; they were forbidden the fashion of
rounding their heads, and cutting their flesh, of marring the corners of their
beards, of making any baldness upon their heads, or between their eyes.
Levit. c. 19. verse 28. and chap. 21. verse 25. Deuteronomy. chapter 14. verse 1. Not
because so to do was simply in its own nature a sin, but for that it gave
show of a sin, of inordinate sorrow for the departed; of which 'twas then an
expression much in use amongst the heathen. H^^o Cardinalis, upon the (...)
^lleageth Hosea chap. 2 (...) 6. Thou shall call me (...) shall call me no
more (...)* The Gentiles gave the (...) of Baal, so also of Baalim, unto their
great and common Idol god, supposed to be the Sun, and to all the several
images and representations thereof. And therefore God prohibited application of
that title unto himself: in worship and invocation, Thou shall no more call
me, O my Baal: for though there be no harm in the word, (it signif^ing in
common use, husband, as well as Ishi,) yet by reason of the ordinary
application thereof unto Idols, there would have been an invocation of God by
that name, a gross, and palpable appearance of Idolatry.

But because it may be excepted, that most of these rigid, and severe
prohibitions were given unto the Jews under their pedagogie of ceremonies, and
time of bondage, and therefore farther than in a moral admonition lay noe
restraint upon us Christians. See therefore all this seconded in the New
Testament by St Jude verse 23. Where in reference to that legal pollution,
which came by touching the garment of one that was Levitically unclean, he
exhorts Christians to hate the garment spotted by the flesh, that is, says
Gualter, quicquid ingenium car nis sapit, whatsoever has but a smacke or
relish of the flesh, all preparations and accessaries of evil, Locus hic, qui
obscurus alioqui vid tur, nihil habebit difficult at is met aphora been
expl^cata; vult fideles, non tantum cavere a vitiorum co^tactu, sed ne qua ad
eos co^tagio perting at, quicqu^d affine est, ac vic^num fugiendum esse
admonet, quem admodum si de pudicitia sermo habetur d^cemus tol^enda esse omnta
libid^nu^ irritamenta, ^d etiamnum clar^^^ fiet, si amplietur oration, nempe ut
oder^mus non carnem modo sed tunicam, qua ejus contactu infecta sit, Nam
particula (...) ad ampliationem ^alet, ergo adeo non permittit indulgen^^a
fovere, uti omnes praparationes, omn^aque accessor^a (ut vocant) pot^us
resecar^ jubeat, Calv. in locum.
any thing that is near of kin unto, or but bordring upon vice, thinks*
Calvin. Observe here the emphaticall gradation of the Apostle, hate not only
the flesh, but the garment spotted by the flesh, not only overspread, quite
covered, but the garment that was but here and there a little spotted by the
flesh. Out of Christ's garment there issued virtue, which cured the woman that
had the bloody flux, but contrariwise out of this garment, but spotted with
the flesh, Exit vis quaedam maligna, there goes a poisonous kind of infection
which soon will stain a soul with the leprofie of sin. But because (as the
old saying ^unnes) praxis sanctorum est interpres pr^ceptorum, I shall entreat
you next to take notice how this precept has been exemplified.

And here in the times before Christ is very remarkable the courageous and
undaunted resolution of Eleazar, against but the appearance of an evil. 2 Mac.
c. (...) v. 18. usque ad ^inem: when he was besought to bring flesh of his own
provision, such as was lawful for him to use, and but make as if he did eat
of the flesh, taken from the sacrifice commanded by the King v. 21. why? even
this evil appearance, this seeming, this making as if he did eat of the flesh
taken from the Sacrifice commanded by the King, so deeply disrelished him, as
that he chose death before it. For it becomes not our age (says he) in any
wise to dissemble, whereby many young persons might think that Eleazar being
fourscore years old and ten, was now gone to a strange religion; and so they
through mine hypocrisy, and desire to live a little time, and a moment longer,
should be deceived by me, and I get a stain to my old age, and make it
abominable, v. 24, 25. But why mention I Eleazar? Behold the example of one
greater than Eleazar, the example of the rule and pattern of holiness unto
the Church, Christ Jesus, God blessed for ever! whose example in Morals and
matters of ordinary obedience amounts ever unto the authority of a command. How
exemplarie he was in this particular you may read, Mat* c. 7. from v. 24. unto
the end of the Chapter. There you have him performing an action, not for that
omission of it would have been evil, but because in opinion of the Jews, it
would have given show of evil. For if first, you understand the words, as most
Interpreters do, of the tribute to be paid unto the secular Magistrate, then
sinful it had not been in our Savior to have refused payment of tribute unto
Caesar. For how could the Son to the living God (who was King of Kings, and
Lord of Lords, King of Heaven, and Earth, whose the earth, and all the fullness
thereof was) be justly tributary unto any mortal? The Kings of the earth take
tribute, or custom, not of their own children, (however they expect obedience
from them) but of strangers; because paying of tribute denotes some degree, or
kind of servitude. The Children then are free. verse 25, 26. Therefore from
all taxes, and impositions, justly was to be exempted Christ, the son of
David, there was no reason he should pay tribute unto Caesar, nay more reason
(he being of the blood royal) should receive tribute from the Jews, than
Caesar, a forrainer, having no title to the Crown, but that which the sword
gave him, not payment, constant denial of payment had not been (you see)
morally evil in our Savior; and yet because it would have borne appearance of
an evil, of disloialtie, and disobedience, and so have drawn prejudices
against, and scandal upon his unspotted person, holy, and heavenly office, and
doctrine, because seemingly it would have crossed a doctrine he afterward
delivered. Render unto Caesar the things which are Caesar's: therefore he
stands not to plead his privilege, but voluntarily parted with his right,
paid the tribute, and to pay it wrought a miracle; notwithstanding, Peter,
least we should offend them, go thou to the sea, and cast an hook, and take
up the fish that first comes up, and when thou have opened his mouth, thou
shall find a piece of money, that take, and give unto them for me and thee.
verse 27.

Or if secondly, with the learned Cameron, you rather conceive to be here meant
the half shekel, which by prescript of the Ceremonial Law, Exodus 30, was by
the Jews to be paid for the use of the Sanctuary. Why yet so also sinful it
had not been in our Savior to have refused paying of it: for first, it was a
ceremony, and the Ceremonial Law Christ was above. Lord he was of the Sabbath,
Mat. c. 12. v. 8. Mark. c. 2. v. 28. where it is manifest (thinks Cameron)
the Sabbath should Synecdochically signify the whole Ceremonial Law. Then
secondly, this ceremony, together with Sacrifices and all other Legal,
typical ceremonies presupposed sin in the party, to whom they were
commanded, and were a note, or badge of the bondage contracted by sin; and
therefore reach not unto Christ, a man without sin. Thirdly, as our Savior
well argues, even as Kings of the Earth take not tribute of their own
Children, so neither the King of heaven of his son: therefore seeing this
half shekel is a tribute to be paid to the King of Heaven, for the Tabernacle
of Witness, 2 Chronicles. 24.6. Christ was certainly free, and so might lawfully
have refused to pay it^ yet because the Jews would have taken offense, and at
such his refusal, and charged it with appearance of a profane contempt of the
Law of Moses, and the Sanctuary: therefore he voluntarily paid it, and so
became a Jewe to the Jews, as under the Law to them that were under the law.
Notwithstanding, lest we should offend, etc. And if this be the sense of the
place, what is said of this one ceremony, may be applied unto all, for one of
the reasons and ends, why Christ observed the whole Ceremonial Law was, to
prevent scandal, to abstain from all appearance of evil. In nature, says
Cameron, there is appetitu^ quidem unionis, which causes things to be moved,
and to rest often besides the proper condition of their particular nature,
whence sometimes light things are moved downwards, heavy things upwards. Unto
this appetite of union in nature, there is answerable in grace, the desire to
promote Gods glory, which often inclines, and carries the godly beyond and
besides the ordinary obligations, arising out of their particular, and
personal conditions and relations. And unto the measure of grace is
proportionable the degree of the desire of Gods glory, so that the holier any
one is, the more vehemently he desires the promotion thereof, and if it
require any thing to be done of him, why he will do it, although other wise
by virtue of his particular, and personal condition, he be not bound
thereunto. Therefore although Christ, secundum specialem rationem personae
suae, if we eye the special consideration, and dignity of his person, was not
tied to keep the Ceremonial Law, yet he kept it in as much as the glory of
God required him so to do. If you demand how the glory of God exacted this at
Christ's hands, why Christ himself tells us, N^ simus illis sca^dalo, lest we
should offend them; for if Christ had not observed the Ceremonial Law, he had
doubtless wonderfully estranged the Jews from him. In observing it then he
did but as Kings often do in stooping to many things, unto which they are no
ways obliged for to win the hearts, and affections of their humorous
subjects. This example of our Savior was followed by the Apostles, and Elders
in the first general Council at Jerusalem, where they imposed upon the
Gentiles abstinence from meat offered to Idols, from things strangled, and
from blood, Act. 15.29. Not for that these meats were in themselves unclean,
and abominable, but because they appeared to be so unto the froward, and
peevish Jews, who were kept off from Christ's, because these meats, in which
they supposed to be such abomination, and uncleanenesse, were usually eaten by
the Christians. But this was but a temporary injunction they gave unto others.
Let us view their own practice. Maintenance for preaching was due unto Paul^*
from both the Corinthians, and Thessalonians, and yet he did forbear exacting
it, 1. Cor. 9.1. These. 2. that so he might take away all color for suspicion
of any mercenary, or greedy appetite after gain, to be in his preaching, and
quite cut off all scandals thereby, which in that dawning of Christianity upon
them, would have put a rub unto the progress of the Gospel, and have made
his ministry to be evil spoken of. And of St Paul, the Saints in succeeding
ages were followers, as he of Christ. Those Libellatici, so often and sharply
censured by St Ciprian, Epist. 15.31.52. lib. de lapsis. lib. de exhortatione
Martyrum: though they did not sacrifice, or directly deny Christ, were yet by
the Church put to their penance, for seeming to deny him, because they either
by themselves, or others, at least accepted from the Magistrate bills, or
scroules testimonial of their abnegation. Baronius out of Suidas.
Auxentius being commanded by Licinius to set a branch of a vine-tree laden
with clusters at the feet of Bacchus his image presently shaped him this
round, and resolute answer, God forbid, O Emperor, that I should do it, for I
am a Christian* The matter was not great in it self, yet because it would have
favored Idolatry, or given manifest appearance of it, rather than do it he
chose banishment from the Court, and loss of the Emperors service. Theodoret
lib. 3 cap. 15 Nicepho^us lib. 11. c. ^ S^^o^en. (...). 6. c. 6.
As Valentinian, afterward Emperor, went before Julian the Apostate into a
Temple of the Goddess Fortune, one of the Priests besprinkled Julian with a
kind of purging or holy water, a drop of which by chance fell on Valentinian,
at which he was so extremely incensed, as that he stroke the Priest, tore,
and rent in pieces that part of his garment on which it fell, with a great
disdain, and holy indignation, throwing it away from him, that so he might
avoid the least tincture of their superstitious, and idolatrous religion.
Theodoret lib. 4. c. 15. Nicephorus l. 11. c 21.
But above all, very remarkable is the zeal of the boys of Samosatene, who
because a tennis-ball, with which they played, had but touched the foot of the
Ass whereon Lucius rode, their Heretical Bishop, they presently cried out
that it was defiled (although indeed it was not capable of any moral
pollution,) and therefore to purge or expiate it threw it into the fire in the
midst of the market place. This may be thought but a childish pranke, and
therefore not imitable, however yet it aptly serves to demonstrate that their
education, framed them unto a hatred of whatsoever had any remote reference,
unto either evil actions or persons. Saint Ambrose forbad Monica the bringing
of wine and cakes to the Celebrities of the Martyrs, not for any unlawfulness
of the custom, but ne ^ll^ occasio se ingurgit an^^ daretur ebriosis, and qui^
illa quasi parent alia superstitioni Gentilium essent simillima, as Saint
Austin lib. 6. confess. c. 2. least occasion of excessive quassing should be
given to drunkards, and because those parentalia, funeral feasts, were very
like to heathenish superstition. A reverend Prelate of our Church, assigns
another reason, because this custom, had some resemblance of those
superstitious and idolatrous Colorydians mentioned by Epiphanius, who offered
cakes to the Virgin Mary in imitation of that heathenish custom condemned by
the Prophet Jeremy, chap. 7. v. 18. of such as did offer cakes unto the Moon,
as unto the Queen of heaven. Now when Monica understood that Saint Ambrose had
forbidden this tam pie, atque obedienter amplexa est, ut ipse mirarer, says
Saint Austin, in that forecited place. Quod tam facile accusatrix potius
consuetudinis suae quam disceptatrix illius prohibitionis effecta sit: she so
piously, and obediently embraced this prohibition as that I my self, says
Austin, wondered to see her so easily rather accuse her own custom, than
dispute his command. The custom of thrice dipping or sprinkling in Baptism
was lawful nay laudable, but when once it was used by Heretics, to signify
a Trinity not of persons, but natures in the Godhead, then Saint Gregory
thought fitting that it should be left of, not because it was evil, but for
that it might seem to countenance their damnable Heresy: his words are these,
de trina vero mersione baptismatis nihil responderi verius potest, quam quod
ipsi sensitis, quoa in una side nihil officit sanctae Ecclesiae consuetudo
diversa, etc. sed quia nunc hucusque ab haereticis infans in baptismate tertio
mergebatur, faciendum apud vos esse non censeo, Lib 1. c. 3. In ipso titulo
pon^tur Divi Paul^ pro Beati Pauli, ego enim nunquam proba^^ vocem Divus, vel
Diva, cum de Sanctis agitur, t^ quod eam voce^ apud La^^nos vetere Patres non
inveniam, t^ quod apud E^hn^cos Div^ nome^ D^^^ tantu^ tr^bui solea^.
ne dum mersiones numerant divinitatem dividant, dumque quod faciebant faciunt,
se morem nostrum vicisse glorientur. lib. 1. Epist. 41. Gabriel Biel lectione
38. says, that the Church of Rome thought it meet to use common leavened
bread in the administration of the Eucharist, lest in using unleavened bread,
they should be deemed to imitate Ebion the heretic: Nay Bellarmine in his
recognition of his book de verbo Dei, admonishes the reader, that in the
title of the third Chapter of the first books Divi Pauli is put for Beati
Pauli, for in making mention of the Saints, I never approved (says he) the
use of the word * divus or diva, and one of his reasons is, because amongst the
heathens, 'twas usually ascribed to their false or fained gods. But what mean
I to allege the examples of either the Chuch of Rome, or Bellarmine, for take
we but a view of our own Church, the lives of her Worthies, will yield store
of presidents in this kind, but I will content my self with one, most
especially deserving our notice, and imitation. And it is the religious care
that King James of blessed memory had, to free, and clear our book of
Common Prayer, not only from faultiness in it self, but also offensivenesse
unto men, and by causing an explication to be made of those things in it, which
were excepted against: how careful, and scrupulous he was in this particular,
you may read in his Proclamation prefixed to the book of Common prayer, we
thought meet, faith he there, that some small things might be explained, not
that the same might not very well have been borne with by men, who would have
made a reasonable construction of them, but for that in a matter concerning the
service of God, we were nice, or rather jealous, that the public form
thereof should be free, not only from blame, but from suspicion, so as neither
the common adversary should have advantage to wrest ought therein contained to
other sense, than the Church of England intends, nor any troublesome, or
ignorant person of his Church, be able to take the least occasion of cavil
against it, etc.

To heap up other, either testimonies, or instances, were to prejudice, if not
the authority of those before mentioned, yet your esteem of them, as if you
were not by them sufficiently persuaded and convinced: my labor (I suppose)
will be better spent in demonstrating unto you the expediencie of that which
may seem rigor in this doctrine, in discovering unto you what good reasons
Saint Paul had to exact so great a measure, and so high a pitch of abstinence
from sin. Those that I will specify shall be drawn from God, from Satan,
from our selves, from our Brethren. First from God, we have these two, our
Relations unto him, our Danger in offending of him.

First our Relations unto him, he is our Father, our Sovereign; Christ Jesus
is our spiritual Husband Now a dutiful child declines not only disobedience,
but whatsoever has the color of it; an obedient, and loyal subject, startles
at not only treason, but also whatsoever may occasion suspicion thereof; a
faithful and chaste wife abhorres not only adultery, but whatsoever may make
her husband justly jealous, others but suspicious of her chastity. And shall
not every child of God, every one that professes subjection unto heaven, be
fearful of the appearance of disobedience, and undutifulnesse to so indulgent
a Father as God, of the appearance of Treason and Rebellion against so
Almighty a King as God? Does it not befit the Spouse the Church, every member
of Christ to dread all shows and signs of disloyalty, and unfaithfulness to
so loving a Spouse as Christ Jesus? Sueton, de Jul. Caesar. c. 74.
Did Julius Caesar, but an earthly Potentate, think it not enough that his
wife was without a fault, unless withal she was without so much as the
suspicion of a fault? And will not Christ (think you?) who is King of Kings,
and Lord of Lords, expect as great unblameablenesse in his Spouse? Plutarch in
the life Pompey.
Theophanes Lesbian to diswade Pompey from flying into Parthia tells him that
his wife would be liable to a great deal of danger amongst those barbarous
people; and though (said he) they proffer no villainy unto her, yet it is an
undecent thing to think that the wife of Pompey might have been dishonored:
To di^wade us from the appearances and occasions of sin it should (me
thinks) be an effectual argument, that our souls which are married unto
Christ in righteousness, judgment, and holiness, will hereby be obnoxious
to danger of pollution; what though they be not actually defiled? yet it is an
undecent thing to think that the spouse, a member of Christ might have been
dishonored, might have been foiled with a lust, ravished, vanquished by
Satan, defiled with sin.

If from these appearances of evil, our Relations to God cannot draw us, yet
(me thinks) in the second place, our danger in offending of him should drive
us, for he is a consuming fire unto, as the works, so also the workers of
impiety: and how can we then but be afraid to venture on not only what we
know does, but what we fear, others suspect may deserve the wrath of so
sinne-revenging a God?

That we should abstain from all appearance of evil, may secondly be gathered
from Satan, from the consideration, first, of his cruelty and malice against
us, Secondly, of his temptations of us.

First, from the consideration of his cruelty and malice against us, which the
Scripture shadoweth out by terming him, Mat. 13.39.
the Enemy, by way of excellency, the Rev. 12.10. Rev. 9.11. Malach. 3.11. Joh
8.44. 1. Joh. 3.15. 1 Pet. 5.8. Rev. 12.9.
envious man, the Accusar, the Tempter, the Destroyer, the Devourer, a
Murderer from the beginning; as also by comparing him unto a roaring Lion,
unto a great red Dragon, an old Serpent. Now me-thinkes we should fear to
come, not only under the power, but also into the sight of such an adversary:
and yet by rushing upon the shows, the occasions of evil, what do we but
hazard the surprizall of our souls by him?

This will be more apparent, from the consideration, 2, of Satan's temptations
of us: of his Temptations of us to sin, of his Temptations of us to despair,
or at least discomfort, for sin; because in both sorts of temptations he
goes about by these appearances of evil, to wreake his malice upon us.

For first, in his temptations of us to sin, they are first the bate by which
he allures: Secondly, an argument by which he persuades us thereunto.
Thirdly, an encouragement, whereby he is heart'ned to persist in tempting of us.

First then, the appearances of sin, are a bait whereby Satan allures us
unto sin, which if we bite at, our consciences will soon be enlarged to
swallow sin it self. Satan well knowing that Gods children would even
startle at your gross and more hideous sins, such as are Idolatry, Adultery,
Drunkenness, and the like, therefore chiefly plyeth them with enticements to
the signs, shows, and occasions of them, for these will smooth the passage
unto the sins themselves. Of this we have a remarkable instance in Alippius,
who, as Saint Austin relates Confess. lib. 6. cap. 8. being drawn by his
friend's importunity to accompany him unto the Roman Gladiatorie Games, yet
resolved though he were present with his body, to be absent in his heart, and
for that purpose to keep his eyes shut, that he might not defile them with so
barbarous a sight; yet at last upon a great shout, that the people gave at the
fall of one of the combatants, his curiosity made him behold the occasion, and
thereupon he presenly became an applausive spectator of that bloody, and
inhumane spectacle. An Italian, as Holerius writes, by his often smelling to
the herb Basile, had a scorpion engendered in his head: even so we, by our
often dallying, and tampering with things that carry a show of unlawfulness,
may have Satan, as I may so speak, even formed in us, for as then Saint
Hierome says upon Ecclesiastes the ninth, Diabolus Serpens est Lubricus, cujus
si capiti, id est, primae suggestioni non resistitur, totus interna cordis, dum
non sentitur illabitur, that is, the Devil is a slippery serpent, and if we
do not keep out his head, that is, his first suggestions, it is not to be
doubted but that he will steallingly slide into the most secret corners of the
heart; and so we actuated by him, shall at last proceed from things only
appearing sinful, unto the practice of most horrid and ghastly crimes,

Secondly, the appearance of evil is an argument by which he persuades us unto
what is in its own nature evil: for if a man have but slipped into such actions
as the best minded judge, to have a real appearance of evil. Satan forthwith
will suggest unto him, that he has by this quite cracked his credit amongst
those that are accounted religious; by them (will he say) thou art as much
suspected, and as deeply consured for thy seeming evil, as for thy being so;
were thou not better therefore, be as thou seem, for they cannot think worse
of thee than they do, thy shame and disgrace their jealousies, suspicions, and
censures cannot be greater for sin it self, than it is already for the show
of it. Now this Temptation of Satan receives great advantage from our nature,
for we naturally are addicted to society, and therefore if we find that upon
the signs and shows of such and such sins in our practice, good men
condemn us as guilty of the sins themselves, and thereupon begin to reserve
and estrange themselves from us, refusing any longer to reach out unto us the
right hand of fellowship, why, then we will presently have fellowship with the
unfruitful works of darkness, and couple in with loose, carnal, and formal
men, whose conversation will quickly infect us, so that it will not be long ere
we run with them to the same excess of riot. And thus you see how Satan
takes occasion from the appearance of sin, to draw us on unto sin it self,
which me-thinkes should be sufficient to dissuade us from them. For is Satan so
backward in tempting, or is his invention grown so barren, as that our lives
and practice must put argument into his mouth? is the purchase of hell and
damnation so difficult, as that we must needs furnish the Devil with baits
to allure us, with reasons to persuade us unto our own everlasting perdition,
this were folly and madness that would want a name.

But in the third place, the signs and appearances of sin are not only a
bait, by which he enticeth us, an argument by which he persuades unto sin,
but withal an encouragement, by which he is heart'ned to go on in tempting of
us, for they make him gather heart, and hope that we are coming on to sin it
self; and this hope will breed diligence, make him a more importunate
solliciter, make him to double and strengthen his assaults, to ply us even
thick and threefold with temptations: A dog will not run from a man as long
as he throws bread unto him, and can any man suppose the devil will fly so
long as he gives place unto him, as long as he throws himself upon
temptations, by practicing such things as have a manifest show of evil, for
though in themselves they be never so small, yet will they serve to usher in
farther and greater matters: being then preparatives unto sin, they cannot be
(as some have imagined) good fences against sin: seeming to be evil is not,
cannot be a means to shield us from being so, no more than the opening the
gates of a City can be the way to raise the siege of it, or letting go the
sluices of a river can be the course to stop its current.

You have seen arguments from Satan's temptation^ of us to sin: take next one
from his temptations of us to despair, or at least discomfort for sin, a
temptation of so hideous a nature, as that me-thinkes our actions should not
lend it any the least advantage, his first labor is by the appearance of sin
to make us offend God, but when he cannot proceed so far, his second
endeavor will be, to make us disquiet our selves, when he cannot wound us by
them, he will vex us for them, for he will wrest and misconstrue all that we
have done unto the worst sense, he will swell motes into beams, molehils into
mountains, appearances of evil into realities, and thunder unto us that there
is not a pin to choose betwixt those and these; unto which our souls being
distracted by the violent importunity of this temptation, will be over apt to
give credence. And for a man to be thus tossed between Satan's powerful
suggestions, and his own fears and suspicions, cannot but even crush his
spirits, and quite eclipse the peace and joy of his heart.

Abstinence from all appearance of evil is thirdly needful in regard of our
selves, for by them we may incur a double danger, a danger of being infected
with, a danger of being punished for sin.

First, a danger of being infected with sin, what Bernard spoke of Eves
beholding the forbidden fruit, is true concerning every appearance of evil:
Bren. Tract. de grad, humilitatis.
Et si culpa non est, culpae tameu indicium est, and si culpa non est, culpae
tamen occasio est, indicium commissae, and causa est committendae. Although it
be not in it self a sin, yet it is a token, yet it is an occasion of sin,
a token that sin has been committed, a cause of committing it for the
future. Now our natures are strongly bent to evil, when this (then) our
natural inclination, is furthered by outward occasions, we may soon be led
to the realities of sin, though the occasions of themselves are weak, they
working but as objects, and the objective causalitie being of all most
imperfect, yet Satan is strong, our lusts are strong, these occasions are
suitable to our lusts: our souls therefore, by a little help from Satan will
quickly catch infection from them. For this reason were the Israelites, Exodus
12.
in the time of the passover prohibited, not only the eating, but the very
having of leavened bread in their houses. For this reason too were the
Nazarites forbidden to eat so much as the husks of the grapes, for if that
had been permitted, they would perhaps, have soon proceeded to eating of the
grapes, and thence to drinking of the wine it self: hence also grew that
precise resolution of David, Psalm. 101. v. 3.
I will set no wicked thing before mine eyes: Well may the world, and devil
set wicked things before mine eyes, but for mine own part I will not invite
temptations, I will set no wicked thing before mine eyes, as much as I can I
will decline the objects, examples, and shows of wickedness: do but put fire
unto flax and it will presently be on a flame: so present we unto our loose
and corrupt natures the shows, (which (as you have heard) are also the
occasions of evil) and how suddenly will they take fire? this Joseph knew, and
therefore when his Mistress solicited him to that foul act of uncleanness,
he hearkened not unto her to lie by her, or so much as to be with her, Gen: the
39. the 10. but fled, and got himself out of her presence, v. 12. doubting
lest the very sight of her might kindle lust. Nay to the shame of many secure
and venterous Christians, of this even Scipio an heathen, and soldier too, was
apprehensive and fearful, and therefore would not suffer certain captive
virgins, though of an exquisite beauty, to be brought so much as into his
presence: Ne quid (says Florus) de virginitatis integritate delibasse, saltem
vel oculis videretur. That he might not seem to have sipt or skimmed the
honor of their chastity, so much as with beholding them. As Appelles then by
drawing the picture of Campaspe fell in love with the pattern of his work
Campaspe her self, so we from retaining, from affecting the show of sin, will
soon proceed to a delight in fin it self.

Some indeed are so strangely confident of their abhorrencie from sin, as
they doubt not infection from appearance of it, they can venture into the
loosest company, yet so bridle their appetite, as that they fear no excess;
be present at an Idolatrous mass, and yet be in no danger of being affected
with it, unless it be with dislike of it.

Surely these men are dropped from heaven, never borne in sin, or conceived in
iniquity; for they, whose original is from men, may possibly be drawn away by
sinful objects, and shows, but these men (forsooth) are above gunshot, beyond
the reach of temptation; Their professed hatred of sin brings me in mind of
Pigmalions averseness from women; he was a professed, almost a sworn enemy to
woman-kinde, yet drawing but the picture of a woman, he fell in love with it,
and he hugged, and kissed it so long, till at last, by the power of Venus (as
the Poet fables it) it became a woman: Their case is like, they profess
detestation of sin, and yet delight in some things that have the appearance,
the resemblance thereof, let them take heed they dote not so long upon these,
at that at length by the power of Satan, and the strength of their own lusts,
they be transformed into real sins. I will end this reason with that of
Chrysostom, in his fifteenth Homily unto the people of Antioch. (...), etc.

It will be to us the occasion of greatest security, if we do not only flee
sins, but such indifferent things also, which are means whereby they do
supplant us, for as he who goes upon the edge of a steep, and craggie rock,
though he falls not, yet with fear trembles, and so falls through his
trembling, so he who leaves not sin aloof, and a far off, but
approaches close to the brinke of it, has just cause to live in fear, seeing
he has just cause to fear to fall into it.

Secondly, danger of being punished for sin, not by God, for he is an
omniscient Judge, and therefore cannot mistake the appearance of evil for
evil it self: he is a just Judge, and therefore will not punish the
appearance of evil, for evil it self: but by man, by the secular Magistrate
with temporal punishments, by the governors of the Church, with
Ecclesiastical censures, and by all men generally with shame and obloquie.
Jehosaphat you know in the apparel of Ahab, was like to have been killed for
Ahab. Plutarch.
Megaclis having on the cloak, and armor of Pyrrhus, was slain for Pyrrhus:
even so many times some men, for the bare appeara^ce of some crimes are as
hardly thought of, and as severely handled, as if they had committed the crimes
themselves. Florus, l. 3. c. 14.
Tiberius Gracchus, was butchered by the Romans, because it seemed unto them,
that by touching his head with his hand, he had demanded a Diadem, when he
thereby as a sign only exhorted them to stand upon their defense. Because the
Island of Creete seemed to have favored Mithridates, for this seemings sake,
the people of Rome took revenge by the sword, Favisse Mithridati videbatur,
Florus l. 3. c. 7.
hoc placuit armis vindicare. Indeed the Lord sees not as man sees, he
looks on the heart, and thereunto squareth his judgment, but man looks on
the outward appearance 1 Samuel 16.7. and according to it censureth, and so he
may do, and yet oftentimes judge righteous judgment, for if when there is
wanting sufficient evidence of fact, Judges and Juries should not sometimes
proceed upon pregnant signs, and strong presumptions, how many villainies would
pass unpunished? and if Ecclesiastical Governors, should not take the same
course too, how could they possibly stop the spreading mischief of Scandals.

This abstinence from appearance of evil is lastly expedient in regard of our
brethren, to avoid scandal unto them.

First as it is taken by Thomas and the Schole-men, for that which occasionally
leads unto sin, which puts a stumbling block, or an occasion to fall in the
way of others, Romans 14.13. for so do all evil shows, and that both in the
way of the weak, and in the way of the wicked.

First, in the way of the weak, for they are misguided, and drawn unto the
practice of that evil, the appearance whereof they see in us.

Secondly, in the way of the wicked; for first, hereby the obdurate are
heartned, confirmed, and comforted: secondly, hereupon adversaries take
occasion to speak reproachfully of that holy name, and profession which we
bear, to blaspheme the Cross, Truth, and Gospel of Christ.

Secondly, as it is used vulgarly, and commonly for forrow, grief, dislike, or
displeasure at an action, for it matters not much whether our facts be evil or
bear show of evil, they equally would wound the hearts and vex the righteous
spirits of the godly, and therefore are both violations of Saint Paul's precept.
Romans 15.2. Let every one of us please his neighbor for his good to
edification. Valerius Publicola (says Florus,) ne specie arcis offenderet,
eminontes aedes suas in plano submisit: he levelled with the ground his high
and lofty buildings lest he should offend the people with the appearance of a
cittadell, and wilt not thou throw aside a vanity; an excrement, some idle if
not monstrous fashion, rather than offend thy brother (for whom Christ died)
with the appearance of an evil. A foul shame were it, that popularity should
prevail more with a Roman, than charity with thee who art a Christian.

But some will be ready to object, that this doctrine is prejudicial to our
Christian liberty, for that reaches to the use of all things that are of an
indifferent nature, and such are these actions charged with the appearance of
evil, and therefore if ye streighten us in the use of them, you injuriously
deprive us of that liberty which we have in Christ Jesus unto the use of all
indifferent things.

Unto this two things are to be answered: First, those facts that bear show of
evil, however they be in Thesi, in their general nature indifferent, do yet
in in cas^ and in Hypothesi, become to be accidentally evil, because done
against conscience, when they appear to be evil unto our selves; against
charity, when they appear to be evil unto others. Zuarez expresses this
though somewhat obscurely, yet more fully; An action (says he) only evil in
appearance, transgresses some virtue not prima per se primo, but only ex
consequenti, connexione virtutum, by reason of the mutual connection, and
commerce of one virtue with, and dependence upon another. Advertendum est
(inquit) dupliciter contra aliquam virtutem peccari: uno modo per se primo,
quia direct agitur contra objectum ejus vel circumstantias illi ex se debitas,
and hoc modo actio solum mala in apparentia nullam virtutem offendit. Alio modo
peccari; potest ex consequenti and connexione virtutum. Nam (ut dictum est 1.2
ae: quia actus virtutum sunt undique boni, quando hic and nunc actus alicujus
virtutis potest esse contrarius alteri virtuti (quamvis in objecto suo, vel
circu^stantiis quasi intrinsecis non habeat defectum) non potest prudenter
fieri; Atque adeo neque est actus virtutis simpliciter, and ideo participat
malitiam contraria^ utrique virtuti, sed alteram per se, alteram quasi per
accidens and consequenter. Sic etiam propria malitia scandali fere semper
fundatur in alia malitia, tamen ex consequenti and per accidens semper habet
aliquo modo illam conjuncta^ ex defectu circumstantiae debitae, saltem propter
aliam virtutem propter quam non laedendam prudenter cessandum esset ab opere
hic and nunc habente speciem mali, quamvis ex se esset alias honestum. Zuarez
de triplici virtute Theologica, tract. de charitate.

Secondly, although our Christian liberty extends to the use of all things
indifferent, yet ought we in godly wisdom, and discretion to abridge our
selves of the outward exercise of this our liberty, whenever it is very
probable that it will become dangerous to our selves, or scandalous to others.
Ye have been called unto liberty, only use not liberty for an occasion to the
flesh, but by love serve one another, Gal. 5.13. As free, and not using your
liberty for a cloak of maliciousness, the 1 Pet. 2.16. Now we use or rather
abuse our liberty for an occasion to the flesh for a cloak of maliciousness,
by practicing such indifferences, as have show of evil, for they, (as you have
heard at large) are likely to prove as occasions of sin unto our selves, so
also active scandals to misguide our brethren, and therefore though they be not
absolutely, and simply in their nature unlawful to be done, yet they are by
accident unlawful for me to do, as long as they carry show of evil. All
things (indeed) are pure (says the Apostle) but it is evil for that man who
eats with offense: Infirmitas nominat promptitudinem ad scandalum, offensio
autem nominat indignationem, etc. scandalum autem importat ipsam impactionem ad
ruinam. Aquin. 2 a 2 ae. q. 44. art. 1.
It is good neither to eat flesh, nor drink wine, nor any thing whereby thy
brother stumbleth, or is offended, or is made weak. Romans 14.20, 21.

What remains then, Application.
but that all be admonished in the Lord Jesus to take to heart a matter so
deeply concerning them, both in conscience, as a duty expressly enjoined by God,
practiced by Christ his Apostles, and Saints; and in consequence, as befitting
us as the sons, subjects of God, as the Spouse, and members of Christ, as
being needful to defeat Satan's malice, to cut off his temptations unto sin,
and unto discomfort for sin, to avoid sin, etc: in our selves, scandalls
unto others, unto the weak, obstinate, and strong. If therefore there be in in
you any love of God, any care to walk worthy of those high relations you carry
to him, any regard to the safety of your own souls, any fear of Satan,
sin, or punishment, any compassion over the consciences of your poor
brethren, keep aloof from whatsoever neighbors, and borders upon sin,
whatsoever has the blush and show thereof: hate as Ambr. l. 6 hexaem.
Ambrose exhorts not only sin, but the coat of sin, the garment spotted
by the flesh. Even an heathen will advise you hereunto. Quint. l. 2 c. 2.
Carendum non solum crimine turpitudinis, verum etiam suspicione.

Want we inducements, take we these three. It will be a course, first safe and
secure: secondly, comfortable: thirdly, honorable.

First, safe and secure, by it sin and Satan shall be stav'd off, kept out at
daggers end, your own souls secured, kept out of gunshot either of infection
or punishment, so that they shall not come nigh scarce so much as the confines
either of sin, or hell. Secondly, comfortable: For what an unspeakable
comfort will it be unto thy drooping soul in the hour of death, or in the
time of spiritual desertion, when thy conscience can truly suggest, that thou
have been so abhorrent from sin, as that thou have shunned whatsoever has
been homogeneall thereunto, whatsoever has looked but like unto it, it must
needs stop Satan's mouth, and make thine own soul triumph in the calmness of
a clear, and good Conscience.

Thirdly, honorable, for 'twill gain thee esteem amongst both good and bad
ones, with those 'twill make thy name precious, 'twill muzzle the mouths of
these, when they behold such uprightness in thy life, as that thou shunnest
not only downright irreligiousnesse to God, injustice to men, but even their
very picture and resemblance, this cannot but extort from the^, though never so
malicious, an ingenious acknowledgement, that thou art a true Israelite, a
sincere Nathaniel in whom there is found no guile. Now though our maine and
first endeavor must be to keep a good conscience, yet is not the Jewel or
precious ointment of a good name, to be in the mean while neglected; our care
should be to preserve that likewise unspotted, S. Paul ( Acts. 24.16.)
professes that he exercised himself to have always a conscience void of
offense, as toward God, so toward men; and he advises us to provide things
honest in the sight of all men, Romans 12.17. To walk honestly toward them that
are without 1 Thessalonians. 4.12. To strive for a good report of them that are
without, 1 Timothy 3.7.

I will but prescribe two cautions directing how we are to abstain from the
appearance of evil, and then I shall have done with the general application
of the words. We are to abstain neither only, nor chiefly from the
appearance of evil.

First, not only, that were foul Hypocrisy, of which yet there are even a
generation guilty, who ouely combat with the shadow of sin, and in the mean
while embrace the body of sin, real sins; who abstain from the show of
every evil work, and yet remain reprobate to every good work, who profess
detestation of gain by gaming, because they conceive it to be an appearance of
theft, and yet make no conscience of fraud, deceit, and cousenage in their
dealings, who stand at defiance with all shows of uncleanness, and yet make no
scruple of the grossest acts thereof.

Secondly, not chiefly, that were a great incongruity, for so care of the
means should, be greater than that of the end, because abstinence from the
appearance of evil is enjoined as a preservative against the evil it self;
The evils themselves therefore should chiefly be avoided, the body of sin
should be opposed more than the shadow, than the shows of sin. The flesh
should be abhorred in a higher degree, than the garment spotted therewith.

You have seen the point pressed generally, as it concerns all men's abstinence
from the appearance of all evils: I will only crave your pardon to call more
particularly:

First upon all men, for abstinence from the appearance especially of some
evil.

Secondly, upon some men especially for abstinence from the appearance of all
evils, and then I will put a period to my meditations upon these words.

First we must decline the shows of some evils above others, of our master,
our bosom evils. For from them is most danger to be feared, they having
commonly most strength from our natures: and Satan besides knows but too well
how our tide stands, he quickly acquaints himself with our predominant lusts,
and most raging corruptions, and unto them especially fits, and accords his
temptations; as Agrippina, when she poisoned her husband Claudius, Tacitus
Suetonius.
mixed the poison in the meat which he most loved.

Secondly some men above others are especially to decline the appearance of all
evils. All public men should do so, but especially we of the Clergy. The
high Priests and Nazarites under the Law were not to come nigh a dead body,
Levit. 21.11. Number. 6.6. And in imitation of them among the Romans, the Priests
might not touch the dead, nay they might not see the dead; for if a Priest
pronounced a funeral oration, 'twas not without a veil drawn betwixt him and
the corpse. Nay a Flaminians Priest might not hear the sound of pipes used at
Funerals, nor come into a place where there was a grave. Was there such rituall
purity under the Law? Such ceremonial strictness in heathenish priests? and
shall there not be found an answerable degree of moral preciseness in the
Ministers of the Gospel? shall they be willingly within sight, sent, and
hearing of impiety, except to reprove it? Mr Reynold, Psalm. 110.
As a woman big with child, for fear and danger of miscarrying forbeareth
Physic, violent exercise, and many meats and drinks, which otherwise she
might freely use: even so those who travel in birth with the children of
Christ, are put to deny, and abridge themselves of many indifferences. I will
eat no flesh, says Saint Paul, while the world stands, rather than make my
brother to offend, 1 Cor. 8.13.

Reasons enforcing their abstinence after an especial manner from the
appearances of evil are two: Because in them they occasion, first greater
loosnesse in bad ones: Secondly, more heaviness to good ones.

First greater looseness in bad ones. Strange it is how the lower, and more
ignorant rank of men will be hereby strengthened in their downeright sinful
courses: Nay if a Minister do but wisely and lawfully use his Christian
liberty, the rude vulgar will thereupon open themselves a gappe unto all
licentiousness. If he be but innocently pleasant, think they we may be mad,
If he but sip, we may carouse. If he spend but some few hours in his honest
and harmless recreations, the common gamester presenly concludes his mispense
of both time and patrimony in gaming to be thence justifiable.

Secondly, more heaviness to good ones: it grieves the spirits of the
righteous to see them in any, it wounds their souls, it makes their bloods,
their hearts rise to behold them in a man of God: it becomes not my weakness
to advise, only in mine own and others behalf, I unfainedly wish and pray,
that this were feriously thought upon, and preached by us all, that all of us
in a tender regard to the reputation and humor of our high calling would walk
with great circumspection, make straight steps unto our feet, tread every step
as nicely, as gingerly as if we went among snares, walked upon ropes, or
pinnacles.

I will conclude with that of Bernard to Eugenius, lib. 3. de consideratione,
cap. 4. which though written particularly unto him, may yet fittingly enough be
applied to every minister, nay every Christian. Interest tuae perfectionis
malas res, and malas pariter species devitare, in altero conscientiae in altero
fame consulis. It becomes your holiness to decline as evil things, so also
evil appearances, in that thou consult'st for thy conscience, in this for thy
same, nay (indeed) if it be not presumption to add unto the Father, in this
thou providest both for conscience and fame: for conscience first; for the
purity, for the peace of thy conscience; for the purity of thy conscience, to
keep it void of offense both toward God, and toward men; for the peace of
thy conscience, to preserve it from the violence of Satan's temptations, from
the vexations of thine own fears, and jealousies. Secondly, for fame, so to
hedge it in from scandal as that it shall be above the reach of suspicion.
Therefore to go on in the words of the Father, Puta tibi non licere, etsi
alias fortasse liceat, quidquid male fuerit coloratum, non sit in fama navus
malae speciei. Think not for thee lawful, though perhaps otherwise lawful,
whatsoever shall be evil colored: In thy fame let there not be so much as a
spot of evil appearance, so shall thou follow things that are of good report,
Phil. 4.8. and thereby quite take off all private prejudices, all open
calumnies against either thy person or profession. However thou shall procure
the testimony and approbation of God and thine own conscience, and be
presented unblameable, clear from offensivenesse before men, from faultiness
before God, at the appearing of the Lord Jesus Christ; to whom with the Father,
and holy Ghost, be ascribed by us, and the whole Church, the Kingdom, the
Power, and Glory, from this time forth for evermore.

Amen.
THE POSTSCRIPT
to the Reader.
WHereas from page the 57. to page the 63. we delivered that according to the
common opinion of the Schoolmen, things commanded might in case of scandal be
for a while omitted or forborne, Vasquez and Becanus dissent from us and them
in this particular, the explication and confirmation of their opinion I will
briefly propound, and then leave to thy censure.

Becanus, to make way for his opinion premiseth that there is a difference
between natural precepts, for some says he bind simply and always
whatsoever circumstances intervene, and their obligation never cease, such
like are those that forbid lying, perjury, hatred of God, Idolatry, etc: for
these facts are so intrinsecally sinful, as that they cannot by any
circumstances be made lawful: others now bind not simply, and absolutely, but
with certain circumstances, and therefore they bind as long as those
circumstances remain, they cease to bind when those circumstances are
changed: Such is the precept forbidding to kill, for that binds with these
circumstances, that we kill not by our private authority, except in case of
necessary defense. Take away these circumstances, and it binds not, for it is
lawful to kill upon the command of authority, or in our necessary defense:
such also is the precept of eschewing scandal; for however it be dictated by
the law of nature, yet it obliges not absolutely and quomodocunque: but with
certain circumstances, and one circumstance necessarily requisite to make it
bind us, is that there occur not any other precept, either natural or
positive. The reason is, because every one is bound to have a greater care of
his own than others salvation; and consequently, rather to avoid sin in
himself, than to prevent it in his brethren. And therefore that precept which
is given us for the prevention of sin in others, is but of a secondary
obligation. Now the precept of eschewing scandal is imposed, only for the
hindering of sin in others, and therefore does not tie us when there occurreth
any other precept, which is given for the avoiding of sin in our selves. But
it may be objected, that the precept of shunning scandal is of the law of
nature, and therefore is more obligatory than those precepts that are but
positive. Unto this Becanus answers, that a natural precept is more
obligatory than that which is positive, caeteris paribus, that is, if each
precept both that which is natural, and that which is positive, be primarily
referred unto the furthering of our own salvation, unto the preventing of
sin in our selves: but now if on the other side the primary scope of the
natural precept be to hinder sin in others, as it is in the precept of
scandal, and the principal end of the positive precept be to shun sin in
our selves, than that precept which is positive does more deeply bind us than
that which is natural.

Again secondly, it may be objected, that if the obligation of the natural
precept of eschewing scandal, cease upon occurrence of but a positive
precept; why then it seems this positive precept detracts or derogates from
the natural precept of avoiding scandal, as being of greater force and
validity.

In no wise, only it takes away a circumstance requisite to make the precept
of avoiding scandal obligatory, quale cum dicimus (says Vasquez) non esse
omittendum praceptum positivu^ propter vitandum scandalum proximi, non dicimus
praeceptum natural derogare praecepto positivo tanquam fortiori, sed dicimus
occursu praecepti positivi cessare quan^am circumstantiam necessariam, ut
obliget praeceptum de vitando scandalo etiamsi natural sit.

FINIS.
Errata.
Page 7. l. 4. 5, for orthoxe read orthodoxe. l. 21. for is little r. is as
little. p. 16. l. 14, for the r. unto the. p. 20. l. 25. for, dissenting unto,
r. dissenting from, or assenting unto. p. 21. l. 16. for, an, r. and. p. 45. l.
5. for, peccata, r. peccato. p. 47. l. 4. for, with, r. without. p. 53. l. 16,
17. for, regal, r. regular. p. 54. l. 13. for, charity limits, how r. charity,
limits how p. 63. l. 4. for really, so a sin, r. ^ really so, a sin. p. 70. l.
ult. for, more r. nor. p. 72. l. 7. for, none, r. of none. p. 77. l. 12. for,
hac, r. hoc. p. 86. l. 8, 9. for superstition, r. suspicion. p. 87. l. 2. for,
Analogically, r. Anagogically, page 105. i^ m^r^ l. 18. for vetere, r. vet^res.
p. 106. dele and. p. 107. l. 13. for, his, r. this. page 114. l. 10. dele,
then. p. 116. l. 25. for, Argument r. Arguments. p. 129. l. 13. for, plano, r.
plana. p. 131. l. 2. dele prima. p. 143. l. 7. for, preached, r. practiced. and
l. 9. for, humor, r. honor. p. 148. l. 23. for, absolutely, r. absolute. p.
151. l. 2. for, quale, r. quare. and l. 7. for, der^gare, r. der^gar^.


