A SVPPLICATION to the Kings most excellent Majesty, Wherein, several reasons
of State and Religion are briefly touched: not unworthy to be read, and
pondered by the Lords, Knights, and Burgeses of the present Parliament, and
other of all estates.

Prostrated At his Highness feet by true affected Subjects.

Nos credimus, propter quod and loquimur. 2. Cor. 4. 13. We believe, for the
which cause we speak also.

1604.

Most high and mighty Prince, and our deerestly beloved Sovereign.
SO many causes concur, wheresoever we turn our thoughts, and these most
great, of rejoicing, as we know not with which we should begin the count, nor
on which to ground our chiefest joy. Your Majesty's direct title to the
Imperial Crown of the Realm, both by lineall descent, and prioritie of
blood, and your Highness most quiet access to the same (Gods only work,
above the expectation of man) do, (as by most right they should,) exceedingly
possess and englad our hearts: Also the thrice fortunate uniting of the two
Kingdoms (which not seldom in former times have been much infestuous one to
the other) and this after so sweet a mean, as by rightful deuolution of both
Scepters to the immediate issue of either Nation, cannot but in semblable
proportion multiply and advance our joys; nor can we any way doubt, but
that the strength of the Monarchy (now made invincible by the union) will ever
be most able to preserve these our joys unto us, and make them perpetual,
either kingdom being such a fortres and countermure to other, and both so
abounding with men and shipping, as no forrayne enemy, how potent soever,
unless he first be weary of his own fortunes, dare ever adventure to offend or
pick quarrel unto: Likewise the hope and strongest affiance which your
Majesty's reign over both nations yields, of reducing the bordurers of either
Country to Christian order: of turning to commodity the vast quantity of
ground, which, by reason of the savage demeanor among them, has, time out of
mind layne waste and unoccupied: and of enjoying peace, commerce and traffic
with all Nations, a blessing most sovereign, and which already is lighted on
us in good measure: Then, the unspeakable benefit of your Highness fit
years to govern, and your long and successful experience in the affair,
being the Art of Arts, and office of God, far more intricate, difficult and
combersome than any other kind of ministration, or state of life on earth: Then
also the special consolation which all men take in your Majesty's regardefull
love toward the Nobility of the Realm, as having already restored some to
their lost dignities, and endowed others with honor and authority in State:
Lastly, to omit other infinite particulars of less moment, the good trial of
your Highness prowess, wisdom, judgment, clemency, bounty, compassion,
the edification of your exemplar life (of like force to your subjects for
fashioning their manners thereunto, as were the twigges of party color, which
the Patriarch Jacob laid before the flock of sheep he had in keeping, at the
time of their conceyuing,) the noblest disposition Genes. 30. 38.
of our young Prince and his brother, the rare virtues of their Queene-mother,
our most respected Princess, and the hope of such store of children from both
your bodies, as may to the worlds end most renowmedly spread and perpetuate the
royal conjunction, name, and family: We say, all these, and other like
gracious respects do so abundantly replenish our hearts with joy, as no
temporal thing can more in the world. And to the end these our joys may ever
inhabit in our souls prosperously without change or diminution, we your
Majesty's reverently affectionate subjects, do prostrately beseech your most
Princely consideration, to commiserate our grievous and long endured pressures
for confessing the Catholic Roman faith; the all only mean (as we
undoubtedly believe) of saving our souls eternally.

We do not presume (our dread Sovereign) to beg the allowance of some few
Churches, for the exercise of our Religion, nor yet the allotting of any
Ecclesiastical living toward the maintayning of the Pastors of our Souls (a
benefit that is not denied by the Princes and State politic of other
Countries, where diversity of religion is tolerated, and infinite good found
to arise thereof,) but the only degree of favor that we seek at your
Majesty's hands in this case, is, that out of your Princely compassion, you
would be pleased to reuerse the penal laws, enacted by our late Sovereign
against Catholic believers, and to license the practice of our Religion in
private houses, without molestation to Priest or lay Person for the same. For
this (most gracious Prince) we entreat, for this we shall ever continue our
humble petitions, and the suite being (as our faith assures us) for the not
abolishing of Gods noblest cause and honor upon earth, and no ways against
the peace, strength, or safety of the Kingdom, but rather much convenient (if
happily not necessary) for the good preservation thereof, and also, for that the
obtaining of the suite would bring unspeakable renown to your Majesty, with
all the chiefest Rulers of the Christian world, and endless comfort to
thousands (who otherwise living against their conscience, must needs abide in
continual horror of Soul) we cannot think it a breach of duty and less
think it a point of disloyalty, ever lowly to solicit, yea petitionarily to
importune your Majesty, for the happy grant of so manifold, farre-speading
and universal a blessedness. And because we would not be thought to speak
unadvisedly in the premises, we crave leave of your gracious Majesty to
adioyne a few brief reasons for remonstrance of that which is said.

1. The world knows that there are three kinds of subjects in the Realm, the
Protestant, the Puritan, and the Catholikely affected, and by general report,
the subject Catholikely affected is not inferior to the Protestant or
Puritan, either in number, or alliance, or generositie of spirit and
resolution. Which multitude or third kind of subjects, would through the
benefit of the dispenall use or toleration of their religion, hold themselves
infinitely obliged to your Majesty, and be ready in all occurrences very
willingly to sacrifice their lives and last drop of blood in any service soever
belonging to the defense of your Majesty's person, crown, or dignity: whereas
being debarred of the said favor and freedom of conscience (in which
consists the true comfort of soul, and all Christian courage) they must be
forcibly driven to lament their hard fortunes, to lie groaning under their
crosses, and consequently without spirit or forwardness in action, unapt for
any employment, as persons overwhelmed with grief and desolation of their most
piteous and miserable state.

2. Again, the Puritan, as he increases daily above the Protestant in
number, so is he of a more presuming, imperious, and hotter disposition and
zeal, ever strongly burning in desire to reduce all things to the form of his
own Idaea, or imagination conceived, and therefore by discourse of reason not
unlike (the enterprise being to be paralleled by many examples) to attempt the
overthrow of the Protestant, and bring the kingdom, especially the
Ecclesiastical state to a paritie or popular form of government, if the
Catholic (perchance the powerablest let thereof) were once extinguished: and
to extinguish him, no mean more potent, than to forbid and punish the exercise
of his religion. And what confusion, havoc, and effusion of blood such an
attempt would work in the commonweal, it is easy to conjecture, whiles the
Puritan with his accomplices, and such as thirst (an infinite number) to have
matters in scuffling, to impugn on the one side, and the Bishops, Deanes,
Canons, and the greatest possessors of Spiritual livings, with all those that
do adhere to them, defend on the other side, and either party stiffely and
violently persecuting other, as is the custom in such commotions, without
regard of God or country. Which disastrous and most deadly mischief can not in
probability approach, or ever grow to head, so long as the Catholic finds
favor with your Majesty, in enjoying the free use of his religion. Or put
case the Puritan should ever adventure to make such an attempt, yet the odds
against him (he having two sorts of adversaries, the Protestant, and the
Catholikely affected by the foresaid favor) are much much greater then any way
in reason or likelihood the victory may be justly doubted of.

3. Moreover, toleration of Catholic religion seems very convenient for
strengthening and securing your Majesty against all worldly attempts foraine and
domestical. Against foreign, in respect the cause why any such trouble should
be once intended, must needs be in all probability the restoring of Catholic
religion, which pretext or cause is quite removed by your Majesty's grant of
the free exercise thereof. Or if it should fall out, that notwithstanding the
happiness of the said most sovereign favor, any foreign Prince, or Princes
confederated, either on envy of your Majesty's greatness, or upon fear of
what consequence the union of the three Kingdoms might prove in time, should
be so intemperate, as either to incite companies within the Realm, or invade
upon the above named pretense, no doubt but all Catholics would eftsoone
disclose the practice, and most willingly strain the uttermost of all their
possible forces and resistaunce for withstanding the said enterprise, made by
whomsoever, and under what shadow of title or authority soever. And if
intestine war or any vproare should happen through any disloyalty of the
subject or other accident, there can be likewise no doubt (the Catholic
religion teaching all temporal obedience to Princes, and more severely
censuring and punishing all sorts of rebellion, then does either the Puritan,
or the Protestant doctrine) but that all Catholics would presently flock to
the banner of your Majesty, and with the effusion of their best blood first
guarde and protect your royal person, and then defend all and singular your
Highness rightes and prerogatives. A bounden duty, as our selves do right
willingly acknowledge, and the contrary a most detestable and treasonable
offense, nevertheless the readiness and performance of our services herein
can not but increase your Majesty's strength and safety of the Crown and
Realme^ the things we desire to have believed, and would remonstrate.

4. Furthermore, both the ancient Philosophers and the Statesmen of latter
time do write, and common sense proclaymeth, that the glory, puissaunce and
stablenesse of a kingdom, consist more in the true virtue and goodness, than
in the store and multitude of subjects; because virtue begets glory, and is
the cherisher of fortitude, both which disdain nothing more than treachery,
and baseness of mind, the common Slewces which convey into all estates all
that is dishonorable. And it is seldom, if ever seen (most noble King) that
they who are constant, obedient and faithful to God in the religion they
believe, are not likewise true, subiectiue, and faithful to their King in all
duties appertaining. For as grace, the fear of sin, and the love of heaven
do work them to the performing of the one; so will the same grace, fear and
love (the neglect being of equal damage in both) induce them to observe the
other. Nay, they both are so nearly allied, depend so absolutely one of the
other, and are alike essentially lincked together, as the one can not be either
laudably or indifferently fulfilled, and the other not accomplished.

How constant and faithful the Catholic has carried himself in the religion
he professes, it appears by this, that neither the paying of twenty pounds
a month, only for not going to the Protestants church, or where his ability
could not afford so much, there the leesing of two parts of his livings, and
the utter forfeiture of all his goods, nor making of Priests (the feeders of
their souls) to be traitors, and their receivers, felons (laws and penalties
that never had similitude of instance or president in the world) either did or
could make him to deny, or exteriorly to disguise his religion, or relinquish
to practice it: proofs, in all understanding most sufficient to convince, that
he dreadeth God, fears to offend his conscience, and that he christianly
seeks to save his soul. And if so, then as we think there cannot justly be
made any doubt, but that he will likewise show himself obedient and duetifull
to his Sovereign in all things that belong to temporal alegeance, or wherein
soever the omission may taint or endanger the safety of his soul.

Of that which is said, we would, under your Majesty's gracious leave,
infer, that the Catholic subject is (if any other) the glory, strength and
perpetuity of the Kingdom, because he principally seeking heaven in this
world, and will not for the world be diuerted, cannot be treacherous or
disloyal, or undutiful to your Highness, but in every service, and
distress occurring, valiant, resolute and most faithful. By which it seems
manifest, that if the Laws of our deceased Queen should not be repealed; but
more, if they should be re-established (a rigor which in it self presently
imbarketh us into all calamities) alas your Grace does not only thereby deprive
your Imperial crown and realm of the best meriting affections, and
suppressingly disable those your subjects, who otherwise would for their
qualities stand your Majesty and their Country in good service, and do much
long for opportunity to make known their readiness that way; but your
Highness by the same shall also give occasion to the frailer sort, of
aduenturing their Souls to everlasting damnation, by dissembling their faith
and religion. Which inconstancy and unmanly part of theirs, how little credit
or reputation it ought to bring unto them, or is cause of trust to your
Majesty, we leave that prudent and heroical example to inform your Highness,
which Nicephorus and others record Niceph. li. 6. cap. 35.
of the Emperor Theodoricus, who seeing a special minion of his to have
changed his religion, thereby to please and wind himself into greater favor,
judged him to lose his head, saying, Si Deo fidem sinceram non seruasti,
quomodo mihi qui homo sum, conscientiam sanam praestabis? Thou that have
violated thy faith with God, how is it possible thou should keep thy
fidelity with me being a man?

5. Besides, the good that to our understanding, would redound to your Highness,
and the whole realm, by the grant of a toleration, is manifold and very
great, for that the same could not but begett and foster a right earnest and
zealous aemulation, or holy strife among your Majesty's subjects, differing in
religion, who should exceed the other in duty, service and love toward your
person and affairs, whiles every one enjoyed the freedom of his conscience, a
mean of all others most likely to make your own state and person very secure,
renowneable and blessed: your kingdoms opulent, peaceful and invincible: your
subjects studious, serviceable and loving, and in all employments pressing to
surpass one the other in care and diligence. Then the which, nothing can be
thought that is either more happy, more glorious, or more general, and which
earthly heaven, if it be any other way to be attained, it seems soonest, by
granting a toleration of religion, and by indifferently preferring the
Professors, according to every man's desert, quality and sufficiency: because
all being in this manner interes^ed in your Graces favor, and impartially
tasting the sweet thereof, can not be but all fastest united in the defense of
the Realm, and in tenderest safegarde of your Majesty's person, crown and
dignity.

6. Neither would toleration of Catholic religion bless your Majesty and all
your several Dominions, with the happiness praecedent only, but the same
would also inuit all the Catholic Kings and Rulers in Christendom (being
incomparably more in number and potencie, than are the Protestant, Puritan and
Lutheran Potentates) to seek and continue a true and real league, both of
peace and amity with your Highness (the sourse and self life of princely
felicity:) and make your Majesty's choice of matches for your children far
more noble, rich and ample, in regard no Catholic Prince will refuse to
entertain, yea to sue for like treaty, where toleration of his Religion, is
by Royal assent permitted.

7. It is affirmed in holy Writ, that Mercy and Truth preserve the King, and
his Throne is established by clemency; Avowances, Pro. 20. 28.
which before they were written, the great Monarch Artaxerxes well observed and
trusted unto. For ruling over many nations, and having subdued the whole earth
unto his dominion, concluded nevertheless with himself (as it is read in the
book of Esther) To govern his subjects with clemency and lenity And the
reason is plain, for that the love Ca. 13. v. ^.
of the subjects (soonest and most won by these virtues) is the strongest
Castle in the world, an army if any other, most puissant, and a bulwark
inexpugnable. And as nothing can sit so near a christian man's Soul, as the
religion he believes: so undoubtedly no mercy, no clemency, no lenity, of
what nature, or in what matter soever, can relish so sweet, so lastingly
grateful, so forcibly binding, ravishing and as it were, coniuring the hearts
of subjects, as does the mercy and benignity which is showed in licensing
freedom of conscience, and the exercise of their religion. So that by
permission of Catholic religion (a religion, that of all other kinds of
religion, has most and woorthiest Professors in other Kingdoms that next
border upon your Highness, and neither the least, nor meanest sort of
subjects within your own realm) your Majesty may make millions in and
without your territories, so entirely and affectionately devoted to your
person, crown and posterity, as no attempt, no danger, no tumult can arise,
wherein your sacred Majesty shall not find present and securest harbor.

8. In few words, for that we are loath to be tedious to your Majesty, in
multiplying of reasons, beside the pleading of these and other like regardefull
Motives that might be alleged, which do all directly stand for toleration,
we further think (under your Majesty's correction) that the permission of the
liberty we entreat, is, neither in reason of State, a thing hurtful, nor by
the doctrine of Protestants unlawful to be granted. The first is clear by the
example of Germany, France, Poland, and other Countries, where diversity of
religion is licenced by supreme authority, and the like sound peace, wrought
and established thereby, as both make the said Dominions and Territories to
flourish, and could never (though often labored) be brought to pass by force of
war or bloodshed. The other likewise is as little doubtful, if not better
known, the Protestants books, their Pulpits, their private writings, and
Discourses sounding nothing more, (whilst they had not the Sword and Scepter on
their side) then that it was unlawful, tyrannical, yea diabolical, and
antichristianlike to punish any for matter of mere conscience, faith and
religion. And the favor we sue for, is but the benefit of that position
which they held for most true and scripturall: so that if they should now
depart from that doctrine, they must needs give the world to see, that either
then they did wittingly mainetaine the position against truth, only to serve
their own turn withal (an engraven blemish) or generally erred in that point
of doctrine (a blot of no less discredit unto them) which breathing
clemency, did most recommend, and gave greatest increase to their religion.

And if the Petition we prostrate, and do most suppliantly beg of your
Majesty, be neither prejudicial to matter of State, nor repugnant to the
doctrine of the religion established and regnant in the kingdom, as the
proofs before going seem to make plain, we hope there is no other exception
that can justly impeach, and many several respects that may much further the
obtaining of our request at your Graces hands. The religion, that under your
Highness favor, we sue to have tolerated, is the self same religion, and no
other, to which our country was converted An. Dom. 596. by S. Austen the Monk,
and our Apostle, sent hither by Saint Gregory the great Pope of Rome. Beda de
gestis Anglorum libr. 1. cap. 23.
from Paganism, and which, both all the christian kings of our nation ( Edward
the 6. a child, only excepted) and also all your Highness predecessors in the
crown of Scotland, ever publicly professed, and for the zealous maintenance
whereof, your Majesty's great grandfather James the fourth, was worthily
surnamed Protector.

2. A religion which by the testimonies of all Antiquity This apeareth by
Mermannus in suo Theatro, the Magdeburgenses in tit. de propagatione, Baronis
and all other Collectors of Antiquity.
was the primary religion that ever any heathen Nation, converted christian,
did profess: and the Wisdom of heaven commands, not to transgress Pro.
22. 28.
the ancient bounds which our Fathers appointed, but contrarily, to abide in
that which we heard from the beginning. 1. Ioh. 2. 24.


3. A religion, of whose communion and fellowship the founders of other
religions, or the reformers of our Churches faith (if they more desire to be so
called) were once, and went out; and consequently their doctrine newer, and
less ancient then ours: and therefore as we believe, not the good Mat. 13. 2^.
seed, but the cockle that was sown after. And that we never going out of
any known christian society (for the whole world can not tell your Grace out
of what church we departed, when, how, and where) as did the former, the
Apostolical marks of false believers, namely, To go out from others; 1. Ioh.
2. 19. Jude v. 19. Romans 16. 17.
To segregate themselves, and To make dissensions and scandalls, contrary to
the doctrine they had learned, can not belong to us by any possible
application, nor by any slight or devise shifted from them.

4. A religion whose first Instituters, except Christ and his Apostles, or
after-deuisers cannot be named by any of our Adversaries, nor can they all show
that piece or fundamental point of our faith, either of late, or sithence the
Apostles time defined, which This is witnessed in the Council of Ephesus in
epistola Synodi contra Nestorium, in the Council of Calcedon, act. 4, 5, and 6.
Item generali 6. act. 4. and 10. and genera. 7. act. 2. And by Athanas. of the
Nicen. Council in epist. ad Afros, and in epist. de Synodis Arimini and
Seleuciae. And by Socrates of the Council of Alexandria in historia ecclesiast.
lib. 1. ca. 5. and others.
was not formerly believed, and the contrary thereof never taught by the Roman
Church. Wherefore in our understanding it is evident, that the religion we
profess, is not, as it is slandered to be, a devise or invention of man, nor
ever was contrary to it self in doctrine; but whatsoever has been in latter
ages explicitiuely defined, the same was always, not only holden true from the
beginning in our church, but also implicitiuely believed for the infallible
authority thereof.

5. A religion, that has confuted and outlasted several hundreds of heresies,
which manifoldly divided in themselves, 488. after Prateolus account.
did yet ever give hands to the overthrow of this one, but never found other
rock than it, on which they were broken, or took their confusion by. Which
seems infallibly to demonstrate, That the weapons of our Churches warrefare,
are not 2. Cor. 10. 4.
carnal, but (as Saint Paul writes of the true doctrine) mighty to God, unto
the destruction of munitions, destroying Counsels, and all loftiness,
extolling it self against the knowledge of God. And that our church and
religion ever conquering their oppositors, and never conquered by them, is that
kingdom which the Prophet says, Shall break in pieces and consume Dan. 2.
44.
all other kingdoms, and it self stand for ever.

6. A religion, that erected and built all the Churches, Hospitalles and
ancient Colleges in Christendom, endowed them with livings, instituted the
Universities and Seminaries, distinguished the multitude into parishes,
proportioned the Tithes, annexed the glebeland, founded the Bishoprics,
limited the Dioceses, decreed Ecclesiastical laws and immunities, enacted all
the old Laws of our Realm, and did (for that they would not be vacant
without fruit, as the Apostle advises, 2. Pet. 1. 8.
in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus) a thousand good works besides, of which
the religion regnant reapeth daily benefit, and could not without such our
churches provision and ordinances, ever have carried the exterior show it does.

7. A religion, that in three ages together had not three 9, 10, and 11.
Centenaries.
open adversaries in the christian world, who contradicted or impugned her
doctrine, or believed another form of faith, then that which she then and now
teaches. And the Wisdom of the eternal God (alluding to his Church)
affirms, that in the multitude of people consists the glory of a King; and
Pro. 14. 28. Glossa interlin. in hunc locum.
in the small number, the ignominy of the Prince.

8. A religion, whose chief professors and spreaders thereof to other Nations
were always of a known holy life, and semblable death, and the protoparents
of all other religions, men of a much contrary note: and we are sure by the
testimony Matt. 7. 20.
of Gods word, that the good and bad tree are to be known by their fruits.

9. A religion, to which the famousest Constantinus Magnus, Iauianus with above
forty Emperors of the East. Maiorianus, Carolus Magnus, with full near
forty other Emperors of the Weast.
Emperors and Clodoueus, Childibertus with above threescore Kings of France.
Ranimirus, Sanctius, with almost twenty other Kings of Aragon. Pelagius,
Fasila, with at least forty other Kings of Castile. Alphonsus, Sanctius, with
many more Kings of Portugal. Geyza, Stephanus, with above thirty Kings of
Hungary. Besides the Kings of Polonia, Bohemia, Denmark, Norway, Suetheland,
Gothland, Dalmatia, Baiorta, Germania, Alemannia, Morauia, Loraine, Burgundy,
Province, Lomberdy, Italy, Naples, Sicily, Sardinia, Navarre: and the Kings of
Affrike, as of Aethiopia, Nubia, and others. Likewise the Kings of Canaria,
Manicongus, Benopotama, Angola, Guinea, Bentoninus, Quiloa, Melinda,
Mozambique; the Kings of Asia, as of Ciprus, Armenia, Jerusalem, Tartaria, and
some Kings of the Agarens and Saracens: many Kings of the Heruleans, Iberians,
Alanes, Abasgorians, Lazorians, Scithians, Persians, and others.
Kings of the world have bowed their Crowns, As Constantinus Magnus Emperor,
Dagobertus, Carolus, S. Ludouicus, and other Kings of France. Alphonsus,
Ranimirus, Alphonsus the great, Ranimirus ^ and Alphonsus 6. with other Kings
of Spain. Stephanus and Ladislaus Kings of Hungary. Miscelstaus, Boleslaus,
Casimirus sanctus, and Casimirus Magnus Kings of Polonia, and many more Kings of
other Nations.
presented their gifts, As Justinius Emperor, the person of Pope John.
Iustinianus of Pope Constantine, King Pipin the person of Pope Stephen the
second: Carolus of Pope Leo the third* ^udoui^us of Sergius the second, and of
Pope Nicholas: Henry the fourth of Pope Paschal the second, and others.
reverenced her Prelates, As Philippus Arabs Emperor, the Censure of Pope
Fabian. Eusebius. lib. 6. ca. 27. histor. eccl. the Emperor Theo^osius the
excommunication of S. Ambr. Theodoret. lib. 5. cap. 17. hist. eccl. Sozom. lib.
7. ca. 24. the Emperor Otho the third, the enjoined penance of R^mualdus
Abbat. Petr. Dam. in vita Romual. To which may be added the devout readiness
of Henry the second, to accept and fulfill the sentence of Pope Alexanders
Legates, touching the death and murdering of Saint Thomas of Canterbury,
N^ubrigens. libr. 2. cap. 25.
obeyed their censures, yea and has at this present many of the greatest
monarchs and potentates on earth to her Professors, patrons, and
foster-fathers: So as of the Roman Religion only, these ensuing passages and
prophetical praedictions of holy Scripture must, of force, take their
verification, or remain as yet (being the latter years or evening of the
Church) unfulfilled: The Gentiles shall fear thy name, O Lord, and all the
Psalm. 101. 16. Psalm. 71. 11.
Kings of the earth thy glory. Again, All Kings of the earth shall adore him,
all Nations shall serve him. And in an other Prophet, Esa. 49. 23.
Kings shall be thy nursing Fathers, and Queens thy Nurses. And again,
Gentiles shall walk in thy light, and Kings in the Esa. 62. 3.
brightness of thy vprising. Places which to our judgment most evidently
convince, that not only some Kings of the earth shall profess and cherish
true religion, but that the greater number of all christian Kings shall embrace
and advance the same. Now, it is most certain, and as clear as noone day, by
all Antiquities, Proofs and Chronicles of the world, that there was never
Emperor, nor till this age, any one King under heaven, that entertained or
professed Protestant religion.

10. A religion, that from the first flower of her infancy ever had, and still
has to her believers, infinite multitudes of either sex, professing Poverty,
Chastity, and Obedience, the three Matthew. 19. 21. marc. 19. 12. 1. cor. 7. 25.
math. 16. 24.
chief Evangelical counselles observed of the Matthew. 19. 27. August. de
Ciuit. lib. 17. ca. 4. Hieron. lib. 1. contra Iouinia.
Apostles, practiced by those Saint Anthony, Hilarion, Benedict, Francis
Dominike, Bernard, and thousands more.
who were counted of greatest holiness, most highly commended by all Of
Poverty.

Hieron. epistola prima ad Heliod. ca. 6. item in cap. 19. Matthew. and ad
Demetria. de seruanda virginitat. epist. 8. ca. 7. Quaest. ad Hedib. epist.
150. and ad Pammachum super obitu Paulinae epist. 26. ca. 3. and 4. Basil.
quaest. 9. in regulis fusius disputat. Damascen. in histor. Barlaam and Iosaph.
ca. 15. Chrysostom. in illud Pauli: Salutate Priscam and Aquilam.

Of Chastity.

Hieron. in cap. 9. Matthew. and lib. 1. aduers. Iouin. ca. 7. Basil. de
virginitat. Epiphan. haeresi. 58. contra Valesios. Aug. de virginitat. ca. 14.
24. and sequentibus. Greg. in tertiae part Curae pastora. admonit. 29. Ambros.
and Theodoretus in 1. Cor. 7. and Amb. in epist. 83. ad Siricium Papam. and 82.
ad Vercellenses. and in tribus libris de Virginib. and alibi. Damasc. lib. 4.
orthodoxae sid. ca. 25. Athanasius, Basilius, Nazianzenus de Virgint. Fulgent.
epist. 3. ad Probam. ca. 9. and 10. Ignatius ad Philadelphi. Cipri. de bouo
Pudicit. Isodor. libr. 2. de sum. bono. ca. 40. Cassian. coll. 12. ca. 4. and 7.

Of Obedience.

Aug. libr. 14. de Ciuit. ca. 12. Hieron. epist. 8. ad Demetriad. ca. 10. Greg.
libr. 35. moral. ca. 12. and in 1. Reg. li. 2. ca 4. li. 4. ca. 5. and li. 6.
ca. 2. Cassian. li. 4. ca. 10 Collat. 2. ca. 11. and Coll. 4. ca. 20. Bernard.
in sermon. de 3. ordinib. eccle. item ad milites templi ca. 13. and in sermon. de
virtut. obed. Basil. de Constit. monast. ca. 23. Philo in lib. de vita
contemplat. Josephus lib. 18. antiquit. ca. 2. Epiphan. haeresi 29. Dionisius
de Ecclesiast. Hierarchia. ca. 6. Eusebius. lib. 1 de demonstrat. Euangelic. ca.
8. Nazianzenu^ orat. 20. Athanas. in vita Anthonij. Sulpitius in vita Martini.
Isodor. li. 2. de eccles. officijs ca. 15. Sozomenus lib. 1. hist. ca. 12.
Chrysostom. aduers. Vituperatores monast. vitae and Hom. 5. ad pop. ^um
sequentibus, and infiniti alij.


Antiquity, not only as divine helps to perfection, but also as beautiful
ornaments in Christ's Church, raising the professors to supreme degree of
grace and glory.

11. A religion that has been testified by the blood and sanctity of such
Martirs and Confessors as our Adversaries themselves allow of, and hold them
glorious in heaven; and either all the points of her doctrine, or the most
controuerted and weightiest, witnessed by evidence of most authentical
Collected in part by Bredenbrachius, in suis collationib.
miracles, by the records of all ages, and by the discussing censure and
approbation of general Counsels, the highest consistory on earth, and oracles
of greatest infallibility, as being the sentences of all the best learned in
the world assembled together, and helped in the affair by the Mat. 18. 20.
and 28. 20.
presence of Christ our Savior, by the Ioh. 14. 16. and 16. 13. and Act. 15.
20.
assistance of the Holy Ghost, and by Ioh. 17. 17. Luke 22. 31.
our Lords promise and prayer.

12. A religion unchanging and of admirable consent in her doctrine, having
evermore the same bounds of faith in all places, and not varying in every
country and state as do other religions which have not one supreme head, and
an acknowledged power to define, but make the letter of scripture
(misinterpretable by every contentious spirit) the only touchstone and chief
Judge of all differences in faith, whereby so many opinions and forms of
religion may be squared out, as there be private fancies reigning.

13 A religion, which by the grant of our Adversaries, has had for the last
thousand years and more, the custody of the sacred Bible, of the Apostles,
Athanasius and the Nicene Creed, and preserved them from perishing by Pagan,
Jew, or heretic: yea, and from whose hands or Treasurehouse, the Religion
now established, not only received all the parts of Scripture she makes use
of; but also learned the form of Christening, Marrying, Churching of women,
Visiting the sick, Burying, and sundry other like, as their books, translated
out of ours, do declare. And therefore our religion must needs be the elder.
Nor can it be told (as we can easily tell all other sorts of Religions)
what former Society we did ever supplant or invade, or took from it, either
our first possession of the Scriptures, form of Sacraments, or any other
Ecclesiastical rites or ceremonies.

14. A Religion, that instituted the feasts, the fasting days, and all the
goodly ceremonies, and solemn observations, which are yet used (though many
other pared away) and commanded in the Protestant religion, as the festiuities
of Christmas, Easter, Ascension, Whitsontide, and the Eues and feasts of the
Apostles, likewise the fastes of Lent, and Ember days, abstinence on Fridayes
and Saturdayes, much wholesome and very commodious to the Commonweal:
Semblably the rites and sacred forms kept in Coronations, installements, and
in all other sorts of solemnities, that carry either state, decency or
veneration with them.

15. A religion, that founded the Ecclesiastical censures, and sorts of
discipline, as suspension, interdiction, excommunication, irregularitie,
degradation and the like, and was also the author of the Cannon law, studied
throughout the universal Christian world, and many points, both of her
censures, laws and discipline, practiced by the Protestants themselves.

16. A religion that only has canonized her professors for Saints after
death, and celebrateth their annual memories, whereby their names ever live in
honor, and all posterity incited both to glorify God for his graces bestowed
on them, and also studiously to imitate their virtues. Whereby that
asseueration of the Prophet is verified, Thy friends (o God) Psalm. 138. 17.
are very much honored of me. Likewise that saying of Ecclesiasticus
fulfilled, Nations shall declare his wisdom, and the Ca. 39. 14.
Church speak forth his praise: and also the rites of friendship and true love
observed, which is to love our friends friend for our friends sake, and
incomparably more the Saints of God, for their and our love toward God.

17. A religion, whose refuse and revolted priests are deemed lawefull and
sufficiently ordered to preach the word of God, to minister Sacraments, and to
exercise all spiritual jurisdiction in the protestant and Puritan
Congregation. A proof, which seems unanswerable, that our Church is the true
Church: for were her doctrine false, she teaching in many points as she does,
it must needs follow, that she is the synagogue, if not the arch-synagogue
of Satan, and consequently, ^e has, nor can possibly have (God and the devil
being so contrary) authority, to initiate and make lawful and complete
Ministers, for exercising spiritual faculties in the true Church. Neither is
the Protestant Minister or Bishop coming to our Catholic fraternity (as many
come of the first sort) reputed other then for mere lay men without orders.

18. A religion, to whose antiquity and verity of most part of her doctrine
controuersed, the fashion of every Church, Chapel, and Chancell, the records
of every Hospital College, and Abbey decayed, yea, every ancient sepulcher,
church-window, and graue-stone, do bring and give apparent evidence, as things
all wearing her badges, and contestifying her elder childrens faith, devotion
and piety.

19. A religion, whose grounds and foundation are so rockie and sure, and the
proofs and testimonies alike infinite, ample, abundant, and unanswerable, as
the Protestant himself assailed by the Puritan and other sects, knows not
how to defend positions encountered, but by flying to the strengths and
impregnable arguments of the catholic Roman church and her doctors.

20. A religion, that teaches not Mat. 7. 13.
the broad and large, but the narrow and strait way, (such as holy writ
affirms the way to heaven to be) as annual Ioh. 20. 23.
confession to a Priest, Psalm. 6. 7. Matthew. 32. and 11. 21. Mar. 1. 15. Luke
13. 3. 2. Cor. 12. 21. Act. 1. 38. and 26. 20.
penance, Leuit. 5. 16. Luke 19. 8.
restitution, Ezech. 8. 30. Joel. 2. 12. Matthew. 3 8. Luke 3. 8. 1. Cor. 11. 32.
satisfaction, prescript, fasting days, set times of abstinence, Leui. 23. 21.
Psalm. 75. 12. Eccles. 5. 3. 1. Tim. 5. 12.
performance of vows, Ephesians. 4, 5.
one uniform stinte of faith, Romans 8. 13. Colos. 3. 5.
mortification of the old man, and the like Injunctions, neither observed nor
imposed by other Religions, but rather liberty in their stead, and yet all of
them directly and plainly prescribed in holy Scripture, except only the
appointment of prescript time for confession, fasting, and abstinence, a power,
and prerogative, left to the wisdom and ordering of the Catholic Church; of
whose Prelates our Savior himself says, Luke 10. 16.
He that hears you, hears me, and he that despises you, despises me.
Which authority also was given to the Bishops of the old Law, and of
consequence more to the chief Prelates of the new Law: He that Deuteronomy. 17. 12.
shall wax proud, refusing to obey the commandment of the Priest, shall die
by the decree of the Judge.

21. A religion, for whose defense, the Title of Defender of the Faith, was
first given to the Kings of our Nation; the Title of Most Christian, to the
kings of France, of Most Catholic to the kings of Spain: the still retayning
of which Titles does argue the allowance of her jurisdiction. And there is no
one of the ancient Fathers, who does not understand these words of the
Prophet, to be only meant of this Church, The Nation and Kingdom that will
not serve thee, shall Esa. 60. 12.
perish.

22. A religion, into whose society and profession, whosoever truly enters,
by and by lives in more awe of God, and fear of sin, and changes his
former life to the better: and of the other side, whosoever leapeth out, and
departs from her fellowship and communion, begins incontinent to lead a
worse life, then whiles he lived her child, and frequented her Sacraments. Of
both which there be store of examples, and of the latter too many, verifying
what is said, and not unknown to thousands, yea, the case is so familiar, as
it is now grown into a Proverb with many: That the Protestant religion is
good to live in, but the Papist religion good to die in.

23. A religion, which now has, and had in all ages, the most famous men for
wit, learning, reading, judgment, virtue and true piety (qualities, of all
other, likeliest to discern and abandon error) to her Teachers and Doctors,
and ever enjoyed the like store of such lights, as our Oppositors had never
reason to compare with, or if they do, the extant monuments in school,
positive, and mystical divinity, and in all other literature, will quickly
show the inequality and disproportion of the comparison.

24. A Religion, whose public, and Church service is executed with that
majesty, honorable gravity, and reverence, and the several parts, and
ceremonies thereof so aptly and admirablie composed, and ordered for annual
commemoration, and representing of our Saviors incarnation, birth, life,
passion, burial, resurrection, ascension, of the coming down of the Holy
Ghost, of the mystery of the Trinity, and of other passages, as well of
Christ our head, as of his members the Saints, as it begets, feeds, and
renews singular devotion in the actors, and hearers, and is also so
comfortable in her Sacraments, especially so easing, and acquieting souls in
the Sacrament of Penance, as no testimony, or demo^stration under heaven, is,
or can be, of like feeling proof for the real goodness and verity of that
Sacrament, as is the supernatural, sweetest, and divine consolation tasted
therein, and in the Sacrament of the Eucharist.

25. A Religion whose secular and religious Clergy live without wives, free
from care of providing for children, and the later sort no way distracted with
the affairs and encumbrances of the world, but encloistered, pass their whole
time in prayer, watching, fastin, in continual study of scriptures, and in
daily exercise and dispute for full and perfect understanding of them: Helps
that do most further the attaining of truth, and such as are not found in the
adverse party, and which in common reason (Catholic Divines being not
inferior to other Divines in wit, or other talents) show, that our teachers
(God being no acceptor of persons) are more likely to have (using fitter means
for the same) the true intelligence, and understanding of scripture, then are
our adversaries, or contradictors.

26. A religion of which the four acknowledged Doctors of holy Church were
both professors, and stout defenders, as their own works most apparantlie
bear witness.

S. Ambrose living 64. years, and dying in the year of our Lord 397.
purposely and approuinglie wrote of Tom. 4. li. 2. de Sacramenti^ ca. 1. and 2.
and lib. 3. cap. 1.
exorcismes used before baptism, of Ibidem.
unction in baptism, of the perpetual Tom. 5. de vocatione gentli. 3. ca. 8.
per totum.
alienation of infants from the sight of God dying without baptism, of Tom. 4.
lib. 1. de poenitentia ca. 2. and 6.
remission of sin by a Priest, and who, as S. Paulinus records in his life,
heard auricular confessions, and so wept in hearing that he caused tears also
in the penitents. He likewise wrote of the Tom. 4. lib 4. de Sacramentis.
real presence in the Sacrament of the altar, and of Tom. 4. de Spirit. Sancto
lib. 3. ca. 12.
adoration thereunto to be done, he observed, and commended the Lent-fast Tom.
1. Sermon. de ieiunio Eliae.
calling it the precept of Christ our Lord. In like manner he wrote of Tom 3.
super Apocal. ca. 14. and 20.
Purgatory, of Lib. 5. de Sacramen. cap. 1.
mingling water with wine in the chalice, he usually said Mass, wept
bitterly in the execution of the dreadful mysteries, and made Tom. 5. in 1.
precatione ad Missam praeparante, and epist. li. 5. epist. 33. ad Marcellinam
sororem suam.
prayers to be said by Priests before Mass for duer preparation thereunto.
Therefore undoubtedly neither Protestant nor Puritan, but a Catholic Bishop.

S. Hierome living 91. years, and dying the year of our Lord 420. wrote Tom.
2.
two books against the Apostata Monk Iouinian, and Ibidem.
two other treatises against the lapsed Priest Vigilantius, in confutation of
their strange, and exorbitant points of doctrine: Namely, that marriage was of
equal merit with widdowhead, or virginity: That all meats might be eaten
upon all days, notwithstanding any ecclesiastical sanction to the contrary:
That fasting had no reward with God: That there was no disparitie of merits in
this life, nor difference of glory in the next: That those who with a full and
entire faith had received grace in baptism, could not after leese the same.
The positions of Iouinian. The phansies of Vigilantius these. The single life,
or unmarried state of Priests is opprobrious, Saints were not to be
worshipped, nor prayed unto, nor their relics to be reverenced, and the
tapers or waxe-lights about their toombs were the ensigns of idolatry, the
retention of worldly substance better then voluntary poverty, and the
solitarines of Monks a thing vituperable.

Against all which assertions, S. Hierome directly, and of set purpose wrote,
and wrote in some choler and anger, adding for reason, or excuse, fatebor
Aduersus Vigilantium ad Riparium epist. 53.
dolorem meum, sacrilegium tantum patienter audire non possum, I will confess
my grief, I am unable patiently to hear so great sacrilege. Therefore
undoubtedly neither Protestant nor Puritan, but a Marianus Victorius episco.
Reatinus in vita B. Hieronym^. Et ipse Hierony. Tom. 3. epist. 150. ad Hedibiam
quest. 2.
Massing Priest, Hermit, a great Pilgrimage Ipse Hierony. in Ezechi. ca. 4. and
in Apologia aduersus Ruffinum, and in plurim. ipsius epist. 8. 22. 43. and
alijs.
goer, a visiter of holy places, and relics.

S. Augustine living 76. years, and dying the year of our Lord 430. wrote a
Tom. 4. ca. 18.
book De cura pro mortuis gerenda, Of care to be had for the dead by the
sacrifices of the altar, prayer, and alms. Three Tom. 1.
books De libero arbitrio, in the proof of free will, a Tom. 3.
book De operis Monachorum, of the labor of Monks, wherein he approves their
state, and consequenthe also the vows of poverty, chastity, and obedience: A
Tom. 4. maxim ca. 14. lib. eiusdem.
book De fide, and operibus, of faith, and works, proving abundantly in it,
as the principal scope, and end intended, that a sole faith without good works
is not sufficient to salvation: He Tom. 10 Sermon. de tempore 255. qui est
quartus de anniuersario dedicationis ecclesia, vel altaris. Et council. Hippon.
can. 6. cui interfuit S. Augustinus vt constat ex lib. 1. Retracta. ca. 17. and
Sermon. 19. de Sanctis.
allows, and celebrated the consecration of aultars, and the anointing of
the^ with Chrism. Also he makes mention, and requires that the sign of the
cross should be made in the foreheads of the believers, and on the water, and
Chrism, with which they are regenerated, and anointed. Likewise he himself
most submissiuely, and earnestly inuocated Tom. 9. li. meditationum ca. 40. and
Tom. 9. Sermon. de Sanctis, Sermon. 18.
the blessed virgin Mary, S. Michael, S. Gabriel, S. Raphael, the Quiers of
Angels, Archangels, Patriarks, Prophets, Apostles, Evangelists, Martyrs,
Confessors, Priests; Leuits, Monks, Virgins, and of all the just. In brief, he
Tom. 6. de adulterinis coniugijs. lib. 1. ca. 8. and 9. and lib. 2. cap. 5.
resolutely affirms, that after divorce, neither the party delinquent, nor
innocent can marry again, the other living, without committing the crime of
adultery, and in like manner agnizeth and testifies the verity of the five
Sacraments, denied, and surnamed bastard Sacraments by the adversary, to wit,
the Tom. 2. lib. 2. contra lit. Petiliani ca. 104. and Tom. 9. in epist. Johan.
tract. 3. and 6.
Sacrament of Confirmation, Tom. 10. Sermon. de tempo 215. and Tom. 9. li. 2. de
visitandis infirmis ca. 4. Item in tract. de rectitudine Catholicae conuersati.
si duo posteriores sint Augustini.
Extreme unction, Tom. 7. contra episcop. Parm. li. 2. ca. 13. and de baptis.
contra Donatist. lib. 1. ca. 1.
Order, Tom. 4. de fide, and operib. ca. 7. and Tom. 6. de bono coniugali, ca.
18. and 24. and Tom. 7. lib. de nuptijs, and concupis. ca. 10.
Matrimony, and Tom. 4. de vera, and falsa paenitentia ca. 10. and ^5. Tom. 6.
de adulterin. coniugijs ca. 28. Tom. 10. li. 50. homiliar. hom. 41. and hom.
49. ca. 3. and Tom. 8. in Psalmum 63. circa medium.
Penance. He Tom. 10. li. de tempore Sermon. 251.
also sharply rebukes those that either neglected to hear Mass, or did not
stay in the Church so long as to the end of Mass, or showed themselves so
cold and wearisome in Gods service as to speak to the Priest to abbreuiate,
or be short in his Mass. Therefore undoubtedly neither Protestant, nor
Puritan, but a Possidius in vita eius.
Monk, institutor of Monks, and strongest maintainer of our Catholic doctrine.

S. Gregory was first a Ioh. Diaconus in vita eius. lib. 1. ca. 6. 25. and 39.
Monk, then chosen Abbot, then created Cardinal, and afterward elected Pope
of Rome. In which dignity he lived 13. years, and odd months, and died the
year of our Lord 604. He wrote in the allowance of Lib. epist. 7. ca. 35.
Images, approved the making of Eod. lib. cap. 109.
pictures in the walls and windows of the Church, terming them the
instruction, or books of the unlearned, and reprehended the Ibid. and lib.
epist. 9. ca. 9.
breaking, or defacing of them (only upon abuse which some idiots committed) as
a thing not lawful, and scandalous. He appointed the Monk Tom. 1. li. 4.
dialogorum. ca. 55.
Preciosus to say Mass 30. days together for Iustus his fellow Monk
deceased. He relates Ibid. ca. 57.
two miracles which God, through the sacrifice of the Mass, most admirablie
wrought. One, upon a Captive, whose fetters so often fell off, as his wife
believing him to be dead, procured Mass to be said for his soul. The other
upon a Shipman named Baracha, who through the same most sacred and propitious
oblation was, being reputed to be drowned, very miraculouslie fed, and
delivered after shipwreck. He augmented Platina, and Johannes stella in vita
eius.
the Letanie, ordained the Johannes Diaconus li. 2. ca. 18.
stations at Rome, incited to the going Ipse B. Gregorius li. 2. epist. ca. 21.
on pilgrimage, and visitation of holy places. He greatly Idem ibid. cap. 42.
affected to see, and reverence the coat of S. John Evangelist, and trusted to
receive spiritual profit thereby. He Lib. 7. epistolarum ca. 126.
sent a piece of the Holy Cross, Lib. 1. epist. ca. 29. and 30. and li. 6.
epistol. cap. 189. and lib. 11. epist. ca. 67.
Powder filed off from S. Peter and S. Paul's chains, some of Lib. 7. epist.
ca. 126.
S. John Baptists hair, and the Lib. 5. epist. ca. 150.
relics of other Martyrs, to several great personages for benediction, and
veneration sake. He travailing in the gowt, and enforced often to keep his bed
for his greater ease, rose Lib. 8. epist. cap 35.
notwithstanding to say Mass upon festival days, as himself wrote of
himself to Eulogius the Patriarck of Alexandria, and also approuinglie
witnesses that Lib. 7. epist. cap. 29.
Mass was daily said at Rome in veneration of Saints. He wrote a letter to
Melitus to tell S. Augustine our Apostle then consecrated Bishop of
Canterbury, that he should not destroy the temples of the idols in our
country, but break the idols, and sprinckle Lib. 9. epist. cap. 71. and Beda
de gestis Anglorum lib. 1. cap. 30.
holy water about the same temples, build aultars, and put relics in them.
Therefore undoubtedly neither Protestant, nor Puritan, but a Monk, and Pope,
and zealous propagatour, and patron of Catholic religion.

To say, that the assertions and points precedent were Naui patrum, the moales
or blemishes, that showed them to be men subject to error, and not to have
seen all things, were in our judgment idleness enough, and greatest
repugnancie; for let them be holden for Saints, or saved souls (which we
think no man of modesty, or yet of Christianity, will deny) it follows
directly to be impossible (we mean if they dyed in the vnretracted faith
they professed in their books, as hitherto none of those who are most against
our religion, ever durst to make open doubt thereof) that the foresaid
positions, and points can be false, because if they should be false, and they
contain, as then they should do, very damnable superstition, and highest
idolatry, (as approving vain doctrine, vain reverence, vain sacraments,
vain and impious rites, and adoration of bread in stead of God, (then which,
nothing is more abominable or idolatrous) it can not be, most assuredly it
cannot be, even by the principles of our common Christian faith, that the
foresaid doctors be Saints in heaven, but contrarily, most accursed
reprobates in hell, understanding as is before rehearsed, that they dyed in the
belief they mainteyned in their writings.

Again, to say, they understood not the Scriptures, as well as does the best
learned Protestant, or Puritan, and that through such fail, and lack of
heavenly guidance, they unwittingly slided into their errors, were to imagine
Chimaeras, or some thing that were more strange, and monstrous: for what help
enjoys the Protestant, or Puritan, that they enjoyed not? and they had many
which the other have not. They were a thousand years, and more, nearer unto
Christ, his Apostles, and their Disciples, then the eldest Protestant, or
Puritan, that can truly be named, and consequently as like, if not more like,
to hear, retriue, and learn the truth, then any of the other two
Professions. They made Comments upon all, or the most difficult parts of holy
Scripture, they beat out the way, and unsealed the hard, and hidden mysteries
thereof, they laid the ground-workes of school divinity, brake the ye, and
reconciled all the differing passages, which in the letter seemed to impugn,
or contradict one the other.

Or must it be conceived, that these holy men working, and thorow-piercing into
the self bowels, and abstrusest depth of all divinity, and that very
excellently, by the grant of our adversaries themselves, could so maynely and
contradictorily err in matters of less difficulty, as are the points
controuerted? No, no, it cannot justly be so conceived, but rather, that the
infinite providence and goodness of almighty God, because he would not have
so sacriligious a conceit harbored against the principal Doctors of the
Church, has in every of their lives and deaths miraculously attested the
contrary, if so much credit at least may be given to the written lives of
Saints, compiled by venerable personages, and received by many ages, as there
is given to the relation of Plutarchs lives, or Caesar's Commentaries.

S. In vita S. Ambrosij.
Paulinus reports that S. Ambrose, being on a certain time in Rome, was
invited by a noble woman there, to come, and say Mass in her house, who
yielding to the request, an other woman sick of the palsy understanding
thereof, caused anon herself to be brought in a chair, into the room where
S. Ambrose was, and kissing his garments, presently therewith recovered her
health, and the perfect use of her limbs. Again the same Ibidem.
author records, that Iustina wife to Valentinian the Emperor, byring a
murderer to kill S. Ambrose, for the exceeding hatred she bore unto him, who
coming into his chamber, and lifting up his arm with his sword drawn, to
give him his death, incontinent, his arm waxed so stiff, and benumbed, that
he could neither strike therewith, nor move the same, but in confessing (which
was no less miraculous) who employed him in so outrageous a fact, the use of
his arm presently returned, and he became as nimble therein as ever before.
Other proofs of Gods special love toward this saint, might be alleged, as Ex
Paulin^, and 2. hist. Eccle. Ruffini libro. ca. 11. and Seuero Sulpitio in vita
B. Marti^^
his miraculous election to the Bishopric of Millan, his long ecstasy, with
which he was taken at the altar, when S. Martin Bishop of Turon dyed; his
prediction of the day of his death, before he fell sick: the three visions or
admonishments, given by the voice of God himself, to Honoratus bishop of
Vercella, for his repair to the said saint, when he lay a dying, and for
ministering unto him his last Viaticum, the body of our Lord: These, we say,
might be alleged for testimony of his holiness. Nevertheless we will
content our selves with the rehearsal only of that miracle which Vbi supra.
Paulinus mentions of an obstinate Arian, who being present at a sermon of
saint Ambrose, saw (and was thereupon converted) an Angel to stand at his
ear, whilst he was preaching, and appeared to suggest unto him the words he
spoke to the people. All which are evident arguments of the saints true faith,
his peculiar favor with God, and of the undoubted verity of his doctrine.

Touching S. Hierom, although both the joint censure of the Sub Innocentio 1
anno Christi 402.
Mileuitane Council, consisting of 59. Bishops, whereof S. Augustine was one,
giving him the attribute [Holie] in his life time, and the In decreto de
apocryphis Scripturis circiter annum Christi 1495.
testification of S. Gelasius, and of 70 other Bishops in session with him,
surnaming him blessed, and most blessed after his death, be argument
sufficient to prove his sound faith and holiness; as also that our Savior
most comfortably appeared unto him in the hour of his death, as Marianus
Victorius, and other writers of his life, affirm: Yet because we desire to be
more full in this point, we think it necessary, having choice of miracles, to
recite a few of many. S. Hierom Eusebius Cromonensis discipulus B. Hieron. in
epist de mort eius, ad Damasum Portuensem episcop. Habetur in cal^e Tom. 9. and
creditur esse eiusdem, test Censura Reatim episcopi Amerini in eundem Temum.
drawing near to his end, the blessed sacrament of the Altar was brought unto
him, which having received, and holding his arms acrosse over his breast, said
the Hymn of holy Simeon, and presently as that was ended, there appeared so
glorious a light in the room where he lay, as the exceeding brightness, and
splendour thereof piercing and dazeling the beholders eyes, none that were
present could any while endure to look thereon; which continuing some space,
companies of Angels were seen, odoriferous smells felt, and a voice heard,
saying, Come my beloved, it is time that thou receive thy reward for thy
labors manfully sustained in my cause. Being dead, the blind, deaf, dumb, and
sick were Ibidem.
healed, some by touching, some by kissing his body. Likewise the possessed
brought in presence of the corpse, the devils going out of them, cried, Ibidem.
Holy Hierome, why do thou thus grievously torment us? thou were always our
scourge, both living, and now dead. What need more recitals? God seemed so
wonderfully tender, and zealous of his servants fame, and honor, as Ibidem.
when a certain Heretic enraged with envy, against the working of the
foresaid miracles, and wishing that the body were burnt; himself was presently
by fire descending from heaven, consumed to ashes: whereupon many other
infected with the same heresy, were perfectly converted. Wonderful things!
but they are saints that report them, saints that wrought them, and Psalm.
67. verse. 36.
God is admirable in his Saints.

We have been long in the Narrations precedent, wherefore our briefness in
the two that follow must be the greater. Possidius Bishop, and disciple of S.
Augustine, who lived almost Cap. vlt. de vita Augustine.
forty years familiarly with him, as himself writes, affirms Cap. 29. ibid.
that he knew S. Augustine, both when he was Priest, and after he was Bishop,
to have (being absent) expelled devils from out the possessed, by means of his
prayers, and tears for them: And that in his deathbed, he Cap. eodem.
cured a sicke-man, by laying his hands upon him, whom God by vision had
commanded to repair to that end unto him. By which miracle his divine
goodness intended no doubt, as it were with his own hand, and seal, to
testify to the world, and all posterity, the holiness of his servant, and
the truth, and piety of the doctrine he had taught.

Concerning S. Gregory, his Iohanne. Diaconus lib. 2. cap. 22. de vita B. Greg.
receiving of an Angel, and of Ibid. cap. 23.
the Lord of Angels in the persons of poor Pilgrims to his table, is
sufficient proof of his sanctity, and of Gods extraordinary love toward him.
And that he taught no heretical, superstitious, or false doctrine, it is
likewise manifest, by the sitting of the holy Ghost on his head, in form of a
Dove, at the time of writing his boobes, as Apud Johan. Diac. lib. 4. cap. 69.
de vita B. Gregorij.
Petrus Diaconus a dear familiar friend of S. Gregory's, and much conversant
with him, witnesses to have seen most often. How powerable also this holy
Doctors prayers were with God, it well appears by this, that for the Idem
lib. 2. cap. 41.
conversion of an incredulous, and misbeleeuing woman, thinking the bread which
her self had made, could not be changed into the body of Christ, he both
turned a sacred host into appearance of flesh, and after again into the form
of bread, as it carried before. Which with other manifold miracles of his, most
clearly testifies, that he was neither of ill life, nor ill belief, but holy
in the one, and Apostolical in the other.

Neither did the said four Doctors (a consideration of much importance)
differentlie teach, or one impugn the other in any of the points of doctrine
above mentioned, but they all concurred in one uniformity of opinion without
contradiction, or least show of dissent. Yea not only these four most renowned
Clearks, the chief lights of Gods Church next after the Apostles, agreed most
uniformly, as we have said, in the foresaid controuerted points of religion,
but all the primitive writers conspired likewise in the same. As in proof of
the sacrifice, use, and holiness of the Mass. Apostolicar. constitut. li. 6.
ca. 23. and epist. 2. and 3. de officio sacerdotum, and clericor.
Clement consecrated Tertullian. de praescript. cap 32. Epiphanius haeresi. 27.
Ruffinus in praefati libri Recognitionum.
Bishop of Rome by S. Peter. Ecclesiasti. Hierar. cap. 3.
Dionysius Areopagita S. Paul's Act. 15.
disciple, and by him Heldumus Abbas.
ordained Bishop of Athens: Epist. ad Smyrn.
Ignatius S. John Evangelists Simeon Metaphrastes in vita eius.
auditor, and by common consent of the Apostles assigned Bishop of Antioch.
Aduersus haeres. lib. 4 ca 32. and 34 and lib. 5. ca. 2.
Irenaeus scholar Feu-ardentius in vita eius.
to S. Policarp, and he scholar to S. John: Pope Epist. 1. cap. 2.
Anacletus the fourth from S. Peter: Pope Epist. 1. cap. 4.
Alexander the second from Anacletus: Pope Epist. ad omnes vniuersaliter cap. 2.
Telesph^rus the second from Alexander, with others their next successors, Apud
Gratianum de consecratione distinctione 1. cano. omnes Basilicae.
Higinus, In Codice 5. librorum li. 4. ca. 117.
Pius, Apud Burchardum lib. 5. ca. 29. and Iuonem part. 2. cap. 98.
Anicetus, Apud Gratianum de cons^crati. did. 1. cano. hoc quoque.
Soter, all received Saints, and Martyrs. Also the Liturgy of the church of
Rome delivered by S. Peter, the Liturgy of the church of Jerusalem written by
S. James, the Liturgy of the church of Alexandria composed by S. Mark, the
Liturgy of the church of Milan made by S. Barnabas. The Liturgy of the church
of Cappadocia, compiled by Ploruit circiter annum. 370.
S. Basil. The Liturgy of the church of Constantinople set forth by S. Floruit
anno Christi. 380.
Chrysostom: And likewise the Liturgies of the Ethiopian, Syrian, and
Armenian churches, which all with some other do most clearly witness the
sacrifice, use, and veneration of the Mass, and do also approve the
ceremonies, and divine mysteries represented, and expressed therein.

In like manner for proof, and direct evidence of the ancient practice, fruit
and obligation of auricular Confession, S. Apostolicar. constitut. lib. 2. cap.
33. and epist. 1. ad Iacobum fratrem Domini.
Clement, S. Epist. 8. ad Demophilum.
Dionysius, S. Aduersus haereses lib. 1. ca. 9. floruit circiter an. 160.
Irenaeus, Homil. 2. in Leuiticum. and Hom. in Psalm. 37. floruit 230.
Origin, Lib. de paenitentia cap. 10. and 12 floruit 200.
Tertullian, S. Lib. de lapsis floruit 250.
Cyprian, Li. 4 diuinar. constitution. ca. 17. floruit 320.
Lactantius, who so highly aduanceth Confession, as he makes it one
distinctiue note Idem cap. vlt. eiusdem libri.
of the true Church, S. Sermon. in illa verba Profecti in pagum qui cu^ aduers.
etc. floruit circiter annum 340.
Athanasius, S. Canone 18. in Matthaeum flor. 346.
Hilarie, Lib. de paenitentia, and confess. flor. 350.
Pacianus, S. In regulis breui^rib. regula 229. and 288.
Basil, S. Tom. 5. lib. 2. de sacerdotio.
Chrysostom, S. Epist. 80. ad episcopos Campaniae, and epist 91. ad Theodorum
Foroiulij episcopum flor. 450.
Leo, with other writers of best note in every age since Christ's time
hitherto. And as the primitive and ancient Fathers and Saints do yield their
abundant testimony in confirmation of these two points, so do they
undoubtedly also afford, if this place would give leave, to particularize,
very ample evidence in all the other points before mentioned, and in question
between us and our oppositors. Nay, if we may be so bold as to deliver our
opinion plainly without concealing ought in this matter: the manner that our
adversaries use in citing places out of the ancient Fathers against us, is but
the study of mere wrangling, and no other then a demonstratiue token of an
exceeding contentious spirit, wilfully affecting to blindfold and mislead it
self. For were they sincere and loved truth above all things, they could not
possible dismember, wrest and pick out sentences of their works, in the order
and to the purposes they do, not letting to rack their words to a sense which
the writers never meant: yea contrary oftentimes even to the general scope
and drift of those books whence they cull the pieces they allege, contrary
to the evident letter and plain passages of their other writings, contrary to
the faith they professed, lived and died in; contrary to the religion of the
age they wrote in; contrary to the doctrine of the Church that first admitted
them for Doctors, or received them for Saints; contrary to the profession of
their lives and state of vocation; contrary to the language and nature of
their own deeds; to the titles and dignities they held, and to the opinion
and censure which all former ages retained of such their parcels of writing. So
that words, and words commonly disioynted from that went before, or follows
after, must balance, and bear more sway and credit for condemning us of
error, then the writers lives, self deeds, their practice, profession, other
their works, or never so many apparent testimonies of theirs to the contrary
for the truth of our religion.

27. A religion, of whose doctrine and communion in Sacraments all the Saints
in the Calendar, the patrons of Churches and countries, conuerters of nations
to Christianity, all personages of either sex memorable for holiness, for
renouncing the world, for mortifying their appetites, for surrendering their
wills, or for any other excellent, and true virtue, were, and so lived, and
died, as the authentical legends of their lives, and other ecclesiastical
writings do testify, and bear apparent record to the whole world.

28. A religion not destitute of any kind of proof; but her positions
confirmable by Scriptures, by Apostolical institutions, by Counsels
oecumenicall, and provincial, by Fathers, Doctors, reason, histories,
chronologies, prophesies, visions, revelations, miracles, traditions, and by
all these, and other like heads, we say, confirmable, without wrest, strain,
or flying to tropes, or figurative speeches. So as these words in the Canticles
seem only verifide of our church, and religion, Thy neck (that is the
puissance of Christ's Church) is as Cantic. 4. v. 4.
the tower of David, which is built with bulwarks, a thousand shields hang on
it, all the armor of the strong.

29. A religion, which Act. 2.
beginning at Jerusalem, has as a river through the length of her course ever
more and more increased, and spread it self, as it was prophesied that the
Church of Christ should, Psalm. 2. 8.
I will give thee (says God the Father to God the Son) nations to thine
inheritance (which is his Church) and the ends of the earth to thy possession:
Esaias. 2. 2.
All nations shall run unto her. Dan. 7. 14.
All people, tribes, and tongs shall serve him. Esaias. 60. 10.
The sons of strangers (that is of the Gentiles) shall build up her walls, and
their Kings do service unto her. Now that these, and innumerable other like
predictions and prophesies are only found true, and fulfilled in our Catholic
Roman church and religion, both the several conuersions of nations unto her,
and the infinite multitude dispersed euery-where of her believers, do, as
nothing can more, clearly testify: And how greatly it spread it self, even
when it first put forth after the death of our Savior, it appears by the
several people and nations to whom S. Paul directed particular Epistles,
namely, the Romans, Corinthians, Galatians, Ephesians, Philippians, Colossians,
Thessalonians, Hebrews, by mission of the Apostles into all quarters of the
world to preach the same, by S. Peter's writing to the Jews dispersed in
Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia, by the contents of the 2. and
4. Chapters of the Acts of the Apostles, where the conversion of 8000. is
specified through two Sermons preached by S. Peter. Likewise what ample, and
most marvelous increase it took afterward in the second age, In dialogo cum
Tryph.
Justinius Philosophus, Lib. 1. cap. 3.
Ireneus, and In Apolog. cap. 37. and aduers. Iudaeos ca. 7. and 8.
Tertullian do witness. And so does De vit. Philosoph. in Aedesio.
Eunapius Sardianus a profane writer, and enemy of Christian religion, Vit.
Constantini li. 3. ca. 24. and sequ. and cae. vlt.
Eusebius, Lib. 1. ca. 12.
Socrates with others for the third age.

And touching the succeeding Centuries, to the end it may appear how our
Catholic religion did in every age spread and dilate it self according to the
former prophecies, we will recite a few of many Nations that were converted in
every Country to the same.

In the fourth age were converted the Bessites, Dacians, Getes, and Scythians
by S. Paulinus de reditu Nicetae in Dac.
S. Nicetas Bishop of Dacia to the Catholic Roman faith. The Morins, and
Neruians by S. Paulinu^ epist. 26.
Victricius Bishop of Roan* And within the compass of this centurie Epist. 3.
S. Hierome also writes that other Nations were converted, as the Armenians
and Huns, adding Idem epist. 7.
that troops of Monks came daily from India, Persia, and Aethiopia unto him.

In the fifth age the Saracens by Cyrillus in vita S. Euthymij apud
Metaphrasten die 20. Ianu.
S. Euthymius Monk, and Aspebetus. The Socrates lib. 7. ca. 30.
Burgundians upon this motive of seeing Gods especial and most singular
favors and protection toward the Roman Christian Monarchy in times of
distress. The Prosper aduersus collatorem in fine.
Scots by Palladius, sent A. D. 429.
by Pope Caelestine, the French Gregor. Turon. de gest is Franc. li. 2. ca. 31.
by S. Remigius Bishop of Reims, and Albin. Flac. circiter A. D. 499.
S. Vedastus Bishop of Arras.

In the sixth age the A. D. 565.
Northern Picts by Beda de gest. Angl. li. 3. ca. 4.
S. Columbus Abbot The A. D. 589.
Goths by Gregor. Turonen. Hist. Fran. lib. 8. ca. 41.
Leander Bishop of Seuil. The A. D. 590.
Bauarians by A. D. 594.
Rupertus Bishop of Worms. The Gregor. epist. lib. 3. ca. 29. and 27.
Barbaricinians by A. D. 596.
Foelix Bishop, and Cyriacus Abbot. The Beda de gest. Angl. lib. 1. ca. 23.
English by S. Augustine, a Benedictine Monk, sent by Pope Gregory the Great.

In the 7. age, the Flemings by Iaco. Mayer in Chron. Flandriae. 649.
Eligius: the Westphalians by the Fasciculus temporum.
two Eualdes, after honored with the crown of martyrdom: multitudes of
Spaniards by Volaterranu^ lib. 21. and Vincentius lib. 23. ca. 92.
S. Andonius, chiefly through the miracle he wrought in calling store of rain
from heaven by his prayers, when in seven years before there had fallen none
in that place: The people of Franconia by Sigibertus in Chronico. 688.
Chilianus sent by Pope Cuno: and the Frisians by Trithemius de Regib.
Franc^^um 696.
S. Willibrode an Englishman, employed in that holy work by Pipin King of
France, and Pope Sergius the first.

In the eight age, the Hedio lib. 6. ca. 17.
Hassuts, Chronic. Isanacense.
Thuringians Mutius lib. 7. and Hartmannus Schedel in Chro. ^tate 6.
Erphordians and Willibaldus in vita Bonifacij 722.
Cattians by S. Boniface, an English Monk: the Lumbards by Sebaldus Hartmannus
vbi supra.
sent by Pope Gregory the second. The Jews of the City of Berythum Crantzius
in ^^trop. lib. 1. ca. 9 and Magd^cent. 8. tit. de Propagat. 785.
by the bleeding of a Crucifix, which the said Jews had contumeliouslie
stabbed, and the blood whereof cured all diseases. The two Saxon Dukes
Witekindus saw this vision at Wolmerstadium on the feast of Easter, when the
Camp of Carolus magnus lay there.
Witekindus and Albion, by a miraculous sight which Witekindus saw whilst he
was but in a new and doubtful disposition of becoming Christian, to wit, a
fair child descending from the Priests hands into the mouths of the
receivers, when, celebrating Mass, he delivered the sacrament of the Altar to
Communicants.

In the ninth age, the Adamus li. 1. ca. 16. and 17. and Grantzius in metrop.
lib. 1. ca. 19. 826.
Danes, and Suethens, by S. Ausgratius Monk: the Blondus Fl^. Deca. 2. li 2.
840
Bulgarians by S. Ioannicius: the Helmoldus li. 1. ca. 6. and li. 2. ca. 12. in
hist. Scla^.
Rugians by the Monks of Corbeia: the Theodomarus Episcopus Iu^aniensis ad
Ioannem Pontificem.
Morauians, by Withungum: the Zonaras tom. 3. and Cedrenus. 875.
Rhossits upon evidence of the miracle ensuing. They demanded of the Priest,
whom their Emperor Basilius Macedo sent unto them to teach them the Christian
Catholic faith, by what powerful and divine sign, he would witness the truth
of his doctrine. The sign was, that if the book wherein the said doctrine was
written should not burn being cast into the fire, then they all with one
accord would presently believe and receive his doctrine. A great fire was made,
and the Priest putting the book (which was the holy Bible) into the midst
thereof, said with a loud voice, Glorifica nomen tuum Christ Deus, Christ our
God glorify thy holy name. The flames gave place to the book, and the book
lay so long in the fire as the people themselves thought meet, and when it was
taken out, it appeared sound, whole, and no one leaf either scorched or
blemished.

In the tenth age the Polonians by f Adamus li. 2. ca. 7. 8. 10. 11. and
D^^maru^ chron. lib. 2. 971.
Cromerus, and alij de reb. Polonorum. 965.
Aegidius, Tusculanks, and others sent by Pope John the 13. The Sclauonians by
A. D. 989. h Cartuitius in vita St^ph. Hungar. reg. ca. 1. 2. and 3. and Aeneas
Syl^i^s Hist. Bohem. ca 16.
S. Adelbert, and the A. D. 1012. Helmoldus li. 2. ca. 13. and Mar. Crom. lib.
7.
Hungarians by Aeneas Syluius.
another Adelbert surnamed their Apostle.

In the eleventh age the A. D. 1106. Bozius lib. 4. ca. 5.
Vindians, and multitudes of Prussians, beside the reclaiming of the lapsed
Circiter A. D. 1150. Ranulphus li. 7. ca. 22.
Hungarians.

In the twelfth age, the Pomeranians, the Noruegians, by Nicholas an English
Moncke, employed in that holy work, by Pope Eugenius the third: The which
Nicholas was afterward chosen Pope of Rome, and named Hadrian the fourth, and
gave the dominion of Ireland to king Henry 2. Stow in anno 7. Henrici 2.
with condition of propagating the Christian faith there; of preserving the
rights of the Church entire, and inuiolated, and of paying a yearly pension of
a penny for every house in the Kingdom.

In the 13. age, the Anno Dom. 1205.
Liuonians, by Crantzius lib. 7. cap. 13.
S. Medardes, the An. Dom. 1230.
Lituanians by M^rtinus Chromer. lib. 8.
the knights of S. Marie, the Anno Dom. 1270. Sabellicus, and G^ili^lmus de
Nangiaco.
Emperor Cassanes with innumerable Tartarians.

In the four^teenth age, Anno Dom. 1300 Niceph. Gregor. Histor. lib. 4.
Azatines Emperor of the Turks, the Isles of the Canaries, the Anno Dom.
1344. Bozius lib. 4. cap. 5.
revolted Lituanians, the Anno Dom. 1346. Sebasti^nus Munsterus in Cosmograph.
Cumans, the Bosnians, the Lipnensians, the Patrinians, and other Sclauonian
nations, by Pope Clement the 6. and Jews king of Hungary.

In the fifteenth age, the Anno Dom. 1350. Michael. Rit. lib. 2. Bonfin. deca.
2. lib. 10.
Samogetians the kingdoms of Bentonine, Guinea, Angola, and Anno Dom. 1412.
Martin. Chrom. lib. ^8.
Congo.

In the sixteenth and last age, to speak in general, without descending to
any particulars, more (...)inces, Nations, and numbers of rich Kingdoms, and
Empires, were brought to the knowledge of Christ, and embracing the catholic
Roman faith, by the labors of the Dominican and Franciscan Friars, and the
fathers of the society of Jesus, God attesting his cause and truth by
several miracles, then all Christendom twice, yea, perhaps more then thrice
told, contained before: which, beside the record of all Cosmographies, and
Histories of this subject, may plainly be demonstrated in that before the
last Centenarie, or not many years different, the Christian Religion extended
not it self beyond the river Ganges Eastward, and the Isles of the Canaries in
the West, which scope and space is counted no more then of an hundredth and
twenty degrees; but the circuit of the world, which is now sailed, and every,
or most where, ports of Christians found therein, is of three hundred and
threescore degrees, which is full out thrice l Anno Dom. 1485.
as much.

The few precedents (most renowned Prince) collected out of many that might be
added, do very clearly show, not only that the aboue-rehearsed, and other
prophesies, and promises of God of dilating the place of his Tents, and of
spreading Esa. 54. ^.
out the curtains of his Tabernacle, that is, the bounds of his Church,
(Christ's Spouse and temporal Kingdom) are to the eye fulfilled, in the
increasing societies, and continuance of our religion, but that also the Word
of wisdom, and the Word of knowledge (graces given by the testimony of
Saint Paul, 1. Cor. 12. ^.
in the Church, by the holy Ghost, to the profit of others) have their
residences in the teachers of our religion, and that in how eminent and most
powerful manner, the conversion of the former Nations bears most apparent
witness, for there can be no doubt made, but that some, if not the most part
of the foresaid Nations and sorts of people, were of excellent dexterity and
judgment, and therefore very unlike that they were led away, specially from
the religion and rites they were bredde and borne in, without store of solid
and substantial reasons moving them thereunto. And it is as little
questionable, whether some of them were not also of a knotty; intractable or
untameable nature, of a proud, obstimate and hawtie disposition, drowned in
uncleanness, and delighting in the varieties of liberty: lets and strongest
impeachments of embracing the discipline, pureness and austeritie of our
Christian catholic religion: and the conquering of them a plain demonstration
that their Conuerters (all stout professors of the Roman religion) ^aught
that doctrine, which the Prophet calls a law, converting souls: and the
Apostle, the lively Psalm. 18. 8. Heb. 4. 12.
and forcible word, more piercing then any two edged sword. Likewise that they
fought not with the leather sheathe, the letter only of Scripture, but with
the letter and true sense, which only is the Sword of the spirit, that
reaches unto the division of Ephesians. 6. 17. Heb 4 12. Luke 1. 79. Esa. 30. 23.
the soul. The bright Candle (Luke 11. 37.) that illuminateth those that sit
in darkness. And the seed to which God promises to give rain for the rich
fructifying thereof. And finally, that they were also true imitators of the
Apostles in doctrine and office, as becoming Fishers of m^n, drawing them out
of* Matthew 4. 1^. and Mark. 1. 17.
the Sea of infidelity, into the harbor of Christianity, a badge or
attribute given to the Apostles, and verified in none but in catholic
teachers. Neither did then, nor does now the word of wisedom^ and knowledge (a
gift proper to Gods Church) 1. Cor. 12. 8.
work in our catholic teachers upon Infidels only, but the same extended and
still extends his power and divine efficacy to the bringing forth of as rare
or more rare effects, upon believing Christians, namely, in exciting men and
women of all ages and estates, even ^amba King of Spain. Hugo King of
Province. Rachis King of Lombardie. Sigismundus King of Burgundy. V^remundus
King of Castile. Ranimirus King of Aragon. Ethelred, and K^neredus Kings of
Mercia. Sigebert. Kings of Northumberland. A frod. Ceolulphus. Egbert. S^bba,
Kings of England. Offa, and Ina. Henry he fourth, King of Denmark. Carlomannus
King of Almaine. Trebellius King of Bulgarie. Cazimirus King of Poland, and
others.


Kings, Radegund Queen of France. Margaret Queen of France. Brigit Queen of
Sueden. Etheldreda Queen of Northumbers. Sexbarga. Q. Q. of Westsaxons, and
others. Ethelburga.


Queens. Lotharius Earl of Romans, and others.
Emperors, Richardix wife of Carolus Crassus Emperor. Chunegundis wife of
Henry Emper. and others.
and Empresles to relinquish the world, renounce the pleasures and delights
thereof, and deuote and bind themselves to a poor, chaste, and obedient life,
under the command and direction of others: Of which religious companies some
eat no flesh but in time of sickness only, or other necessity, and observe
both silence, and solitariness, as do the Benedictines; some never eat flesh
at all, wear always shirts of hair, go not forth of their Cloisters, nor
speak to their fellows but with leave, as do the Carthusians: some neither
eat flesh, eggs, nor whit^-meates, and fast three parts of the year, as do the
Bouhomes; Some discipline themselves sundry times in the week, or daily go
barefoote, touch no money, have nothing in proper nor in common, and beg their
food from door to door, as do the Capuccines: some attend the sick in all
diseases, assist them with ghostly counsel, provide them Sacraments, and bury
their dead bodies as do certain fraternities: some cleanse ulcers, and festered
sores, nor refuse any office, how base and loathsome soever about impotent
criples and lazars, as do the Nuns of S. Elizabeth's order: And all these,
with other diverse orders, that after another manner labor to mortify
themselves, and do good to others, he upon no other beds but of straw, rise at
midnight, sleep little, and spend much time in prayer, and meditation. Which
are no conditions of life, that either Romans 13. 14
make provision for the flesh in concupiscences, or Galat. 5. 16.
do seek to accomplish the desires, or Titus. 3. 3.
serve the voluptuousness thereof (sins which the Apostle forbids) but
rather forms of life that Galat. 5. 24.
crucify the flesh, with her vices, and concupiscences, do Galat. ^. 19.
nail them to the Cross with Christ, and render both Galat. 6. 14.
the world crucifide to those that so live, and them to the world. Virtues
which by the testimony of the same Apostle Galat. 5. 24.
make their dooers the servants of Christ, and Galat. 2. 20.
to live now not they, but Christ in them. Effects of no false religion.

30. A religion, from which Countries either departing. or mingling other
doctrines with it, made present wrack of their former felicities, falling
either into flat Apostafie, or most lamentable bondage, or both. The
instances are: The Theodoretu^ lib. 4. cap. 32. Sozomen. lib. 6. cap. 37.
Goths, while they remained Catholic, flourished and enlarged their
territories, but becoming Arians, were shortly expelled thence by the Hunnes,
then Infidels: The like, and by like occasion befell the Iornandes de rebus
gest.
Dacians, Mysians, and Pannonians, by invasion of the Hunnes, Gepides and
Rugians. The Ex Aenea Silu^^, in Eur. cap. 16. 17. Anto. Sabel. Enne 10. lib.
6. and ex Chronicis earundem Nationum, alijsque Historijs.
Dalmatians, Gaulls, Britanes, Spaniards, and the Africans by superinducing or
mixing, one the heresy of Manichaes, another the herisie of Vigilantius, the
third the heresy of Pelagius, the fourth the heresy of Priscillian, the last
the heresy of Donatus, with the catholic religion, were conquered, and
supplanted, the Dalmatians by the Turk, the Gauls by the French, the
Britains by the English, the Spaniardes by the Goths, the Africanes by the
Vandals: To which may be added the Germans, wasted and subjected by A^tila to
the seigniory of the Hunnes after the Arian heresy had rooted it self in
several quarters and provinces of their Country: The inhabitants also of the
city Iulinum, who being converted to the Ortelius in Rugia. ex Saxone Helmold^
and Cran^zio.
Roman faith, and falling again from it were all consumed, both citizens and
city with fire from heaven. Touching the Countries in the East, after they
began to dishonor themselves* with new doctrines, they so fast ratine
headlong therein, (an inseparable property of all heresy, because they are
unbounded, and lack a defining and binding power) that in short while after,
to wit, in the reign of Heraclius the Emperor, there were on foot Nic^ph.
lib. 18. 45. Iacobitans. Georgians. Theopaschite. Armeniaens. Monophysites.
Agnoetans. Staurablatans. Monothelites. Seuerites. Aphtarthodocites.
Phantasiasts. Manichaes. Tetradites. Tritheites. Arians. Nestorians.
sixteen several sorts of belief: but what followed? First, Chosroes king
of the Persians sacked Jerusalem, and much weakened the Empire: Then, (
Heraclius the Emperor turned Monothelite) Mahomet that infernal monster,
being made the Captain of the Saracens, took Syria and Egypt, Anno Dom 635.
Mesopotamia, An. Dom. 639. and afterward all Africa: Finally we think that in
the revolution of the fifteen first ages, the Nation or kingdom cannot be
named, which forsaking the catholic Roman religion, or not keeping it whole,
and inuiolated, was either not conquered, or miserably torn by civil division
and slaughters.

31. A religion, whose professant company or congregation, has been evermore
since the first planting thereof, very visible and perspicuous; as the several
resemblances, parables and figurative speeches, used in holy Scripture, do
clearly testify, that the true Church and Spouse of Christ should ever be,
comparing her to a Psalm. 18. 5.
tabernacle placed in the Sun: to a Esa. 2. 2.
mountain prepared in the top of mountains: to a Matthew. 5. 15.
City, situated on a hill: to a Matthew. 3. 12. Luke 3. 17.
Floor: to a Mat. 13. 47.
Net: a John 10. 16.
Sheepefolde: a Luke 14. 16.
great Supper: a Mat. 21. 33. Luke 20. 9.
Vineyard etc. and her doctrine to a Matthew 5. 15.
Candle put upon a candlestick, shining to all that are in the house, that is,
in the world, as Tract 2. in epist. Joan.
S. Austen understands the place: things that are all, most visible and
obuious to weakest sense, and therefore do prove, that the true Church ought
to be always visible, and apparent to the view of others. Neither is the word
[ Church] to be found throughout the whole body of Scripture, to signify other
then a visible known multitude: and the reason is plain, why it must so
signify, because it were otherwise impossible for any one, to join himself
to the true Church, persevere therein, obey the head, and be subject to the
Prelates thereof, (which all are bound to do by the express word of God, law
of nature, and under heauiest Matthew. 18. 17. Ephesians. 5. 23. Hebr. 13. 17.
curse and censure of damnation) if the Church were, or could be invisible, or
not remonstrable. For unto things hidden and invisible, there can be no
repair, no adherence, nor homage of duty, or tribute of obedience defrayed.

Nay, to deny the perpetual visibilitie, and duration of the Church, were in
great part to euacuate Christ's passion, and plainly to rob him of the end
he suffered for: namely, to sanctify and cleanse his Church, as S. Paul
witnesses, and to render Ephesians. 5. 26.
it glorious unto him: It were ( the Church being, as the same Ephesians. 1. 23.
Apostle writes, Christ's body and the fullness of him) to make Christ a head
bodylesse, and take, as it were, his totalitie or perfection from him: it were,
to divorce our Savior from his dearly beloved spouse formed out of his side
upon the cross, Ephesians. 5. 29.
and inseparably joined in marriage with him: it were, to bereave his
omnipotent Majesty of his house, kingdom, lotte and 1. Tim 315. Colos. 1. 14.
Psalm. 2. 8.
heritage upon earth: for such is his Church unto him, and so called in holy
Scripture: yea, It were, directly to charge the Prophets, the Apostles, and
even Christ himself, either with untruths, or absurdities: The Prophets;
because these words are read in Esaias: Thy gates (speaking to the future church
of Christians) Esa. 60. 11.
shall be open continually, neither day nor night shall they be shut, that
the strength of the Gentiles and their Kings may be Ca. 61. 8.
brought unto thee. And in another place; I the Lord will make an everlasting
covenant with them, and their seed shall be known among the Gentiles, and
their branches in the midst of people. All that see them, shall know them, that
they are the seed which our Lord has blessed. What could be plainer spoken
for proof, either of the visibilitie or perpetuity of Christ's Church? her
gates (says he) shall be open continually, shut neither by day nor night; and
that God has made an everlasting covenant with her, and that all that see her
children shall know them, and know, that our Lord has blessed them. The
Apostles; because S. Paul writing to Timothy, teaches him how he ought to
converse in the 1. Tim. 3. 15.
house of God, so tearming the Church of God: now if the Church were
invisible, the instruction must needs be vain and absurd; for none can
converse in an invisible house. Again, S. Luke writes, that the holy Ghost
placed Bishops in the Acts 20. 28
Church of God, to rule the same: but who can rule a flock, that is either
invisible or unknown? Christ himself; because he promised his Apostles to
remain with them all days to the consummation Matthew. 28. 20.
of the world: Which promise being made to the Apostles, was made to a visible
Church: and for that they were not (being mortal) to live to the worlds end,
the promise was undoubtedly made, to them, and their Successors in their
persons: and therefore the Church neither ever to cease or become invisible.

Neither can the reasons and places precedent be avoided, by the ignorant
distinction of a visible and invisible Church, A fantastical apprehension of
Wicliffe and his followers, Waldens. to. 1. lib. 2. ca. 8. and 9.
understanding by the latter, the hid and unknown congregation of the
Predestinate: because the Church, being a society of men, (as all writers
affirm) and every society requiring of necessity some visible sign, badge,
ceremony, bond, rite, profession, inrollement, or some other like ma^ke,
whereby the members of the same may be known, one to the other, and also from
others; which essential point failing in the company of the predestinate, they
can no way possibly make up the realitie, name or nature of a Church. For as S.
Austen Contra Faust. lib. 19. cap. 11.
truly writes, In nullum nomen religionis, seu verum, seu falsum, coagulari
homines possunt, nisi aliquo signaculorum vel Sacramentorum visibilium
consortio colligentur. Men cannot be incorporate in any one name of Religion,
either false or true, unless they be combyned together by some community, or
participation of visible seals or Sacraments.

Again, this hid and unknown predestinate company, which must be thought
to constitute an invisible Church, do either refuse, or not refuse to
communicate with the false and adulterous church in ecclesiastical subjection,
service, sacraments and external worship: If they do refuse, then is their
company and church not invisible, but most visible and markable: and of the
other side, if they do not refuse, then since the false Church is by testimony
of the holy Ghost, the Apoc. 2. 9.
Synogogue of Satan, and her doctrine 1. Tim. 4. 1.
the doctrine of devils; they must needs be guilty of damnable sin by such
their partaking with her. And therefore their company not Gods Church, because
that multitude cannot possibly be Gods church, wherein there are none Ephesians.
5. 27. Aug. contr. Donatist. post Col. cap. 20. and de doctr. Chr^sti lib. 3.
cap. 34. and Retract. lib. 2. cap. 18. and epist. 48. ad Vincentium.
good, but all wicked dissemblers, and clokers of their faith. With the heart
Romans 10. 10
(says S. Paul) we believe unto justice, but with the mouth (understanding
thereby all external actions) confession is made to salvation. And the same
Apostle bids all men Romans 16. 17. Tit. 3. 10.
to avoid false teachers, and 2. Cor. 6. 17.
separate themselves from them: yea Ioh 10. 5.
not to follow them, but to flee from them, is a mark which our Savior
himself gives, of distinguishing his true sheep from others. We would say
by that is said, that perpetual visiblenesse, being an essential quality
and note of Gods church, and ever really existing with us, and in our religion,
(as all sorts of testimonies in the world do witness) and in no other
company or congregation soever: it follows, that our church is the sole true
church and spouse of Christ.

32. A religion, in whose largeness and spreading amplitude over the whole
world, the predictions and promise of our Savior are verified, nor can take
their truth and verification in any other sect or doctrine that ever was, or
is at this day on earth. Mat. 24. 14.
This Gospel of the kingdom (says our Savior) shall be preached in the
whole world for a testimony to all nations. And by the pen of another
Evangelist, Luke 24. 47.
That penance should be preached in his Name, and remission of sins unto all
Nations. And our Lord also compared this his Gospel to Mat. 13. 31. Mark. 4.
32.
a Mustard seed, one of the least of all seeds in the beginning, but when it
is grown, it makes great boughs, so that the byrds of the air (that is, as
Expositors interpret, the greatest Powers, and the most wise of the world)
come, and dwell under the shadow thereof, making their residence, happiness,
and rest therein: A resemblance, and predictions, which cannot agree or fall in
with any other religion, save only with the catholic Roman religion, and
with this very fully, as the particulars precedent, and subsequent do clearly
demonstrate.

33. A religion, that has always had (as the Apostle assures Gods Church
should ever have, yielding also four weighty causes of the same) a perpetual
visible continuance of known Pastors and Doctors, to the consummation of the
Ephesians. 4. 11.
Saints, the first cause: unto the work of the ministry, the second cause:
unto the edifying of the body of Christ, the third cause: that now we be not
children wavering, and carried about with every wind of doctrine, the fourth
cause: and this, until we meet all into the unity of faith, that is, to the
worlds end. Which successiue and ever continuing duration of Pastors and
Doctors (the same being also promised before to the true christian Church by
several Psalm. 88. 31. and sequ. Esa. 59 20. and 21. Ierem. 31. 31. and sequ.
Ezech. 37. 25.
Prophets, and so greatly material in it self, as without it, there can be no
Church (as both Lib. 4. epist. 9.
S. Ciprian and Lib. contr. Luciferian.
S. Hierome do absolutely affirm) has not, nor can be ever proved to have
been fulfilled in any other Church, save only in the Catholic Roman Church:
and in it, most apparantlie demonstrable by the Ecclesiastical histories of
all ages, and by the short space, or rather momentarie blast of time that all
other religions compared with ours, have endured.

34. A religion, whose doctrine is to be traced even up to the Apostles chair,
by true and lawful succession of Bishops, every one of them holding unity
with his predecessor, and keeping still, as the Apostle directs, the
depositum that descended from hand to hand unto them. Which uninterrupted line
of succession, never leaping over the head of any one age, or year, and
drawing his original from the Apostles, can not but necessarily prove, that
our Church is only the true Apostolical Church, and that we continue and
contend Coloss. 1. 23. phil. 3. 16. and jude verse. 3.
(as we are commanded) in and for the faith which was first preached. And it is
also evident by the irrefragable authority of S. Paul, that the Romans had
once the true faith, affirming ( d) their faith to be renowned in the whole
world, and common to Romans 1. 8. and cap. 16.
him and them. Likewise it is evident by the uniform report of all
Ecclesiastical histories, and by the writings of all the Fathers Theodoretus
in ca. 16. epist. ad Romans Prosp. carmine de ingr. in principi^. S. Leo de Not.
Petri. Aug. contr. epist. Fund. ca. 4. Orosius lib. 7. ca. 6. Chrisost. in
Psalm. 88. Epiph. har. 27. Prud. in him. 2. S. Laurentij. and him. 12. Optatus
lib. 2. contr. Donatist. Ambr. lib. 5. epist. de basilicis tradendis. Hiero. in
Catalogo. Lactantius lib. 4. ca 21. de vera Sapien. Eusebius hist. Eccle. li.
2. ca. 13. 15. Athanas. de fugasua. Cipria. epist. 55. nu. 6. Tert. de praes^r.
nu. 4. and li. 4. Contr. Marcio. nu. 4. Origin. in Genesis apud Eusebius. lib. 3. ca.
1. Irenaus lib. 3. ca. 3. Hegesippus lib. 3. ca. 2. de Excid. Hierosolym.
Caius, Papias, and Dionis. Episco. Corinth. citati per Eusebius. lib. 2. ca. 14.
and 24. Ignat. epist. ad Romans Council. Calced. act. 3. and others.
Greek and Latin, yea and by the very sense and sight of sundry monuments
yet extant, that S. Peter was at Rome, suffered death there, and was the first
Bishop of that See. Now if our Counterpleaders can sufficiently show (as we
are sure the whole world cannot) either that the Romans have since that time
left the faith which S. Paul commended in them, or that any of the succeeding
Bishops to S. Peter in that See, have changed the first faith by paring away
any part thereof, or by adding any new doctrine contrary to the rule of the
former, or what was not taught before by the Fathers, and after explicitiuely
added as a more clear and particular declaration of the same: if this, we say,
can be sufficiently showed, by naming the Pope or other man, who in such sort
changed the primitive faith, and the point or points of faith that were so
changed, together with the time and place, when and where the change was first
made, we yield our selves to be profane Nouellers, yea Heretics, and most
worthy of the faggot.

35. A religion, whose doctrine so generally symboliseth, and holds the like
absolute consent with all parts of holy Scripture that were ever received of
the Christian world: with the decrees of all confirmed Oecumenicall Counsels,
and with the joint assertions of all ancient Fathers: as she is not driven
like The Lutheran, and Caluinist reject Baruch, Tobie, Judith, the book of
Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus, the Machabees, certain Chapters of Esther, the last
part of Daniel. And the Lutherans the Epistle of S. James, S. Paul to the
Hebrews, the Epistle of Saint Jude, the second of Saint Peter, the second and
third of Saint John.
other Religions for defending her positions, to reject either Scripture,
Council, or the uniform opinion of Doctors, but takes the approbation of her
doctrine from them all, and teaches all her children out of S. Augustine,
Epist. 118. ca. 5.
Disputare contra id quod tota per orbem frequentat ecclesia insolentissimae
dementiae est, To call the lawfulness of that into question, which the whole
Church frequenteth throughout the world is most insolent madness.

36. A religion which no persecution could any time vanquish, nor the
conjoined forces, malice, and machination of Pagan, Jew, or other her most
powrefull enemies, nor yet that which is infinitely of far more force to this
end, the wicked lives of several her professors and chief rulers either have
hitherto, or shall to the worlds end (as we assuredly believe) ever be able to
extirpate it wholly, or so to darken the visibilitie, or beauty thereof, as to
make it no where to appear, or not to shine. Nay, God has always bin so
strong on her side, as the more she was persecuted, the more she multiplied. An
observation that long since caused In Tryphone.
Justinius to resemble our Churches persecution to the pruning of Vines, which
makes them the more fertile, and likewise moved Cap. vlt. Apologetici.
Tertullian to call the blood of her Martyrs the seed of Christians, one dying,
and many rising thereof. Neither can it be well doubted, but that if our
religion (to speak with Act. 5. 39.
wise Gamaliel) had bin of men, and not of God, it would have bin dissolved
long ere this, as all other sects have perished in much shorter while,
agreeablie to the saying of the Apostle S. Paul, 2. Tim 3. 9.
They shall prosper no farther, and to that of S. Peter, 2. Petr. 2. 3.
Their perdition slumbreth not. Since therefore our Church is not only not
sunck, or obscured by any might, or never so violent storms of opposition, but
rather as the Arck of Noe, the greater the deluge and waves, the higher, and
more illustriouslie she mounteth, it follows, that of all others she must be
that very Church, against which by the promise of our Savior, Math. 16. 18.
Hell gates, (that is, the power and hatred of man, and devil) shall not
prevail.

37. A religion, some of whose Professors have had always upon every need
occurring, power and grace to cast out devils of the bodies of the possessed;
the first of all other signs, which our Savior himself gave, for having his
true Mar. vlt. v. 17.
believers distinguished from others. And this gift is so well known, by
continual execution thereof, to reside in the Roman catholic church, and
never found in the companies of any other Professions, as there needs no
recital of particulars. Pius Quintus, Pope of late memory, dispossessed tactu
Onuphrius de vita Pij quint.
stolae, and data benedictione; only by touch of his stole, and by giving his
benediction. And how frequent these effects, not only upon persons possessed,
but in driving away devils also from the places they most infestuously haunted,
have bin even newly wrought in both the Indies, where no other religion
professing Christ, is known, but the catholic Roman religion only: Petrus
Martyr, Gonzalus Ouetanus, in their histories of the Indies, and Gonzalus
Mendoza in his history of China, do give most ample testimony.

38. Finally, a religion, (that we descend to no more particulars) which by
more means, and stronger then any other kind of religion, keeps, by the
nature of her doctrine and holy ordinances, the subjects in due allegiance to
their temporal Lords; teaching that D. Tho. 1. 2. q. 96. art. 4. Council.
Ephesians. to. 4. ca. 16. P^ltano interpr.
the just laws of Princes do bind in conscience, and some kinds also of
unjust laws upon fear of scandal; and likewise decreeing Council. Tolet. 5.
ca. 1. and Council. Meldense ca. 14. and 15.
that all such as move sedition against their Sovereign, or obstinately
impugn or disobey his lawful commandments, should be p^esently
excommunicated, and all the faithful debarred to keep them company. And a
religion, which has evermore blessed the kings, that were her lovers and
children, with more peace, with more love of their subjects, with more
prosperity, with more victories, with more true glory, with more temporal and
eternal renown, then other Princes, who were her enemies, or aliens, at any
time attained to; as the registers of former ages, and the memorials of the
present, are most clear and undeniable witnesses.

Nor are these (o most gracious Sovereign) the only respects, that thus
embolden us to become humble suitors at your Highness foot, for toleration of
catholic religion; but our manifold dangers vnder-gone, our several losses
and indignities sustained, and the store of catholic blood that has been
shed, for affecting your mothers Rightes and Title, and for seeking how to
succor her piteous distresses and person, (the worthiest Queen that many ages
enjoyed, living a long imprisoned Confessor, and dying a most glorious Martyr,)
serve also to plead and cry to your Majesty, for commiseration of our case,
and grant of the Petition we make. And as our true love, zeal and tribute of
service, did not then dilate and extend it self only toward your Highness
dear mother, but in and through her, reached also to your sacred Majesty; so
since the time of her happy Crown of Martyrdom, our wishes, endeavors and
actions, have ever leuelled, as much as lay in our power, to the most advancing
of your Majesty's Title. Yea, the pressures and afflictions loaded on us for
this cause, were in a sort comfortable, or not discomfortable unto us, in hope
of the relaxation and ease, we assuredly expected by your Highness actual
arrival to the Crown. So that now, if your excellent Majesty may not be
moved, to permit the free exercise of the catholic Religion, Oh, our hopes
fed on, are not only frustrate, and our long expectations vain; but our
temporal lottes, by reestablishing of penal laws against us, become more
abject, servile, desperate and forlorn, then ever before.

Puritanisme differing from Protestancie in 32. articles of doctrine, (as their
own books and writings do witness) looks up, spreads, and is neither
suppressed with penalties, nor oppressed with indignities, but her professors
receive grace, and hold high authority in the government: only the
catholic religion (whose professors suffered most for your good Mothers sake,
and ever least offended your Majesty) is despised, trodden under foot,
maligned, punished, and must be, alas, by all violence abolished, without
regard of her venerable antiquity, or respect of the large dominions she
otherwhere has to her dowery, or of the innumerable conquests she has made
over all other Sects, from Christ's time hitherto, or of the multitude and
impregnablenesse of her proofs, which her professors are ready, yea, press,
and do most earnestly long to bring in public Dispute, for testimony of the
doctrine she teaches. And that which moves not the least admiration herein,
is; for that neither the inward belief of the catholic Roman faith, nor the
outward profession or defense thereof in words, seem to be the
transgressions which are so sharply animaduerted; but rather the only fault
which is punished, and never sufficiently, as some think, punished in us, is
the undissembled profession of our inward faith, in refusing to go to the
Protestant church: A necessity, which under guilt of deadly sin, and breach
of our churches unity, all are bound unto, that believe the verity of the
catholic religion, and purpose still to keep themselves her children: because
the unity thereof consists in the Aug. de doctr. Christian. lib. 3. cap. 6.
and epist. 118. cap. 1. and Basil. in exhort. ad baptism.
connection of the members together, by an external reverence and use of the
same service and sacraments, and is broken by having communion in either, with
any other contrary religion. And it is an axiom among all Divines, that Aug.
de unit. Eccles. cont. Petil. ep. cap 2. and contr. lit. Peti. lib. 2. cap. 38
and in Euangel. Joan. tract. 118. and in ser. sup. gest. cum Emerito vltra med.
and epist. 152. Cypr. de Simplic. Praelatorum.
extra ecclesiam non est salus: there is no hope of salvation out of the
church. To which Lactantius most plainly subscribeth, saying; Lib. 4. cap.
vlt. diui. Instit.
Sola ecclesia catholica est templum dei, quo si quis non intrauerit, vel a quo
si quis exierit, a spe vitae ac salutis aeternae alienus est. The catholic
church is only the temple of God, into which if any shall not enter, or out of
which if any shall depart, he is an alien from hope of life and eternal
salvation. Neither does the Apostle affirm less in sense, where he says,
that Ephesians. 5. 23.
Christ is the Savior of his body, and that Ephesians. 1. 23. Ephesians. 4 5. and
Cantic. 6. 8.
the Church is his body. Nor is it possible to be conceived in any
understanding that two such repugnant and contradictorie manners of serving
God, (there being but one Lord, one truth, one faith, one Church) as the
Catholic and Protestant observe in their churches, can be both, good, or not
one of them, very ungodly, and in no case to be communicated with, under pain
of eternal damnation.

By the little which is said, your princely Wisdom may easily perceive, that
our abstayning from Church, is in us no formal act of disobedience, much less
of selfe-wilfulnesse or contempt of your Majesty's laws, (aspersions, with
which, many would distaine our refusal) but a true ^eall obligation of mere
conscience, especially for so long, as we hold the inward persuasion we do:
in respect an erroneous conscience Romans 14. 14. and 23. Chrisost. hom. 26. in
ep. ad R^m. and est sententia com^^nis omnium Thelogorum in 2 Did. 30. and D
Tho. 1. 2. qu. 10. art. 5.
binds as strongly, and under equal pain, as does the conscience that is
best and most rightly informed.

To draw to an end; we most submissiuely beseech your Majesty, to conceive
no otherwise of us, then of your most dutiful and loyal vassals:
acknowledging in all politic and civil affairs, no other Superior then the
sacred authority of your Highness, and resting ever most ready to accomplish
all your commandments touching the same, were our lives never so certainly
engaged in the execution; Only requesting, that in matters of soul and
conscience, we may have leave, to distinguish an eternal Lord, from a
temporal Lord, and to prefer our obedience to the one before our obedience
to the other, if obedience to Princes, against God, may be termed obedience;
and not rather irreligious pusillanimitie. And as we have presumed (most
precious Sovereign) upon confidence of your true royal disposition and
benignity, to make known to your Princely consideration and wisdom our
griefs, our hopes, the favor and conniuence we desire, together with some
few reasons, as well of state as of religion, for showing the concordaunce that
our request has with the good of state, and also the grounds of our
persuasion in conscience, why the religion we believe in, is true: So do we
carry a most tender regard of yielding all satisfaction to your Majesty, and
to all other in authority, yea, even to those who stand most iealously
conceited of the true affection and loyalty of Priests, (the Pastors of our
souls) toward your Highness person, Crown, and the weal of the Realm. In
whose behalf, we do therefore confidently and most assuredly undertake, that
they all shall willingly and readily take their corporal oaths, for continuing
their true allegiance to your Majesty and the State: or in case that be not
thought assurance enough, they shall give in sufficient suerties, one or more,
who shall stand bound, life for life, for the performance of the said
allegiance, and of their fidelity and faithfulness in the premises. Yea,
they most voluntarily offer yet further, that if so any of their number be not
able to put in such security for their loyal cariages, that then they will
all join in one supplication to the Pope, for recalling such priests out of
the Land, whosoever they be, or how many soever.

We fear to be tedious, and therefore we will shut up all in few words. Our
hearts, our souls, and both, with deepest cries do most humbly and alike
instantly beseech your most excellent Majesty to take pity of our
afflictions, to compassionate our sufferings, and to relieve our long endured
pressures, either by licensing the free use of our Catholic Religion; or if we
may not be so happy, yet at least by granting a public Disputation, to the
end we may be heard, our cause tried, and our teachers receive confutation, and
the deserved shame of their false doctrine, if in case they have misled us. A
favor which the adversaries of our religion have obtain^d in other Countries,
and which our Country-oppositors seem in their books to be very desirous of,
and is also of it self, of all other means, the most potent, to reunite all
parties in one, the deceived being hereby let to see their errors. So that by
the grant thereof, no doubt your Majesty shall get eternal praise over the
Christian world, the Protestant religion everlasting fame if she prevail; the
neighbor countries great edification; the wauerers, and such as are doubtful
in faith, a stay and worthy satisfaction as none greater; all posterity a
right noble example and president to follow: And we your Majesty's loyal
subjects must and shall always, as our bounden duty exacteth, rest, through
the delivery out of the blindness (if so we live in blindness) for ever most
strictly obliged to pray incessantly for your Highness long life, and
prosperous reign over all your Dominions, with multiplication of immortal
renown in this world, and of endless joys in the next.

God save the King.
Faults escaped in the Printing.
(...) line 26. for, to impugn, read do impugn. Page 14. in the Mar(...)
Francis Dominik, read Francis, Dominik. Page 36. line 27. for, (...) 30, read
daily, go.


