A SERMON Preached before the Queens Majesty at Hampton Court, the 19. of
February last paste. By William James Doctor of Divinity.

printer's device of Henry Bynneman

Imprinted at London by Henry Bynneman. Anno Domini. 1578. Aprilis, 24.

A Sermon preached at Hampton Court.
Ezrae. 4.

BUT the adversaries of Judah and Benjamin, heard that the children of the
captivity builded the temple unto the lord God of Israel.

2 And they came to Zerubbabel, and to the chief fathers, and said unto them,
we will build with you, for we seek the Lord your God, as ye do, and we have
sacrificed unto him since the time of Esar Haddon king of Asshur which brought
us up hither.

3 Then Zerubbabel and Iesua and the rest of the chief fathers of Israel,
said unto them, it is not for you, but for us, to build the house unto our
God, for we our selves together vvil build to the Lord God of Israel as king
Cyrus the king of Persia has commanded us.

GOd that first created man to his own image, and placed him as Lord of
Paradise, that after his fall recomforted him, that the seed of the woman
should bruise the Serpents head, that with most gracious promises blessed
Abraham and his posterity, that led his people through the wilderness by
the hand of Moses and Aaron, that sent them faithful Judges and zealous
Priests, to execute justice and maintain truth, that after long contempt of
his merciful call (by many of his Prophets) gave them over to be schooled by
the king of Babylon, that suffered their temple to be raced, and themselves
most miserably to be entreated: that God that at no time can forget his
faithful people, but remembers them when they are in trouble, and rescueth
them in the perilous time, because he will not suffer Virgam peccatorum super
sortem iustorum: Psalm. 100 at once works three strange wonders.

First he inflameth King Cyrus with an earnest desire, not only to dimisse the
people held in captivity, but also to restore unto them all such vessels
and treasures as Nabuchadnezer had before taken out of the Temple.

Secondly, he rayseth up three notable guydes, three excellent and rare men,
for the preservation of his people now after their return from babylon,
Zorobabell, Ezra, and Nehemias.

Thyrdly, he encourages the people with all earnestness to travail in the
work of the house of God, so that neither the weariness of the captivity
which they had endured, nor ye true service of God of a long season
unfrequented, nor the pleasures which Babylon offered, could once wythdrawe
these weak and feebled persons.

The sum is, the snare is broken, Israel is delivered, Zorobabel, Ezra,
Nehemias, the people al apply their business, desiring in heart no one thing
so much, as to erect the Temple of the Lord to advance the glory of their
despised God. But see, the adversaries of Judah and Benjamin came not of any
conscience, but craftily to suppla^t these workmen. It so falls out, that if
God have a Church, ye Devil, if he cannot hinder it, yet will look to have an
oar in it: if Moses work wonders, Pharaos soothesayers will use an apishe
imitation. The Apostles, Peter, Paul, Barnabas, shall no sooner testifye the
truth of Jesus Christ, than Simon and Elymas the sorcerers will be at inches to
peruerte the right ways of the Lord. If Paul preach at Athens, or at
Ephesus, then shall he surely find either Stoikes, Epicures, or Jews, or some
sect of miscreants ready to misse-leade Gods people. The envious man that when
the servants sleep sows tares to choke the wheat, yt plucketh the word of
God out of the hearts of ye hearers ne crederent and seruarentur, yt sometime
like a roaryng Lion seeks who^ he may devour, and at another time, can turn
himself into an Angel of light, yt so shook yt consciences of Caine and Judas,
that they thought their sins greater than could be forgiven, and yt so
cunningly bleared Saules eyes with the counterfaite shape of Samuel, and made
Ananias and his wife to lie to the holy Ghost. That man of sin, as a
Spirit saw the intent of Israel, and as an enemy by all possible means
goes about to hinder the building of the house of God. The devil and ye
superstitious Samaritans saw, that so long as King Cyrus favored the Jews,
and the reedifying of the Temple, that so long it was impossible openly to hurt
the^, or hinder it: and therefore now after that frowning will not serve, he
uses a far more cunning shifte, he begins now to flatter and speak fair.
You have a long time endured trouble, your treasure is wasted, your bodies
weakened, ye work is heavy, your strength is feeble, ye charge great, your
substance small: we Zorobabell, and you the rest of the chief of Israel, we
will join with you in this work: distruste us not, for we seek the Lord your
God, as you do, and we have sacrificed unto him since the time of Esar Haddon,
which brought us up hither. Whom might not these sugared speeches have
deceived? we will build, we seek the Lord with you, we sacrifice to him as
you do. But that God that even in that same hour instructs his what to
answer, and that has left to his servants judgment to discern the
sprytes whether they be of God or no, here in a trice, teaches Zorobabell,
Joshua, and the rest of the Elders to answer: It is not for you and us to
build together.

I will not stand here to discuss why this Book, and the next of Nehemias
are accounted Canonical, neither why the other of Esdras are refused. I purpose
only at this time briefly to rest on these two points: the adversaries
coming: and Zorobabel, Ieshua, and the rest of Israelles rejecting of the^. Of
these that I may so speak as may redounde to gods glory, I most humbly crave
your Christian aid in earneste prayer.

These Jews now returned from seauentie years captivity, and now in hand
with reedifying the house of God, and desirous every man to abide by his
tackling, at ye first are set upon with these subtle Samaritanes: Let us build
with you: this they said, intending nothing more than indeed to pull down.
They saw thus much with Scribes and Phacifies, that as if new Christ were
suffered to grow up, that then all the people would go after him: and that if
Paul might be allowed to preach at Ephesus, that then Diana should have a
great down fall: so if the buylding of the temple might go forward, that then
the Idols of Samaria would be but little set by.

There are in these superstitious Idolaters two things worth the consideration:
their consent and agreement universally to hinder Zorobabel and the rest: and
that in these words, let us build etc, when they intended to suppla^t. The
other is, their lying Hypocrisy, we seek as you, we sacrifise as you: and
first it is strange to see the agreement of the godless. Against true
Mycheas, the whole rabble of false prophets prophesied good to king Achab.
When the people wanted water in the wilderness, the text says: conuenerunt
aduersus Moysen and Aaronem. Iosue 11. Against Israel both Iabin king of Hazor,
and Iobab king of Madon, and the king of Shimro^, and the king of Achshaph, and
the kings that were by the North in the mountains, the Cananites both by East
and Weast, the Amorites, Hethits, I^busits, Phorezites, with all their host as
the sand in ye sea shore for multituds pitched to fight against Israel.

The kings of the earth stand up, and the rulers take counsel together,
against the Lord and against his anointed: Manasses against Ephraim, Ephraim
against Manasses, and both against Judah. Pharisees against Saduces, Saduces
against Pharisees, and yet both against Christ.

Herod against Pilate, Pilate against Herod, and yet in Christ's death ^ch is
reconcyled to other. These Samaritans were of diverse sects, and yet al
against the buylding of the temple.

Among all the false Prophets not one to take Micheas part, nor among all the
people, one to answer for Moses, nor among all the kings any one that favored
Joshua, not one Pharisie, not one Saducey, to assist Christ, not so much as
one Samaritane, to set foreward the buylding of the temple.

I say with Tertul de prescript: Nihil enim interest illis, licet diuersa
tractantibus, dum ad vnius veritatis expugnationem omnes co^spirent: It
skilleth not how diverse matters they entreat of, so long as they conspyre all
together to the rootyng out of one Truethe. Rauenyng Wolves although each will
tear other, yet every one seeks the slaughter of y^ Lamb.

Greedy Kyghts albeit they will fiercely fight for their pray, yet al seek to
kill the Chicke.

Common robbers, although every one thinks an other to have too much, yet
none will suffer the poor true man to escape scotfree. Light and Darkness,
Christ and Belial, Heaven and Hell can never agree together.

These superstitious conspirers against Judah and Benjamin, show to al
christian princes, to al good magistrates, to all faithful people, what they
are to look for at the hands of this world: if not open resistaunce, yet
false undermining: if in one hand fire of zeal, in another water of
discourage: in one hand bread to comfort, in the other a stone to strike: if
honor in lips, yet dishonor in heart.

If whatsoever things be written, are written for our instruction, if all that
have ever attempted reformation of Gods house with Zorobabel, have been troubled
with Samaritanes: if the first Abell in his sacrifice with a blouddy Cain: if
Daniel with false worshippers: if all the true Prophets, with many false
Prophets: if John Baptist with a generation of vypers: if Christ Jesus with
Scribes, Pharisees, and Saduces: if the Apostles, with Jews, Stoyckes, and
Epicures: if Constantine the great with Arrius: if Theodosius with Macedonius
and Nestorius: if Marcia^ with Eutiches: if the Children of this world be in
their generation wiser than the children of light: if those that seek to
please God shall be sure to offend men: then surely has Zorobabel no cause to
marvel at the strange conspiracies daily practiced against Christ and his
Gospel. What though they frette and fume? what though they appoint holy
leagues and name their generals? Let them seek to make havoc of the flock of
Christ, and like wild Boares to root out the vine Jesus, and that the name of
God be no more named: yet as long as he that dwells in heaven laugheth them
to scorn, so long shall David with his slyng brain Golyath, and little Gedeon
with his goade, and Sampson with his Iaw-bone slay thousands. Better is one
that fears the Lord, than a thousand wicked, and greater is he that is on our
side, than he that is against us.

Let them term us Heretics and Schismatickes, yet with that which they
call Heresy do we worship the true God of our fathers: Let them blaspheme
us, and speak all evil of Zorobabel: well, let loosers have their words, they
have lost a great part of Christendom (the Lords name be praised, he has
won them to himself) let us pray, Confirm this O Lord yt thou have wrought
in us, that thy ways may be known upon earth, thy saving health among al
nations.

Let them now put in practice their late Tridentine advise, let the Devil be
much madder than heretofore, leffe there be more trouble under the gospel
than under ignorant popery: for why? Apoca. 12. Woe be to the inhabitants of
the Earth, and of the sea, for the Devil is come down and has great wrath,
knowing that his time is but short, his practices are disclosed, his vysor is
plucked off, his blind Ceremonies are al abandoned, his Locustes, his
Grassehoppers, his Monks, his Friars, are al swallowed up.

He that does evil, hates the light, the thief can not abide the candle, his
gold is but copper it cannot abide the touchstone, his gauled back may not be
touched without winsing, his bleared eyes can not abide the bright sun beams
of Christ's Gospel. At the beginning it may appear, what bloudye conflictes
he raised by his ministers, as the shedding of Innocents blood, as the
corporal possession and vexation of many with unclean spirits, of privy
hindering, (as bear) of open withstanding (as to Elyas, Jeremy, Mycheas, and
others, John Baptist, Christ Jesus, his Apostles, yea and in the primative
church in ten bloody persecutions, and al this) until he had filled himself
with the reproach of Gods Saints. But after that this adversary had (as it
seemed) gotten a little victory, and had obscured (with a foggy mist) the
clear light of the gospel, and as the God of this world ruled in the children
of unbelief, without check or controlement, then had he leisure to lull the
world asleep in reachelesse security. Then raised he up strong illusions, of
the lives and deaths of Saints, of wonderful miracles wrought by their
relics, of gogglyng eyes, of salt tears from dead stocks, of strange
operation, of strange bloods, of the insufferable pains of purgatory, of
pilgrimages, of walking spirits, of vggly and fearful ghostes: yea and in the
latter age, of Hob-gobblin, of Robin goodfellow: very startlebugges, very scare
crows: and with these his practices bewitched he all that drunk of the cup
of his abomination, by the space almost of seven hundredth years last past.

But after that it pleased God of his great and rich mercy to take the candle
from under the bushel, and to draw that two edged sword of his word, that
deuideth between the bones and the marrowe, then was that man of sin revealed,
the^ was ye Babylon laid waste, his kingdom the^ draws to an end, his Empire
is abridged, a stronger man possesses the house. His rage and fury is therefore
the greater, especially now that he sees that the days are shortened for the
elect sake, he now bestirreth him self, for he knows his time is but short.

Isod^r. lib. 1. de summo ^ono. T^nto crudelius persequitur, vt qui se
damnandum nouit, vt sibi socios multiplicet quibuseum gehe^nnae ignibus
addicatur. He persecuteth so much the more cruellye, that as he knows
himself sure to be damned, so he may multiply fellows, to partake the pains
of hell fire.

He that in old time began with deceyte, he now ends with deceyte, he
began with blood, he now ends with blood.

He that made Adam to lose Paradise, he makes many to forsake their own
native country: him for an apple, them for less than the paryng: he that
made Adam disobey God, he makes them to disobey the Lords anointed: he that
made Lots wife look back to Sodom, he now makes old English beldams to
return after, xix. years preaching of the Gospel, to the loathsome puddle of
Popish trumperie: He that in old time by the blood of the Lamb was overcome
and dispossessed of heaven, he by a drop of blood is content to take
possession of his witches and Sorcerers here on earth: He that in old time
shed the blood of innocent Abell, and prepared hoate fornasses for Gods
faithful servants, he at this day rayseth up bloody massacres and fiery
inquisitio^s, and why? but because his time is short.

Where the Gospel is preached most diligently, there does the Devil rage
most furiously, and like a good Captain endeuoreth by all means to reedifie
those walls that the word of God has battered down, and to renew that old
Adam, that by the spirit of God is put away, and (as one said) Account al
time lost that is not spent in some virtuous exercise: so the Devil
accounts all time lost, that is not spent either in veryng, or withdrawing
from God the children of God: and why? but because his time is short.

A second thing in these idolatrous Samaritanes, is their lying and false
hypocrisy, for neither sought they ye Lord as Israel did, neither sacrificed
they as they ought to have done. 2. Reg. 17. they pretended to fear ye Lord,
but appointed priests of themselves for the high places, and prepared sacrifice,
and did after the manner of the nations, and therefore the spirit of God
testifyeth, that they neither feared God, nor did after the ordinauntes, nor
custom, nor law, nor commandment which the Lord commanded the children of
Jacob, whom he named Israel: notwithstanding here they come with these lying
speches, we seek, we sacrifice.

Singular was ye impudency of these Samaritanes, that notwithstanding their
own consciences accused them, and their daily practices declared the clean
contrary, yet they blush not to say we seek. etc. It is a plague that lies
on Hypocrytes: there is no other sinner, be he never so strong a thief; be he
never so filthy a liver, be he never so common a liar, be he never so great a
blasphemer, be he never so biting an usurer, be he never so cruel a murderer,
be he never so rank a traitor, be he never so false to God, so faithless to
men: but in his theft be desires darkness, in his adultry secretnes, for his
lying pardon, for his blasphemy sometime seeks forgiveness, in his usury
fears law, in his murder dreadeth the wagging of every leaf, in his treason
suspecteth the bewraying of the birds of the air.

But the Hypocrite (neither fearing him that knows the heart and raynes,
neither regarding his own reproach) dares, because he ca^ bleare men's eyes,
to present himself (as it were) into the presence of God. Such were they that
came to our savior Christ, Master we know thou speak truth, and regardest
no man's person, is it lawful to pay trybute to Caesar or no? Why, if I speak
truth, believe you me not oh ye Hypocrites? and another: Master what shall I do
to inherit eternal life: and, Master what is the greatest commandment in
the law?

To whom our savior answers, Not every one that says to me Lord, Lord,
shall enter into the kingdom of heaven, but he which does the will of my father
which is in heaven. Why do you call me Lord, Lord, and do not the things
which I command? why tempt ye me O ye hypocrites? what offer ye to me O ye
painted sepulchers? you appear fair outwardly, but inwardly ye are full of
dead men's bones, and all filthynesse. Why do ye honor me with your lips,
your hearts being far from me? Why speak you lies unto me, you have
consciences marked with an hoate Iron? Why pretend you a show of godliness,
seeing you have denied the power thereof? Surely these Samaritanes are as it
were a clear glass to behold the misery of iniquity that in this world
preuayleth. Such an hypocrite was Herod, that when he purposed nothing but the
death of our savior Jesus Christ, as may appear by the slaughter of the
innocents, yet he persuades with the Wisemen, to return home by him, that he
with the^ might worship him, that was borne King of the Jews: such false
teachers hurt the Apostles, such false brethren added much to Paul's bonds.
And died these Samaritanes only think we with Zorobabel? and rose there none
of their ashes? and are there at this day no Herodians that in word speak
that in heart they think not? and are there no false teachers to hinder the
Gospel of Christ? and are there no false brethren to add to Paul's bonds?

Not to speak of such as when Steven preached stopped their ears: nor of such
as say we will not hear, charm ye charmer never so wisely: nay there are a
brood which live in the church, and by the church, but are not of the church,
that at this day do hinder, and hitherto have hindered the course of Zorobabel.

And as true it is, yt new wine is not to be put in old bottels, nor new cloth
to be patched in an old garment, nor Christ and Circumcision to be matched
together; and as God in old age raised up not a Priest of Baal but Elias, nor
our savior any learned Pharisee, but simple fishermen, to tread the way of
his Gospel: so is not Zorobabel to admit such as mingle Christ and Belial,
the Church of God and Idols, the Gospel and popery, religion and mockery. What
better words than of Samaritanes, we seek, we sacrifice: what better
profession than of Herod, Go and seek and bring me word that I may worship:
yet were the Samaritanes Idolatours, yet was Herod a Fox. What better
speeches, tha^, we be comfortable men, we observe our princes laws, we follow
iniunctio^s, we obey orders: yet if it come to examination at the passage of
Jordan, (as Iepthe and the Gyleadites did try the Ephraimites, by pronouncing
Shiboleth) I fear me, they will say single Siboleth, there will want the hearty
aspiration (h) (h) wants, the heart wants.

It is an old proverb, Ex vnguibus leonem. Let them be narowly looked into,
how they grunt and groan at the preaching of the Gospel: how they carpe at
the doings of the godly learned: how they deride the simpler sort of the
professors of the Gospel: how open ears they have to hear, and how ready
tongues to mislike the state of our Church: what secreate conuenticles they
have: how they daily buzze of strange news: how big they look on the
professors of the Gospel: how they still retain one Mass trick or other to
put the people in mind: how willingly they will maintain gross Popery, but
for disputation sake only.

If you look narrowly into them, you shall perceive them to be plain
Samaritans, plain Herodians, the one ready to hinder the building of the house
of God, the other like craftye Foxes, to eat up the lamb Jesus.

God that is not deceived will vomit out all those luke warm Soldiers, he
cannot abide such as can cover Neroes cruelty with Catoes gravity, nor such
as to hide Herodes butcherie, pretend John Baptistes simplicity.

These leaves without fruit, these ears without corn, these clouds without
water, these lamps without oil, as they have lived without fear, so shall
they dye without hope, and as they have bodies without life, so have they
souls without God. As Copper resembles Gold, and is nothing less, as stage
players do often put on another person than their own, as in the Rainebow there
appear many colors, when in deed there are none at all, as in broken
glasses, where there is never a face, yet there appear two faces: so in these
double faced Ianusses, in these cha^geable Chamaeleons there is nothing less,
than that which seems most to be. What though they say, they seek, they
sacrifice: let them brag of their forwardness: we know that empty Tubbes do
ever make the greateste sound. A fresh Iuy does not always signify the best
wine. The Cypers tree is ye tallest tree, but it bears least fruit.
Bladders puffed up with wind, are good for nothing but to make footballes.

I can compare these hypocrites to nothing so fitly, as to the Distridge, who
(when there was a contention between the birds and four footed beasts) to
deceive the byrds, showed his bil and wings, and to deceive the beasts put
forth his hoof, so seeking to please both, deceived both. And as Austin said
of some, while they will be Jews and Christians, they are neither Jews nor
Christians, so these while they will be Papists and Protestants, they are
neither Papists nor Protestants. Yet they say, we seek, we sacrifice, we love
the Lord with all our heart, with all our soul, with all our strength: But if
they once may warm themselves at the high Priests fire, they will
foresweare with Peter: if a little storm of affliction rise, they will go
back in the time of trouble: if you bid them sell all they have, they will
either with ye yongma^ depart heavy, or with Ananias and his wife keep back
half: they will embrace the world, with Demas: they will forsake the Apostle,
with Himeneus and Philetus: they will persecute with Alexander: I pray God they
do not sell wc Judas. And yet notwithstanding all this, such is their
shamlesnesse, that as in heart they seek nothing but the overthrow of
Christ's Kingdom, so in word they pretend nothing so much, as to serve God,
and to sacrifice unto him. And thus much as touching the consent and hipocrisy.

The second part of this text, is the answer, wherein there are four things
in order worth the consideration.

First the unity of the aunswerers, Zorobabel, Iosue, and the rest of the
chief fathers of Israel, and a flat denial, It is not for you, but for us.

Secondly, the agreement of them in building, we our selves, and we together.

Thirdely, what they will build, a house to the Lord God of Israel.

Fourthly, the warrant whereby they build, as King Cyrus the King of Persia
has commanded us.

And for the first: the answer was not of one, but of Zorobabel, Iosue, and
the rest of the chief fathers of Israel: wherein we learn, that in matters
of weight, there ought not to take place Zorobabels own opinion, but it must
be aided with the consent of others, sic volo, sic rubeo, must have no place
in Gods matters.

They answer not as the Datorse in time of Poperye did to a reasonable
demand, The Popes holiness will not admit it, and if his holiness would,
yet my Lord would not suffer it.

Zorobabel, as his name importethe (by interpretation) to one strange and
far from confusion, and although in this refusal he be a very Precisian,
yet he is not singular. He answers not, it is for you and me, but joining
himself with the rest, It is not for you and us.

Here are many things, that if time and place would suffer, would require long
tractation. As first, that Zorobabels refusal and the rest, does teach us,
that aid of the Idolatrouse, of the wicked, although it be offered, is to be
refused, especially in matters touching the building of Gods house.

Abraham refused to take of the King of Sodom, so much as a thread or a shoe
lachet, least he should say: I have enriched Abraham. The young Prophet for
eating bread with the wicked old Prophet was devoured of a Lion.

Theodorus li. 2. ca. 6. Eccles. Hist. reports, that Liberius going into
banishement, refused al gifts of the Emperor and his wife, let them give these
(says he) to Auxentius and Epictetus their Arrian heretics.

Secondly, here we learn by this example, that the company and leagues of the
wicked are utterly to be shaken off. For blessed is the man that does not
walk in the counsel of the wicked, nor stand in the way of sinners, nor
sit in the seat of the scornful.

He that touches pitche shall be defiled with it, one sheep infecteth a whole
flock, one sparckle kindles a great flame, and one infected house is able to
poison a whole City. There is no participation of righteousness and
unrighteousness.

John the Euangeliste would not wash in the bathe wherein Cherinthus the enemy
of the truth bathed himself. Caius and Alexander being condemned to die, and
being led to execution with certain Marcionistes, made an especial request
to their tormentors, that they might be slain aside from those Marcionists,
and that their blood might not in death be mingled with theirs, with whom in
life they agreed not in religion.

Thirdly, here may be observed to our singular comfort, that the Lord
discloseth to his servants, the counsels of the wicked, and ouerturneth the
practices of his enemies against him and his church, as of Achitophel, Hamman,
Herod, and the rest. The thing yt here is especially to be weighed, is ye reso^
ye moved Zorobabel and the rest: and that is, ye they would not have the true
service of God mingled with Idolatrous or strange worship.

They enuyed not that these Samaritans should serve the Lord, they desired
nothing more, than that the Lord might faithfully and religiously be served,
but therefore did they deny them any part or fellowship in this work,
because they worshipped strange Gods, erected Idolles, and put their trust and
confidence in creatures.

The God of Israel can not abide to be worshipped with other Gods, and
therefore although they pretended as you hear, yet that God, that is
worshipped in spirit and truth, would not have his servants to admit these
hypocrites.

God requires the whole heart, the whole soul, the whole mind. He that
made the whole man, will not be contented with half man: God is a jealous God,
and will not divide with the Devil. If God be God, honor him, if Baul be God
honor him.

Lactan, de falsa Relig. Lib. 1. Ca. 19. Si honor idem tribuitur alijs, ipse
omnino non colitur, cuim religio est, illum esse vnum ac solum verum credere:
If the same honor be given to others, he at all is not worshipped, whose
religion is, to belee us him to be one, and him alone to be true.

We must not plowe with an Ox and an Ass, nor sow our ground with diverse
Seeds, nor make our garments of Linsey Wolsey.

How long shall we halte on both sides? What agreement have Christ and
Belial? if ye will be circumcised, then is Christ dead in vain: if you will
be justified by the Law, then are you fallen from Grace. Ye cannot serve
two Masters, ye cannot serve God and Mammon. Christ says not, it is not
convenient to serve two masters, nor it is not profitable, but by an argument
of impossibility, Ye cannot.

Such Samaritans had Zorobabel, y^ notwithstanding that the spirit of God
puts down an impossibility, yet would say yt they sought, that they
sacrificed etc. that although they loved in heart Idolatry and superstition,
and that neither would have the Priests read, nor the Prophets expound the
law, neither would themselves eat of the Passover, nor suffer their childrens
forskinne to be circumcised: yet with shameless face, with lying tongs and
false hearts, would say they did love Zorobabel. If the son shall rise
against his father, the father against his son: if the daughter against her
mother, and the daughter in law against her mother in law. If Cicero said that
Philosophy did first unite men into one body, but we know it was God by yt
mighty power of his word: truly then if with Infidels no society, but through
Philosophy, then with us no true obedience toward the Lords anointed, no
faithful love among brethren, where there is not concord in true and sound
religion The jar about religion is ye greatest iar, and the bond of religion
is ye strongest bond. Let them the^ come, and tell Zorobabel, truly we will
build with you, we will keep back your enemies, we will execute your laws, we
will live like good subjects, but (as for our consciences) we cannot abide the
talk of this God that only will be served, we cannot abide to be present at
your prayers, we can not partake of your Communion. Did not these Samaritanes
lie when they said, we seek, we sacrifice, and shall we think these speak
truth? Well, it is well said in my text, Zorobabel, Iosue, and the chief
fathers (...) Israel, he and al his counsel answered, It is not for you and
us. Trust you? nay not for a Denyre, he that gathers not with us, scatters
abroad: he that is not with me (says our savior) he is against me. Now can
he be faithful to man yt is faithless to God. The Isralites admitted neither
Jew nor Proselite, not so much as once to come among them, unless he first
were circumcised, had received Moses law, and had bin partaker of their
sacrifices, Zorobabel here refuses all their offered service: Is it then like,
ye either ye Isralites, or Zorobabel, would either have put them in great
authority, or have given them leave to have lived after their consciences?
Nay, he that would not allow them for their superstition to help to lay
lyme and stone, would not allow them to live after their own Idolatry. He
would not give them leave to go to the Devil. He that said, do that only that
I co^ma^d, and decline not either to the right or to the left hand, but, ad
legem and ad testimonia, to the Law and to the testimonies. He had so
instructed Zorobabel, that he would not yield, and had so terrifyed the
Samaritans, that they durst not ask, but whatsoever inwardly they mente,
outwardly they say: Let us build.

It had been a shameful thing for the Samaritans, not only not to have
proffered aid, but to have gone about privily to undermine, and to have
craved leave, in that his painful business, to have layne in a corner
repyning at his endeavor: But to have judged his conscience, nay to have
condemned him, nay to pour out prayers for his ennimyes, to account him a
Schismatike, his Heretics, his work wickedness, his building confusion, to
harbor, nay with money to supporte his enemies, had bin detestable, had bin
devilish. Answer me O ye Samarita^s, shall not Zorobabel give you leave to
rob men by the high way side, and dare you ask leave to rob God of his
honor? shall not Zorobabel give you leave to commit murder of others, and
shall he suffer you to kill your own souls: Shall he not license you
(although your Pope do) to open adulteries and keeping concubines, and shall
he suffer you to make your bodies, the temples of God, slaves to Idolles
sacrifice? Shall he not suffer any high treason against himself, and shall he
wink at open blasphemy against God? Answer me O ye Samaritanes.

If old father Chrysostom now lived, he would tell the people of Antioch, that
they bound horses and fettered them, and with horns poured in medicine, and
shall they suffer their brethren to run on headlong into iniquity.

If father Austen now lived, he would tell Gaudentius, ye it seems unto you
yt the unwilling are not to be compelled to hear: you are much deceived, for
while you compel them against their will, you often times make them willing.

Is it behoofefull for the common wealth, that no man abuse his own house or
horse, for that if they please not him, they may profitte others? and shall it
not be behoofefull that no man abuse his own soul?

You are not your own, you are boughte neither with gold nor silver, but with
the precious blood of the immaculate Lamb Christ Jesus.

But O Sir, it is for their conscience, be good to them, show mercy.

I will show thee (O Man) says the Prophet, what it is to do good, it is to
love Justice, and to show mercy.

Iehu might have suffered ye Baalites, Josias and Ezechias the Idolatours: well
they might have showed mercy, but sure they should not have done justice.

Saul spared Achab, Achab spared Benadab, Elye winked at his sons wickedness,
but it was to them all occasion of ruin.

Solomon suffered his concubines and wives to have Temples, to serve Astartes,
Chamos, and strange Gods, but the renting of Gods service rent his Kingdom,
half to his own son, and half to Jeroboam the son of Nebathe.

Peter might have spared Simon the sorcerer, and Paul the incestuous
Corinthians, but what mercy had this bin?

I am of this opinion, that if I see one ready to drown himself, and stay him
not if I may, yt I am guilty of his death.

If I feed not one ready to dye with famine, having food wherwithal, I have
killed him.

Cicero said, that he that when he may defend injury, if he do it not, is
no less in fault tha^ if he forsake his parents or country.

He that said, say not so much as good morrow, or hail sir, but let him be as
an Ethnicke and Publibane to thee, he would not admit him to eat at his board
that would not eat and drink at Gods board. But he is my friend. But Christ
answers, he yt does ye will of my father in heaven, he is my father, my
mother, my brother, my sister. Cicero says, that yt is the surest frie^dship
which ye similitude of good manners has coupled. You know the Proverb, No
cousin in Court, No cousin in Cheapeside: so surely it ought to be, No
Christian in the Church, no Cousin in Court. If thy hand or foot offend thee
cut the^ off, if thine eye, pull it out, this may (I deny not) be well
understood literally, for we use to cut off rotten members, ne pars sincera
trahatur: but it is indeed mente of them that are unto us in steed of these
parts, of hands, of feet, of eyes, yt is, most near and familiar friends, if
they go about to draw us or to hinder us from Christ, whom to know is eternal
life.

O but he has done me good. Pharaos daughter nursed Moses, the hungrye Ravens
fed Elyas.

But alas shall I render evil for his good? shall I not love my neighbor as my
self? shall I suffer him cum ratione insanire? his father did me good: should
Moses have reserved Pharan for his daughters sake?

To end this point, it is evident, that what protestation soever these
Samaritanes made, yea so long as they worshipped Idolles, so long Zorobabel
would not trust them, no nor vouchasafe them so much countenance, as once to
number them among such as hewed stones or made mortar.

But what if they had denied? he was not ignorant, that if in the cold
winter, in the time of gracious Cirus, the snake might have warmed himself by
his or the elders fires of Israel, that then he would at spring of the year,
if not have bitten, yet have hissed at Zorobabell. But answer me O ye English
Samaritanes, O ye recusantes that dishonor God and disobey the Lords
anointed, shall a strange proud Italian Priest withdraw you? what has the
church of England offended you? wherein have we corrupted the gospel of Jesus
Christ? who flies to ye touchstone of ye scriptures, you or we?

Offends it you that the Scriptures are in our mother tongue, and are known to
the Lay people, blame your own Doctors: even Nicolaus Lyra and Caietanus in.
14. 1 Corin. do teach, that it was the manner of the primative Church, and
that out of this doctrine of Paul may be gathered, that it is better to the
edifying of the church, that public prayers may be in a tongue known to the
people, than to be said in Latin of the Priest and Clerks.

Offends it you (and that is the matter) that we deny Transubstantion the
Real presence? blame your own Doctors, for Bonauenture, Durande, Scotus,
Thomas, hold four several opinions. It is an opinion never heard of until the
Laterane counsel, 1215 years after Christ.

Rupertus abbas Tutiensis confesses, that before that Counsel it was lawful
to believe or not to believe. Tonstall late Bishop of Durham. li. 1. de
Eucharistia, De modo quo idfieret, satius fortasse erat, curiosum quemque suae
relinquere coniecturae, sicut licitum fuit ante consilium Lateranum. Of the
manner how this should come to pass, it had been best to have left every
curious man to his own conjecture, as it was lawful before the Laterane
counsel.

Offends it you that we deny the Pope to be Universal bishop? Blame your own
Pope Gregory, for he says: Nemo predecessorum meorum etc. none of my
predecessors ever took upon him this name of singularity, this profane,
this po^pouse, this proud name.

Offends it you that we preach against Purgatory: blame not us but your
own Doctors. For Gregorye your own Pope says, it is as it were in hot
bathes: Alcuinus says, it is in the air, some in yse, some in shadow of trees.

The fathers in their late Tridentine counsel confess, that there are many
things uncertain, which have a show of falsehoode, which tend to curiosity,
and to vayn superstition, and which savor of filthy lucre.

Your schoolmen are together by the ears, whether the Pope be more mercyful
than Christ (seeing that it is not read that ever he released from ye pains
of Purgatory) and whether the Pope may emptye Purgatory at his pleasure.

Offends it you, that we deny prayers and invocation of Saints? blame your
own doctor Eckius, who after much said for that matter, concludes thus:
Explicit non est praecepta sanctorum inuocatio in sacris literis. Invocation
or prayer to saints is not commanded in holy scriptures: not in the old
Testament, because the people were otherwise too too propense into Idolatrye:
and the fathers were in Limbo, not yet blessed: nor in the new Testament, least
the people might seem to be led to the worship of erthly creatures again:
and if the Apostles and Evangelists should have taught this, they should have been accounted arrogant, as though they had sought for this glory after their
death.

Offends it you, that we pull down Images? blame your own Doctor Barnarde,
who ad Guil: abbatem Cluniacens. Quem ex ijs fructum requirimus etc. What
fruit look you for of them, which serve for nothing, but either to feed
fools, or to seduce the simple.

Offends it you that you may not have the Popes pardon? that you may not be
absolved a pena and culpa? blame good father Jerome, who upon the. 16. of
Matthew, Quorum remiseritis peccata: Istum locum Episcopi and Presbyteri non
intelligentes etc. This place bishops and Priests understanding not, take upon
them somewhat of the Pharisees pride to absolve or condemn, where as before
the Lord, not the sentence of the priest, but the life of the sinner is to be
regarded. Offends it you that we burn and disgrace your Legenda aurea,
blame Ludouicus Viues, for he says, Non video cur dici possit aurea etc. I
see not why it can be said to be of gold, seeing it is written of a man of an
Iron face, and a leaden heart.

What look you for O ye Samaritanes? For your devises of men, we preach ye
gospel, ye power of God to salvation to all yt believe it. For your
Tra^substa^tiatio^, we show in our Communion ye Lords death until he come. For
your Pope Christ's vicar, we preach ye holy ghost to be vicare general, which
does teach us al truth. For your pick purse Purgatory, we preach that ye blood
of Jesus Christ does cleanse us from all sin. For your many mediators, your
poor helps, we teach that there is but one mediator between God and men,
Jesus Christ both God and Man.

For your Trentals of Masses, your Bulls of lead, your Lambs of wax, we
preach the Lion of the tribe of Iehudah, and that Christ by one oblation of
himself, once for all, has perfitted them that be sanctified, and that the
Lamb of god takes away ye sins of the world.

For your wodden Gods, your laymens books, we deliver the word of God, which
is a Lantern to the feet, and alight unto the steps.

To conclude this part: if we have not departed from you until you have
departed from God: if we have not sucked this of our own fingers, but drawn it
out of your fou^taines: if for traditions of men we preach the truth of the
Gospel: if for very tri^^es and trashe, we declare the infallible word of
life, then arise O ye Samaritanes, seek the Lord while he may be found,
walk while there is light, now is the axe laid to the root of the tree:
awake oh ye Samaritanes, it is no shame to amend your manners, taste and see how
sweet and pleasant the Lord is.

But if neither your own consciences, nor the testimonies of your own
doctors, nor the difference of the Doctrines which we deliver, nor any our
requests may once move you, behold we answer, It is not for you and us to
build together,

The second thing in this answer is, but we our selves together will build.

Zorobabel, Iosue, and the rest of the elders, as they would admit none but
themselves, so would they suffer none to build by himself but altogether.

The Philosophers hold diverse fa^tasies of their summum bonum, of ye end, but
these Isralites had al but one end, one temple of the Lord, and herein they
(...) all together.

Behold it is good and pleasant (s^^th (...) Prophet) brethren to dwell
together in ^^^tie. Austen says, Ita dule^^ est sonus, vt qui Psalterum
nisciunt, ipsum tamen ^^^sum cantent: the sound is ^o ^weete, that they which
never knew the Psalter, yet sing that Psalm. There is nothing more acceptable
to God tha^ unity, and nothing more hateful tha^ dissentio^.

God is love, Christ is the prince of peace, his testanient is a covenant and
league of peace, his Angels are messengers of peace, his Apostles were
preachers of peace, their whole life was an example of peace. Origin said that
no sense without the scriptures, how excellent soever it seemed to be, was
more to be received, than that gold to be accounted holy which was without
the temple: but I say, that there is no work nor labor of any man any whitte
to be esteemed, unless he observe the unity of the spirit in the bond of
peace.

I need not stand to declare the inco^ueniences of dissension, the two eyes of
Greece, Lacedemon and Athens, (...) th^^ hold not together, made Greece a pray
to her enemies.

The dissension of Hanno and Hanniball raced Carthage.

The vnbrotherlike wars between Etheocles and his brother Poleni^es, decayed
yt flourishing state of Thebes.

While Aristobulus and Hyrcanus do strive, they suffer their city to be
spoiled, and their temple to be raced.

Scipio Africanus having overcome y^ Numantines asked Tyrestas how it happened yt
Numa^tia before so invincible, was at the last with great ease overcome: He
answered, brag not Scripio, our co^corde before made us victors, but our
discord has bred our destruction.

Old Micipsa on his death bed did sing his last cygnaea ca^tio, By concord
small things increase, by discord the greatest come to nothing.

It is much to build together, for as virtus vnita fortior, so many hands make
light work.

Surely the dissentio^ about the building of Gods house did never good, for
(...), how shall the day laborers do, when the master workerm^n do dissent?

Clemens Alexan^i^ ^trom: says, the heathens were wont this to obic^, you
Christians do dissent among your selves, and (...) so many sects, which
although they do every one challenge the title of Christianity yet every one
does hate and condemn Another.

Chrysostom complained that in his time the Jews were wont thus to say, I
would ben Christian, but I know not which part to cleave unto: surely for
this cause (says he) we are become rediculous to the Jews and the Gentiles,
while the Church is rent into a thousand parts. The dissension between Peter
and Paul, the departure of Paul and Barnabas, the holding of some of Paul, of
some of Apollo, of some of Cephas, no doubt vexed the godly in the first
primative Church.

The quarrels between Theophilus and Epiphanius, Austen and Jerome, Jerome and
Ruffinus, opened many gappes to wicked Heretics.

The question between Luther and Zwinglius about the supper of the Lord, no
doubt, hardened and at this day hardneth many in the error of popery.

The contention among us about round and square, about white and black,
about sitting, standing, walking, kneeling at yt communion, makes both parts
of less credit, and encourages none but sworn adversaries to both. We al
agree of the holsomenesse of the meat, and why do we fall out for the dishe?
it skilleth not whether it be Pewter, Tin, Silver, Gold, or a treen dishe.
And as long as we account the medicine to be sovereign, why do we take
exception to the bore of wood or stone? It is the Devils policy to divide us,
that he at our breach may ye more easily enter in.

Straggling Soldiers are soon swalowed up. The mouse and the frogge may strive
so long, until the Kite devour both warriers. Sylurus sons shall be a terror
to all their enemies, so long as they abide in the fagotte bond of true
friendship: if once they separate themselves, they shall be an easy pray to
their adversaries. Aristotle said truly, that in a civil dissension one
enemy armed within the City, is more able to hurt than many without: but we
may say it much more truly of the church. Let us my brethren seek those
things, Quaesunt ad pacem Jerusalem: as the Prophet faith: Let us pray, that
as in the acts of them that believed there was but one heart, and one soul,
so that we may build al together, that as all things may be done to edifying,
so all things may be done dece^tly and in order.

The third thing in this their answer is, what they will build, a house to the
Lord God of Israel. These Israelites do in reedifying follow Solomon in his
first buylding, for as he first builded the temple before he meddled with his
own house, so these at the first desire to erect a house, to build a temple
to the Lord their God. But what? does the God of Israel delight to dwell in
temples made with hands? Albeit that every place is meet for Christians to
make prayers in, for as Austen says, there is no place where. God is not: if
we go up to heaven he is there: if we go down to Hell he is there: if we take
the wings of the wind he is there present, for himself has said, behold I
am with you to the end of the world.

The house of God has sometimes been in a ship on the Seas, as with our
savior, sometimes in a poor house with his disciples, sometimes in the market
place at Athens, in a parlor at Troas, on the shore with Paul and the
faithful. Where two or three are gathered together in my name I am in the
midst of them, and where Christ is, there may we be assured is Christ's Church.

Tertul in exhorta. ad castitatem: Ecclesia est vbi duo aut tres sunt, licet
laici sunt, the church is where two or three be together although they be lay
men.

But God to the intent he might have a peculiar place for his people, where
they might use prayer and thanksgiving, and offer sacrifice, first raised
Solomon to build, and these to redifye a house for his own honor.

In the books of kings and Chronicles we read, that in the four hundredth and
four scour year after the children of Israel were come out of Egipte, did
Solomon build the house of the Lord of three scour cubits long, in
Jerusalem, in mount Moriah, which had been declared unto David his father, in
the place which David prepared, in the thresshing floor of Ornan the Iebusite.

It is well worth consideration, that neither Solomon in his first, nor these in
their new buylding, do either build to any other than to the Lord, or once
herein think of buyldyng to themselves.

Solomon builded not to Abraham, although he were the father of the faithful,
nor to Isaac, although in him the seed were called, nor to Jacob although of
him came the twelve Trybes, not to Moses, nor Elyas, nor Aaron, not to any
Priest, not to any Judge, not to any Prophet, but to the Lord God of Israel
only: But we have forsaken Salomo^, and followed the Samaritans, we have not
builded one temple to yt Lord, but many temples to Idols.

As yt Jews in old time built up high places in every city, and erected
altars in every high hill, and every nation made themself a God, and put them
in the high places which the Samaritanes had made: even so did we, where was
there any then that builded unto the God of Israel? They builded Temples, they
erected Altars, they carved Images, they appointed certain feasts, they washed
themselves at their entry into the church, they fell down before their Gods,
they kindled lights and burned Frankensence, several Gods had several
Priests, and was it not so in popery? Might not we compain with Jeremy,
according to the number of thy cities was thy Gods O I^huda^, and according to
the number of the streates, haste thou erected Altars of confusion to sacrifice
to Baal. And was not this true in popery? In every great Town how many
Temples? and till of late not one dedicated to Christ. Whereas the virgin Mary
had every day her Mass, and many Saints many Masses: then was Christ
only on the Friday, (and that but in Cathedral churches only) remembered.
That which was true while he lived on earth, yt birds of the air have nestes,
the foxes dens: that may much more truly be spoken of such services as were
done to him here on earth. Every where has Peter a church, Mary, Paul,
Dunston, Aldate, Gyles, George, Scythe and Katherine, but the son of Man has
not where to hyde his head. Tertul. li. 1. contra Marcionem, said truly,
Inuenio plane ignotis Dijs aras prostitutas, sed attica idololatria est, item
incertis Dijs, sed Romana superstitio est. I find Altars erected to unknown
Gods, but it is the Idolarye of Athens, and to uncertain Gods, but it is the
superstition of Rome. Austin feared not to say, that there were temples
builded to them on earth, whose souls lay buried in Hell. Well might therefore
yt prophetical Spirit in Jeremy complain, and well may we, that the people
have channged the true God, and sought for that that pro^^teth not: that they
have forsaken the fountain of the water of life, and have dug themselves
cesterues that can hold no water, nay (as David says) their Idolles are
multiplied, after the which they make so great haste: Superstition has no
hoe, nothing too hot, nothing too heavy. The Jews offered their own children
to Moloch. The priests of Baal did cut and lance themselves. The people to
make a Calfe and an Ephad offered all their richest jewels.

Again, these Jews build not to themselves, they build not houses, and call
them after their own names. They did not with the Agregentines build as
though they would live for ever, and live as though they would dye for ever,
but they builded as men by their lives destrous to set up ye glory of the true
God, They to build Gods house spared nothing, but we to build our own nestes
pluck from Gods house.

If Zorobabel, Iosue, and the rest of the chief fathers were not more
careful, tha^ some of ye feet be, both learning, with out which we are like
brute beasts, and religion without which we nothing differ from Infidels, would
speedily perish.

I fear me there are that wish as he did of the Romans, that they had al but
one head, yt he might cut off al at once: so that wish that many Churches were
but one church, that it might at once be ouerturned. But will you live alone
upon the earth? what profits it a man to win the whole world, if he loose
his own soul? Quid prosunt ista cum caro datur vermibus anima daemonibus?

The last thing is the warrant, as King Cyrus king of Persia has commanded us.

The warrant whereby the work went forward, was not of Zorobabel, although he were
their guide homward, nor of Esdras, although he were a learned scribe, and was
to reform both their religion and manners: nor of Nehemias, although he was to
finish the walls and to deliver them from oppression. It was not at the
commandment of any Patriarche, of any Prophet, not by the direction of any
Priest, but of King Cyrus King of Persia. God, by whom Kings do reign, and
that has not given the^ the sword for naught, and yt has promised to raise
them up as nursing fathers, and nursing mothers to his church, does her^ stir
up Cyrus to further his own cause, to set forward she buylding of his house.

It is worth the marking. God does not this work by any that were (as it may
seem) of his own couenante, he does not fetch either Saul from keeping of
Asses, or David from keeping Sheep, or Elizeus from the plowe, or Amos from
the heard. But as the deliverance is altogether miraculous, so is the means
ordinary, by a King, by K. Cyrus king of Persia. It is wonderful to see yt Gods
people in reedifying the holy Temple did so willingly obey a K. in all other
points unholy. But God that would at the first frame them to obedience, and in
them teach us and al posterity, what we owe to the Lords anointed, does here
warrant his own work both by the letters patents of the King of Persia, and
does also by this his example show to the true seed of Abraham all his, that
if he in his own Church building, (whereas his might have had legons of
Angels) would yet use as a countenance to the world, the commandment of
king Cyrus, that they in all their actions should next under him depend on them
whom the Lord shall set over them. The first Temple was not builded by a
Priest, but by Solomon a King.

It is not said, we will build as God has commanded: but it is the Lords
house, and we will build it as Cyrus King of Persia has commanded.

Let every soul submit it self therefore to the higher powers, no doubt Paul
set it eue^ out of that he had learned at Gamaliels feet.

Chris^st. Theophylact. Oecumanius, gather thereof, that all Priests, Monks,
Prophets, Evangelists, Apostles, the Pope himself, (if he have a soul) to be
subject to this precept. Submit your (...) the King as to yt most excellent,
and ^o these that are put in authority under them.

Did they obey Cyrus a strange king* and shall we disobey our anointed of
the Lord?

Solomon did build the first, and Cyrus commands this, and what has
either Patriarch or Prophet to ^o^.

He that withstandeth Power, withstandeth Gods ordinance.

Ignatius ad Magnesian^s Epistola. ^^mo remansit inultus, qui so contra
superdores exculit etc. None escaped unpunished that set himself against his
superiors.

Dathan and Abyram resisted Moses, but the earth swallowed them up alive.
Chore and his accomplices that conspired against Aaron, two hundredth and fifty
persons, were consumed with fire. Absolon desiring to supplante his father, was
hanged by the hear of the head, and his wicked heart shot thoroughe with an
arrow. When one broughts David word of Saules death, and brought his crown and
bracelet, signifying also that he stood upon him to rid him out of his pains
being wounded to death, and half dead, David not only not rewarded him, but
caused him to be slain, fearedste thou not ye Lords annointede and when he
might twice have slain him, he refused so much as to touch him.

To conclude, if ye good be ever oppugned of the (...) if the devil go about
craftily to undermine the Lords house, if he raise up tormentor^ to persecute,
false brethren to seduce, ^ar^^ to choke the good seed of Gods word, if he
come with these flattering Samarita^s. and say, Let us build etc. let us with the
Doves simplicity join the Serpents wisdom, resist him strong in faith,
communicate not with his unfruitful works, a little of his leaven will leaven
our whole lump.

Let us consecrate our selves, our bodies and souls to serve ye Lord our God:
as children obey our father, as brethren love one another, as members defend
our head, and as good branches maintain the root. Let us account all vt
stercora, as duste, to win Christ. Better to be a door keeper in the Lords
house, than to dwell in the tents of the wicked.

Let us give most humble thanks to God for Zorobabel: let us live in
faithful obedience in all things as to the Lord: let us with Tertulian
pray to God to bless Zorobabel with long life, with a faithful Senate of
Elders, with a quiet realm, with a happy peace, with an obedient people: This
God grant, to whom with his some and the holy ghost be al praise and glory.

FINIS.
IMPRINTED AT London, by Henry Bynneman. Anno. 1578.


