THE SON OF GODS entertainment by the sons of men.

Set forth in a Sermon at Paul's Cross the seventh of October. 1604.

By Richard Iefferay of Magdalen College in Oxford.

John. 1.11.12. He came unto his own, and his own received him not. But as
many as did receive him, to them he gave power to be the sons of God; even to
them that believe in his name.

AT LONDON Printed by T.P. for Henry Tomes, and are to be sold at his shop at
Graies Inn new gate in Holborne. 1605.

IN the Temple of Praeneste amongst diverse other counterfeits most cunningly
and curiously portrayed Deum quendam (...) reperiri ferunt. They say there is a
certain mouthlesse God to be found, whom the Egyptians call Harpocrates, the
Gretians (...), the Romans Deum silentij, we the God of silence; to whom they
say, unless due sacrifice (to wit) dumb silence carefully be offered, there
is no safety for those that speak: now while I am constraind to neglect the
rights of this profane God, and enioynd to perform the duty of this
consecrated place for the service of the Lord God alone; I may much fear into
what dangers I may slip or fall, for I cannot but acknowledge my self with
Moses to be a man of a slow speech, and with Jeremy of polluted lips, nay
with David a worm and no man, so that with Esaias my heart of ashes, and tongue
of flesh must needs fail God, unless I be enabled by his holy spirit, and
assisted by your religious prayers and patience: wherefore I beseech ye (right
Honorable, Honorable: right Worshipful, Worshipful, and the rest whom I
reverence and love) in the name of the Lord Jesus, Ascendat oration vt descendat
gratia, compareat patientia vt consurgat consolatio in salutis opere, as
Chrysostom says, Let prayer ascend, that grace may descend; let patience
appear, that consolation may be found in the work of our salvation.

The son of Gods entertainment by the sons of men.
John. 1.11.20. He came unto his own, and his own received him not, but as
many as did receive him, to them he gave power to be the Sons of God; even to
those that believe in his name.
WHen Moses declared the mercy of God, and his loving kindness toward his
people Israel; then he says, The Lord came from Sinai, Deuteronomy. 33.2.
and rose up from Seir, unto them he appeared clearly from the Mount, and came
with ten thousands of Angels. When Abacuck revealed the glory of the highest,
and made his favor known unto the world, then says he, God comes from
Mount Teman, and the holy one from mount Paran, Selah. Abac. 3.3.
His glory covers the heavens, and the earth is full of his power. When our
Evangelist saint John had showed the goodness of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ in his Godhead, and the greatness of his Godhead in his glorious
goodness, first by his eternity equal with his father, Secondly, by the
testimony of John the Baptist his forerunner, he comes to the manifestation
of Christ himself to the world, And says, He came unto his own, and his own
received him not. He cam^ and was in the world, but not known of them that
were in the world, for as a garden enclosed, a treasure hid, a fountain shut
up, so he remained: He came and was known of the world, but as the word by the
voice, the body by the Image, the Godhead by the manhood; so he appeared,
known, and not known, come, and not welcome into the world: and therefore
unwelcome because unknown, to some yet welcome, and known to other-some, for
some believed, and received him: and some were known and accepted of him, and
believing in the Son of God, were made themselves the sons of God.

He came unto his own, etc.
Three things especially for your memory, and my methods sake, are to be
considered in this text. First the coming of Christ unto his own: a manifest
token of his unspeakable love: He came unto his own. Secondly, the course
entertainment his own gave him, an evident testimony of their inexcusable
fault: They rece^ued him not. Thirdly, the effect of Christ's coming, the
certain and souera^gne benefit of our salvation. But as many as did receive
him, etc. First touching the first, He came: Non venit qui aberat, sed apparuit
quilatebat, as saint Bernard says, He came not as one that had been absent,
but appeared as one that was continually covertly present: As the day star
that springs from on high, Luke 4. Mat. 4.
has visited us: As the Sun that never goes down: As Emanuel the seal on
Gods finger, even God with us. Thus our Evangelist interprets his coming,
and that by the same phrase of speech which he uses in his first Epistle. Non
tanquam maiestas impressa carne, sed tanqua carne imbuta; not as a majesty
imprinted in the flesh, Ioh. 1. E. 1. ca.
but as imbued with flesh. Which plainly showed the love he bare unto
mankind, that being God became man, the word became flesh, glory became
infamy, to make men Gods, to bring flesh to heaven, and shame to glory,
according to that of the Apostle. 1 Epi. John 3. John. 1.3.
For this purpose appeared the son of God, that he might loose the works of
the Devil And saint Paul says: Tim. 1.49
This is a true saying, and by all means to be believed, that Christ Jesus
came into the world to save sinners. Tim. 1.4.9. And Christ himself says in
the 15 of Luke. Luke 1.5.
The son of man is come to find that which is lost.

He came; as a shepherd to find the lost sheep; as the woman to find the
lost groat; as a father to find the lost son; the lost sheep, to restore us
unto perfection again; the lost groat, to renew us to the Image which before
we had lost; the lost son, to receive us into favor again.

For all this, impacient of his glory, as unworthy of his grace, injurious
Arius and profane, to disgrace the gracious goodness of Christ Jesus, speaking
of his coming, says, He was sent before he came, thereby impairing his loving
kindness, in that he came not before he was sent; whereto our Savior
answers directly himself, in the 40. Psalm, lo I come; they be his own
words. Whereupon S. Cyprian says, Cyprian.
though sent from the father, yet willingly of himself, because God coequall
with the Father, to will and to do one and the self sam, eneuer divided. Saint
Basil, Basil.
Venientem Christum propria benignitas inuitauit, misericordia traxit, veritas
compulit, puritas vteri suscepit, potentia abduxit, obedientia deduxit,
beneuolentia conduxit, patientia armauit, charitas verbis and miraculis
manifest auit. When Christ came his benignity invited him, his mercy drew
him, his truth compelled him, the purity of the womb undertook him, his
power forth led him, his obedience past him, his benevolence guided him, his
patience armed him, his charity revealed him by words and miracles. Gregor.
Cum tempus completum erat and opus compertum sacrificio, quo veniret Christus,
vltro venit, and sponte se hominibus videndum attusit, occidendum obtulit,
mirandum contulit, credendum transtulit. When the fullness of time was that
Christ should come and perform the work of sacrifice, he came willingly, and
of his own accord, yielded himself to be seen by men, offered himself to be
slain for men, conuaied himself to be wondered at amongst men, translated him
from men to be believed Cumplenitudo temporis erat, tunc, missus erat Christus,
Chrysostom.
and venit non compulsu patris, sed consensu sui, non ex necessitate mandantis,
sed ex voluntate venientis. When the fullness of time was, then Christ was sent
and came, not by compulsion of the father, but by consent of himself, not out
of the necessity of him that commanded, but out of the willingness of him
that was coming. Which Saint Augustine upon saint John makes manifest, August.
saying: the father sent his son unto us, where we may not think he sent
any thing less then himself, for in that he sent his son, he sent himself,
and so goes further with the same manner of speech. Why should we wrangle,
seeing the father in sending his son came himself? The Sun sends forth
his beams, yet separateth not his beams from him: the Moon sends forth her
light, yet separateth not her light from her* the fire sends forth his heat,
yet separateth not his heat from him. In every one of these there is a
sending forth, but no separation, much less in the son of God, which is
joined to the father in their indivisible nature, one God in glory equal, in
majesty coeternall; neither confounded in persons, nor divided in substance,
but one God of the substance of the father, begotten before the worlds, and man
of the substance of his mother borne in the world, one, not by conversion of
the Godhead into flesh, but by taking of the manhood into God, one altogether,
not by confusion of substance, but by unity of person. And so he came, equal
to his father as touching his Godhead, inferior to the father as touching his
manhood. He came: Appio^ makes the coming of Christ three sold Venit ad
homines, venit in homines, venit hominibus. Christ comes unto men, into men,
and to men: unto men in the flesh, John. 1.14 and so he came unto his own
directly: John. 1.14.
Into men by the spirit* John. 14.18. and so he comes to his chosen
continually: John. 14.1^.
to men in judgment, and so he will come finally to all. Acts. Acts. 7.31.
A day there is which the Lord has set, wherein he will judge the world by that
man Christ Jesus, of whom he has given us assurance, in that he has raised
him up from the dead, and made his enemies his footstool. S. Bernard makes
the coming of Christ as the numbers of Delphos fiue-sold Venit Christus, says
he, vel spiritu formante, vel verbo informante, vel cruce reformante, vel
sacramento conformante, vel carne deformante. Christ came by his forming
spirit, by his informing word, by his reforming cross, by his conforming
sacraments, by the deforming flesh. He came, Venit ad sua, for ad suos, as the
Apostle says in his sixth Chapter afterward. Omne quod dat mihi pater, for
omnes quos dat mihipater: All that my father has given me, for all those my
father has given me, using one gender for another, the Neuter for the
masculine, instructing us thereby as Athenagoras makes gloss, that neither
Masculine, nor Feminine, male nor female, man nor woman, are happy without his
coming, alluding to that of the holy Ghost, that without are withered
branches, without are dogs, infidels, pagans, without hope, without faith,
without love, without truth, without grace, without the spirit of God, without
the blessing of God, all those that are without the compass of Christ's
progress, or circuit of his visitation, therefore he came unto his own, that
they might receive allcomfort by his coming.

He came unto his own.
There be amongst our newfound, now-fond Gospellers a sort, (I had almost said
a sect) that challenge to themselves a great pre-eminence in this respect, and
take upon them of themselves that they are these his own to whom he came,
forgetting the tence and sense of this purescripture. For they themselves will
seem so pure, that all their Christian brethren must stand apart from them,
and rather then they will loose the property of this prerogative of being his
own, they will be tear med brethren in Christ, and brethren of Christ, nay
Christ's nowne brethren, they are so holy, or so hollow in their purity; but
surely I think they are traduced in their title, as ill as seduced in their
opinions by those that call them Puritanes, unless they take their names as
Diogenes named his man, Manes a manendo, because he ran away from him, or as we
say, lucus a lucendo quia minime lucet, or Mons a mouendo, because it stands
still: so they by the contrary are termed Puritani, a puritate, quia minime
puri, which in his proper place anon shall be declared, though they deny the
Sun to shine while as it dazeleth their eyes. Where as the Prophet notes all
people forth of all Nations, and all kinreds of the world for Christ to make
his own of. God gave him heaven for his inheritance, and the earth for his
possession. Psalm. 2. All are his but not all his own: we are all his by
nature, but not all his by grace: we are all his by creation, but not all his
by election. Omnium hominum dominus quibus quid dat, sed Israliet arum Deus,
quibus praecipue prodest: God is the Lord over all, to whom he gives any of
his blessings; but he is Isreal's especial God, to whom he gives himself, and
which he prefers before all other people: they were those which in the
beginning he called by his own name. I am the God of Israel. Esaias. 43. If you
will be my people, I will be your God. The great blessings he graced them
withal, declare they were his own; their wealth, honor, sovereignty above
all other, show they were his own: witness Moses. Deuteronomy. 15.28. Thou shall
lend to other Nations, but of none shall thou borrow: Thou shall seem strong,
dreadful, terrible and glorious unto others, but none shall overcome thee,
Esaias. 2.
etc. The Law God gau^ them, the covenant he made with them, show they were his
own, Acts. 2.
witness, Esaias. a. God dwelt with them, gave the law to Sion, and the word of
the Lord to Jerusalem. Witness Saint Peter. Acts. 2. To them pertained the
adoption, the glory, the Testament, the constitution of the law, the Covenant,
the worshipping and the promises. The descent of Christ showed they were his
own, witness Saint Paul. Romans 9. Of them came Christ according to the flesh:
and therefore he is called the star of Jacob, the Lion of the tribe of Judah,
the Rod of Isacke, the seed of David, the son of the Virgin, as of the
greatest and royalest blood amongst them: to these he came, these were his
own, and had foreknowledge of his coming from the beginning. Adam in the 3.
of Genesis Abraham in the 12. Isacke in the 20. and in the 26. God told Jacob, In
thy seed shall all the nations of the world be blessed. He bound the same with
an oath to David: whereupon David did rely and prevailed: and so have all they
no less benefit which believed in him promised, then those that received him
exhibited. He came: to Adam with the promise in the time of despair; to
Abraham with supply in time of sacrifice; to Isacke with relief in the time
of famine, in time of exile with honor to Joseph, in time of persecution with
comfort to Elias, in time of battle with a hand in Gedeons hilt, in time of
invasion with triumph to Ezechias: in the time of need he came unto every one
with some good or other, promising to all life in Jesus Christ, to wit, all
those: Qui Christum pollicitum in carne venturum expectarunt in carne venientem
crediderant in carne moriente^ coluerant.

He came unto his own.
He came unto them in figure, before he came in flesh, he appeared unto them
tipically, before he came unto them personally: He came in Circumcision. Romans
3. he came in the Pascall Lamb. John. 1.1. he came in Manna. John. 6. he came
in the brazen Serpent. John. 3. he came in the Arc, and on the Altar: all
these were figures of Christ He came tipically, as our rest in Noah, our
increase in Joseph, our love in David, our peace in Solomon, our salvation
prefigured in Iosuah. All these were forerunners, and foretellers of Christ's
coming: Gal. 4.
and when the fullness of time was that he should come, as it is in the 4. to
the Galathians, then came he unto his own, and took flesh upon him, as the
substance of the earth, and became man for their sakes. God became man, that so
he might make men to be gods: the Creator took upon him the shape of the
creatures, that so they might become like to their maker. Mortality put on
immortality, that it might so make that immortal: incorruption put on
corruption, that it might so make that incorruptible: the master came unto his
servants, that they might so become his fellows, yea fellow heirs with him in
the kingdom of his father. In all these kinds, and in all this kindness, Jesus
came unto his own, to manifest and publish his unspeakable and unchangeable
love to those which he vouchsafes to own.

Thus he came unto his own: and thus I leave CHRIST JESUS in love with his
own, and his own in his love, which is the scope of my first part, and go to
examine the fault of his own who received him not, which is my second part.

They received him not.
The course of his entertainment, The 2. part:
course intertainment; the kind of his receiving, unkind receiving; the manner
of his welcome, unmannerly welcome; the form of his usage, deformed usage; if
we be not like horse and mule that have no understanding, or like those
people with the brazen bone, that have no feeling of the holy Ghost, will teach
us for ever to enter into a due and dutiful consideration of receiving so
gracious and worthy a guest, as our Lord and savior Jesus Christ is, as he
comes unto us, or into us: for who does not blush with shame? who does not
swound with grief? who does not split with sorrow? to think that man, the
Image of God, the purchase of Jesus Christ, an honorable creature, inferior
only to the Angels, crowned with honor and glory, (which is much more dear)
then the finest gold of Ophir, that he should be by the weakness of the spirit
so ignorant, as not to know, or by the wickedness of the flesh so ungrateful,
as not to acknowledge, or by the corruption of nature so malicious* as not to
welcome the Lord and giver of all good gifts: who can keep their eyes from
tears, their heart from sighs, their bodies from sackcloth and ashes? to
think, that the Israelites which were so favored of God, so renowned amongst
men, so feared of their enemies, so furthered by their friends so generally
graced, that nothing wanted they could wish for worldly power, pomp and
dignity; that they should be so graceless, as to neglect or not receive the
founder of their graces; that these people which were so near and dear unto
Christ Jesus, as the apple of his own eye, the signet on his right hand, the
soul of his delight, that they should be so careless as not to entertain the
Lord of life, in all solemnity: it is for a lamentation, and will be for a
lamentation to the end; it is a caution, and ought to be for a caution for
ever, for all succeeding ages, to look unto the entertainment and receiving of
Christ Jesus. Read the Evangelists, there shall you see how our Lord was
accepted. At his birth, they did not so much as give him lodging in an Inn,
his best chamber was but a base stable; his haule but a houel, his cradle but a
cratch; and none came forth to welcome him, nor any in to comfort him, but a
few poor sheepheards, and those not of their own accord, but by the direction
of an Angel. Thus and no otherwise did they receive him, O hard hearted
Israelites. And while he was yet in his swaddling clouts Herod the tyrant sent
forth an army of men, to kill all male children under two years of age, that
he might be sure to meet with Christ for his welcome; he made such a massacre
of Infants, that Bethlehem the place where Jesus was borne was made red with
blood, fresh blood of sucklings that were slaughtered; Bethlehem was made white
with the bodies, bare bodies of babes that were murdered: the earth was watered
with the tears, salt tears, that were shed by the mothers, heaven was filled
with the cries outrageous cries of the fathers, heaven and earth did sound with
the sobs and sighs, and skreekes of kinsfolks, made for the children, and
there was none came forth to rescue him, save the Angel that made his parents
pack him away into Egypt. Thus and no otherwise did they receive him: O foul
hearted Israelits. The residue of his life as it increased in years, so did it
increase in cares; for as he grew up, and came amongst them teaching and
preaching, disputing and instructing in their Synagogues and Temples, they
regarded him not, but anon the Scribes and Pharisees infamed him, Is not this
the Carpenters son? say we not well that thou art a Samaritane? and none
came forth to comfort him? thus and no otherwise did they receive him: O false
hearted Israelites. The whole race of his life was but a warfare, a wavering
and way faring estate, never at ease, never at peace, never at rest: the fowls
of the air have nests, and the foxes have holes, but the son of man has not
where to lay his head, but is still tossed from place to place; from post to
pillar; from Bethlehem to Egypt, from Egypt to Nazareth, from Nazareth to
Capernaum, from Capernaum to Jerusalem, from worse to worst of all. For there
at Jerusalem which was the city of the great king, where a man would think
the heir apparent of the king dome should be royally entertained, even there
the measure of his woes, and their wickedness was fully filled, as ye may read
in the Gospel of saint Matthew: there the devil tempted him, his Disciples
forsook him, Judas betrayed him, the Soldiers took him, bound him hand and
foot, carried him before the high Priests and Elders; false witnesses accused
him, the multitude cries out, Crucify him, Pilate condemns him, the Governors
servants convey him to the common hall, they strip him, put a skarlet robe upon
his shoulders, a crown of thorns upon his head, a reed in his hand, and then
salute him in derision: Hail Jesus king of the Jews; they blinfold him, and
their unhallowed rabble buffet him on the cheeks, spit in his face, scourge
him on the back, and in the end nail him on the cross, and crucify him;
where hanging, the proud Pharisees, false Scribes, hypocritical Elders, cruel
captains, merciless soldiers, malicious passengers, both great and small
(wagging their heads) most scornefully, cry out, Thou that saidest thou
could destroy the Temple, and in three days build it up again, save thy
self, and if thou be the son of God come down from the Cross: and none
there were that comforted him: thus and no otherwise did they receive him; O
bloody minded Israelites O people Israel, no people of Israel, but a Nation
prepared for the vengeance to come. O family of Jacob, no family of Jacob,
but a generation of vipers left for the black day. O sons of Abraham, no
sons of Abraham, but fruit of Nepthilim, proud workers of iniquity, fit
subjects of Gods eternal wrath and indignation: that so unkindly entreated,
and so inhumainly entertained him, that was so kind to them, as to give them
all happiness, and live himself in misery: that gave them the earth for
their possessions, and had no better then a manger for his mansion; that placed
all rest, and had himself no resting place. Was there ever such ingratitude
expressed? The Sun did hide his face, the Moon gave not her light; the stars
kept not their course, the universal engine of the world was out of frame at
this neglect, the veil of the Temple rent in twain, the graves burst open,
and the dead bodies rose at this neglect: all creatures were moved with this
ingratitude, man's heart alone relented not. The Text is plain, they received
him not. They received him not as man, as he came unto them in the flesh; they
received him not as God, John, 6, ^
as he comes into them in the spirit. It is his own complaint in the 6. of
John. I said unto you, that you also have seen me and believed me not.

His gracious and his graceful presence could get him no grace amongst them,
his painful and faithful preaching, which was so praise-full, (that never man
spoke as this man did) it could gain him no credit amongst them, his good life
which was the light of all goodness, could procure him no good liking: his
actions that were wonderful and powerful in all things, had no power to win
him favor amongst them; his very miracles themselves prevailed not with them
for him. They saw the sick healed, the lame go, the dumb speak, the blind
see, the deaf hear, the leapers cleansed, the dead revived by his power, and
yet they did not believe: they saw the nets breaking, the boats sinking, the
storms ceasing, the seas his walking place, and yet they did not believe: they
saw him cast forth devils by legions at once, feeding five thousand with two
loaves and five fishes, turning water into wine, doing many other miracles, and
yet they did not believe. Elias came down to attend him, Moses rose up to
wait on him, Peter, James and John, parted not from him, at his transfiguration
on mount Tabor, the place shone with brightness, and a voice the voice of God
himself was heard from heaven: This is my beloved Son in whom I am well
pleased, hear him, and yet they did not believe him; the prejudice of Moses,
on the one side, and their palpable ignorance on the other side, made them
incredulous; they were Moses scholars forsooth, and followed him, we know
that God made a promise unto Moses, but what God promised unto him we know
not, and in the 4. of John; they came to our Savior: Moses gave us a law (and
so forth) but alas says saint Paul, 2, Cor, 3,
yet the veil was before their hearts. 2. Cor. 3. And howsoever they forsook
Christ, they forsook Moses as well as him, therefore says our Savior, I am
come to enlarge the king dome of my father; if you had believed Moses, ye
would have believed me, for Moses wrote of me, but ye believed him not, ye
believed me not: Mat. 13*
how often would I have gathered you together, and you would not Mat. 23. And
thersore says S. Peter. Acts. 13. Behold ye despisers, and wonder, for I will
do a work in your days which ye will not believe although you see it, which
is the very same that here is spoken of*

He came unto his own, and his own received him not.
Thus much of my second part, the ingratitude and iniquity of the people,
opposed against the gratuitie and goodness of their God, that came unto them as
his own, though they received him not, and gave power to as many as did
receive him to be the sonns of God, even to those that believe on his name,
Notwithstanding the hauiour of these creatures, a people given over to their
wickedness, yet does not the sheepeheard of their souls leave them all to
their woefulness, but as many as do receive him, to them he gives power to be
the sons of God, insinuating by these words as many, that some receive him,
assuring us by these words as many, the benefit of our salvation to some: the
sum whereof is conveyed unto us in this second verse, by the certainty
thereof, as many as do receive, by the sovereignty, they have power to be the
sons of God, by the manner of our obtainment thereof, He gave them power, by
the means we do lay hold thereon, even faith to those that do believe, by
the object of our faith which is the name of Jesus, to those that do believe in
his name.

The certainty of our salvation is declared in these words, as many. The
common adversary, because they be so many, boast much, and triumph in the
multitude of their associates, and think to put us down with the fault of our
forefathers: but as it is in the vision of S. John: we see who glories in the
greatest number even Antichrist himself. Apoc. 19. and let him glory in the
rout and rabble of his unhallowed accomplices, sithence praise be given to him
that sits above, and swaies below, the harvest of true intertainers is great,
and the line of them that receive Christ is stretched far and wide upon the
face of the whole earth. It is not tied to the family of Jacob, as the Jews
would have it, nor to the soil of Affricke, as the Donatists would have it,
nor to the sea of Rome, as the Papists would have it, but God has chosen for
the seed of Abraham, all which have the faith of Abraham; and for the family
of Jacob, John. 4.23. A^o. 21.12.
all that worship the Lord in spirit and in truth. John. 4.23. And therefore in
the Revelation 21.12.13. the Church of God is compared unto a city having 12.
gates, opening 3. into every quarter of the world. And saint Pau^e the second
to the Ephesians, and the 14. shows that now the wall of partition is broken
down, so that all the world is equally the Church of God, and some did
faithfully receive Christ, though his own received him not: for so much do
these words as many, report and import. Although for the quantity the Church
of God be counted small, yet for the quality it is greater then the rest,
because Christ does more esteem one member of his mystical body, then all the
number of infidels, and wicked reprobates in the world: though Christ call his
flock a little flock, yet he says: Fear not my little flock, it is your
Fathers pleasure to give you a king dome. We must needs confess the number of
the faithful is less then the number of the wicked, we cannot deny but there
is more store of weeds then corn in the Lords harvest. For Noah and his
family, being but eight persons, all the world was drowned in wickedness: for
Lot and his two sons, Sodom and Gomorrah with all the cities round about
were burned in sin: for one thankful Samaritane, there were nine
unthankful leapers: for one Elias, there were 450. Prophets of Ball. Reg. ^,
18. for one Micheas, there will be 400. false Prophets to A^^ab. 2.22. there
will be but one of a city, and two of a tribe, which shall enter into Sion.
Iere. 3.14. in stead of the two legs, and piece of the ear, which the
sheepheards shall save from the mouth of the Lion, the whole body shall be
devoured, Amos. 3,1^. but a few names will be found in Sardi, which have not
defiled their garments. Apo. 3.4. for wide is the gate, and broad is the way
that leads unto destruction, and many there be that enter into it: but
straight is the gate, and narrow is the way that leads to life eternal, and
few there be that find it; we grant more chafe then grain, more tares then
corn in the Lords field. We grant Christ came unto his own, and his own
received him not: yet (dearly beloved) the flock of Christ is far greater
then can be perceived by the eyes of men. For as John says, there are very
many wolves within, and very many sheep without, and therefore we must not take
upon us to judge our brethren, nor despair our selves, but leave judgment
unto God, and look for mercy of the Lord: 2. Tim. 2.13.
for as saint Paul says, The foundation of God remains sure, and has his
seal: Dominus nouit qui sunt sui. The Lord knows who are his.

There is no place, nor any sort of people throughout the world, where the Lord
has not some chosen. In the wicked court of Pharo there flourished godly
Joseph: with that cruel persecutor of the Prophets Achab, there was a
preserver of Prophets, and a seruer of God Obadiah. In the house of Rimmon,
where the king of Aram served strange gods, the captain of his host Naaman,
served only the Lord God of Israel: In the camp of soldiers which is most
suspected, there was Cornelius most sincere: In the rank of sinners that were
most detected, even amongst the Publicanes were found Matthew and Zacheus the
faithful servants of God: amongst the blindest recreants the very Pharisees,
was Necodemus that refused his companions, and thought nothing too dear to
bestow in the honor of our Savior: Herod that mortal enemy of Jesus Christ,
had Manahen his companion, and Iohanna the wife of Chuza the steward in his
house which feared God: the Jews themselves that were so malicious against
Christ, had some amongst them that received him, there was Nathaniell in whom
there was no guile; there was old Simeon which looked for the consolation of
Israel: there was religious Annah, that served God day and night with fasting
and prayer, and confessed the Lord Jesus to all that looked for redemption in
Jerusalem. Thus was the state of Christ's Church for ever certain, though the
seat uncertain sometimes where to find her. This is the certain seal of our
salvation, though the sign uncertain sometimes where to find it, because we
cannot judge with outward senses who receive, or not receue Christ Jesus when
he comes; yet is it most certain, that as many as do receive him, to them he
gives power to be the sons of God. Here is the sovereignty of our
salvation, following the certainty thereof, we are made the sons of God by
receiving the son of God coming unto us, and into us.

A happy day, and a happy deed, a blessed time, and a blessed change for us,
that are by nature the sons of Adam, the children of wrath, by such a guest,
by such a grace should be made the sons of God. Filius Dei (says S. Cyprian)
factus erat homo vt faceret homines filios Dei, vnicus natus erat, attamen
noluit manner vnus; The son of God was made man, that he might make men the
sons of God; he was borne one, but would not live alone; he loved us so, that
he could not leave us till he had made us his brethren, sons with him to God
our father: nevertheless there is great difference between his s^ate and ours,
he is the natural son of God, we the adopted; he begotten in eternity, the
perfect son of his father, we creased in dew time out of the earth our
mother; he borne, we made the sons of God: yet such his kindness, that he
never says, Pa^er meus and dominus vester, sed dominus meus, and pater ves^er*
as says S. Greg. My father, and your Lord, but my Lord and your father. The
reason is, as saint Basil says: Sic tungit vt non distinguit, and si^
distinguit vt non seiungit: he does so join that he does not distinguish, and
so distinguish that he does not divide: so that we are sons, and being sons
are fellow heirs with Jesus Christ in his kingdom, Romans 8.
as the Apostle says in the 8. Romans where the inheritance pertains not to
one, as to the eldest son in an earthly kingdom, but every one does inherit
all the revenues, rents and rights of the whole kingdom, none more or less
then another, but all have full possession of all things that are all perfect.
For as ^^^rie says, this kingdom is most high in dignity, most free in
liberty, most secure in peace, most glorious in honor, most pure in
clearness, most joyous in the society of Angels, most copious in the
affluence of riches, influence of pleasures, confluence of all perpetual
graces. This is the portion of all those that are the sons of God: this is
the pre-eminence, says one translation, the prerogative, says another, the
privilege, says another, the dignity, says another, of all those that
receive Christ Jesus: but they all say this: He gave them power to be the
sons of God.

He gave them power.
Here is the manner set down how they come by the benefit; they do not buy it,
as the Heretics Circumseliones think; they have it not in their own
naturalitie, as the Pelagians hold; they work it not out of their own
ability, as the Papists suppose; but they receive it of Gods mere
liberality. He gave them power: It is the mercy of God, the goodness of God,
the bounty of God, that bestows this benefit upon us. The best in this case
must say with Jacob, I am not worthy the least of thy benefits. Genesis 32. Gene.
32.
The best must say with Daniel, Righteousness belongs only unto thee, to us
belongs nothing but shame. Dan. 9.
Dan. 9. the best must say with Job, If I would seek to iusti fie my self, I
must needs condemn my self. If we consider with our selves what we are of our
selves, we shall plainly find our selves, the best of us all dust and ashes,
by our substance, Genesis 3. by knowledge but beasts. Gene. 3. Ierem. 10.4. Ephesians.
2.3.
Iere, 10.4. by nature the children of wrath. Ephesians 2 13. I remember Lemnius
gives a strange report of flesh: let bulls flesh lie above the ground in the
open air, it turns to Bees; let horseflesh lie in that manner, it turns to
Hornets; but let man's flesh lie in that sort, it turns to Serpents* I will
bank the application, least I be taken for a Be, or a Hornet I say no more,
but if any challenge any goodness unto themselves, as of themselves or of their
own power, it is much vanity, for of our selves we cannot so much as think
a good thought. 2. Cor. 3.5. It is more arrogancy, because we give that to our
selves which is proper to God: for euer^e good and perfect gift comes from
above. James the 1.17. It is most iniquity because we do not acknowledge the
giver thankefully, Col. 3.17.
for all praise and glory is to be given to God. Col. 3.17. Wherefore as the
wise man says, White birds with black feathers have no prerogative; if merit
then death, if mercy then life, salvation comes freely from the mercy of
God: August. Cant. 2. Bernard.
Non per innatam, sed per donatam iustitiam salui sumus, says Augustine: Non
infixa, sed infusagratia, Whereon saint Bernard: I for my love, and my love for
me, that she may know her self to be full of grace, when she ascribes all to
her love, and nothing to her self.

He gave them power to be the sons of God, even to them that believe.
By grace ye are saved through Jesus Christ, Ephe. 2.8.
says saint Paul, and that not of your selves, it is the gift of God: It is
the gift of God taken hold on by faith, which is the means by which we
receive all good things, the means by which we are made the sons of God:
Galat. 3. John. 1. ep* 5. Romans 4.
you are all the sons of God by faith in Jesus Christ. And our Apostle
himself in his 1. Epist. 5. cap. reaffirmes his report: He gave them power to
be the sons of God; not the unbelievers, but believers. And in the 3 Romans It
is one God which shall justify circumcision of faith, and uncircumcision
through faith. Chpysost.
This faith, says Chrysostom, must be simple, without curious searching,
strong without fearful fainting, constant without doubtful wavering: this
faith will appear by the fruits which are good works; Gregor.
by the trial which is affliction; by the end which is salvation. If thou be
like the Persian Apple Tree, says Basil, that bears continually buds,
blossoms, green fruit, ripe fruit, some fruit for all winter storms, or
summers blasts, till it be rooted up: if thou have this faith, thou art surely
the son of God: for to them only that believe, he gave power to be the
sons of God.

Even to those that believe on his name.
Here is now the object of our faith, which is the subject of our salvation,
the name of Jesus, to which the mercies, merits, and mediation of Christ
belong, which are al contained in his name Jesus, which signifies a savior.
To Abraham and his seed, was the promise made, not saying to his seed, but in
his name, as of one Lord Jesus Christ: to him all the Prophets give witness,
that through his name all that believe in him shall receive remission of
sins. Act. 10.43. In his name shall all the Nations of the world be blessed:
Acts. 10.43.
whosoever calls upon the name of the Lord shall be saved: Great is the name
of the Lord and prevails: The name of the Lord bring eth mighty things to
pass: Mine enemies compass me round about, says David, but in the name of
the Lord I will destroy them. Our enemies, the world, the flesh and the devil,
compass us round about, but in the name of the Lord, in the mercies, merits,
and mediation of Jesus Christ we may destroy them: They kept me in on every
side, says David, hell, death, and damnation, kept us in on every side, but
in the mercy, merits, and mediation of Jesus Christ we may escape: they came
about me like Bees, says David, but in the name of the Lord they are extinct:
they came about us like Bees, but in the name (the mercy, merits, and
mediation) of the Lord Jesus Christ, they are so extinct, that we may boldly
say, and safely cry, death where is thy sting, Application.
hell where is thy victory.

Christ Jesus is come, the king is come, and the king coming the enemies are
fled. Those that have eyes to see let them see; those that have ears to hear
let them hear: those that have a heart to understand let them understand those
things that belong unto their peace, let them see the love of Christ in coming
to his own, and embrace it; hear the fault of his own in receiving him not,
and eschew it; Understand the benefit of our salvation, given to as many as
receive him, by believing on his name and enjoy it. Christ Jesus is come. he
that was to come to the Patriarks, is come to the Apostles; he that was to come
to Moses, is come to John; he that was to come to the Prophets, is come to the
Disciples he that was to come to all, is come to his own* Why then farewell
all Types and Figures, and welcome the sum and substance of our salvation:
farewell the shadows of the fathers, the visions of the Prophets, the
ceremonies of the Tabernacle, the superstitions of the Jews: farewell night,
and welcome day; farewell darkness, and welcome light; farewell danger, and
welcome safety, for the Physician of health, the haven of rest, the door of
truth the mirror of goodness, the fountain of our redemption: Christ Jesus
is come: he is come at whose appearance the tree of Paradise was turned into
the food of life: the circumcision of the skin into the circumcision of the
minds the golden covering of the propitiatory into the golden crown of glory;
the rock yielding forth water into the side issuing with blood; the coat of
Aron into the wedding garment of Christ, Moses into Christ, the type into the
thing; the shade into the shine; the shine into the sun it self. Romans 13.
Away therefore with all your shadows now, for the day is come. Romans 13. Away
with all sacrifices and flesh offerings, for we must sacrifice unto God the
sacrifice of praise: Psalm. 49.
Psalm. 49. Away with the lamps and lanthornes of the Tabernacles, John. 1.
for the true light is come into the world, John. 1. Away with old baptism,
for we must be borne of water and the spirit.

The suspicious Jews are now confuted in their suppositions; the misbeleeuing
Turks are now confounded in their expectations; the faithful Christians are
confirmed in their salvation by this coming of Christ.

Cuius aspectu dispelluntur tenebrae,
Cuius intuitu liberantur animae,
Quem qui fugiunt moriuntur viui,
Quem qui sequntur viuunt morituri.
In quo qui manent nihil damnationis habent, quia sunt in Christo.
Sine quo, qui ambulant, nihil delectationis habent, quia sunt sine Christo.
Christ Jesus is come, and he is come unto his own, and to us as to his own;
we are his own and the same priueledges, the same blessings, the same favors
that is said to belong unto the Israelites as his own, are common to us of
England as his own, if we examine our estates of Israel and England, by the
rules of the Prophets and Apostles: is it not with England as it was with the
little land of Goshen, which had the light of God, when all Egypt was dark: is
not the Law and the Gospel freely and truly published in our ears? is not our
star like unto Joseph's star, as the Moon in respect of our brethren? do
not all Nations creep and crouch to us? Does not the Olive with her fatness,
the fig with her sweetness, the vine with her fruitfulness abide with us?
What benefits had the people of Israel immediately from God, that we have not
as graciously amongst us, to show that we are his own? Our portion is such in
God, and our proportion such with them in all things between God and us, that
as we may truly say with David: The Lord is the lot of our inheritance: so we
may truly say with Lot: The Lord is the Judge of our transgressions. As we may
boldly challenge a property in Christ's loving coming, and coming unto us; so
we must humbly acknowledge our fault in not receiving him: for in the same
manner that we are approved, we are reproved with Israel: yet he that will take
upon him to descrie or describe the manner of our receiving, or not receiving
Christ, as he comes unto us by his members, or into us by his spirit, had
need transform himself: for, Sitang as mont^s fumigabunt, si aspergas valles
inundabunt, si calcas colles inhiabunt: so that the Minister of God that
deals faithfully in this point, has the Wolf by the ear, which if he do
not warily hold, or wisely let go, he may chance to be had himself by the
ears, or be sure to be laid fast by the heels, when he is not aware: yet
as Ambrose said to Theodotius so I humbly say to you.

Neque imperiale est: dicendi libertatem negare,
Neque Sacerdotale quod sentiat non dicere.
And that I may speak most mildly of all to all that Christ comes unto, I must
say as saint Paul says to the Corinthians, the 1.11. Omnes imbecilles sunt,
and dormiunt: or as Fulgentius speaks to his auditors: Quilibet piorum
perfectus, et imperfectus: perfectus spe glorificationis, imperfectus
corruptione, perfectus quia in animo seruit diuinis legibus, imperfectus quia
seruit legipeccati: or as Solarius speaks continually unto the traveler, that
they that pluck up the Baaran root are stifled with the savor: they that
look into the poisoned poole of Babylon loose their sight; they that come
within the air of Sodom are infected; they that touch pitch are defiled. To
the Angel of the Church of Sardi, these things says he that has the seven
spirits of God, and the seven stars. I know thy works, thou have a name that
thou live, but thou art dead, I have not found thy works perfect, before God,
remember therefore what things thou have received and heard, hold fast and
repent. I know thy works, O London, etc. To the Angel of the church of Ephesus,
these things says he, I have some few things against thee, thou have lost thy
first love: remember from whence thou art fallen, repent and do thy first
works, or else I will come against thee, and remove thy candlestick. O
England, O London, I have some few things against thee, thou art fallen away
from thy first love with Ephesus, thy works are not all perfect. Thy love is
not careful, thy care is not fruitful, thy fruit is not graceful to
entertain Christ Jesus. The laborers hire kept back, till the morning, the
poor ma^s pledge withheld wrongfully, judgment withheld from those that are
in distress: all these are seen in thee; all these are sin in thee: in all
these are showen that Christ is not received as he ought to be. The buildings
enlarged by Achabs cruelty, the coffers enriched by Achans the every; the
states maintained by Gehesies policy: all these are seen; all these are
sin: in all these is showen that Christ is not received as he ought to be.
Those that make widows a pray, the fatherless a spoil, the friendlesse a
prize, receive not Christ: many storehouses sorted with wares, many ware
houses filled with store, many shops with false lights, and light waights, many
cupboords garnished with plate, many wardrobes furnished with gorgious
apparel, show that we receive not Christ as we should do; those biting Usurers
that deuonr the needy, and feed upon the flesh of them that are fallen into
their nets, receive not Christ; those griping oppressors that quench their
daily thirst with the tears of women and children, grinding the face of such
as are fallen into their snares, those double dealers that give Ioabs stabbe,
with Judas kis^e, those bloody slanderers that make reproach, their custom,
and delight to die their tongues in the blood of their brethren receive not
Christ; the false witnsse and the suborner, the corrupt quests man, and the
extortioner, receive not Christ. Where Envy stands in the door, where Wrath
leanes in the porch, where Gluttony sittes at table, where Drunkenness lies in
the floor, where Sloth sleeps on the bed, where Lechery keeps the chamber,
and Pride looks out at the window, Christ Jesus has no welcome, and thither
he will not come, the places must be clean (from vice) they must be
garnished with virtue, they must be perfumed with holiness, where Christ Jesus
comes; the houses must be swept, washed and pared, where he comes; swept
from dust and cobwebs, ab offensis lemoribus, from sleighter offenses; washed
from filth and slabbering, a delictis suauioribus, from sweeter faults; pared
from dirt and rubbish, a peccatis grauioribus, from more grievous sins: so
that wheresoever Christ is entertained, the place must be as the Sanctuary,
hallowed: the people must be as the Priests, sanctified; and the furniture
must be as the vessels of the Temple, consecrated. If this city, and the
citizens be thus provided, ye are fit to entertain Christ Jesus, if not, it
behooves you to look for better furniture. I remember Eusebius the Bishop of
Caesarea, in a certain Epistle of his to Constantine the Emperor, makes
mention of a goodly city that he passed through in his travels called Augusta,
which before his coming to it, was reported to him to be a place very stately
for building, very rich for furniture, very plentiful for provision, very
populous for inhabitants, but when he came into it, he found no people dwelling
in it, but lions, tygres, dragons, camelions, foxes wolves, goats, swine,
unicorns, Vipers; which when the Emperor read, he calls unto Macarius his
chaplain, and requires his knowledge and opinion of the place and people:
which Macarius advisedly declares, saying: it was true which the reuer end
father had written, both of the place and people: for the city in his knowledge
was such as it was described, and the citizens in his opinion, such as they
were noted: some cruel as lions, to wit merciless, preiudicant bribe-taking
magistrates,: some greedy as tygres, the symonicall illiterate soul-staruing
ministers: some fierce as dragons, the usurious extorsiue state-spoiling
mony-mongers: some cha^gable as Camelions, the political informant
time-seruing state-mongers: some deceivable as foxes, the privy Brokers,
subordinate Scribes, and crimping gamsters: some ravenous as wolves, the city
sergiants, country bailifes, court officers: some lascivious as goats, the
brothell-haunters, brothel-hunters, sappe-suckers and soakers: some filthy as
swine, the lasie licentious, inordinate taske-masters: some proud as Unicorns,
the rising courtier, standing lawyer, falling merchant: some inhumane as
Vipers, the unnatural children, ungrateful friends, unfaithful servants.
Thus do these famous writers deliver this infamous city by the condition of
wild and savage beasts, which is an unnatural and strange thing amongst men,
whereas if they had described it by tame and serviceable beasts, which are
familiar with men, it might have passed with more ease, as dogs, cattes,
horses, calves and oxen, but they report it of the brutish and insociable
inhabitants: which is a fearful and a shameful reproach, such a reproach as
God forbid I should conceive of this city! much more publish, most of all
perceive amongst the inhabitants: yet ye must give me leave to say of it, as
Mantuan did of his native city. Quo magis approprio tanto magis omnia sordent:
the nearer I approach unto her, the more reproach I hear of her. And by your
honorable and religious patience, I may freely speak what I have plainly
seen in the course of some travels, and observation of some courses that in
Flanders was never more drunkenness, in Italy more wantonness, in France more
dissimulation, in Creet more lying, in Spain more insolency, in Jury more
hypocrisy, in Persia more curiosity, in Barbary more cruelty, in Turkey more
impiety, in Tartarie more iniquity, then is practiced generally in England,
particularly in London: all this is seen, all this is sin, in all this is
showen that we receive not Christ Jesus amongst us.

Yet amongst the route and rabble of unhallowed miscreants, or recreants, that
receive not Christ, there be four sorts of people most opprobrious, which I
cannot pass without reproof, namely the obstinate Papists and malicious, the
profane Atheists and vnconsecrate, the discentious and licencious Scismatike,
the proud and pampered worldling.

The obstinate Papist, Papists.
who has said with Nym rod, Go to, let us build us a Tower, whose, top may
reach unto the heavens, that we may get us a name for ever, least we be
scattered upon the face of the earth for ever. Thus they think to raise the
state of their salvation by their great works, and mount into heaven upon the
wings of their deserts: this they presume spiritually: and carnally what do
they not presume? There is a certain drink which they call Catholicon, and a
certain drugge which they call Huiguiero, which the Menipized Satire speaks
of; whereof when they have taken a draught or a dram, they are so bold that
they dare undertake any thing be it never so abominable: disturbance of
states: destruction of kingdoms: death of kings and princes themselves; their
infection is so venomous, that their affections can hardly be religious, what
pretense soever they make of religion: insomuch that I cannot see how these
that are so faithless in their devotion toward God, can be faithful in their
duties toward their king. My reason is, because they consecrate themselves
unto the Pope their suffragan, they cannot contain themselves unto the king
our sovereign; they cannot serve Christ and Antichrist, God or Baall must be
God, for God and Beliall cannot be joined. I wonder then in what kind of
allegiance they stand that are reconciled unto the Pope, they that subscribe in
the casting of their king out of the Church: what supremacy do they allow his
Majesty in the Church: Cum iurauerunt in verba Pontificis maximi: In case of
excommunication: I dispute not what manner of subjects these are in their
kinds, but leave the consideration thereof to whom it belonges. In the
Revelation I read of seven Angels, to whom was given seven several trumpets.
The third Angel blew a trumpet, and there fell a great star from heaven
burning like a torch, and it fell into the third part of the waters: It was
called Wormwood; therefore the third part of the waters became bitter as
Wormwood. This star as our best authors write was Pelagius a monk, the
chief pillar of their side that made the waters bitter, corrupting the
scripture with false doctrine, so that many died: he took away the doctrine of
Redemption by Jesus Christ, wherein men should believe; he disabled the
doctrine of justification by faith whereby men live; he would not suffer that
Christ Jesus was the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world,
that Christ was the sole and soul saving sacrifice; once offered upon the
cross, never to be renewed, not needing help, but of it self sufficient for
our salvation, he could not endure: and so made the word bitter, whereby many
souls were lost. The seventh Angel blew a Trumpet, and the third part of the
moon, and of the stars were smitten, so that the third part of them was
darkened, and those were the Arians, their great champions, who by boasting of
their works and merits, obscure Christ's justice and mercy, and tread his
death and passion under feet; they darken the third part of the church and
ministers and teachers with their false doctrine; It is not unknown how they
did monstrously grow to the trouble of all Europe, and the confusion of that
city Transiluania. You see these Papists receive not Christ as he comes unto
men in the flesh: they spare neither king nor subject, prince nor people that
stands in their way, but down with them, down with them as the Babilonians
did, eue^ to the ground: they receive him not as he comes into men in the
spirit. You hear how they oppose themselves wholly against the doctrine of
Christ in the Gospel; they scorn the virtue of his mercy, merits, and
mediation. The obstinate Papist, and malicious receive not Christ: they receive
him not

The profane Atheist, who has said in his heart with the fool. There is no
God. Like Nebuchadnezzar walking upon the battlements of his high Palace,
breaths forth, Is not this great Babell which I have built for the house of
my kingdom, by the might of my power, for the honor of my Majesty: so they
walking upon the Torrace of nature, and upon the battlements of their wits,
breath forth blasphemy against God, and infamy to men, is not that which we
do, done by the power of nature? have not we wit and will, reason and skill, to
understand and execute those things that concern our glory: and thus they make
their arm of flesh, and take no notice of the power of God. But when his name
is spoken of, like the Adder they clap one ear to the ground, and stop the
other with their tail. They learn to weaue Spiders webs, and hatch
Cockatrices eggs; they learn of the toad to swel above their proportion; of
the wolf to bark against the moon; of the wild Ass to bray against the
thunder; of the Owl to eschew the light of the sun; of the Vipers to goare
and gnaw the breast and bowels of their dearest parents, as Epiphanius says.

Latus matris sauciunt, and sic gignuntur, vt pater and matter eorum periunt
Saint Jerome speaks of them as of the serpent Hydaspis, whose poison is so
venomous, that whosoever they touch or sting, they consume in body, or
languish in mind. Saint Basili speaks of them as of those worms Hemorhoides,
which cause althose they touch to bleed in all parts of their bodies until
they die, and be distracted in their spirits while they live. Examples where of
are too fresh in our memory, and the bleeding wounds of some are scarce yet
dry, and therefore I forbear the application. It is well if we^ be free from
their imputation and immitation, that are so far from receiving Christ, that
they say in their heart there is no God: and charm the charmer never so
sweetly, they will not receive him. The profane Athiest receyues not Christ,
they receive him not.

The Schismatike which say with Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, Come let us break
their bonds, and cast away their coards from us: are not our tongues our own,
and what Lord shall control us? These appear in the visions of John. The
second Angel blew the trumpet, and a it was a great mountain was cast into
the sea, and the third part of the sea became blood, and the third part of the
creatures that were in the sea, and they that had life died, for by the water
is understood the word of God, and by the mountain is meant diverse sects and
schisms, whereof Montanus was one, with Prisca and Salisba, two women which
had led a great man Tertullian so far, that he confessed he had Priscam a
Prophetess; but she proved such a Prophetess to him, as Juno did to Hercules:
The story is of Juno, that she being much displeased with Hercules, and
resolved to do him mischief, used many means to vex him, but could not
prevail, till she had set Hercules against Hercules; till she had made
Hercules mad, she could do him no hurt; but when she had divided him from
himself, had made him mad, then she might do what she would with him, when he
did rage and rave in himself, and against himself: such are our Schismatiks,
as Juno against Hercules, offended with the state of our church, and not
knowing how to have their will in her, and of her to obtain her goods, and not
maintain her good, to enjoy her wealth, and not preserve her weal* they set
Hercules against Hercules, they divide the unseamed coat of Christ Jesus, and
fill the church with sects and schisms, outrages and madness, and so disturb
the peace thereof, that while Simeon and Leui offend, good old father Jacob
cannot be at quiet, and while the fathers eat sower Grapes, the childrens
teeth are set on edge. They have no hoe nor hold of their affections, but
condemn and contemn governors, and government, mutter and murmr against the
manners of governors, and manner of government, content with nothing but their
own peevish courses, when they see all courses have been taken that are
ordinary and lawful for perfection. The idle and Idol sheepeheards have
been severely dealt withal, the drowsy and sluggish have been mildly
handled; the blind and ignorant have had spittle and salt, and clay, put upon
their eyes, nay their eyes have been rubd with the gall of fishes, as Tobias
his was. And what would they have more? I know not what they would have,
unless it be the calfe with the white face. Yes marie, they would have
Bishops to be no Lords, Archbishops not to be at all, for these lettes do much
trouble their consciences: is it for conscience sake that they find these
faults? then surely it is with knowledge: for Cons^ientia est quasi scientia,
vel conscientia est cordis scientia: but certainly it is not for conscience,
but for contention sake: can we think they are so barren in their
understanding? that they do not know that Bishops are called Lords, because
they are Barons, and not because they are Bishops: and for the addition of
Arche, is there such great pre-eminence in that syllable? I pray you what
dignity has Arthetreclinus (he that brings in the first dish to the table)
above those that sit at the table. Alas, who sees not that this is to tyth
Mints, and Annes-seede, and Commin together, and to neglect the greater things
of the law: alas who sees not that these refuse Christ Jesus, which will not
receive him in that form which he comes into his church: yea but the same
form which Christ Jesus left in his church is not retained (say they) yea but
the same form and fashion which Christ Jesus appointed is maintained in the
church, and the same face and fashion which was of old is now continued amongst
us: was not Melchisedeck a king, and a priest? was not Moses a prophet and a
governor? was not Elias a judge and a priest? was not Samuel so likewise? was
not Solomon a king and a preacher? our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, was not
he a king and our high priest for ever? When the Arc was brought home, there
was Gad and Nathan, as well as David; there was Abiathar and Zadoch, as well as
Solomon, in the building of the temple: and at the building of the second
temple, there was Zorobabel and Aggai: why should not both swords go together
then? Why should our graceful Moses, our gracious sovereign have cause to
cast the tables out of his hand and break the^. Undoubtedly they that contend
about this in the church, the zeal of the Lords house has not eaten them up,
but their zeal would eat up the Lords house. If you wait but the sound of
the fist trumpet in the Revelation, you shall hear and see what manner of people
these are: you shall see a star fall from heaven unto the earth, to whom is
given the key of the bottomless pit, where hence issued a great smoke, out of
the which our Schismatiks hight Locusts came: the form of them is like to
horses prepared for battle: for so are they, proud, malicious, ambicious,
dissentious and stubborn, cruel disturbers of Gods Church. On their heads
they wear cronets like unto gold: their faces are like the faces of men
pretending a certain title of sincerity, which indeed belongs nothing to
them; they pretend love, and they have hair like the hair of women, but
their teeth are as the teeth of Lions, they are delicate to entice their
harlots, but they have tails like to Scorpions, to sting, to infect, to kill
with their venomous doctrine; and at the last did a king creep out of the hole
to rule over them, which was the Angel of the bottomless pit, whose name in
Hebrew is Abaddon, in Greek Appollion, which is a destroyer. And this is the
form and fashion of our Schismatiks, Quorum in ore Christus est, in cord
Judas; in ore sacrificium, in cord sacrilegium; in ore puritas, in cord
pruriens obscaenitas; in ore reformatio, in cord deformatio; in ore
euangelium, in cord sanguis and bellum; in ore Templum Domini, in cord
patibulum Domini; in ore religio, in cord proditio and perditio est. This is
the manner of our Schismatikes as saint Basil says, Omnes amici, omnes
inimici; omnes proximi, omnes aduersarii; omnes familiares, nullifideles, omnes
domestici, nulli pacifici. These are they, as saint Cyprian says: Qui gladium
habent, quo inimicos trucident: sed clipeum non habent, quo amicos defendant.
These are they that take upon them, that Christ comes to none but them as his
own; and these are they amongst others that receive him not: our licencious and
dissentious Schismatikes receive no Christ: they receive him not.

Our pampered worldling, who gives himself over unto pleasure and vanity,
lives carelessely and says in his heart, I am, (with Babylon) and there is no
more besides me, I shall not sit as a widow, neither shall I know the lack or
loss of children or friends. Thus do our full gorged fat franked worldlings
huggle themselves in ease, they stretch themselves upon their beds of Iuorie,
they invent unto themselves diverse kinds of music, they drink wine in
bowls, and eat the fattest of the calves from the stall, and none of them
cares for the affliction of Iosephe their poor brethren, whose mouth know not
the taste of bread, savor of meat, relish of drink, nor so much as of the
crumbs that fall from their tables, nor so much as a cup of cold water in the
name of Jesus, they are so sarre from receiving Christ as he comes unto them,
that they are deaf at the cry of the poor, they are dumb in the cause of
the poor, they are blind in the misery of the poor, they are lame in the
relief of the poor, they are altogether dull in the entertainment of Christ,
as he comes unto them in his poor members: and as he comes into them in
the spirit; they have no feeling thereof; the bowels of compassion are dried up
in the^, they have no motions toward the service of God; their feet indeed
are swift to shed blood, their hands strong to do mischief, their hearts
imagine a vain thing, and the poison of Aspes is under their lips, they walk
in the counsel of the wicked, stand in the way of sinners, sit in the scate of
the scornful, lurk in the courts of princes, lurch in the houses of nobles,
diue in the state of devils. It is with them as it is storied of cleopatra, who
falling in lone with Marcus Antonius, was so enamoned and besotted in his love,
that when she could not enjoy him as she would, she took two Aspes and set
them to her breasts, which by reason of the coldness of their natures, did so
benumme her senses, that she became quite senseless: so our worldlings being
in love with their paramour Mundus immundus, the filthy world, and not able to
enjoy it so fully or freely as they would, set Aspes unto their breasts, place
the vanities of the wicked world so near their hearts, that they become
senseless, deprived of all their senses, they prove as deaf as those people
Catadupi, which dwelling near the downfall of the waters of Nilus, by reason
of the continual noise thereof, loose their hearing. The sound of those
temporal commodities that come by sea and land to our rich worldlings, stunne
their hearing in those things that concern their spiritual peace; they are as
blind as those people Hiperborei, that sit and gaze against the Sun till they
have lost their sight so our worldlings sit and gaze against the sun shine of
their bright estates in riches and glory, till they loose their sight of Gods
mercy that has bestowed those blessings upon them, and the beams of his
justice, that does threaten his wrath and indignation against all those that
do not use his blessings spiritual and temporal to his glory, and their
neighbors good; they are as insatiable as the Leopards that feed on Marioran
till they die; so they be never satisfied till their mouths be filled with
earth: they are so unreasonable that they never look into the dangers they
run into for their riches, but are heedlesse like the little beast Satyrus,
that is not content to stand by the fire and warm himself, but must leap
into the fire and burn himself: so they are not content to make good use of
their goods and enjoy them, but they will leap into the fire, even hell fire
to increase them. I will not stay to argue this point, how many come by their
goods? no, how any use their goods? but this I say with saint James, for their
goods gotten by deceit, they shall weep and howl, for the misery that shall
come on them: their riches gathered by oppression, extortion, usury, or any
other indirect, unlawful or dishonest means, it shall corrupt and vanish from
their uses, and be as venom to their souls: their gold and silver shall
canker, and the rust of them shall be a witness against them, and shall eat
their flesh as it were fire: these do forget what Epiphanius says.

Aurum, voluptas, gaudium,
Opes, honores, prospera:
Quacunque nos inflant,
Sit mane nihil sunt omniaque.
Gold, pleasure, delight, riches, honor, whatsoever things we account
prosperous, we find dangerous: they puff us up, and while we think them all
things, they fly from us as nothing. They remember what Horace says.
Omnesenim res. virtus, fama, decus, diuina, humanaque pulchris diuitiis parent,
quas qui contraxerit, ille claruserit, fortis, iustus, sapiens, etia^rex and
quicquid voluit. Every thing, virtue, fame, renown, divine and humane things,
obey fair riches, which whosoever has gathered, he is in request: he is
valiant, he is just, he is wise, yea a king, and what he list. This is it that
makes our worldlings so proud, and pampers them so much, that they neglect
God, and think not how straight their entrance is into the kingdom of heaven
which is straighter then the passage of a Camel through the eye of a needle.

Our proud and pampered worldlings receive not God.

They received him not.
But as mamy as did receive him, to them he gave power to be the sons of God.
To conclude therefore, if they only that do receive Christ are made the
sons of God, they that receive him not abide the children of wrath. In the
23, of Mat they be our Saviors own words, I would have gathered you
together, but you would not, behold your habitation shall be left unto you
desolate. In saint Basil his Exametron, they be his words, that whosoever
receive not Christ, as he comes unto men, or into men, they shall be sure to
receive him as he comes to men, they that receive not Christ in the flesh nor
spirit, shall undoubtedly receive him in judgment. A day their is appointed in
which the Lord will judge the world in righteousness, by that man whom he
has appointed, whereof he has given assurance to all men, in that he has
raised him up from the dead, and set him at his right hand, where he abides
with his eyes like fire, his feet like burning copper, his face more shining
then all precious stones, prepared for judgment, against the time which his
father has appointed, which time when it comes, then comes he not riding
on an Ass, but on the Cherubins, not with a few poor disciples, but with
legions of Angels, not to sessions to be arraigned, but to judgment to judge
the tribes of Judah, for then is then, he comes to fold up the heavens
together like a scrowle, to turn the dust of the earth into pitch, and to put
those people of the earth which received him not into scalding lime, for then
is then, the moon shall be turned into blood, the Sun shall loose her light,
the stars shall change their course, the universal engine of the world shall
be dissolved: for then is then: he comes with a mighty tempest before him,
and a whirle wind round about him, and then those miserable recusants that
refused to receive him as he came unto them, and would have come into them,
cannot escape him as he comes to them, for then they shall see and feel
without them the world burning with fire, within them the worm of conscience
ever gnawing above them, their vnapeasable judge condemning them; beneath them
the horrible torments of hell prepared for them; at their right hand their
sins accusing them, at their left hand, enraged and blood-thirstie, any
soule-thirstie Satan ready to execute Gods irreuocable judgment against
them, and to give them their portion with hypocrites which Du Bartis describes;
for bread the gall of serpents, for meat the tongues of Adders, for drink the
venom of Cockatrices, for their habitation utter darkness, where there is
nothing but weeping, wayling, and gnashing of teeth; for their comfort
everliving and never dying fire to burn, yet not consume them: for their ease
everlasting neuer-dying torments, such torments as neither eye has seen, ear
has heard, nor never entered into the heart of man. And then as it will be
intollerabile apparere, so will it be impossible latere: as it will be
intolerable to appear; so it will be impossible to lie hid, although they
call unto the mou^tains to fall on them; unto the hills to hide them, the
woods to shrowde them, the deep to swallow them up, it will not serve their
turn, although they come unto him and say, that they have cast forth devils in
his name, he has no more to say to them, but depart from me you wicked, I
know you not, you knew not me in the flesh, you clothed me not when I was naked
amongst you, you fed me not when I was hungry, you gave me not drink when I
was thirsty, you lodged me not when I was harbourlesse, you visited me not
when I was in prison, and therefore I know you not, I regard you not, because
you received not me, you knew me not in the spirit, you agreed to no holy
motion whenever I provoked you to righteous, you accepted no godly exercise
when I moved you to goodness, either by my preaching, practizing and
persuading, you received not me, and therefore I refuse you, depart from my
presence, where there is fullness of joy, provided only for those that receive
me, no joy, no comfort, no favor, no pity, no compassion, but annoy,
discomfort, disgrace, contempt, confusion, for all that receive not Christ
Jesus: this is the time of lamentation, desolation, destruction of all those
that receive not Christ: this time how soon it may come unto the sons of men
no man knows, no not the Angels of heaven, saving the father only: we all
know that he will come, and veni^s veniet, and non tardabit, and coming he
will come quickly, and not linger. The leaves of the fig tree are green, can
the spring the^ be far of, all things are come to pass that are spoken of by
the Prophets and Apostles, touching the coming of Christ to men. All ye
therefore that look for peace in Sion, and hope for joy in Jerusalem, let me
entreat you, even in the name of him that sent me, which is Jesus Christ the
righteous, who is to come as Judge of the quick and the dead, that you be
wise and wiser then the generation of your forefathers, that ye be so prudent
and provident, seeing he will come and not linger, come and not be known of
his coming, come and not be avoided when he does come, to be furnished with
Oil in your Lamps, Frankensence and Myrrh in your lappes, Balsam in your
Boxes, clothed in white with the Lamb, covered in gold like the Dove, crowned
in strength with the Lion, bathed in blood with the Leopard, that whenever he
come, and howsoever he come, you may boldly and gladly bid Christ Jesus welcome
It is storied of those ruder people Gaffrani, which are by nature barbarous, by
education hardly ever civil, that when the time is that their Priests (for
such a custom they have yearly amongst them) visit their houses with their
gods Colossi, as they term them; the people entertain their gods with
wonderful reverence, and their priests with great rewards. Those ciuiler
people Esseni, which dwell to the westward of Judea, are noted to be so
zealous in the entertainment of our God, that when they saw the star that was
seen to shine at the birth of our Lord and savior Jesus Christ, they did
consecrate themselves unto his service, and have ever sense been devout
obseruers of him: so that profane and hallowed, rude and civil, natural and
spiritual creatures, exhort us, and direct us to the entertainment of our God,
and shall we be more profane or less holy, more rude or less civil, more
natural or less spiritual, the^ these that saw but through a veil, not in a
myrrour, much less with open face the glory of God as we do: shall the
natural man show devotion and grave reverence to the false god which is the
work of men's hands, and shall not the spiritual man fall down and worship
the Lord God of hosts that made both heaven and earth, in spirit and in truth:
shall the spiritual man be moved with the sight of a star to serve God, and
shall the day star from on high visit us, and not enlighten us to perceive
and receive our God Christ Jesus? if neither the ruder Gaffrani, nor purer
Esseni prevail with us, to entertain our Lord and master, let hasty
Zacheus, liberal Nichodemus, careful Martha, stir us up unto our duties; if
none of these, let devout Symeon, zealous Nathaniell, religious Marie, that
chose the best part, when all the rest did their parts to entertain our Lord
and master joyfully: If this be not enough to make us look about us, and cast
about us all to entertain Christ Jesus, I know not what to think, nor what to
say, but even to leave you to the Ecchoing love of Jesus Christ, which alone
must waken and quicken all deaf, dull, and drowsy spirits to their duties. Lo
I come, come, come ye to me because I come to you. Thus he inuites us, that he
may not loose his labor, nor we his love: come, I come: come that you loyter
not by faith, that you wander not, to me that ye stagger not, to me all that
ye straggell not, come why stand you idle, to me why stand you doubtful, to
me all why stand you fearful: come here is the course of those that receive
Christ, to me, there is the way of their course, to me al, there is the end of
their course, that all those that receive me may be made the sonns of God.
Which the Son of God grant for his mercies sake. To whom with the Father, and
the holy Ghost, be all honor, glory and praise, for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.

