AN ANSWER To A CATHOLIC ENGLISHMAN (SO BY HIMSELF ENTITVLED) WHO, without
a Name, passed his Censure upon the APOLOGY, made by the Right High and mighty
Prince JAMES by the Grace of God King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland
etc. for the OATH of ALLEGIANCE; WHICH CENSVRE IS HERE EXAMINED AND REFVTED By
the BISHOP OF LINCOLN.

PSALM. 63. 11. REX verolatabitur in Deo, laudabuntur omnes qui IVRANT in eo,
quia obstructum est os loquentium IMPIA. LONDON, Printed by Thomas Haueland for
Matthew Law, and are to be sold in Paules-Church-yard at the sign of the Fox
near Saint Austines-gate. 1609.



TO THE RIGHT HIGH AND MIGHTY PRINCE, JAMES BY THE GRACE OF GOD, KING OF GREAT
BRITAIN, FRANCE, AND IRELAND, DRFENDER OF THE FAITH: etc.
MOST DREAD SOVEREIGNE, that the worthy Acts of Eminent Persons, should
always be attended with malignant Envy, is, unto ingenuous Pindarus. (...)
natures a vexing indignity; though the auoidance thereof Josephus. (...).
does appear unto some, a mere impossibility: Yet seeing the great
Philosopher is of opinion, that there is a sort of men who Arist. Rhetor.
are (...), as being above and without the reach thereof, because Envy
stretches her self no higher then those which are a man's equals, or somewhat
his Superiors: If any state or condition might claim the exemption, to say
with the Poet Inuidia quia mayor -- who would not Horace.
think, but that the height of Sovereignty, and the depth of the Grave, should
be freed from this pursuing Fury? but that neither of these (whether Scepter
or Sepulcher) can prevail with some creatures, were there no other instance,
the malice of English lesuits enraged with Envy of your Majesty's admirable
judgment, singular learning, and constant Resolution for Religion; together
with the flourishing prosperity of these your Churches and Kingdoms, gives
evidence sufficient; and among them a principal, this Antapologer, shrouded
under the title of a BANISHED CATHOLIC, who has singled out no meaner object,
against whom to discharge his rankor, then your SACRED MAJESTY'S both Person
and Apology through his whole Pamphlet; and also, in a chief part thereof,
the blessed memory of that Lady (in her time peerless) QVEENE ELIZABETH,
from before her birth, and below her grave. An infallible demonstration of his
degenerous and unregenerate mind. For none use to be more spightfully
malicious, or Censoriously contumelious, then the debosched abject, and
unreformed Hypocrite; whom a man can neither avoid without Calumny, nor
encounter but with blot of Infamy, nor Conquer with hope of any Masterie. That
your Majesty vouchsafed not the Conflict with such a Rake-shame, but adjudged
a Rope the fittest answer for him; Premonition before the Apology page 13
therein your Majesty showed your magnanimous spirit, geeuing unto him his
just doom. And with all humbleness, I could heartily wish, that your HIGHNESS
would be pleased, from henceforth, to contemn all the rest, as Him, and not to
go forth any more unto these Battails (they will glory in it though they be
sure to receive the foil) even the General of their Camp, were his learning
greater, or his Crown higher, is no match for SVCH a King. Shall they then
pass altogether vnconfronted? In no wise; the Infection spreads to far, and
silence (though with contempt) they of that rank will account an overthrow.
But I trust your Majesty shall find, among your Subjects, many, which may
with more truth and less vaunt, say as much as Campian their highly Concert.
Eccles. Anglic. Plutar. de sui laud.
reputed martyr did for them, that there is a great number and a continual
succession which are ready for this cause, and already entered the Combat; and
as the courageous Spartans were wont to sing, (...). Try them when, and wherein
you please. The meanest among those many I confess my self to be; yet in
zeal toward your Majesty, and in just indignation against this Rabshekah, I
have undertaken the answer to his Censure; which, being finished, I humbly
present to your Majesty's Patronage, for two principal respects: first,
because it is in the true Justification of your Majesty's late unanswerable
Apology for that OATH of ALLEGIANCE, which, like to Ieptha his Shiboleth,
discovers the true Israelite from the false-harted Judge. 12. 6.
Fugitive, and rebellious Ephraemite. Secondly, because what is in it for
soundness of Argument, or truth of Story, is, in a manner, your Majesty's
own; who, at the first sight of both these Antapologists, could readily
discern their falsities, and presently refell with sound answer any quarrel
that they made. If, therein, some terms have passed, not fully Episcopal, or
not so fitting (perhaps) the calling and place, which, under your Majesty's,
and by your Gracious favor, I hold in the Church; I trust the Readers eye will
from Me be first turned upon Him that prouok't; who is known for these many
years to be of a prostitued Conscience and Impudence, not careing what he
writes; nor whom he reuiles; nor how it is taken: as also to those excellent
Personages, TWO SACRED PRINCES successively reigning; whom he has in the
basest sort (with his scorning Ribauldry) defiled and besmeered: that gulf in
Rome being not so vnsauorlie noisome to the City, as his reproachful
Contumelies and opprobrious slanders, odious and offensive to the best
affected Subjects of this your Land. Into which Gulf, if by casting my self
(of Duty to your Royal Majesty, and in memory of my late dear Mistress,
and for contentment of your true-harted people) I prove not so happy, as that
Roman was by Curtius apud Liuium.
running into the other, to choke up the sink from sending out, for ever
after, such loathsome savor; yet this good (at least) I shall do, by drawing
ALL the filth upon MY SELF, keep it off, either from further annoiance of your
Sacred Majesty or from a general noisance. For seeing he can not hold, but
must needs regorge (his spirit is so turbulent and unquiet) and as Ierom
speaks of Heluidius, Maledicere omnibus bonae conscientiae signum arbitratur,
he thinks his conscience Hieronim ad. uer. Heluid,
then best discharged, when he has reviled most: against ME let him empty his
whole quiver of reproaches; all of them, I hope, will be like the Romish
arrows shot against Sebastian, drawn with bent force, loo'st with much ease,
but received with strong comfort; Et quem veritate Ambros. in. Psalm. 118. Idem.
non potest, laceret conuitijs, since he is too weak to dispute, let him lash
on with his tongue. This ONE advantage he shall be sure to get by that license,
that he shall put me to silence; for personal Calumnies I regard not,
especially from Parsons, whose very name is the Epitome of all Contumely,
being as current in a Proverb as was once the name of Daedalus, in omni
Fabula, Vide Erasm. Chiliad.
and Daedali execratio: for no Libell can come from Rome, but PARSONS is
presently supposed and noised to be the Author; and the more vile, the more
PARSONS like. If the objection be, that I have not spared from reproaching
HIM, I deny it not; how could I forbear, or who can blame me? None, that has
either Loiall heart to your Majesty, being our Gracious Sovereign, or
Christian regard of Her (who late was) that euer-blessed Queen. Yet there, in
have I dealt with him no otherwise, then the Apostle with the Cretians: as he
out of a Poem of their own Prophets; so I, out of the Tit. 1. 12.
Books of his Fellow-Preists, give him the same Quodlibet. Just. defense. etc.
(and no other) terms of reproach or bitterness, which men of the same
religion with him, have described him by, in Print; and, unto the worlds veiw
have confidently a vowed of him. If he SO requite me, and quote the printed
Authors, I open my self unto HIM, and will endure THEM; If otherwise, I must
repute him as a Slanderer, and wear them as my Garland: comforting my self
with that Conclusion of S. Hierom, Caninam Ierom. vbi supra.
facundiam Seruus Domini pariter experiatur, and Vnctus, accounting it my
Glory, that the same Creature should rage and snarle at ME the Lords unworthy
Minister, which has not spared TWO ROYAL MONARCH Sthe Lords anointed, and
amounted. In hand ling the maine points, I trust it will appear that I have
neither dallied with him, nor illuded the Reader; so that, from any sound
reply thereto I dare assure my self security from HIM. Verbalize he can,
dispute he cannot; In Stories he is a great flourisher, but a false Relator of
them: who so inioines him a modest answer, does undo him; neither his age, nor
profession; neither shame of the world, nor fear of God, nor grace of the
spirit, can mortify his nature, or restrain his tongue. But be the Reply any,
or none, modest or distempered, your Sacred Majesty I trust, shall be freed;
whom, I beseech the eternal God, still to preserve, in prolonging your days to
your Subjects comfort; and in strengthening your arm, not with Pen any more to
confute (it gives them too great Honor) but with Justice to confound, and with
courage to cast off such seducing spirits; restles in nourishing disloialties;
cruel in plotting mischieus; and too subtle in veiling Treasons under the
title of Religion: and account this as your great blessing (amongst the rest)
from the great God that he has made your Majesty (a thing rare in so high a
State) a Protector of the Faith, both with Pen and Sword; and a partaker also
of his Sons reproach, for So being. To the saving grace of which blessed
Jesus, I, in all humbleness commend your Highness, resting

Your Royal MAJESTY'S Faithful and Loially devoted Chaplain. W. LINCOLN.

An Admonition to the Reader.
GENTLE READER, the IESVIT his speeches, through this whole book, are printed
in the smaller letter, al ways with this mark " in the beginning of the line
prefixed. HIM I have termed the EPISTLER, CENSVRER, and ANTAPOLOGER, because
in a pretended LETTER, he passes his CENSVRE against that learned and
religious APOLOGY, made and set forth by our most Gracious and truly renowned
Sovereign. The style, in respect of my place and profession, may,
peradventure, be adjudged too bitter; but compared with his Person, and
reuiling vein against two such Christian Monarchs, no one JOT thereof in
exact Suruiew of better judgment, is either pared off, or spared at all.
Faults many have escaped tn printing partly upon negligence, partly ihrough
have; but the most of them, are but either a few letters mis-placed, or dropped
out; or else points not so curiously set, or some matginall quotations drawn a
little higher or lower, perhaps, then they should; which an ingenuous Reader
will pardon, and a learned will epsy: those which HE or any such as HE can
carp at, are very few; which it may please thee with thy pen to amend, btfore
thou read it.

NVMB. 1.
THere is no END of making many books (says the Preacher in the end of his
Eccl. 12. 12.
book) especially if they be books of Encounter: Whereof there is no End,
either for Cessation, because reuengefull spirits, fostered with rancor, are
ever restless; which made Plato Sympos.
the Philosopher to say, that Braules were easily begun, not so soon taken up:
nor End, for Profit; So Nazianzene expounds that speech of Solomon, because
Metaph. in Eccles.
the parties interessed (which the Orator observed) either through self-love,
or pertinacie, will not be drawn from what they have published, by any
arguments of the adverse side, though many and forcible: and the indifferent
Reader finding in such writings more partial bitterness then sound Tul. Acad.
dealing, loses his time, which is precious in it self, and might in more
profitable studies be employed: whereof Cal^ach.
came the Heathens prouerbiall sentence, that a great Book was a great
Mischief.

2 All which, the Critical Censurer of the Triplex Cuneus (if we be not
deceived in the Author) acknowledges Preface to his Manifestatio^.
elsewhere, and prefers a reposed life, before such contentious iangling:
which if he did truly affect, not in pretense, he might well have left the
blunting or dislodging of the tripled wedge, either to him that wears the
tripled Crown, or to him, who under his Red-Cap breathes after it: for this
business concerned them both, the Pope for his Breues, the Cardinal for his
Letter: this Censuring Epistler it touched no whit.

3 Whom to answer, might be thought both endless and needless: needless,
for his Letters being only a fardle of conceits, either slight and unsound,
or malicious and untrue, they carry their answer with them, and, as the Prophet
speaks in an other case, Agnitio vultus earum respondet eis: They bear there
own confutation in their foreheads. Esa. 3. 9.
Endless, for an itching arm desires still to be scrub'd, and an Eele
delights not more in troubled waters, then he, whose only glory is in
scornful Inuectiues, reioiceth to have occasion given for his busy pen.

4. Yet sithence his Censure unanswered might infect others, and give him
occasion to triumph in his own vanity: and peradventure some partially
affected might imagine, that not contempt of his reasonlesse railing, but lack
of good grounds for reply had enforced a silence; I have harkned to King
Solomon his affirmative advise, and for suting an answer in some measure
proportionably, have Prou. 26. 5.
taken no other then his own vnmethodicall Method, both for his trebled
Paragraph, and his multiplied Numbers, which is more sincere dealing then he
affoordeth the Apopologie; for what he could wrest or cauell at, that we find
answered: that which apposeth him, he passed in silence, and we take it
granted as truth: (for silence implies, if not consent, yet no denial.) Not
that I mean De reg. Iuris.
verbatim to answer every Number, that were to grace a Pamphlet with a Volume:
but directed by his own Index, to take the sum and substance (such as it is)
of so many Sect^ons, as serve to the proof of each chief point, as he
entitles them.

5 For example.

Paragraph. 1. Numb. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7.

Wherein, first, as if he were in a troubled poole, he casts out his angle
to fetch out an Author; and lest either his bait or skill should seem to fail
him (as Anthony deal with Cleopatra at his fishing in Egypt) he fasteneth to
his Hook one out of his own store, namely: Plut. in Anto^


Another T. M. (forsooth) an inferior Minister near his Majesty, to whom he
might show the Book, and so publish it with his Majesty's authority, print
and Arms; marry his Majesty is so far from being the author thereof, as that
(in this Critics persuasion) he did not so much as read all the Contents
advisedly; many passages therein being contrary to the Kings judgment and
Honor. Numb. 2. Namely for judgment, first altering the Question twice or
thrice. Secondly charging Bellarmine (so great a man) with eleven
Contradictions, not one of them so to be proved, as not only learned but
unlearned will find. Numb. 3. As in that concerning Justification and
Antichrist particularly. Number 4. 5. but especially, both in that general
assertiue note, that Bellarmine, being driven to a pinch, cares not to
contradict himself for a present auoida^ce; as also in that stinging
conclusion, that Heaven and Hell do not more differ, then Gods Books and
Bellarmines works do, concerning the dignity of Temporal Princes. Numb. 7
Secondly, for honor; there being such Phrases of contempt against the Pope,
and against the great Cardinal also, calling him Master Bellarmine, which his
Majesty would, in Law of Honor, surely condemn.

Numb. 6.

6 To tread his steps, we might also dally with the Reader to retriue an
Author, and inquire (as he does) pro and cotra, who this English Exile, this
Epistling Censurer should be? whether R. P. or N. D. or F. P. or P. R. or
Doleman, that is, under all these Ciphers, Parsons the Jesuit? whom his own
brother entituleth a Raunging-voluntary Under his own hand. Quodlib. pa. 238.
239.
Runagate, not in Exile by authority; whom his own Priests do style an
Hispanized Camelion, the Brat of an Incubus, filius terrae, no true Englishman,
either in heart or by birth.

7 That HE should not be the man, these rea^ons are probable; First, it much
greeueth HIM yea, HE accounts it a violence offered him to interrupt the course
of his peaceable Preface to his Manifestation
Priestly labors, by entering into a war of writing: therefore for HIM, like
an other G^liah, (Pigmae as he is) to enter this combat, not provoked there
unto, and upon such disadvantage, cannot sort with HIS retired profession.

Secondly, that HE, a man of no inferior talent (so he pub lisheth of
himself) an Author of no mean labors, should, like an other Ahimaas, needs
thrust himself to carry a Manifestation page 51. 2. Sam. 18. 12.
Message, having neither leave nor errand; that is, should write so shallow a
Pamphlet, whereout, rid those offalls of Sophistry, Railings, and some addle
Discourses; of the remnant ye may truly say, as Ahimaaz of his own message,
Vidi tu multum, sed nesc^ al^ud, is scarcely coniecturall. Verse. 29.


Thirdly, if Parsons were ever famous for any good thing, he won himself
credit by the book of Resolution, though not invented (as the Priests say) but
borrowed peece-meale from others; translated only, and methodized by him: which
Quodlib. pa. 71. 237.
when a man reads, he will take the Compiler or translator to be that very
Crucifix of Mortification described by Saint Gal. 6. 14.
Paul, The world crusified unto him, and he unto the world: now that HE should
fall into such passionate profane, and Barbarously-distempered Page 27. etc.
reuiling of a Christian Princess, the mirror of the world while she lived,
some years dead, and laid up in rest with her Fathers; as if the very mention
of HER Sacred Name, were an Eleborous purge to make him disgorge the gall of
his bitterness, and the venomous rancor of his cankred heart, by his
Rabshakeis pen; no man that professes the name of Christ, can believe it to
be the labor of one that is ingralted into Christ: For they that are Christ's,
have Gal 5. 24.
crucified the flesh with the passions and lusts; saving that one of his own
Priestly Coat assures us, that, for all this Resolved or Resolving Divinity,
he has not as yet fully cast off the Just. defene. page 297.
outward man.

8 And yet that he should be the Author, besides the gerall report, and
certain intelligence, First, his straining at the elder T. M. as he calls him,
is euid^nce sufficient; whose Discovery of Romish Doctrine, and Practices for
heinous Rebellion; as also his full Satisfaction for Heathenish Aequiuocation
Tho. Morton Deane of Gloucester.
(which Parsons under the dumb Characters of P. R. undertakes to patronize by
a Mitigation) like Pope Adrians Fly, will not leave troubling the Jesuits
throat till he has forced out his gall, heart and all. Secondly, the so
cunningly concealing his knowledge of the Apologies true Author, wherein he
shows himself to be right Doleman, not as himself deriues the name of
Dolor, virdolorum, as a man of Manifestat. page 51.
grief, repleat wi^h sorrows, (blasphemously applying the title of our
Savior Christ unto himself, and quotes the place of Scripture in the margin
for it) but of Dolus, vir dolorum, Es. 53.
being, as his own Priests term him, the Abstract quintessence of all
coins, coggeries, and forgeries; that lies, dissembles, and equiuocates at
every word. Quodlib. page 236.


9 For is it probable that Parsons, who makes himself another Elizeus, takes
upon him to know what is done 2. Reg. 6. 12.
and spoken in the Kings Privy Chamber, (as it seems by that he writs page 37.
concerning T. M. the younger) that HE, the great Intelligencer among States,
who weekly spends five or six Crowns for postage of letters only (as the
Priests of his own rank report) should be ignorant that our Sovereign King
himself was Author of the Apology, Just. defense. page 236.
it being not only in every man's mouth styled by the name of the Kings Book,
but the warrant in the frontispice (which this Confuter observes) Autoritate
Regia, ^owing, though not proclaming it to the world, that it was his Majesty's
doing? (for you shall not find, to my remembrance, a book of an English man
extant, in those words warranted, but the King himself has a hand in it)
which the Jesuit knew well enough, as under those Ciphers of T. M. he implies;
for by them, if he will speak without Aequiuocation, he meant TVA or TANTA
MAIESTAS: but being guilty to himself that he cannot write with modesty, he
faines an adversary to himself, through whose sides he might lash his Sacred
Matestie with le^e envy, and more liberty; as Ajax the whipper in the
Tragedy, wreaking his teene upon a Ram for Ulysses; he madly; this Jesuit
Sop^oc. Ajax.
purposely.

10 This quarrel of the Oath which received life by his Majesty's Royal
assent, and whose safety it principally concerns to be secured, by all
means, of his Subjects loyalty, among whom a great many by those Breues and
Letters (as the Israelites by the detracting message of the Esp^ls) staggered
and mut^ered, it behooved his Majesty to ^pouse Number. 13.
and undertake. But to front the Apology with his own Name, being a King of
so Royal Descent and Blood, had been a displaied disparagement of so great a
Majesty, the adverse parties (with whom he was to cope) being no other but
Burghesie and Bellarmine, men of no eminent birth, except as Sixtus Quintus,
another manner of Pope then the first of these that is, or the second that
would be, Ci^rella in Sixto qu^ato.
they would plead themselves Ortos ex illustrious Familia, and (as he) to come
out of an illustrious and resplendent family, because the Cottage wherein he
was borne was so poor and ragged that the house was gloriously bright by the
Suns and Moons shine through the walls and roof thereof day and night.

11. Nor yet concealed he his Name as ashamed of the Work, for it is his most
Kingly Resolution, not to harbor the secretest thoughs (they are his own
words) but such as in Presace of his (...). ^o the Reader.
the own time he will confidently and openly avouch; examining ever so the
secretest of his drifts before he gave them course, as how they might some day
abide the touch stone of a public trial: Much less for fear of any defaults
by gaine-saiers, to be detected therein, especially if no other or greater then
this scribbling Linceus has alight upon.

12. For to omit till their due place, whereunto he refers us, page 3. the
Challenges of the Kings judgment in matter of altering the state in question;
of Bellarmines contradictions; and his abasing Royal dignity: that one maine
blarre of inciuilitie, wherewith he does here besme^re his Majesty (as
appeaching the Kings honor, Numb. 6. for a great contempt offered by his
Majesty, in calling the Cardinal Master Bellarmine) must first be wiped out.
Wherein humbly craving pardon of his Majesty for doing him this wrong, Compare
we the Persons; the Uncivil Stile-giuer, a King, a Name and dignity founded
by God himself, and fastened by him upon Abraham's seed as Pro. 8. 25.
the chiefest part of his blessing; and which is more, the Genesis 17. 6.
KING OF GREAT BRITAIN, one of the most absolute MONARKES of Christendom: the
great party so styled, a Cardinal. Search the Scriptures; there appears no
shadow of such an Office, unless as Sowters their leather Polydor. de in uent.
lib 4. ca. 9
with their teeth (it is the comparison of one of their own in this very case)
so they will stretch the Scriptures, (namely 1. Sam. (...).
that place, Domini sunt Cardines terrae) to serve this their purpose. Peruse
all the Fathers (I speak not of Gregory and Bernard) say if you find it once
named, as now ca^ed, Interpre. vocl^ Ecclesiast.
unless with Onuphrius you will fetch it from Cyprian, because he writes of
the CARDINAL works of Christ; and yet that is not Cyprians book: reckon all
the Ecclesiastical degrees, greater, lesser, higher, lower, which the ancient
Councels record, in that row you find them not: -- Sicnou^s imponunt nomina
rebus: a dignity denominated either of the Carpenters Mortizes, out of
Vitrunius, as being Incardinated (it is Gregory's word) that is Mortized or
riuited Onuphr. vbi supra.
to a Church, as a hinge to a door; or of the four winds out of Seruius upon
Virgil, as bearing the principal sway where he has the title.

13 Now for the King, so great a King, to call such an Vpstart Officer, that
knows not where to rake for the beginning of his sublimity (as Polydor
confesses) to call HIM Vbi supra.
(I say) Master, is as unmannerly an oversight, says this CARDINAL WOVLD-BEE
(the Priests say he went to Rome for it, and had Scarlet brought him) and no
Quodlib. pa. 121.
less dissonant, then if a man should call the chief Officers of Estate by
that name, as Master Chancellor, Master Treasurer, Master Duke, Master Earl.
etc.

14 Such a dignity it may be, that Master prefixed before it, may prove a
diminishing Term; but if put to the Surname of any man, i^ is an addition of
Worship. Did his Majesty call him Master Cardinal? then had those instances
some semblances of fit application. No, but he called him Master Bellarmine.
And is the stiling him Master Bellarmine, such a Scandalum magnatum? In which
of the words rests it? in Bellarmine? This Censurer within the compass of Pa.
3 5.
one leaf, does thrice Bellarmine him barely, without all preface either of
Honor or Worship. Belike familiaruie may do more then Souereignty; and a
Jesuit with his Superior Jesuit, may be more bold then a King.

15 Is it in Master? Better men, both for honor and virtue then the Cardinal
ever will be, have not refused that title in any age or language. Take the
Hebrew Rabbi, it was given our Savior Christ by those that wished him neither
Contempt nor disgrace, as by Nicodemus a Ruler of the Jews (and therefore knew
what belonged to manners) who was no bad friend to our blessed Savior, as
appears John. 7. and he So saluted him; as also by the holy convert Mary
Magdalen, who called him Rabboni, that is to Ioh. 7. 51.
say) says the Evangelist) Master. Briefly, by all his Disciples, which our
Savior acknowledges and approves, Ioh. 20. 16.
Ye call me Lord and Master, ye say well, for so I am. Take the Greek;
whether (...), how could this Great Ioh. 13. 13.
Man be fitted better then with the first, were he among the Cardinals, as
Saul among the Israelites more eminent then the rest? or with the second, were
he the principal of the Conclaue; or with the third, as he is the great
Reader of Controversies? for these all import nothing but Master: and in
Hieronym. in Catalogo.
Latin when S. Cyprian would grace Tertullian most, he would call for him in
that title Da Magistrum; and Peter Lombard has the name Master given unto him
above all their School Doctors, as an Antonomasticall eminence of note and
style.

15 And therefore, seeing neither God himself, nor Gods Liuetenants on earth,
whether Emperors or Kings (from whom all true titles of honor are derived)
have given this name or dignity, but a Pope only invented it, without sound
warrant; what reason had his Majesty to take such respectfull knowledge
thereof? Of which, even a Bishop did make so mean account, that he refused
then to be created a Cardinal, because (he said) he would not descend from a
higher to a lower place. For the true first institution of Cardinals was but to
be Vicar; of the particular Parish-churches of Rome, under the Bishop thereof;
howsoever now, by the iniquity of time, the pride of Popes, and the sloth of
Christian Princes, they are start up from Parish-Priest's to be Princes Peers,
taking it in scorn to be called Master's, even by Princes. And yet, if his
Majesty had either continually through the Book, or at least at his first
naming of him, called him Master, it had been some thing, but since he is so
far from being ceremonious in giving of Titles unto him, as sometimes he
calls him Bellarmine, sometimes Cardinal, sometimes Cardinal Bellarmine,
and seldomest Master Bellarmine of any of them, hereby may the groundles and
malicious quarrel of this shallow wrangler most clearly appear.

16 But why is it not as lawful for so Mighty a King to call the Cardinal
Master Bellarmine, as for every Popish Scribler (even this fugitive Tenebrio,
Parsons himself) having occasion to name our Archbishops and Bishops
(dignities merely Apostolical, and therefore more honorable) never to style
them otherwise but Master Cranmer, and Master Whitguift, Master Ridley, and
Master Jewel? Yea, we must be beholden unto them, if they be pleased to
afford them a title so mannerly and civil. But enough of this; the truth and
conclusion whereof is, if this MASTER (forsooth) of Ceremonies had the grace to
leave Aequiuocating, his secret intendement and drift is (what Prep^ ^b. f^de
(...). ^t. o^n ^n etc. vide Pl^ra apud. Cass^d.
some Canonists have openly auowed) that Cardinals are Kings Compeeres and
Equals, and therefore that the King should have spoken of the Cardinal as of a
King. Mean while is it not a saucie part of Robin Cowbucke (for that is his
right name, by the wrong man that knew his mother Quodlib. pa. 109.
(as the Priests say) to twit a King with inciuilitie, and (Su^ Mineruam) to
teach his Majesty Ceremonies of civil respect?

17 We now come to his Censure (such as it is) of the Apologies substance; the
reducing whereof into an orderly Analysis for answer (of which he made no
conscience at all in his Pamphlet) will trouble a man more then the answering
it self. The Preamble to the Breues, concerning the nature of the Oath, the
Contents thereof, with the Popes proceeding therein; the Examination of
Bellarmines Letter to the Arch priest is the Division he makes of the Apology,
Number. 8. (or rather was made to his hand, for he shows not so much Logic in
his whole Censure.)

Paragraph 1. Numb. 9 10. 11.

18 The Preamble is a Colloquintida unto him, not so much in respect of the
Epithetes given to the POWDER TREASON, of monstrous, rare, nay never heard of
treachrous, famous and infamous attempt; it descrues them, says he: but
first, that it should be SINGVLAR FROM ALL EXAMPLES, there having been the
like done by Protestants (though not in specie, yet in indiuiduo) as at
Autwrep, the Hage, and in Scotland. Secondly, that it should be Crambe his
posita so often repeated, the parties being executed. Thirdly, that the Kings
promise and Proclamation being, that other Catholics Garnet resolved it to be
lawful when the Parliament house should have been blown up.
shall not fare the worse for it; yet * the innocent for the nocent are
punished, at least oppressed, as by Libels, Inuectiues, and by searching of
houses; with other outward affictions: so above all, whith this NEW DEVISED
OATH, for their inward pressure of Soul and Conscience. This is Mors in Olla,
and makes him dilate his Style into dolefully Rhetorical expostulations.

19 The Epithetes please them well now, which aggrauate the detestation of the
fact; but had there not been (as Decad. 1. lib. 1.
Liuie speaks in a Case of treachery) error insidiatoris, their applause had
been greater in the attestation thereof; Such actions are not commended but
when they are finished: So Hall (alias Old cor^) the Jesuit said of this Plot
when it was discored. The murder of a King alone, pleased a Pope so well, that
he made a solemn Panegyricke in praise of the Murderer; and we make no doubt,
but if the Parliament House had burned, that the Jesuits (who were the
principal privy Counselors in that bu^nes) would with Nero have been
Suetoni. in eius vita.
pleasant Spect^ors thereof, as at a Feu-de-ioy, and have sung to their
instruments the Destruction of Troy in that combusture of the Senate, and
graced it with no less Epithetes then Sixtus the Pope did the murder of
Henry the third to be Rarum, insigne, memorabile Facinus.

20 But were the attempt so odious and loathsome, as this tender-stomacks
Censurer makes it, wherefore is the Coriphaus of that Complot (Garnet I mean)
turned to a Miracle and his Face made to aequiuoate after his death? one
rotting upon the Bridge for his horrible Treason, the other shining in a straw
for his Ghostly purity? and why in Spain is his Picture drawn with two ropes
about his neck, and his bowels (like an other Judas) trilling down his body,
with the inscription of a Martyr for the Catholic cause? yea, by this Censurer
his fellow-Traytor himself so entitled and maintained? In his Epistle to Sir
Ed. Cook. Sect. 51.
but that their meaning is to en-ammell, with a glorious pretense of
Sacramental Confession, the Counselling, supporting and Concealing an HIDEOVS
TREASON.

21 Which, howsoever this Censurer strains at it, is, both in Specie and
indiuiduo SINGVLARFROM ALL EXAMPLES, and not to be Paralel'd with any one out
of ancient or modern Historian or Poet, either in Fact or Fiction; as if of
purpose their meaning were to do an Act which should put the Holy Ghost to
School, and consure his Maxim penned by Solomon, that Nihil nouum sub sole.
For weighing all circumstances, of conspiracy, parties, Eccles. 19.
objects, instruments, cruelty, pretense in this Prodigious attempt; it
deserves to be graced with that Motto of singularity from all other, Ecce hoc
recens est: unless they will account all murders in hostile arms, or private
fewde, done verse 10.
by Gunpowder, to be matches aquiualent.

22 And it seems this Censurer does; else would he not mention those of
Antwerpe, Hage and Scotland; the first in open Hostility, what time all
actions for discomfiture are lawful, either by sleight or Force: the other a
plot of one single man, and in revenge upon the States for giving him
discontent, and by the report of some writers he was Meteranus Lib. 11.
distraught and mad. But by his noting of the last he discovers the rancor of
his heart against our Sovereign; for though the execution of Paricides and
murders upon Princes, has eft-soones alighted upon some of the greatest and
best of that royal sort, that ever were, and therefore no dishonor to them
nor their posterity; yet to cast up such a disastrous example in his Majesty's
teeth, proves well that he is sorry that his Majesty escaped the like
peril, whom he so earnestly wished to have been his Fathers successor in
such a fortune, as having by hope deuouted the same, he came on his journey a
good step (as some report) toward England, that he might have sung a Te Deum
in his native Country, for the good success of that happy exploit. And yet
that all men may see how malice blinds judgment in this his resemblance, the
truth is that his Majesty's rather was not blown up with Gunpowder, but after
that the murderers had strangled him in his bed sleeping, he was carried out
to the Garden, and then was the house blown up, to make the world believe that
it was but a Casual accident of fire: and so what semblance of comparison is
there between the Powder Treason and it?

23 Which, howsoever it cannot, by a proper title, be expressed to the full,
yet it being in the nature of those designements, quae plus famae apud posteros
habiturae essent quam Liuius. Decad. 1. Lib. 2.
fidei, which are rather memorable for the singularity, then credible for the
horror (let the repetition thereof grieve this Epistler never so much, and it
is the second block he stumbles at; and transpose he the Project with a Lap
wings-cry, upon certain unfortunate Gentlemen, thereby to remove the Crime
from the Jesuits, the Principal Instigators of the Pioning Traitors to the
Act, and the kind Receptors of the Fugitive after the Detection, (for who
entertained Gerrard but Parsons?) we say with the Apostles that we cannot but
reco^d the things which we have heard and seen, neither will we be Act. 4. 20.
silent thereof -- rumpantur ilia Romae, so long as we have either pens to
write, or tongues to speak; or a generation living, or a posterity
succeeding, but we will Report it and Repeat it, both unto God with the
Psalmists Memorandum Remember O Lord the children of Edom (that is, the bloody
Scarlet Generation) how in the day of Jerusalem, they said. Edom is red or
bloody Genesis 25 30. Psalm. 137. 7. Ezech. 24 2.
Down with it, down with it, even to the ground: and to men also with Gods
own Memorandum, for the Day assigned, Son of man, write thee the name of the
day, even of this same Day for the King of Babell (the Pope forsooth is a
temporal Prince) did set himself against Jerusalem, even this very Page 4.
day.

24 Execution of such Offenders, must not be the silencing of their offense;
death is the last punishment, for sense and passion, not for sins of that
nature and condition: their bodies deserved not entering in Grave, much less
their vices, burial in oblivion. The Relikes of their dismemberd carcasses are
erected for a prey to the Fowls of the Air to feed on, the villainy of their
designed Cruelty to be reiterated upon all occasions, for the Nations of the
earth, and all Posterity to wonder at. And therefore have patience (Gentle
Jesuit) for our so often repeating it; we first say with Chrysostom, (...) if
the Repetition be so odious and burden^ome, (as in your margin you note it) how
odious was the Fact it self, so complotted and engined? Secondly, we say with
Saint Paul to inculcate these same things often, to us it is not grievous, and
for you it is surely Philip. 3. 1.
profitable, if not to work your conversion by repentance, yet to make men, at
least, inamored with your Profession, that warranteth such Acts good in
Religion.

25 And therefore ye did well to call those detestable Traitors (after the
Discovery and Conuictions) CATHOLIC Gentlemen, as if ye would insinuate,
that they died in a Catholic Cause; and in an other place, INFORTVNATE
GENTLEMEN, not for their fortunes and state in the world, (they were too great,
unless they had more grace) but for their VNLVCKIE SVCCESSE, in missing their
designed purpose. Sic foelix scelus virtus vocatur. Had it been effected,
Moses and Phinees should have been reported inferior to those Gentlemen in
zeal for Gods cause. Else why did Hall the forenamed Jesuit (a Ringleader of
this desperate crew) comfort himself and Littleton with the defeature and
discovery of those horrible Traitors, by the Examples of the Eleven Tribes of
Israel twice discomfited, though sent by Gods especial Commandment, (mark
that:) then of Lewis the French King, overthrown in sight against Infidels in
a case of Religion: and lastly, of the Christians vanquished by the Turks in
the defense of Rhodes? but that hereby he would conclude they were unfortunate
Gentlemen, scilicet, that their cause for undertaking was good, but their luck
was ill in missing: otherwise it is too gentle a title for such odious
creatures.

26 And so this Censurer also (a part-taker no doubt, in the Complot) cheares
up himself not only persuading, but definitiuely determining, that Both
afflictions outward, and pressures of conscience inward, caused this POWDER
TREASON: which is a shameless untruth (yea even themselves being Judges) for
that the Conspiracy was plotted before any hard measure thought of, by their
own confession is manifest. For the Lands Invasion (a Treason no less
desperate, though more manly and visible then the POWDER PLOT) in the late
Queens time of famous memory motioned, was immediately and hotly pursued by
those very parties; and aduertisements given to Foreign States, whose aid they
requested, that our King WAS LIKE to proceed rigorously (this fellow says,
that the rigor was put in execution) with the Catholics, and to run the same
course which the late Queen did.

27 Secondly, these Conspirators were combined in the first year of the King,
when (so far was the thought of any Severity) that, as it was openly proved,
for the space of a Preceedings against the late Traitors.
whole year and four months, no Penalty by Statute was taken of Recusants:
Insomuch that Doctor Bishop, who wrote his book in Anno 1604. even the year
before the detecting of the POWDER TREASON, acknowledged the Kings most mild
carriage in government THITHERTO: Epist. dedica. to the King. pa. 10.
and yet, it is worth the inquiry, what the same Doctor should mean by those
desperate words in the very same Epistle, when he says, That the state being
now settled, and a continual posterity like to ensue in one nature, God
knows what that forcible weapon of necessity may drive men to at the length.
It seems then some such thing was plotting, even in that Eadem page 12
confessed time of mildness.

28 Thirdly their own reason of their engining against the Parliament house,
because say they, unjust Laws had there formerly (not in the Kings time any)
been made against the Catholics, confutes this bold assertion: which were it
true, that Severity in executing some Laws went before this plot, did not the
Priest Treason, even at the Kings first entrance justly enforce it? Belike it
greeues them that his Majesty (as the Prophet speaks) would not corpus dare
percutientibus, yield his body to the Smiters, Es. 50. 6.
and his cheeks to the nippers; and still like a Lamb before the Butcher, not
once open his mouth: or rather it vexes them, as it did Fimbria in Tully, that
his Majesty had not taken into his body the whole weapon like Ehuds Judge 3. 22.
dagger, bl^de, hilts and a^l, but suffer his land to be betrayed, his Person
hazarded, his subjects alienated, his succession extinguished, his state
brandled: and in the mean time, like the Pro con^ul of Achaia, Et nihil little
Gallioni curae erat, Act 18 17.
he must sit still, look on and say nothing: or as Caesar wounded and
environed with stabbing knives, only cry out, Et Sueton. Julius ca^. 8^.
^u fili? Make no resistance, but speak with pity, and die by Treason.

29 But what are these A^greeuances and Pressures of rigor, that either
praeceded or ensued that desperate Plot? First, infamous Libells (forsooth) Et
tute Lepuses? and who has scattered more then Parsons? who is noted, by the
Priests themselves, to be the Popes PEN-POST, and the Pasquill in Print of all
shameless slanders, that sets out no one Book (which is the fashion of all
Jesuits, they say) but stuffed with Rebellion, Conspiracy and Treason. Quodl
b. li 3. a. (...). 6.


30 M^rry principally T. M. the Elder his Discovery. Will it not out man?
Excrea. I told you it was a burre in his throat like the Ravenous fellow in
Athenaeus, he has chopped in a Dipnos. lib. 3.
creature, and will neither let it go for curst-heart, nor can take it down,
the crust is so harsh: all that he can do is to cry out as that fellow did, O
scelera^um Edul^um; a shameless Libell, but will neither be silent of it, and
cannot answer it.

31 Secondly, searches of houses, Attachments, vexations etc. This verifies
that speech of Solomon, Mul^er scort^ns P^o. 30. 21.
comedit, and deinde abstergit os suum. Look back, and see in one small compass
of five years (when Rome swaied England for Religion) 300. innocent Christians
for profession of the Gospel cruelly burnt to Ashes, not only their houses
searched, and goods spoiled, and that was no aggreeuance, but Justice against
Heretics. In fifty years of two Protestant Princes, scarce 60 p^sons
executed, all Guilty of Treasonable Practices, either for Complotting
Treasons, or harboring disloyal Seducers, who (as his Majesty has
excellently observed) Apolog. pa. 3.
do make diversity of Religion, a safe Pretext for all kind of Disloyalty
and Rebellion: which the Secular Priests acknowledge and a^ow, especially in
the Iesuited sort; who (say they) under color of Religion, and zealous desire
of our Countries Conversion, labor to stir up all men against our Quod lib.
pa. 149.
Sovereign and the present state: now for us to feret and knetch these Ve^min;
to search and attach such dangerous Vipers, is a rigor and cruelty of
Persecution.

32 And were it so? how is it that Father Parsons is thus Metamorphised, to
become -- e vulture Turtur? thus dolefully to bewail the aggreeuances of their
Catholics, which compared to them in Queen Elizabeth's time, are by their own
confession, but easy Censurers: yet when they were at the hottest and sorest,
Parsons himself thought it stood not with Policy or Wisdom, neither did he
wish, that the said Persecution should cease in England in Quod lib. pa. 21.
afflicting them.

33 But the third, which of all other is the Phallaris Bull, this NEW OATH is
the most grievous. Is the aggreeuance in the abstract, because there is an OATH
commanded? The highest Judge allows it: both by his own Example, swearing by
himself to Abraham: and by precept Genesis 26. 3.
to us; Thoushalt fear the Lord, and swear by his Deuteronomy. 6. 13.
name. The unsearchable fraudulency of man's heart, which Jeremy laments,
exacteth it; for Honey being in the tongue Ierem. 17. 9.
and treachery in the heart (as the same Prophet elsewhere complains:) the
best way to make words and thoughts Cap. 9. 8.
appear semblable, is by OATH which the holy Ghost does therefore call
Vinculumanimae, because it does (or should at least) both link heart and tongue
together in the same promise; and also bind the party to perform, without
Numb. 39 3.
starting what he has so promised.

34 Indeed to be tied in bonds, is an aggreeuance to man's nature, which
desires liberty; but of all other unto Iesuited Catholics it can be none:
who with their Paganish Aequiuocation, vocally swearing, but mentally
distinguishing, can, with Sampsons s^ight, break new Cords, as a thread Iud.
16. 9.
of towe is broken when it feels ^e, though they be seuenfold, so is an Oath,
and so to be reputed; by the Hebrwes therefore Shebuaah 1. Shebaah.
originally derived from that number, Seven, as being a bond multiplied and
indefezable.

35 Perhaps then the aggreeuance is in the Epithete, because it is a NEW OATH;
so did a Pagan call the Christian Sueton. N^ro Cap. 6.
Religion Nouam and maleficam. But how is it new? Never heard before? SINGVLAR
FROM ALL EXAMPLES? Be it so, dignum Patella operculum (quoth Saint Hierome)
such an Vl^er, such an emplaster; Ex ipso boue Lora; evil manners procure good
Laws; Hierom. ad C^rom. Pl^tar. de ^ua vit. viuendo.
and extraordinary Treasons must have extraordinary Preuentions. For though the
Children of this world be wiser (by our Saviors judgment) in their
generation, then the Children of Light: yet give us leave, sithence (with Saint
Luc. 16. 2. Cor. 2. 11.
Paul) we are not ignorant of Satan's Engines, to be as waty in preventing, as
they are Wily to invent Mischiefs.

36 ^s the matter of the OATH NEW? That subjects should bind their allegiance
to their Sovereign for his security by OATH, has been both usual in all
Nations Christian and Heathen, and as ancient a Custom in our Land to the
Princes thereof, as that Iuramentum fidelitatis exacted by the Pope of his
Vassals; commended by Bellarmine De Pontif. Romans lib. 7. cap 11.
for antiquity, because continued from the time of Gregory the great; and is
grounded upon Scripture, both in the examples of holy Kings, and the Apostles
definition of an Oath; namely that it is (...) the end of all Heb. 6. 16.
Controversy. Wherein take this very case; the Antilogia or controversy
whereof is, Whether any Romish Catholic can be are any true allegiance in his
heart, unto the Kings Majesty? This Jesuit in many places of his book holds
the affirmative; we by effects of so many Treasonable Plots of Priests and
Jesuits, do hold the contrary: yea, the Priests of the same Religion are
merely contradictory to him, while they say, that the Execution of Priest hood
and Treason are now so linked together by the Jesuits in England, Quodlib.
page 304.
as they cannot exhort any to the Catholic faith, but dogmatizando in so doing
they draw him in effect to Rebellion. For the taking up of the Antilogie, and
the better securing himself of his own saftie, and his Subjects loyalty,
what other Remedy could his Majesty think of then this of the Apostles, by
OATH, both assertorie for the present, and promissorie for the future
assurance? which is no other but what his Royal Ancestors in this Island have
done before him many Vide our Chronicles and Polyd. Virgil.
and often.

37 The NOVELTY then, belike is in the form of the Oath; not as it is received
by them tactis Euangelijs, that is Justinian. in Authent.
no modern invention; Justinian long since prescribed it: but as it is
conceived by the State to be done in the true Faith of a Christian without
Aequiuocation. This is, in sooth, that (...), that pressure of conscience under
which he groaneth, as appears by him, where he complains, Page 19. and 32.
that the OATH excludes them from all Aequiuocating: the Trial of which
complaint we refer to that place, or rather (though it grieve him) to the
elder T. M. that is, Tuus Mastix (in that point) Fa. Parsons. In the mean time
observe the integrity and divinity of this Censurer, who makes that a New
Pressure of Soul, which Saint Augustine (grounding himself upon that speech
of the Psalmist, Qui Psalm. 15. 4.
jurat proximo and non decipit) concluces to be of old, the full and faithful
discharge of Conscience; namely, that a man A^g. ^l. 224. ad Alipium.
should swear according to the mind of him that ministers, not of him that
takes the Oath, especially when he knows the Judges mind, by the words of
the Oath.

38 And now we follow him to examine the weight of this pressure, which he
aggrauateth by an Ironicall Sarcasmus against his Majesty, under the Ciphers
of T. M. For using the word ONLY, (an exception mitigating;) as if the taking
of this Oath were so lightly to be esteemed, as to be thrust upon them with an
ONLY, (scilicet, the King intended no hard Usage to the Catholics, ONLY a
form of oath was framed to be taken etc.) as if that were so easy a thing
which is an extremity of Rigor: for if it be taken, it hazards the Soul by
swearing against their Conscience; if not taken, it endangereth their worldly
estate by loss of goods, life, and liberty. Number. 12.

39 To be Verborum auceps, is a right Aequiuocators trick. Who knows not,
that the word ONLY does not so much signify an hypocoristicall alleuiation,
as a Compendiary limitation? He that said to our Savior, ONLY Math. 8. 8
speak the word, did not thereby extenuate the power of Christ, as if healing
in absence, by a speech, had been a more easy miracle, then by approach to
touch the party; but thereby wished a course more easefull to the body, not
less powerful to show the Deity of our Savior. And so his Majesty by the
word ONLY, signifies, that omitting all other courses of Enquiry into his
Subjects allegiance, he took that ONLY course to frame an OATH: not hereby
implying the taking of an Oath to be an easy charge, (because Oaths press
upon the Soul) but more expedit for evidence, and the readier way for the
assurance of his own State, and the manifestation of his subjects affections.
But grant that ONLY be an alleuiating particle, yet it is so by comparison:
and so is an OATH, a trial of more ease, both to body and mind then are those
other means by Rackes and tortures (usual in the Inquisition:) for as the
peines are insufferable to flesh and blood, so have they a very perculsiue
force even upon the Soul, Nam and innocents cogit mentiri dolor, says the
Stoicke, because in so many streights, of terror, Seneca.
pain, hope, fear, nihil veritati loci relinquitur, as the Orator well
observed, (let Aelian speak of the Egyptians courage or insensiblenes what he
will): men will say Ci^ ^ro. Sylla. A^in. var. hist lib. 7.
any thing (though most vnture) for ease and release from such pangs.

40 And this Oath (says this Censurer) does as much; for it drives men into
David's dilemma of streights, to fall either into the hands of God or men; of
God, if the Oath be taken, because they swear against their conscience; of
men, in that their goods, life and liberty are liable to law. And good reason
for the last; because every Statute having the Penalty annexed, none can be
more fit and proper for the breach of this, then Confiscation and death: for
he is unworthy to enjoy either wealth, ease, or life, under a Christian King,
who being required, denies to swear his Allegiance and obedience to his
Sovereign against all persons; which every true affected subject should
voluntarily offer. For the first, their swearing against Conscience, the answer
must be referred, where he inlargeth that point; for he runs the
wilde-goose-chase, backward and forward: within two leaves he confesses (as if
he lost himself) two returns. In the mean time he must know that a
Conscience may be misled by error, or stifned by pertinacie: and the^ the Greek
Divines will tell him, that unsoundness in the Judgment, and obstinacy Pa
30. sect. 33.
in the Will, makes but (...), a conscience so Chrysostom. Oecumenius.
nicknamed, which is more properly to be called ignorance and perverseness,
and rather to be censure then tendered.

41 But all this his Majesty had by a double anticipation prevented; first,
that neither the OATH NOR PENALTY Apolog. pa. 4.
thereof was intended against any for their opinion and conscience, but only
for acknowledgement and assurance of their Civil Obededience: Secondly, that
many of both sorts, popishly affected, had freely taken it, and thereby had
freed both themselves from suspicion of disloialtie, and the Oath from the
slander of pressure: and both these the Censurer observes and answers, Number.
13. the first by a concession: If it be so, the matter is ended, says he:
for no Catholic will deny to swear all Civil Obedience THAT HE OWES TO HIS
MAJESTY.

42. Wherein I pray you mark how Sorex seipsum, how Treason hatched in the
heart cannot conceal it self from uttering, though in hidden terms; for
observe those words, ALL OBEDIENCE THAT HE OWES TO HIS MAJESTY: what is that,
and how far extends it? Saint Peter stretches it without limitation, Submit
your selves to all manner ordinance for the Lords sake. Peter's Successor (so
called) he limits it, with 1. Pet. 5. 13.
Salua semper autoritate Apostolica, as in the Council of Trent: the
Successors Parasite, this Traitorous Claw-backe minseth it with a distinction
in ordine ad spiritualia: whereupon, Numb. 30.
as Tertullian says in an other case, Nisihomine Deus placuerit, Deus non
erit; so, if the King please not the Pope, Apologet.
he shall be denounced an Heretic, and so Cataloguised on Holy-Thursday: he
shall be pronounced no Christian, as Matthew. Tortus page 97.
the writhen-vexed Cardinal (so he entitles himself, and indeed writes as
though he were wroong with the colike) has already passed his Sentence; and
so consequently no King; or if a King, yet without Subjects: for they must
renounce their Obedience, and the King his safety and authority.

43 The second he answers by an Interrogation, such as the Rhetoricians call
(...), a question reprehensiue at least expostulatory, why Blackwell and
Charnocke, having Hermogen.
taken the Oath, are still imprisoned!

44 This Polypragmon would feign be a privy Councellor: he has wrong that his
Majesty acquainteth him not with all occurrences of State, and reasons of his
proceedings. To resolve his question either by conjecture or truth, I endeavor
not; Jam not his Intelligencer: to answer a scorn is folly. Only as the
parents said of their son borne blind, miraculously cured, so say I for
Master Blackwell, Aetatem habet: and if he might freely speak, he John 9.
would say with David, Let the righteous smite me, that is a benefit: Oleum
autem peccatoris, but let not their precious Psalm. 141. 5.
blames moisten my head, nor let me eat of their delicates: or as the vulgar
has it, Non communicabo cum electis eorum: Keep me from the company of them
that make themselves the Choice Company: for Jesuits are unmerciful, ask the
Priests else, who have protested they would rather Quodlib. 1. art. 2.
live under the Turks for security of their souls, then come under the
Jesuits hands. Blackwell (as the Proverb is) in Aristoph. Gr^matic.
holmo cubat, by the example of Tempest and Benson; He divines and foresees
his usage, and therefore (it is like) had rather choose restraint by authority,
then dismission with liberty: for were he once loose, order should be taken
with him for taking any more Oaths, yea, it is thought, for speaking any more
words. Greater men then he have been so served, if their own Catholics do
truly instance in the Bishop of Cassana; Cardinals, Allen and Tollet; yea
Quodlib. page 84.
Pope Sixtus Quintus himself, all figg'd away in a trice, for crossing, at
least not serving the Jesuits humors in their designements.

45 After this (as if he had all this while spoke by rote) he returns (as he
says) to the book, where his Majesty auoweth, that the Devil could not have
devised a more malicious Apolog. page 4.
trick, to interrupt this so calm and clement a course, then the Pope did, by
countermanding the taking of this Oath, in his published Breue: which this
fellow answers, first by deducing the cause that brought forth the Breue,
namely a doubt made about the Oath. Secondly, the doubt consulted Apud Procop.
l^b. 3. de bello. Vandal.
and canuassed abroad and at home: and here, as the Proverb is, Gamma Betam
persequitur, the Garnetists differed from the Blackwellists, some allowing
Aequiuocation in ^ters of faith, others not: and among these principally (which
allowed no Aequiuocation in matters of faith) says he, are the Jesuits,
though they be accounted the forwardest abet^ers of Aequiuocation.

46 (For the truth of this, though it grieve him, we refer him again to the
elder T. M. that is, the True Manifestator of their Aequiuocation, even in
matters of Faith and Religion.)

47. Thirdly, in this pudder of different opinions, recourse is had to the
Great Oracle for HIS determination: HIS Sentence is negative, drawn into a
BREVE, published and sent. For indifying whereof, this Libeller spends four
whole Numb. 15. 16. 17. 18. to show how THAT course was over used by English
Catholics, as so warranted by Catholic doctrine, in matters of doubt to
Consult with the Pope.

48 And here (as Plutarch says of Lucullus) (...), Plut. in Lucul.
etc. he roules in his element: scarce any Epistle, Preface, Pamphlet, Book,
or Petition, wherein HE has a hand, but this is his Cypress tree; a theme in
which he is very perfect and rhetorical, to tell us what a loadstone Rome
Simulare Cupressum, Ho ratius.
has been to England; for drawing thither the trial of our Gold in both
senses, as well that of the MIND (to which S. Paul resembles the doctrine of
faith) when no other 1. Cor. 3.
could be current but what Rome had coined and stamped; as that also of the
MINT, equal yearly to a Kings reuennue, if Bonner said truly; without which
neither would Rome afford instruction, neither could our Preface before
Gardener de vera obe, dieutia.
Land be quiet for fear of interdictions: In which Argument, HE, and ALLEN
before him (from whose Apology this Centonist has borrowed all that he has
spoken, concerning the OATH and flying to Rome) have received full
satisfactorie answers; namely, that if they understood the purer times of
Rome, when the Bishops there behaved themselves as religious members, not as
presumptuous Heads of the Church; and lived as ghostly Fathers to counsel and
comfort, not as Superiors to control and depose Princes, the Realm being
then rude, Learning scant, Religion newely sprung, and no where settled;
recourse was thither had upon devotion and mere necessity, and yet not then
without leave of the Prince: if after, when Popes left their Keys, and took
them to their twohand sword, the running then to Rome was not for devotion, but
by constraint, either wrought by the Popes Tyranny Ecce d^o gladii. 1. Reg. 12.
and cunning, (as Hieroboam, who made all Israel to sin by drawing them to
his Calves in Dan) threatening Interdictions, exacting Leuies, intruding corrupt
Teachers, and suppressing (even by death) the detectors of his errors: or else
yielded unto by timorous Princes, ambitious and tumultuous Prelates;
enuassalled Parasites; or the ouer-awed superstition and blind ignorance of
the people: which made one of their own Historians to call England Matthew.
Paris.
the Popes Ass. And yet even then many restraints were made under severe
penalties, which this Rhetorculist himself confesses, though he minseth it,
Numb. 17. All these reasons he does well not to acknowledge, lest he should
want matter for his next work, (for he is one of those busy deceitful
workers of whom the Apostle speaks) and therefore, being nothing to the
purpose in hand 2. Cor. 11.
(himself confesses it to be a digression, Numb. 19.) the fittest answer is
in brief:

49 First, that of the Apostles, Is there not a wise man among you of all the
Priests Secular and Iesuited in England, 1. Cor 6 5.
that can determine a Controversy about the OATH of Allegiance? Might not your
Archpriest Blackwell, so authorized by the Pope, so commended and countenanced
by two Cardinals, Caietan and Burghesius, so entrusted with regencie of Souls
over the whole Land, to whom al were enioined to repair for decisions and
questions; might not (I say) HIS judgment carry as much sway for the KINGS
SOVEREIGNTY against some few Iesuited, as HIS Censure alone against all the
Seculars, yea against the definitive of the whole faculty of Divines in
Declarat. motunm. page 1 10.
Paris, for the support of his own authority?

50. In the case and doubts about the late horrible Treason, Garnet and Hall
were thought sufficient Oracles to resolve and determine for it against the
King, without recourse to the Pope (for ought HE would be known:) In cases
concerning loyalty and allegiance to his Majesty, Blackwell and many his
associates cannot resolve for the King but the Pope must be first consulted.
Was it because there is no God in Israel to enquire of his word, said Elias of
2. Reg. 1. 16.
Ahaziah, that you must send Messengers to Baalzebub the God of Ekron? Has not
God answered by Vrim, nor by Prophets? 1. Sam. 28 6.
is not his will concerning allegiance to Kings in so many places sufficiently
revealed in his word, but recourse must be had to a Sooth-sayer in Endor? I
will not urge that bitter speech of the Secular Priests, it is to sharp; yet
the time is not long, since they said, that for the decision of doubts, the
Catholics must depend upon the Archpriest, the Quodlib. pa. 151.
Archpriest upon Garnet; Garnet upon Parsons; and Parsons upon the Devil: yet
then there was a Pope able to Judge: but only it would be known which is the
second answer fitting this point.

51 What there is in THIS Pope for judgment in Divinity, that His
determination should be expected about the OATH of allegiance to his Majesty,
more then in his predecessor Clemens, whose opinion was not inquired of about
the OATH for conspiracy against the whole Realm; Of Pius Quintus, who absolved
the late Queens Subjects from their obedience, it was said by some of his
own, that he was Homo pius and doctus, sed nimis credulus, religious, and
learned, but to easy of belief: Of this Paulus Quintus, who has interdicted
the subjects of our sovereign King, to swear their obedience, either for his
divinity or piety, we have heard nothing. S. Peter, whose successor he is
styled, S. Paul, whose name he has borrowed, had their divinity indeed by
infusion; but their writings revealed it to the world: so that Peter we know
and Paul we know to be singular divines, but WHO IS THIS? No man who seeks to
be famous, does any things in secret, say the Brethren of our Savior. Ioh. 7.
4.
Where then are his labors; his Sermons; his Treatises; his Commentaries; his
Epistles Theological, his Doctrinall determinations; his Judicial decisions?
all which are the usual attractiues to draw an opinion upon a man, that he is
a sound Resoluer: but in all these, as the Greek Poet speaks Plut. Lucull.
(...), as if he were Pythagoras his Scholar, he is wholly silent.

52 Into his qualities I will not enter: he stands and falls to his own Master:
but if he be that Cardinal Burghesius whom some of the Secular Priests have
sometime described, M. Bluet. etc.
and have assured us that to be true in him, which Plut. in Tiber.
is spoken of Tiberius Gracchus, that he is (...): A rash speaker, and an heady
undertaker; of a most violent spirit, and impatient of contradiction, in
whatsoever he has but once imagined: if this I say, be true, (which God
forbid in so great a Churchman) now surely he is not the fittest Judge to be
resorted unto in cases of conscience, especially of such nature and consequence
as this in Temp. Henr. 7.
hand. Wherein (as a learned Poet once merrily said, there stands Latro at the
bar, and Fur sits on the bench) himself becomes both party and Judge. When
Popes allege Popes for proof of their Supremacy, the Canonists say it is
Familia is probatio: certainly this must needs be a more familiar proof,
when reference is made to the Pope in his own cause.

53 For the knot of the quarrel between these differing Catholics, if there
were any concerning the OATH, and that which vexes them most, was the point of
the Popes authority in deposing Princes, and absoluing from the OATH; for, so
far as touched Civil Obedience, THAT stuck not with them, they say. Here is
the Pope become a party. Who now must unloose this knot, and determine the
quarrel? None but the Pope. If I should bear witness Ioh. 5. 32.
of MY SELF, says our Savior Christ, MY witness were not true: yea, but
says this Jesuit, the Pope being Page 10. no. 15.
the supreme Pastor, to him, by the principles of their Religion, Catholics
believe that our Savior gives assistance for the direction of men's souls.
Here Is the Pope made a Judge. Certes, had he determined negatiuely against
himself, he had been to blame, at least his authority for ever after, might
have been encountered with Serve nequam Luke 19. 22.
ex Ore tuo. Would not the Israelites themselves (though it were their misery,
that they might have neither weapon for 1. Sam. 13. 19.
war, nor tool for work, but they must fetch them from the Ph^listines)
have justly laughed at them, if the Philistine would have either hammered the
one, or steeled the other, or furnished them with either? And if the Pope, in
whose alone determination the Catholics must rest, would give any arguments of
Resolution against his own challenge, if it had not been ridiculous, sure it
had been miraculous. The Apologue is known, if the Lion may be Judge in the
division of the prey, his fellow-hunters shall Aesop.
have but a small share: and Kings shall be sure auguste sedere, (as Tully
said to Caesar) have both strait limits and unquiet Ma^o. Sat. 2.
seats, if the Pope may determine their Bounds and States.

54 But let Fa. Parsons say in sooth (if there can be any sooth in a man of
such singular honesty as the Priests describe him, intituling him an impostume
of all corruptions) Quod lib. p. 237
was there any such reference made out of England unto the Pope for his
Resolution? Was it by Petition written, or by Message of mouth delivered? Let
him show the State of the Question, as it was framed; put down the arguments
of the difference, to and fro, as they were objected; and make knowea the
reason of the Popes negative decision: this were plain dealing in him, and had
been fair dealing in the Pope, if, before he had sent his Breues of
Interdiction, he had acquainted his Maiestic with the encounters of doubt that
had bred the quarrel, and the ouerswaying reason which carried him to the
Negative. This being omitted, his Majesty gave his decision the right name,
when he called it a malicious trucke of the Devil.

55 For there was both malice in the Sentence, because done of purpose, and not
out of passion, but after due deliberation, Numb. 15.
(says this Epistler) and that is malice in any sin, as the Schoolmen define
it: Secondly, in the intent there Aquinas. 12ae. q. 47. and 78.
was extreme malice, thereby to foster in his Majesty's heart jealousy of his
Subjects; and in them disloyalty to their Sovereign: and all this, which is
truth indeed, upon the only information, advice, and instigation of a known
Incendiarie, Parsons; who ever since he ran out of his Country, like
traitorous Absolon, cares not to set his own friends Land, yea to see his
native soil on a light 2. Sam 14. 30.
fire, so he may purchase the Popes favor, as the other did Ioabs corn, to
approach his fathers presence. Thirdly, malice in the whole action, busily
interposing himself in other States which concern him nothing (for that is
noted as a great part of the Devils malice, that he is Magnus ille
Peripateticus, and takes upon him to be the general Job 1.
Surueyer and Compasser of the whole earth.) For what has the Bishop of Rome
to do with the King and Subjects of England in matters of Religion? Much less
of State: especially seeing he medleth not for good, but for evil, (cuen as
that other universal Rector in the air, quaerens quem deuoret) not
instructing, but interdicting? 1. Pet. 5. 8.


56 We say with the Fathers in the Council of Carthage, when they took the
Bishop of Rome his Advocates cardie, and falsaries in his challenge for the
cognizance of all Ecclesiastical differences to belong to HIM: Aliae Ecclesiae
habent Spiritum Sanctum, vt causas cognoscere and dijudicare Council. Cartha. 6.
possint. Nay (says this Censurer) the Pope only has, Numb, 20 supposing as
we do in matters Catholic, concerning persons Catholic, that England is the
Popes harvest, and the Catholics therein, his flock; the division of the
Island by Sea not making any separation from him their general Head for
dependence.

57 This is a strong Argument, no doubt; the Pope has to do in England,
because some Catholics SVPPOSE he has: but before that SVPPOSALL be brought
into a positive and resolute Conclusion, it will ask a longer time then such a
Pamphlet as his Letter is will require; and more deep divinity then Parsons
has, if it be true which the Priests report of him, that he is neither acute
Schoole-man, nor profound divine, but a mean Preacher, and a barren Ghostly
Counselor. Quodiib. page 237.


58 For whether Saint Peter be made Terminus a quo, or ad quem, either to
derive the universality from him to the Pope, or reduce it from the Pope to
him, many a knottre question is to be decided: as first, Whether the Government
of the Church should be Monarchical? Whether that Monarch should be Saint
Peter, as superior to the rest of the Apostles? Whether the Charge of the
Keys were given to him, alone? Howfarre the Jurisdiction of the Keys will
reach? Whether feed my Sheep and Lambs be an universal charge, and to Peter
alone? If all this true; how comes it to the Bishop of Rome, rather then an
other? Whether Peter appointed him his Successor? Whether he has it Iure
diuino, or Ecclesiastico? Whether that same one Pastor and one slocke be not
proper to Christ alone? Why not an universal Emperor as well as an universal
Pope? with many other such, which would trouble a better Clarke then this
Jesuit, even to discuss: sor hot brains as they undertake matters busily,
so they perform nothing soundly or indiciously.

59 If other states and Nations brook the Pope for their Judge (and yet in
most of them which he names, they do but Quatenus) it is either their
voluntary submission, not his just claim; or else his violent usurpation
forced on them by terror, not their spiritual subjection, warranted by
divinity. And therefore it argued some ingenuitie in the man, that he made it
but a SVPPOSALL. For if all the rest of the Apostles were not Ordered Bishops
by Saint Peter, (says Bellarmine) then (...). Rom (...). l. ca, 23.
cannot the Church of Rome be the Mother of all other Churches: (much less
the Bishop of Rome be the Universal Bishop) and whether it were so or no, the
best writing Jesuits Salmer. in Gal. 1. Victor. Rel. 2. con. 3. Suarez in Tho.
Tom. 4. disp. 16 Greg. de valet. Anal. fid. li. 7. cip, 2.
do indeed make it but a SVPPOSALL; the most favorable of them, that it is
but Likely; an other, that it is uncertain; but others, that it is scarce
probable: yea, that it is an opinion, neither generally received, norgreatly
necessary.

60 A fourth trick of Malice, mixed with Craft, (two properties of the envious
man, that sowed tares in sleeping time) was the Popes Riddle, rather then
answer, in not particularizing Mat. 13. 25.
the specialties to be excepted in the OATH: his Craft, lest straining at that
point which touched his authoritic in deposing and absoluing, he should
reveal his partiality; for so, as Demetrius the Ephesian, his clamorous Act.
19. 24.
plea for his Diana, in respect of his private gain, and credit of the City,
or rather of the Sea, would have been too manifest. His Malice, closely
insinuating the whole OATH to be utterly unlawful, even that very point of
swearing Civil obedience; for so he says, Such an Oath cannot be taken (this
minsing distinguisher puts in [as it lay] without annoyance of the Catholic
faith. All this the Censurer repeateth, but refelleth not. Number. 19.

61 And this was his Majesty's just agreeuance; that how soever in matter of
Religion the Pope would meddle; yet in things that merely and only concern
Civil obedience, that he should interpose himself, could not but argue him to
be Curiosus in aliena Republica, a busy Polypragmo^ where he had nothing to
do; which this Jesuit confesses to be a just mislike if it prove true.

62 Now then this must be cleared, whether the OATH does only concern Civil
Obedience, yea or no? That it does not, he takes upon him to satissie in eight
Numbers; from the 20. to the 28. and that four several ways, as he says;
First, Out of the words of the OATH, wherein 1
the Popes authority is limited (indeed this is it which startles them;)
Secondly, Out of the Popes words marshalling 2
the taking of the Oath, thus mixed with clauses concerning Religion, with
repairing to our Church assemblies, arguing that he forbade the OATH so far
as it was an Act Spiritual. Thirdly, Out of the Cardinals Letter, who after
Consultation with others, (scil. with a Traitor 3
called Parsons) does therein include the OATH to be unlawful because it is
compounded by joining of spiritual and Temporal things together, as Julian
his Picture, with the Images of the Paynim Gods. (...)


63 (This Bellarmine does in cold blood, as he is To bertus Cardinalis,
covertly resembling his Majesty to that Apostata; but when he is by his
Metamorphosis, or Metonomasie translated into Mathaeus Tortus, that is a
Publican vexed, either with wrath or fury, or malice, or all, then he
particularizeth the comparison, and makes his Majesty no better, yea worse
then Julian.)

64 Fourthly, by are all offer on the Catholic part; the 4
former whereof he draws and diuides, First affirmative two ways, viz. That
so much of the OATH as concerns Civil obedience, every Catholic shall take
(marry with a restraint twofold) as much as any Catholic has done in time of
Popery, or any Foreign Subject does to a Popish Prince. Secondly, Concerning
the Pope, this Catholic shall swear, that he hopes, that his Holiness will
do nothing in prejudice of his Majesty, yea, he will labor to stay him if
he do, and will pray for them both: the other part is negative; that the
Catholics shall not touch any part of the OATH which seems to impeach the
Popes Authority; therefore that more is required then Civil Obedience, by
this it is evident. By what? because the Pope deciares so; and the Cardinal
writes so, and this Jesuit says so?

65 But we laying this for our ground, first, that both swearing and
performing Civil Obedience is as well negative, against any intruder,
Challenger, or Usurper; as affirmative, for the lawful Governors and
Sovereigns: Secondly, that this challenge of the Pope in dethroning and
deposing Princes, is a temporal intrusion, and no spiritual Jurisdiction, do
conclude with as strong and apparent evidence, that the whole bulk of the
OATH, both in the submissiue and exclusive part, does only concern Civil
obedience. Of the first ground there is no doubt; for Art thou on our side, or
on our adversaries? was a proper and fit question moved by a resolute
Governor: lukewarm Josh. 5. 13.
Subjects being as odious and dangerous in a State Politic, Apoc 3. 16.
as such professors are in Religious Societies, justly to be vomited out of
the Realm, as Solon his (...), and Plut. Sol n.
Neutralls from his commonwealth. Of the second, we make as little doubt; the
proofs thereof, by so many that have debated that controversy, are so
plentiful, so pregnant and impregnable: but seeing we mean this Jesuit a
favor, we will remit him to T. M. the elder (he D. Mort^bis full satisfact.
part. 3.
had as leefe go to the Rack) who, among many other, has canuassed this
point, in a Confutation, to the Popes confusion.

66 For this authority of the Pope, if it be a spiritual Jurisdiction, it
must be either from heaven or of men, grounded upon law either Divine or
Ecclesiastical: Nam Bern. ad Eug^.
quod amplius est, a malo est, says a devout Father to a great Pope: All
execution thereof, not derived from either of these, implies a tyranny, imports
no right. If upon Divine Law, then either the Old or the New Testament; not the
Old, the Priests among the Jews had no such authority over their Kings,
either united to their Priesthood by God, or assumed by themselves; confessed
so by a Jesuit, that the state Salmer, in Epist. Pauli, disp. 12.
of the Jews was rather earthly then heavenly: therefore the carnal part was
more eminent, that is, Kings had the Souereigntie over the Priests.

67 Not in the New: for then S. Peter should have had it, either when the Keys
were given him, Matt. 16. or when that trebled Pasce was inioined him, Ioh. 21.
If it be so, then had he this Jurisdiction directly from Christ, and
universally over the world: but that is not so, says Robert the Cardinal, and
this Robert his Echo, but only over Bellar. lib. 5. de Pontis. Romans cap. 4
and. 6.
Christian Princes, and that indirectly and obliquely, in Ordine ad Deum. Nay,
neither directly nor indirectly, says Saunders; for there being a double power
of Christian De claue, lib. 2. cap. 13.
fortitude, constant suffering, and courageous attempting, that power of
suffering (as the more excellent) Christ chose, as the fittest sibi and suis,
for himself and those that belong to him; or, if you will, for himself and
his Apostles. So, then to suffer oppression under Kings, not to infer upon
them Rebellion and Disloyalty, was the power Apostolical in respect of
Princes.

68 By Law Divine then it was excluded; for no man can transfer that to
another, which he has not himself; but this royal Sovereignty over
Princes, to depose them, or dispose of their States, Christ had not as he was
man (and yet he said Omnis potest as data est mihi in Coelo and in Terra) Math.
28. 18.
yea such power had been unprofitable and superf^uous (says Vbi supra.
the Grand Cardinal) therefore he could not transfer it to Saint Peter, or
the rest.

69 For Ecclesiastical Law; no Canon, Council, Decree, Practice extant,
reckon to 600. years after Christ, by Bellarmines De Council. lib. 1. ca. 13.
Bercla^us. li. 6. cap. 26. Sigeb^ri. in. an 1088.
confession, yea to 1000. and amplius, says one of their own Writers, does
auow it; insomuch that a Friar of account, writing in the year 1088. calls then
the doctrine thereof a Novelty, if not an Heresy. And that Act of Hildebrand,
that famously infamous Pope, who first took upon him to deprive an Emperor of
his regiment, is by a Popish Divine called Nouellum Schisma, a rent, and a rent
Clau. Espencaeus in Tim. Digres. li. 2. cap. 6.
of Novelty: the challenge of this authority utterly unknown to the
Fathers, who have pronounced Kings to be no way liable to any violent Censure,
or penal Law of man, tuti imperii potestate, their Empire and Sovereignty
exempting Ambros. Apolog. David. cap. 4. and. 10.
and priueledging them therefrom.

70 Therefore this authority of the Pope, thus proclaimed by himself, thus
patronized by the Jesuits, being merely temporal, neither Scripture, Father,
Council, or Practice, for so many years, warranting it, and by consequent, an
humane Invention and Intrusion, presumptuous in the Pope against a Civil
Magistrate (which is Gods Ordinance) and prejudicial to Kings in disquieting
their states, and disparaging their Souereignties: the matter of the Romans 13.
whole OATH both submissiue for affirmative allegiance, and exclusive for
negative acceptance of foreign disturbers, must needs be merely Civil and
Temporal; and the whole OATH to be as entirely taken of English Subjects for
their King and Sovereign against the Pope, claiming and usurping part of his
right, as well as that of Iehoiada by the men of Judah for Ioaz their King,
against Athalia that usurped 2. Reg. 11. 4.
his state.

71 Neither does that point of the OATH more concern Religion, then if any
other Prince, Christian or Heathen, should have been put in the same, and the
Pope lest out. For this authority of the Pope, so excluded in the OATH, must
be as he is either a Temporal Prince, (and then the OATH is merely Civil)
or else as he is a spiritual Judge; which, if it be a point of true Religion,
must have the warrant in Scriptures, and by the donation of the Keys Matthew. 16.
if in any Scripture.

72 It Is so, says Saunders: for S. Peter with THEM, Vbi supra c. 10.
received both Powers, Temporal and Civil, to build and destroy Uictoria,
Rel. 1. Sect. 2.
Kingdoms. Not so, says a Jesuit, for this power of the Keys, est alia a
Civilly Potestate. Thus they jar. Mean while, we are sure that this is a
Precept in true Religion, Romans 13.
Every soul to be subject to the higher powers. But if there be a Religion,
such as he calls Catholic, which exempts any when the Apostle includes all, I
say no more but that which our Savior said to the Pharisees, Hypocritae, Mat.
15. 6.
irritum fecistis mandatum Dei propter Traditionem vestram. and that which he
said of them when they were offended at that speech, Every plant which my
heavenly Father has not Verse. 14.
planted, shall be rooted out. And perhaps this rufling of the Pope with his
BREVES against his Majesty, argues as well for him, as it did for an other
Rufler elsewhere, that he has great wrath, Sciens quod BREVE tempus habet,
knowing his Apoc. 12. 12.
time is but a BREVE.

73 Now we proceed to remove two blocks at which this Jesuit stumbles, but he
goes back to fetch them, for this fellow treads the Maze; he was even now at
the 6. and now he is come to the 4. page, wherein he takes two exceptions
against his Majesty: first, in that it is said Many Popishly affected of both
sorts did freely take this OATH. Secondly, that their so taking of it is called
a blessed success of so good adeuice and intent in proposing such an OATH. In
the first, the Assertion he denies not, that many did so; but he sticks at the
Aduerbe FREELY. God loves Aduerbes, say the Canonists, the Devil does not;
for, that the Aduerbe does make the action commendable, yea, denominate the
action, is an Axiom both in Divine and Humane learning. Now, lost this action
of theirs should be commended too much, he first descants upon the word FREELY,
and disprooues it by the Statute penalty, and a distinction of Philosophy:
for the statute inflicting upon the refuser so strait a punishment, Aristotle
in his Ethics, and Thomas in his Sum, are so far from accounting it a FREE
action, that the Schoolmen determine it to be Inuoluntarium secundum quid;
and the Philosopher Inuoluntarium simpliciter: much like the instance which
Aristotle gives, and the owner of the ship (wherein S. Paul was a passenger)
felt, the throwing of all the fraught into the Sea to sauemens lives: whereunto
Act. 27.
this case is semblable either for me to take the OATH, which is against
Conscience; or endure a strict penalty, which cannot be FREEDOM: for that
FREEDOM (says he) requires liberties, that is FREEDOM to both extremes or
objects. And here, as if with Aesops hen he had laid a golden egg, he
cackles out a Triumph: Let the discreet Reader (says he) consider what
coherence there is in this tale; namely, that there should be a penalty upon
the Refuser, and yet the taking of the OATH to be called a FREEDOM.

74. And is there then such an (...) and disagreement, between the peine of a
Statute Law, and the will of a Subject, that he which obeies the Law so
inioyning, shall not be accounted a Free-subiect for his Obedience? then are
all the people of the Christened world Slaves, not Freemen. For what Nation is
there governed by Laws, not enjoined by sharp penalties? Were all Subjects
Saint Paul's true Scholars, and would obey their Superiors for Conscience
sake, all Penalties were then unnecessary restraints; or were all Princes
Draco-like, who having such Subjects, would write each law in blood, such
penal Laws were Tyrannical inforcements: but the subjects of the best
Princes being of diverse dispositions, some willingly submitting themselves to
the streitest Laws, not for fear of the punishment, but for conscience to
God, and duty to their Sovereign: others refractarie, whose mouths must be
holden with bit and bridle, because without a penal constraint they will wax
wild, and yield no obedience: therefore in the best managed States, are all,
or the most Laws backed with penalties, and yet the Subjects liberty no way
infringed. It is License, not Liberty that admits no penalty. The Law of God
it self is imposed with penalties, and yet man's Obedience yielded thereunto,
is not Thraldom but Freedom; which made the Apostle say, That the Law was not
given unto the righteous man; for his direction, 1. Tim. 1. 9. Gal. 3. 23.
no doubt it was, it is our Schoolmaster unto Christ; but not for his terror,
because his willingness preuents the Constraint, and his obedience the Censure.
But to the Wicked and rebellious it is given, not thereby abridging their
Freedom, but punishing their contempt.

75 Were the Statute enforced peremptorily and no leisure granted for
deliberation, or after deliberation no liberty of choice, but inforst upon
them to take it whether they will or no: then might the OATH be accounted a
pressure, and the acceptance thereof a slavery. But first, time being given to
consider thereof: and after consideration, leave granted to choose or refuse,
this in their own schoole-learning is True and Full Liberty: for to it they
annex these two conditions. 1. indeterminationem Iudicij ad deliberandum,
Medina in primam (...). quest. 6 art. 2.
an unlimited scope for the judgment to deliberate. 2. facultatem eligendi vel
refutandi quod deliberandu^ est, power either to choose or resuse what is
deliberated. The first is Radix Libertatis, the sourse or fountain of
Liberty; the other is ipsa Libertas, Freedom it self, says Medina. And
that is the very case between the King and his subjects in this matter of the
OATH; so that the very refusal (after deliberation) argues, that, either to
take it or no, they had liberty of choice; but in refusing it, no loyalty of
affection.

76 But what if by the word Freely, his Majesty meant either a voluntary
offer of some, who to show their loyalty to their Sovereign, of themselves
desired to take the OATH; or, being required, after view thereof, without
either respecting the penalty, or doubting of the Lawfullnesse, Readily
yielded that pledge of their allegiance, by taking the OATH? Then let the
discreet Reader, (to whom he appeals) consider what a trifling Sophister this
is, to pick quarrels at words, by wrests and streines neither to purpose nor to
sense: for that his Majesty's meaning was so by the Latin translation, is
manifest; where these words Many FREELY took the OATH, are there translated
Permulti Sacramento se obstringere non DVBITARVNT, Apolog. lat. page 4. lin. 6.
that is, they stuck not at it, but without terror or doubt took it. And this
the Makebate knew well-inough, but that he would perhaps take a small occasion
to vindicate his credit (which the Priests have somewhat impaired, by assuring
the world, that he is no Scoole-Diuine) by showing his skill in Aquine and in a
piece of Aristotle, which every Puny has by rore.

77 Secondly, lest this their acceptance of the OATH should be too much
commended, he takes upon him to interpret their meaning; wherein let the
Reader consider what an Hypocrite he is: for it is an inseparable mark of an
Hipocrite, to judge of other men's consciences. The Mat. 7.
heart of man is Gods peculiar: for any man to place his Consistory there, is
an high presumption; and therefore when some have taken the OATH, and swear
they do it heartely, we say with Nazian. (...) for us to Nazi. in Epist.
diue into their conceits, and to judge with what affection (either of fear of
punishment; or hope of favor; or love to their Prince) they do it, it is not
our purpose, nor comes it within our reach: and yet this Serpens Epidaurius can
see more in them, then their selves will acknowledge; and Horace.
though they swear they do it willingly, yet he can assure both them and us,
that they do it by constraint.

78 Et nunquid Saul inter Prophetas? yea surely, for he can prophecy, that
though they swear they do it heartily, 1. Sam. 10. 11.
and without any mental evasion, yet he is persuaded, and would persuade us,
that they do it neither Freely, that is Willingly, without fear of Coertion;
nor Freely, that is plainly, but with a reserved distinction. And now again,
let the Reader, (whose help he craves) behold a malicious trick of a notable
Aequiuocator, that cannot be contented to be himself alone (for doubling and
dissembling) the Devils Scholar (that ancient Aequiuocator, that can be the
Prince of darkness, and an Angel of light all at once) but must also be his
Diuilitie Reader or Schoole-man, to teach 2. Cor. 11.
others to distinguish themselves to Hell fire, and that is, Number. 30. Wherein
he shows himself to be, vere Spiritus mendaex in ore Prophetarum, framing two
distinctions like the two horns of Sedechias (such another as himself, full
1. Reg. 22. 22.
of that spirit) and putting them into their mouths: the first, that the
Popehath not authority without Just cause, to proceed against Princes: the
second, that the Pope has not his authority directly, but indirectly, and in
ordine ad spiritualia, and for the Catholic cause: Et in his ventilabis
Syriam, verse. 11.
says the false Prophet, of his horns: and with these distinctions, says
this Jesuit, the OATH- taking may satisfy the Statute, and reserve integrity
and sincerity of true Catholic doctrine.

79 As if he should say, though they swore (as it is in the OATH) that they
believe, and in conscience are resolved that the Pope has no authority upon
his excommunicating of Princes, to absolve Subjects from their Obedience; and
that they swore this according to the express words by them spoken, and
according to the plain and common sense and understanding of the same words,
without any Aequiuocation, or mental evasion, or secret reseration whatsoever,
(all which are the words of the OATH:) yet if in their mind they shall
secret^y conceive these two distinctions, No authority without JUST CAUSE, or
not DIRECTLY: though the Pope shall after he has excommunicated a Prince,
absolve his Subjects, they must persuade themselves notwithstanding, that they
have sworn truly; and yet that the Pope has done that, which in their
consciences is just; in that his so proceeding is either upon just Cause, or by
his indirect authority.

80 And now let a Christian Reader (that makes conscience either of God, or
common honesty) consider whether these be not profunda Satanae in the
Revelation, even the very mist and mystery of miquity; wherein he may Apoc. 24.
demand of this Jesuit, first whether this be not a Paganish delusion both of
God and men! the very same of Lysander and Dyonisius, that Children are to be
mok't with toys, and men with Oaths! Nay more then heathenish; for Aristotle
Pl^.
was of opinion, that he which doubleth in his Oath (for that is (...) to
swear with a mental addition) has neither fear of Gods vengeance, nor shame
of men's reproof. Secondly, if the OATH may by such distinctions, R^d Alax and.
Ca. 18.
according to the true Catholic Religion (for so this Censurer says) be
interpreted and expounded, why did not the Pope by his Breues, rather ratify
these as lawful euasions, then at the first dash thunder out his awful
Interdictions? Thirdly, if the OATH be so thin a Cob-web, that two such Flies
may so easily break through it; why does this Jesuit so often term it a
pressure of Conscience, forcing men to despair? Lastly he might ask of this
banished Catholic, whether that part of the OATH, touching the Popes
authority, upon which he thus mentally didistinguisheth, be a matter of
Faith, or no ^sno; then the OATH binds to no other thing, then the
acknowledgement of mere Civil Obedience: if yea; then in ^o secretly
distinguishing, they did a thing unlawful: for no sort of Aequiuocation
(says Fa. Persons) is lawful in matters of Faith and Religion. Yes (says Fa.
Parsons) their so Aequiuocating in this matter of faith, is lawful, and may
stand Number 14. Number 30.
with the integrity and sincerity of true Catholic doctrine. So then in
matters of Faith and Religion it is not lawful in any sort to Aequiuocate; but
in this matter, though it concern Faith and Religion, it is lawful. Will not
the discre^t Reader conclude these to be roapes of Sand? and to have less
coherence then that which he strains at for dissonancie in the Apology?

81 And yet (says he) Number. 31. Unless these distinctions may be admitted,
he that swears honestly, and takes the OATH simply as it lies, and is meant
by the Magistrate that offers it (namely that the Pope has no authority upon
what occasion so ever, for never so much good of Christian Religion to proceed
against any Prince, either by himself, or by permission of other Princes to
do the same) does contradict the consent of all Catholic Divines, and
professes that Gods providence is defectuous in care of his Church.

82 Dolosum versar^in vniuersalibus, and for him that means deceitfully, to
speak generally, is an old Proverb, upon an old Custom. The first of these
Assertions, that the Popes authority for deposing of Kings, is concluded by
Content of all Catholics Divines; if by them he mean Scriptures, Councels,
Fathers, Stories for 1000. years after Christ, the Reader must take it for a
mendatious vanity, and let it pass for no better. But if in that number he
account Popes testifying of themselves; or Canonists Paraziting to Popes; or
Glosses hyperbolizing the flatteries of the Canonists; or Schoolmen
blasphemously detorting Scriptures; or adulterate and partial stories, forging
a Mathematical Donation (quae palea est, at Ecclesia pro grano habet, which is
but Chafe indeed, though the Church hold it in Alu^r. Pel. de Plan. Eccles.
lib. 1. Cap. 13.
the granarie for good Corn, says an ancient Canonist of their own) he must
expect no fitter answer then that which our Savior gave to him, that
challenged to himself to be the Great Donor of the Kingdoms of the World,
cum mendacium John. 8. 44.
loquitur, de proprijs loquitur; to bring credit to their own sab^es, they
must bring in witnesses (like Knights of the Post) of their own humors.

83 The second, as it is a triuiall Objection, and borrowed by this Epistler
from Allens Apology; so, as by one of their Glossaries it was first uttered,
it is a charge favoring of Blasphemy, namely, that if this transcendent power
over all Bertian. in addit. a^ Gloss. V^am sa^cta. Ex^. V^es in Aug. de C^it.
dei. lib. 10. cap 16.
things, (even for deposing Princes) were not proper to the Pope, OUR LORD
saving his reverence, says he, had failed in his discretion for government of
his Church.

84 Viues, upon Saint Augustine, tells us o^ one that persuaded his
neighbors on a dark night, that unless the Moon were in his Assesbelly (for
sine she drunk it up of late shining in the Poole) the world should want that
light for ever. Parsons upon Allen would persuade ^s that unless Gods
providence be so tied to the Popes Diadem that he may Triple it with
supremacy of control over all Princes Christened, the Church should want
that pillar for support, and that eye for direction in government: the first,
being a fancy of an Io^or, is but a meriment of folly; this challenge,
s^riously maintained, and a maine argument among Jesuits is a presumptuous
challenge of arrogant impiety.

85 That men in agony of grief; or torment of pain; or coffeehouse of
humor; or rage of passion; or in cases of distress and disgrace, will speak
irreuerently of God (or as the Hebrew has it Dare insulsum Deo, will charge
God with folly) through impatience, it is usually by Poets fained; and by
stories of good Job. 1. 22.
note, in men of good parts, sometimes observed: but that Pride should so far
ouersway men's affections, that to maintain their ambition and tyranny, they
should so much forget God their Savior, as to challenge him of Improuidence
toward his Church (which is as dear unto him as the apple of his eye; which
he has purchased with his Blood; which he has handfastned unto himself for
his spouse; and to which he has promised his perpetual assistance) is
singular from all examples; admirable, but intolerable: only that it
favors of the spirit of Antichrist, who as in his pride he lifts up
himself above all that is called God, so for the support of his pride,
sticks 2. These. 2.
not to charge with indiscretion, and want of foresight even the very true God.

86 Whose Providence is as his power; this, most puissant where the means are
most weak: that, most Vigilant 2. Cor. 12.
where the means are least seen. Et quod stultum videtur homi^ibus, that
which the world counts folly, is Gods 1. Cor. 1. 26.
wisdom; to pass by the mighty and the noble, and to choose the weak things
of the world to confound the mighty; yea, things vile and despisable, to
abate and pull down things lofty and Honorable: not by curse of mouth, or
dint of sword, but by patience of spirit, and power of his word. For Gods
providence in his Church-gouernment by Church men is Operative, not
vindicatiue; that same Vlcisci in promptu, that 2. Cor. 10. 5. 6.
vengeance in a readiness against all disobedience, whereof the Apostle
speaks, leuelling every high thing that is exalted against the knowledge of
God, and captiuating every thought to the obedience of Christ, like the
ru^nating of Hierichoes walls by Rams-hornes is powerful not violent
spiritual but not visible, Josh. 6. ^0.
by means weak in show, mighty in effect. Those Compedes ad alligan dos
Reges in the Psalm. Those fetters made to Psalm. 149 8. Aquin. in 2. 2 Cor. 10.
bind Kings are DOCVMENTS OF FAITH, says Thomas, not Thunders of disturbance.

87 Yea, had not God in the depth of his wisdom, and providence of the
Church, kept that conceit, (or any the least occasion to breed it) even from
the thoughts of Princes; that the same snake, which (being almost statued to
death with hard and cold weather, they should warm succor and nourish in
their bosoms, would, when she had go^ten liberty and strength, first st^ke
them: and that the Roman Bishops brought so low in the world by pou^tie and
persecution, after their advancement by them, would have grown to that height
of insolence, as to am^te them: still should they have lien forlorn and
vnp^tied, at least unfurnished of those large indowments, francke immunities,
vast privileges, and honorable places, which now they hold, and wherewith they
are uphold (...).

88 It Is natural to Kings to be jealous of their Thrones, wherein they can
abide neither Mate for division, n^r Check mate for scorn. It cost Ado^ah his
life for asking (...). Reg. 2. 20.
Abishag to wife, because Solomon did thereby take occasion to suspect, that
he which desired the Fathers bedfellow, would also aspire to the brothers
Throne. It was not the blasphemy laid to our Saviors charge by the Jews,
that moved Pilate to sentence him; the which hastened his death, was a jealous
opinion, though a false persuasion* that he should be a King, and thereby
defeat Caesar of his claim Ioh. 19. 12. 13.
to Jury.

89 In that point therefore we shall see God himself to be very wary; for
even that Psalm (which of all the Scriptures is most threatfull to Kings, and
begins with a Psalm. 2. 1.
thundering expostulation) Quare fremuerunt Gentes, and astiterunt Reges? It
pleases him to conclude it not with a minacing ex^rusion, but with a calm
persuasion, Osculemini filium, or as the vulgar has it, Apprehend^
Disciplinam: and what is that? Be wise, o ye King^, and (...) the Lord in
fear: I^ not, what is the da^* Nepereat^s de via iusta, that is, lest you lose
the righ^ way to Heaven, and your right in the Crown of Heaven: He said no^,
your Titles to your Kingdoms, no^ right to your Crowns on earth. God (...)
thought it fit to support his Church, by daring of Princes, Professors of his
name; for that had been the way to make them not nourishing F^s, but either
Esa. 19. 23.
pinching supprest^, or at least cold and wary fauo^s of the same.

90. As therefore in the time of the Law, he had a Church, flourishing and
famous, to the worlds astonishment, In Jury was God known, his Name was great
in Israel, Psalm. 76. 1.
where there were Pr^ests of very ^nent port and ^te: yet, that they were
subject to their Kings (both for reu^rent demeanor to their persons, and all
due obedi^nce, to their Commands, both in civil affairs, and for
Ecclesiastical charge,) argued no de^ect in Gods prou^ence or di^tion: So in
the p^itiue time of the Gospel, the purity of doctrine, the increase for
number, the success by the large prop^tion of Christianity, was far more
eminent in the world; and the Evidence of Gods Providence more apparently
demonstrated, when the blood of Martyred Bishops was the Seed of the Church (at
what time the Title of Christ's Vicar General was not heard of) then since the
challenge and claim of this Papal supremacy; the issues whereof ha^ been
the bloody Massacres of Christian Princes, designed and abe^ted by the
Successors of those Bishops, successors (I say) in Seat, (and yet that is a
question) but not in ^aith.

91 And the Christian world can witness, to Gods glory, and the Popes regret,
that the vigilant eye of Gods Providence, for support both of sincerity in
doctrine, and integ^ of di^, and public maintenance of both, where Bishops and
Priests use the Keys committed to them, toward, their Sovereigns for winning
their souls, not for disturbing their states; for preaching to them, ^ot
factioning against them; in exhorting, not threatening the^; in praying for
them, not ^sing them, is more (...) (...) ^visible then where the pope and all
his gimmals the P^sh Priests o^ C^rats of Rome (that is their true (...) in
S^atuscons. Fra^. number 58.
original) who for their often winding and turning are only called Cardinals,
do practice their usurped claim, in ^acing Interdictions, managing
Rebellions, allowing Periuries, instilling and complotting Treasons. But in
brief if it were seriously propounded, what became of Gods Prou^dence when
there was no Pope at all (as at once for s^uen years and a half, anothertime
for three years together the Sea was vacant?) And to which of the Popes Gods
Providence for Church-gouernment was tied in the Anti-papacie or duplicitie of
Popes for so many years, it would pin^h the Jesuit to answer it.

92 Now from his Doctors Chair, where he has been urging the lawfulness of
his distinctions, he descends, and falls on his knees. Number. 32. And as before
he framed an Oath for a Mitigation, so now he puts up a request for an
exposition (which is indeed an oblation for our OATH) where he propounds
three offers; that it would please his Majesty either, first, to admit of these
Mental Euasions; or, secondly, to wipe out the last words in the Statute
against Aequiuocation; or, lastly, not to think much if they utterly refuse
the OATH.

93 It may be said to him as unto Cain (in their own Translation) Recte
offers, sed non recte diuid^s: his submission is good, but his proffer^ are not
so: it becomes him to be Genesis 4.
humble, but not thus to Capitulate: wherein he seems to honor the King, (as
Bernard notes of an hypocrites sacrifice) it is munere foetido. For the sum
of In Cant. ser. 24
his Petition is this, that either the OATH might not at all be imposed (and so
his Majesty should have of them no bo^d of allegiance) or else that it might
be taken with the forenamed Reseruations; that so (as the same Father
speaks) Vbi supra.
they may dare manum deuotioni, and animum liuori, swear loialty on the book,
but hatch Treason in their hea^s.

Notwithstanding (says the Jesuit,) the rather (...) this be yeel^ed unto,
because both the chiefest learned of their Church have judged the OATH
unlawful (as it is now framed) and also their chief Pastor, has v^erlie
condemned it. And this indeed has caused (says he) the great scruple and
repugnancie of Conscience.

95 How holds this together? He told us before, that it was the Scruple of
Conscience, which caused them to seek Number. 15.
beyond the Seas, both to enquire of the learned there, and to consult with the
Pope: now he tells us that this scruple is an effect engendered in them, by the
resolution of those Learned, and the peremptory Sentence of their Pastor. Et
pergit vobiscum Papa perplexe loqui! Does the Pope breed scruples in their
minds which consult him? He has Priuilegium infirmitat is says Canus) and
cannot err; therefore his resolution should remove all doubts, cause none;
should settle the conscience, not startle it.

96 But take it either way, either as a cause moving, or an effect succeeding;
it bewraies in both a singular disloyalty in the affection. Did the scruple
cause the enquiry and consultation? That argued alienated dispositions; for
true love obeies, disputes not; yeeldes, and doubts not. David noted it in his
Subjects, in auditu auris, they no sooner Psalm. 18. 44. Den^t. and ^gra ca. 69.
1. John. 5. 3.
heard, but obeyed him. Omnia charitati facilia, Love makes all things light,
says S. Augustine: and therein is S. John's speech made good, that our Lords
Commandments are not grievous. The weight of an Iniunction is not so much in
the Vbi supra.
Object as in the Subject. Potest esse cordis affectus, cui nil grave sit
(says the same Father) There may be such an affection Matthew. 11. 28
in the heart, which may make a Yoke easy, and a Burden light^ such an
unwillingness again there may be, John. 6. 60.
that Durus est hic sermo, shall be pronounced upon a commandment, be it never
so easy.

97 The holy Ghost notes it, that when Jeremy willed the Jews to put their
necks under the Yokes of Nebuchadnezar, they which made a scruple, and (upon
that scruple) in quired of some Prophets, whether they should serve him or no,
God himself does, pronounce both them that moved Ierem. 27. 12.
the doubt, to be authors of their own misery, and those Prophets that
dissuaded them, to be liars in themselves, and not authorized by him. Much
more when a Christian King requires a bond of Obedience from his native
Subjects, only for his Temporal indemnitie and securi tie: In that case
(bl^nch it as they will) every d^ubtful inquiry is an Impostume of
Disloyalty; it is not a (...) of Conscience, it is a (...) at the hea^: which
because those doubting Catholics could not (...) (for a potsheard, though it
be guilt, will show it self to be earth) and yet were loath to bewray it, they
t^ke Sanctu^ P^o. 26. 13.
(...) at Rome, as inquiring of that Oracle, thereby to cover their wilful
refusal, under the pretense of the Popes Ne gatiue Resolution; that so they
might answer, when they were called to the OATH, We are willing to doe^t, bu^
our chief Pastor has forbid us, and thinks it unlawful. Sic Coelum, non
animum mutant: The (...) they carried out, returned with them.

98 Was this scruple an effect? and did it follow upon the Resolution of those
Learned, and the Popes Breue? then is it worse, because now it is Armata
impietas, Disobedience authorized. As for those chiefest learned (as he
in^itles them) they are all but one Bellarmine (for ought that appears to the
world) whose opinion in this case, what it is, his (...) manifests, and the
Apology has discussed it. Learned he is, his works do show it; and yet he
that should say they are more painful then learned, should do him ^o wrong,
no^ judge of them (...). This we are (...), that as learned as he, and better
minded then he, are of a con^arie judgment to him for the Princes immuni^ie
from the Popes Souereignty, as will appear when we come to his Let^er.

99 But the Popes Brene, that is a Persian Decree, and his Interdixit, an (...)
dixit. It may not be disputed, much less dissauow^d. In this very case, Et si
Regum Iura peruertat (^aith a Jesuit) though he pervert the Laws of Kings,
Az^rius Jesuit.
either by sinister const^uctions, or pri^y subornations; prey for him they
may; judge of him they may not; obey him they must. Now this reliance
vnrepealable (though he call it in the Catholics, a scruple of Conscience) yet
is it not in them, thus tied, a vassalage of slavery? and in the Pope, thus
binding them (look to himself) an oultrecuidance of Tyranny? and, in respect
of Kings, a license for disloyalty in their Subjects, and the Allumettes of
Treason to their persons? For what greater slavery, then if Popes carry
troops to hell, yet men must follow them, and not argue with them? So says
Boniface the Archbishop of Mentz: and Boniface. apud Great. d, 40.
what more dreadful instabilitie to Kings, then to enact Laws for their
Subjects, to try and tie their Allegiance, and a foreign Countermand must be
sent to free them, and affright them from Obedience?

100 A second stay, which holds him so long in this Preface (he calls it the
third point) is that speech in the Apology, that it argued Gods blessing upon
the devised OATH, that so many Popishly affected, did take the OATH: This he
trips at, and gives his reason, That if it be a blessing, it must be so; first,
to the takers, which are of two sorts, either in act, which are sworn already;
or in desire, which wish they might, but dare not. The first have no outward
blessing of Liberty, for they are still imprisoned; if inward blessing of
Comfort, he knows not: but to the other, it is the greatest pressure of
Conscience, and angaration of mind, that ever befell them; for that oppression
exceeds all other, either Corporal for pains, or worldly for loss.

101 Indeed the the trouble of Conscience is a fearful vexation: but the next
that comes to it (because it is a mental work) is the trouble in answering a
Cauelling Sophister; who having some remnants of common-places, wherein he is
perfect (like one ready to be drowned, that lays hold of any thing, though a
rush or stick) snatcheth at words, to give vent to his notes, neither well
couched, nor properly applied.

102 His majesty concluding, as the Scripture directs, and as man may judge
Gods approbation by an outward and unexpected success; that so ma^y of the
Clergy and La^tie, (diversely affected in Religion) did take the OATH, whereby
he was secured of their allegiance, and they freed from his ie^lousie, whom his
M^iestie might otherwise have suspected, (because there is no such alienation,
as that which is caused by difference in Religion) calls this success, GODS
BLESSING: for multiplication, whether of wealth or people, is a benediction;
and therefore in Scripture often conjoined. Of Just Job, says the wicked
spirit, Benedixist^, and creuit possessio. Of the same man, I^b. 1. 10. Job.
42. 12.
says the Holy spirit, the Lord BLESSED his last days, for his substance and
Family INCREASED. Of all the faithful the Ps^lmist pronounces it, He BLESSED
them, Psalm. 107. 38.
and they MVLTIPLIED exceedingly.

103 In the MVLTITVDE of a People is the honor of the King, sait^ Solomon,
because his strength lies in them. But if (as David his Father described some)
they be Pro. 14. 28.
(...) contradictionis, a muttering and a disloyal people; Filij alien^,
mentientes, and claudicantes, of estranged affections, Psa. 18. 43 44. etc.
dissembling tongues, false hearts; the King might then say (with the Prophet)
multiplicasts Gentem. non multiplicasti La^tiam; the more the worse: for it is
Populus voluntarius, Esa. 9 3.
or as the Hebrew has it, Populus deuotionum (we see it in Gedeons Army)
which makes d^em fortitudinis (^aith Psalm. 110. 3
the Psalmist) that gives courage to the Kings mind, and strength to his
battles; which words the vulgar has left out.

104 Now God having blessed his Majesty with an accrument of a great and
mighty Nation; but finding with all, that rule in Vegetius to be true, that it
is not numerus but virtus, not multitude but Loialtie, which in time of exi
gence must prevail; to assure himself that his Subjects, will be neither
filij Ephraim a saint-hearted people, with their bows bent, ready to turn
their backs upon him, Psalm. 78. 9.
fail him at his most need; nor filij Belial, a false-hearted people, either
vilifying his person (as some did Saul's at 1. Saui. 10. 27.
his first entrance) or turning their weapons against him, as David was served,
both by the son of his loins, and 2. Sam, 15. 12.
his great Councellor of State; the rather having been already in David's Case,
affrighted with the bloody hands of strange Children, whose mouth talked of
Vanity, and their right hand was the right hand of iniquity. He devised this
OATH Psalm 144.
for a pledge of his assurance, for abond of their allegiance, which
accordingly succeeded; because what he hoped, happened; yea, more then he
expected. For many unrequired, came and showed themselves to be Populus
voluntarius, FREELY offering to take the OATH; and this the King truly calls
a BLESSING of God upon the devise.

105 For mortal men must judge the best of Gods proceedings by outward happy
successes; and what more happy to Kings, then a sure est^blishment in their
Th^oanes? and none surer among men, then inuestiture, confirmed by Conuenant
and OATH. For David was the King of Israel, even while he was in Hebron; but
when the Tribes came and passed their Covenant with him of Allegiance, t^en,
and not before, he calls himself a King established, and exalted, which he
only attributes unto Gods blessing. And 2. Sam 5. (...). 3. Verse. 12. Apol.
Lat. pa. 4 lin. 3.
that this was his Majesty's only meaning, the Latin translation cleeres it by
the word fortunauit, arguing thereby, that is was a blessing outward and
visible.

106 Now what has the Commonplace of the Conscience Grief to do with this
blessing, that is, this event thus fortunately succeeding? No more then it had
before to Numb. 12.
do with the aduerb ONLY, saving that of a word of exaltation he would make a
Tragedy of Angariation. Wherein to answer him once for all; First, if the
Catholics (as he calls them) have vexed Consciences, it is no marvel, in two
respects; for Idolatry being mixed with Superstition, and Superstition never
void of fear, (because, as it suppo seth there be many Gods, so it wishes
th^re were none) Plut. de Superstit. Vincen. aduer. Here.
fear must needs work a vexation of the mind: but Heresy is Idolatry,
(says Vincentius) for so many self conceits, are so many Gods, yea, the
basest kind of Idolatry (says Saint Augustine,) this, adoring the woks of
men's Deveia relig. cap. 38.
hands, the other, worshipping fancies of their own brains.

107 Again, where the mind has no certain stay for her Vltima resolutio, in
matters and cases of Faith and Conscience, there must neceslarily follow a
miserable vexation; which is the Case of those Catholics, whose dependence for
Resolution, must ^est upon the supreme Pastors determination, then which what
^s more uncertain? For what one Pope decrees, another disalowes. It is
observed of some, that from the time of Stephanus Sixtus, it has been the
custom of Popes, that the succeeding Bishops, Acta Specul. Pontisi
priorum aut infringerent, aut omnino tollerent, would either narrowly impale,
or v^terly repeal their Predecessors Decrees. And will any call that
Conscience, that has this Dependence? Our Sovereign King has given it the
right name, when he says, That Conscience not grounded upon (...). pa. 18.
sure knowledge, is either an ignorant fancy, or an arrogant vanity: and what
resolved comfort can be in either of these?

108 Secondly, if pressure of conscience may serve for good Plea of Recusancie
to Princes Laws, there is nether malefacton for crime, nor Heretic for
schism (never so great) but will make that his Apology against any Censure.
The making of Laws, and the execution thereof, must depend upon the
Magistrates will directed by Gods word, not upon other men's Consciences,
whether tender as unresolved, or pecuish, as never satisfied.

109 Thirdly, the answer may be with that of our Math. 6. 23.
Savior, If the light which is within you be darkness, how great is that
darkness? because it is with the Conscience of man, as with the Eye of the
body: be the object never so bright and visible, if there be in the Eye any
thing which may Ferus in ill^m ^cum.
impeach the sight, either mist, or dust, or lime (which one of their own
writers very elegantly does allegorize) either fancies of their own brain
(which is Caligo tenebrarum in this life, and dusketh the eyes of the
understanding to a man's perdition, for if our Gospel be yet hid, it is hid to
them that are lost;) or wordly delights of honor and wealth, 2. Cor. 4. 4.
(for that is Puluis pigmentarius, the merchants dust, which tickleth the eyes,
and blindes the sight of the wisest) or Envy Cani. 3. 6.
by Emulation, or prejudice of affection, or wilfulness Deuteronomy. 16. 19.
by opposition, which like lime torments the eye, and peruerts the judgment
concerning the Object; where lies the fault then?

110 If the Jews to this day behold not what they should, nay what they might;
but whatsouer is spoken of Christ (though never so demonstratiuely) they do
reject it, because they conceive it not; Is it (says S. Paul) because the
veil is not removed from Moses face? or that the Law is still Typical? Nay,
that is gone, but the veil is now spread, by their own wilfulness, over
their own hearts. Such is the Conscience of those Catholics whom he
bemoaneth; who either led by their own conceit (obstinate by some former
impression) or misled, what with future hopes buzzed into their ears, or by
present terrors of Churches Censure, or relying upon the Pope, as the Jews
upon Moses (though these last have the better warrant) do name that to be
Conscience, which is but Error; and angariation of spirit, which is naught else
but peevishness. The issue, either of superstitious fear, or malignant
opposition, or slavish dependence, for to be grieved with that which is good,
is not weakness, but wickedness.

111 To a corrupt stomach, even the lightest meats are burdensome; but cleanse
it, and then it will easily concoct, and orderly digest the strongest food: So
to the unclean and vnpure, nothing is clean; for even their minds 2. Cor. 3.
14. 15 Tit. 1. 15.
and consciences are defiled (says the Apostle;) but rectify and cleanse the
Conscience, Et lapides isti panes fient, quoth S. Bernard, that which now
pincheth for a pressure, will pass for a Comfort. And so the conclusion shall
be for this Bern. in Cant.
point of Conscience, which (as his Maieslie once well obsetued (...). 21. 15.
many p^attle of, but few feel. If any which hau^ taken the OATH, be tormented
in mind for abiuring that unjust claim of the Pope, it is not Conscience but
fancy that a^slicts them; without reason on their parts, o^ occasion of ours.
It is not the Statute which must bear the blame but either their own
inconstant affections, variing in themselves; or their inthralled judgments
ouerawed by the Pope; or hopes, or fears, whispered in by others, raising a
storm where there was a settled quietness.

112 For them which are to take it, if they refuse it, the penalty is before
them, their conscience is free. But his Majesty (no doubt) will be ware of
them, and the State observe them as men branded by the Apostle, seduced with
the error of Balaams wages, and penshing in the contradiction of Corah and
Dathan. 2. Pet. 2.


113 The Censurer goes on, to show, that as not the Takers, so not the
Exhibiters of this Oath can account it a Blessing; and that for two reasons:
First because whereas they think hereby to assure the King of his Subjects
allegiance, they rather make them to grow desperate: for when their Consciences
tell them they have taken an unlawful Oath; they are more exasperated against
their Sovereign, then before; this grief of their working in them an auersion
of heart, no fastness of loyalty to his Majesty: for they that will upon
passion swear, will, upon a secondpassion, break out against that which they
have sworn: and for ex^mple he cities the story of Count Iulians passion,
Numb. 34. Secondly, this Imposition of an Oath is a Scandal active, for it
forces men with repugnance of their Conscience to s^are; which is a sin
reciprocal, both in the Taker and in the Exhibiter, but especially in the last
Number. 35.

114 Thus you see how this one word Bless has cased his note book of three
Common-places; Angariation of Conscience, Enforcement to desperation, and
giving Scandals. All borrowed from Allens Apology; and either join them, or
sever them, neque Coelum neque Terram attingunt; Lucian.
according to the Proverb. As they sin^ not very fitly with that word in the
Apology, so in general they are extrauagant from all Divinity and Policy Of
Conscience we have already spoken; Now for Desperation. First, even in Policy;
Are severe Laws not to be made? Or being made, the severity to be abated, for
fear that some (either froward or dissolute) will either fall into despair of
mind, or ^ush into some desperate act? Hoc est terrere pietatem, says Epist.
50.
S. Augustine, this were to affright Justice, and cross S. Paul's doctrine, who
tells us, that the Magistrate carries not the Romans 13. 4.
swo^d in vain. Jn vain he should carry it, if he would be afraid of every
terror.

115 It was the furious fancy of the Donatists; rather then they would be
forced from their schismatic opinions, in a desperate rage, either to lay
violent hands upon themselves; or (if they were strong enough, and could make
their party good) to put them of the contrary opinion, either to torment, or
to death: but this stated not the Church from compelling them (notwithstanding
their furious courses) by rigourous Laws, either to unite themselves, or bear
the penalty; little regarding their threats, or Acts of Desperation; which
Rigor the same Father calls Mercy, because by it many of them were reclaimed
from their error, Aug. vbi supra
and in that Church willingly gave thanks for their conversion, to which they
were unwillingly, and by rigor drawn.

116 But for Divinity; are their Catholics no better instructed by their
Ghostly Priests? Then, if they may not do (as in Israel, when here was no
King) every man what Judge. 17. 6.
is good in his own ^ies; out, because they take their Sovereign to be
austerus homo, severe in his government, as Luc. 19. 21.
one that takes a strict account of his servants; presently they must break
out into a desperate Rebellion, and the watchword to be, Nolumus hunc regnare?
Belike with them Verse. 14.
Lenity must breed Insolent Treasons, (whence else came that of the Priests?)
and Severity must work Desperate Martial.
Treasons; and thence came the Powder Plot. Nobis non licet esse tam disertis,
qui Musas colimus seueriores: We English Boz^s, Staplet. Allen, (...). 1. Pet.
2. 18.
contemptible Divines (so the Romanists account us) have thought S. Peter's
Divinity to be better, when he exhorts Servants to their Masters (much more
Subjects to their Sovereign) to be buxome and obedient with all fear, not
only to the kind and courteous, but also to the froward and implacable: For were
there no rigor, there should be no trial of Christian patience: the
Philosopher could say, Imperia dura si tollas, Seneca.
quid virtus erit?

117 So that, admit his Majesty (by his Laws) were more severe; true
Catholic Divinity teaches men, either (by submissiue duty) a ready
obedience to them, if they think them lawful: or if not, but either through
weakness they cannot, or repugnancie of Conscience they dare not be so
persuaded, then to endure the penalty with all humble patience: for that is
thanks worthy, if a man for conscience sake Petrus vbi supra.
toward God, endure grief wrongfully, because our Master did so; Who when he
suffered, threatened not, but committed his cause to him that judges
righteously. But belike some Desperate Treachery is hatching, wherewith this
Boutifeaux is acquainted: what else it his meaning, -- vt precibusque minas tam
fortiter addat,
Plut Lysand.
that thus stripping his Foxes case, he now shows himself in his Lions skin?
and from his Suppliant Petition, to threaten some Act of Desperation? even as
HE once said, who having his hand on his sword, when entreaty could not
prevail, cried, At hic faciet. This threat of his (and let his example Count.
Julian. ex Hisp. Hist
be marked, of no less moment then translating an Empire, upon a desperate
passion) may be a Caveat to the State: and so an end.

118 The other about the Scandal Active, is as frivolous and impertinent as
the former; for he frames it (as the rest) upon a false surmise. Does the
Magistrate enforce any to the OATH against his Conscience? No, but if any plead
Conscience, the Magistrate endeavors to inform him, and rectify it: if then
he refuse, the penalty ensues; which, he that knows what Conscience is
indeed, will rather endure (though to the loss of life) then venture upon the
check of that in-dwelling and vpbraiding witness. it argues they have but a
Leprous Conscience (as his Matestie (...). pa. 15.
well calls it) that dread more the Censure of a Civil Bench, then the
fearful daily Doom of that in bred and inseperable Remembrancer.

119. But in this point of Scandal, will this great Di^ine vouchsafe to learn
a lesson from their own Schooleman Aquinas.
! Is the exacting of this OATH a Scandal Active in our Magistrates? Then is it
Passive in their Catholics; for it is no Scandal given, if it be not taken.
If their Consciences be offended at it, they are (says Aquinas) either In 1.
Job. 2. 10.
simply ignorant, or wickedly malicious, and the last rather; for he that is
well instructed, or truly sanctified, can take no offense, though given never
so openly: which he confirms by that place of David. Great is their peace
which l^ue thy L^w, Et non est illis SCAND ALVM: He Psalm. 119. 165.
which truly loves God, neither does scandalize by sin^ing, nor is scandalized
by repining, quicquid ei fiat; because love endures all things, and therefore
whatsoever is imposed, Compatitur, and tollerat, he suffers, and frets Aquin.
vbi sapra.
not: he bears, and rebels not.

120. But what if there be none, or few that make such Conscience, or take such
Offense as he speaks of? but that the ease he with them as once with some
Donatists, Qui nobis quotidie confitentur, (says S. Augustine) many of them
Epist. 50.
confessing, that they would long since have been conformable to the State,
but that they were ouer-awed by those, Inter quos si vnum verbum pro Catholica
dicerent, If they should speak but one word of this submitting themselves to
the Kings will, Et ipsi, and domus eorum euerterentur, if not actually (as with
the Donatists) yet spiritually: they are threatened to be Apostataes, to have
renounced their first Faith; and to be no members of the Catholic Church of
Christ. It was Balaams fault (and let the Supreme Pastor (as they call him) for
his Breues; and Bellarmine, the chiefly learned (as they style him) for his
letters, look to it) branded upon him in an everlasting Record, for a
perpetual remembrance, Quia docebat Bala^c mittere SCAN DALVM coram filijs
Israel. Apoc. 2. 1^.


121. Now at last he shuts up his Myndian Gate, his long Counter-Preface:
wherein, if the Reader observe him (as if he had been brought up in
Lambs-lease) he seems for the most part very tenderly affected, and pitsfullie
complaining of the hard measure which the Catholics endure by our Laws; but
above all, this last OATH of abiuring the Popes authority in Deposing Princes:
as if the Church wherein he lives, and the Religion which he professes, did
neither practice, nor allow such enforcing Pressures upon men's Consciences: If
it do, then Hypocrita Matthew. 7.
eijce Trabem, and medice teipsum: when their Inquisition is suppressed, then
let them pinch at this OATH, and our Ioh. 2.
Statutes: otherwise (as the Poet said) Nil mihi vis, at vis cuncta licere
tibi? Martial.

What should they compel, and not we?

122. This he is guilty of, and therefore by an anticipating Concession he
grants it true, but preuents an Objection, which we might, and have often justly
made; that if they by their (more then Hellish) Tortures, force men (as they
do) both innocent and ignorant (even against the Law of Nations) Travelers,
Merchants, strangers, to renounce and abjure the persuasion of their Faith;
Much more may our Sovereign, by OATH, enforce (under penalty) his native
Subjects, to abjure the Popes Temporal authority in deposing Kings.

123. To which he makes answer, both negative, and untrue: negative, that they
enforce none to swear, if they suppose they do it with repugnance of
Conscience: (no more do we; for if any be required, and take the OATH, we
accept it: if heresuse, we press him not: if he swear, he does it willingly,
(and the words of the OATH are so) we judge not the heart: the ouert-act and
the word uttered is the utmost that man's judgment can reach unto.) Untrue; for
if the party conuented refuse to abjure his opinions (notwithstanding he plead
the repugnancie of his Con^ience) they put him to Tortures, and the most
extreme violence that flesh can endure, or malice invent. In which kind, Rome
(both Heathen and Popish) has been noted most exquisite. If, thus tormented,
he renege and deny his profession, can the Inquisitors be persuaded he does
it without reluctance of Conscience? But if, thus mangled, he resist (as the
Apostle speaks) ad Cruorem, even to Blood, Heb. 12. 4.


Tam bibit HVNC auide, quam bibit ante merum, was sung long since in Rome of a
great Ruler therein: To death he must.

124. And this the Jesuit confesses and answers: First, affirmatively, that
THEY may lawfully do so. Secondly, negatiuely, that WE may not do it. His
principal reason, for affirming, is, because the Catholic Church has Ius
acquisitum, an ancient right over Heretics, in that they were baptized into
her, and after left her.

125. It is an excellent liberty, to encounter an adversary never extant, and
to argue upon Conclusions never granted: he takes it pro concesso, that the
Church of Rome is the Catholic Church; which we deny; and the chiefest
learned on their side, as yet, could never euict our denial: for whether they
take Catholic for Universal, as containing all the members of Christ's Church,
militant and triumphant within it, Rome (being but a particular City, and the
true Jurisdiction confined within a limited Diocese or Province) cannot be it:
or take Catholic for the profession of the true Faith (as S Cyprian, for that
purpose, calls that Ep. 55. ad Cornel.
of Africa, the Catholic Church) neither can the Romish Church be, in that
respect, so entitled. For what was said of the Church of the Jews in her
corrupt state, is too true of Rome: Her gold is mixed with dross: and She,
whose faith Esa. 1. 23.
was plight to Christ, is become an Adulteress.

126. And if Vincontius his rule be true, that it Only is to be accounted
Catholic Doctrine, Quod semper, vbique and ab ^irinen. aduersus Haer.
omnibus creditum est, neither shall Rome be proved Catholic, nor England
Heretic. When either of these is soundly determined, then let him plead her
Ius acquisitum. So truly called indeed as Rome now stands possessed thereof,
per vsurpationem non bonafidei, having achieved it by fraud and ^ine force,
where she has interest: (and this is HER Torment, that in England, where she
once had that Ius acquisitum, awing our Princes, enuassaling our Prelates,
exhausting our substance, and selling our dignities, it is now Ius amissum.)

127. For that right which the true Catholic Church of Christ, and every
visible part thereof, within her compass, respectively, has against
Heretics, either for their conversion or chastisement, is Ius innatum, bred
within it, and inseperable from it: for no sooner was there a Church designed,
but this right was annexed: Semen Multeris conteret Genesis 3.
Caput Serpentis: as the enmity for contradiction, so the right for
suppression, is native.

128. If the challenge of Acquisition be in respect of Baptism (which is
Allens claim, and this Page of his does sooth him in it) as it is an injury
to our Church, so is it a blasphemy against Christ. Neither the Spiritual
Mystery, nor the prescribed form, nor the intended effect of Baptism,
directing any way, or making us in any thing liable to the Church of Rome.
First, in Baptism for the Mystery; there is an Indument and a stripping, which
the ancient Church reduced to two words, Credo, Abrenuntio: in the first, there
is the putting on of our Lord Jesus Christ: For as many as are Romans 13. 14.
^al. 3. 25.
baptized, have put on Christ: First, as a Lord, acknowledging no other Master,
whose voice to hear, whose doctrine to rely upon, but only his. Secondly, as
Jesus, assuring themselves, that there is no other name under Heaven whereby
they may be saved. Thirdly, as Christ, as well their anointed King, submitting
themselves to his will, giving their names to his wars, and swearing
themselves his Subjects: as also their anointed Priest, resting in his One
Sacrifice, as the Only sufficient. Here Is no mention of Romes Church. In the
stripping part, they renounce and forsake the works of the Devil and Flesh:
and into that part, indeed, (if with Saint Paul) Heresies be marshalled, Gal.
5. 20.
Rome (the nurse of them) is renounced in Baptism.

129. For the Form, it is by our Savior appointed to be in the name of the
Three Persons of the indivisible Trinity, Mat. 28. 10.
and so it is performed; neither of Cephas the surnamed 1. Cor. 1.
Rock, nor of Paul though a great Apostle, much less of Peter's successor,
that bears Paul's Name. For the End, they which are baptized, are thereby made
both the Sons Gal. 3. 26.
of God, by adoption and grace, invested with an Inheritance everlasting; and
Priests to God, to Offer and slay; to Offer Apoc. 1. 5. Mal. 1. and Cyril.
Alex. in eum.
that mundam oblationem (which Cyril expounds (...), the clean and unbloody
Sacrifice of Prayers, and Thanks, ^o Slay themselves, mortifying their
affections Romans 12 1.
and lusts.

130. And what makes all this to the Ius acquisitum of the Romish Church over
the^ that are Baptized? yea, though they were Baptized in the midst of Rome?
unless they can soundly prove it to be the Only, true, and unerring Church;
and that it neither has swarued, nor does add to that faith and doctrine,
which they that are truly Baptized are bound (by the Scriptures) to profess in
Baptism?

131. Therefore we, having as good cause to be persuaded of our Church, as well
in assurance of Gods promise, truth, and presence within it, as her just right
for suppressing Heresies, make no doubt, but that against them of Rome, we may
as lawfully proceed, by compulsarie means, and by this OATH, as they against us
by the like.

132. HE denies it both by Reason and Example; Reason, because they had
possession long before us: Example, because never the like Oath was exacted
before (...) in this Nation, or elsewhere by other Kings.

133. Possession for hold, and Prescription for time, may be Pleas in Civil
Courts, but no sound Arguments in case of Religion; for the first may be a
Claim by intrusion (which is their Case that plead for Rome) and the other the
antiquity Cypr. ad Pom^
of error, (for so is prescription without verity) therefore when truth
appears, let custom yield to truth, was the conclusion of a Council. But
what is all this (if it were Conc. Carthag. apud Cyrpi.
true) to the OATH of Civil Allegiance? Does it exact of them a renouncing of
their Baptism? or their opinions in Religion, concerning Faith and Doctrine?

134. Yea, but there was never the like OATH here, or elsewhere exacted: If he
mean for Temporal Allegiance in the submissiue part thereof, it is an
untruth; our Chronicles are full of Examples to that purpose; and there is no
Christian Prince, but upon occasion, inforceth the like upon his Servants and
Subjects. A Friar of their own mentions Sigeb. vbi supra.
Iuramentum fidelitatis to Kings 600. years ago. If in the Exclusive part,
for the abiuring of the Popes temporal right (whether directly or indirectly)
over Kingdoms and Nations; if other Princes do not the like, we judge them
not: perhaps it is in some of them an infused persuasion, that it is not
lawful; in others peradventure it is a violent restraint, if gladly they
would, but cannot be suffered.

135. If with us never the like before, (suppose he say truly) first, look to
the Motive; it was upon an occasion (we must repeat it, though it vex him)
Singular from all Examples. Secondly, the Pope was never so insolently busy
with any Nation, nor his vassals so unnaturally malicious with this Land
heretofore, as of late with Our Sovereigns and Kingdoms; which, but for him,
our Gracious King might enjoy with a Peace more continual and happy then
Solomon or Augustus. And so having done with his long Preface (which is like a
flash of Lightning before a Thunder) we now come to the Thunderbolt itself
(as his Majesty well calls it) I mean the Breues (not Musical, but (...)) of
Paulus Quintus: wherein he agrees with him of his own name in the Acts, Qui
spirauit minas, thundered Act. 9 1.
out threats against the Disciples of our Lord: but differs from him in that
very case in some respects.

136. For first, the other did it before he changed his name: while Saul, he
breathed his minaces against Christ: being Paul, he preached the faith of
Christ, and Obedience to Princes. This man, while he was Burghesi, was in
effect Paul, that is, (as the name signifies) a still silent man; for ought we
read of, he never breathed word for Christ: no Of (...).
sooner does he change his name (he is Saul indeed, his throat an open
Sepulcher) but he threatens and thunders Paul signifies a Sepulcher.
against Christ: if not the Messiah, our Lord the anointed, yet against our
King the Lords anointed. Secondly, the Apostle was but a Commissioner
subordinate, under the Highpriests, for Gods truth (as he thought:) this
High Priest (being the chief Commander himself) in his own name sentenceth,
and for his own sake pursues, and in his own claim, as he pretends. Saul,
while he was striking, was Act 9. 4.
stricken into his Conversion, Faxit Paulo huic; yet it is folly to wish where
there is no hope.

137 Retractation argues modesty (says S. Augustine) and is a preamble to
conversion: Defense of a fault, doubles Retract. lib. 1.
it (says Philo) and is a forerunner of obduration; which is the Popes sin,
in setting up this Epistler, as his Vindicator: and because it might be [Labra
Lactucas] semblable Hieronym. ad Chromat.
to the former, whom before he used as his Vulcan, to fashion his Thunderbolts
(the force whereof was broken by the Apology) he now makes him his The^sites,
by a shifting and shameless Libell, to rail down that Apology.

PARAGRAPH. 2.
Number. 1. For, as if he were borne among the Lindians, Strabo Herod^t. Lactan.
lib. 1.
who used to offer their sacrifices with execrable maledictions, and did think
his Book (as they their holy Rites) to be profaned and unacceptable, if at
unawares a good word should fall from him: after he has begun his Second
Paragraph, and in one Section, contrived the Sum of the Popes two Breues,
presently for 16. whole Numbers together, as if he had an Impostume of
venomous filth ranckling within him, and nothing could burst it but the Blessed
Memory of QUEEN ELIZABETH'S Sacred name; upon a brief mention thereof, he
disgorgeth out of his filthy throat, by his devilish pen, the basest and most
barbarously loathsome contumelies, against HER, of WHOM to speak as she
deserves, I am unable; and in what I can I am unworthy.

2. SHE was a daughter of the blood royal, borne to the Hos. 9. 11.
Crown (in the Prophets words, from the Birth, from the Womb, from the
Conception:) a Princess advanced to the Crown in apparent right, and by
uncontrollable succession: an Imperial Monarch, wearing the Crown with most
absolute command.

3. Soladomum and tantas seruauit foemina seeds: a famous Virgil.
Empress, or rather indeed the very Impreso of fame, blazoned out, not by
homebred favorites, but by foreign travelers and writers, before and since
her death (yea even her enemies, both for Religion and war) to be in her
Osorius. Bizarus. Mercur. Gallob. etc.
time, and for her Sex, the Star of Souereignty; the mirror of Principality;
a terror where enmity; the Load stone of Majesty, drawing to HER Ambassadors
Christian, not Christian only for enteruiew and Salutation; in truth, for view
and admiration. For when they had satisfied themselves with her sight (and
hardly could they be satisfied) what Sabaes Queen once said of King Solomon,
they all 1. Reg 10.
concluded of HER, that which often falls not out (says the Orator) their eyes
had overcome their ears, and truth Tully de Repub. infrag.
had out-striptfame; report was less then verity, and her renown far short
of her desert.

4. For had SHE been Royal in Blood Only (and that is a blessedness to a
Kingdom, when the Prince is the Son Eccles. 10. 17.
of Nobles, says Solomon a King) and not Prudent in Government, nature might
have claimed the honor, but the State been weakly managed. It is the
Prudence of a Prince which swaieth the Scepter, as the stern guides the ship:
Histor. lib. (...).
and Prudent she was, Etiam supra Sexum, says Thuanus, and he no Protestant:
or had she been sagely Prudent, and not Religious, her directions had been no
better then Aristotle's Politikes, paganish and profane; for many heathenish
Kings have excelled in them: but so Religious she was, that the way she made
in this Land Ad Euangelium Regni, for the Gospel of the Kingdom, made her
Realm to be accounted Regnum Euangelii the Kingdom of the Gospel: So Lib. 13.
much says Meteran, and more then that, and yet he no English man: In brief,
had she been Religious alone, and not endowed with others virtues, gracing her
as a woman, furnishing her as a Queen, devout she might have been, but
retired; her Counselors Grave, but not at all directed, perhaps often thwarted;
her people many, but in peace unarmed, in war dishartned.

5 Therefore, besides those two supporters, of a State, as Nazianz.
Nazian. calls them, which were in her most absolute, Prudence and Fortitude;
that for direction, this for defense or annoyance as occasion served: her other
graces of mind (either suting with her Sex, or fitting for an Empress) were
so visible, so eminent in her, so innumerable for the variety, so,
inexpressible for the dignity (says Bizarus an Italian) that as Demosthenes
once spoke (...) etc. All her actions being royally virtuous, Histor. Genues.
lib. 3. Demosth. de Corona.
virtuously religious, and Religiously wise; her Wisdom seazoned her Religion,
her Religion sanctified her Policies, her Policies graced her Descent, all of
them together wrought her Immortality: and her Immortality is accompianed
with Renown upon earth, and Reward in Heaven.

6 The first; Records in print, Foreign and Domestical, do proclaim. Omit
all but two, as most fitting for this place. An absolute Queen she was, who
is thus basely traduced; a most absolute Monarch shall speak for her: a
Railing Jesuit he is that thus reuiles HER; as Railing Priests of his own
Religion, shall testify of HER.

7 The foremost, HIS SACRED MAJESTY, who, by his place, knew what a Queen
should be, and by his experience knew what a Queen she was, when he had
neither cause to flatter her, nor need to fear her, writes Ba^. (...). in
praesat. ad lectorem sol. pe. nult. a.
thus of her. In England reigns a lawful Queen, who has so long, with so
great wisdom and felicity governed her Kingdoms, as I must in true
sincerity confess, the like has not been read nor heard of, either in our
time, or since the days of the Roman Emperor Augustus.

8 In the second place, hear Balaams Priests, like Balaam himself blessing
against his will, and beyond his Numb. 23.
hire) uttering a truth, even perforce; Our Noble Elizabeth Quod lb. page 274.
Prince Paregall, and Paramount, and Paragon the so, admired at Saba of Europs
England; as also, the world has wondered at her more then ordinary Endowments
of Princely nature: giving place to none of former, present, or future times,
persons, or ages, for, and in all points attending at the gates of Royal
Honor, and throane of Regal Majesty.

9 For her Reward in heaven; if restraints of liberty, and pursuites of malice
for Gods truth, inflicted through Jealousy, and endured with singular
patience; if a release from them unexpected, followed with honors and
blessings, neither interrupted by others, (whether Treasons or Invasions) nor
blemished by her self with vice Criminal or continued; if life shut up after
length of days, and a full age, with a courage defying Death; with Prayers
imploring mercy: with Faith assuring her Prayers; with testimonies witnessing
her assurance; can be preceding conjectures, or rather evidences of
unspeakable happiness, we may safely conclude, that SHE which passed through
a Crown of Thorns, (borne so constantly) to a Crown of Gold (worn so
tryumphantly) has now gotten the Third of glory, to enjoy for-euer-lasting.

10 For can we think, that he which gave her patience to be an humble
Confessor; crowned her humility with honor, to be a Royal Queen; Seconded
her Honor with wisdom, to be a Careful Governor; grounded her wisdom upon
religion, to be a DEFENDER OF THE FAITH; adorned her Religion with
incomparable graces, to be an example of virtue for her own to follow, and a
Load-starre for other Nations to admire: that he (I say) would leave HER in
the end, to be a prey for Satan? Nay, rather, as he showed himself, at
first, to be her Father, chastising her in love; and after that, her God in
sanctifying her mind; and withal her King, in advancing her Throane; so, much
more to be her Savior, to make her an inheritor with the Saints in Heaven.

11 Now this Renowned Queen, this eternized Saint, (whose memory may for ever
be blessed) a Black mouthed Shemei, this Parsons, famous for nothing but
Capital Infamies, has defiled (I will describe him no otherwise, then their
own Priests, his own self, and his own Brother discipher him.)

12 The Priests: a Bastard by Birth, a Libellar by custom, a Factionist in
Societies an Expulst Acad^mian, rung out with Quod lib. page 236. 237.
Bells (as a carted Strumpet with pans) for a graceles Companion: a Diabolical
Macheuilian: astaine of humanity: a Corrupter of all honesty: all which and
more, (as if with shameless Ballio, he delighted to hear himself so lively
Plaut. Pseudol manifestat. pa. 106. 6.
described, he repeates with a kind of joy in another pamphlet of his own.

13 Under his own hand, a Chamelion for his Profession: a Backe-sliding
Apostata from his witnessed assent to In a paper left by him in his study.
the Articles of Religion: a perjured Intruder into Priesthood; (having once
sworn the contrary) a dissolute Libertine in choice, in Act, in maintenance.

14 By his Brothers testimony: a Fugitive with discontented Runnagates; a
viperous Complotter against his country; a Firebrand of treasonable
Combustions by pen and ^cris scrip^s ad ep^st. Ba^hon.
advice; and (which is of all o her most re-markable) a Jesuit by proxy, a
Votarie by Substitution of one of his Associates that died upon a surfeit of
figs; a Paduan Mountebancke, and an Empericall Quack-Saluer; (let not the
Pope ^nger him, he has studied Physic for the purpose; wit nesses Allen the
Cardinal, and Sixtus the Pope, say the Priests) a disdainefull Scorner of all
reproof or Council; and yet a scorned vassal by all the Popes he has
served; of an aspiring desire, but defeated of any eminency which he
expected: and, but that they use him in this kind (which is his only virtue)
as a Dog to snarle, and bite, and rage at his own Country and Nation, they
had dealt wi^h him ere this, as the old Romans with their Dogs in the
Capitol, unless they did bark, their legs should be broken; except he do
still Libell, his Pasport will quickly ^icer pro Sex. R^s.
be seal^d: The name (I say) of that Sacred Majesty, now resting from her
labors, this Canker of Youth, this Spawne of Vipers, this Slave of Satan,
(from her birth to her grave, yea, and lower then the grave) has
contumel^ously, basely, barbarously defiled with ignominious, unnatural,
beastly, and leau^ slanders.

15 And as Abishai said of Shemei, Why does this DEAD DOG -- (never Title
suited him better 2. Sam. 16 9
then that; being, even while he lives, a rotten Carcass of a poison^d Curre,
infected in his intrals, and infecting with his savor the air he breathes,
and the land where he had his first breath: a miching Curre, biting HER
behind, Honer.
when she cannot turn back: (Sic mortuo Leons rabidi insultant Canes) at
whose very look he would have fled with haste, -- Candamque remulcens,
have closed his black mouth: A Carrionly Curre, entering Virgil.
her Tomb, and exenterrating her very bowels to stanch his rage: yea, as if he
were the Porter of Hades, Carons Mastiffe, Plutoes Cerberus, he harrowes
Tartar, and (I tremble to write it) feignes with a wish, her glorified Soul,
in a ghastly Ghost to speak from HELL, Numb. 3.)

16 O Blessed Trinity, the concurrent Creator, Savior, and Sanctifier of her
Princely Soul and Body? and all you glorious Angels, which enuiron Her (now
possessed with bliss;) and all you Kings of the earth, who either admired or
loved Her while She lived, or respect your own Fame when ye are gone; can
ye endure this hellish Blasphemy, and brook these slanderous impieties in
silence, and unrevenged! Never was S. James speech verified more of any James.
3. 6.
then this Rabshekais tongue, It sets on fire the course of nature, and it
self is set on fire of Hell: the fuel whereof, being brimstone, it rages
(as you see) in burning with impartial fury, and with loathsome stench.

17. But again J say with Abishai, Why did this dead Dog thus curse my Lord
the King, our late Queen and Sovereign? What occasion was given him to revel
thus? Only a short, but pithy and worthy recordation of Her Clement government
(which is His Majesty's singular virtue, and gains HIM love with God, and
honor among the good, never to name. Her but with some preface or addition of
Princely respect) and not by the way, or from the purpose; for the Pope in the
very entrance had wept him into it, having be-blubred his first Breue with
pitiful Lamentations, for the Afflictions and Persecutions (for^ooth) which
the Catholics many years endured, for their Faith and Religion. HIS Majesty
therefore (because it must be meant in either of both their times) first
acquites Her, and lets the Pope see, that his tears, were either as a
Crocodiles (false and diss^mbled) or as a Woman's (causeless, and for fashion)
assuring him, that never Papist was punished by death for his Religion; but the
Pressures then indu^ed (in Her time) were extorted from Her by their own
misdemeanour; begun upon Pius Quintus his Proscribing her Realm,
Excommunicating her self, and authorizing her Subjects to take Arms against
Her: continued by the Apolog. page 16. 17. 18.
frequent and Hydra-headed disturbances of her State and Person; what with
foreign Invasions, domestical mutinies, private Intentions and Assaults for
Murder, with weapon, with poison, and all from Rome. And therefore, comparing
their offenses, and her punishments, (the cause, not the peine denominating
Persecution) SHE should be found a GRACIOUS PRINCE, and no PERSECVTOR.

18 These few last words (as the servants of Benhadad served the King of
Israel, Festinantes rapuerunt verbum ex ore eius) this Iebusite hastily
snatched at; and, as if he had 1. Reg. 20. 33
swallowed a Purge of Scammony, out gushes this loathsome gulf of contumelies,
filling five whole leaves with despite, disgrace, and slander of the Lords
Anointed Queen; and that (with Reverence be it spoken) even into his Sacred
Majesty's Princely face: challenging him, first, of Profaneness, for
borrowing a phrase from Heathen Writers, expressing thereby the charitable and
Christian discharge of a Kingly office, in acquitting her with her due praise
(after her death) for her perpetual memory, from that false Imputation of
being a PERSECVTOR: namely, that he had sacrificed (if he might so say, for
that he added) unto the MANES of that defunct Lady; that Apolog. ^a. 18. numb.
5.
is, had done her her right in recording her just commendation.

19 And this he proclaims for a profane Heathenish speech; as if his
Majesty had sworn By the life of Pharaoh Genes. 42. 15.
which Joseph did, and the Holy Ghost (if it were a fau lt lets it pass: and
as though Christians might not lawfully use Phrases, Metaphors, and Proverbs of
Heathen men to good purposes: which S. Hierome allows by an elegant Epist. ad
Romans Oratorem.
Allegory (out of Moses law) of taking to wife the Captive Woman, after her
nails were pared, and her hair cut: and Deuteronomy. 21. 12. De Doctrina Christiana.
S. Augustine, by allusion to the Israelites converting the Egyptian spoils to
their own use; for warrant whereof, some of the Fathers, and amongst the rest
S. Basil, have written whole Tractats.

20 Yea, does not the Holy Ghost himself so? S. Luke Act. 27. 11.
in naming the badge of the Ship (which was no essential note, if it had
pleased him to omit it) wherein S. Paul sailed, (...), which is adverbum,
Jupiters boys or sons; did he thereby allow himself, or would he derive to
Christians for a truth, that fabulous story that Jupiter had such sons; that
they were the Gods of the Sea; or taken to heaven, and made Stars, and Signs
in the Zodiac: or that the ship was the more luckie for carrying their
Pictures, which was the general opinion then received among the Idolaters?

21. Or more nearly to purpose: S. Peter, in expressing the torments of Hell,
whereinto the Angels that first fell, were cast, using the very words of
Poets, (...), 2. Pet. 2. 4.
that they were committed to chains of darkness, being cast into Tartar: did
he allow thereby that Fiction of that (...), that lowest gulf with brazen walls
and Homer. Il. (...).
iron chains described by the Poets? Or S. Paul at Athens, disputing about the
Altar erected to the UNKNOWN GOD, applying that half verse of an Heathen
Poet: (...), We are his Generation: Shall we think he Act 17. 28.
thereby meant, that we are all the offspring of that their fained Jupiter?
(for so Aratus, from whom he fetched it, understood In Phaenomen. Naz (...).
Origin contra Cells. lib. 1. Iliad. 5.
it.) Or Nazianzene, by using the Proverb of Orcigalea, or Origin, of Plutonis
Cassis, did they approve thereby of Homers Fictions, of Mineruaes playing
bopeepe with Mars under that Helmet? No: but manifestly arguing to our purpose
in hand, that good use of Poets phrases, without any challenge of
Profaneness, even in the highest points of religion may be made.

22 And therefore this Hick-scorning-mate shows him Calius, Rhod. lib. 25. and
Alex ab. Alex. gen^dier.
self to be MANES in Greek, that is (as the word was then used) a Slavish
mad-braine, thus to twit^ his Majesty, as if by Manes he meant Infernal
Spirits, or HOB GOBLINS, as he scoffingly translates the word (which indeed is
a Name and Fiction of Popish terror, invented by illuding Papists to bring
their holy water and Orizons (as Scarre bugges) in request with superstitious
ignorant people, whom they had blinded:) whereas the word MANES alone is not so
applied, either in Grammatical or Historical sense, by the most judicious
Heathens themselves except they join [Dis] unto it.

23 For as Apuleius witnesses, they present under that Name, the Souls of
those departed, which were Meliori De Socr. Demon.
meriti, as Iouis MANES in Macrobius: and so does Festus, deriuing it from the
old word MANA, which signifies Good; and therefore they which Sacrifice unto
Festus and Ma c^ob, in stat. lib. 1. cap. 3.
them, in memory of them, called them MANES, that is, Good Spirits; as
contrariwise, those which were very Bad, they called IMMANES: and never came in
Hell, but, as Rhodigin will have the word derived from manare, Lib. 9. cap. 10.
are conveyed into the bodies of men at their first conception. Take it at the
worst, it is applied to those Souls, by S. Augustines relation, whose state is
uncertain whether they deserve well or ill. Aug. de Ciuit. Dei.


24 So that, to suppose that Renowned Prince to be in Hell because that His
Majesty mentions her MANES; as it shows his ignorance, so it bewraies his
hellish troubled conscience, Quae suos patitur Manes, which ever threatens to
it self fear of cruel torments to succeed: (Nam saeus semper minatur sibi
perturbata Conscientia;) and therefore, being less Religious then Dives, who
would have kept men from thence, he will needs send others into Hell before
him: for having a selfe-gultie Soul, that he Luc. 16. 28.
is one of them that are Praescripti in hoc Iudicium, bill'd by the Devil, and
enrolled in that Catalogue of the damned, which S. Jude mentions, knowing
himself, and feeling within him, (which makes him to be so earnest with the
Jude. verse. 10.
English dead Saints to bring him to Heaven) that he has all the marks of a
Reprobate; his brain, the forge of mischief; his face, the Anuill of
Impudence; his heart, the Quod li. p. 237
Mint house of Treasons to his Country; a libelling hand rest^esse and
truthlesse; a railing tongue without measure or dis^etion; his throat an open
Sepulcher; his feet swift for bloodshed; Et interiora Impietas, his very
eutrals the Psalm. 5. 9.
Inward of Impiety: In brief, the engarbled Anatomy of a d^mned wretch,
being brand^d with Caines mark, that no man may attach him to punish him
here, as reserved by God himself to be revenged for all, by his own Genesis 4
15.
mighty hand.

25 This (...), thus guilty to himself (as if he had already conference with
the Devil, to whose King Tit. 3. 11.
dome he has beforehand sworn himself a vassal) presents QVEENE ELIZABETH'S
Ghost appearing from Hell, which never in her life committed Hellish crime, and
whose soul rests (no doubt) in Abraham's bosom Whose MANES, that is, whose
residuall memory, will both Manare and Manner by diffusion and duration; as
well ext^nd it self with glorious renown over all Nations of the known
world, as endine for perpetual Generations of succeeding age, to the worlds
end.

26 And HIS part herein, His majesty (as we see) most royally discharged, in
Sacrificing to HER memory, that is, performing this action, both kindly, as to
his Parent (so he expresses himself by the Latin word Parentars Apolog. lat.
pa. 18.
) and also in solemn manner with hearty affection, and vnseinealy; for that is
Sacrificing in the Metaphor, both by divine and humane learning.

27 And surely, (as it was said of Caesar, that in renewing Pompey his decayed
Statua, he had erected and established Plutar.
his own) his Majesty in thus recording her praise, and freeing her (being
dead) thus graciously from imputed slanders, Exegit Monumentum sibi aere
perennius, has fastened in the hearts of the true English Subjects, an
vnremooueable Horat.
Monument of his Royal Nature, and never perishing same: and may serve for a
Precedent of a most Regal disposition to all Princes of the world, not to win
reputation to themselves by blemishing or concealing the virtues of their
Antecessors.

28 In which sense (for it was no other) his Majesty might use that borrowed
phrase, (especially uttering it with a Deprecatory Parenthesis, as it were in
modesty asking leave for the passage thereof; secretly thereby insinuating,
that otherwise it was that which (among the Rhetoricians (is called Audax
Methaphora) His Majesty, I say might better use it then Parsons, who without
blushing or straining courtesy, dedicates a printed Calendar (a lying Legend
of his own) to the Saints in Heaven; whom, as if Third part of his 3. Conuers.
their bodies and souls were already there united, he calls WIGHTS of such
worthiness: and as if they could Page. 4.
literally read from Heaven to Earth (at least by reflection) he directs them
from Page to Page in his Book, that there they may read how they are iustled
out and confronted Page 7.
with English Martyrs.

29 But how will this Censuring Aristarchus interpret that place of their new
Convert of Old-castle, who in that frapling discourse of his Italicall
progress, tells, that he Iustus Baron. Epist. sacr. li. 3. ep. 14.
with his company being at Millan, among other special rare Monuments, which
they went to see, they came at last ad pussims Ambrosa iunioris MANES? Will he
translate it in his scosfing fille, to the INFERN ALL GHOST or HOB-GOBLINS of
that yoonger. Ambrose? (so that Changeling intitles Cardinal Borromaeus, whose
tomb it was.) Be it so: then Cardinals belike may go to Hell, and their
tormented Ghosts may walk: but thus the Relator will think himself abused;
for he there describes Borromee to be a man of admirable sanctity while he
lived, of more admirable grace after his death; for his MANES wrought miracles
equivalent to all SAINTS. Will he turn it to the best sense for the holy
memory or sacred monument of that Sainted Cardinal? Why then may not his
Majesty, speaking of a dead Princess (so Religious and Renowned) use the same
word for HER blessed memory, which, like that precious Oil in the Gospel,
not only with Matthew. 26.
the favor filled the whole house where it was powered, (this Land where she
lived) but the whole world with the report thereof, wheresoever HER name is
mentioned? Will he say that SHE was an Heretic, but the Cardinal a Catholic?
That vents his malice, but withal confutes his scorn and ignorance; because
thereby he confesses that MANES may be used for the memory of men departed,
who never came in Hell; unless he will reply, that Borromee was in Purgatory,
and all that while his Ghost walked. But, that he might seem with some reason
to conclude HER in Hell, he says, She walked not in the ancient ways to life,
especially those of Mortification by Prayer, Alms. deeds, Watchings, wearing
haire-cloth, and the like.

30 First, What art THOU that iudgest another man's servant, seeing that every
man shall bear his own burden! Romans 14. 4. Gal. 6. 5.
Secondly, fasting with sower countenance, prayer in open places, dole of Alms
with proclamations, are ensigns of Hypocrytes, in our Saviors judgment: and
how know Matthew. 6.
THOU, whether (her chamber being shut) she prayed in secret? Yes, and in
public too, seldom missing prayers once every day in her Closset, never
omitting the Sabbath; silent at the hearing, devout in the pronouncing of them;
enduring in others, neither absence from them, nor irreuerence at them. For her
relief of the poor of all sorts, her Almosners allowance, and privy purse,
are more fit intelligencers then such Sycophants as Parsons. Thirdly, such
outward habits of Mortification (as Jesuits term wearing of haire-cloth, and
the like) might argue 1, Reg, 21, 27.
Ahab (who went bare-soot in Sackcloth and Ashes) to be a mortified creature,
as well as the seuerest Selfe-chastising Jesuit of you all.

31 Indeed she was no Cloister-Nun. A Queen she was, and a State she had to
manage, a people to govern, and much business to attend. Bodily exercise
(says Apostle) profits nothing, but godliness, that is, sound Faith 1. Tim.
48.
^ith a good Conscience au ^les with God, and argues a mind ^uely regenerate.
The highest praise of Mortification is re^e of sin, where there are the most
objects of temp^t on. Marcet enimsi^e aduersario virtus. And therefore greater
in HER then in your vestall, and sometime, diuested S^ne and Tall. (...).
Nuns; who commanding in a Court of all dencacies and plenty (besides her
most exceeding temperance in Diet, and her du^y ^tiring her self from company,
to an assiduous, orderly and attentive reading) was of most chaste eyes and
ears, not end^ring in any (that were about her) either a light unseemly
g^sture, or a ^ciuious word.

32 Fourthly eu^h to be a King, and to govern as a King should do, is a
Mortification of it self; for that cause he is compared to the Can ^e of
Israel, which though it 2. Sam. 21. 17
shine bright, and be set alof^, consumes it self in burning 1. Sam. 15. 17.
to give others light: And to the Head in the body, eminent for place, but most
turmoiled of all the members, when they rest at ease. Fifthly, it would win
some more credit to the romish Church, if most of their Heads, for many years
together, (whom they call Christ's Vicars, but their own Stories call Ugly
monsters) could have led their lives with as few sins of note, and as many
true signs of Mortification; and left their lives with as much reputation
Genebrard. a. ^3. 973.
of honor, as she has done. Some of them entering like Foxes, reigning like
Lions, and dying like Dogs; Here^kes, Atheists, Apostataes, ^ucestuous,
Poisoners, Conturers, and Blasphemers; stricken by the Devil in the Act of
Adultery, as their own Cardinal does auerre: (which Tur^rem. li. 2. de
Eccles. (...). 103. Fa, (...) (...)
enforced also one of their own Writers to confess, that Holiness had
forsaken the Popes, and betook it self to the Emperors, quorum illa non
minima.)

33 These might Father Parsons have presented from Hell upon his Tra^icall
Stage, whith their damned Ghosts, and let Queen Elizabeth alone; who led a
life (to use his own words) either wholly different, or most opposite to
Page. 27.
these, and therefore enjoys that place, betwixt which, and that where they
are, there is Chaos magnum sirmatum, Luc. 16 26.
a huge gulf set, that affoords neither entercou^e of passage, nor enter-parle
for Exchange.

34 After this, for confutation of his Majesty, who had commended both her
Clemency in making no rigorous Laws against Catholics, till after the Bull
of Pius quintus; and her Piety in not censuring with death any for Religion:
(which is no more then, I will not say our own Judges, who should be most
skillful, and our Statutebookes, which are the most infallible witnesses
thereof; but then Genebrard, an obseruer of our English course against Papists,
as curiously despightfull as any Chronologer Chronol. lib. 4.
can be, does confess: for though in the year 1559. he says some chief of
the Popish Clergy were nece and veneno, by murder and death made away (which
is a shameless untruth) yet he mentions no Laws either rigorous or moderate
against Papists; till after the Bull of Pius Quintus, wherein he proscribed
her Kingdom, Predaeque exposuit, set it out to port-sale, and for a prey;
which passed from him Anno 1569. and was fastened by Felton upon the Bishop of
Londons Gates, Anno 1570. and yet no Laws made till the year 1572. when the
Pope excommunicated her whom before he had denounced an Heretic, and now let
loose her Subjects to Rebellion, as against a Publican and Heathen; and yet no
Laws mentioned till the year 1581. when Camp^on and Sherwin, with others,
were sent hither: then (says he) INDE from that time, Ingranescit latis
legibus Anglicana Persecutio.) Thus far Genebrard iumpeth with his Majesty.
Nay, it is not more then one Fa. Parsons himself said, that for twelve years
together the State and Court was in great quiet, and no question made of
Conscience In his green Coat. and Quod li. p. 165
or Religion.

35 Which to confuce, the Jesuit, Number. 5. tells us (out of Saunders) of the
OATH of Supremacy and penal Laws made for heating and saying Mass, before
that Bull came; which are Nihil ad Rombum; his Majesty speaking of Laws whose
Peine was death, he mentions an OATH which was but the reuiuall of the like
made in the time of Henry the eight, HER worthy Father, and of some laws
backed with pecuniarie mulcts, or loss of office and preferment.

36 And so, slightly casting off that point, he leaves his Majesty a while,
and lets fly at the Lo. Cook, who at the arraignment of Garnet, indignantly
scorning that the High priest of Rome, should in a Breeue of his, call so great
a Prince, (as QUEEN ELIZABETH was) MISERAM FOEMINAM, a miserable woman; by a
description of misery, consisting of two Contraries, want of Comfort, and
plenty of tribulation, shows many reasons evident and demonstratiue, that
she, having abundance of joy, and no touch of affliction, but blessed with all
kind of Felicities, could not be called Miserable: this the Censurer Number. 6.
answers; first by a shifting evasion; secondly, by a false interpretation of
Scripture, thirdly, a slanderous imputation upon the Holy Ghost himself.

37 His evasion; that outward Felicities are world lings arguments, no
necessary improouements of Gods blessing. Indeed, whether a man be loved of
God or no, by external prosperity, no man can certainly know says King
Solomon, nam vniuersa aeque eueniunt iusto ac impio. But, if not concluding
demonstrations, yet at least, Eccles, 9. 2
let them be probable persuasions of Gods favor, especially when some of them
to her, were such, that the very enemies themselves (like the Egiptian
Sorcerers) have been forced to say; this is the finger of God. Exodus, 8, 29.


38 But why may not Temporal prosperity, be made an argument of Gods love to
QVEENE ELIZABETH and of her felicity, as well as be skored up for one of the
notes of the true Church, by their beau-Clarke Bellarmine? which he does
(very strongly no doubt) in gleaning De notis Eccl. No a. 15.
three or four examples in War (Cuius alea communis) against Heretics. Hall
the Jesuit (as you heard) reasons for the contrary, reciting unto Littleton
for his comfort, certain examples of Heretics ouer-comming Catholics in
battle, and infidels overthrowing Christians. The truth is, they care not what
they say, nor how they cross each other, so they may serve the turn for the
time in saying something.

39 The Scripture perverted; a part of the Psalm. Where Psalm. 244. 11.
(says he) the worldlings made that their argument, for to prove their
felicity, by their full Cellars; their fat kine; their plentiful Cattle;
their beautiful and prosperous Children; and make this their conclusion,
Beatum dixerunt populum cui haec sunt, so reads the Vulgar, they said Blessed
are the people who have these things: which is a manifest detortion; for it is
the Prophets argument, as a great motive in himself, to continue his
acknowledgement of Gods blessing unto him and his people: wherewith after he
had begun the Psalm unto the fourth verse, upon present dangers he requests
deliverance from the fifth verse to the ninth, and redoubles the same request
verse the eleventh: from thence to the 15. verse he shows what would be the
happy effects of that deliverance which in three whole verses he does fully
particularize, and then concludes all with a double Epiphonema, Beatus populus
cui haec sunt, beatus Populus cuius Iehoua Deus. So that what the Prophet makes
a Religious ground of Exultation for Gods Praise, this Jesuit makes it the
wordlings Insultation of their own Iollity.

40 Whether of these is most true (omitting all other writers) a Popish
interpreter, who dedicates his Paraphrase of the Psalms to Cardmall Farnesius,
shall determine; Flamini. in Psal^os.
who expounds it, as spoken in the person of King David. The reason of their
mistaking (which otherwise interpret it) is easy to be given. First, the word
Asher in the twelfe verse, the Vulgar turns into the plural, Quorum which is,
according to the Hebrew, vt, or quod. Secondly, for Banonu which is, filij
nostri, they translate it barely si lij. Who shall witness t^i,? no Protestant
Gramarian, but Arias Montanus in his Inter linear Bible and Genebrard too.
Thirdly, that which m^sled them all, is the word dixeru^ in the last verse of
the Latin, which in the original is not at In Psalm. 144.
all, nor any word semblable.

41 When the woman in the Gospel cried out to our Savior, Blessed is the
womb which bare thee; our Savior de med not that, but answered her by a
Correctiue comparison, YEA RATHER Blessed are they which hear the word of God;
which if the Psalmist had here done in the last vers^, Luke. 11. 27.
and in the first part had said, Blessed are the people which are in such a
Case, and then had seconded it by a Correction, yea, RATHER Blessed are they
which have the Lord for their God, (as Genebrard would have it, to make their
exposition hold with the Hebrew) some probability there had In eum locum.
been of his application; but being pronounced in an Asyndeton without either
dis^unctiue or correctiue particle, Beatus populus cui, beatus cu^us Iehoua, So
the Hebrew reads it, so Montanus consters it: the argument holds strong against
his inducement, as implying, that the same Lord who blessed a people so far
as to be their God, is the some which also blesses them wi^h those external
felicities that they enjoy.

42 The third, which is a slanderous imputation laid upon the Holy Ghost, is
when he says, That the spirit of God scorneth at them which so argue; if he
mean of any place in that Psalm, he does misreport the spirit of truth; the
whole Psalm has no such word; if elsewhere, he should have named the place.
It is true that good men grieve, and oftentimes murmr, yea almost revolt, to
behold the wicked flourish, and fare so well. It was Jobs, it was David Case.
But first the Holy Ghost comforts them, not by scorning at the prosperity of
those men (it is Psalm. 37. and 73.
his own gift) but intimating that it is joined with many slipperie
uncertainties, and that the end thereof shall Psa 37. and 73.
be visible and apparent miseries.

43 Secondly, the just men themselves observe, that those ful-fed creatures do
mix their prosperity with blasphemies against God; so speaks Job, They say
unto God depart Job. 21. 14.
from us, and who is the Almighty that we should serve him? So David: They
set their mouth against Heaven, and Psalm. 73 9.
say how does God know? If QVEENE ELIZABETH'S felicities had issued into such
effects, then the more outwardly happy, the more undoubtedly miserable: but
she blessing God in her self, and causing him so to be, through her whole
Realm and life, she was beata cuius Iehoua Deus, and therefore she was beata
cui haec erant. But this is a small wrest, in comparison of many other
violences offered by him and his to the Scriptures; which they use as
Procrustes served his guests, hacking them off, Plus. Theseus
or racking them out, to fit them to their turns. For the point in hand, Saint
Augustine shall conclude it: Beat us est Aug. de beata Vita.
qui habet omnia quae vult, et nihil mali vult. Blessed is he who has all
that he desires, and desires nothing but what is good, and that was QVEENE
ELIZABETIIS case.

44 His second stitch against the chief Justice, is, the description of
misery, as consisting of two contraries, COPIA and INOPIA, which, says this
profound and great-read-Scholler, Is a miserable one indeed, never heard of be
fore; ridiculous in Philosophy, and absurd in Common sense (...) says he in
the Poet: and who is this brags thus? (may the Lo. Cook say) was he ever
Grammar Scholar? Euripid.
has he not then read in Ovid, of one that complaining, as of his greatest
misery, uttered in these words, -- inop^m me Copia fecit --


Had he been either with Ulysses in Hell (and it seems Narcissus in Ovid.
Me^am.
he has been there, he is so nimble in fetching up Ghosts) or with Homer in
describing Tantalus his torments, (...).
which were no other then those two contraries, Plenty and Want: he should
there find the Poet (and he is no ridiculous Author, either for Poetry or
Philosophy if we will credit the Arch bishop of Thessalonica, an other manner
of Scholar then this insolently ignorant Jesuit) (...).
the Poet, I say, to call them (...) grievous and dreadful MISERIES. What says
he to Horace, who thinks it In epist.
as great a misery to have plenty of wealth, and Want of the use, as for a
pur-blinde man, to have goodly pictures, and dim eyes to behold them?

45 And if he had read Epictetus his Enchiridion, or A^iani Epict.
those which comment on him, he should find it a Philosophical conclusion,
that those two contraries make the greatest misery, when a man possesses much
and yet desires more. For where desire is, there is always want: such a man,
says one of them, frustratur vtrisque dum vtraque consectatur, he wants what
he craves, and enioyes not what he has. (...) ^ius.


46 And then in Divinity, King Solomon, no mean Philosopher, (the Sons of
Mahal came short of him in 1. Reg 4. 31. Eccl. 4. and 5.
that skill) found that to be afflictionem pessimam, a most vexing misery,
as any under the Sun, when with satietie of riches (which implies plenty)
there is joined an insatiable eye (which argues Want.)

47 And even in Cases of Conscience; were they not those two Contraries, Plenty
of good desires in Saint Paul to do well, but want of ability to perform
those desires that made him to cry out miser ego homo! why? because to will
was present with him, there is his Copia; but he found Romans 7. 24. Verse. 18.
no means to perform that which was good, (there is his Inopia,) Certainly in
Divine and humane Phylosophie, that is the greatest misery whereof these two
meet. For a man may be as full of distresses and Wants, as Lazarus of sores
(which the world calls miseries) and yet resting full of comfort in his mind,
be no way miserable: which Saint Paul describes very elegantly, aporiamur, sed
non destituimur; tribulationem pati^ur sed non angustiamur: and albeit 1. Cor.
4. 8.
our out-wardman perish, yet our inward man is renewed day by Verse. 16.
day: but in the midst of plenty, and redundance, to Want the true comfort of
Conscience, and the right use of them, is the height of misery in this life.

48 So then the describing of misery by Copia and Inopia, need not be
proclaimed so strange, never heard of before, and so ridiculous. The Stoike
that loved not much to laugh, nor deserves to be laughed, at for his Seneca.
epist. l^
philosophy, shall dismiss him; Miser est qui se non beaussimum iudicat, licet
imperet mundo: To command the whole world is a plenty, but not to have the
right use thereof; or not to take the true joy therein, there is the Want: and
both these together (says Seneca) make a miserable man.

49 From the description of Misery, he tells us that he RETVRNES (for he is
very often out of his way) to the matter it self, viz. That albeit Queen
Elizabeth was so full of Temporal felicity: protected by God: bea^ing her
potent enemy: setting up a King in his Kingdom: defending Nations, etc. it is
no more then Scripture mentions of Pagans, and namely (says he) Numb. 8. 9.
of Nabuchodonozer by the Prophet Jeremy.

50 (He might as well have said, that her case was no other then King David's
as described in the Psalm: their Psalm. 18.
entrance, reign, and end were so semblable; both of them hunted by Ielousies
before possession; enioyning the Crown with glory and victory being
enthronized: and ending their days in peace, and going to their grave in a
full age, as a Ricke of Corn in due season carried into the Job. 5. 26.
Barn, as Job speaks: but that he thought the example was to good, and his
spite to great.)

51 Nabuchadonozer had visible and horrible Interruptions of his felicity,
being turned into a Beast, for Dan. 4. 30.
seven years together; propounded to scorn (whiles he lived in his greatest
ruff) by God himself; and among the rest with one, that triumph of the Fur
trees, insulting over him before his death, as if he were dead. Ex quo
dormisti Esa. 14. 8.
non ascendit qui succidit nos; since thou were dead, none came in thy place to
cut us up: which vexes both Pope and Jesuits that it is not verified in QVEENE
ELIZABETH; for after her death, there is ascended into her Throane, by just
Right, a MOST CHRISTIAN KING, resolute for the Religion which he professes;
as able to beat down the strongest arguments for contrary opinion with sound
conclusions, as if from Dogmaticall positions they break out into Pragmaticall
Treasons) he is ready bent (as was QVEENE ELIZABETH) succidere, that is, to
reward them according to their demerits. Indeed, if either Parsons, Dolem^n,
or Pope Clements Breues in Garnets keeping had effected what they did purport
(as shall appear when we come to his number 61.) that Prophecy of
Nabuchadonozer should have been fulfilled, and taken place at QVEENE
ELIZABETH'S death.

52 Therefore finding his resemblance in that maine point to differ; and that
the state she left, is reserved as well settled in peace, and established for
succession, and Resolved against Romish opinions and practices, as in HER time;
the Censurer now preuents Our Lord Christ at his second coming, and assures us
that her Infelicitie will then appear.

53 It was the Apostles precept, That man should judge 1. Cor 4. 5.
nothing before the time until the Lord come. Our Lord him self while he
lived, avoided it, and said, I judge no ^h. 8. 15.
man, accounting it a Pharisaicall humor so to do. Nam aliter liuor aliter
Christus iudicat, says S. Jerome. The best is, that the souls of the
righteous are in the hands of God; and it is not [Scarabaeus Aquilam] the
malice of a filthy beetle, yet it is animal obscoenum et olens, that is, not a
^stoph.
Jesuits doom (though most dispightfull) can adiudge her from joy into sorrow,
or from bliss into torment.

54 Yea, but her passing hence with so small feeling of God, as neither to name
him her self, nor suffer others (here he notes in the Margin, the Archbishop
of Canterbury) to bring in any speech of God, gives great presage of a
lamentable issue.

55 If one of their own great famous Popes died so, let Bellarmine pass his
sentence on him; as the Priests say Quodlib. page 57.
he did of Sixtus Quintus, qui sine poenitentia viuit et sine poenitentia
moritur, proculdubio ad infernum descendit; He that lived and died without
repentance, is undoubtedly gone to Hell. With QVEENE ELIZABETH it was not so,
who lived and died a true Christian: if at the first assault of her sickness
she was silent and solitary, Physic will ascribe it to the nature of
Melancholy diseases, whose Symptoms are (among some other) taciturnit as et
Solitudo. And as Reason would interpret, that, as she in peremptorily refusing
her bed, did show her princely resolution, Stantem mori; so Christian Charity
would infer, THAT retired silence in her, (both active and passive) to be a
withdrawing of her mind from her senses, for a more serious Meditation of her
bypast life, and her future state; which she herself also professed, being
moved by a D. of Phy sick, to tell how she spent her time in so long
silence; I Meditate (quoth she) and yet those lasted not out: for as strength
or disease weekened, and nature decayed, she both took her to her bed; and the
last most Reverend Arch bishop kneeling by her, and praying for her, she laid
her hand upon his head, and gave her Am^n of Assent unto his intercessions made
to God in Christ's name on her behalf. And when one of her Ladies desired her,
though she did not speak, yet to think upon God; I WARRANT YOU SO I DO, MY
MIND IS LITTLE OFF ON HIM says she. And after that, being in perfect
understanding, she had, and heard, and endured vehement prayers to be powered
out for her, not far from her, until the last gasp she gave. Wherewith she
seemed in such sweet and mild manner to send her soul into heaven, as if no
hand of violence might take it from her, but her own devout willingness must
redeliuer it unto that God, from whom, together with so many blessings she did
receive it. And hereof there are alive Honorable and Honest witnesses; not
such corner creeping Reremise, whose credit this companion (as he says)
relies on, but whose names he dares not utter (for they dare not appear to
it.)

56 And this is another Iesuiticalltricke, as well in matters Historical as of
Doctrine, to brave it out with an impudent tale: but ask them for their
Author, who said it? their answer is like the Cyclops cry in Homer (...),
Somebody with no bodies name, or a name cogg'd. O^. 1.


57 But had it been as he says; shall the manner of death, or Symptom of
diseases at men's departures, be presages of their condemnation in the life to
come? It will then go hard with many holy and good men, both in Scripture and
other stories. Nunquam male moritur, qui been viuit, says S. Augustine: For,
is thine eye evil because mine is good? is a speech uttered in his person, who
is able Matthew 20. 15.
to save his servants souls at the last gasp, in the greatest distemperatures
of their bodies, and distraction of their minds by violent or silent diseases.

58 He has rowsed her in her Deathbed; now he runs back 70. years, to
towse her in her Cradle, and there barks at her (what ear or heart can brook
it?) for a Bastard, so promulged by Statute; so adjudged by the Archbishop; so
reputed by her Father; First, were it so, and that upon such as are so bred,
there are branded, as Plutarch says, (...) Indelible reproaches, and matter
(...)
fitly ministered for Scorners to vpbraid; yet why a Jesuit, professing
Divinity, should reckon it among her personal Infelicities, the Fathers of
the Church would marvel; who think that it impeacheth neither right in
Heaven, nor renown on earth; Vndecunque homines nascuntur, says S. Augustine,
From what stock soever Children do proceed, if they follow not their parents
vices, they must not bear the burden of the ignominy: So Chrisostom: So Hie-
Hierome, all cited by Gratian. The Scriptures are not so Did. 56.
censorious: for God himself mislikes that Proverb, that it should be said,
The Fathers did eat sower grapes, and the Ezech. 16.
Childrens teeth were set on edge. In S. Paul's Catalogue of the Heb. 11. 32.
Judge. 11. 1.
faithful, Iepthe is placed, and he was Meretricis filius: and it is no mean
Genealogy which runs to a maine branch, wherein from Pharez of Thamar there is
a passage to King Matthew. 1.
David, and so higher.

59 Secondly, whether it hinder, or cut off succession or advancement, is a
great question among their own. Lawyers of both sorts; the rule being current
with the most of them, Non est impedienda dignitas eius qui nihil admisit. And
it seems by Damasus a Pope that he accounted Priests sons to be lawfully
begotten in marriage; or if they were reputed Bastards, yet nevertheless they
were Great. vbi supra.
not incapable even of the Popedom; and he reckons many such that had been
Popes, But this was not the case of that Royal descended Queen.

60 For first, if that rule be good, Fortes creantur fortibus, SHE showed her
self, by her Princely qualities, (had there been no other evidence)
especially by her magnanimity and courage, to have been sprung, not only (as
Plutarch speaks, (...)) of noble Progenitors, Vbi supra.
but to be a Kings, and no other but King Henry's Daughter. For whereas those
that are so mis-begotten, have servile base minds, at least dejected spirits:
(...), etc. Euripid. Hippolit.
says the Poet, the very memory and mention of their wrong-birth, abates the
courage, and inthrals the mind into a kind of baseness: So far it was from
HER, that her subjects saw, and her foes felt, that she had the most undaunted
and vn-yeelding Spirit, even in the greatest troubles that could betide the
State.

61 Secondly when Sanders and Rishton, with others, had in print aspersed her
birth with like stain and obloquie, and some had undertaken by discourse of
Arguments, (plain and unanswerable, in a just volume compiled and printed) to
clear those base and disgraceful slanders, she so far scorned to have her
Birthright questioned, that with great indignation she caused them to be
suppressed at the press.

62 Thirdly, grant it, that by her Father and that Statute (which this Epistler
here mentions) she were so pronounced. First, did not the same Parent and
Statute also disgrace their Catholic Persecuting Queen Mary her Sister as
much? and yet in all the Popish Writers she is highly extolled, and not once
touched heerewith. Secondly, Mysteries of State, and Secrets of Kings actions,
are not to be narrowly pried into, and sifted by their Subjects, much less by
Jesuits to be censured. Princes are Men, and Parlaments are assemblies of
Men; and Men (as the Philosopher said to a great King) are changeable
creatures. Look Plato ad Dion epis^. Stat. anni. 25.
therefore backward; The same, both Prince and Parliament, but two years before,
had ratified that marriage with her mother for lawful; and invested the
offspring of her body with the succession of the Crown. Look forwards but
seven years after, and the same both Head and Body, received Stat. Anni. 35.
the Legitimation, repealed the anulling Statute, and pronouncing the Lady
ELIZABETH for his lawful Daughter, reduced the Crown to HER right and
Interest again. So that, were not this Jesuit of HIS School that takes so
much text as serves his turn, that which Math 4. 5.
makes against him, to leave out; as he had vpbraided her with a Statute
blemishing, he might have choked him self with a Statute also honoring,
advancing, and truly possessing HER.

63 Or rather, knowing (if the Priests of Rome say true) how his own Mother
(another Pasiphae it seems by them) advanced his reputed Fathers head, (by the
birth of this Jesuit) betaking her self, for the time, to one called Cow.
buck: a name compounded of two beasts with diverse Quodli. p. 109
frontlets; that so her husband might, for the enhauncing of his top, be both
Actaon and Minotaurus, that is (as himself speaks) one of the most
substantial for degree in the parish; Manifestat. page 90.
he might have recorded his own Infelicitie, and rebuked his kind Mother; and
not have laid this ignominious slander upon a Kings Daughter, his Native
Sovereign, and the Mother of his Country.

64 In the mean time, it seems the Pope has an exorbicant power; that
whereas both Law of God and Church exclude Bastards ab Ecclesia Domini, for
bearing any office of Ecclesiastical charge, yet admits this Manzer (so the
vulgar Deuteronomy. 23. 2.
calls him) to be a Jesuit, and a Rector among them: unless hereby the Pope
do insinuate, as Sixtus Quintus did, Quodlib. p. 100
that he takes the whole society for no other but a Bastardbrood; or that the
College in the vacancie put up their petition for Parsons to be their Head,
beginning with that verse of the Poet, Iuuenal.
Malo pater mihi sit Thersites --
And I trow with all, that Parsons himself will account the Wisd. 3. 16. etc.
Book of Wisdom but an Apocrypha; else there is a Chapter will shrewdly touch
him with a more grievous Infelicitie then that Statute (which he mentions)
will any way hurt that good and most Noble Queen Elizabeth.

65 Now from her infelicitie passive, he comes, Numb. 12. First, to her
Infelicitie repercussiue, how others for her sake were made unhappy; as one in
her brothers time for falling in love with her: and others, as Wiat and Carew
in her sisters time, raising Rebellion for Her: And why does he not rather say
so much of the Whore of Babylon, and observe what an unlucky Religion that of
Rome is, which intoxicates so many with her Philtra, her filthy Loue-Drugs;
that for her sake they machinate and practice treasons against their lawful
Princes; and for their Treasons (under pretense of madding for Her) come to
unhappy Ends?

66 But for love matters, as that of the Admiral (be it what it was) let him
treat of them who once renounced the study of Divinity, because (they are his
own words) affecting company as I do (says he) I shall not keep the lists
Fa. Parsons. in the paper left by him in his Study when he was expelled.
of modesty: for the other of the Rebellion by Wyat: or HER ^ke, they are so
impudently v^ue, that our Chroniclers will refer those imputations unto that
commonplace, Os quod mentitur occidit animam.

67 Secondly, he reckons up her Infelieitie active. vz. Sa. 211.
^errigorous Laws and cruel against Catholic Religion; (that is simply
false;) against Popish Traitors he might have said, and we will both deny it,
and yield it: deny it, quatenus, for twelve years together (as has been
often ^old them) of the reign of that most memorable Queen, the forest
punishment of some of them, who obstinately refused to do her Majesty
service, was commitment to Bishops and Deanes houses: and of others, if they
were justly suspected to be dangerous, unto certain Prisons, where they lay as
warm, and waxed as fat in their restraints, as the best Subjects that lived at
liberty in their own houses.

68 For the time subsequent, we yield; (if death deservedly drawn on by
demerit, may be called cruelty in the Magistrate;) for after, Religion was
made but the Stawking-horse to practice Treasons: if then the complaint be of
Rigor, and request for more ease, we say with S. Augustine (when he was
entreated to mediate for a mitigation of some strait Laws) nay, if Princes
serve Christ in making Laws for Christ, they do what they ought, I will not
Epist. 48.
gain say them.

69 And yet to examine this Cruelty, and Rigor thereof, we will not do it by
comparison of Popish Tyrannies, fearful Tortures, and bloody Massacres: but
first their own Priests shall speak for QVEENE ELIZABETH'S Laws, who say,
that considering Jesuitical practices shadowed under cloak of Religion, all
the Laws enacted Quodlib. page 269. 277.
against Catholics were made with great moderation and Clemency, as coming
from a Prince most mild and merciful: nor they have cause to verge repeal of
any Statute made, so long as Jesuits take such courses. Secondly, one Fa.
Parsons, who in the Preface of one of his Legends, commends Queen Preface to
the first part of his triple Conversion.
Elizabeth for her MODERATE government, and that was in the last year of her
reign. And yet by the way (for the man's singular honesty) it is worth noting,
that in one and the same lease, having so commended her in one Page, (many then
SHE was a live) in the very next Page (for then he heard SHE was dead) in a
Preface In eode^ libello
to his Majesty he compares her to no other but Dioclesian for cruelty.

70 Now belike, to ratify that comparison, he would persuade us here, that it
was not Treason, but Religion, upon which she did practice her Cruelty; which
he proves with such a Medusa-like Argument, as is able to strike the answerer
into a stownd, -- iuraretque Lupos vidisse priores, Virgil.
and put him to silence; because some were executed which might have had their
lives at the last cast, if they would have yielded in this one point of
Religion, viz to renounce the Pope and conform themselves to the present
State. Might not that good Queen complain here, as he once did, Theodorus.
that what he reached with the right hand, his Schoolers took with the left;
and that a principal demonstration of her indulgence should be brought in for
an apparent evidence of her Cruelty?

71 Put the case that Absolon had been an Idolater, as he was a Traitor; and
King David, after sentence passed against him for his unnatural Treasons,
would have acquitted him from death, conditionally, that he would renounce
false gods, and worship only the true God, in that manner which God himself
had prescribed, and he refusing it is executed; shall we say he died for
Religion, or for Treason? It was Mercy in the King to offer, but Wilfulness
in the son to refuse a condition so easy and Religious.

72 Or if some father had a leaud son, who to waste his wealth upon harlots
(like the Prodigal in the Gospel) should conspire with his brethren to rob
their father first, and then cut his throat to enjoy all, after arraignement
and sentence past, the father should promise to procure a pardon, conditienally
that his Son would frequent the Church upon Sabao^h days, and leave those
Brothell houses, which wrought in him the thoughts of such wicked courses; and
the desperate youth refuses it, choosing rather to die then to leave his
filti^ pleasures; shall we say that he is executed for his Whoredoms? (they
were not before laid against him:) No but for the Parricide, and petty treason
against his Father, according to the Sentence. Princes which make such gracious
offers, do therein show their most Christian affections, that they desire the
conversion of men rather then their destruction; and look rather to the saving
of their Subjects souls, then the safety of their own persons, as being
contented to remit all bypast breach of Law and duty to themselves, so they
may make them truly religious toward God.

73 But to conclude this complaint of QVEENE ELIZABETH'S cruelty, An Italian,
no Protestant shall speak. Tanta extitit eius animi MODERATIO, atque innata
Bizar. Histor. Gene^s. pa. ^68.
CLEMENTIA, vt non immerito etc. So great and so apparent was the MODERATION of
her mind, and her inbred CLEMENCY, that (not undeservedly) it may be said of
her, which the ancient Histories have left to posterity of Alexander Seuerus,
borne of his Mother Mommaa, ^empe AN AEMATON, hoc est, CITR AS ANGVINEM;
namely, that she has governed her Kingdom WITHOUT BLOODSHED, cum SV APTEN
ATVRA SEMPER AC AEDIBVS and CRVDELIT ATE ABHOR AT; for EVEN HER NATVRE DOES
ABHOR THE THOUGHT OF SLAVGH^ER OR CRVELTIE: And so he goes on in a large
discourse; in this HER praise; and when he wrote thus, she had reigned twenty
years. It is marvel their Index Expurgatorius has not scowred him ere this,
and for this.

74 Yet the Curre lets not go his hold, but sna^les at another Infelicitie of
this Memorable Queen; her Jealous fears which made her suspect her life to
be aimed at by all sorts, both Puritans and Papists; and those Iealousies
enraged her Cruelties, to the ending of their lives: and Squiers Story must be
fained; and Lopez, a Jew must be fetched in, and cast away: yea, she was
never quiet till she had made away the KINGS MOTHER.

75 For Princes to be jealous of their lives and safeties, is both usual and
necessary; Ingenia Regumprona ad formidinem, Salust. in I^gurth.
says the Historian, especially if they have in their Realms such as do
either competere or impetere, pretend a right, or intend a michiefe against
their Crowns and Kingdoms. Nor is it the fear of their own death, but doubt
of the event which may follow. (Et dubia pro certis solent timere Seneca. Oedip.
Reges) That which troubles them, is both the issue of their State, which is
their heavy charge, how that shall be either brandled or quieted; and also the
estate of their issue, which is their tender charge, how they shall be either
hurried or established.

76 There is no King, be he never so Gracious, but he walks in the midst of
Eyes observing for hurt; and no Eyes so dangerous as that O^ulus nequam in the
Gospel, which is therefore evil because the Prince is good. He rewarding Mat.
20. 25.
the most industrious with grace and bounty; his advancing to Honors the best
deserving; approximating to his secrets the most trusty and faithful: these
things in some, which think themselves to be either neglected, or wronged,
breed discontent; and how deep the impression there of will reach, who can
tell? an quantum vertice in altum, tantum radice in Tartara tendat? the more
asspiring Virgil.
thoughts (being defeated) do contriue and machinate the more hellish
designements. Who then can blame Princes if they be Wary and Cautelous; but
principally if they have been Icti piscatores, already within the ^awe of the
Lion, and upon the mouth of the sword? a quality pardonable, especially in a
woman, whose Sex by nature (as appears by the Apostle) is inclinable to be
alrighted with 1. Pet. 3. 6.
every terror.

77 But it was not so with QVEENE ELIZABETH; Careful she was; fearful she
was not: Wary, but not Jealous; provident, but not suspicious: the undoubted
love of her subjects, and the sincerity of her own mind, was the double
brazen wall of her Security. No one such quality either concomitant with
Jealous fear appeared in her, which Histories in suspicious Tyrants do
observe: Her body not privily armed; her eyes (abroad) not whirled about; her
Countenance not appalled; her Spirits not troubled; her sleeps not disquiet;
no Stranger or Subject (admitted to her presence) searched; nor any quality
issuing from such fears, appeared in her government. Her people loved her,
hated her not; her Arm^es fought valiantly for her, and shrunk not; her Land
Flourished, it sunk not; her Reign continued long (outlasting the Regencie of
a Dozen Popes) it vanished not: an evident demonstration of her mild
deportment, Nam inuisanemo Imperia re^inuit diu. Her person Seneca.
not assaulted, nor her State at any time ^umultuated, but by Romish
instigation or Conspiracy. And now being dead, SHE is still lovingly
remembered: and the memory of HER uttered without envious comparison or
malicious disparison of others, HIS Sacred Majesty is pleased most graciously
to accept; an infallible argument both of HIS most Princely disposition, and of
HER temperate and vnburdensome Government.

78 Lastly, if jealous suspicion and fear, extend it self toward any, it
commonly alights upon the Heir apparent, or the Successor expected (so ^aith
Tacitus, Suspectus semper inuisusque dominantibus quisquis proximus destinatur)
Histor. lib. 1.
and whether it were so or no, his Sacred Majesty (who had the nearest and
most undoubted right) can answer best in this Case. As for the trial of the
examples which he brings, as Stories fained, and fruits of her Jealousy,
namely Lopez and Squier, whether their Treasons were fictions or A^ions, he
shall have e Sinu ^estem. First, Priests of their Quodlib. lib. 1.
own, that confess Lopez to be set on to poison her by Hoult the Jesuit.
Secondly, a Chronicler of ours (whose S^ow.
Credit he much relies on, for he often cites him) who says, that they were
both found guilty and condemned of High treason, the one Anno 1593. the other
Anno 1598. both of See the Jesuits Catechism for this.
them for intending her death by poison, and Wal-poole the Jesuit was the
instigator of Squier.

79 Why did he not also name Parry the Doctor, authorized by the Pope to the
murdering of her; commended by HIM, for intending it; absolved from all his
sins, for pursuing it; and assured of merit for performing it? Cardinal.
Com. his letters.
whom when she knew that he was armed for the point, so far she was from
affrighting Jealousy, that she personally confronted him; with her presence
amated him; and without terror dismissed him: So unhappy is this Jesuit in
reckoning up the Catalogue of Her unhappiness. And yet, that his hellish
malice may leave nothing (though never so sacred) vnsnarled at; as before he
brought in the Murder of his Majesty's Father for a parallel to the POWDER
TREASON: so now he reckons for one of her late Majesty's miseries the death
of the Queen his Mother: whereby the Reader may judge, how he would use his
Majesty's own fame if he were gathered to his Fathers, when he is glad to
allege so vnlauorie examples of both his Parents. That Renowned Queens death
was a misery indeed to this whole Land, and the most indelible blot that can
be recorded of this Country: but that our late Sovereign was abused therein,
and that wicked act committed before her knowledge thereof, beside her notable
expressing of her own greefes when she heard of it, other sufficient proofs
have fully resolved all honest men hereof. And since, our now Sovereign, who
had the nearest interest in that errand, was long agone satisfied by her
Majesty's own purgation therein, it is a far fetched slander for a Jesuit,
being not so much as that Queens borne subject, to awaken it now again, out
of so long dead ashes. But what may not the venom of Satan doc? And yet since
he would need, rankle up again so old sores, it is his Majesty's part, and
all his good Subjects, justly to blame the practicing Jesuits and Priests of
his order, for bringing that Vide Ca^e. (...). Jesuit.
misfortune upon her; for never rested they from all kind of Treasonable
plots and Practices against our late Sovereigns person, fathering them (though
falsely) upon the said Queen, and making her the highest mark of their
ambition, till they brought her to her unfortunate end.

80 And thus having strained out his very Gall to vent his rancor, by rans^king
her Birth, youth, age, and end, (with what despite, and how little truth the
Christian Reader may see) being guilty to himself, that he has done more,
then either before God or Man he can Justify.

81 (For Principem populi ^ui non Maledices: Thou shall not speak evil of the
Ruler of thy people, was Moses precept, and a memorandum to Saint Paul; and by
an ancient Canon, Exodus 2^ 28. Act. 23 5. C^n. A^ost. 74.
a severe Censure appointed upon any that should be Contumeliosus in Regem,
aut Magistratum; if a Lay man, to Excommunicate him: if in Orders, to depose
him. If so straight alive; much more being dead; because first, contumelies are
uttered, either for reproof to amend, or vexation to grieve the parties
Calumniate; both these ends cease in death; the tongues-sting imprints no
passion (either for good or hurt) upon Dead-men. Secondly, if the Almighty when
he left them open to the world, yet restrained the tongue from disgracing or
despighting them, much more having now taken them from the world: for if they
be in Heaven, every contumely against them is blasphemy against God: if
Damned, sufficient for Hell is the torment thereof. Thirdly, the very Heathen
condemn it, and both enjoined silence to them that attempted it, Be still,
and cease to revile the dead, says he in the Poet: and accounted them no
better then Laruas, Hegs, and (...) ex Astoph Plin. N^. Hist in prefat. Arist.
in Rhetor. In Antig^ue.
wicked Spirits: So Pliny, then Dogs; so Plato and Aristotle: then Profane
and Impious: so Homer, then Second Murderers, so Sophocles reputes them.
Fourthly, this Jesuit himself is so tender over Traitors, (and those the most
Odious, H^leous, monstrous, horrible, Barbarous, desperate, unmatchable,
inexpressible, that is in a word, those IESVITED POWDER-PLOTTING-TRAITORS) that
he expostulates with his majesty for recording their bloody designements after
death, and is there no end of exprobra tion? and are not those VNFORTVNATE
Gentlemen executed, says he? But Queen Elizabeth is dead, and as David said
of Abner, Nunquid vt Stulta mortua est! Died Page 6. Number. 10. 11. 2. Sam. 3. 3
8.
she as a base woman, ignominiously? or as a Tyrant in Caede and Sanguine, by
violence and blood? or is she cast out unburied or unregarded! No, but departed
in peace, with as much Love and Honor as possibly a Prince could be capable
of; and gloriously entombed by her MOST ROYAL SVCCESSOR. And cannot SHE be
suffered to rest? and is there no end of barbarous malice? but a currish,
Blood-hound must rouse her, and tear her, from top to toe, within and without,
from Birth to Death?)

82 Now knowing (I say) how detestable this will be in the ears of God, and
in the eyes of men (for God it seems he cares not, who has barred even the
very thought from conceiving evil of the Prince) he would Eccles. 10. 20.
fain satisfy the world by yielding three or four reasons, Why he has thus
yelled against her; first to repress the Lord Cooks insulting speech (as he
calls it) that is to abase his true extolling of that famous Queen: as if he
should say, Because the Chief Justice discharged the duty of a Christian, in
continuing the name of the righteous for an ever lasting remembrance, therefore
J will play the Devils part, to be Accusator fratrum, and recount her virtues
or vices, after she is departed: even as the Jews d^alt with Christ, because
he prosessed himself to be the Son of God, they would brave him down with a
slandring encounter, and justify it when they had done, Say we not well John.
8. 48.
that thou art a Samaritane, and have a DEVIL?

83 Secondly, to vindicate the credit, at least to make good the Epithete which
Pope Clemens gave her, in calling her MISERABLE WOMAN: so did the uncircumcised
1. Sam. 17. 42 43.
Philistine vi^ie David, calling him Boy, and cursed him by his gods: Et mutuo
mul^ scabunt; belike if Rabsheka revile in a word, Shemei must make it up with
a Comment of Contumelies. It is recorded, that they of Alexandria in Egypt kept
their Ibides, great birds, to devour the Di^dorus Sic^lus. lib. 3.
garbage of the City, and to cleanse their streets; which they do indeed, but
leave of their own filth, more noisome, behind them: So does this Jesuit,
the Popes Sca^inger, kept in Rome for no other purpose, but that, Lutum luto
purgans, he may justify their ribauldrie with more abominable Lucian.
contumelies.

84 Thirdly, in imitation for a Consolation, which is Numb. 15. That as some of
the Fathers, who to animate the persecuted Christians, described the leaud
life, and fearful end of their Persecutors (as Nero and Domitian) so he to
comfort the Catholic Traitors, must revile and be-lie that worthy Queen; the
rather because she was a Woman. If Parsons have no other comfort then to cheer
them up because a Woman quelled their insolency; then may the Devil be
comforted because the Woman (Ipsa they read it) Genesis 3. 15.
has bruised the Serpents head; and Sissera might take great pride in it, that
he was brought down by the hand of a Iud. 4. 21.
Woman. But if that be the best comfort the Jesuit has, their Catholics will
think of him as Job of his friends, that he is Job. 16. 2.
but Consolator on^rosus, a miserable comforter.

85 As well for that, as for his double comparison; first, of the late
Christian Queen, with those beastly Tyrannical Atheists, seeing the
resemblance would better sit those their Holy Popes, of whom some were, as
Clemens speaks of the Heathens Jupiter; and S^tonius of Nero, virorum Clem.
Alex. in Protrept.
foemmae, and faeminarum viri; others, successively Murderers, Sese inuicem
veneno tollere tralati^ium est, says Rodi^s in meibedo.
one of their own Authors for their Popes. Secondly, in that comparison of the
primitive Christians, with their executed Priests.

86 In both which, the indifferent Reader will find more spite then truth,
more malice then Conscience; Heaven and Hell not more differing, then SHE from
those Tyrants; then those Christian Martyrs from these Priested Traitors. They
acknowledged the Emperors Supremacy in dependant upon any but God; prayed for
them seriously, both living and dying: (Extrahite animam Deo supplicantem pro
Imperatore, says Tertullian in their persons.) These companions Tertul. in
Apol^get.
suck Treasons with their Principles, hatch it in their Conuenticles, and end
with it at their Executions. If Queen Elizabeth were the first of her Sex that
took upon her Supreme power in Spiritual and Ecclesiastical matters (as the
Epistler says) in IT she was no usurper by Nouellclaime, but accepted what
God himself had annexed to her Crown; her Sister before her renouncing it in
a superstitious Indulgence of the Popes former loss, shed more blood of
persons Eclesiasticall within three years, then SHE that kept it, did in forty
years, for Causes Criminal of Popish Priests.

87 His last and conclusiue reason. Numb. 16. is a Sarcasticall scorn to his
Majesty (for this old Silicernium has not yet purged the pruriginous humor
of his scoffing brain) because (says he) the Apologer has taken upon him to
Sacrifice to her MANES, I thought my self obliged, to offer some incense for
mitigating the evil sent: Even so, because the sons of God (the holy Angels
stood before him, to report their messages, the Devil took himself OBLIGED
to intrude among them and reckon up his Roguerie: and because Elisha thought
Job. 1.
good to make provision for the Students, therefore One less skillful, but
more busy then the rest, takes it his Duty 2. Reg 4.
together Coloquintila to poi^on the pot: Or more nearly to this Metaphor,
because Aaron and his sons were privileged to Sacrifice, therefore a
Ringleader of Rebels Numb 16.
must think himself OBLIGED to take his Senser in his hand to disgrace Gods
Ordinance. But as that proved not Incensum but Incendium, so such
Ranck-incense as this, being the unsavory egestion of a filthy strong stomach,
is by God himself pronounced an abomination. E^. 1 15.


88 Which being so loathsome, it is time to dismiss him for a Sensing Coniurer,
or rather an Incensing Blasphemer, with S. Peter's farewell to Simon Magus:
Repent of this thy Act. 8.
wickedness and pray God that if it be possible, the thoughts of thine heart
(and the Blasphemies of thy pen against that worthy Queen, may be forgiven
thee: for I see that thou art in the Gall of bitterness, and in OBLIGATIONE)
and OBLIGED in the bond of iniquity.

89 If it be possible (I say) for God to forgive thee; which doubt I ground
upon Fa. Parsons his own challenge of the Priests; whom, because they have in
their books turned the in side outward, revealed the Hypocrisies, disclosed
Quedlib. etc. Important consider.
the Conspiracies, anatomised the Atheismes, Cataloguised the leaud vices of
the Igna^ian brood (a Society, which like Hannibals Army, is gathered Ex
colluuie omnium Gentium, of the Refuse and Malcontents of all Nations: Liuy.
cemented into a Fraterni^e, as the walls of Babylon built with the demolished
rubbish of Rables Tower; nourished by the Pope, as the Ianizaries by the Turk,
to be Herodotus.
the valiantest Cutthroats of true Christians their own native Countrymen)
especially because they have blazoned HIM in his proper colors; he not only
includes them within the Civil and Canon Law for detestable Libellers, but
brings Casists of Conscience to enthrall them in Manifestar. sol. 11. and 12.
despair, pronouncing them scarcely able to disburthen their Souls, though
with second Recantations they restore the fame of those whom before they had
standered; vea, drives them into S. Paul's dreadful Impossibility, and Heb.
6. 4. 5. 6.
there em^ds them, because in their entering into Priesthood beside their
Baptism) they did renounce the Devil and all his works, whom now before this
Libelling and reuiling vein, it seems they had taken in again, with seven
worse then himself; this humor of Contumelious Reproaching being most
opposite to charity, and therefore one of the highest steps to the sin of
the holy Ghost; he wills them to remember that fearful place, Having behaved
themselves soirefully and impudently, not only against their brethren and
equals, but much more their betters and Superiors.

90 What then is the cause of this Mote^er, but trans Matthew 7. Romans (...). 1.
am^ey'd Jesuit? Does not S. Paul say to him, Therefore THOU art inexcusable,
O man! unless he account Qu. Elizabeth to be neither his Superior, nor
Equal, so contemptuously and contumeliously, so falsely and ignominiously to
reduce HER from her grave, and traduce HER by Slanders in the world: whose
blessed memory, though his venomous tongue (most base wretch as he is) cannot
^annoy, more then a poisoned dart pearl a marble stone: yet, Ex suoore, what
sta^e is he in, in his own conscience, by his own doom of the Priests?

91 If he say, SHE was an Heretic; so was Saint Paul accounted: First, that is
not proved. Secondly, it is but a selfe-soothing distinction or excuse, which
in his own opinion makes a spiritual sin less sensible, but more
dangerous. Manifestar. pr^ac. sol. 2. 3.
Thirdly, admit it were true, and that she were a Persecutor; what less was
HE that smote our blessed Savior standing at the bar? And what answer was
returned? If I have evil spoken (says our Savior) bear witness of the
evil: but if I have well spoken, why smitest thou me? All this he knowing and
urging against the Priest, condemning their reproaches to be issues of the bad
Spirit, thinks he to be exempted from that dreadful Impossible? Seeing Heb.
6. 4 5.
He has taken the same orders which they have, and runs the same race of
reproachful ^iot which they did?

92 He has spent his spite upon the dead, and row he vents his malice against
a living Majesty; scorning for three Numbers together, 17. 18. 19. that T. M.
the younger (as he calls him) should commend OUR MOST GRACIOUS SOVEREIGN for
his kindness and Clemency formerly showed to their Catholics, which he
terms OLEVM PECCATORIS, flattery and adulation.

93 Is not this fellow truly Canis in praesepi, that can neither speak well
himself, nor endure that virtue should have her due commendation by othersi
but as some write of the Galathians that will permit no Gold to come into their
Country, and yet they will rob any man that has Gold about him: so he, being
neither capable of virtue himself, nor inclinable to it, will not suffer it to
be praised in them that have it, without imputation of base flattery; which
cannot be without touch of both parties: because none use to flatter, but such
as have none other means to advance themselves; and none love to be flattered,
but those which have no true virtue to commend them: neither of which can take
any hold of these persons, whom he thus slily scoffs in this place.

94 For, the first whom he deciphereth with the letters of T. M. (as mean a
Minister as Fa. Cow bucke makes him) was never so defective either of
honorable alliance, or large Page 2.
provision of means, or many good deserts and qualities, that he need the use
and help of such Servile Oil, whereby to glide more easily into preferments.

95 And for his sacred Majesty, the world cannot but know, that (being so
absolutely complete with those graces of the Spirit, and gifts of nature, and
helps both of art and experience, that may be required truly to commend him as
a man, a Christian, or a King) he is neither so degenerate from a princely
nature, as to have or crave such weak supports, as fained blandishments;
neither so unskillful, as that he cannot discern between the precious and the
vile: but that HE can make use of the Praisers mouth, [Os ^lantis, so the
vulgat reads it] as King Solomon directs Pro. 27. 21.
Constitorij loco, as the fi^ing sornace, to try whether it yield dross for
gold, or countefeit for truth: and therefore can quickly distinguish in this
place, between the true acknowledgement of a faithful Subject (which this
Scorner calls Oleum peccatoris,) and the dissembling kisses of a fawning
Hypocrite which is Pharmacum Proditoris, as that is which follows in this
Section.

96 Wherein this Judas commends his Majesty's great Humanity, Royal nature,
and noble disposition (so the Devils confessed Christ to be the Son of God,
but their conclusion was withal, Quid tibi and nobis?) Math. 8.


97 Whereunto his Majesty may answer as he in Seneca, What evil have I done,
vt hic tam Nequam de me tam been loqueretur, that so bad a fellow as this is,
should speak so well of me? Can we gather grapes of thorns, or figs of
Matthew. 7.
thistles? Is not this that selfsame Parsons, who (as the Priests witness)
labored the Popes Holiness to Excommunicate longagoe his Majesty, as an
obstinate and forlorn Quodl. pa. 257
Heretic?

98 But this noble disposition of mildness and clemency (both inbred by
nature, and ingrafted by Art, so apparent, so inherent in his Majesty, that
being truly reputed Amor and delitia humani generis, he winnes the love and
affection of all good men unto him; among whom, some account it a great part of
their Infelicitie (though otherwise well provided) Suet. de Tito Vespas.
that they cannot daily stand before him, to be partakers of his sweet
conditions and behavior) if it be (as the Epistler says) altered, who has
auerted him, or changed it? Surely T. M. and some such other Ministers,
desirous to draw blood, who inci^e his Majesty against the Catholics, having
neither place near him, nor admittance to him to speak for themselves.

99 (It vexes them, that (as Satan stood at Gods Zach. 3. 1.
right hand to resist Iehoshua) they may not have one of their sort always at
his Majesty's elbow, either to instill into his ears that Poisoning Doctrine
of abasing himself to the Popes lure; or, i^ he will not stoop (as Clement
the Monk served the French King) to f^stenitat his heart with a Poisoned knife.

100 This reason of his for the Kings auersion or change, is not only a
Calumniation against T. M. but a dis-reputation also to his Majesty: as if in
Tertullians Proverb his custom were De suo Cor^o ludere, to be so variable,
De (...).
as at every man's sudden information, to alter his clemency into cruelty, and
his mildness of nature to the drawing of blood; then which there is nothing
more contrary unto his Royal heart: Only he takes that course (being forced
thereunto) which either David did by Gods direction, or God himself by David's
description, Cum peruer^ perverse agere, with the froward to deal as sowrly.
Psalm. 18. 26.


101 For patience often tried, must needs turn into rigor; and vlcerate
Apostemes must be launced at least: and where there is a (...) and infecting
Gangren, the Saw or Chizell must make the deuorce from the other members, and
if there be any fault, the defect of this is it. His Majesty's Constancy what
it is, we shall have occasion within a few leaves to examine. In the mean
time, for this challenge of his Change (as God said to Israel) to their
Catholics may be truly answered, Your destruction comes of your Hos. 13. 9.
selves; it is not his Majesty's either Mutabilitie of nature, or Vespas. in S^t
di^position to Cruelty (qui justice etiam supplicijs illachrymauit and
ingemuit, as was said of that Emperor;) but the reiterated Disloyalties of I^
suited Vassals, and especially this last indiscreete Act of the Pope, in
discharging Catholics from taking the O ATH of Allegiance, (which his Majesty
used as a Fan to try the Chafe from the Wheat, for the purging of his
floor) that has caused it.

102 So that, if there be a drawing of blood, (as his Majesty has well
forewarned) let it alight upon the Popes head (Ipse hoc intriuit sibi omne est
exedendum) who by sending out his Breue of counter-obeisance, as in old time
the Erasm. ex Diogenia.
Heralds were wont to send out a Ram in token of defiance, has, for
maintenance of his own usurped power, rowsed a Lion to their overthrow which
harken to that Rebelliously inciting Message: as that old Prophet in Scripture
procured to him that believed an errand from a feigned Angel 1. Reg. 13. 24.
by a false dissembler.

103. But his principal stitch is at T. M. the yoonger, whom he knows well
enough to have a more honorable place in his Majesty's household, as he is Deane
of HIS Chapel, then Bellarmine should have in the Popes Court as he is
Cardinal (for by that he is truly and originally a Parish Priest) yet he that
was so full of manners to tax his Majesty of Inciuility for calling the
Cardinal, MASTER Bellarmine, affoords the Deane, now a Reverend Bishop in the
Church, no other Title but of T. M. in Ciphers, and of an Inferior Minister,
in scorn. And his anger is, because, either by Jests or Tales out of Popish
Writers, this T. M. (some Aretalogus or Iester belike) makes his Majesty
sport; or with some bitter g^ds prouokes hard speeches from his Majesty
against the Catholics; so that Sycophancie is his whole exercise. It is true
that his Majesty's Table, for the most part, at times of Repast, is (as ^useb.
de vita Constant. lib. 4.
Constantines Court, Ecclesiae instar) a little University, compassed with
Learned men in all professions; and his Majesty in the midst of them (as the
Grecian entitled one less deserving) a living Library, furnished at all
hands, to reply, answer, object, resolve, discourse, explane, according to
several Eunapius.
occasions, emergent upon Fact, or accidental upon Speech: and as El^hu said,
His ears tries words, as the mouth tastes meat; being as exquisite in the
Trial, as Antonius Job 33.
Pius, who for his singular and sisting wit, was called Cumini-sector; so
narrowly and thoroughly would he search Cuspin. in vita ei^.
every point, and distinguish upon any hint. Among many other, whose happiness
it is to attend a King, so wise (from whose Table no intellige^t waiter
departs, but bett^ instructed then before) this T. M. is one, whose Birth
Learning, Religion, Degree, and (...), do al^ concurre^ scorn of SYCOPHANCIE,
and none more detest ^th it then his Master our Souereig^e: therein excelling
Augustus Caesar, who though he be commended for his (...) (...) vita (...).
cap. 74.
singular affability at board, and desire of discourse; yet often times would
have Iesters and Plaiers to be sent for to attend, and confer with them. For
this is his Majesty's excellency, that he had rather have acroamata then
HISTRIONES; Theological and Philosophical arguments canuassed, then Mimicall
Jests composed and vt tered: but of all other, Sycophancies and Calumniations
he does abhor.

104. And yet, why may not we be as merry, or bitter with this Epistlers
SYCOPHANCIE (it being a profane word) as it pleased him to be with the
Apolog^ers MANES, which HE translated HOB-GOBLINS? and tell him that every
schoole-bovk* owing the word to be derived, and the name imposed for revealing
Figs: therefore taking the word in the primitive use, and as the Plut. Solon.
Athenians did (who gave the first Denomination) it is no dis^race for T. M. to
be called a SYCOPHANT in Philomnest. (...) Athen.
that sense: for to that office were solemnly chosen in Athens (...), the most
Trusty and Faithful of all the Citizens. And, in the opinion of a better
Grammarian then this Censurer, whosoever was noted to be (...) Alexis. ibi.
(...) 3.
an honest man, and pleasant in discourse, -- qui misc^ v^le dulci,
Horace.
was so entitled: and then, whom fits the Office better then the Kings daily
Attendant? And when is it fittest, but in times of his Majesty's Repast?
whereat there is not more variety of meat, then diversity of learned
Discourse; much like the Table of Augustus Caesar, and Francis the second King
of France. August. ap. S^t. Thuan. lib. 3.


105. But, if taken at the worst as there is (...), a deprauing vein in it)
even by the Epistlers own verdit, T. M. can be no SYCOPHANT; for they which
delight in such Calumniations, and use those Delatory accusations, they do it
Clanculum, and without witness: which gave Aristoph. Plut.
occasion to the Proverb, That the poison of a Sycophants tooth is
immedicable, because the Secrecy of the biting is inevitable: but T. M. does
this (by the Censurers confession) when his Majesty takes his Repast, that is,
in the hearing of many, and of some, as it seems, which are Parsons
Intelligencers, to send what they hear to Rome: so that the party being
known, and the tale openly told, he cannot be called a SYCOPHANT.

106. Yet grant him this: wherein then consist his Sycophancies? What Figs
reueales he? It seems by the Apologue in Scripture, that they are a pleasant
Fruit, and nothing Judge. 9. 11.
more sweet, by the ancient proverb; to which, first, because the Miracles in
Romish Legends (so magnified) may Apud Aristop.
well be compared, pleasant in the Ear, and good for nothing else but to pass
the Time, T. M. perhaps, by occasion of Table-talke ministered, recounts some of
them, at, and for the Kings Repast.

107. As for example, omitting the old Stories of Saint Dionyse, that carried
his own head in his hand after it was strooken off; and of Clement the first,
who when he was cast into the Sea with a Millstone about his neck, the Sea
Infest. Clem.
^ed three miles from the shore, and there was found a little Chapel ready
built in the Sea, where his body was bestowed. And that of Neocaessarien,
whose staff stuck ^owne by him at the banks side, kept the river from
ouerflowing Greg. Thau. mat.
the banks, and presently sprung up and spread it self into a mighty Tree:
(that passed Aarons Rod, and Number. 17. 8.
came nearest to Romlus his Iaueling, which he darting from him, it
immediately stemmed up into a stately Cornell Tree, and there it grew till
Julius Caesar's time.) Plut. Romans


108. Like enough T. M. takes the Miracles of the New-Mint, whereof the Lady of
Hales, and the Conformities of Saint Francis (whom they call Iesum Typicum) and
Xauerius his life, and Bozius de signis, will afford great plenty: and
perhaps occasion was given to such discourse upon Garnets Stram: neus vul^u, as
if the Pole which holds his head upon London bridge were turned into a Straw.

109. These are Figs indeed, pleasant in the care and in the taste: but
Physicians write, that as such fruit (though Dioscor. lib. 1.
very pleasant, breeds corrupt blood, and ingendereth such Creatures which may
make Friars Postils as current and nimble as vitas-patrum: so it causes
choler also, procuring unto men of settled judgments, a zealous indignation,
to see that Religion should be Pharmacized with such Drugs.

110. Secondly, it may be also that this T. M. alighting upon the Popes large
extended Indulgences (which may fitly be compared to those Fig-leaues where
with our first Parents covered their dishonorable parts) pardoning enormous
sins for innumerable years upon sweet Conditions; as for kissing two iron
Crosses at Saint Peter's Church door in Rome, five hundred years of Pardon;
for looking Indulg. Romans liber.
upon one of the Pence for which our Savior was sold, 1400. years Pardon; for
beholding the Cross upon the top of Saint John of Lateran his Steeple, 1400.
years Pardon: Why? Because that Cross was made of the Sword which cut off
Saint John Baptists head. But all this is nothing, for Sixtus Quartus granted
forty thousand years of Pardon to him that would say a Prayer of his making,
consisting of about forty five words: And why? Because his Catholics might not
complain, that the Protestants satisfaction was easier then theirs. These, and
such like, this T. M. recounting, procures his Majesty some pleasure at his
Repast; and like enough occasion was given for this, in discoursing of the
Jesuits absoluing the POWDERTRAITORS from all their Sins, for so Worthy a
Work.

111. Thirdly, because (as it appears by the Prophet) that all Figs are not
of one quality, but like Grapes, some (...). 2^. 2.
exceeding naught and sour, such as the Historians write of the Laconi^ Fig,
which they say is (...), Athen. ex. Aristop.
^ery odious, dangerous, and Tyrannical Fig: it is probable that occasion is
ministered at his Majesty's Table, to disourse of those dreadful cruel
Positions of Popes deposing Kings, expo^g them to murder, inciting their
Subjects (...) Rebellion, and determining such Parricide to be Meritorious.
which (to some Waiters attending) seeming incredible, because they are so
horrible, this T. M. the yoonger (...) the Vessels to the full view; cites the
Authors (for he is like Plato his Philosopher, (...), very ready in all those
Writers) points to the Pages out of Rossaus, Symancha, Allen, Creswell,
Azorius, Bannes, Bellarmine, and Sixtus Quintus, that notable Panegyricall
Orator, and Extoller of such Murders.

113. Lastly, to make him a perfect SYCOPHANT, Dion Coccei.
because Stories do mention Liuiaes Fig, which was both Poisoned and
Poisoning, for so she served the Figs that the Emperor Augustus used to taste
of (which kind, by report, is not strange in Italy) happily, as it may sort
with the time, he records out of some Romish Writers, what an excellent vein
both Popes have in Figging each other away, and Jesuits too (as the Prists
relate) in dispatching with such pleasant Pills, any that stand in their way
or light.

113. If this fashion of his be SYCOPHANCIE, speaking the truth upon just
occasion offered, openly before Witnesses, alleging his Authors, pointing out
the places, and reading them; he need not be ashamed of the Title, but (as Job
speaks of his adversaries book) he may Job 31. 36.
take it, and bind it as a Crown unto him.

114. In the mean time, is not that SYCOPHANCIE in the worst sense, that
Jesuits, and principally Fa. Parsons, who in this kind, they say, is
Mereurius Solenniorum, Amian. Marcellin. lib. 14.
and (like him in the story, that related unto the Emperor mere dreams,
neither truly framed, and peruersly interpreted) mutter in Corners, and utter
in foreign Nations (to bring our Profession into hatred) that in England, we
put Catholics into the stocks, and there let them sit so long upon the
ground, till body and earth so rot together, (...). Ecclesiae Anglicanae.
that there cannot be a separation, but with flesh pulled from the bones; that
at Dover, some Catholics were put in Bears skins, and so baited to death by
Dogs!

115. That Garnet (the Arch-Traitor) was executed for reproouing the
Protestants with some sharp speeches; that his forehead received a Blow as he
was dragged upon the stones; and where the wound was, the sign of the
appeared, and the blood dropping down upon the Printed in Spain in Quarto
with a ballad.
Straw in the hurdle (others say it was at the Gibbet when he was bowelled, a
tale much like the Judges of Susannaes tree) and his face in full feature
printed upon the Straw (like another Veronica) and a Seraphins countenance
therwithall, that so there might be two faces under one hood; and all this to
bring Credit to their Society: this may be called Sycophancie, by S. Paul's
description, for speaking lies 1. Tim 4. 2.
through hypocrisy, without truth or testimony.

116. Whereas Relation of Stories, either serious or pleasant (warranted by
their own Authors) is not Sycophancie, but Verity. And if such discourse
work upon his Majesty's affections respectively for anger or mirth, and make
him cry out with the Poet, O Romanistae, Seruum p^us, vt mihi ^aepe
Bilem, saepe iocum vestri mouere tumultus? Horat.

Let them rather purge their Books both of such Fables, which (being
ridiculous) procure laughter; and also of such Positions, which (being
dreadful) breed horror in the care, and detestations in the hearts of
religious Princes, then call the relating of them SYCOPHANCIES: for wherefore
are they printed, but that they may be recounted?

117. Yea, but they are unfitly applied, or misunderstood by the Relator
(says this Grave Censurer:) for he the ^print (which is subject to
examination) as in this Apopologie, would ^e Authors so impertinently, either
making against him else, or nothing to his purpose; what liberty will he take
(quoth he) where he speaks with an applause, without Contradiction?

118. The Apologier (as he calls him) will answer with the Prophet, Existimasti
intque quodero tui simil^s: But it is Psalm. ^0. Judge. 9. 36.
no marvel if diuaken Zebul the Traitor took an Armic of men to be but
Shadows of Mountains; and there is no drunkenness to that of the Wormwood
Waters, which in Scriptures resemble Heretical Malice. Let that therefore
Apoe. 8. 11.
be the trial; and as here he shall be found either impertinent, or his own
adversary, accordingly let his Discourse at table be judged of: but when it is
come to that issue, the Reader will see and say, that you (Mass. Parsons) are
the right T. M. TV MEND AX; and the truth of his allegatio as so apparent and
pregnant, that if your conscience be not seared, your own judgment will be as
was his of Thamar, Iustior me est, his sincerity will so far outstrip Genesis
38. 26.
yours: we may conjecture it by your long holding off, with By-Discourses and
Inuectiues. For protraction always argues a misdoubt of good success.

119. From T. M the Minister, he comes again to his Majesty under the name
of the Apologier; who to acquit himself of Persecution, as before he had most
royally freed Queen Elizabeth; and thereby both to staunch the Popes weeping
for the afflictions of Catholics, and to tax their ingratitude, who, as Aesops
Wolf served the Crane that rid A^sop.
him of his choking bone, and saved his life, were so far from acknowledging
his Majesty's extended kindness, that they broke out into expostulation of
hard measure offered; plotted Treasons against his whole Realm with foreign
enterparle; that denied, against his person by Combination domestical; that
discovered, by Conspiracy against Root and Branch, King, Progeny, and State,
all at ONE BLOW; that defeated, by procuring the Popes Breues for discharge
from their Allegiance: His Majesty, I say, by the example of God himself, who
did so argue with Saul and David, declared his moderate courses with those
Catholics, exceeding Queen Elizabeth's, (though they 1. Sam. 15. 17. 2. Sam.
12. 7 8.
very great) and sets out his Clemency both by the effects which it wrought
in them, and by the particular enumeration of his benefits toward them.

120. For albeit Commemoration of good turns be generally an exprobration,
yet has it, in some cases, warrant in Divinity: for, What could I have done
more unto my Vineyard which I have not done? said God to Israel for her Es. 5.
4.
Sour Grapes: and, Were there not ten cleansed? says our Savior: thereby
reproouing the unthankfulness of nine, Luc. 17. 17.
with recording the benefit. And in humane learning also, two principal
reasons Plutarch yields among many other, De sui laud.
how without envy or blushing a man may commend himself, and recount his
extended favors; either against a Calumniator that does abase or extenuate
them; or an Ungrateful person that conceales them wholly, or requites them
badly: which is no vpbraiding (says he) but in the former, an Apology to
clear the slander; in the other, a reproof to check an ill nature.

121. The Effects; viz. that it wrought in them that height of Pride, as in
confidence of his Majesty's Clemency, they directly did expect, and assuredly
promise unto themselves Liberty of Conscience, and Equality in ALL things,
with his Majesty's best and most faithful Subjects.

122. In censuring whereof, the Jesuit in three large Numb. 20. 21. 22. shows
himself both a scorning shifter, and a sly Sophister: for after he has
scoffingly played with those words [HEIGHT OF PRIDE] he shifts them off, First,
by running again to his Common place of TORMENT OF CONSCIENCE, and in matching
the liberty thereof (that is, Toleration of their Religion) with freedom of
breathing the ane; (as if that ought as safely and freely to be granted, as
this.) Secondly, by Recrimination, that the humble and underling Protestants
among us; the Lollards and Wickl^sts in formertimes; the States in Germany
both high and low; and the Subjects of some Kings did and do make that their
plea with their Superiors. Lastly, by ^xpostulation, why not they as well*
especially of his Majesty; a King, First, so free before time from cruelty.
Secondly, descended of a mother that thought her self beholding to the
Catholics. Thirdly, confessing that he ever found the Catholics party most
trusty to him; and rewarding them for it thereby gave hope of like favor to
others. Fourthly, received with universal joy, trusting that as by his uniting
of Two Kingdoms, he had conjoined the Obedience of Two Nations; so would he
also have entertai ned their Religion, thereby to unite both sorts of his
Subjects

123 His Sophistry he shows in applying those words Height of Pride to One
thing, which his Majesty has reterred to Twain: for herein it consisted,
that they not only expected liberty of Conscience, but also Equality of ALL
things with us. This last he leaves out, and insists only upon the former. For
grant it were but a Step of Pride upon such slight presumptions to expect the
first; yet to promise unto themselves, together with that, to be Equally
preferred and favored by a Prince so diversely affected in Religion, and in a
State so thoroughly settled and well furnished with men more undoubtedly loyal (a
thing which his Majesty both in his book, and in his Government denies to
his faithful native Subjects of both Kingdoms whom (...). pa. 55.
He excludes from Offices of Judicature and State, in Both Realms
respectively,) This is the Summitie and Sublimitie of Pride.

124 Yet we will also join that issue with him; that, not to desire and
supplicate, nor to expect and hope (to which purpose he bringes all his
examples, varying from the point) the King ^aith not so: but, which are his
Majesty's words, DIRECTLY to expect, and assuredly to promise to themselves
LYBERTY OF CONSCIENCE, is itself alone, a Celsitude of Pride.

125 For, whether we measure the height of Pride by Lucifer the Prince over
all the Children of Pride, as Gregory moralizeth Jobs Leuiathan, whose only
presumption In Job. 41. 25. Jude. verse. 6. Genesis 3.
of Liberty without warrant, was both his inbred Pride, causing his own
overthrow, and his infused Pride to our first Parents, procuring their fall: or
by Scholestricall Divines, who confine all proud men within two sorts; One, of
Aquin. 22. q. 33. 5.
them which advance themselves above others; the second, which arrogate to
themselves that which is above them, and beyond their pitch: this
Selfe-promising assurance of those Catholics for Liberty of Conscience,
cannot be placed but in the Highest degree of pride, because it assures a
matter both unwarranted, and far above their compass, and beyond their duty.

126 It being first, Impious against God, who Symbolically forbids such mixture
in the Linsey-wolsey-garment, Deuteronomy. 22. 11. 1. Reg. 18. 21.
Metaphorically vpbraides it when he calls it halting between two opinions;
directly inhibiteth it in aduising not to draw in a counter ^ecting yoke with
Infidells (much less with Heretics, 2. Cor. 6. 14.
by Romish Divinity: because the first arises by ignorance, the other grows
strong by pertinacie:) pincheth at the permission of diverse Factions of
different opinions Apoc. 2. 14. 15
within the Same Church, and threatens the Toleration thereof with Revenge;
brandeth even very good Kings with 2 Reg. 15. 3. 4 34. 35.
a perpetual Censure, for not preventing or enduring it; severely punishes it
in the Samaritans, who feared the true 2. Reg. 17. 33.
God, and yet served Idols after the manner of other Nations; and is fastened
upon them for one of their maine Heresies, by the Church of God to this day.
Now, to Communicate Epiphan, lib. 1 de Samaris.
with a sin, is equally liable to the same punishment with the sin, and the
Magistrates permitting, is a Communicating.

127 Secondly, it being a matter dishonorable to the King, DIRECTLY to expect,
and ASSVREDLY to presume of it, is an Extremity of Pride. For honest men (even
of their equals) will expect nothing but that which shall stand with the credit
and reputation of the Granters: only Jesuits fugitives from their Country,
without leave, and against Law (as if they had been Conquerors of the Land,
or the sole Disposers of the Crown) presume upon a Liberty for heretical
superstition: Et rei per se faedissimae Liuy.
adiecta indignitas est, as the Historian speaks: and expect, yea, in a
manner claim, and exact of their King and Soue reign, who without stain of
his Honor cannot yield it; or satisfy them.

128 For so, first, he should be Contrary to himself, a quality sauouring
by his Majesty's own judgment (in matter less weighty) of two much
Weakness, and slipperinesse; (...). prefat. ad lectorem. pa. 7. (...), pa. 1.
he having apprehended the Religion which he now professes from the Cradle
of his Infancy; resolved his Conscience, that it is grounded upon direct
words of Scripture; maintained it both by Arguments in Disputation, and
against broiles by Combination, with his utmost skill and strength; enacted it
by Laws; established it by Oath; and neither by fear nor flattery, persuasion
or threate, could be drawn into the least inclination of yielding to this
Dispensatiue indifference: but did protest, even while matters were in a
mammering, as Watson, that Priest and Traitor witnessed (to whom his Majesty
spoke To the Earl of Northamp ton.
it) THAT ALL THE CROWNS AND KINGDOMS IN THIS WORLD, SHOULD NOT INDVCE HIM TO
CHANGE ANY ^OT OF HIS PROFESSION, WHICH WAS THE PASTVRE OF HIS SOVLE, AND
EARNEST OF HIS ETERNAL INHERITANCE: accounting in that his Golden Book, any
contrary Religion an Abomination: abhorring the disturbance Pa. 6.
of the Church peace by bitter Spirits, for matters indifferent even eo nomine,
as giving too great an advantage Presat pa. 11.
for entry to the Papists by such Division: distwading his Son the Noble
young Prince from taking to wife a woman (...). p. 78, 79.
of Different Profession, (though his choice should that way be much scanted)
fore-warning him of the Inconveniences many and dangerous, which would ensue
such a match: and withal, both sharply taxing, and with severity disgracing
Prefat. pa. 4. etc.
the blind zeal and rash Censures of some hot-mouthed Ministers in that
Country, who touched him for some few passages in his book, as if his Majesty
were either cracked, or cold, or at least, indifferent in Religion. Finally,
imputing it as the gteatest dishonor to Solomon the wisest King THAT his
slipperinesse and inconstancy; who having served God in his younger days,
being advanced to the highest, and honored with peace, abundance, and all
other blessings, most, then most of all failed in his Zeal and Religion, and
in this point principally, by admitting a strange worship within his Realm. 1.
Reg. 11.


129 Ag^ine, it must n^eds be dishonorable for a truly-Religious King, to
encertaine that into his Realm, which no Christian Emperor or King, ancient or
modern (were he a Prince absolute and hereditary, not elected upon condition,
nor enforced by violence, nor wrought upon by fear, nor induced by irreligeous
Policies) would ever endure, as in Constantine, Theodosius, Gratian, A^adius,
Eusebius. de vita Constable. l^b. 3. S^crat. lib. 5. Cod lib. 1. ^it. 5 Tul. de legib.
lib. 2.
Honorius, and others is manifest: yea, which the very Heathens in their
Commonwealth would not admit; who enjoined, that none but their Roman God,
should be adored, and THEY after no other manner but their own Country
fashion; Interdicting any private Shrine, or particular worship Different from
their public Order in Religion.

130 Moreover, his Majesty's Predecessor, a Prince of the weaker Six, being so
Resolute, as never to brook it in all her Reign, notwithstanding all the
persuasions, ^^p^ngs, threats, yea Treasonable assaults; no not so much as to
hear of any entreaty or treaty tending that way: and yet ruled at home in
peace, with comfort and honor, and made her party good with any foreign
Opposite whatsoever: If then his Majesty (beholding to no man for the
Kingdoms he entered, but God and his Native right) should immediately choppe
into this public Indulgence, (give it the best name) it might be thought
(then which nothing could be more Dishonorable) that HE had for doubt, or
fear, or some other circumstance, promised it before his entry; and so did
Watson, Digby, and Piercy give it out: and was not that the Height of Pride?
even that in the Psalmist, Vt torquem cinxit eos Superbia, ideo iniquitatem in
excelso loquuti sunt: They did wear PRIDE as a Psalm. 73. 6. 8.
Chain, therefore they talk wickedness presumptuously.

131 Thirdly, an Height it is of Pride, to presume of that which would be
Dangerous to the whole state if it were granted; especially their positions
being, first, that as soon as they can get strenght, they may break out into
Rebellion: Secondly, Creswel in Philop. pa 198 Rannes in Thom. 22. Bellar lib.
5. de Romans Pontifice
that if the Pope command, they must obey, though it be to take a^mes against
their Lawful Sovereign: Thirdly, disclosing what such Tol^ration would sort
unto if they had it, as appears by a chief B^l-weather among them, one
Parsons, whose peremptory Resolution was, as the Priests report it, that
hearing of Queen Elezabeths inclination, Qu^lib. pa. 156.
(which was but a false b^t) to a Tolleration (upon the League between France
and Spain) he utterly disliked it; and gave his reason, because they would
have AL, OR NONE; they would admit of NO conditions: Fourthly, having such
bloody minds, which some of them in words have prosessed, one of their great
Cardinals vaunted that his horse should Cardi. Farnes. Apud. Sl^id. lib. 7.
Swim up to the belly in the blood of the slaughtered Heretics. Make the best
of it, the Scripture assures us, that they will be either, as the Cananites
Whips in the sides, and Ios. 23. 11.
Thorner in the eyes of the Nation where they are; or (as the Amalekites) take
advantage of the feebleness of the Land Deuteronomy. 25. 16.
when they have espied it.

132 Besides, where the Prince is not loved, the State must needs be in
continual hazard: and admit HE. Tolleration, adeiu his love on each side: the
Contrary affected will dislike him, as Different from them in the main point;
they of his Own profession will neglect him for Tollerating a Religion so
oppos^e to theirs; so superstitious in it self, so Rebellious in the
principles: and no quarrel is so deadly as that which is for Religion (we see
the Samaritans could not abide the Jews, yet excluded our Savior, ONLY
because his face was toward Jerusalem) for, thence do Luc. 9. 53.
arise distraction of minds; bitterness of speech; plots of treacheries, and
mutuali Massacres; and each pa^e endeavoring to win other to their fashion,
would make the Commonwealth, like the dismembered body of Metius, rent and
torn between two Carts, driven contrary ways (Auertere omnes a tanta
foeditate spectacul^ ^culos, says Liuie) dreadful in it self, and loathsome
in view. Decad. 1.


133 Lastly, it is an Extreme HEIGHT of PRIDE to expect that of others, which
(to speak in the Prophets words, (though with more reverence then the Jesuit
here uses them) if Iordanis were conuersus retrors^m, and that Psalm 114.
the case were theirs, as now, God be thanked it is ours) THEY would not
endure to hear of, yea think it impious to ask, and irreligious to grant;
that is Stapletons Prompt Cath^ for 6. post. Pas sion. B^din. lib. 3. ca 7. ^ol.
opinion, who reuiles Bodin in particular, as an enemy to Christianity for
maintaining that Liberty. Which they conclude to be the Calamity of a Church,
and out of Hillary to be a miserable thing and perilous in a State, where there
are as many Faithes as Wills, so many Doctrines as Manners; that is the
Rhemists conclusion in their Testament. And Bellarmine spends two whole
Chapters in In Ephesians. 4.
confuting their Arguments, which plead for it, enforcing De ^icis. cap. 18.
19.
it from the example of the Jewish Church; grounds of Scripture; practice of
Emperors; judgment of Fathers; yea, reason and experience, to be pernicious in
any Realm both to Ecclesiastical and Civil state, and dangerous even to
themselves, which use that Liberty: breeding in them (for the time) a coldness
in their profession, and in the end a Nullity of Faith. Neither is the time
long, since that this Jesuit himself, among many reasons against this
expected Tolleration, Quodli. pa: 151.
used that for one, that it would make the Catholics in England Dull, and
without spirit.

134 Now let the indifferent Reader judge, whether this be not truly called an
HEIGHT of PRIDE, in a Company of Fugitives, directly to expect, and assume to
themselves, that such a King, desirous in his heart to serve God truly without
shrinking or Waue^ing: settled in mind; resolved in judgment; professing by
word, by Oath, by Laws, by ad^e, would admit either an Alteration total of
his inbred Religion, or a partial Tolleration of a different Profession: a
thing so contrary to Gods will; so dishonorable to himself; so dangerous to
the State; so condemned in others and denied in them, even by those that
request and expect THIS; unless they should think his Majesty to be of the
Sultans mind, to make no other account of Religion, but as a Nose-gay or
Garden of flowers, the more Variety Cam^rarius, ex Lewen^. in Paudect. Tur^c.
of them, the more delightful view, the more pleasant favor.

135 And it seems this Jesuit does so, by the slight resemblance he makes,
in comparing the Liberty of Conscience, to breathing and using the
Common-ayre: as if the King might as safely grant, and they as freely challenge
the one as the other. Surely were the Doctrine which they suck, like the Air
which they take in, this, first, concocted, and prepared by seuering and
purging the impuritie thereof, before it breed or feed the vital Spirits; so
the other, cleansed from the Dregs and corruptions where of it is compounded,
the best turned into Nutriment of the Soul, the rest cast out as excrement;
the restraint of both were too severe, and this resemblance might carry some
sway. But, seeing that both the Principles which are delivered, infect the very
Inwards, and they which take Plin. lib. 7. ca. 2.
them in (like the Psilli in Africa) do contagiously re-infect the very air
which they breath with a pestilent Savor of superstition and Disloyalty;
alienating the minds of their cohabitants, as well from the true Service of
God, as from their duty and allegiance to their Sovereigns; the comparison is
unfit, and the restraint different: the use of Common air may be left free,
and yet Liberty of Conscience precluded to such infecting Doctrine, and
infected spirits.

136 His Recrimination (which is the second shift) is drawn from Domestical
and foreign examples. Domestical; first Modern, of those which in matters of
Ceremony, and Church government, differ and sever themselves from us: whom,
both to currie favor with them, he calls humble, and to excite envy to us,
he terms Underling Protestants: two titles, in those men mere
contradictory; for neither are they humble because they are Underlings (we see
the Bramble and Shrub in the Scripturs, has as lofty conceits, and more
stinging prickles in his low site, then Judge 9. 15.
the spreading Vine, or the pleasant Fig tree:) neither a^ they Underlings
because they are humble; it is only Pride and self conceit (like him in the
Prophet, Stand apart, come not nee^e me, for I am holier then thou) which
keeps Fsa. 65. 5.
them aloof: It is not the inferior place; or the dejected visage, or the
^oft voice, or dislike of Prelacy, that denominates humility. To disobey
authority, is a greater Pride then to be in place of authority; and therefore
he did well to match these humble underlings with his presuming Catholics:
for Heresy and Scisme to frame the same Plea of Liberty, and claim the same
Privileges is neither unusual, nor improbable: and even this very thing
conuinceth Him and His of HIGH PRIDE. For if these humble Underlings (as he
calls them) dwelling among us, differing in matters Only Ceremonial, are not
heard in that their claim of Liber^e; it is an audacious Boldness for those who
in points essential and fundamental are severed from us, to expect that which
to them is denied. The truth is, the obstinate Plea of our Reformers for such
Liberty, has been the very life and soul of the heart, and hope of this
Presumptuous Expectation in the Romanists; which, by the brotherly and
unanimous concurrence of the other with us, had long ago been quelled and
crushed.

137 The other part is of Domestical ancient Examples, namely of Lollards and
Wickliuists, beating upon that argument; and conspiring against the Prince,
upon the Denial. Their Conspiracies, if any such were, (but the contrary is
pregnantly proved by Master Fox, who coped Acts and Momu^ in Hen. 5.
with Harpsfield shrouded under the borrowed habit of Allen Cope, in the trial
of that point) we defend not: Subjection to Princes we preach; Insurrections we
defy: lawful Conuentions for Gods service we allow; mutinous bandings or
Conuenticles seditious we condemn. To Supplicate unto Princes, and to make
friends of the greatest, (with modesty and sobriety) for enjoying a freedom
to serve God in that manner, which they are persuaded truly is most
conformable to his word, that is allowable: If petitions be denied. Submission
with patience is Christian humility, and the Evangelical Precept: but with
reuerated Impudency to press, or vnd^full terms to threaten, or banded
Routs either to enforce a grant, or daunten the Prince, is devilish Pride, and
Disloyal Conspiracy. The answer therefore in brief is this: Did they well
that claimed this liberty? Why then were they condemned? Did they not well?
Why do those Catholics strike upon that string so often, and expect the grant
with such confidence? Had the King done well in giving them that Liberty? Then
was the Pope to blame, who incited him against them. If he did well to deny
them, it is injury (if not impudency) in these Catholics, to crave that for
themselves, which they thought fit to be denied to others.

138 The foreign examples, as of the higher Germany in the time of Charles the
fifth, and of the Low Countries are no fit precedents for our State: the
government of the Emperor being limited and conditional; which he
transgressing, they by their Laws and Customs had warrant to oppose, and
stand for their impeached Liberty. For every Sleidan. lib. 18.
Duke, Lands-graue, and other great men (both Ecclesiastical and Temporal) in
Germany, having Regal Jurisdiction within their Precincts, it is no marvel,
if, to countenance their special Immunities, they strive to maintain their
several Religions: for Conformity in Religion will quickly work a Coalition
of distinct Regiments. Now what Argument call you this? Several Magistrates in
their particular Jurisdictions, challenge their liberty of conscience,
according to custom anciently continued, and upon conditions mutually and
formerly capitulated: therefore Subjects under an absolute Monarchy must
Claim it of their Sovereign, and at least expostul^e with him if they have it
not.

139 Yea, but in Bohemia, Polonia, Hungaria, etc. which are governed by Kings,
the like is urged and tolerated. Were the entrance into those Kingdoms,
successiue, not Elective: or, if by Descent, without conditional restraints,
the example were more proper: but it is well known (as it has been answered)
that many of those Kings, willing enough to reduce their Countries to one
Profession, have had both their desire and power restrained by the Nobles; and
were received of their Commons at their first entry, with that Prouiso, that
their accustomed Liberty of Conscience be no way prohibited or interrupted.
If then they (as Traian the Emperor, when at the admitting of a Praetor,
girding his sword, he gave it him with these words, If I rule according to
Law, use this FORM: if contrary to Law, use it AGAINST ME) are contented so
to Capitulate for maintaining their Subjects Liberties, their Allegiance (by
their own Law) is no longer tied, then the other Condition is performed.

140 Yet grant they were absolute Monarkes which either yield or offer such
Liberty of Conscience, what is that to his Majesty? who in Cases of Religion
takes not men's examples, but Gods laws for his Directs: HE knows what
Princes ought to do, not regarding what they please to do, being desirous
rather to govern by Christian piety, then Irreligious Policy. HE knows it
to be observed both by Jewish and Christian Divines, that the diversity of
Religion Tolerated by King Solomon in Divine worship, was by God required upon
his Heir and next Successor, 1. Reg. 12.
Iure Talionis, by a retaliated division of an unrecoverable rupture in the
Civil Government: and therefore how can they, or why should they, Expect or
promise it to themselves from his Majesty?

141 Yes (says he) first, because HE was FREE from Cruelty and persecution
before: that is to say, HIS Majesty is naturally merciful; therefore he must
become carelessly Irreligious: for, to license Idolatry, is to communicate with
Impiety. Moses was a very mild man, above all the men that were upon the earth
(says the holy ghost) Numb. 12. 3
yet when he spied a Calse in the Camp, he proclaimed a bloody Massacre, and
pronounced the execution to be a Exodus 32. 27. 29. 1. Sam. 2.
Consecration. It was not Ely his Clemency, in suffering his sons to
profane Gods Sacrifice, that could excuse him from a fearful punishment. HIS
Majesty's Song is the same with King David, Mercy and Judgment: His eyes to
be bent upon the faithful in the Land, that they may Psalm. 101.
dwell with him: but withal, Betimes to root out facientes praeuaricationem,
and operantes iniquita^em, both those that under pretense of Religion, fall away
Disloyally, and those that Combine together for mischief rebelliously.

142 Secondly, HIS Mother held herself much beholden to Catholics. To the Lay
Gentlemen for their Faithfulness and Allegiance she did perhaps; but had She
not relied too much upon the Priested sort, her End had not been so sudden nor
unkind. This Jesuits meaning is (for true love to his Majesty, no doubt) thus
to cast salt into his eyes, or to stir revenge in his heart, by the often
Repetition of his Royal Mother. In the mean time, is it not a violent
presumption upon a valiant ground: The Mother loved Catholics for their
dutifulness and Loyalty: Ergo, The Son must give them liberty of
Conscience, though defiled with Idolatry against God; and enuenomed with
Treasonable malice against his Person? Religion is not derived Ex Traduce, it
is the infusion of the Spirit, not a conueyance by Descent; it is the instinct
of grace, not the instilling of Nature. The Son of Their, who was an
Idollmaker, became, and had the name to be a father of the faithful: and the
heir of Hezekiah a most religious King, became Rom 4. 2. Reg. 21.
a Prince of cruel Idolatry.

143 Thirdly, His Majesty confesses in his Book, that he found the
Catholics party most trusty to him in his other Kingdom. That is not so:
His Majesty names Preface. pa. 6 B^. pa. 34.
not Catholics at all; but both, in the Preface, and in the Book it self,
professes that he found non^ so steadfastly to a bide by him in his greatest
straits, as they which constantly kept their true Allegiance to his mother.
True Subjects withdraw not their Civil Obed^ence from their Prince, though he
be of a different Religion. God has revealed the one by commandment; he
reserues the secret judgment of the other to himself: for it is not Romes
Divinity, but Gods Book that makes good Subjects: and it is very probable,
that when his Majesty has cast up his account of former Disloyalties, he
shall find the moderate and Direct Protestant (that inclines neither to right
nor left, depends not upon Popes indulgence, nor pleades for Presbyters
Discipline) to be the fast and faithful Subject: THAT Divinity either of
Deposing Princes, or surprising their Parsons, or renouncing Allegiance, being
found neither in Books, nor practice of any, but such as are either Iesuited,
or Geneuated.

144 Fourthly, his Majesty's entry to this Realm, was applauded with
universal rejoicing. If he had said General, that is, Ex generibus
singulorum, that the most of alsorts received HIS Majesty, even as King
Solomon, when he was proclaimed, with such shoutes of joy, that the earth rang
1. Reg. 1. 40.
with the sound of them, it is most true: or if by universal, he meant through
the whole Land, and of all true-hearted Subjects, it is his Majesty's comfort,
and was no more then their Duty. For how can it be but that the members of the
body should express their joy at his access, who is the head of their
guidance, and the breath of their Nosthrils? but if he take universal for
every Subject, howsoever affected; either his speech is not true; or their joy
was unsound. For some of them, before ever they had seen his face toward us,
were plotting Treasons against him: and others had Breues in their Cabinets, if
power had concurred, or occasion fitted, to impeach HIM. So the universal
Bishop, (as Antichrist terms himself) was no Party, Greg. Mag.
nor Friend in this Universal Joy; nor this filius vniuersi, Fa. Parsons, for
he in his Viro D^loso (his Dole-man) had renounced his part in our Sovereign,
and pronounced himself elsewhere a Desperate and Forlor^e Heretic: yea,
Dolm. pa. 216
they are his express words, Whosoever shall consent to the succession of a
Protestant, is a most grievous and damnable sinner.

145 And that the joy was not universally unfeigned, himself does implicit,
confess it: for their Rejoicing was (says he) in hope of LIRERTIE: that is a
mercenarie respect, no entire joy: for true love seeks not her own, (says
Saint Paul. Had it been sincere and simple, then (being 1. Cor. 13.
commanded) they would perform Obedience; or if crossed, they would submit
with patience: for perfect Ibid. Psalm. 18.
love, neither disdaineth, nor repineth, nor falls away. But strange Children
will fail; David found it by experience; and that was their purpose, as this
Jesuit purports; for (says he) they MEANT to serve him faithfully; but now,
defeated of their hope, their Joy is quailed, and that MEANING altered.

146 The last reason he uses for the ground of this Presumption: is (as
Solomon speaks) carbones ad prunas, Pro 26. 21.
a Ball of Wilde-fire cast in, to set his Majesty and his English Clergy in a
mutual combustion; and that by way of Retortion, viz. Why should not the
Catholics hope of equal favor from his Majesty with T. M. and his fellows,
who having been old enemies, and always borne a hard and hateful hand and
tongue against his Majesty, both in Sermons, Books, and speeches, all the time
of the late Queens reign, must now be so privileged. (Nullis meritis
praecedentibus) as they will suffer none to be equally preserred with them?

147 This is the Devils humor up and down; first, as he is DIABOLVS, a
Calumniating forger of malicious Leasings (for there is not one word of all
this true) yea, it was the hearty joy of T. M. and his fellows, (we need not
be ashamed of our society) in that Orbity and age of our late Sovereign, that
there was an HEIR to the Crown apparent, though not by a Declaration, yet,
maugre all Opposites (Iesuitic all and Infernal) apparent by Deuolution, and
vn-auoideable Succession; most soundly grounded both in the essential points
of Religion^ and royally affected to the outward policy of this
Church-Gouernment: which joy, so far as without offense they might, they did
express. Secondly as he is SATAN, an adversary of Peace, a sower of Discord
(whose Kingdom fares best, when there is most distraction, thus to set enmity
between the Sword, and the Keys; a Gracious Prince, and his Loyal Clergy:
but Apage Satana, says his Sacred Majesty. Thou perceiuest not the things
that be of God: for it is HIS property, Psalm. 68.
to make men to be of one mind in an house: and it is the duty of every
true Christian (by the Apostles advise) As much as in him lies, to have peace
with all men; much more to preserve and nourish it between Prince and Subject.
Romans 12.
Thirdly as he is LVCIFER, to challenge (as in their Doctrine) God, for Heavens
inheritance, so (in their Pride) the King for earthes preferment, as Debt^ers
to desert. WE in both, plead Grace, and not merit: and the less we have
deserved of both, the more we acknowledge Gods mercy, and his Majesty's
favor.

148 Preferment of Many is the amplitude of a kings power: the singling out of
Some is the Liberty of his choice, and where there is less desert, there
Grace is the larger, and the streiter bond to the us more nearly in Love and
Loyalty to so gracious a King: not by presumption (challenging a special
privilege) nor through Envy repining at other men's aduancements: but in
duetifull affection and care to keep those farthest from him, whose
entertainment into favor would be dangerous to his Majesty, and like to the
untamed Heyffers, sed to their own liking, would soonest Goare HIM, that had
given them life, and armed them with strength.

149 For had not the truly-affectionate acknowledgement and gratulation, been
more entire and sincere from T. M. and his Fellows, then hitherto has been
showed from the Head and Members of the Romish Synagogue, his Majesty, might
too justly have said of England, as they did of Canaan, Bonaterra, sed Mala
gens, the Land is pleasant and rich, but the people are the Sons of Anak,
Monstra Numb. 13. 29
quadam siliorum, not Christians, but Monsters: a Title fitting unthankful
men, not for the raritie of the persons, Verse. 35.
(there are too many) but for the hugeness of that vice, which comprehends
within it all kind of Impiety: Nimis enim durus animus (says Saint
Augustine) Qui dilectionem, Augustine.
et si nolebat imp^ndere, nolit rependere. It is too bad a disposition that
will neither afford love, nor requite it; neither offer it with kindness,
nor return it with acknowledgement.

150 THIS, because it pleases his Majesty to exaggerate, by enumeration of
his manifold benefits, and gracious Clemency toward them; both by release
from greeuances of Purse, of Prison, by access to his presence, by additions
of honor, by rescue from death, (though convicted, though sentenced) and many
such: thereby to Embroider the Popes Ingratitude, and to heap coals of fire
upon their heads, who had heaped up Coals for Fire to have taken off at ONCE
so many heads: how disdainfully this Jesuit accounts of the One, and how
simply he answers for the other, will appear as follows.

151 For first, Numb. 24. in the Margin, he terms his Majesty's rehearsal,
an EXPROBRATION, which (as was said before) is rather an expostulation for
returned unkindness: because to twit unthankful men with recounting the good
turns which they have received, is no vpbraiding of bitterness, but a
necessity of Reproof. Neither is such Enmeration an Advocate to plead for
requital, but a looking-glass to present to the parties their own
deformitic, and to exhibit to strangers a view of both: lest taking knowledge
of disloyal courses enjoined of the one part; and with all, not understanding
the benefits bestowed by the other, they might take them to be inforcoments
upon hard measure offered, that are truly the issues of corrupt natures ill
disposed: and this course God himself took; first, recounting his benefits,
then calling Esa. 13.
Heaven and earth to witness between him and his people; and lastly m^ng the
parties Judges unto themselves of their own unthankfulness, Sape enim opus
est, Esa. 5. 3. Seneca de benes. lib. 7. ca. 23
malis Exactore, etiam bonis admonitore: forgetfulness in good men requires
admonition, in ill men an exaction, says Seneca.

152 Secondly, after he has set down, Number, 24. his Majesty's particulars
of those benefits; he concludes it Numb. 25. with Pilats Ecce Homo, this
Ieting scorn, Thus writes THIS MAN. Belike some contemptible fellow of the
Plebeian sort; or foam refuse Scribe like unto Fa. Parsons, that Writes he
knows not how, nor cares what: yet well fare King Saul, though forsaken of
God, (when David repeated the kindness which he had showed him in sparing his
life, even when the Lord had delivered 1. Sam. 24. 10. etc.
him up; and some of his fellows had eg'd him on to kill Saul; and for an
evident token thereof, let him see the skirt of his Garment cut off,) he had
the grace (at least the civility) to acknowledge the kindness, not only in
good terms, (Is this the voice of my Son David?) but Verse. 17. 18.
with a detestation of himself, for dealing so ill with him (thou art more
righteous then I:) and also an Obtestation for a blessing from God, The
Lordrender thee good, for thy good done to me this day:) but this Jesuit
comes short even Seneca vbi. supra.
of the Stoikes use, who wishes benefits to be recorded, and repeated to a
forgetful receiver, vt sic nescisse se aut mentiatur, aut doleat, for so he
shall eitherlie in denying that he has received them; or be sorry and grieve,
that he did not acknowledge them: for this fellow, his memory being rubbed,
denies not the benefits, yet scarsely acknowledges them to be benefits, but
turns them off with a scornful extenuation, SVCH AS THEY WERE, like enough
not worthy the naming: too mean (no doubt) for a King to give; and too base
(belike) for such true Subjects, (the Popes vassals) to receive.

153 Sed Stulto intelligens, quid interest? a Right noble Lord, truly
honorable in himself, and soundly Loyal to his Sovereign (who knows what
belongs to Religion and Duty) after particular Enumeration of the very same
with comfort, weighing them in the just Balance of wisdom and thankfulness,
acknowledges them, for the weight and price, to be Many Talents, and a large
portion of grace and bounty. But this is the Kings Comes No* (...) ad Garnet.
Agg. 1. 6.
Guerdon from VNTHANKFVLL WRETCHES, Mercedes locat in pertusum Sacculum (as the
Prophet speaks) that he has powered his Rewards into a riuen bag.

154 But whatsoever they were, small or great, they apper^eine nothing to the
Pope, (says this his Proctor:) as if the Pope were another Heraclite, that
weeps all: Vir magni m^oris, nullius gaudij; But as if he were of the Stoikes
mind to auow, that Nihil boni a Caesare, the King Arrian. Epict. lib. 4.
can bestow nothing worthy HIS account, be it preferment, or Office, or
whatsoever.

155 Surely then is the Pope either unnatural; for a true head has a perfect
Simpathy with the members as well for mirth as for grief; to be merry with
the joyful, as to weep with the sorrowful (that is Saint Paul's rule:) or Magn^
cum anim^ maeiore etc. Breue. 1.
else his grief he speaks of, was but Hiprocrisie, A^ramentalis, not
Mentalis; all his tears turned into Ink, conveyed through a Goose-quil into a
paper Breue, never came near his heart, nor were expressed with true
affection: for he can never truly grieve in others distress, that will not
heartily rejoice in his well doing. The Elder Brothers Luc. 15.
sullenness at the yongers ioy-feast upon his return, argued that his riot
and afflictions did little affect him; whereas the Angels double rejoicing at a
sinners recovery, implies their grief to be very great in his former fall.

156 But indeed in the Pope it is very Pride: a quality which is ever
querulous, repining if in every thing the turn may not at all hands be
served; never thankeful, as challenging all Courtesies (even of the greatest
states,) to be debts of mere duty, and offices of Obliged Allegiance; Sed
cesset Gratiarum decursus, si non fuerit recursus (says Bernara) if the Pope
have no more feeling of benefits bestowed Bern. in Ca^^ic.
upon his vassals, either they serve a senseless Master; or else good turns
(that way conferred) may well be spared. Marry as for the Catholics (says
he) they accept even the least favor gratefully, hoping to have received much
greater, (as due unto them) if his Majesty had not been prevented by Sinister
Information.

157 Here Judas is turned into Caiphas, and speaks a truth, as President to
the Council for the POWDERPLOT; the revealing whereof by a Letter unexpected,
he cunningly calls a Sinister Information, which indeed prevented his majesty
from feeling the event of that dreadful Design; and them also of their
greater hopes, which here he calls their DVE, as if ALL but THEY were
Usurpers; for had not that prevention happened, the greatest places of the Land
(which THEY in hope had swallowed) had been ere now at their disposal; and
this Prevention he calls Sinister, as unlucky to them: otherwise he should
have said, that his Majesty had further enlarged and continued those favors,
but that he was Prevented, not by Sinister Informations of others, as T. M.
etc. But by a Dexter combination of themselves, Jesuits and Gentlemen; they
councelling, these complotting: they concealing, these engining; they
absoluing, these resolving; all, together vowing and swearing, and sealing with
the Sacrament Secrecy and Villainy. And this says his Majesty was the
Labrusca, the sower fruit returned, and the whole recompense that was made,
for his former indulgence of Grace and bounty.

158 Which speech, this Miles Gloriosu^ (in disdain) calls a Calumniation of
THIS MAN (as, THIS PVBLICAN, says the Pharisee) And why a Calumniation? first,
in respect of the Time, because there had been Persecution before that treason,
namely the pecuniarie mulcts imposed in Queen Elizabeth's time, once Remitted
by his Majesty, were presently recalled again; the Arrerages exacted, and for
leuying thereof men's houses ransacked, Cattle seysed, Rents streyned, and
Tenants vexed, as in a common spoil aad Desolation.

159 Here are words of a Tumult, or rather a tumult of words, to make a
Tragedy of trifles, and a story of Fables, trussed up together like a
Mountebankes pack of Unsavory Intelligences, conveyed unto him by some of his
Malicious and illuding Agents. But in these cases, other manner of Statesmen,
and better acquainted with the course of such proceedings are to be heard.
First, that the Arrerages of those Mulcts in the Queens time, being due debts
to the Crown, were not wholly remitted; but (which was a principal favor) by
a special Commission to Comes Northam. orat. ad Garnet.
that purpose directed, Recusants had liberty to compou^d, almost for what
term, and at what rates they might best, and with most ease satisfy.
Secondly, that those mean profits which had accrued since the Kings time, to
his Majesty for their Recusancie, were forgiven to the principal Gentlemen,
who had both at his Entry, showed so Comes Salisb. orat. ad Digby.
much Loyalty, and had kept themselves freefrom all Conspiracies. Thirdly, for
the ransacking and the distreyning which he talks of, if it were according to
Law, it is warranted; if otherwise, it was punished. For that was a further
favor of his Majesty to command that those Officers Comes Northampt. vbi supra
should be punished, which made a prey of Penalties, and a personal private
gain by the public justice of the State.

160 But admit it were all true he speaks, (as every word is false) did not
the Treasons of your good friends, (Fa. Parsons) Watson and Clerk break out
first, and a second Combination (not without a Popish Priest) after that? upon
which, some Principal Recusants were sent for, to Hampton Court, and dismissed
with the favor before specified? And grant it were before the POWDER
CONSPIRACY fell out, it was not before those Traitors fell into it, or another
as desperate as that, which was the Preamble unto this.

161 A second reason why he calls it a Calumniation, is in respect of the
effect; Wherein Clemeneie (says he) is made the cause of that POWDER TREASON,
which neither was so, nor can be so; first, because CLEMENCY does not
exasperate men or Beasts; but the Treason was a Plot of MEN PROVOKED. Secondly,
no Philosopher in his institution of a commonweal, or security of a Prince,
puts CLEMENCY for a cause of such effects. Thirdly, No examples of any prince
who came to disastrous ends, do warrant THAT to be the cause of their violent
Deaths, and therefore this is a STRANGE ASSERTION.

162 Is this Jesuit a Preuaricator in the cause of those Traitors, or a
Proctor for them? For this very same is his Majesty's argument and
aggreeuance, that his CLEMENCY should exasperate any to such a Treason, as was
Singular from all examples, different from all Instructions of Policy, and
degenerate from the nature of Men or Beasts: for in nature, the fiercenes of
wild Savages, by mild handling Iac. 3.
is tamed; and in Politikestates, the more certain security to Princes, (for
their safety) is by mansuetude and Clemency; Senec de Clem. li. 1.
and None but Tyrants are noted for examples of not leaving their lives, --
Sine Caede and Sanguine: and therefore Horace.
they, who against a moderate Prince should intend so bloody a death, showed
themselves to be more undutiful and unnatural then wild men or Beasts.

163 And yet that discontented and Rebellious humors are caused and nourished
in some by Clemency, is no strange Assertion, either in Nature or Policy,
whether for position or example (as this great Philosopher does confidently
auerre it;) for, as in Nature, some vegetable creatures the more tenderly they
are touched, the more they will sting (as nettles, which being crushed hard,
will reflect no Plut. de discer. adulat.
smart:) so in the sensitive, some so fierce, that no discipline (violent or
moderate) will cicure them; others so malignant, that the more kindly they are
handled, the more currish they are, (as some Dogs, stroke them, they will
snarle, strike them they will crouch:) So in Philosophy, the Seneca.
rule being general, that Actu^ actiuorum est in patiense pradisposito, the
effect of any active power, is according to the Disposition of the Patient:
ask then the Naturalists, they will tell you, that the Sycamor tree, the more
it is moistened, Ama^us I^it. in Dioscor.
the drier it waxes; that water sprinkled into a Smiths forge, will make the
fire burn the more fiercely. Ask the Phys^ans, and they write, that what
states the stomach of one, will make another to regorge; and that the sweetest
honey procures in some the most bitter choler. Go to Gregor. N^ss. in
Ecclesiast.
the Oeconomickes, ye shall hear them say, that some Servants account their
Masters Lenisie but for an Anarcby, and thereupon (...), so carry themselves,
as if Philo (...).
they had no Master. And was it not a Father that said to his Son, Male ^e
do^uit meafacilitas multa? My lenity has Terent.
taught thee much mischief? Ask the Politickes, first, Speculatiue; they say
that the gentle disposition of Governors (...), (if it be always mild and
benign) is Clem. Alexan. (...). 10.
eftsoons contemned; and Contempt is the Mother of disloyalty. Secondly
Practique; begin with heaven, and the King thereof (who among the Heathen is
called Regnator Senec. Tacitus Psalm. 78. 34.
Pols) what found he? When HE SLEW them, they sought him, and returned early
and enquired after God: but when they had QVAILES to the full, and MANNA with
Satietie, then they repined and tempted him most. Come to Kings on earth;
first, Jewish; David in his own person Pro amore meo aduersa^ sunt mihi: For
my friendship (says Psalm. 109. 4. 5.
he) they were mine Adversaries, and returned me hatred for my good will: and
in the person of Christ, (as S. Augustine applies it) because our Savior
(says he) in the depth of his benignity, rendered good for evil; therefore
they in August. in eum locum.
the height of their maliguitie, would render him evil for good. Secondly,
Kings Christian; Berengarius the Emperor had no such Treacherous enemy as
Flambertus, Cuspinian. in berengar.
whom he highly advanced, and entirely used in his Secrecies of State and
Familiarity: yet the story says, that the more kind the Emperor was, and
professed himself unto him, Eo magis aestuaret innocentem tollere Regem: for
some Seas will boil and rage, even in the greatest Calm.

164 Not to fetch examples far; Our Gracious Sovereign, in all the Realms
which HE enjoys; has found it too true, by an ouer-deere bought experience,
as his self confesses. For Scotland, hear his Majesty speak: I thought by
being GRACIOUS at the beginning, to win all men's hearts to a loving and
willing Obedience: but by the (...). pa. 32.
contrary, I found the disorder of the Country, and the loss of my thanks to
be all my Reward. For England, the fact it self shall speak, viz. the
Jesuits Crying Sin, out of the Vault of Powder and Iron, hatched in the lake
of Fire and Brimstone: Whence arose those Devilish and destroying thoughts? As
the Lord pleaded with Israel, so might his Majesty with those Catholics: O my
people, what have I Mich. 6. 3.
done unto thee, or wherein have I grieved thee? Testify against me. Is it
because I eased you of your Fines and Amerciaments? or that I sent you with
life and limme out of the Land? or, that I made no distinction in access to my
presence, of Tro^an or Tyrian, of Hebrew or Egiptian? or, that I honored you
with favors and aduancements equally with others? or, for which of my Good
Deeds would you have thus stoned me? For no unkindness can you lay against
me, but that I have not been at all Unkind. For Ireland, let the Rebel
himself speak; What hard measure felt Tirone from his Sacred Majesty?
unless admittance to personal speech, gracing with favors, granting him
immunities, pardoning him Treasons, giving him his life, which now breaths
NEW Conspiracies be an Exasperation, or provoke discontent.

165 And therefore, that there should be so bad dispositions, in which
Clemency (so gracious a virtue) should work so graceless fruits, argues a
Strange affection: but that Clemency should exasperate some natures to
disloyalty, is no such Strange Assertion in Philosophy, either humane or
divine; no more then that the same Suns heat should exhale a fragrant favor
out of the flowers in the field, and a loathsome stench from a dead Corpse in
the same Champian. For sore eyes will smart in that light, whereby the sound
eye receives the help and comfort: Is It is adiumentum, illis tormentum, says
S. Augustine. And August. contra. Crescon. lib. 10.
in Divinity, S. Paul found the same Doctrine to work the savor of life in
some, which wrought in others the savor 2. Cor. 2. 16.
of Death; not intentionately from the Subject, but occasionately by the vice
of the Object. For the preaching of the Cross, to them which Perish, is folly,
but to them which are 1. Cor. 1.
saved the power of God. Truth to beget hatred, is the Poets Terent. Gal. 4.
speech, and the Apostles experiment: and Lenity to exasperate some natures is
no strange thing, either in Philosophy, or to Magistracy: which, our Dread
Sovereign, being both a Philosopher, and a Magistrate, (that is our happiness)
does know in his Learning, and has felt in his Government to be too true.
And therefore we will close up this point with the Jesuits own words
elsewhere: But his Majesty is wise, and will (as we hope) according to his
Numb. 24.
prudence, in time, look into THIS SORT of men, and discern to avoid such
manner of dispositions: well knowing, that Waspes, if they be not strongly
repelled with the Bees sting, will possess their hi^s, suck their Combs
dry, and Plut. de disce^i. adulat.
their bodies dead.

166 Now let us proceed (says he, Numb. 28.) that is, let us return to show,
that as there were (before the POW DER TREASON) persecutions for spoil, so
also by searches of houses; whereof some were so violent and inhumane, that
Gentlewomen were forced out of their Beds to be ransacked for Crucifixes, etc.
(Me^rane shows of a Cloistered Priest in the Low Countries, that forced men's
Histor. Belg. l. 8
wives out of their beds in a more beastly sort, so to make them right
Catholics, that is Common-woomen:) some so fellonious, that a friend of his
was bereaved of a silver Cup (no Challice,) only because it had the name of
Jesus graven on it.

167 Many Thieves use to rob with Ch^lures and false beards, because they
would not be descried; and Jesuits will huddle stories, but conceal names,
lest their credit should be hazarded. That Malefactors, either for acts
unlawful committed, or public Edicts contemned, should be pursued to their
holds, and fetched out of their houses, yea, some sort to be plucked even from
the horns of the Altar, is justifiable both by Gods book, and man's Law; and
principally such as seduce Liege people, stealing their souls from God, and
their hearts from their Sovereign: yea, and if Achan have any thing execrably
consecrated, his Tent must be searched, and the Babilonish garment, with the
Wedge of Gold, and the shekles of silver Josh. 7.
(though hid in the midst of the Tent, and in the bowels of the earth) must be
ransak't, dug out, and confiscate, either to public de facing, or utter
demolishing. For the Cup he speaks of, if it were a Challice hallowed for the
Mass, it was forfeited by Law either as Corah his Cense^, (to be translated to
right holy use) or as the Brazen Serpent, to be accounted Nehushtan, and
trampled as a piece Numb. 16.
o^ brasle, or refuse Silver: and it is probable it was so, by that inscription
of Jesus, which upon profane vessels (for common use) either is not usually,
or should not at all be charactered. For if the Heathen reputed it an indig
nity to the Emperor, that any should Principis imaginem obscoenis infer,
stamp the Princes image upon homely vtensils; Christians should be more
religious then to engraue Seneca.
our Savior his holy name upon Quaffing-Cups: but this is a story out of
Lucians Icaromenippus, told out of the Clouds; for had he named the party, he
had uncased himself ^o the world, to appear (as he is indeed) a mere
Falsarie.

168 From Searches of Houses, he comes, Number. 29. to Imprisonments, and
condemnation to death of many Catholics. And the whole great number of those
Many, were but two executed, a Priest and his Recepter: the rest that were
sentenced, but four or five pardoned, and sent to Wisbitch, where in their
ret^red ease, and full diet, they might cry heu quanta patimur? and for what
cause? for coming into England to exercise their function (says he) against
the Statutes of Queen Elizabeth; and after his Majesty's Proclamation, and for
seducing the Kings people he should have added. As if, either a Statute of a
Land with the Princes death were annulled, which is not Epist. 16^.
so, says S. Augustine, for though Constantine be dead, yet the judgment
given against you by Constantine lives: or, if in force, that the breach of
Statutes enacted, and contempt of Kings Edicts proclaimed, were either a
Peccadilio, or no sin at all, Saul's Edict, transgressed by Jonathan, neither
God himself (as it seems) took well, nor the King would be satisfied for the
transgression, but by 1. Sam. 14. 27. etc.
allotting to Death his own son. And what was the offense? casting of an
hony-combe, contrary to command. Christian Princes and States, for their
security, enact Laws, and promulge Decrees, in cases of higher nature; by
abandoning Seducers to Idolatry, and Perswaders to Disloyalty; contempt and
breach of both ensues, and the punishment upon the Transgressors must be
entitled Persecution. The Bishop of Rome his Breues to interdict Allegiance,
must, upon dreadful Censures (without contradiction) be obeyed. The Monarch
of great Britain his Proclamations, to disburden his Realm of a VIPEROVS
BROOD, must be either calumniated, or sans-punie transgressed. Whereas
Divinity teaches Christians, that Princes Edists (not made against Christ) are
propounded to alacrity of subjection, not variety of construction, much less
to contempt by violation. When Emperors hold the truth (says Saint Augustine)
they command for truth; which whosoever despises, purchases to himself
Judgment. Vbisupra.


169 In the next Section, after mention of one Wildborne executed at York
(belike for Rebellious and Traitorous speeches) he says, for persuading a
certain woman to be a Catholic: (not utterly untrue, for the Law punishes
even that by Death, because to be their Catholic, is to be disloyal) and
Mistress Shelley her Imprisonment (for receiving a Priest, contrary to Law and
his Majesty's prohibition (and the condemning to death) but not executing (one
Tempest) whom here he calls a Gentlemen; but the time was when the Jesuits
handled him very ungently, and so Tempestuously, that he confessed, He neither
would nor should like of that Society to death, knowing their tyranny Quodli.
pa. 84.
and exteame cruelty to pass all measure, against whomsoever they powered out
their wrath:) at last, he much bemoaneth Master Pound (one of their Pillory
Confessors, as in the Star Chamber he was sentenced, to loss of ears, and
open shame) being a Libeller, and Slaunderer of the State (HE calls it his
co^plaining of hard measure against Catholics.) So that the Censure for that
Sin, which S. Jude concludes within Blasphemy, Dominationem spernunt,
Maiestatem Verse 8.
autem blasphemant: They despise Rulers, and speak evil of those that be in
authority: which S. James auerres to be Atheism, at least to be Irreligious
Hypocrisy: If any man among you seems to be Religious, and REFRAINETH Iac.
1. 26.
NOT HIS TONGVE, that man's Religion is vain; This Arch-Diuine calls it CRVELTY
in the Judges, and an HONOR from God to the Libeller,whom he styles with
Bedaes Epithere, A VENERABLE GENTLEMAN; The Scripture terms his fellow
Shemei, A dead Dog. But does not this fellow complain 2. Sam. 16. 9.
of ease? For Pownd (notwithstanding the Censure of that High Court, and this
foul crime) was ficed by his Majesty from the corporal punishment; and no
penny is yet demanded of the Fine by Sentence imposed.

170 In Numb. 31. (which is the next) he passes over (as he says) Hereford
and Lancashire Persecutions. A transition of that, which because it is not at
all, he lets go; for had there been any such thing, he that so
rhetorically bewailes the Calamity of Shittles children in Oxford (who had
none, or but one at most then alive) is neither so mealemouthed to conceal
them in silence, nor so briefly styled to pass them over with sleightnesse.

171 But there is one horrible Persecution that strikes him into an agony,
which, as if he were Carrying the Cross with Simon of Cyren, he calls a New
ANG ARI ATION, THEN first brought up; namely, that men should be bound to pay
for their WIVES Recusancie. The remedy is easy: let them garre there Wives to
frequent the Church, and then they shall not be Angariated in their purse;
otherwise it stands with reason and Religion, that they should be So punished:
for either they are their w^es heads, and so can command their obedience to the
Laws of the Church; or else they are Underlings, and count^mastred by them,
and then are they justly punished in sust ring their Wives (...), to carry a
sway over them, which S. Paul permits not in a peremptory denial. Were their
Wines Recusants 1. Tim. 1. 12.
before they took them? They deserved to be mulcted for their bad choice.
Prove they so afterward? They deserve it (much rather) for their careless
regard. And if the Lacedaemonians set a great fine upon their King, for tak ing
a little woman to his Queen, giving the reason, that she Plutar.
would bring forth Regulos, not Reges Kinglings, not Kings; much more are such
to be punished for taking or suffering their Wives Recusants, in respect of the
hereditarie danger. For Men have not those insinnating means, to seduce others
to their Superstition, as Women have; especially, the Mothers Religion is (for
the most part) derived to the Children, because to Her the principal care of
their Education is committed. We see it in Iehoram the Son of 2. Reg. 9, 22.
Iezabel.

172 But was this Mulct enacted in the Queens time? as it was indeed? Then
does Parsons calumniate the Kings government in calling it a NEW Pressure Was
it enacted, but not exacted before? Then, it being such an Angariation, he does
contradict nimselfe; for so makes he his Majesty's hand heavier then Queen
Elizabeth's, which before he denied. Howsoever if pa^ting with a piece of money
be such a Pressure to the husband for the Wives wilfulness, what a miserable
Pressing Cruelty was that to burn a woman great with Child, which opening
the womb in the totments, and coming forth, was Angariated and thrown back
in to the fire, to be consumed with the Mother?

173 An other Persecution follows, His Majesty re^ected the Petition of the
Catholics, in writing for Tolleration; and Mitigation of Calamities. This,
indeed, is a new kind of pressure; an Insolent Petition is offered; the first
request whereof is (as before was said) Impious against God, dishonorable to
his Majesty, and injurious to the State; his Majesty denies it, that is a
Persecution. Then were all the Christian Emperors Persecutors, who forbad
either public Vide Codicem
place, or private house for assembly of Heretics; and Saint Ambrose was
either a spiritual Persecutor, or an insolent Rebel, Ep. lib. 5. orat. contra,
Auxen.
that would not yield to Valentinians request, by delivering up a Church in
Millan for the Arrians resort: The second part thereof, A motion for
mittigating of Penalties; and themselves in the mean time, neither slake
instigating of Treasons; nor obey Laws; neither will leave the Land with
License, nor live in it with obedience; nor give pledge of their allegiance. It
is a cruel pity which procures hazard to the Kings safety.

174 Yea, but this Petition was answered by a Minister with contempt Answering
of a Libell (for it was no better) complaining of Greeuances when there is
none; or if any, forced by their own Misdemeanor upon themselves, (Nostris
demerit is punimur, the Fault is not in her Majesty. nor her Council, nor the
Civil Magistrate, but in our selves, Quodlib. pa. 164.
say the Priests:) The answering, I say, of such a Libell, is it an
Angariation? It Is so verily, to them which make no conscience what they write;
for to have either their weakness discovered, or their falsities recounted, or
their wickedness displa^d, is a sore Pressure. He that evil does, flies
the Ioh. 3. 20.
trial of the Light (says our Savior) lest his deeds should be repro^ed:
no greater vexation can betide a strumpet, then to be v^ask't of her visard,
and to have her painting wi^ed from her riueled brow^ and wan-worn cheeks. The
others never refused such Combats, nor accounted them Pressures: yea rather
provoked such conflicts, as e^ ^th. I^ the contempt and insulting in the
answer, were the greeuance, it need not strike deep; for as long as one
Parsons lineth, the world shall want neither Contemptuous nor Contemptible;
neither insulse nor insulting, either Pamphlets or Replies.

175 Yet another Persecution; His Majesty yielded to a Conference between
Protestants and Puritanes, concerning Differences of Religion; to Catholics
none at all. It is a strange humor, that this Epistlor has; if he say truth
he lies. It is true, there was a Conference; but about difference in Religion,
it is utterly false. Feign they would possess the world, that we are at Jar
among our selves, about our Religion; whereas the Quarrel, though it be
(indeed) unkind, yet it is not in this kind; save only for Ceremonies
external, no points substantial (for those are the Iarres of Popish writers.)
This difference about things indifferent, his Majesty desirous to reconcile,
that as in the substance there was an Unity, so in the Circumstancies there
might be an uniformity, vouchsafed his Princely pains to moderate and
mediate.

176 And Why not the Catholics obtain the like favor? First their opinions
touch the very Heads and foundation of Religion; in the truth whereof, his
Majesty knowing good reason for himself to be so firmly settled, and finding
this Realm so truly grounded, that being perfect in all the Arguments of the
adverse part, and thoroughly understanding the weakness of them, he held it
both unsafe and unnecessary. For if the rule be true in Architecture, a Corner
stone, (though somewhat amiss laid) is not to be stirred; much less
Religion, being thoroughly well placed, and so having long continued, is to be
disputed. Secondly, Puritans, though they have peenish minds, and refractarie
against the Laws for Ceremoni^s, yet they have no bloody hears to his
Majesty; at least no such ouertures for action doc appear: Papists have,
which they could not conceal, even in their Petition: where they wished his
Majesty as great a Saint in heaven, as he is a King upon Earth; Gladly they
would be rid of him: which way they care not, so he were not here; by Fire
from Heaven or Hell, the Jesuits care not how, say the Priests; and therefore
took order to h^rle him hence by Garnet, and Vaux their Quodlib. pa. 224.
Whirle wind in a Chariot of Fire. Thirdly, did those great and Princely
pains his Majesty took with the Puritanes, work a general comformitie?
with the Judicious and discreet it did, but the rest grew more awkward and
violent: the like or worse issue would have ensued the other Conference; for
after all pains taken and arguments pressed, Ca. 17. 5. quis
who must be Judge to determine? Deiu noster Papa; for to doubt of that, is a
Sacrilege says Gratian; and then, if HE a ward not for his own emolument
(being in his own Element (he has left his old wont, as King Henry the eight
Sleid. lib. 11.
wrote to one of his predecessors.

177 Neither yet do Persecutions cease; but Number. 32. Which was a greater
vexation, his Majesty confirmed all that heap of Constitutions and Canons
made by the Archbishop of Canterbury, and Bishop of London. It was a good
Argument of Christ's integrity, that Saduces and Pharisees, (each opposite to
other in Capital points of Religion) should both of them carry dislike of our
Savior, Math. 22.
and combine against him* and it makes much for the credit of those Canons,
that Papists and Puritanes (so severed in opinions) should both conioyne in the
reproof of them. Wherein then lies the Vexation? in the sharpness of the
Censure annexed thereto? First, that argues the Corruptnesse at the heart in
Catholics, and the excellency of the Constitutions, as Saint Paul argues for
Gods Law. For the Romans 7.
Commandment is just and good in it self, but it works fear, and anguish,
and death in the corrupt nature of the disobedient. Will thou therefore not
fear? do well and obey. Secondly in the sto^e Conciliable and conuenticle of
Trent, every Canon against the truth, is brandished with the thunderbolt of an
Anathema; a lawful Synod assembled for Truth may more justly arm her
Constitutions with sharp Censures and feuere. Or is the Confirming of them by
his Majesty the Corrasiue that frets this Vicer?. yea, ^inc. ill^ Lacri^ae,
there is the gr^euance indee^, for thereby does his (...) show, and the Church
ac knowledge his Supreme moderation and power in causes Ecclesiastical: which
the Popes no^able, either to regorge, o^ digest, it vexes them into tha^
disentery, from whence proceed those purulen^ excretions, and bloody egestions
of Bulls and Breues, of Excommunications and Interdictions. But in sooth who
should comfirme them but the King, according to the examples of all the
Emperors Christian in the primitive Church? by whose command the Synod was
conuented; by whose Leave, Liberty to consult, and power to Constitute was
granted, and under whose authority (derived to subordinate Magistrates) the
breach or contempt is to be Censured.

178 Lastly to make up a whole decade of Persecutions two more dreadful are
added: The Lord Chancelors speech (...) the Star Chamber, and the Bishop of
London, (D. Vaughan) his Sermon at Paul's Cross, both tending to take all
hold from Catholics of any the least favor, and the former, expreslie
charging the Judges to search for them, and punish them, (but he should have
added the reason, his Majesty's resolution upon the pr^eding ^solencie and
treacheri^ of the Papists), and upon these speeches proceeds the Powder plot
(says he) of these Gentle^; that is to say, the Pyoneis were digging at the
W^es before Christmas; the Vault^ (as more convenient) wa^ hy^d, and the
POWDE^, conveyed into it before ^er, the spe^ and Sermon were made, the one in
June, the other in August following, and yet the POWDER TRAITORS fell into that
project after them both; Mendacem op^rtet esse memorem, and such is the best
answer for that point.

179 Now hear this Conclusion, Numb. 33. To say then that it is a main
untruth, and can never be proved that any persecution has been in his said
Majesty's government; or that any ^re, or are put to death, or punished, for
cause of Con^cience (which, if it were uttered in the Indies, or many miles
from England, might perhaps be believed) but to auerre such a thing in print,
in England, where all men's eyes and ears are open to the contrary, is a
STRANGE BOLDNESS.

180 No sooner had Eve conference with the Serpent, but presently she learned
a trick of Adding to the Text. God had said, You shall die; she put in Lest
perhaps you die: Genesis 2. 17. and 3. 3.
with that Serpents ^sse has this Viper been instructed to do the like. His
Majesty said, It can never be proved that any were, or are put to death; he
puts in [or punished:] yet if his Majesty had said so, he had spoken no more
then truth; for their punishments are not inflicted for their Conscience, or
opinions of Religion, but for their wilful d^sobedience to the laws of the
Land, wherein they live; and to which implicit, as by Proxy, they have given
their consent: for being Civil members of one and the same Body, as natural
Subjects to one King, what is concluded (...) the Representative Body in
Parliament, they (though absent) do assent unto it.

181. But the maine untruth, whereof his Majesty spoke, is the challenge of
Persecution to DEATH for Religion, which in sincerity and Christian confidence
may be auerred and justified in the Eyes and Ears of all England for an
uncontrollable assertion: for howsoever both the Priests before named, and
after mentioned in this Section, as Dru^y, Flathers, Geruis, with their
Receipters, were Papists or Catholics (so falsely called) yet for their
opinions they were not executed, no nor questioned: and though they died
Papists, yet they died not for Popery, no more then Shemei did for his railing
tongue; for their case (in this kind, for Execution) is in a manner the same
with His.

182. Shemei was at King Salomons mercy; for though 1. Reg. 2 9.
King David had pardoned him for his own time, yet he lest him to his son
with Iniunction for his Death: they for breach of the Law, were in the Kings
mercy for their lives: for though the Queen were dead, yet the Law h^ld them
Guilty. King Solomon in favor spared Shemei his Blood, but, by his Prerogative
Royal, confined him to Jerusalem: Verse 36.
Our Sovereign, of mere grace, remitted to them their lives, and by his
Proclamation exiled them the Land. Death is the Penalty to Shemei, if he pass
over the River; the same is their punishment, if they pass the Seas hither:
Shemei transgresses in seeking his run-awaies beyond the Verse 40.
River; and his contempt is punished according to the Sentence: they return
hither, to make Run-awaies or Rebels; Execution is performed according to Law.
It is not Shemei his railing (for King David had pardoned it simply, and King
Solomon conditionally) but his breach of Covenant that caused his Death: it is
not their Religion (which is not once called into question) but their Contempt
of Laws and Edicts, which puts an End to their lives.

183. As for telling tales in the Indies, that is proprium quarto modo to the
Jesuits, who make it a principal part of their profession to win credit to
their Society by Indian Fables. Were it not for Congo, or Cochachine, or
Iaponia, or the Maluchees, or other part of the Indies, East or West, Bozius
had lost that sign of the true Church, and Xauerius, Lib. 5. cap. 2. de fignis.
Valentia, Bertrandus, and many a strange Jesuit, had never been worthy the
naming. The Hebrew women are not as the women of Egypt, said the Midwiues to
Pharao, for they are lively, and are delivered ere the Midwife come Exodus 1. 19.
at them: so belike it is with the Indian Jesuits and Conuerts; they are more
nimble at a Miracle (both actiuely and passiuely) then the Christians of these
parts, Sacred or Lay. There it is but saying a Mass, and a dead man shall
start up to life, though he be dead Seven days: Lay but S. John's Gospel,
there, upon a woman's breast, the Devil shall fly from the possessed, as if he
were shot out of a Gun. It Is Vide B^zium.
but carrying a Standard of the Cross, and an Army of horsemen, all in
glittering harness, shall apppeare, whose Armor shall dazell the eyes, and
number strike terror to the hearts of the adverse part: Elizeus his mountain
of 2. Reg. 6. 17.
Horses, and Chariots of fire are not to be compared thereto.

184. Either our English Jesuits are but dullards, or our Soil is not capable
of Miracles: else why did not Garnet, Hall, Greenwell, Gerrard, and the rest
(which were indeed Portenta virorum, Miracles among men, for their strange
villainy; but (...) Portentorum, Miracle-workers they were not:) why, I say, did
not they show any miracle among us? Certainly, if the Provincial had had the
Indian trick, or that our Parlament-house had stood in Congo, we should have
heard from thence, that such a house had been pus^'t up with a trice, upon the
Mass or Orizon of a Jesuit: for in Molucca, a Jesuit fetched down fiery
stones from Heaven, raked up trees by the roots, filled Bozius, vbi su^ra.
up streets with s^ones and ashes, raised a Lake so high, and made it rage so
strong, that it swept away all the houses at once. It were best therefore to
send Fa. Parsons to the Indies, were it but to work One Miracle, that is, to
make HIM SELF an honest man; for, to report in England that He is so, in the
Eyes and Ears of so many that are witnesses to the contrary, that read his
railing Libels, know his Traitorous Conspiracies, and discern his Devilish
Atheismes (so the Priests write of him) were a Strange Boldness indeed: but to
say that no Romish Priest, or Popishly affected Layman is put to Death for his
Conscience, may, for the fame thereof, ^ee proclaimed in India, and all the
world through; and for the truth thereof, is and shall be avouched in the most
public places (whether Pulpits for Divinity, or Seats of Judgment) in the
heart of England. Impudency may frame Libels to the contrary, but Truth is
mighty; the Evidences demonstratiue, and will prevail.

185. But to confute the Assertion, he, first, names the two Statutes, 4. and
5. in the third year of his Majesty's reign, more severe against Catholic
Recusants for their mere Conscience, then against any one sort of Malefactors
or wickedmen before. Secondly, he brings the Examples of three Priests to whom
Death was less grievous that died expres^ for refusing this Oath, which is a
persecution for Conscience, valesse it will be said, that the Oath has no
matter of Conscience in it, for a Catholic man to receive.

186. It is a question whether this Jesuit has less Logic or honesty, his
arguing is so absurd, his dealing so unsound. His Majesty frees himself from
Persecution, o^ doing any to Death for his Conscience, BEFORE the
POWDER TREASON; he fetches in Statutes and Executions SINCE that villainy was
discovered. But for the Statutes severity, if more sharp then before, it is
but according to the Proverb, Termerium malum, like malady, Plat. These.
like remedy: for if Plato account Treason against the Prince, equal with
Sacrilege against God, not only the De leg lib. 9.
Actors in the Fact, but the Seedes-men of such doctrine, are to be met withal
by more then Ordinary Justice: Celeri Valor. Max. lib. 9. Dion li. 52.
poena (says one) by a present dispatch: (...) (says another) as in heat of
war, and havoc of enemies, as by Martial Law: for no Execution can be
invented too Exquisite or speedy, for such wickedness, says a third: God
Cicer. Ca^il. 4.
himself taking that course against a strange Rebellion, not to bring an
Ordinary Visitation, but to make a NEW punishment Numb. 16. 30.
upon the earth: Schools defining it, that an accustomed sin, to which any
Nation or People is most inclinable, Aquin. 22. q. 39. art 2. E^ 4. 15.
is to be provided for more severely, especially if it be V^bs Rebellis, and
nocens Regibus, as they apply that place in Ezra, which is the very case in
hand. For besides the dangerous Theorems and Positions which their Writers
(especially our Englishmen) set down for Principles (their Archpriest
confesses, that his heart is wounded to read them) their continual practice is
all for Rebellion: the said Blackwell professing, that many youths are sent
over daily, and they (by Confess at large, page 134. 143.
virtue of their Oath) bound to draw men's Obedience from their King: and
therefore the conclusion in Schools is, by the example of Corah, with the
rest, not submitting themselves to Moses his government, that the Censure for
such offenders, must be incons^ta poena. And yet in the Statutes Aquin. vbi
supra.
which he mentions, there is neither New, nor Strange, nor Rigorous
punishment; but a reuiuall of certain Statutes before enacted, and all
grounded upon the ancient Laws of the Land, made 200. years since, in the
times of Edward the Third, and Richard the Second.

187. In the examples of Priests executed, he shows himself to be that same
Turpissima Bestia, a practiced Aequiuocator: They died EXPRESSLY (says he) for
not taking the OATH: which in some sense is true, because they were sentenced
to death for being in the Land, contrary to Law and the Kings Edict: their life
was offered them, if they would take the Oath: Drury at first accepted the
condition, afterward refused it; the other would none, unless he might do it
privately, remotis Testibus, that so he might moresafely deny it afterward:
upon this they were executed: which conuinceth them of a double crime: first,
Contempt of his Majesty's Laws, to return or abide in the Land, contrary to
the same: Secondly, Obstinacy, in refusing such gracious Favor offered upon so
reasonable terms, to take an Oath whereby they should Only manifest their
trusty and vn-treasonable Allegiance to his Majesty. So that they died
Refusing the OATH: but that they EXPRESSLY died for Refusing it, that is false:
the Sentence of death was passed upon them before the mutual offer, or
refusal. Which Offer, as on his Majesty's behalf, it expresses a singular
Indulgence, and tender desire to spare-Blood; so is it an exact Trial of their
Allegiance, whereby the King may see, whether (as the Philosopher speaks)
though they be Parum Sani, they be, notwithstanding, Seneca.
Sanabilis ingeni^; that albeit in Lurking here they have been undutiful,
yet whether there may be hope that they will be Sound at the Heart toward
HIM. Neither is the case any other, then if a Woman, false to her husband for
his bed, and withal attempting the poisoning of him (being convict and
condemned for the crime of Poisoning) were offered her pardon, conditionally,
that she would swear, for ever after, to keep herself honest, and alone to
her husband; she refuses it, and is executed; it is true that she dies
renouncing the Condition, but not for renouncing it; her judgment for death
was passed before upon the criminal attempt.

188. But the Preamble to the examples is worthy the noting; for what he sets
down as a Triumphant Garland to the offenders, Death (says he) is less
grievous unto many of them, then the other Persecutions (how many and grievous
they were, he did before enlarge) is a stain to their Profession, and may be
a Caneat to his Majesty; it being a mark rather of desperate Pagans, then
Consecrated Priests: for S. Paul, though professing his resolution in
Cupiodissolui, (arguing his desire to be loosed hence, and to be with Christ)
yet when his death was vowed by the (...). 1.
Jews, he avoided it by information; and when he seared it at the bench, he
prolonged it by Appeal; and being hard set Act. 23. 17. Act. 25. 10.
at Rome, after his escape, he acknowledged it with thanks, and accounted it a
riddance from the Lions Jaws: so far 2. Tim. 4. 17.
was he from rushing into the breach of any National Law, to hasten his death.
A Caveat it may be to his Majesty: for the saying of the Philosopher is very
true: Vitae tuae Dominus est, quisquis suam contempsit: He that is prodigal of
Seneca.
his o^ne life, cares not whose blood he spils to atchieue his desires. And
Parsons himself has confessed in a Letter of his, that it is justly suspected
that many Catholic Martyrs suffer in England, not SO MVCH for VERTVE and
Quodli. p. 129.
LOVE to God, as of CHOLER and OBSTINATE will to CONTRADICT Magistrates. What
will they do now, when by the Popes Breue they are armed with Contradiction?
which, if it procure due punishment upon them (as his Majesty has well
forewarned) let their Blood alight upon the Popes head, as the principal
cause.

189. Which speech after he has, Number. 34. with his viperous Gloss, varied
into these phrases, [Hee insinuates, and expressly threatens, that there may
chance to be a greater persecution, and more abundant shedding of Blood, which
must alight upon the Popes head] he applies it two ways: One is, a Taxation
of his Majesty's cruelty, as expressing hereby his desire to Ingolph himself
in the effusion of Catholics Blood; and also his Hypocrisy, shrowding his
injurious cruelty, either under the name of Justice, or under pretense of the
Popes entermedling: the other application is by way of comfort to the
Catholics.

190. If I will that he tarry till I come, says our Savior, Ioh. 21. 22.
concerning Saint John, what is that to thee? Upon this was bruted the report,
that the Evangelist should not die. Mistaking, both breeds and spreads
misreports: if ignorantly, it is a pardonable error; if wilfully, it is a
palpable dishonestie: which is the very case of this Jesuit here. He has
labored long to no purpose, to prove his Majesty a Persecutor; now out of
the Kings own words, he would feign make him a Blood-goloser: and to effect
that, he turns a Gracious Premonition into an express Commination; a supposed
occasion into a Positive conclusion; a due punishment by Justice, into Cruelty
by Persecution; and the true cause, into a veil of pretense. For his Majesty's
speech is this: It can never be proved that any are, or were put to death for
case of Conscience, except that now this DISCHARGE given by the Pope, be the
CAUSE of the DVE punishment of many: which is as much as if his Majesty should
say, I am so far from executing any for their Religion or Conscience, that I
have been content to wink at their Breach of my Command, and their contempt
of Law, assuring my self heretofore of their Loyalty: but now, if I, through
favor, suffer them in my Realm, and the POPE, by WARRANT, forbid them to give
me security of my state, so that they shall neither yield Obedience to
Statute, nor give pledge of their Allegiance: If I be not secured, the Law
shall be executed: who then cause that, and must answer for this blood but the
Pope? whose Breues they now make the only Allegation for their refusal? Is not
the Devil therefore truly called the Murderer of mankind, because by his
insinuating dis^asion Ioh. 8. 42.
from obedience, he brought death to the world? which is the very case
between the OATH and the BREVES, his Majesty and the Pope.

191. It concerns the Policy of the Land, and the Kings safety, to exact
their Allegiance: it stands with their duty to perform it: they are willing,
the Pope forbids them: their Refusal draws on punishment for their former
breach of Law: where is the cause? Partly in themselves, dispositiue, who are
naturally inclined (at least radically instructed) to disobedience: but in the
Pope Consummatiue, who, like Balaam, puts a stumbling block in their way,
Apoc^ 14.
that is, arms them with authority to disobey: Now causa causae est
causacansati, say the Schools: He that caused sin, caused Death for sin.
In the Revelation, the third Apoc, 8. 10. 11
part of the Waters became Worme-wood, and many men died of the Waters, because
they were made Bitter: bitterness caused death, but whence came the
Bitterness? from the STAR that fell into the Waters, called by the name of
WORMWOOD: a perfect Resemblance of the Popes Breues: the Rebellious
disloyalty of the Catholics hastened their ends; the Popes Breues nourishes
it in them, and hardneth them in it: there is the Colloquintida that has
brought death into the pot.

192. His Comfort to the Catholics follows; First, in a general Theoreme,
that no suffering is so honorable as that which comes with a dishonorable
title: So Christ suffered as a disloyal person and a deceiuer: So Paul as a
disturber. First, that is not simply true; for the ignominy of the title ads
nothing to the Honor of the passion, unless the cause be goo^, and the party
innocent, either from the just imputation, or the violent presumption of
deserving that title; for good Subjects (like Casars wise) must be careful,
not only to be free from the fact, but from the occasion also that might
Sueton. Iul.
give suspicion of the fact: and that was our Saviors case, who both preached
obedience to Caesar in his Doctrine, and performed it in paying Tribute.

193. But what is this to the Catholics? yes, says he, Mat. 22. and 17.
(that is his particular comfort) They suffer for the false Imputation of Civil
Disloyalty, whereas it is indeed for their Roligion and loyalty to God their
eternal Prince. This is that which they call in Schools begging of the cause,
Petitio principis; he resumes the case which is in question between us,
fondly supposing that either the Statutes in that case are against Religion,
which are for the Princes safety, and the States security; or that the Oath
impeacheth the Popes Spiritual jurisdiction; both which we deny: and neither
he, nor any of theirs shall ever be able to euict it, unless they can
prove, that Laws made to void the Land of Seducers, and Seeds-men of
Rebellion, be against Gods word: or that our Savior (with the Keys) gave
authority to de-Throan and de-Crowne Princes, either directly or indirectly:
which distinction, unless it had been better followed, and more substantially
handled (says Master Black-well) it had been better that Bellarmine had never
Confess. at large page 65.
touched it at all. What then may we expect of this poor Atomite when he
comes to the point? who can break no ground but with Bellarmines Heiffer: for
if that Oracle fail in any substantial controversy, he is one of the
Sceriphian Frogs, clamorous in Inuectiues, (as they in Scyrus) in Plin. lib.
8. ca. 85.
any sound point either dumb or dull. And now it is like he will come to that
issue, in this second part of the Paragraph, as he has divided it.

The second part of the second Paragraph.
1 THe front of which Division, seperating it self with Greater Letters from
the rest, would put a Man in hope, that now the point should be canuased to the
purpose. but in the very entry he shall find, that it is a great Gate, to a
pingle of trisles. When men are wearied with the greater affairs of State, for
their recreation sometimes, they will go^ to gather pebbles at the Seaside (as
Tully noted in the De Oratore.
Senators of Rome: and they that have full fed, and drunk well, have leisure
to behold the Celatures, and pictures of Plut. de prosectu.
the vessels on the table: but in the very Entrance of a maine quarrel, to
fall a playing with words, argues that he is either weary of the cause, or
loath to come to it, or has no stomach to meddle with it; and so would shift
it off with such Childish dalliance.

2 For whereas his Majesty presses the point for trial, how the Pope can in
Divinity justify that speech of his, that the OATH contains many things
PLAINLY AND DIRECTLY contrary to Faith and Salvation; he, Numb. 35.
challenges the King of an Injury in thrusting in the word directly. As i^
plainly and directly in honest men's mouths, and acts, have not all one
meaning: for plane among the Latinists is not only used for clare and aperte,
openly, plainly, and manifestly; but for penitus, and omnino, thoroughly,
wholly, and directly: except he derive the aduerbe plainly from the Greek
word (...) to deceive; a word fitting Jesuits, both their natures (who are the
only right planets in Saint Jude, wandering themselves, and teaching others to
go astray) and their Art too, who in uttering plain words, conceive in mind
an indirect sense. Such an one, the Orator describes, Hic ille planus
improbissimus, quastu nefario Cic. pro. Cluent
pastus.

3 In the very next Numb. preceding, this iangling Sophister had changed all
the words of his Majesty's speech, clean contrary to the Kings meaning, as
has been showed; here his Majesty puts in but one Synonymum: which hoth in
English and Latin, are usually joined each with other; and this gives him to
an exclamation of injury: he might as well have blamed Tully for joining
apertam, simplicem and directam to one and the same way of happiness. De
finib. lib. 1
But his Majesty's plain and direct dealing against al Calumniation is evident,
in that he sets down the Popes whole Breue, word for word both in Latin and
English; whereby the Christian Reader may judge that his Majesty purposed not
to take any advantage upon any Term, or tittle not there expressed.

4 A second and greater Injury follows. His May stie uses a sppeech which a
Mohammedan Philosopher uttered against Moses, and turns it upon the Pope
(Tortus the Writhen Pa. 34.
Cardinal, says it was uttered against Christ:) but wherein lies the Injury,
unless it be in the application, that the Pope (an usurping challenger, and
only a Breue-compounder) should be match^ with Moses, (a lawful Governor, and
an holy writer?) otherwise, that speeches used by men, or Devils (take the
Malice and Profanesse from them) may be applied to the best, is not unusual or
unwarrantable either in Divine or humane learning: thither tend the profitable
Vide Basil. and Socrat. li. 3. ca. 15. grae.
Mythologies of Poets fables, and the moral use of Apologues, applied both to
the best sort of men, and the most eminent virtues.

5 In Divinity, that speech of Saint Paul against the 1 Cor. 14. 36.
insulting Pseud-Apostles; Came the word of God out from you; or came it unto
you only? is the very same in effect which Z^dkiah, the false Prophet, used
against Michaiah, When went the Spirit of the Lord from me to speak unto 1.
Reg. 22. 24.
thee? Or more plainly and directly, the same words which the Devil uttered
to Christ, What have we to do with thee? Math. 8. ^9.
our Time is not yet. The very same (I say) our Savior uses to his blessed
Mother, Woman what have I to do with thee? Ioh. 2. 4.
mine hour is not yet come. And I think there is no doubt but that the same
text of Scripture which the Tempter misapplied to the breaking of our Saviors
neck by presumption, may be Christianly applied to the comfort of a distressed
soul in assurance of Gods providence. Math 4. and. Psalm 91.


6 If peradventure the Apologier had not truly charged the Pope in that
applied assertion, some might have thought it a wrong, (or as this high-stiling
Jesuit terms it) a more gross point, and injurious: but peruse the whole
Breue, there appears not one, either authority, or reason, brought to confirm
his said bold Assertion; but as is he were an Oracle, to Speak and away, as
Saint Augustine said, Haec Manichaeus dixit and abiit, it not standing with the
Popes irre^ragabilitie to yield a reason of his conclusions: or as Gallen (whom
Tortus in this place cites for that speech of Auerroes) speaks of such an
other, he (...)
delivers his Theorems so confidently, as if either he had (...), a mouth
that could not err nor trip, or as if none were able or worthy to find any
probable contradiction against his speech.

7 A third thing is an ABUSE offered by his Maieiestie to the words and meaning
of the Breue; namely, that the King should charge the Pope, of new and
vndiuinelike Doctrine, for saying that the OATH contained many things, apertly
contrary to faith and salvation: as if thereby the Pope should say or mean,
that natural allegiance to their Sovereign and King were directly opposite to
Faith, and Salvation of Souls.

8 His Majesty (under Correction) has done the Pope too much honor, in
vouchsafeing an answer (especially with that judgment) to such pelting stuff
of a WOFVLL Breue; wherein he has been so sincere from detorting any thing,
that the Pope could not have met with any more Candide and Ingenuous writer:
neither is it to be thought, that the High Priest himself, would have used
such a Saucy term of ABUSE, as this rightly Male part, that is, Mis-begotten
Catechresticall companion has done. But if it appear that the Popes words
imply so much, and that necessarily, Quid dabitur viro? what shall be done to
him that knetcheth this opprobrious Curre? For what is this uncircumcised
Jesuit, that he should, in so base terms, scurrilize so great a King?

9 This therefore is his Majesty's argument: Whosoever pronounces THAT OATH
VNLAWFVLL AND FLAT CONTRARY TO FAITH, which contains nothing else in it, but
an acknowledgment of all natural and Civil Obedience, due by the Subject to
the Prince; he broacheth a NEW, STRANGE, and VN-DIVINELIKE ASSERTION: but the
Pope does this, in pronouncing so of the Oath of Allegiance, which contains
in it nothing else: therefore, his Assertion is strange, uncouth, and dissonant
from Divinity. Where Is now the Rub? In the Minor perhaps; suppose it to be so:
that is but a failing in the terms, no abuse to the person, no injury to the
words; modesty would stay for the proof, not hasten the doom, especially in
such terms of Saucie Bitterness. If therefore the Assumption had been
insisted upon in the Consequence thereof (for therein is the Cardo and Marrow
of the Question; scilicet, that the OATH contains NOTHING in it but THAT
which concerns Civil and natural obedience) This had been Scholar like,
and Christian dealing, and to purpose: but the very words of the Oath it
self, do ratify his Majesty's collection, and inference.

10 For the Oath (as has been showed) consisting of two parts, assertiue for
the Kings Right to his Crowns and Kingdoms; and negative against any foreign
challenger or Intruder whatsoever, or under any pretense whatsoever (for so the
Oath does manifestly divide it self) his Majesty's Arguments then thus hold:
First, THAT OATH, the positive and exclusive parts whereof do not touch nor
impeach any Spiritual Jurisdiction or Authority, directly or indirectly;
contains nothing in it but matter concerning Civil Obedience; but neither of
the parts in the OATH of allegiance does so (for Deposing of Kings, or
Absoluing Subjects from their duty, or inciting Rebellions (foreign or
domestike) comes not within the reach of Spiritual Jurisdiction) Ergo, etc.

11 Secondly, nothing can be contrary to Faith and Salvation, but that which
crosses some point contained within, or grounded upon the Articles of Faith,
comprised in those Creedes which the Church has allowed; the OATH of
allegiance crosses none of those, nor any part in them, unless the Popes
authority in Temporalibus be an Article of faith, and so be referred to
Ecclesiam Catholicam; but that cannot be: for among many other of their own
writers, their Archpriest refels (and repeates it often) that because the
Church Letter to the Catholics.
has not yet concluded it to be a point of Faith, whether he has any such
authority or no; or (if he have) not determined how far it stretches, if
to Excommunication, yet not to Eradication (says he) neither directly nor
indirectly: (surely then not to Deposition from their Crowns, or Instigation
to Rebellions:) Ergo, It crosses no point of FAITH.

12 And therefore his Majesty said well, that the Pope had done honestly and
discreetly, if he had put down the special words, at which he quarrelled in
the OATH; and this Libeller had revealed some sparks of integrity, if he had
showed one point soundly proved, wherein it touched Macrobius de Le^ulo. Sat.
2.
Matter of Faith before he had fetched up his pinguem Saliuam out of his filthy
throat, to cast an Aspersion of Abuse, Cavil, Calumniation, and voluntary
mistaking the question, upon his Majesty: For if there be any of these, it is
in the Pope, who mistakes either the meaning of the Oath, or the Limits of his
own authority.

13 His Majesty is in the right: and the assertion which he gathers out of
the Popes words, that he denies the acknowledgement of Civil obedience, is
no surmised principle, but a necessary Inference: as also the Examples, which
his Majesty brings out of Scriptures, Fathers, and Councels, are most proper
and direct to the purpose.

14 The dilating and multitude whereof, vexes this Epistler, and makes him, in
scorn, first to call it a Flourish. (So some did account that for the noise of
a Thunder, Ioh. 12. 29.
but a rattling in the air with an vndistinct sound, which others acknowledged
to be the voice of an Angel answerable to the occasion; and the Sword, placed
at the entry of Paradise, appeared but a Flourish of a Blade, yet it Genesis 3.
struck a terror, and recordation of their former disloyalty into our first
parents; as these commemorated examples might into the hearts of Priests, and
those Catholics of their with held Obedience, were not their consciences
seared, and by prejudice made incapable of such tender Recognition.) But David
seems a Fondling (says S. Augustine:) To whom? To Achis: id est, Stultis and
ignorantibus: to them, which themselves are both Fondlings and Aug. in Psalm. 33.
Rudesbies: and these authorities but a Flourish to a Superficial Jesuit,
that never could diue deep for any learning.

15 Secondly, he terms it a Borrowed Discourse from THEIR Authors, because
otherwise we are dry and barren, if we say any thing which they do not say:
witness that challenge which was never yet foiled nor answered, that for 600.
years after Christ, all the Scriptures, Fathers and Councels stand for our.
Assertions; not One true, natural, vncogg'd or vnadulterate, for any point
then propounded, and Rome now maintains against us. Thirdly, a Combat with a
shadow, because THEY are not adverse to us in the matter of Civil obedience.
For first, THEY hold that Subjects must obey both good and badde Princes, in
all things LAWFVLL. But who must judge what is lawful? The Apologue is known;
if the Lion say the bunch of ^sh in the forehead be an horn, though it be not
so, 'twill be accounted so.

16 Secondly, THEY teach that the Prince is to he obeyed propter Conscientiam,
yet not contra Conscientiam; for Conscience sake, not against Conscience. That
is no sound doctrine in the negative part; for even against a man's Conscience,
the Prince is to be obeyed, unless that he which disobeieth, can prove his
Conscience to be the same which 1. Tim 1. 9.
the Apostle describes; A good Conscience accompanied with true love and faith
unfeigned; for there may be Asinina, and there may be Lupina Consciencia (it is
the distiction of one of their great Martyrs, named by the Cardinal in his
Letter:) Sir Tho. More consol^n Tribulat.
some man's Conscience may be so steightned, that it will strain gnats, and
make scruple of every thing that is commanded; and another so vast, that he
will devour whatsoever is enioined him.

17 And this distinction meets with that vain Challenge of his, which is the
third thing he objects: Let them (says he) show but one only authority,
example, or testimony out of Scripture, Fathers, or Councels, that Princes
must be obeyed against Conscience or Religion, and then we will grant he
speaks to the purpose. If he had said against Conscience rightly instructed,
and purely cleansed; and true Religion soundly warranted by Gods word, we
contend it not, we cannot: We say with S. Augustine: Si aliud Deus, aliud
Imperator iubeat, contempto hoc, obtemperandum est Deo. But seeing that
Conscience may both Err, and be polluted; and the Scripture insinuates, that
there may be a vain and Iac. 1. 26.
defiled Religion; there is nothing more easy for proof, or evident for
demonstration, then that Obedience is to be enioined even against Conscience,
if it be erroneous or Leaprous; and against Religion, if forged and fasly so
called. For if knowledge (which is the ground of Conscience) may be nicknamed
(as the Apostle tells us it may) and so no knowledge 1. Tim. 6. 20.
indeed; much more, both Conscience, which applies that knowledge to
particular acts; and Religion, which deriues out of that knowledge her supposed
Theological Principles, may be so: or else, both Heretics and Schismatiques,
who can, and do plead Conscience for their standing out, have received great
wrong from the Church of God.

18 And therefore either the Pope, or this Proctor of his, should (if they were
able) show what that point is, one o^ more, in the Oath, that is contrary to a
Good Conscience, and True Christian Religion; which because they neither have,
nor can, his Majesty's Conclusion is uncontrollable, that the Pope has
prohibited Catholics, to perform even Civil Obedience to their Sovereign;
and therein has crossed both precepts and examples of Scriptures, Fathers, and
Councels, touching that point.

19 To the examination whereof, or some of them rather (for where he cannot
cavil, there he suppresseth) this great Bible-Clerke vouchsafes to
condescend, Number. 30. His examination of the Scriptures consists, first, of an
expunction: for the so most, which touch th the oint nearest, wherein the
people profess their unlimited Allegiance to Joshua, in ALL things to obey him,
that is gone Josh. 1. 17.
into the Index Expurgatorius; such vn-confined and large Obedience to Princes,
makes not for the Popes Triple Turbant. Secondly, of a Concession: that he
grants the Examples which his Majesty aleageth, of the Isralites obeying
Nabucodonozor, Pharao, and Cyrus to be true, because it was only TEMPORAL
Obedience which they exhibited. If by Temporal, he mean concerning Matters
merely Temporal, he abuses the Reader; for they showed their Obedience to
be due, and performed it in Matters of Spiritual Service; for to Offer
Sacrifice unto Exodus 5. 1.
the Lord, by his own appointment, and message delivered to Moses their
Superior Spiritual Governor (as this fellow cal-him Numb. 39.) upon dread of
danger, and punnishment for the neglect, is an high case of Conscience and
Religion, yet would they not attempt it without asking and obtaining the Kings
Leave. So the Commandment of Cyrus was in a cause merely Ecclesiastical,
viz. the building Verse 3. Ezr. 1. 2.
of the Lords house at Jerusalem, and transporting thither the consecrate
Vessels, according as the Lord had commanded him: (for God puts the managing
even of Spiritual affairs upon the Kings charge;) (...) without HIS license,
the Isralites endeavored not; but being appointed, they refused not.

20 The third part of his Examination, is a Counterscarfe of Examples opposed
against the Instances in the Apology; some Canonical, and those varying from
the point; as that of the three Children, who refused to adore the golden
Statua set up for that purpose by Nabuchodonozor; Dan. 3. 12.
and of the Israelites, who would not obey Pharaos Commandment to Sacrifice in
Egypt. but they would do (...) in the Wilderness; and of Daniel, refusing to
eat of the King Dan. 1.
of Babels meats; some of them Apocryphal, and nothing to the purpose; as that
of Tobie his burying the dead, contrary Tob. 1.
to Proclamation; and for bearing the Assyrian^ ments; and lastly, that of the
Machabees, refusing to eat Swines 1. Mac. 1.
flesh, and to Sacrifice, notwithstanding the Commandment of Antio^us.

21 For which refusal and disobedience, they had ALL their especial warrant,
by the revealed will of God. Against the adoration of that Image, the whole
second Commandment of the Mo^rall Law: for Sacrificing in the Wilderness, the
express Precept by the mouth of Moses from the Lord; not as ^e cunningly s^ts
it down Numb. Exodus 5. 1.
39. that they (...) obeyed, because THEY PERSUADED THEMSELVES, that God would
have the contrary: For SELFE-PERSWASION (which often times proceeds from
Self-love and ends in selfe-deceit) is no warrantable restraint from
Obedience. They that kill Ioh. 16. 2.
you (^aith our Savior to his Disciples) persuade themselves that they do
therein God good Science: good intentions, from self persuasion, against Gods
Command, are mere impietis; Vzz^ and Vzziah may be examples. For Daniels 2.
Sam 6. 2. Par 26. Leuit. 11. Deuteronomy. 14.
abstinence, (if it were a case of Conscience) first, he had warrant for it by
the Law of God; wherein, either such meats which the Babilonians eat were
prohibited; or, if not forbidden, yet were served in, or eaten with certain
idolatrous Ceremonies, contrary to Gods word, as appears Dan. 5. 1. Dan. 1. 8.
elsewhere in that Prophecy; for which cause the Holy Ghost does call it a
Pollution: and the same was Tobies case also for his abstinence. But if it were
a civil duty, as being a matter of ordinary diet, then being commanded by the
King) his disobedience had not been justifiable, unless that first he had
obtained leave of the Kings Chamberlain, or master of the household; and
secondly, had by Prophecy foreseen Gods blessing upon that his abstinence.
Verse, 13.


22 Burial of the dead, (for which Toby is instanced) is it is a matter of
Christian Ceremony, so is it also an humane respect, and a point of Civil
Courtesy: (Let the dead bu^y their dead, says our Savior of them that were
Matthew. 8. 22.
no very zealous Christians:) but did Tobiah this, though contrary to the
Edict. yet openly against it. and in Contempt of the King? Him else says no;
he did it by stealth, furtim ab^piens, and in the night after Sun set; and
being detected, Tob. 21,
(...) sled upon it: take it either way, was his disobedience in such a case
justifiable? No. The Machabees for their refusing to eat, and circumcising
their children against Antiochus command, had their double warrant from the 1.
Macab 1. 65. etc.
written word; the one for Ceremony, the other for a Sacrament: and the reason
is yielded in the Text, because they would not break the HOLY COVENANT, they
were put to death. It then the Pope, or his Advocate could, show in the Oath of
allegiance, any one particle contrary to the will of God, either revealed in
his word, or by special messege and Commission delivered; the refusal were
justifiable, and these examples pressed to the point. But, to speak in the
language of one of their own Writers, Seeing they can bring no one argument to
prove, accepisse se a Deo Lorinus in act. ca. 5. 19
tale mandatum, that they have received any SVCHPRECEPT FROM GOD for their
refusal, it is a WILFVLL PERVICACY, no LAWFVLL DISOBEDIENCE.

23 And yet (as if he were master of the field) he sets up his Trophee with
this (...): You ^ee ^he places of Scripture alleged by the Apolog^er, make
nothing for him, yea, are flat against him. Just ^o does Plato d^sc^ibe ^is
Craue^ Cock, after about or two skipping out of the pit, and crowing a
Conquest, being ready presen^ly to Cry Plat. Thea^.
Creake Reui^w the Encounter briefly, and th^n let the Spectator judge whether
this be not a Thrasonicall impudency. His Majesty, to prove that the Pope,
in prohibiting to take the Oath of Allegiance (which contains nothing in it
but an acknowledgement of mere Civil Obedience) has done that which the
Scriptures will not a^ow, cites many texts wherein all Temporal Obedience is
perfo^med and command^d, even to Pagan Kings: which p^aces, so far forth as
they concern Civil Allegiance (and his Majesty brings them in for no other
purpose) this Epistl^r, Numb. 37. grants to be truly alleged, and the same
which they themselves allow. Yet here, Numb. 40 ^e proclaims that they make
flat ag^nst the Apo^ogier and all for the Catholik^s. So did the Devil
pronounce of the Kingdoms Luc. 4. 6.
of the earth, All these are mine, when he had not a foot (by right) in any one
of them: no more th^n ^he mad fellow in Aelian who thought that All the Ships
which came to the H^uen, were h^s own. Var. Histor.


24 But much more (s^ith he) Numb. 41. The authorities all^ged out of the
fathers; for they (especially that of Saint Augustine) are f^a^ly FOR the
Catholics Refusing; and clearly against the OATH enjoined How so? Ch^istians
in temporal matters obeyed Julian (says Saint Augustine) though an Apostata
and an Idolater: our Christian King requires no more; the Oath enioynes no In
Psalm. 1^4.
other thing: they, in cases wherein appeared difference between Christ's
honor and the Emperors' command, refused, and if there be any such thing in
the Oath, let Catholics forbear to swear, but show that point which is
different from true Religion. I^ not, then has the Popes Breue (...) that
Fathers (...) and, the Christians pra^ze: and so S. Augustine must needs make
for the Apolog^er. And so does also Justin Martyr: for, excepting the Ap^o. 2.
ad Imper.
adoring of God, in ALL other things (says he) we cheerfully s^rus the
Emperor; but the Oath enioineth nothing that impea^heth or crosses adoration
due to the Almighty. To say, (which is their vsu^ll shift) that the difference
being between some Contents of the Oath, and THEIR Religion, therefore they
are not to obey, that is a vanity, and yet that is their Anchor-hold, when they
are hoisted and put to the p^sh. S^ppose s^ith Parso^s in English, Creswell in
Latin) that a Prince professes that he w^l bring in a more sound Philopator.
(...) tha's not to the purpose, he is bound to defend the Romish Faith,
assuming that of THEIRS to be Christ's Religion, which we (looking to their
Doctrine and opinions) account to be a Mass of (...); and respecting the
usurped Jurisdiction, have proved and found to be the sulphurated fuel of all
disloyalties.

25 And therefore that Protestation which he makes Numb. 42. We will serve our
Sovereign; we will go to War with him; we will fight for him, and do all
other Offices of temporell duty:and that, Numb. 44. We will acknowledge him
ONLY inferior to God in his temporal government, is but an Hypocritical
flourish of words, (like Josh. 9.
the Gibeonites cou^enage) without truth of heart. For their positions (which
he there cal's Rules of Catholic Doctrine, are directly contrary; The King
can use his temporal sword but at the Popes beck, says one; and if a
Christian Molina tract. 2. de Institut. disr. 29. Simanch. lib. 23. sect. 11.
Institut.
King be an Heretic, says another, immediately his people are freed from his
command, and their subjection. What service then may his Majesty expect* being
now (by Mathaeus de Torto ore (pronounced an Heretic, and by the Popes Intorto
Breu^, curbed and cut short of his temporal* Supremacy?

26 ^he (...) (...) be the (...) of the other (...) cited by his Ma^estie; for
if the King be^ ONLY (...) our to the true God (as says Tertullian:) if ab^ue
^he Emperor, th^re is none but ONLY God which made the Emperor, (that is
Optatus his speech:) then make^ it fully for the ^S a^ul. (...) (...) (...). 3.
OATH, which denies the Pope to have any authority over our Sovereign,
either to depose him, or to dispose of his Kingdoms and subjects: for that
were to bind the King to his Good behavior, and make him a most base
underling to the Pope: because Deposing, is the highest point of Supremacy, and
the basest for indignity that a King can indu^e, and belongs to none but God
only, who is the alone superior to Kings, as those Fathers confess: or to an
inferior, for message and relation, and that by Gods special and person^ll
command, as was the Case of some Kings by Prophets. Yet for all this, these
also must make for the Catholics.

27 Nowithstanding, it seems the speech of S. Ambrose (...). (...). A^xent.
^p. li^. 5.
does somewhat trouble him, who professed, that otherwise then with SIGHS AND
TEARS, he neither might nor could resist; for such are the Weapons of a
Priest: how then will the ^igh-priest of Rome, justify his Breues of
interdiction; and his Faculties of Absolution; and his Bulls of Rebellion
against Princes?) and how makes this Flat for the Catholics refusing the
Oath? therefore in sifting this Father, he is curious, and that by double
Interrogation.

28 One; did Saint Ambrose by this, acknowledge that the Emperor had higher
authority then ^ee in Church matters? that is Extra Oleas, not the case in hand.
Superiority in Ecclesiastical causes, h^th the proper (...) in answer to the
Cardinals letter, where it is to be discussed. The point now controue^ed upon
Saint Ambrose his speech, is whether the Pope has done like a Priest in
forbidding the taking of an Oath, which concerns nothing but Civil obedience?
i^ he have not; then Saint Ambrose, and he are different. Indeed, so much of
his Breue as was written with the fresher moisture of his ink, the raine-water
of his tears [magno ani^ maerore; afflictio nostra; Cordis dolore] ^hese (...)
(I say) were Ambrose-like, and Priest-like. But when he comes to put in his
Caveat, with the Copres, (...), and ^egar, [acrius exigimus] the sharper
Ingredients of his Prohibition, these are the waters of Marah, so bitter, that
none (of a Religious pallat) can drink them: and therefore Saint Ambrose
leaves him there: for by any other means (says that holy Father) then by
TEARS and SIGNS, I cannot, I ought not to resist.

29 And the Popes Predecessor Gregory the great, more Epist. 61. li. 2. Indict
11.
openly forsakes him; for he having received a Law from the Emperor, to be
promulged according to command of his superior, misliking the Edict (as
contrary to religion, in his opinion,) sets down the reasons of his dislike,
but publishes the Law notwithstanding, according to the Emperors mandate. THIS
Pope deals clean contrary with the Oath, neither shows his reasons of
disallowing it, nor yet suffers it to pass for current, but plainly forbids
the taking of it; and yet says this vain Epistler* this example of Saint
Gregory makes flat for the Catholics.

30 The other interrogation concerning Saint Ambrose is, Whether, if the
Emperor had offered him an OATH Repugnant to his Religion and Conscience, he
would have taken it? to which, first he answers both for himself and us too,
Surely no. And this also is (...), nothing to the Catholics; for neither is
there in the Oath any m^tter touching Religion, other then that Obedience,
which by true Religion is allowed; neither is their Religion and that holy
Fathers more semblable (especially in that point of O bedience) then cha^e and
wheat, then Gold and dross. But suppose that Saint Ambrose would refuse such
an Oath vr ged upon him, would he with all for-bid others to take it, by
warrant of Interdiction? Surely no: for in as great a point of Conscience as
that, his answerwas, I have done what belongs to a Priest, Quod Imperatoris est
Imperator faciat ^i. l.
for the rest let the Emperor do as an Emperor should; that is, I have
discharged mine office, answering like a Priest, in making known the
unlawfulness of the Emperors demand, now leaving it to the Emperors pleasure, I
have no other means of resistance, but grief, and tears, and sighs.

31 And this to be the Proper Office, and right course of Pastors and
Preachers, the Fathers have observed in an elegant Allusion to that name of
Boanarges the sons Ieronym. in Mar. 3. 17. In Psalm.
of Thunder: for Preachers are Clouds, says S. Augustine; among which, if by
the power of Sun and Stars, an exhalation be forced up, and by coertion so
streitned, that it cannot have passage; by counterforce of both their strengths
(the one impelling, the other resisting) the Clouds break into Thunder; yet
that dreadful noise ends in moisture and rain: Nam Deus fulgura ad pluuiam
fecit, says Saint Hierome; that is, (as they moralize it) Superiors Vbi supra.
and Governors command that unto Bishops and Pastors which is unlawful; they
yield not, but show causes of their Recusance; not prevailing (but more
pressed) they lay open those judgments which in such cases God has revealed,
there is the Thunder: yet, when that is done, they go on further, but end in
tears, and prayers, Vt extinguat misericordia quod Iudicium vrit, that pity
may mo^e, where threats Ibid.
perhaps exasperate, says the same Father. This did Saint Ambrose, and yet
must this example make for the Pope for sooth, who surely, by that resemblance
of S. Ieroms, shows himself that either he was never good Pastor; or else his
Breue is a strange Meteor, which begins with moisture (Tears and Lamentation)
but without either rendering cause, or showing reason ends in a Thunder of
dreadful (...); like the Crocodile that first weeps, and then rages.

32 Secondly he gives a reason of that his negative, for S. Ambrose, why he
would not swear in a matter repugnant to his Religion, and that by three
instances of fact (in all which -- moueat Cornicula risum: for like Aesops
though ^ce, has borrowed them all from Allens Horac.
Apology; neither serve they for any purpose, but to e^ke out his Pamphlet,)
The first, His denial to dispute with Auxe^tius the Arrian in the Consistory
before Valentinian, required thereunto in the Emperors name, by Dalmatius a
Tribu^e and a Notarie, (for so the Text has it, (...) Tribunus and Notarius
con^enit, not as he varies it, the Tribu^e bringing with him a public Notarie
to test^fie the same) with reason and ground of his resusall, That Bishops must
Judge of Emperors, not Emperors of Bishops, in ma^ters of faith.

33 It is true, and Saint Ambrose did well in it, and said (...) for it; his
fact and reason both were Christian-like: ^son, place, and cause, making wholly
against his consent. For^o app^are before HIM as a Judge in Divinity, and ^o
(...) a po^ (whom Aristotle would scarle admit Ethic. 1.
^o b^e an Auditor in Philosophy) had been a great weakn^sse; first, the
Emperor was a young man, not only in y^ares, but in grace, neither yet
baptized, nor rightly ca^ chized: secondly, prejudicial in his opinion, having
already Vide Ambros. Epist. li. 5. etc Sig^nium de Occident. Imperio lib. 8.
an. 383.
e^cted a Law for the Arrian Doct^ne, which was the matter di ^utable; Toll
legem sivis esse certamen, says S. Ambrose: Thirdly, ouer-awed, at least
misled by his mother a woman Heretically affected (and that Sex must
predominate which way soever inclined:) fourthly, the conference must be in a
public consistory, among a multitude of Jews, Gentiles, and Heretics, where
he could expect no other issue but what the Apostles found, when they Act. 2.
13.
spoke with diverse ongus, Mocks, and Scoffs. For there are some places, not
fit for Christians either their Actions or arguments Our Savior himself could
do no great miracle in his own Country; not that he was unable for want Mar.
6. 5. Mat. 7.
of power, but he saw it was vn-auaileable through their lack of faith: and
why should that holy Father cast his Pearls before swine?

34 His reason of denial was Diuine-like; denial (I say) not of coming, for,
Venissem, Imperator, ad Consistorium, says Saint Ambrose, I had come, most
noble Emperor, unto the Consistory (according to the Summons) save that the
Bishops and people both withheld me; but of disputing before the young Emperor
as a Judge in causes of Faith, which might not be, the spirit of Prophets being
subject to the Prophets, by the Apostles rule. 1. Cor. 14. 32.


35. May not then a Prince judge in cases of Religion and Faith? No, not
Iudicio definitiuo, to determine what is sound Divinity or not, and so impose
that upon the consciences of men, for Faith, which HE alone defines to beeso:
but Iudicis exequntiuo or Iurisdictionis, he may and ought, when the Church
has determined matter of Faith, command the professing thereof within his
Kingdom, as the soundest and worthiest to be received. For so some Schoolmen
distinguish of Judgment, making it, first twofold; Definitive, to set down
what is to be thought of each Occam. in Dialog.
thing, and so prescribe it to men's belief (and that is the principal
prerogative of God himself:) and Secondarily, of the Church representative,
guiding her judgment by Gods voice, which is his word: the other of
recognition or sifting out the truth, which they make threefold; either
discretiue, to try whether things either be or be not, or whether they be
that they seem to be (and that is common to all Christians, to try the
spirits, whether they be of God or no:) or directive, to lead others into a
right judgment, 1. John 4. 1.
by revealing the Truth, and instructing them; which being a publik duty, is
proper to the pastors of the Church: and thirdly decretiue, which is in the
Prince, both affirmatively to bind those within his compass (as well Clergy
as Laity) to the observing of that which is so tried and adjudged; and
negatiuely to suppress the Contrary. This last, to judge for the truth, Saint
Ambrose denied not to the Emperor, yea it was his grief that he did not so;
but to judge of a truth, whether it should be so or no, as in this very case
(being a high mystery of Faith) Whether Christ should be the Son of God or
not? which God himself by his word had warranted, and the Church, by the
assistance of his Spirit had already determined and established: this (I say)
he denied, especially to Valentinian, who wanted (as it seemed) those three
qualities, which are principally required in judgment: first, Authority, for
it is the Churches Aquin. 22. q. 60. and 61.
right to determine in matters of doctrine; secondly, Prudence, to which many
years are required, says the Philosopher, but the Emperor was very young,
and a Nouice Arist. Ethic. l. 9
in the rudiments of Faith; thirdly, Justice, which has indifferency ever
annexed, and that in Valentinian was defective, who had forestalled the same
with a partial Law for the adverse part, a strong bar against true
judgment; for men are hardly removed from private opinions, much less Kings
from their Laws once published, especially in points of Divinity; because
such Retractations will always leave an aspersion, either of Ignorance,
Rashness, or Inconstancy.

36. His second and third Instances follow, as stale as the former: (for this
fellow lives upon Allens scraps) S. Ambrose denied to yield up a Church at the
Emperors command for the Arrians to assemble in: as also he refused to send
the Consecrate Church-vessels to the Emperor, requiring them: and his reason
for both was, Quaediuina, etc.

37. That is, things separated to holy use, and houses dedicated to Gods
Service, are not to be alienated to common usage; for Bis Dei sunt quae sic Dei
sunt, say the Fathers: God has in them a double right, as King David
confessed: first, as his gift to man; secondly, as man's gift back again to
him: which twofold cord tyeth them so strong, that it is 1. Ch^o. 29. 14
an Anathema for any (not consecrated) to challenge them; yea, for them which
are consecrate, if they do not only put them to that use alone for which they
were dedicated: otherwise the Sacrifices of the Lord (even in the hands of a
Priest) may yield an evil savor: much less are they to 1. Sam. 2.
be betrayed to heretical pollution; for why should the Church, separated to
the honor of Christ, b^e opened for entrance to Blasph^mies against Christ?
This was S. Am brose his reason of denial.

38 Now what of all this? He that thus refu^ed in these things, what would he
have done if he had been pres sed with an OATH against his Conscience? Sur^ly,
if the Emperor had commanded him to have abiured his Faith, he would (as he did
there) refuse by denial; render his reasons with all humility; and, if
occasion so ^quired, rather yield his body, then betray his faith; and in the
mean time weep for grief, to see Christ so wronged, and his Sovereign so
misled: (for so himself professes often.) Vide ^t supra.


39 But put the case aright: if the Emperor had pres sed him, because he saw
his diversity of opinion in Religion, to swear his true Allegiance unto him;
to abjure all usurpers, or challengers of his Crown, either pretending right
unto it, or claiming any authority to depose him, or set free his Subjects
from their obeisance, would be not have taken THAT OATH? Yes, he that ple^ded
so diuine-like for Gods right unto the Emperor, would for the Emperors right
have been as zealous, acknowledging unto Casar his due, as unto God his duty.
so (...) would he have been from the Popes vein, to send out Breues and
Prohibitions, thereby to nourish mutinous and intestine Rebellions. For even in
those cases of conscience before specified, when all the Citizens of Millan
stood for him, and the soldiers denied to at end the Emperor to any but S.
Ambrose his Church, the people being in a unnult, be defi^ed them of the
Emperors part, that if they took him to be Ince^or, the St^rer or Procurer of
the same, he might be executed, or (...); and protested for himself, that for
his part, he neither might, nor ought res^st: and commended the Christian
patience and for bearance in the multitude (as an influence of the holy Ghost)
when with their weapons in their hands, they (...) (...) said, R^gamus,
Auguste, non pugnamus: We request, noble Em peror Epist. (...). 5. 33.
we fight not. And is not this directly to his Majesty's ^urpose, to show that
the Office of a Priest and Bishop (the Pope is none other) is to practice and
(...) obedience? to gre^vnder pressures, not to make resistance? to pray
against unchristian violence, not to countermand Civil Alleg^ance?

40 But that of Gregory touches the very quick; who, as he thought his duty
discharged to God, in showing his reasons why he disliked the Law; so did he
per form it very readily to the Emperor in promulging the same immediately
according to Commandment. A^ this example (for all the Epistlers slight
account thereof, as not cited to purpose) is a bu^e in his thro^t, and make him
cough up a little bortowed reading, but that falsified: for, not denying the
promulgation of the Law by the Pope, upon the Emperors mandate, he would feign
make it good with a false Gloss; namely, that Gregory, first CORRECTED the
Law, and so TEMPERED by him, sent it to the Emperor, to which Mauritius
yielding; the Pope did publish it so CORRECTED. Grant this to be true; Gregory
showed more manners and Religion then Pope Paul does, who neither qualifieth
the Oath himsel^e, nor desires his Ma^estie that it might be tempered; not
declares the point wherein it is to be mitiga^ed; (...) (...) new married guest
in the Gospel, scorning his Predecessors Habe me excusatum, all sober excuse
set a^t, as a m^n wedded to his own will, and newly possessed o: Pope Io^nes
(...), he sends out his peremptory Non Luc. 4. 18. 20.
poss^m, neither himself will, nor others shall yield unto it.

41 But what this Jesuit speaks of correction or mitigation of the Law,
before Gregory's publication, is utterly untrue; and were not his profession
mere impudency, he ^ould not d^e to speak it: for, that the Pope did, after
some reasons delivered, adi^re the Emperor, pertremendum Iudicem, very
earnestly, to alter or dis^null the Law, is apparent in those words, Aut
temporando aut immutando E^ist. 61. lib. (...) (...). l. 11.
piet as vestra inflect at; but before ever this motion of his was made known
to the Emperor, the Law was by Gregory published, (for he was sick and could
not then write) as not only in that letter it self is manifest, but in
another not far from it, wherein it will appear, that the Pope having
diuulged the Edict, but seeing his request for Mittigation nor accepted, write,
to Theodore the Emperors physician, Ep^st. 64 lib. 2.
and intreates him to deal with his Lord and Sovereign about it: the reasons
whereof he had not, yea he would not (he says) a responsal^ suo public
dare, publicly yield, as from his Chair and Oracle (much less by his Br^ue
interdict) but having suggested it privately, he left it to God, and the
Emperors leisure and wisdom. If, after that, upon his importunity, it
pleased the Emperor to qualify it, by giving a more large scope to that
monastical desire, yet was not that yielding of his, made so public that all
might take knowledge of it; but Gregory is feign to make it good upon his
credit, in those words, in that Epistle which this Falsifying Jesuit
mentions, but leaves them out very cunningly, [Mih^redite] Believe ME,
Epist. 11. lib. 7. (...). l. 1.
our gracious Emperor is so contented: (it seems then that they had read the
Edict, and received it before uncorrected.)

42. And is not this most properly applied to his Majesty's purpose? that a
Pope, though misliking a Law Ecclesiastical, made without his priuitie and
consent, should not take any public exception against it, but privately by
Letters; not prohibit any to obey it, but make means to the Emperors
attendants for mitigation thereof; and in the mean time publish it PRESENTLY
upon the Mandate, as it was sent unto him? If the Pope had revealed unto his
Catholics the unlawfulness of the OATH, and yet willed them, for conscience
to God, and in duty to their Prince, to take it, and in the mean time
promise that he would endeavor by intercession and mediation to the Kings
Majesty, either to mitigate or abrogate the Law, then had he been more like
Gregory, and yet the example make nothing for the Pope or his Catholics; sor
Gregory excepted privately against the Law, but obeyed the commandment for
publishing it; the Pope openly interdicteth; they obstinately refuse taking of
the OATH. The truth is, the submissiue carriage of that Pope to the Emperor,
both in his style and deportment, does so plunge the great Bellar. de Pontis.
Romans lib 2. ca. 28.
debater of Controversies, that like one foundred, he knows not whether he
should ascribe it to Gregory his humility or necessity: and so makes their
great Sainted Pope, either an Hypocrite, to give the Emperor an Hail Master,
(whom in heart he contemned, yea, accounted a Persecutor, says Parsons) or
else a temporizing lukewarm Laodicaan, that for fear or constraint would
yield to any Number. 49.
thing against his conscience, that the Emperor should command.

43. The Councels follow; and not only that of Arles in France, with five
other at least (which submitted themselves wholly to the Emperor Charles the
great in most humble terms) but the four general Councels (which Gregory
compares to the four Evangelists) summoned at the beck and command of the
Emperors, and submitted (for the validity and establishment of their decrees)
to their most royal assent: and yet all this is nothing to the purpose, says
this Antapologer.

44 No? If whole Councels submitted themselves in all dutiull reverence to
their Souereignes, not only in matter of Temporal Affair, but of Faith and
Religion; then does the Pope an il Office, and vn-priest like, in forbidding
the Kings natural Subjects to acknowledge their allegiance to him in Civil
right. It is even the like argument which God himself uses in way of
Complaint, by comparison, the SONS OF IONAD AB Rechabs Ierem. 35.
Some KEPT the commandment of their Father which he gave them but MY PEOPLE
(...) NOT me.

45 Yet (...) his reasons; particularly against that of Arles (for the other,
of the general (...), He will not Tom. 3. C^l. (...) 4^1 etc.
stan^ to examine, as he says Numb. 55. Postulant vt (...) (...)
inexplicabilia, quoth the Ora^ of ^ome that were driven to a stand and
inconvenience in (...)) (...) (...) (...).
and they are by way of Interrog^, four in number.

First, in that Synod in Arles, (...) there any mention of an OATH? no more
was there in that example which God brought of Io^adabs son any m^ntion of
Idolatry whereof he complained in his people, but the Rechabites obedience
was showed in abstinence (...) strong drink; Isreal's disobedience in following
strange Gods. Hi^ Majesty is now in argument a Thesiad Hypothesia; by
comparison thu^: All^bedience was heeretofor by Scriptures, Fathers, and
Councels, ackn wleged to Princes in ALL causes; then surely, in Hypothesi is
the Pope very faulty to forbid his catholics to take an OATH, which
contains ONLY a Recognition of natural and Civil obedience.

46 His second Interrogatorie: Was his SVBMISSION in requ^sting the Emperors
assent because the Council was assembled by his Commandemen^? Yes, for he
that has the sole authority to summon a Council, h^th the sole power to make
good or void what it concludes Without the Emperors liking. It is probabie
they met not,says this Je^ite, (which he borrows from Bellar:) but the chief
commission came from Rome. How will that app^are? The Popes (...) C^cil. ca* ^3.
(...) is not once mentioned, either in the Preface or body of the who^e
Council; but the words (...) p^ine, Iussis IMPERATORIS, frater^itatis nostr^
(...) est adunatus, by the commandment of our most Religious Emperor, our
brotherhood is here met in one: and the year of his reign is there prefixed.

47 Yea, But in a Council at Worms, the first that the said Charles caused to
be Celebrated in his Dominions, Anno 770. (...) was left Registered, AVTHORIT AS
ECCLESIASTICA, etc. ECCLESIASTICAL AVTHORITIE teaches that councels may not
be held with out the allowance of the Bishop of Rome. A manifest untruth made
good by an obscure Author, out of a Council either no^ assembled, or never
recorded. Canizius who in his Chronology Ante. Catechis.
seems very diligent in nu^bring all the Councels both universal, provincial,
and National, names it not. Genebrard, himself a Frenchman, reckoning all the
Councels Chron. l. 4.
which the Emperor Charles assembled, mentions it, but neither dates it, nor
warrants it, as he does the rest at Arles, Towers, Chalons, etc. All which he
mustreth in the vere^ 13. but in the year 770. he ackowledgeth no such thing.
Binius (no idle compiler of the Councels) names it only in that year, and
leaves this note upon it, In the French Annals in the life of Charles the
Great, there is found mention of a Certain Synod, to be Celebrated at
Worms, QVID IN EOGESTVMFVERIT NON CONSTAT. Caranza the Epitomist names only
one at Worms, held in the year 816. or there abouts, under Lewis the second;
but of any under Charles, either as King of France which must be (...) (...))
Anno. 770. or Emperor, Tom. 2. Con. pa. (...).
which was not till (...) (...), at least, he says not a word; and yet out of
such a smothered Record (...) ^out of Baronius, and he mistaken, this fugitive
(...) a definitive sentence, to warrant no Council goo^ (...) ted without the
Popes authority for assembling: that is to say, at one push to overthrow the
credit of all the Councels, both general and particular, for the better p^rt
of 900, years after Christ, especially when the Churches had rest, and
flo^ished under Emperors and Kings.

48 A thing so clear and radiant, that Bellarmine himself being dazeled in
beholding the Evidence, as S. Peter, not wisting what he said, oppressed with
the glistering Matthew. 17. Luc. 9.
countenance of our Savior, would needs build Tabernacles bo^ (...) (...) and
Moses: so he, laboring to build for the Pope, as if all Councels must
necessarily depend upon his Oracles, and come to his Tent for summons and
strength; labors also to build for the Emperor, and in the same place shows
diverse reasons, why it rather belonged (...) council l^. c^. 13.. Habemus
Council. Laterane. sub Ha^rian. Funcci. Com. li. 4 Geneb. lib. 3. did. ^3.
Adrian. Papa Romanus,
to Emperors then the Pope, to assemble them. And if any Emperor might
challenge it, Charles the great much rather; to whom by authority of Council
and Pope, power was given to appoint the Bishop of Rome, and to dispose of the
Sea Apostolic; which so remained in him, and his Successors for a long time.

49. Was then this submission at the Council of Arles, made to the Emperor for
approbation of matters of Faith? That is his third interrogatorie. To which he
answers No, and yields his reason by repetition of that place in Saint
Ambrose before specified, That in cases of Faith, Bishops must judge of
Emperors, and not vice versa* To judge definitiuely, which are matters of faith
or no, it is not for the Emperor; but to ratisie by his assent, and command by
his authority, what the Church or Council (so assembled) has defined to be a
matter of Faith, is proper to Emperors and Kings; and this was the end of their
submission at Arles, as the words purport And that this was S. Ambrose his
meaning also, his own fact is the best interpreter; who, when the Synod at
Aquil^ia, conuented by the Emperors command, about the point of Christ's Deity
(no mean Article of Faith) was dissolved and broken Tom. 1. Council. pa. 5^4.
etc. per (...). Gratian. Valentinian. Theodosius.
up, wrote with the rest of his brethren their letters to the Emperors,
particularly discoursing the whole manner of their proceeding; and (by
messengers purposely addressed from the Synod) humbly and earnestly desired
them that they would vouchsafe to make good what the Bishops had in this
assembly concluded, Ne obtempera^tes vestrae tranquilitis Statutis frustra
Conuenisse videamur, least this our ^eeting should be frustrate and to no
purpose, which we have made in OBEDIENCE to your Clemencies Commandment.

50 Or was this Submission, or rather remission by the Synod, made, because
this Council was assembled ONLY for reformance of MANNERS? that is his last
interrogatory and answered by him affirmatively; Yea for after the first Canon,
which contains a prosession of their Faith, the other twenty five (being in
all but twenty six) are about Reformation of matters amiss; and so he
reckons up eleven of the twenty five. Genebrard indeed does call all those
Synods by Charles the Great assembled, CONCILIA Chron. lib. 4. Anno 813.
REFORMATORIA. Belike then it is granced, that Princes within their several
Dominious, may assemble their Clergy concerning matters of Ecclesiastical
Discipline, and that is NERVVSECCLESIAE; matters of Faith have a great
Dependence upon that Reformation; because unsoundness in opinions, is seldom
separate from dissolutenes of Manners.

51 But was the assembly only for that? first then, the Clergy did aliudagere,
and went beyond their commission, for after their mutual Salutations and Joy
at each others meeting, Coepit vnionis nostrae numerositas de Rebus
spiritualibus Praesat. ad Consil.
mutua Collatione inter se ora diffundere, our whole company began to
confer at large about matters Spiritual, say the Fathers of that Council.
Secondly, the eleventh Canon defines who are to be accounted (...), and within
what degree of Consanguinity they are comprised; and that (I trow) is a matter
of Dostrine: yea, and the eight Canon (which in the Margin the Jesuit has
marked, but omitted in the body of the discourse) is by their own rule a
matter of Faith, and Religion, and by this Epistler termed Nomb. 50.
a point of the Law of God, namely the Prohibition of entering into Monastical
life. Mauritius in his Edict forbad that Soldiers should be admitted as Monks,
and that by Greg. the great is accounted such a matter of conscience and
Religion that he takes it to be against God himself, and to be a mandate
preclusory of the way to heaven: the said very restr. int, for Vbi supra.
Nuns and Monks is within this Council, and yet now it is reputed but a
matter of manners. The 18. Canon not only concludes the Crism. to be safely
kept under lock and key, but determines it to be Genus Sacramenti, a kind of
Sacrament, and therefore not to be touched by any but Priests.

52 Yet grant it were so, that this Council were only assembled to correct
deformity in manners, did they then by their submission acknowledge the
Emperors authority Only in those Cases, and not in matters of Faith and
Religion? What can we say to the four General Councels (specified by his
Majesty) assembled by the Emperor, and particularly that of Ephesus against
Nestorius, summoned by the Emperor, and after many earnest supplications and
interceptions of their Letters, and hard pressures upon some Orthodox Fathers,
(for Cyril and Memmon upon sinister Tom. 2. Council. per Binium. p. 921.
Informations were laid fast) their Decrees were at last confirmed by the
Emperors authority? His answer is, Numb. 55. Those ONLY tend to prove
TEMPORAL Obedience and therefore he will not stand to examine them. Very
learnedly spoken, and very honestly, no doubt.

53 Such is the fashion of many ignorant Geographers, says Plutarch, when they
come to some Terra incognita, Pl^. These.
that goes beyond their small reading, and they know not how to describe it,
they place it in a corner of their Map, and say, that nothing lies beyond but
certain quicksands, or impassable mountains or frozen Seas. Just that which
Aristotle noted in Anaxagoras that absurd disputant, who Metaphys. 1.
when he was driven to any exigent, vt hareretin explicanda causa, and could
not give a cause why such a thing should have his existence, he would shift it
off with his old spell of Not that the understanding did it; when as in all
other things he would make anything the cause rather then it. Here Temporal
Obedience is made the cause of the Councels submission, (which says the
Jesuit, we offer most willingly) when as those Synods were not assembled for
any one such point; and he with his are ready to perform nothing less. And
so passing them with silence, because he knows not what to say unto them, he
tells us that he will draw to an end of this Paragraph. Wherein, like
Schole-boies, when they have spent their questions, he falls on railing against
the Apologier with his Saucie terms.

54 And why so? Because his Majesty professed, that it never came within His
reading, that Temporal Obedience was against Faith, and Salvation of Souls.
Sure he was, that Christ professed himself of another opinion, in denying his
kingdom to be of this world, and in commanding Ioh. 18, 36. Matthew. 21. 21.
Caesar's right to be given unto Caesar; and therefore if the Pope had once set
it down as an Article of Faith, (for he has a trick by the infallibility of
his spirit to make NEW ARTICLES at his pleasure) before he had thus pronounced
of the Oath of Alleagiance, it had been more excusable.

55 Upon this the Jesuit resulteth in a kind of Tertullus rhetoric, with a
volume of empty and hauty words, calling this speech an INSVLTATION, and the
Apologer a TRIFLER, a WRANGLER, a WRONGFVLL IMPOSER upon his Adversary, a
VOLVNTARY MISTAKER of the question, and a CALVMNIATOR. Numb. 56. For first, the
Breue, says he, forbids not TEMPORAL Obedience. No? It forbids the Oath
wherein is Only acknowledgement of Civil Allegiance; and he which Prohibits
the Swearing against an Usurping Deposer, denies Temporal Obedience to the
rightful Sovereign. Secondly says he, Neither the Pope, nor the whole
Church together can make NEW ARTICLES of Faith, by the judgment of any LEARNED
CATHOLIC. They may make NEW Rules of Faith; for those Books which the
Churches in all ages have reputed Apocrypha (as the Book of Hermes, and the
Constitutions of Clement) the Pope and Council may make Canonical, so says
Stapl^ton, and he Relect. d^ct. prine. cont. 5. (...). 2. (...). 4.
no unlearned Catholic. Yet more nearly, Bish^p Fisher, a most holy and
learned man (so Bellarmine styles him (says, that what a Pope with a Council
delivers us to be believed hoc pro fidei articulo recipiendum est, that must be
received as Art. ^7 co^a. (...) (...)
^n Article of Fait^. Yet more directly Aquinas (no meanly learned
Schoole-man) is of opinion, that to prevent or (...) errors newly arising, it
is necessary to make a NEW (...). q. 1. art. 10. conclus.
SYMBOL or Creed, and no man has that authority ^ut the Pope, to whom it
belongs FINALLY to determine concerning matters of Faith, to be of all
bel^eued and received FIDE INCONC^SSA, without doubting or wavering. Which
point of desining Dogmata fides, how many or how few they should be, to belong
to the Pope only, and not to a Council, a Jesuit (and therefore Learned, ^or
Institut. pa. 2. lib. 4. cap. 10.
Parsons will say) maintains very firmly. For the Pope may define any thing
(though not expressed in Scrip ture) to be defide, an Article or point of Faith,
without any explicit Revelation from God, says Suarez another Jesuit. Tom.
2. disp. 3. art. 2. sect. 6. qu. 27.


56 But what need opinions, when the practice is extant? A whole new Symbolum
is set out in the provincial Synod tom. (...). Council. pa. 950.
at Millan, wherein twelve new Articles are added to the Nicen Creed, which all
Catholics are bound upon pain of an Anathema^, to profess by word, and
swear by Oath.

57 These are EXPLANATIONS, not NEW ARTICLES, as SHE was not the true Mother
MORE after the child was sentenced to be divided, then before; but then it
appeared more plainly, that she was so, (says the Epistler.) So some
Canonists call the Popes challenge C. fundamenta de Elect ^n 60.
to his doubl^ Monarchy, Constantines, not donation but Declaration, or real
EXPLANATION of that Text, [Tues Petrus.] Explanations are declaratorie
illustrations of a truth inuolued in some former Article, not additions of a
doctrine newly conceived for a truth; so says the Council of Florence: but in
that annexion at Millan the most of the Articles have no ground, either in
Scriptures or Decrees, by the primitive Church allowed. And therefore
Purgatory; Trans-substantiation; communicating under one kind; seven
Sacraments; Worshipp^ng of Images, etc. (which are annexed to the Nicene Creed
by the Synod at Millan) having no relation to any Article of that, or any
other ancient Creed, or divine Scriptures, can not be Explanations, Quia
omnis expositio (says the Florentine Council, ^om. 4. Council. pa. ^22. etc.
wherein that case was fully canuased) sit ex intrinsecis; but must needs be
ex^ranea, additions of NEW Articles, fetched in by the Popes extrauagant Power,
which the canonists ascribe unto him* Extraius, contra ius, and Decius and Can
li. (...). 1. Reg. 3.
supraius Omnia posse. Which shows his comparison of the true mother, revealed
by the appointed division of the Child, to be a fopperie. For if the Creed
could speak for it self, at the imposing and enforcing New Articles upon it,
under the name of Declarations, as that natural mother could at the sentence
for the dismembring of her child, it would tell the Whore of Babell, that she
played Michols part, to make a dead Image carry the resemblance 1. Sam, 19, 13,
of living David* and that these Explanations (so called) are but
Ephesiael^terae, illuding impostures, no concluded truths. Athen. dipnos. lib.
12.
And would justify that charge of his Majesty (in saying that the Pope can
make new Articles of Faith) to be as far from Calumniation, as this Jesuit is
from shame or honesty, to auow the contrary, in saying that no learned
Catholic does affirm it, when there are so many witnesses, against him, and
the practice it self in their new form so apparent.

58 Insomuch that some Schoolmen (pressing that Canon of the Eph^sine
Council, that none under pain of Anathema, should Edere, or Condere any other
Symbol, Them. ^qu. vbi ^upra.
or addere any thing to that of the Nicene Creed) turned it off first, that
the Anathema in that Case, touches private men, and not the Pope. Secondly,
that those Articles of the Popes are ^ut Explanations, not additions, which is
a weak privilege; for so much may, yea, every Minister in Catechizing must
do, that is Explicate and declare the sense and meaning of the Creed. Therefore
what the Pope adds, must needs be a NEW Article of Faith, or else his
Prerogative is no more then belongs to the Office of every ordinary Priest
that is learned. So that if the Pope had by his infallible judgment, and
irref^agable authority once determined it for an Article of Faith, either as
his Majesty puts the case in particular, that Temporal Obedience is against
Faith and Salvation of Souls; or as M. Blackwell in general, that the Pope
had iudicially, (...) ex Cathedra, declared his Souereignty and power in
Temporalibus, E^l. ad Catholic. ^glic.
then his BREVE to come upon it, had carried some color? which is a thing (as
it seems) very soon done if he will; for if there be a question, says
Suarez, though it have been long canuassed, and none dare define either way,
yet Simultum referat ad Ecclesiae vtilitatem, if it make for the profit of the
Church (as for example, Suarez. ^bi supra.
whether the Virgin Mary were conceived by her Parents without sin) the Pope
has power in alterutram partem decidere, and what he concludes, must be de
Fide received

59 From this his Majesty's Prolemma and anticipating conclusion, the Epistler
comes to answer this Dilemma that is, If Temporal Obedience be lawful, the
Pope is injurious to forbid it to his Catholics; if it be unlawful, yet is
he unjust to condemn, and not to show the reason. Both these PILLARS (as the
Jesuit calls them) like another Sampson, he sets his force to frush at once,
and yet (they standing) himself is crushed with his own shock. For what he
has hitherto labored to confute, and now again peremptorily denies,
(scilicet, That the Breue gainsa^th not obedience in Civil things) in answer
to the last part of the Dilemma, he plainly confesses and gran teth: for the
Pope being justly taxed by his Majesty for not expressing any cause or reason
of the unlawfulness of the OATH, the Epistler says, There are as many reasons
that it is unlawful, as there are POINTS in the OATH which concern Religion:
And there is no one point but does so, even that very first Article which
merely touches Civil Obedience, I do swear before God, that King lames is
the lawful King of this Realm, etc. for every Subject is by Religion in
conscience bound (if he be required) to swear unto the lawful right of his
true Sovereign. And therefore the Pope, by this Antapologers grant, not
distinguishing the parts, but laying down the whole Oath in a lump, as a
sufficient reason of the unlawfulness, denies even Civil Obedience, and
Recognition to be acknowledged by his Catholics unto their Lord and King.

60 But perhaps by Religion he means the points of the Oath, where the Pope
and Church of Rome is named; it had then been honest dealing in the Pope,
first, to have said so, and then to have showed what foundation that, Religion
has which gives him such power to depose Kings, or absolve Subjects; and to
have made that point soundly good for himself, before he had rushed into such
a peremptory Prohibition: but that being yet a debate-able ground, and a
Controversy not agreed upon amongst his own Professors, nor determined by his
Cathedral autliority, it was an hasty rashness, not upright justice, to award a
sentence so resolutely Interdictiue. For though a Judge disputes not, but
determines, (as says this Jesuit) yet it is a Judges part to guide his
determination by the allegations and proofs made on both sides, in the hearing
of the parties, if it be possible; if not, yet to intimate the reasons of his
so sentencing; which otherwise, even a Pagan thought to be an absurd, yea a
brutish course. For he which gives a definitive Sentence, hearing but one
party, Aequum Act. 25. ^7.
licet statuerit, hand aequus fuit; though his determination were just, his
proceeding was unjust, says the Philosopher. In the Pope then there was a
double injustice; first, to judge in Seneca.
the absence of one side; secondly, (suppose they say that the Oath it self
served as the adverse party present) that ^so is injustice to condemn the good
with the bad; for either Genesis 18.
but some part of the Oath concerns Temporal Obedience, (that Parsons
confesses) and then has the Pope dealt both unjustly to condemn the whole
Oath as it lies; and indiscreetly and injuriously, not to express the
particles of his exception: or else the whole Oath does only concern it, and
then is the Popes dealing both aberrant from Divinity, and cruel to his
Catholics, forcing their Souereignes sword out of his scaberd, and whetting it
in his hand against them; as also (which his Majesty very iudiciously
collecteth) by exhorting them to constancy not to yield therein, he casts a
foul imputation upon that Religion, as if It and Civil Obedience were
incompatible in themselves, and that no zealous Papist could be a true Subject
to his Sovereign.

61 This Collection he terms an Injurious Inference; but answers no other
way, then first by a shifting comparison, that the same Objection might be made
against Saint Cyprian and other Fathers, for exhorting Martyrs to Constancy,
not to yield against their Conscience; and secondly by a preoccupation, that
if we should reply, that the things then exacted by Emperors, were simply and
apparently unlawful, these not; their answer is, that unto them in their
Consciences, the Oath is as utterly unlawful: which is as much to say, to
swear allegiance unto their natural and rightful Sovereign, is in their
Conscience as unlawful as to Sacrifice to Idols; for in denial thereof only,
was the Constancy of those Martyrs tried, whom S. Cyprian hartned, as in the
very book which he quoteth is manifest, Exhort. ad Martyrs.
divided into twelve Chapters; six of them, all handling that only argument as
the subject of their perseverance.

Thirdly, he answers by an Expostulation: Why should it be more indispensable
to deliver up a Bible or a New Testament, which the Martyrs then denied to the
Emperors, and so died for denying it, and are by the Church commended for so
dying, then now for Romes Catholics to swear an Oath against their Conscience
when the King exacteth it?

62. The reply is, first, that it is not the substance of the OATH that
sticks in their Consciences, but the form thereof, especially those last
words, I do make this Recognition WILLINGLY and TRVLY: otherwise they have a
trick in their Religion to swallow the whole Oath without straining; for this
is their doctrine (and it is worth the observing) that if a man be called to
swear, if he take the Oath unwillingly, it is unto him as if he had not Azor.
In^itut page 1. (...). 10. c. 4.
sworn at all; yea, grant he have voluntatem iurandi, be very willing to
swear, but has not voluntatem se obligandi, no will to bind himself to
perform what he swears, it is no OATH unto HIM, he is as free as if he were
never sworn.

63. Secondly, that this is (as the Schoolmen speak) Comparatio non
aequalitatis, but similitudinis: for there is no proportion in these cases of
Disobedience; because simply to deliver up a Bible unto a Superior requiring
it, is no sin, yea, to deny it, is a contempt; for so far forth as they
are material books, they are but Opera deletiua, (as Victor in August.
speaks) and, after delivery, may either be transcribed by Copy, or recovered
by entreaty, or supplied from other places: but if the Emperor require them to
use as Iehoiakim did Jeremiah his prophecy; or Antiochus ^e books of the Law
to burn and deface in contempt Iere 36. 23. 1. Maccab. 1. 59. 60. (...). lib.
8. ^p. 2 ^nob. lib. 4. 4.
and despite, or fury and passion; and that was the case, as appears by
Eusebius and Arnobius in those words: Cur ignibus meruerint dari nostra
scripta? Or as Julian the Apostata (who called in all the heathen Writers, both
of Philosophy and Poetry, out of the Christians hands, under a Socrat. lib 3.
cap. 12 grae.
fair pretense of abandoning Paganism, to bereave them of all knowledge)
thereby to take from Christians the true means of their instruction; the cause
is far different: for so to obey, were wilfully to betray the truth of God;
whereas Obedience to Princes, is an iniunction both to 1. Pet. 2. 13. Tit. 3.
(...).
all subjects for performance, and to Clergymen, for suggestion also, to
remember the other of their Duty

64. From which there is no startling exception, says Aquinas, unless he be
either an Usurper or intruder which commands (and that is not our case, God be
thanked,) or 22. q. 105. art. 6. ad. 3.
that he command things unlawful: if they say that is their case, we deny it:
but let us suppose it, yet their Angelical Doctor will tell them, that in
those things they must notwithstanding Obey, propter vitandum scandalum aut
periculum. (Of this Divinity I judge not, it is their own.) And can there be a
greater scandal in a State then that a King should have so many subjects in
several ranks, that shall refuse to join in the same Allegiance with their
native Countrymen and Cohabitants? As for danger, Can a man take FIRE in his
bosom, and his CLOTHES not be Prou. 6. 27.
BVRNT, says Solomon? Or a Prince nourish Recreants in his Realm, and be
secure of his safety? Obedience therefore being the Bibles doctrine, what
resembla^ce has the delivering up of the Bible to the despite and rage of
furious Tyrants, and the Oath which binds the Obedience Only in Secular
things, and is therefore called the OATH OF ALLEGIANCE?

95 To which he answers, first, That Is the Inscription, not the truth; for
the fairest Title is put upon the foulest matter, when it is to be exacted or
persuaded. It Is true Fa. Parsons; for Murdering of Princes is now entitled a
Sixth. Quint. Panegyr. Card^m. ad Parri^.
Memorable and Worthy exploit, as in the Monks case that slew the French King:
yea a Meritorious Work, deserving Letters of Commission, Indulgence of Pardon,
and Inheritance in Heaven; as in the case of Parry the designed Slaughter-man
of Queen Elizabeth. As for deposing Kings and inciting Subjects to Rebellion,
they are entitled the two principal Wards of S. Peter's Keys, without which,
God Bulla P^j 5.
had been desicient in his Providence, because without them the Church could
neither be well opened nor shut. But that the Oath is such an Harpye (with a
fair face and a foul heart) we must and will denieit, till it be proved,
that there is any thing in it which either scandalizeth a GOOD Conscience, or
contradicts any point of TRVE Religion; or which merely concerns not
civil Obedience.

66 He therefore secondly answers that the exacting of Bibles to be delivered
up was under pretense of Allegiance. Unless he had a warrant under the Popes
Seal, to falsify that little Reading he has, he would not thus write; the
Authors which he names, mention no such thing; vea, the contrary is implied by
them. For not only the Bible; but paper Books also of collected notes, and
books of Physic were exacted to the fire, as in Saint August appears: yea
some of Tully his works (as Arnobius witnesses) even as Numa Pompilius his
volumes Contra. Crescon lib. 3. cap. 27. Lib. 3* contra. Gentes. Sixth. Scnens.
li. 2.
long before, by an ancient decree of the Roman Senate: and for this Exaction,
two reasons only are given; first, a purpose to destroy all writers, that made
against their Doctrine of the Paynim Gods, and that fetched in Tully, and the
Old Testament especially. Secondly, it was the current opinion in those times,
as witnesses Arnobius, that our Savior Christ was Magus insignis, a notable
Sorcerer and coniurer; and so the New Testament was fetched in, and whatsoever
writings concerned HIM, as reckned in the number of Magical books. They that
through torments and fear yielded them up, were called Traditores says Saint
August. The name first known 40. yoares after Saint Cyprians Vbi supra, and de
^apt. lib. 7. cap. (...).
death, in the time of Dioclesia, and no one word mentioned by any writer
concerning Allegiance, either in the Emperors Edict, or relation of the
History: and therefore to bring it in for comparison with this Oath is absurd
and ridiculous; wherewith the other Edicts of the said Tyrant (commanding
Christians to sacrifice unto Idols) have as much coherence. More truly do
those Traditores represent unto us the Roman Expurgatores; for as they, by
their faint yielding, did what in them lay (to speak in Arnobius Ad ^rsus Gent
lib. 3.
words) publicatam submergere Lectionem, utterly to abolish the published
knowledge of Christ, and to make the Savior of the world a Sorcerer; so do
these by their false purgation (as much as they can) endeavor to make all the
fathers Romish Aduocats, and to leave to the Church neither true History nor
sound author, no more the^ Pharaoh would have left one Male Israelit alive, had
not the midwiues prevented Exodus 1 16.
him.

67 Some shadow hereof (to go no further) may be seen by this Jesuit in the
point of these two Breues of Clement, the 8. in this place mentioned by his
Majesty, which Garnet the Arch-Traitor had, and burnt, and wherewith the
Epistler makes the way to end this Paragraph (for Tortus page 46 li. 5.
as concerning Rome being Babylon, he speaks not a word, as by silence granting
that which Cardinal Matthew plainly acknowledges, and confesses it to be even
that Babylon in the Apocalips.) Now then his Majesty (who has good reason to
know what concerns matter of State) affirms that those Breues, were sent by
Pope Clemens octauus immediately before the late Queens death. This the
Antapologer concludes to be an Exaggerated Calumniation. The Tortuse in Latin
says it is a vanity and falsitie: belike Page 45. li. 24
these men stand upon a sure ground, they are so confident: what is then the
proof? the English Jesuit says, That having procured knowledge of the two
BREVES, he finds them sent into England, not together, nor immediately before
the Queens death, but the ONEDIVERS YEARS BEFORE, Anno 1600. and the OTHER
AFTER HER DEATH. 1603.The Vn-Iesuited Latinist, Tortus, page 46. li. 20.
he says, that having the Copy thereof in his hands, he finds that Clemens
the eight sent these two BREVES in the years 1600. one to the Clergy, and the
other to the Laytie: BOTH OF THEM TOGETHER three years before the Queens
death. One came not til after her death, and yet both of the^ came before her
death 3. years, where is the Falsitie now? perhaps One was dispatched by
Cut-speede the Post, and the Other sent by Tom-long the Carier. The holy Ghost
spoke it of as honest men as these, et non erant conuenientia Mar 14. 56.
Testimonia, and their witnesses agreed like Harp and Harrow.

68 If the date thereof must determine the truth, why agree they not upon it?
but suppose they did, that must not carrieit, it being an easy matter for the
Pope to make an ante-date. The Gibeonites came to Joshua like far-went
Travelers, when as they were his confining neighbors; Iosu. 9. 12, 13.
and with torn clothes and moldy victuals, as become so by iourneying, which
they had made by craft: and the Breues of the newest coin may easily have an
old stamp in the Popesmint, to make them current for his Catholic purpose.
They writ of Asia, that the want of one dipthong* Plut de dysop. Luc. 16.
was the overthrow of the whole Country. The Pope is not so nice, to hazard
his case upon such quillits; if adding or altering, or falsifying, or
out-facing will do it, in words, sentences, or volumes, his Scribe is at
hand, (like the honest Steward that can write down 50. or 80.) it is but
turning a figure into a Cipher, and 600. will easily Apul. Florid. lib. (...).
be made of 603. But it is more then probable by that which this Epistler
confesses, that upon report of the Queens dispaired recovery, both the
Breues were drawn according to the Proverb, a Dorio ad Phrygium of two diverse
natures, the One to raise a Tumult, if they found any head to make a foul
stoppage against the King; if not, but that (in despite of the Devil) the King
should have his Right, and the state be once settled, then the other should
start out, to make a fair show for the Pope, and some way for a tolleration. A
stale and silly policy (God wot) and not much different from the Laconian
Scytalismus, to have Vide Plut. and Gell^um.
two tickets in one pocket of a contrary fashion, for two diverse events.

69 Yea, rather which is the truth, according to his Majesty's relation
(contrary to what the Scriptures observe in natures course, which denies
sweet Waters and brackish to spring from the same fountain, yet, which the
same Scripture abhors in man's tongue) out of the same mouth of the Pope
proceeded blessing and cursing at one time: His Breue even then gastring his
Majesty's title Iac. 3. 12
and debarring his right, when (to send some of his Majesty's ministers abroad,
he both professed and promised (...) furtherance in advancement thereof. For
the substance of the Breue was, That the Catholics should admit NONE for King,
were he never so nearely conjoined in blood and descent, except he would first
SWEAR, not only to TOLERATE, but promote the Catholic ROMISH RELIGION
within his Realms.

70 To this he answers, That the Breue was rather a determination of the
Popes upon a Question moved unto hi^, what Catholics were bound to do in
Conscience, for admitting a new Prince after the Queens death? First, what
has the Pope to do in decyding Tules, or Marshall^g Descents? One that had
more right to the possessions of the whole earth (he by whom Kings do reign
and Princes Psalm. 3. Pro. 8. Luc. 12. 13.
bear rule) refused to be vmpier, in any such matter, for who made me a Judge
of inheritances, says our Savior in the Gospel? and One, not the meanliest
learned among them denies the Pope to have any authority either by
prescription or power, to meddle with titles of Kingdoms, aut in prima
instantia, aut in gradu appellationis. Secondly, who taught Franc. Victori.
relect. 1. de potest. Eccles.. Ex ^us.
the Pope such divinity, that Kingdoms Hereditarie descend to Religion, not to
blood? Thirdly, the Pope therein directly, et ex diametro opposed against his
majesty's claim. For HE had many evident demonstrations, that the King neither
was nor would be Popishly affected; his profession general settled in the
Church and state where he lived; his resolute answers; his Statutes enacted:
his Edicts published; his Book printed; his Arguments multiplied (and upon
occasion enforced) made all to the contrary. His Tule was not so weak, that he
needed the Popes furtherance, nor his desire of a crown so ambitious, that for
atchieuing it he would betray his conscience: which the Pope knew, and his
Majesty should have felt the smart thereof, had the Catholic party bin strong
enough: and therefore that other ground of the Popes, which the Epistler puts
down, is a falsitie, and a vanity. scz. a hope conceived that his Majesty was
not far from being a Papist, but there might be some reasonable hope of his
CONVERSION.

71 What went you out into the Wilderness to see, says out Savior, a Reed
s^ken with the Wind; and what ministered Matthew. 11.
the occasion to this hope of his majesty's inco^stancy, which they call
conversion? The relations and earnest asseuerations of those his Majesty's
Ministers abroad,quoth he. First, that is one just reward of a Strumpet, to be
guld with Gloses and false promises of her Riuals, to feed her lustful humor,
and win her liking to themselves, and the Whore of Bobylon, Queen of the
world (as his Majesty entitles her) to whom there is such frequent recourse,
cannot want whole Stews of intelligence; yet a politic Historian notes it as
a point of singular folly and rashness, for Princes and Statesmen to credit
enery report, especially in bru^tes of high nature, and not (...) very narrow
Dion, lib. 52.
ly to (...) out the truth thereof. Secondly, though he were Nabal a Churl,
that spoke it, and failed then in the particular, yet his Thesis is too true,
Hodie increuerunt Serui qui fugiunt Dominos suos, there are too many servants
now a^es 1. Sam. 25. 10.
that break every man from his Master; that carry names of Ministers being
Fugitives; and of Agents being Traitors. Great men (Princes especially) do
seldom want a Ziba to give out treacherous Informations, contrary to the
intention, and derogatorie to the Reputation of their 2. Sam. ^6. 3.
Master, which puts them most in trust. But as it was not the wisest nor
vprightest doom (in the judgment of all divines) given by David upon a report
so maliciously framed and so slenderly proved, to condemn Mephibosheth as a
Traitor; so it argued no great discretion in the Pope, up Ibid.
on bare informations, and (as the end will show) mere slanders (having in them
neither ground for proof, nor shadow of truth) to be so credulous, as to
conceive, that his Majesty would be an Apostata from that Religion, which in
his infancy he had sucked, and had succored in his Kingdom; and hazarued
sometimes for it both li^e and liberty. If perhaps he mean those letters which
Tortus mentions, ere this time he cannot but know that those treacherous
abuses are now fully discovered by the voluntary confession of the party
himself, the then Secretary of Scotland, who got those letters signed, but
made not his Majesty acquainted with the contents L. of Balmerinoth.
thereof; because before that having moved the King ^o write unto the Pope,
his Majesty had utterly denied him. And what Prince Christened may not in such
sleight of deceit be abused, if those to whom he commits his especial
^ust, will be so sraudulently wicked? yea, was not one even of their own
modern Popes served in the very like kind? Wherefore was Belochto the Taster
unto Sixtus Quintus, and his attendant whom he dearly loved, condemned to the
Galleys, where, after many months, he miserably died; but for signing with the
Fishermans Ring. an Apostolical Breue, the Pope unwitting thereof; quo
continebantur eaquae Pontifex admittere nol^it; the Onuphr (...)* Six. Quinti.
Contents whereof were contrary to the Popes mind? nor the Taster only, but
Gual^erruccio, also one of his Secretaries, as an accessory to that treacherous
cousinage, and another besides him, whom Onuphrius will not name, were all
adjudged to the like punishment for the same fact Cuiuis potest accidere quod
cuiquam potest, says the Stoik; and it may be the case of any Governor, be
he never so circumspect. The Masters credit may for a while be hazarded by the
Servants unfaithfulness; but when time has revealed the truth, the falsily
of a Treacher, may not be a prejudice to the Innocence of a Sovereign.

72 So that what this glosing Scribler writes of that Popes kind affection to
his Majesty, as loving his Person most heartily: speaking of him honorably;
treating his Nation kindly; and using more liberality that way then he
thinks convenient to speak of are but Iugling devises to deceive the
understanding of simple Readers.

For though there be nothing (...) (...) Majesty but that which is amiable
and admirable; his parts of nature, Art, and grace all so singular, that (by
the eminency of his place, being descried far and near) they most needs
excite great love to his Person; draw men's affections to him: and occasionate
most honorable speeches of hi Qualities and Deportment: ^et that Pope Clement
should be so kindly respective, is much to be doubted, whose Letters sent to
his Majesty while he was in Scotland, were refused by him, and returned
without admittance. Yea, but the Pope (and the King cannot be altogether
ignorant of it, nor ingrate for it) caused a special PRAYER to be made for his
Majesty.

73 First, Who required these devout Services at your hands? says God himself
to a people as religious as Rome Es. (...). 12.
affoords. We know that God hears not sinners. Tainted affections may mar
good Orisons, and the best prayers John 9. 31.
from such minds (like Caines Sacrifice) may turn into Sin. Humility
inforceth Prayers into the Clouds, to be returned Genesis 4. Psalm. 109 7, Eccle.
35. 17.
with effect, says the wiseman, but the claim of deposing Kings is no humble
conceit; such haughty imaginations send forth but hollow suits, and receive
but empty answers. Secondly, both the Subject, matter, and the intended end
of a Prayer, being corrupt, may make it frustrate. Ye ask and receive not,
says Saint Iaines* because Iac. 4. 3.
ye ask amiss. Such a Prayer therefore it might be, that his Majesty had
little cause to thank the Pope for it. Had the Jesuit set down the Collect,
it might have been examined; but by that which he insinuates, it was grounded
(as it seems) upon the former Hope that his Maies^ would be ONE of their
Catholics,or at least Tolerate their Religion and even this conceit alone
were able to over: throw any good Prayer: for God, which usually hears, ad
Sanitatem, not ad voluntatem, does not in mercy grant a Aug. in Psalm.
request that issues from an affection intended both to the dishonor of his
anointed, as also the hazard of his lives safety, and his souls health; and
therefore the best thanks the Pope can deserve at his Majesty's hands, is that
of the Prophet David, Let not their precious Bal^ms break my head, that is as
one of their own interprets it) Let not (...) Psalm. 4^.
their blandishing Prayers alter my mind, nor dissipate my Councels.

74 But having thus Glossed upon the Breues of Clemens the Eight, he comes now
to show his Art in those of Paulus Quintus, which is the last point in this
Paragraph. The first whereof he would make good against his Majesty: (who in
the Apology affirms, that in the opinion of Diverse Catholics (not of the
simpler ^ort, but of the choicest, yea the Arch Priest himself) it was so void
of Divinity, Policy, and natural Sense, that they accounted it a
Counterfeit Libell, made in hatred of the Pope:) and the answer which he makes
to it is soure-fold: the two foremost, his old Palinody of scorn and
malediction: first, that it is a Calumniation; secondly, that it is but a
fained de^se of T. M. for no Catholic of judgment or piety would think so;
thridly, an injury to the Reverend Archpriest; fourthly, a double Supposition,
first, it might be that some did doubt at the beginning, whether it came from
the Pope ex motu proprio, or from the Inquisitors their defectuous Information:
Secondly, that if there were such a doubt, it was now removed by the second
Breue; whereby all men may see the sentence of the Sea Apostolic, and learn
to obey him whom God has appointed for the Decision of Doubts. And having thus
said, he leapes from thence to Bellarmines Letter.

75 Such as men are themselves, for the most part they (...) others to be,
because they would fa^e have them ^o be such; which makes this fellow, whom the
Priests (...) ^titled to be the Mint Master of all Forgeries, to repute Que.
li^. p. ^36.
even vnseigned truths, to be Calumniations and De^. But is this (in sooth) a
fit course of answer, to turn ^ll so deep and pressing a charge with such
vn^itting frumps and a short negative, IT IS NOT SO? A woman answered more
sobe^ly, but as fully, and said as much, when the Angel charged her that she
laughed, IT IS NOT SO, ^ghed not; and yet, which is worse, to vary in that
nega^e: Gene. 18. 21.
for what before he denied, now he grants, and says it may be it was so. It
had been to the purpose, both in (...) to his Majesty, and satisfaction to
the Catholics, if he had made it plain, that none of that sort thought so of
the Breue; or ^ad showed some reasons that they had no cause to think so, and
to have proved by some sound Arguments, that this course which the Pope took,
was neither against Divinity, Polli^e, nor Common Sense.

76 But, that both the Archpriest, and diverse Catho^kes were of that opinion,
is without question; and that ^hey h^d good reason so to think, is manifest:
for whether it should come from the Pope ex motu proprio, of his voluntary
motion, which (as they say that know him) is hasty, violent, and boisterous
enough, or from information of Jesuits or Inquisitors, who want neither partia
litie nor malic^ in their relations, (no more then they did falsi^ and desp^ght
in their translation of the English Statutes diuulged in Spain, with horrible
additions of their own cruel imaginations, never dreamt of in our State, nor
congruent with the true body of those Laws, thereby to procure detestation to
the Realm) it forces not: the Breue it self caries those Brands with it in
the bulk there of, to be irrel^gious, imprudent, and void of common sense.

77 For Religion, there is no more in it, then in the (...) Co^ban. to which it
may be fitly compared: for Mar. 7. 11.
as by that Tradition (or Illusion rather) the most natural duty to Parents
was dissolved, under the most specious pretext of Pret^e, being (in our
Saviors judgment) the very height of Impiety, as derogatory to the express
commandment in the Law: so the native and legal Obedience, in the which
Subjects are borne and bound to their Sovereign, is, by the Popes Breue, under
pretense of Faith and Salvation, Churches right and Christ's authority, (even
against Christ's precept and the true Churches practice) ca^iered, frustrated
and prohibited; which has made some of that Sect to rely thereon, and die
therein as Iudes did: For as HE, presuming upon that Corban Tradition, as a
sufficient warrant to exp^ate his Treason, brought the hire of his Treachery
into the holy Treasury Matthew. 27. 5.
and presently upon it went to his own execution; so THEY, taking that Breue
unto them for a sufficient dis charge from their acknowledgement of Loyalty,
do wilfully thrust their neck into the halter, and become Authors of their
own death.

78 For Policy and Sense, as much to be had in it as Job found favor in the
white of an egg. Prudence, in the Philosophers opinion, is the Eye of the
mind, which Job. 6. 6.
who so wants, is in worse case then the blind Cyclops, says a Proteus of
their own: whether therefore we respect (...). Polit. l^. (...). cap. 1. quin.
^2. q 47
that which in the Schools they call Prudentiam Monasti came, whereby any
particular man may be adjudged wise in his own affairs, even THAT Eye was
either dazzled with passion, or miss- carried to a wrong object, in sending out
a Breue so evidently proceeding from Self-love, grounded upon misse-conceit,
published in revenge, and Pythagorically peremptory without yielding reason:
or, if we look to that which they call Prudentiam Politicam, Ibid.
and shows a man's wisdom in State-matters, therein also was THAT Eye much
blemished; that Breue of his being like Rehoboams answer upon his yoonkers
advice, more Lordly then judicious, more imperious then Politic: 1. Reg. 12.
for what Policy could there be, so to deal with a King, lawfully possessed,
royally allied, strongly backed; now newly invested in his Throne; rowsed some
few months before by Treason upon Treason, in a redoubled Conspyracie with
Romish priests; freshly exulcerate with the most horrible design (for Savage
Cruelty) that ever was engined, and that also from Jesuits, and the Pope his
own darlings; while his Majesty was (as it were) in hot blood, his spirits as
yet troubled (and who could blame him?) by ^he horror of such intended villainy:
what Policy, I say, could it be, that the Pope (a stranger to this Nation,
and the Grandfather of those Romish brats) even then should send out a
Prohibition, that his Majesty's native Subjects, especially of that Religion,
(so lately tainted) should not acknowledge their Allegiance?

79 Put case that some Ingredients in the Oath (upon the fresh memory of that
CRVELL PROJECT) had been over sharp, yet time might have allaied that heat,
and fair entreaty wrought a Mitigation in the Oath; In the mean time, had the
Bishop of Rome showed unto the King his detestation of those Tresons, and
requested some Monument of that strange and barbarously designed eradication,
which, like Lots wives Pillar, might have remained Liu. lib. (...).
as Triste Exemplum sed in posterum salubre; A woeful, but a wholesome spectacle
to posterity: yet withal entreated, that neither the Religion (which THOSE
pretended) might be thought the worse of, nor the Catholics that profess the
same, to be more hardly dealt with; this had been both a seasoned and a
seasonable, a prudent and a sensible Policy. For generous minds yield where
they find a relenting passage; rebecke by opposition prouokes Liu. lib. 22.
to wrath; and hasty opposites, as they are unwary, so prove they unlucky.

80 To avoid therefore this Imputation, and to show John 19. ^2.
that the Pope, like another Pilate, Quod scripsit scripsit, did what he did,
with mature deliberation, and without hope of Reuocation. -- rursus ad icta
pede^.
He seconds it with another Breue like a second Crambe, Ovid.
whereto this Jesuit ascribes a double virtue, as well CORROBORATIVE of the
former, to put it out of question; as RETENTIVE to the Catholics, confining
them within their Obedience to HIM, whom God has appointed for decision of
such doubts. But what if the first Breue were a sin, and this Doubt-Driuer
prove errant HIS doubling of the one; shows pertinacie in the mind, but
aggrauates the crime; and THEIR relying upon the Other, (like the Egiptian
Reed) argues their misery, and Esa. 36. 6.
hazards their safety. And is it not a Sin to Prohibit the taking of that
Oath which the Scriptures do call Iuramentum Dei, the OATH of God? because in
his name, and for his sake, and at his command subjects do swear Loialtie
Eccles. 8. 2.
to their Sovereigns? And can there be a more miserable slavery then to
fasten their souls upon his Decision, who (by the confession of their own
writers) has no more Privilege for warrantable resolutions then an other m^
(howsoever a new late starte up of U^ce endues him with Benedictus a Benedict^
prae sal. ad Antithes. Sape. et Co^ar. to. 1 page 184. Aduersus haeres. lib. 1.
ca. 4. Mat. 15. 14.
a more then Super angellicall immunitie, that volens nole^s errare non potest;
though he would never so fame, HE CANNOT ERR.) In particular controversies of
Fact, there is no doubt but the Pope may err: says Bellar. yea, even in
points of Faith, says Alphonsus in his last Edition, though corrected. Our
Savior then concludes, If the blind lead the blind, the danger of the
Pit-fall is equal to them both.

81 This Controversy therefore, whether of Fact, or Faith, rests not there:
but least it might be thought that the Oath was ouerswaied by the Popes
authority, without ground of learning; or was interdicted, either upon passion
(without deliberate judgment,) or upon ambitious maintenance of the Sea
Apostlolike (without weight of Argument); to strike that stroke dead,
out-steps Cardinal Bellarmine, a ready armed Champion in HIS behalf, whose
successor (perhaps) he hopes to be; and by a LETTER to the Archpriest
Black-welll (as by his Gantlet cast) he challenges the Oath of Atheism, and
him of Apostasy for taking it. And now according to the Proverb, Res redijt ad
Triarios: for this is HE, in whom lies their maine strength and hope. For
Baronius compares his books to David's tower and Armorie Cant. 4.
Et number vidistis virum hunc qui ascendit, said the dismayed 1. Sam, 17. 25.
Israelites at the sight of a tall Soldier? And is there any standing against
such a Combatant? But in the mean time does not the Cardinal take it in scorn
or for a wrong that this Rotarius or Accensus miles (such the old Romans
accounted minimae fiduciae viros, to have little strength and less Liu. lib. 8.
trust (such an One as Parsons, should take upon him to make good HIS challenge
against the Apologer; which is as much as if TINCA the frapling Rhetorculist
should undertake Tul. de cla^is Orator.
the defense of Tully his Oratorie: and this he does in the

THIRD PARAGRAPH.
Entitled ABOUT Cardinal Bellarmines Letter, and answer thereto by the
Apologer.
Numb. 1. As if the Apologers answer like Ierichoes walls should presently fall
with the Blast of a Rams horn, and Josh. 6. 15.
a few turns About it: and yet is the Title well fitting his reply; for many
windings and turnings he has in a Preface ABOUT it, before he come to it; and
being in it, he treades a Labyrinth and sometimes loses himself: and yet in
the conclusion he winds his Cornet in three several blasts; first,
COMMINATORIE to our state; Secondly, CAVSATIVE of his Antapologie; Thirdly,
SVPPLICATORIE, for a more moderate proceeding. In the Preface, after he has
first showed the occasion impulsive of Bellarmines writing; scilicet, a
Foreign mislike of Black-wells taking the OATH though with a limitation; and
a scandal conjoined, in regard of his person and place: (the Catholics of our
Clymate, as this Jesuit confesses, were of another mind, so full of concord
they are between themselves:) he, secondly, summeth Supra. nom. 14. par. 1.
up as in one Total the Particulars in the Cardinals Letter; yet neither like
a Logitian, nor a good Auditor: but (as if a false borrower should sum up the
interest without the Principal) he leaves out the Essential and kindly parts
thereof, and only takes those that are consectarie and dependent, and those
very simply and rudely.

2 As thus, The Cardinal (says he) shows his opinion consisting of two
points; the one, that the OATH as it stands compounded could not be taken; the
other that the Archpriest ought to stand firm in regard of his place, in
defiance of danger. Whereas to make Bellarmine speak himself, the true
Analysis is this: the Cardinals whole Letter (after the Gratulatorie Preface)
is exhortatorie to Blackwell; first, to rectify his judgment in the true
understanding of the Oath; Secondly, to recover his Constancy, which he has
lost in taking of it: the first he persuades by reason; because either openly
or privately it impugneth the Faith touching the Primacie of the Sea
Apostolic; which is slenderly proved, and falsely grounded: His first proof,
a sly anticipation, that the Oath implies more fear then danger; Secondly, a
false luster, that it is like the mixture of Iulians pictures. His false
ground, that the Oath impugneth the Spiritual Primacy of the Sea Apostolik,
which is utterly untrue: and set upon that Sandy and unsound foundation, his
whole building is placed, and so the standing thereof is prefigured in the
Gospel. This is the true Analysis of the first part of the Letter; the second
is untouched, Mat. 7. 27.
and so let it lie.

3 And as he has summed it up fondly, so falsely also; this Epistler says,
that Bellarmine takes the OATH to be compounded of lawful and unlawful
clauses, whereas the Cardinal says plainly, that the OATH though it be so
Apolog. p. 39. 30
tempered and modi^ied, yet is it WHOLLY unlawful, which is as much to say, as
there is not a lawful clause in it. And this is his labor in the two first
numbers. After which who would not expect his present encounter? but it will not
be prop^gnat n^gis ^rmatus -- ye must give him leave, af ter his manner (...),
to stepalide; he is somewhat gri^pt Horat. Tpist.
and a knottie point or two troubles him, before he can join issue; The first,
is the Wrong Translation of the Cardinals Subscription, which the Apologer had
thus metaphras'd, YOUR VERY REVEREND BROTHER; whereas those words (says the
Epistler are to be referred to the Archpriest, and not to the Cardinal: and
this (in his pang) he calls a CAVIL, both in the Corpse and in the Margin.

4 So the Moralist writes of a quick sighted Empericke, that would perforce
make a gentleman believe he was inclinable to a great sickness, because he saw
reduuiam a pimple or the skin rising below his nail. But suppose Plutar.
it were not exactly translated; first, is not the sense al one? for both the
Brotherhood and Reverence is Reciprocal and may be referred to both parties,
either your Reuerendships Brother, or your Reverend Brother, especially as it
was in the written Copy, where the D. in the end had such a dash, as it might
be taken as well for dus, as dae. Secondly, why did not the Epistler mend it,
and translate it right himself? because he is apposed. For should he have
intrepreted Dominationis in English truly adverbum, the reply (he foresaw)
would have been upon him as Alexanders was upon Diogenes, who begging a
Tallent, the Emperor answer it was to much for a Cynike Diog. Luert.
to ask; he then craved an halfe-penny, the Emperor told him it was to little
for Alexander to give. Had it bin translated your Reverend Lordships, that were
to lofty a title for the Grand Cardinal to give an Archpriest, whom the
Canonists (some of them) make but a Rural Deane, others Glos. did. 50. in
Capite. Did. 25. c. per lect^. Distinct. 60. ca. Nullies epis
an Archdeacons inferior; they that put him to the highest streine, rank him
but as a Deanes equal. If it had been your Reverend Masterships, that had
been Terminus diminuens, too mean a style for an Archpriest, for so you
might as well call Bellarmine MASTER Cardinal, which in this Censurers opinion
(ye heard before) is Scandolum magnatum, Parag. 1.
an unmannerly part, even in the King himself.

5 But why should he call it a Cavil? was any argument framed out of it; or
the Cardinals ambition aggrauated, for so stiling himself? no such thing;
only translated and so left: the Latin is extant and unaltered; and in
BLACKWELS Examination at large, translated Your Reverend Lordships Brother.
Whether properly in the one or the other, is it not truly both a quarrel De
Asini (...). (...).
vm^ra, who should have the Lordship, either the Cardinal or the Archpriest?
and an abuse of the Reader, to withhold him from serious matters, with trifles
and gew-gawes? The other point is the Apologers wilful mistaking of the
question, and thereby a great ADVANTAGE given to the Cardinal for his defense.
That yet sub Mart; and let not him that is girt to the battle, boast as he
that's unbuckled from the fight. If it be so, that need not then have stopped
him; the more advantage, the easier Conquest: the trial will show it, and upon
that let it rest.

6 And now these twinges are past, he comes, Numb. 4. to the first exception
taken against the Cardinals Letter, confessed by him to be great if true,
that Bellarmine has mistaken the Question, and like a man blindfold, has
impugned the OATH OF SVPREMACY instead of the OATH OF ALLEGIANCE. And so much
does M. Blackwell confess, after he had well read and weighed the said
Letter, in saying, that he perceived Examine. large page 12.
the Cardinal did not distinguish between those TWO Oaths, that of 1o.
Elizabethae, and this of 3o. Iacobi. But Bellarmine has himself prevented
that Objection (says this Jesuit) in that he speaks of an OATH TEMPERED AND
MODIFIED, which cannot be understood ^f any other but THIS OATH; THAT of the
SVPREMACIE has no such MIXTVRE in it: and this he calls a clear Refutation.

7 Which is indeed but a duskish illusiion; for, first, if this Oath be so
modified in comparison of the other; why is IT accounted by this Censurer, the
greatest affliction and pressure that ever befell the Catholics? And why
should not Paragr. 1. no. 33. page 20.
an OATH, so allaied and tempered, be as readily entertained by the Pope and
his followers, as was the Edict of Mauritius the Emperor, by their own
confession, after it was corrected and moderated, as they say? Secondly, those
Parag. 2. no. 49
Mitigations and alleuiating Temperatures, being not mentioned by the
Cardinal, argue rather that he did verily mistake the Oath; writing upon other
men's relations, not his own understanding and judgment: for he that compares
the Oaths; shall find this last of Allegiance, to be more pressing, pithy,
and peremptory against the Popes Primacie in Temporalibus, then the other
against his Spiritual Supremacy; and in all circumstances a more exact and
searching touchstone, to try and discover a loyally-affected Subject, from a
hollow-hearted Recusant. Thirdly therefore, the Modification which the
Cardinal speaks of (as by the verb and tense he uses [offerebatur] may well
be coniectured) is not in the tenor of the Oath passed so by the State, which
still remains as it did; but in the Offer of the Magistrate, when Blackwel
took it not long before, whereof himself speaks in his Letter to the Priests
Exam. breuis, page 23. lin. 3.
and repeats it again in his Letter to the Cardinal, at those words, Qrod ad
Iuramentum, etc. the first of which Resp. ad Bellar. lin. 12.
Letters being written in the midst of July, and Bellarmine dating his not till
the end of September following; to that offered Temperature and acceptance
there specified by the Archpriest, it is more probable that the Cardinal
alludeth, then to the Oath it self, wherein there is no one quallifying point.
So that his Majesty's exception that the Cardinal has mistaken the Oath,
remains yet vnremooued, for all this Clear Refutation; unless he bring more
evidence, which he intends.

8. But soft, the giddy fellow tells us he has another errand to do, not out
of the way, but a note BY THE WAY: The Scripture sets a more essential Note
upon such By way takers, Operantes iniqiutatem, declinant in Psalm. 125. 5.
obliquationes: Wicked men (as thieves plotting, or pursued) take all the
By-waies, nookes, and lanes they can pass, for Arist. Eth. ^gatho. apud. Athen,
fear to be described or apprehended; and both Poets and Philosophers have
noted them for absurd Disputants and Discoursers, that start into
circumstances, and leave the principal matter which is controuerted But this
is just according to the Title of this Paragraph ABOUT the Cardinals Letter:
for the prolongs to come to it, and being in but a while, is out again
presently. Let Us follow him though, and see what Daiz^e he has plucked by the
way in three whole Numbers, 5. 6. 7. scilicet, the Apologer (belike as Caligula
did with Jupiters Statua) Sueton.
has taken off the right HEAD and put another in the place thereof, in setting
down the form of the OATH OF SUPREMACY; For whereas in the times of King
Henry the 8* and King Edward the sixth, The Title was then, The Kings Highness
is the Supreme HEAD, the Apologer thinks it not good to give IT unto his
Majesty; but calls HIM only supreme GOVERNOR.

9. Questionless, either a bold oversight in his Majesty, that he durst
change a borrowed Metaphor into a proper word, or an ouer-awed fear to take
that Title of Head into his style, which God himself gives to a less and a
far worse King, and the Apostle to every married 1 Samuel 15. 1. Cor. 11:
man, whom he calls the woman's Head. But what is the Ulcer that vexes him for
this alteration? Perhaps because the first which gave that Title of Supreme
Head unto King Henry the 8. were Bishops of their own Profession, Stat. 26. c.
1. Hen. 8.
not of ours, and so it was, as appears in that Statute which he mentions:
If so; why was it then accounted such a Sacrilege and Blasphemy of ours, as in
all their writings it is continually traduced? Or is it because the Title of
GOVERNOR has more in it, or is a loftier and prouder Style then HEAD? No:
themselves confess it is all one to be Head of the Church, and to be chief
Governor Allen. Apol. ca 4. and Heart. in Confer.
in causes Ecclesiastical. If so, identitie of command expressed in diversity
of terms, admits no just quarrel; much less is to be accounted (as it is
here) a NEW DEVICE of John Reynolds (certainly he deserves as well to be
called MASTER, as Bellarmine CARDINAL) because such an ONE as HE (or such
others at he) about some twenty years agee, were the first deuisers of it: so
says this Epistler. And will this great Intelligencer make himself so ignorant
as he seems to be, to attribute that to one, or some few private men, and
repute it for so modern an alteration, which was the Action of the whole State
of this Stat. 1. Elizab. anno primo.
Land, above fifty years past? For so it was, in the first year of the late
Queen of famous memory, explaned rather then altered, at the request of the
Nobles and Diumes of the Land and expressed, not by the words of Supreme
GOUERNESSE, (as this Mate scornefully speaks, and falsely lays it upon M.
Reynalds) the words of the Statute Numb 7. Confer. cap. 1. di. 2. pa. 52. in
Quarto. Vbisupra.
being put in the Masculine, GOVERNOR: and in that Conference also (which he
has neither quoted nor alleged truly) the words of M. Reynolds are, We give
unto her Highness the title, not of HEAD, but of Supreme GOVERNOR, and repeats
it so again in the same Section.

10. And that, not in regard of her Sex, which permits her not to speak in
the Church, as this malicious hickscorner dallieth; for being descended as she
was, She had as due right to the Crown, and as absolute authority in the
fruition thereof, as any Male-Monarch whatsoever. Neither did she take upon her
to speak in the Church, that is, to desine matters of Faith, administer the
Sacraments, ordain or consecrate (as Oziah once sacrificed, and as some 2.
Par. 26. 16.
Romish slanderers have written) nor meddled She with Church Matters more then
Scriptures gaucher leave by the place She had, nor was her authority in
Ecclesiastical causes any thing amoindred or made less by that change, or
rather Explanation of Head into Governor, which (as before is said) the
Romanists themselves confess to be all one thing; but only to prevent or
avoid a scandal, which (through ignorance) might be taken at it; least weaker
minds should think we gave unto our Kings that Title Secundum interiorem
influxum, which is the proper office of the Head, as being the fountain of
moisture, and is the Arist. de somn. and Vigil.
most true attribute of Christ alone, who is so called by the Apostle; who also
elsewhere gives a reason thereof, because Ephesians. 1. 22.
by HIM all the body, being furnished and knit together by Coloss. 2. 19.
joints and bonds, increases with the knowledge of God, and that by the
influence and working of his holy spirit: but only Secundum exterius Regimen,
as the highest and chiefest for pre-eminence and command, (as the Head in the
Body, which is Reliquorum Imperator, Guide and Director Plat. Timaeus.
of the other members) thereby to settle truth, prohibit error, anioyne
Church Officers (as Inferiors and Subordinate) the discharge of their several
duties, and punish their negligence or contempt, etc. and is a more true
Interpretation and Exposition of the Princes lawful authority in Churchcauses,
then that worthy one of the Popes; who, to prove S. Peter's Primacy above the
rest, expounded S. John's Cephas (which is a stone) by Caput and Principium, a
Head and John. 1, 42. Did. 22. c. sacrosanct.
Beginning, from whence all the other are to be derived.

11 But it seems his hope is, that this alteration may work THEM some gain,
and be as a Reconciler between us and them for an agreement: why then did it
stumble him out of his Way? or how will that appear? Because, says he,
whereas in HEAD was included a Supremacy in causes Ecclesiastical, by
GOVERNOR, perhaps, they mean the Kings authority within his Realms over all
persons spiritual, but it matters ONLY Temporal; for S. Ambrose (as ye heard
before) for bids Laymen THEIR intermedling in those affairs. To be Supreme
Judge of Doctrine, by debating, deciding, and determining points of Faith and
Religion, that S. Ambrose dislikes, and we approve not, nor give it to the
Prince (so you heard before too.) But by their authority to command Priests
(even in Religious Services) to do their Office, Paragraph. 2. par. 2. number. 34.
and punish their neglect thereof, or negligence therein, that the Scriptures
commended in diverse Kings, Danid, Ezekiah, Josiah, etc. and we justly ascribe
it to our Princes; acknowledging with S. Augustine, that it is the duty of all
Epist. 50.
Kings, to command in matters not only concerning the (...) of men, but the
RELIGION of God ALSO; and thus much I SVBSCRIBE UNTO, says Heart, one C^nser.
cap. 10. diuis. 2. ^a. 674 Quarto.
of their banished Traitors. But the very next words to Governor in the Oath
(as by himself it is cited (are, in all causes as well Spiritual as
Temporal; which might have well cut off this sly scorn of his, but that he
isidle, and has no other means to spend time, or to frame answers, but by
Excursions and Out-leaps to no purpose. It was wont to be the Proverb Been
current, they run well, yet OVT OF Eras. c^l. 1.
THE WAY: but to run badly, and out of the Way too, is not only an erroneous,
but a ridiculous quality. And yet ye see for what he has stepped aside; for
some on-sowne grain fallen by the Way, which our Savior noted to be the food
Matthew. 13.
for those fowls of the air, which the Grecians call (...) such as Woodcocks
and Dawes, to gather up.

12. But now, Let Us RETURN again (says he) to the Apologers charge. It is a
vexing torment to a man, enioined a journey upon a speedy business requiring a
serious dispatch, to travel with a trifling companion, that will make many
errands by the way, or has many acquaintances to stop him in the Way, or is
forced to make often Returns upon forgetfulness of diverse things; such an one
is this v^tiginous Uertumnus, whom Plato describes for an inartificial
disputant, (...), now going on his Way, now stepping by the way, now returning,
and In Parmenide
anon gone again. Well then, Let Us return now (says he) to that charge of
gross mistaking, laid by the Apologer to the Cardinal, for giving the Child
a wrong name; which, besides the former mention of the MODIFICATIONS, and
couching of lawful and unlawful Clause in the OATH, the Cardinal does also
confute those MODIFICATIONS, in saying that they are but the SLEIGHTS OF SATAN
to impugn the PRIMACIE of the Sea Apostolic, either SECRETLY or OPENLY; which
argues that the Cardinal aimed at both the OATHS.

13 First, can a man confute that which he never mentions, nor points at,
nor can find? Or secondly, is this a good Argument, The Cardinal says, that
such Modifications as these in this Oath, do impugn the Faith touching the
Primicie, either secretly or openly: Ergo, He has relation unto two Oaths,
the one secretly impugning the other openly? Is it not as strong a consequent,
our Savior in the Gospel speaks of a Judge, that neither feared God, nor
reverenced man: Ergo, He had relation to two Judges, the one not fearing God,
the other not regarding Luc. 18.
man? But be it so; Then both the OATHS (belike, by this Jesuit) have their
Modifications; though the one more close, the other more ouert: which is a
plain Contra diction to his first argument; for there he said, that Bellarmine
must needs mean this OATH OF ALLEGIANCE, and no other, because THIS only
has these Modifications, the other of the Supremacy has none. Here he
insinuates, that both of them have their mixtures, the one more secret, the
other more revealed. Thus is the Antopolog^r become Turn-sicke in troubling his
little wit more then he need, to free the Cardinal from that imputation, which
honestly he cannot.

14 For certain it is, that Bellarmine in that his dismaying Inuectiue (rather
then Letter) unto the Archpriest, has played the Andabata, or blindfold
Fencer, committing three gross ouersights therein: First, in that either he
through ignorance wist not, or in his policy would not see a difference
betwixt those two Oaths: Secondly, in that he discovers not those subtle
stratagems (as he calls the Modifications here specified) but in general
terms says they do impugn the Primacie, either closely or openly: Thirdly,
that all his Arguments and Authorities brought, are touching the Spiritual
Supremacy, not one of them concerning the Temporal, which the Oath of
Allegiance does only impeach and encounter. So that his whole Epistle is the
same which they call Rhetorica He terogenea, a good speech if it had been to
purpose: for there is not any one part of the Popes Spiritual Supremacy
touched, or aimed at in this last Oath.

15 Had the Cardinal therefore either meant the right Oath, or intended a
direct confutation thereof, his Argument should thus have been framed; That
OATH which either secretly or openly shoots at the Popes Primacy in
Temporalibus, cannot be taken without endamaging the Catholic Faith, and His
Conscience that takes it; But this Oath of Allegiance does impugn His
Primacie in Temporalibus, ei there secretly or openly: Therefore this Oath
cannot be taken without a double damage. Had he thus reasoned, his Mayor
Proposition should have been (...), and his whole Epistle to Blackwell been
bestowed in plain and effectual proofs, that the Crossing of the Popes
Primacie in T^MPORALL GOVERNMENT over all Christened Kings, is the overthrow of
the Catholic Faith, and of true Religion. Which Conclusion, as it would have
made his brains to sweat, before he could have gotten any show of proof for
it; so it would have made both him, and his Religion odious and hateful to all the Kings and good subjects in Christendom: which he knew well enough, and
therefore voluntarily did mistake the Question, and turned all his force to
support the Popes Spiritual Supremacy, which is not touched in one point of
t^is Oath

16 Which, because his Majesty in the Apology auerreth, this Jesuit makes him
to be Contradictory and adversary to himself for so saying, and that in the
very next period, where dividing the OATH into 14. particles, 12. of them at
least (says this Epistler) do impugn the Popes spiritual supremacy. It
appears then there are at most but two of those lawful and allowed clauses in
the Oath, if there be so many; and those Modifications (whereof he speaks) very
few, even one in all, as appears, Number. 10. Namely the first, I do truly
acknowledge that our Sovereign Lord King James is lawful King of this Realm;
which is the same almost verbaum with the first clause in the Oath of
Supremacy: so that either one and the same modification is in both OATHS (and
then this Censur^ ^are Refutation is obscured (or e^e the Cardinal has
mistaken the Oath; if not in words, surely in sense, which is not only his
ERROR but his IN^STICE, as his Majesty well observes because in aduising the
refusal of the whole Body of the Oath, as it is conceived, and impugning the
same, as Wholly unlawful, he makes those that believe him, to fall into
Rebellious conclusions; for he that shall refuse to take it, must needs hold
the negative to those fourteen propositions: because all Refusal is either
of wilful obstinacy, or of a persuaded contrariety, as first, That our
Souereign lord King James is NOT the lawful King of this Realm; Secondly,
That the Pope HAS power to Depose him; and so of the rest.

17 And this the Jesuit S^reth at: (in the mean time what is become of the
Apologers contradiction; and the overthrow which his Majesty has given
himself? THAT he is not yet ready for; he craves a respite to a further
examination. Numb. 8.) but this (says he) is a simple Fallacy, called by the
Logitians a composito ad diuisa, from denying of a Compound to infer a
denial of all the parcels therein contained; which he exemplifieth in an OATH
framed either by some Platonist in magnifying his Master, or by an Arrian, or
Pelagian Prince in favor of their Sect: and both the OATHS mingled with
clauses, some LAWFVLL, some VNLAWFVLL. Wherein first, secretly he girds at his
Majesty for being both a Philosopher (which is his Majesty's great glory, and
our Realms happiness; for true Philosophy joined to Government, regulates
the Scepter to the Subjects comfort, and the Kingdoms renown) and an Heretic
also, Tortus says so plainly: a perfect slander in them both: for by that
Religion which they call Heresy, he does truly glorify the God of heaven.

18 Secondly, this challenge of Sophistical arguing is more then a Fallacy,
it is a Falsitie. For thus his Majesty argues: He that refuses the whole
body of the OATH, not distinguishing, nor declaring his allowance of some parts
thereof, by this his UN-DISTINCT REFVSAL concludes the unlawfulness of the
WHOLE, and is presumed to hold that the Contrary assertions are true; but the
Cardinal condemns the WHOLE OATH, as it is conceived, not excepting any ONE
for a lawful parcel thereof, and wills the Archpriest so to refuse it:
therefore, thus condemning it WITHOUT DISTINCTION, he induces them that Refuse
it, to a lawful persuasion of a TOTAL NEGATIVE, and contrariety of opinion,
which is the very argument of our Savior Christ, He, that gathers not with
me, scatters, that is, who so condemns me as WHOLLY unworthy to be
received, does thereby will men to Matthew. 12. 30.
refuse my person; reject my Doctrine; blaspheme my Works; and TOTALLY denies
me to be God and Many and renounceth al Prophecies written, and testimonies
revealed concerning me.

19 Semperin generalibus specialia insunt, says the Law: F^ de reg. iuris.
and in toto, pars continetur. The general, whether affirmative or Negative
contains in it all the specialties; and a total refusal, is an entire Denial
of each particular. He that should say that the whole body of the Decalogue is
unlawful in it self, and repugnant to Christian Liberty; does he not conclude
the unlawfulness of every several precept in Law^ and withal imply that a
Christian (free by grace) may be (without fear of the Law moral,) an
Idolater, Blasphemer, and an Adulterer, etc.? Neither is his Majesty's Argument
drawn from the Compound to the parts divided, the Cardinal has made no such
division; for he has condemned, totum continuum, the Whole body and bulk
thereof to be unlawful: but it is rather a toto ad parts per contraria; as he
which denies the Whole world to be of Gods making, h^ both denies that God
made the light, and Sun, and Stars, and Planets; and also argues his
opinion to be, either there is no God, or that he is no Creator.

20 Take therefore the Jesuits own example, and frame it aright to the point:
put the case that an Arrian Prince should contriue an OATH for his subjects to
swear that there are Three Persons in Trinity: that God the Father created
Heaven and earth; that the second Person is the Son of God, had a beginning
of his essence in time, was crucified, dead, and buried, etc. Some Christians
searing or hearing of an error therein, but not discovering it, have recourse to
some great Doctor to know his opinion: HE, descrying the Arianisme, forbids
them to take it, and not showing them the erroneous Article, assures them that
the Whole OATH, as it lies is unlawful: does not that Doctor condemn all the
Articles therein, and wills them inclusiuely to deny the Trinity, and the
Father to be a Creator? yes, and as much as in him lies, causes the enemies
of God to Blaspheme them as Atheists and Pagans for their General denial. And
therefore the rule of God Almighty is, Siseparauerit pretiosum a vili, quasi os
meum eris, to separate Ier: 15. 19,
the precious from the vile is according to my word. THIS the Cardinal should
have done, but did it not; therefore his disallowing it in gross, shows his
manifest dislike of every Article therein, and his implyedaduice, that
Catholics should deny even the very first, That King James is the Lawful
King of this Realm. Nay, says this Epistler, that is a calumniation, all
Catholics do both profess and confess the contrary.

21 Do they so? then Father Parsons either is not, or Part. 2. cap. 5.
was not a Catholic when he wrote his Doleman; for there he labors the
point hard, that King James cannot either by Religion, Nation, Blood or ^awe,
be the rightful King of this Realm. And if it be Catholic doctrine, as
Simancha and Philopat^r have concluded it, that no Heretic is capable* if an
Heir; or can be a just possessor of a Crown when he has obtained it: then
Tortus who has so pronounced of King James, either denies him to be a lawful
King, or all of that profession are not of the same mind for the King. Yea,
we will go further; whosoever refuses to swear to any One of the Articles
in this Oath, acknowledges not the first, For the Whole Oath is like an
Indenture, all the Clauses tying and tending to One condition of Allegiance;
the breach of One prouiso in the Indenture forfeits the WHOLE: the denying of
any One Article in the Oath, is the denial of the Whole, even of the very
first.

22 Take but one for example: he that refuses to swear, that the Pope has
no manner of authority (simple or compound) to depose the King, he refuses
to swear that King James is lawful King of England. For if he were once
lawful, then is he ever so; true legitimation is neither intended, nor
remitted: and unlawfulness of title ONLY, carries with it the casualtie of
Deposing and Dethroning; it is not varying in Religion, nor altering of
manners; nor misordering a Realm: all which may show a King to be un just, but
not prove him an unlawful King; they may hazard his safety, but not impeach
his Title. A right of deposing must be in him, that has either an higher,
power (and that's only God, for tibi soli peccaui says David, and none Psalm
(...). and. Ambrose in cum.
but a King can say so) or the iuster claim, and then is not the Sovereign in
place the lawful King; for two several parties cannot have equal right to
One Crown; but the Pope least of all other, being a Forreiner to the Nation,
and an utter stranger to the blood. So that he which denies not the Pope that
deposing power, denies unto our king the Lawfulness of his Inuestiture and
Dominion. The brief and truth is, Let a King be what he will for his Religion
or Government; if he have right to the Crown, the subject must endure and pray
for him; the Forreiner may advise, but not disturb him; they both may lament
and use means to amend him, but neither of them both assume the power to
Depose him: which authority of the Pope for deposing (as also his power in the
rest of the Negative parts in the Oath, either of absoluing subjects, or
licensing Rebellions, or inciting Murders of Kings excommunicate, etc.) No
Complete Council ever fastened upon the Pope; neither can their own
Schole-Doctors agree how that should concern him, but are (as his Majesty
truly observes) at irreconciliable Iarrs among themselves about it: to al
which the Epistler answers not one word

23 But the next exception he takes, is the Example brought out of the Councels
of Toledo, especially the fourth; which contains an Oath of allegiance,
commanded and laid upon all persons without distinction; and therein also the
very point of Aequiuocation, so carefully eschued in this Statute Oath.
Insomuch, that ALMOST every point of that Action, and this of ours agrees,
save that the Fathers of that Council were careful to see THAT OATH executed;
but he that pretends and usurps to be Head of al counsels, is as straight in
prohibiting it to his Catholics. Which discourse, the plaine-dealing Jesuit
does call the Apologers fraudulent manner ^f proceeding, arguing a bad cause,and
add's his reason, because in those Councels (which were thirteen in number)
there is neither form of Oath prescribed, nor any mention of Aequiuocation,
but ONLY of flat lying, and perfideous dealing.

24 Were WE so idle as to follow him in his own vein, we might catch at
these last words of his [but ONLY of flat Lying] and play with his word ONLY as
he did before; as if he thereby made flat lying and perfideous dealing, but a
small fault; for so he taxes his Majesty, Parag. 1. Numb. 12.
for saying ONLY a form of Oath was framed; and thereby conclude upon him with
his own words there; By this excepting of ONLY a man may well perceive this
Fugitive makes little account of flat lying and perfideous dealing. But let
him go, idle he is, and the Pharao of Rome uses him accordingly, keeps him
to gather such straw and stubble in Egypt, because he is neither good nor fit
for any thing else. Sed Quis tulerit Grachum? while this Jesuit is attaching
the Apologer of a supposed fraudule^cie, himself must even there be arrested
of a Fraudulent impudency; charging his Majesty to say, that EVERY point of
that Toletan Action has aggreeance with ours, and leaves out the principal
word which his majesty used, when he says that ALMOST every point; and
subnecteth immediately a particular exception of disparison. As if there were
no difference between his speech that should say, Fa. Parsons was almost upon
the Seacoast for England, expecting the issue of the POWDER PLOT, and his that
should auerr that he was upon the Seacoast, and shipped for England.

25 In the mean time, what says he to the Council of Toledo? it puzzels him
horribly, and makes him roue about, for 8. Number together to shift it, and when
he has (like a fond Surueyor, who, having no more ground then will serve a
Goose to graze on, will needs discourse and show how it abuts upon all the
quarters of the world) when (I say) he has with many circumstances set down,
the occasion of that Councels assembly, with the cause of the Treaty
concerning one Sisinandus, that had displaced King Suintula, (the Canon says,
that fearing his own wickedness, Council. Tolet. 4. Can. 75.
Seipsum Regno priuauit and exuit, he stripped and deprived himself of his
Kingdom) and how that the said King procured this fourth Council; then
reckoning up the Prelates and humble behavior of the Emperor before them; with
the full sum of the Decrees, all of them in Ecclesiastical causes save one,
the last of all, concerning an Order for the future establishing of their
Kings; and then has told us of the excommunication denounced against all those
that shall attempt the Destruction of their King, or break their Oath of
fidelity made to him; with a repetition of that curse, diverse times in that
Canon, and a Reason therereof; with a commendation of the Care which those
Fathers had for preserving the Subjects fidelity to their Princes; and a
supplication of their Clergy to their King for his moderate and mild carriage
to his Subjects and a promulgation of a counter-curse against the cruelty of
the succeeding Kings, if it prove such; with a confirmation of the Expulsion of
Suin^la for his wicked life (though Saint I sidore speak much good of him) and
finally a form of an Oath in the sixth counsel of Toledo, prescribed to the
Kings of Spain before they be Cronned, that they should not suffer their
Subjects to violate THIS Catbolike Faith and a special mark upon the word
THIS, showing THAT Faith to be opposite to the Protestants Faith: after all
this ranging discourse (as if he had run himself out of breath and sense
to) his sober conclusion is, that this is ALL against the Apologer.

26 Some say, that Pericles had that skill in wrestling, that though he
received a fall, yet he would persuade the wrastler that cast him, and the
Sectators that beheld thu^ in Plut. Per^cl.
him, that HE was the Conqueror notwithstanding; this Art does Father Parsons
assume to himself often, but very unluckily; for what is that One point of
all this, that makes to the purpose; much less to Confute the Apologer, or is
against him? Had he taken exception against the Council, as unlawful
(because his Majesty called it a famous Council) and therefore not to be
alleged in this controversy, Baronius would have snib'd him, who has
magnified it to the skies. Is it then that this famous Council (consisting of
so many Prelates, 70, or 68. or 62) was summoned and conuenied at the command
of the said King? for so it was, the words are Religiosissimi Sisinandi Regis
iussu and imperij^ Conuenimus; we are assembled by the command Pref^. ad
Council. (...) 1.
and authority of our most Religious King Sisinandus:) this indeed may make
against the Apologer, for he had before maintained and demonstrated that
Emperors and Kings were wont to Convent Councels both Universal and
National? (...). pa. 26.


27 Or is that the point, because the Canons of that Council were all flatly
opposite to the Protestants opinions? Be it so: first, the Apologer meddled
with no one Canon of that Council, but the last, concerning the Oath. How then
does this make against him? but is it so indeed? view three or four of them;
the marriage of Priests (so^ be with the Consent of the Bishops) is there
allowed, Canon 43. that ignorance is the Mother of all errors, (not of
devotion) is there positiuely set down, Canon 24. that the Clergies immunity
from civil molestations and trouble is from the King, and by HIS command and
authority, that is decreed in the 46. Canon. Lastly, that all the Decrees and
Canons of that Council were confirmed by the Clergy ANN VENTIRELIGIO SISSIMO
PRINCIPE, after the Kings ROYAL ASSENT had unto them; and that is let down
Canon 75. Now which of all these makes against either the Apologers discourse,
or the Protestants opinion? that so the Reader may see he might have spared
his mark THIS set upon Catholic; for the Church of England, both for
substance in Doctrine, and Ceremony in Discipline, does hold the same, which
many of those Canons do conclude.

28 As for the particular Canon concerning the Cath how is the Apologer therein
taken short? yes, four ways First, there is no particular form of an Oath
set down in the Counsels but only a general command for KEEPING, not for
taking an Oath. Can an Oath be kept which was not first taken? But ^n the
Canon it apppeares that all of them had before taken it Quicunque sacramentum
quod POLLICITVS est temerau^rit, are the words Vbi. supra.
of the Canon; for it was Iuramentum PRESTITUM says Barro^s. And did his
Majesty say that the council Annal to. 8. An no. 633. 72.
did decree the TAKING of the Oath? No but an Oath WAS decreed a thousand
years ago, which a famous Council with diverse other Councels COMMANDED to be
OBEYED, without exception: the state decreed it; the subjects of all sorts
took it: the Counsels enjoined the in^iolable performance thereof. So then, an
OATH there was, that is without question; and a form it had; if not set down in
the Council what is that to the point? Sufficiently has his Majesty euicted
what he would, to prove that this OATH of alleagiance amongst vsis no such
strange thing it having a precedent in like kind, confirmed by diverse Councels
about a thousand years since. But is this a good argument, Thereis no form of
an Oath prescribed, therefore either there was NO such Oath, or it is
fraudulent dealing in the Apologer to speak of it by the same consequent, the
title whereby the Pope supports his Souereignty Monarchical, and deriues it
from S. Peter (even in spiritual causes may be justly concluded a fraudulent
claim: for when the Keys were given, and that triple Pasce enjoined to Saint
Peter (which are the two mayn pillars and refuges for that challenge of the
Popes) there is no mention either of Successor or of Rome, Mat. 16. Ioh. 20
but only Peter to THEE will I give the Keys, and Peter feed THOU my Lambs;
the fetching of both which (the Successor and See) into those Texts, drives
Bellarmine into a maze: for first he says, that the Bishop of Rome is Peter's
successor IVRE DIVINO, and that Christ De Pontif. Romans li. 2. ca. 1^.
appointed it so; presently he says, that it was FACTVM PETRI, it was Peter's
own institution, that the Bishop of Rome should be his successor. Might such
reasons prevail, that Manifest Texts either of Scriptures or Fathers, verbatim
to express what we argue, might only take place, or the quarrel end, the Pope
would be found a more fraudulent Impostor then a Pastor and Transubstantiation
should never have had either the being or beginning.

29. But say, in sooth, Fa. Persons, is there not in those Councels a FORM of
such an OATH? De specie, of the kind and quality of the Oath, it seems you
doubt not; the Council declares it to be an Oath Promissory, which is defuturo,
of something afterward to be done: de Re, of the substance and matter of the
Oath, it is not questioned, for the Canon sets it down, and you also confess
it in your second exception, saying that it was an OATH OF ALLEGIANCE. The
Controversy is of the FORM, which though in Scriptures and Use we know to be
diverse, yet all conclude that to be the true form Authent. Justin.
wherein the name of God is used, for so himself commanded: Deuteronomy. 6. 13.
which being of many sorts also, that is found to be least questioned, wherein
his name is joined: either with a preposition, as BY or BEFORE God; or used by
way 2 Cor. 1. 23. Vide Azor. ^stit. lib. 10. ca. 2. par.. 1. Apolog. pap. 54.
ex. Co^l. Tol. let. 6. C^. 1. 8.
of Imprecation or I^uocation, as in that of the Apostle, I call God to
witness to or against my Soul; and this their own Doctors deny not. Now,
even this very FORM is expressed in one of the Councels of Toledo, cited by
his Majesty, and translated, and it begins thus: Testamur coram Deo and
omni Ordine Angelorum, etc. vt nemo intendat, etc. We protest and testisie
BEFORE God and the whole Company of Angels, that noman shall or may intend or
enterprise the destruction of the King, etc. What then meant the Epistler to
venture all the poor Credit of all that he writes (which he may do well
enough, he was banckrupt of that long ago. Nilisthic quod agat tertia tussis
habet. Martial.

said the Poet of an old woman that had lost all her teeth with twice coughing)
if in all the 13. Toletan Concells, there be found any FORM of an Oath
prescribed? How will he avoid the TESTAM VR above cited? Perhaps he will say
there is an OATH described, but not prescribed. Acutely, Be it that the State
Secular framed the Oath and enjoined the Subject to take it, yet the Council
assembled confirmed the Oath, (which is all that his Majesty endeuonred to
prove) and expresses the Form thereof as it was conceived: Divines then do
teach us, that every Canon of Confirmation by a Council, is a prescript of
Iniunction for Obedience.

30* Let us now hear his Second exception: sc. That Oath in the Council
confirmed, was an OATH OF CIVIL ALLEGIANCE, which neither the Cathelikes
refuse, nor Pope Paul prohibits. The Cathelikes refuse that which Pope Paul
forbids, and that OATH which he condemns, concordat per omnia, is the very
same for substance in every point with the OATH of Toledo: the title is the
same with ours; each of them called Iuramentum Fidelitatis, An Oath of Feal^y
or Allegiance; that of Spain Tolet. 4. (...). 75.
comprehends all the Articles of our Statute- OATH: If in a shorter space, and
less number, that makes no more to the altering of the quality or the
substance thereof, then (if we may compare humane with Divine things) the
abridgment of the Decalogue into two great Commandments; which our Savior
made? yea, into one word, as the Apostle contracts it, does vary the quality
or substance of the Law Matthew. 22. Romans 13.
Moral. For who so takes these 14. Propositions, into which his Majesty has
resolved and branched the OATH set aside the first clause (whereof they say
they make no Apolog. page 49. 50. etc.
question) and the last part touching Aequiuocation (which has the proper
place anon to be examined) all the rest of the particulars may most properly
and naturally be reduced to those few which in the Councels are comprised.

31 For the whole OATH, either in general concerns the Protection of his
Majesty's both Person and Crown, and that's the maine branch of the 75. Canon of
the fourth Council: or in particular, a Prevention of any other claim,
Co^pendium. Iuram. (...). anno 3.
or attempt by any Person to deprive his Majesty either of his Life, or his
Kingdoms, or his Subjects; whether by single hand, or joint Conspiracy, or
treacherous Defection or open Rebellson; and these are all within the list of
the 18 Canon of the 6. Council. First, for Usurping claim, NEMO, We protest
NO MAN shall or may (there is the Pope wholly excluded, if he be in the number of
Men) usurp or challenge apicem, any one tittle of HIS Dominion, much ^le
^astigium, (which is in the fourth Council) the Souereignty of his Kingdom:
(there is power of Deposing gone, for it is an higher Souereignty to make, and
mar, and ouer-top Kings, then to be a King, and that which God has reserved
to himself alone; for God is the Judge, it is HE that pulls down one, and
sets up another, (says Psalm. 75. 7.
the Prophet.) The other particulars of the Statute-Oath are easily reduced to
these: No man shall seek the destruction of the King, nor attempt his life,
nor deprive him of his power, nor by any machination associat^ or help the
hand of any Conspirrators against him. All which are plainly and verbatim in
the 18. Canon of the 6. Council, cited by his majesty And the Jesuit espying
it, passed it and the rest over, not so much as either touched or named. And
this was the manner, and form, and nature of the OATH which those Councels did
allow and ratify: but the Top-Councell Pope Paul has wholly interdicted, and
willed HIS Catholics to refuse it, as being repugnant to Faith and Religion,
which in no one essential point differs from THAT so approved by those
Fathers.

32 His third exception is rather (...) supposall; If King (...)*
Sis^d had offered the Council an OATH pretudictall to their Ecclesiastical
affairs, they would have lost their lives, rather then have yielded to it.
This is again his Sophistical Elench, though very silly and simple, whereby
he beggs the question in hand, and that by a supposed conjecture, when his
Majesty speaks of a Fact: but we have often said, and they shall never disprove
it* that there is no one Article in the Satute OATH crossing any Ecclesiast
call affair, nor challenge of the Pope in Spiritual Causes; unless the very
naming of the Pope be the prejudice, which in the whole Council is indeed not
once specified, either for conuenting or dissoluing it; yet at the time when
they met, there was a Pope, and his name was Honorius. When the Council
therefore confirmed that OATH, against Depri^on or abetting Conspiraties, in
those general terms, Nemo priuct, etc. Had they but dreamed of such an
authority in the Pope, they would sure have added, Semper excipimus Papa^, or
Salua authoritate Sedis Apostolicae. This they did not, but in simplicity of
heart went on, and set it down, NEMO, NO MAN may or shall DEPRIVE our King,
wherein the Popes challenged Power is as much impugned as in our Statute OATH.

33 His fourth and last Exception is; There is no mention of Aequiuocation in
the Councels, but the words are [IVRARE MENDACITER] to swear falfly or
lyingly: Between both which, what is the difference? No more then between a
pair of cousening Iuglers, the one shining in Silk, the other clothed in
Rullet; this more open and clownish, the other more fine and cunning Feater.
Nay, it is no more, then that which was noted to be a fashion in all Languages,
the abating of an odious vice, or harsh and unpleasing thing with a finer
term: and that fashion never more frequet then where the vice was most used;
as in Israel, their Blasphemers were called Blessers; and in Athens, (...),
their Srumpets, they would 1. Reg. 21. Thucyd. li. 3. and Plut. Solon.
call (...), She-friends; and their grievous exactions, Covenants of State: So
among the Romans, Perduelles their open enemies they would term hosts, which
naturally signi fieth no more then strangers; and whom we in the Southern T^l.
Offic.
parts call Thieves, in the Northern parts they call Takingmen; and who ores
(which is the more gross, but truer appellation with us) they call Vsed-women:
Even so, that which Scriptures, Fathers, and Councels, have heretofore simply
called MEND AC IVM, A LIE in plain terms, the finer-mouth'd Jesuits (to
blaunch the soulenes of the sin to which they are so accustomed, and by an
inbred pranitie of mind, as Tertullian speaks, rejoice and delight in
lying) by a Rhetorical (...), call it in a finer word AEQVIVOCATION; a term
to all Apologet. cap. (...).
antiquity utterly unknown, but only as a Fallacy in Logic, and a sporting
figure in Rhetoric: and therefore to define out of any authentical Writer
this Jesuitical Aequiuocation, to make the difference appear from flat lying,
it is impossible. For a thing unknown in nature or custom, cannot be defined
by Art.

34 Yet (not to enter into a full tractate thereof, because cau^. M. the elder
has hunted this Fox in his Aequiuocating Male-Pardus thoroughly well) to try the
difference Full Satisfact. par. (...).
between the Canons Sense of Iurare mendaciter, and Aequiuocare, shall we
say, that to Aequiuocate mentally, (for of the verbal and literal, the
question is not now) is to speak one thing with the mouth, and to conceal or
reserve in mind a thing diverse from that which is vtte red? That Is not full;
for so should Abraham have been said to Aequiuocate, when he told Abimelech,
that Sarai was his sister, keeping the other part unto himself, that she Gene
12.
was his wise, for both were true: and every wise man might be so styled; for
it is the mark of a ^oole to open all his (...) inde at once, whereas a wise
man reserues it till afterward, says Solomon. But put the case that the King
had Pro. 29. 11.
asked Abraham whether Sarai had been his wife and he had said, No, reserving
the other part [She is my Sister] in his mind, this had been a flat Lie in
Divinity: and yet it is the same which the Jesuits call Aequiuocating. For it
is an ouer-rul'd case among them, that if the Question be put to one of them,
Whether he be a Priest, by the rule of Aequiuocation he may answer, No,
(though he know himself to be one) reserving some Evasion within himself. Is
then to reserve in mind any thing which we know contrary to that which the tongue
utters, whether answering to a Question, or swearing before a Judge; is that
(I say) Aequiuocating or flat lying? Take either of them; it is no other then
that which the Council calls PRAEVARICATIONEM FIDEI, a varying and double
dealing, with faith plighted, and prosession made; and also SIMVLATIONEM
ORISCVM MENTIS PERFIDIA, Tolet. 4. vbi. s^
The fair semblance of the tongue with Treachery at the heart, even while the
OATH is in taking; and was first practiced by Arrius (that abominable Heretic)
in matter of Religion, and is abhorred even in Civil Commerce, not only Socr,
li. (...). c. 38. Aug. de verbis Apost. Ser. 2^. Homer.
by Divines, (who accountmen that vseit, detestable beasts) but among Pagans
also as much detested as Hell-gates: and what is this but the Jesuits
Aequiuocating? which all ancient Holy Writers call flat lying, no other then
the very sin of A^^n^^s and Saphira; for when a man speaks any thing
contrary to that which in his mind he thinks, Aequiuocare est, say the
Jesuits; Mentiri est, says Act. 5.
the Master of Sentences. Li. 3. D^st. 38. c.


35. The principal Difference which they make is in their purpose, that they
do it not with an intent to deceive, but only to defend themselves from
danger. First, good Intentions can never make actions, forbidden by God, to be
lawful; especially private respects should never s^lue perjury; for he that
Swears, though to his own (...) or hurt, he must keep his Oath, without
varying, says the Kingly Prophet. Verum ex falsis non est Syllogizindum is a
Psalm. 15 4. (...) (...) Romans 3.
rule in Schools, not a good End by ill means must be effected. Secondly,
this is but a iuggling mist of mere appearance, void of sound and true
distinction, because they knowing that it is impossible for them to be
concealed or escape, without illuding or beguiling the Magistrate, do
therefore purposely deceive him, that so they may decline their danger: the
auoidance of being disclosed, it may be, is the first thing in their Intention,
but the first that they put in Execution, is the beguiling of the Judge; for
the End cannot be purposed, without the means to the End. Thirdly, this was the
very case of those Goths in Toledo toward their King; for, having an Oath
prescribed by the State, many of them thinking that Sisenand usurped the
Kingdom, either by an unlawful depriving, or an ouerawfull Paul. Aemyl.
pressing of Suintila his Predecessor to a voluntary Resignation; yet for fear
of the Laws penalty, and to keep themselves untouched from confiscation of
goods, and forfeiture of life, Swore Fealty and Homage unto him as their
lawful Sovereign, but thought contrary in their heart to that which they had
sworn: and this the Fathers of that Council called slat lying, and is no
other but the Jesuits Refined Aequiuocation, though not in that very term
specified, yet agreeing in Sense.

36. And if that was accounted but a Cavil in Arrius Russinus and Socrat.
and his Sect, to except against the word Homousion because it was not found in
the Scriptures, though the truth and full meaning be there; and when we put
them of Rome to the proof of Trans-substantiation, because there is no such
term in any Scripture, Father, or warranted Council, they count it a Cavil,
and vpbraid us with that exception taken by Arrius against the Co-essence of
the Son with the Father; what a shift is this of a trifling Cauiller, that
when the matter and substance which the word implies, is in the Council, he
will proclaim it in his Majesty a fraudulencie, to parallel the persidiousnes
of both the Actions together, because the very word is not there to be found?
Which (like Rahels children that must needs be missed because they were not)
could never be mentioned, because Iere 3^. 15.
never dreamed of.

37, And therefore we will conclude this point, and dismiss the Censorious
Epistler with that admonition, which those Fathers assembled, gave to such as
himself and those Council. Tolet. 4. Can. 75.
that are of his Cut: Non sit in vobis, vt in quibusdam Gentibus, Insidelitatis
subtilitas impi^ non subdolae mentis persidia; non periurij nefas, and
Coniurationis nefanda molimina: Let there not be within you, or among you, as
among Pagans and Gentiles, and other Heathenish Nations, any ungodly SLIGHT or
SHIFT of disloyalty and unfaithfulness, not the falsehood and treachery of a
crasty and deceiving mind; not the abhorred crime of PERIVRY (as v^orthy the
naming) nor the abhominated enterprises of Conspiracyes and POWDERPLOTS: but,
which is the preachers advice, Take heed Eccles. 8. 2.
to the mouth of the King, and to the word of the Oath of God. And so, with Him
we end this part of the Paragraph; yet with a Nouerint vniuersi praemising
this, that to the rest of the Councels, either of Toledo or Aquisgrane, he
has not answered One word; nor showed the difference between that which they
call Aequiuocating in an Oath, and that which the Council calls Swearing in
the name of God DECEITFULLY; but passes to the particular exceptions against
the Cardinals Letter, which he calls

The second part of the third Paragraph.
1. In the Entrance and first Section whereof (as if he were another Phocion
the hatchet of Them stenes his pithie O rations) he chops off full six leaves
of his Majesty's Answer Plut. (...) hoc.
at once, with two or three slight words, that they are but Dalliance and
picked Quarrels: whereas in the whole Apology, there is no passage more witty
and proper, nor more seriously with judgment handled. For in the Seven
Exceptions (so many they are to be numbered) not the Cardinals weakness of
judgment, but wickedness of have and affection (which is the chief seat of
Religion) is ransack't and discovered to the world, as it rightly deserves:
For whereas the general opinion, conceived commonly of the Cardinal, has
been this, by those that have not pondered his works, (and Prefaces
especially) that Father Rob. Bellarmine has been no base Pragmaticall Fa.
Parsons but an honest, quiet, ingenuous Student; now, by this his Letter to
Blackwell, he is truly made known, first, to bestow some good part of his
hours in receiving Intelligences out of England, how painefully Blackwell and
his fellows do labor every day and hour, like true Foxes and Swine, in
rooting and undermining the Lords Vvteyard so that for the space of almost
these forty years, neither Heart, nor Campion, nor Garnet, nor Gerrard, nor any
other D sturber of our Christian Peace, has wanted Bellumarma-minas, from
Bellarmine, howsoever he couers it under Numa his (...), his Sacrificing in
Prayers at the Lords Altar: which can nether be very charitable in him Plut.
Number.
nor acceptable to God, nor any way profitable to them for whom he prays; so
long as he now reuealeth himself (which is the third exception) to account
Death for Treason to be the most reioycefull kind of Martyrdom: and withal
(which is the fourth) to esteem of our Gracious Sovereign as of an other
Julian and a most bloody persecutor. To which four, and to the other three, as
well concerning Bellarmines mislike of the Modification in the offering of the
Oath as also of the challenge, that no point in the Oath tends to matter of
Faith, which should make him that swears, either to believe or not believe
any Article of Religion: and lastly of the Rebutter to that unsavory and
unmannerly comparison, between Peter's Successor, and our Sovereign his
Succession from King Henry, that neither the Popes doctrinall nor personal
succession, can come near any such probable warrant or assurance, as that
there should be any semblance of comparison: to all these this Contre-defender
scarce spends three Sections and that in answering only two of them.

2 The first whereof is clearing of Bellarmine from the Imputation, that the
Greatest Traitors and Conspirators against her late Majesty (and particularly
Campian and Heart) gave up Fa. Rob. Bellarmine for one of their greatest
Oracles, and this he does two ways. First, dubbing it for an ABUSE exceeding
a man's imagination, that the Apologer should thus write. Secondly, a
deceiptfull Aequiuocation; that because they did cite him in Controversies of
Religion, therefore he should be accounted an Author of their Conspiracies.

3 It is well that he will give Aequiuocation the right Epithete of Deceit;
but did his Majesty say HE was alleged by them as the Oracle of their
Conspiracies? No his words are, the greatest Traitors and Fomentors of
CONSPIRATORS, gave Bellarmine up for one of their greatest Oracles in their
Conference; (for thereto his Majesty referres the Reader in the Margin) whereof
their Conspiracies was no part. For their Treasons they were arraigned Apol.
pa. 57.
convicted, and adjudged; the Conference was had about their opinions in
Religion; in which Colloquie, the prinpall Author they relied upon (Campian
borrowed much from him, and Heart, called for him by name) was Bellar mine,
whose Dictats there specified, were transcribed; and Conference in the Tower
pa:, 6.
every young Nouice that came into England, was bound to have them; for to them
principally, the Cardinal was appointed the Doctor of the Chair and Reader of
Divinity, as himself boasts in the preface mentioned by his majesty. Tom.
1. Contr.


4 Secondly, had HE bin concluded as the greatest Oracle of those and other
like Conspirators, there is no such improbabilitie of truth, no ways to be
defended, as this Censurer auoweth; but the argument is necessary: For the
Cardinal being their principal Author for opinions, and the issue of those
opinions being Treason and Conspiracy, it is more then probable, that from HIS
positions and Lectures, they had sucked that poison which there ranckled at
their hearts, and here broke out (at their arrival) in their actions. The
Apologue is known and proper, that when the Trumpeter was taken in battle,
and pleaded for his life, that HE had killed no man, nor shed any blood, Aesop.
Only sounded his instrument which gave a pleasant noise; the answer was, that
HE did more harm, and was the greatest slaughterman in the Army; because, were
it not for his heartning and inciting sound, the horror of the cry and blood
would appall his fellows hearts; but when they were ready to quail, HE then
prouok't them to a fresh assault. And it was not for any valor that was in
the^ or any hostile Act in open arms done by them, that made Philip of
Macedon to condition with the Athenians Plut. Demosth.
for yielding up their Orators unto him; but because by their enforcing
Rhetorique, they persuaded and incited the Citizens to the continuance of
war, he reputed them for his deadliest and most annoying enemies.

5 Which is the very Case of Bellarmine; He, in his Lectures and Dictats,
blows the bellows of Seditious Doctrine which flames out by his scholars
Conspiracies, to the disturbance of the chief States of Christendom. One part
of his Lectures, whether at Louan or Rome (for he read in both) whereof his
Dictates were an extract, was his fifth Passeui. bibli. select lib. 7. cap. 4
and Tort. pa. 64.
book DE ROMANO PONTIFICE: and what is the whole sum of that, but Arguments
and Examples, to prove and show that the Pope, may by his imperial power
(though indirectly) depose Princes from their states, and Seats? his
familiarity therefore being more inward with the Nouices of England, because
he was their Master, his Majesty might properly call him the Oracle of his
Scholars Conspiracies; for they are the only visible issue and effect of his
Doctrine in them, for ought appears yet. So much for that.

6 Now here the Censurer makes an Almaine leap, skipping 3. whole pages
together; and the second thing he alights upon is his Majesty's complaint,
(with our Savior) that neither severity nor mildenes; that neither weeping
Mat. (...).
nor piping will content these men. The first Oath of Supremacy, was accounted
such an egar potion, that it was improbable, unreasonable, unnatural and
impossible to be taken down, able to drive men into utter desperation, Allen.
Apolog. ca. 1. sect. 5.
says Cardinal Allen: this OATH OF ALLEGIANCE is offered (by their own
confession) tempered and modified, and it is the greatest affliction and
angariation of Page 8. etc.
spirit that ever did betide distressed Catholics, says this
Cardinal-Parasite. It is the subtle sleight of Satan impugning the Epist. ad
Archi pres.
Primacie of the Sea Apostolic, unlawful and repugnant to Christian Faith,
says Cardinal Bellarmine. Now whereunto shall we compare this wayward
generation, whom neither rigor nor temperature can please? give them merum,
wine from the Grape; that makes them Brainesicke to storm and rave: reach them
Dilutum, allaid and mixed; that makes them stomacke-sicke, to disgorge and vent
their inward rancor against the state. And does not this give a just cause of
his Majesty's complaint? wherein, what is there that should make the Apologer
blush at it?

7 Blushing is no virtue, but a laudable affection says Aristot. Eth. 4.
the Philosopher, and that in young men and underlings Only for in Magistrates
and men of years it is not com mendable, because it is to be presumed, that
they will do nothing which shall procure their blushing: belike then there is
here some maine and shameful Crime that is thus Censured! and what is that?
Forsooth, the Cardinal does not say that the Oath is TEMPERATE in words; but
TEMPERED in matter. And can matter be expressed without words? And is not
Temperatum in Latin, as truly translated Temperate as Tempered? And when
mention is of things written; rather attributed to words, then matter? as in
Tully, and Hierom often, to temper the st^e and pen; and Hierom. in Eccles..
in all professions both of Divinity, State, Physic, Music, and other Arts,
always signifying an allaying or quallifyng by mixtures; nam Temperamentum non
est mistio sed m^onis ratio, Aristot. de. Ge^. Fernel. There. li. 3.
say the naturalists: so that, be it the Cardinal meant in substance and
matter, his Majesty's complaint remains just, and his charge vnblushable, that
their stitch against the former Oath being for that it was too riged, Tort.
pa. 66.
they should kick at this also, though themselves confess it to be tempered,
that is allayed, by a proportionate mixture, and so the Cardinal meant;
otherwise his other word modified were unnecessary, which signifies drawing to
an equal measure, as when a thing is made neither too sharp nor too sweet,
nor too high nor too low, etc, But that the Cardinal meant it was tempered in
the style, and Words, it is manifest by himself in that subsequent speech of
his, Certe enim quibuscunque VERBIS Iuramentum ab aduersarijt Fidei concipiatur
in Regno isto: certainly with what WORDS soever that OATH is conceived by the
adversaries Apolog. lat. pa. 3^. Ang. 38.
of the Faith in that Kingdom, etc.

8 And as this is his Majesty's complaint, so the ground thereof also remains
yet good; for surely did they not build a Monarchy to the Pope and not to
Christ, one of these courses would content them; either that of the first Oath,
severely peremptory for the Princes Supremacy in Spiritual causes: or
Moderately TEMPERED for his Souereignty only in Temporal respects, the sole
subject of this last OATH. Which his Majesty euicteth by a double Question;
First, can there be found in all the OATH one word tending to matter of
Religion? whereunto the Censurer makes a short and a sly answer, in a
conclusion affirmative upon a Supposall; If the power and authority of the Pope
and Sea Apostolic, less by Christ for governing his Church ^n all occasions,
be a point of Religion, then there are ten or twelve Articles or Branches in
the OATH touching Religion.

9 And will the Pope Iudicially forbid, and the Cardinal doctrinally conclude,
and the Epistler impudently impugn the Oath as utterly unlawful and against
Religion, which yet depends upon an IF; and is not yet determined for a point
of Reli gio^, that the Pope has any such authority over kings, as in the Oath
is mentioned? This therefore is his majesty's pressing question, and should have
forced the Jesuit to tuch the quick; but like an Aequiuocating Iugler, he
bemist's the Reader in cunning conueyance, and supposes an authority lest by
Christ to the Pope, but distinguishes not whether in Ecclesiastical or Civil
causes: for put the case it were granted, that the Pope had his Supremacy in
Ecclesiastical causes from our Savior Christ, this is not now the question in
hand, neither does the Oath meddle in that matter: his other usurped claim
over Kings and Princes, till it be determined for an Article of Religion, the
OATH does justly oppose; and yet without touch or impeach of any point of
Christian (yea, or their own Catholic) Religion: for a controversy
undetermined, cannot be held in any Church, either for Article of Faith or
principle Theological, and thereupon ensues his Majesty's Second question.

10 Does he that takes the OATH promise to BELIEVE or NOT to BELIEVE any
Article of Religion? To which, the Jesuit puts the Oath it self to make the
answer Even every clause thereof in effect, says he: as that I. A. B. (...)
profess that the Pope has not any power or authority to depose the King: and
that; I do fur there abjure as impious and Heretical, that damnable doctrine,
that Princes Excommunicate by the Pope may be depos^ a by Subjects: and that
also; I do believe and in Conscience am resolved, that the Pope has no power
to absolve me from this OATH: upon which the Jesuit like another Amaeus
doubles his force with a two sold question; first, Do not these clauses
include either BELIEF or UNBELIEF? for what a man is resolved on, that he
BELIEVES; what he abiures, that he does NOT believe. Secondly, What will the
Apologer say hecre? Surely nothing, (to put the last first) for he has more
serious affairs in hand, then to answer such pelting questions.

11 ONE that has less judgment and more leisure will easily shape a suitable
answer, that this Censurer is an absurd disputant, still to beg the question:
as if these Articles abiured or allowed by him that takes the Oath were points
of Faith which are but Machia^lisines of the Conclaue; or as is belief were
every where used Theologically, and that a Christians belief should be always
taken for his Christian belief: for there is a natural belief, the Objects
whereof are natural and Civil things, such as in this Oath, wherein there is
not any clause which is not grounded upon the very principles of nature; that
though there were no word of God at all (which is the true ground of Christian
Faith, and whereunto his Majesty has reference in his question) yet every good
Subject is bound to believe and to be resolved in his Conscience, even in the
light of nature, as a truth which without Scripture is infallibly sound that he
must obey his parents both of body and country, and abjure and resist (by all
means) any, that should impeach his Sovereign either in his Title or Person,
which two, even the very law of nature, has so fastened unto him, that no
authority or power may alter or hinder. His Majesty therefore added for the
explanation of himself (which might have prevented all this verbal Cavil, had
the Censurer purposed, or were able to deal ingenuously) that the taker of the
Oath is not bound thereby to believe or not believe any point of faith, whether
Articles of the creed, or positions in Scripture, or determinations of the
Church; for Moral Certitudes, and pie Credendum, and Historical narrations,
(which are the strongest resolutions and best grounds for the Pope either his
succession or Souereigntie) must not, as his Majesty most wisely observes,
pass current for Articles of Faith, although the Cardinal thinks it
sufficient for his greatness in a bare assertion to say, that the Oath
endamageth the Christian Faith: which when (without proof) he has confidently
and Categorically auerred; from the Archpriest, he mounts to the King; and
turns the envy of the Oath upon his Majesty's causeless fear of danger from
the Pope, because it was never heard off from the churches infancy that any
Prince though an Heretic, though Ethnicke, though a Persecutor, was murdered
by the Pope either his Command or allow ^nce.

12 Unto which objection of Panic fear, his Majesty in his reply, purposely
(upon good judgment) auoideth to make any answer; the sincerity of his
conscience witnessing within himself, and the opennesse of his carriage showing
him in the world, to be as confident as a Lion: otherwise his Majesty might
have told Bellarmine, that if in any persons, in Princes especially, that rule
is necessary Abundans Cauteli nonnocet, Kings cannot be to provident for their
safety; in which respect it is observed in Homer, that he ever presented the
great commanders in the field armed at all points; and that the Lawgiuers among
the Grecians, made straight decrees against (...), such as cast away their
shields and Targets, though they tolerated Plut. Polopid.
(...) those that threw away their spears and swords; which politic
Historians apply to Princes and Governors of states, whom they persuade to be
more careful of their safety in defending themselves, then of their valor to
annoy their foes: for both Scripture and nature make it plain, that in a King
(though one in person) the lives of Millions are endangered; and if any Prince
were ever forced to stand upon his safeguard, and fence himself with Laws,
our Sovereign much rather, having such Embowelled enemies within his Realms
as Jesuits are, and do procure; and such Hydra-headed Treasons;
suppullulating one after the other, and exceeding each other in degrees of
unspeakable cruelty: and of all other times, Now especially, that they Refuse
and Prohibit others to say their hearts open by taking this Oath. But his
Majesty passing by that, as a sillly frumpe of a WHITE LIVERED RED-CAP,
observes in this speech of the Cardinal: first his voluntary but
subtile-preter-ition, in leaving out all the other disasters in the Oath,
wherewith Popes have affrighted and infested Emperors and Kings (as Deposing,
Degrading, Exciting Arms, Kindling Rebellions, etc.) and insists here, only
upon One, Sc. murdering of Princes; and this very cautelously done by the
Cardinal; lest (as his Majesty well observes) he should in open and direct
terms Cross his Own Pofitions, wherewith his books are stuffed

13. All which, the Cardinals Page, this Antapologer passes in silence, and
staieth himself upon the second; wherein his Majesty charge Bellarmine with
an implied Contradiction against himself, in that denial of his, that Popes
have neither ^manded nor allowed Murders of Princes; seeing that Bellarmine
confesses (and exemplifieth it) that they have waged wars against them
diverse times. And what difference is there between personal murdring of
Princes, and raising wars against them, the lot whereof is common and
impartial? Nunc bunc, nunc illum ferit 2. Sam. 11. 25
gladius, says David, the King being no more exempt from the slaughter then
the ordinary Soldier; yea more exposed to Deaths hazard then any other, and
the chief mark aimed at. Fight neither against small nor 1. Reg. 22. 31.
great, but against the KING of Israel, says Benhadad; and Ahisophel^
resolution to assault David in battle, was as dangerous, as if he should have
plotted to have killed him in his Privy Chamber: For we will s^ite the KING
ONLY, said that Pestilent Counceller. Doubtless, he that exciteth 2. Sam. 17.
2.
and allows Rebellious and Civil Wars in hostile arms against natural
Souereignes, does much more allow their personal Murders; unless his meaning
be, that they shall not die alone; or that the more blood is shed, and more
money spent, the greater shall be his glory. And that Popes have thus done, no
other testimony need be brought, but out of Bellarmines Books.

14 This the Censurer here answers, first, by diuerting the Argument, Number.
27. and says That though the Pope has waged war against Princes, yet he
never caused any to be VNLAWFVLLY murdered. Wherein he deals like Saul's
armor-bearer; because the Cardinal has stabbed himself somewhat grossly, he
will help to kill him more cleanly and neatly: for the Aduerbe is worth the
observing, secretly implying, that the Pope has commanded, or may command
Princes to be murdered, but not VNLAWFVLLY; whereby it seems Lawful Murders
of them have been commanded and commended; and of the Lawfulness no man may
judge, if the Pope say the word: so that what Stories soever Bellarmine has
quoted, or what Murders the Pope has committed, or we can enumerate, this one
Aduerbe must salve them all; Either they were not UNLAWFVLLY done, or else the
causes were JUST, says this Epistler; or (which is a pretty passage, Numb.
28.) the Popes have PERSUADED themselves they were JUST: and therefore (as a
General in the field) pursued them as open enemies; or (as a Judge upon the
bench) commanded execution to be done upon them as MALE-FACTORS.

15 But first, who girt the Sword to the Popes side: Suppose the Keys were put
into his hands, they are no weapons for war; as he is a Priest, he may not
fight: Our weapons (says the Apostle) are spiritual; Tears, and Prayers, and
Sighs; for with no other we may resist, says S. Ambrose 2. Cor. 10. lab. 5.
ep. 33.
If as a Temporal Prince, defend his own Territories he may; but hostily to
invade another Kings Land, or infest his Kingdom with Rebellions, or aid his
Subjects with wages, or Arms, he may not. And yet he has done it; for HE
deprived Leo the Emperor (if Bellarmines report be true) from the Principality
of Rauenna, when as yet he had nothing to do with it; for it came to his
patrimony De Pontif. Roma. 1. li. 3. ca. ^8.
afterward, by the Donation of Pipin. Secondly, who made him a Judge Temporal
in this manner to proceed? (for Ecclesiastical Censure stretches not to
Goods and Life,) If over his Underlings and Vassals; be it so: yet over princes
in no case, who are the second and next persons in Comparison of God, after
whom they be the first and highest, but BEFORE all, (...). Apolo get.
and ABOVE all other, both GODS and MEN.

16. In the second place, the Jesuit denies the consequent, both in general
and particular; That though Bellarmine confess Popes to have waged Wars, and
Deposed Emperors, yet it is no opposition to himself, when he says, that no
Pope ever commanded the murder of Princes to be committed; or commended them
after they were committed As if Capitis Dim^utio (which is by depriving them of
their Realms) be not all one against Princes, with Ca^itis Obtruncatio, the
cutting their throats. For he that is Deposed from his Throne, is presently
Exposed to death; yea death to him is more welcome, because no misery is to be
compared to his, who, from sublimity and affluence is thrown into disgrace and
distress; Et vbi non sis, qui fueris, non est curvelis v^re: which was
verified in the particular Tul. Epist.
instance that his Majesty brings, and to which this Jesuit shapes a kind of
answer in the Emperor Henry the Fourth whom al their Authors concurrently
conclude to have died after his Deposing, prae moerore and ingenti dolors,
Cuspinian. Sigonius^r per. etc.
through extreme grief and sorrow. But before we come to that, had the
Cardinal (writing to the Arch Priest) plea sed to remember what another
Archpriest, a Cardinal, has recorded of Hildebrand the Pope, that he hired
with Beano. Cardin.
money a base fellow, to tumble a ^reat stone from the roof of the Church upon
the said Emperors head, as he was praying before the Altar in S. Mary's Church
upon (...) A^entine, he would never have let fall such a peremptory conclusion.
Or were there no Example of Fact extant against the Popes in this kind, yet
that they may command Princes to be killed, is Bellarm nes own Doctrine, both
Symbolicall, as the Spirit may command the De Pontif. Roman. lib. 5. cap. 6. Ex
quo.
Flesh to fasting and chastisement, yea, even to Death it self, if the Spirit
see it necessary: and Positive also, confirmed by diverse arguments, but one
more direct then the Ibid cap. 7. tertia con.
rest: sc. Christians may not tolerate or suffer an Infidel, or in Heretical
King to reign over them; but to judge of Infidelity and Heresy, belongs Only
to the Pope, says he, and therefore at his doom, the King must stand or
fall. And lest it should be said, that this reaches but to Deposing, not to
Death, it follows after, that such a King is Ibid. Paragr. Quarta ratio.
unworthy to receive the Sacrament of Baptism, who takes it for an injury done
to him, if the Church (that is, the Pope) adiudge him to loose his honor and
wealth, adhuc autem and ANIMAMSVAM, yea, his Life also; for to that end does he
cite the place out of the Gospel. Luc. 14.


17 But the first particular instance which his Majesty brings of the Popes
fury against the Son for the interring of his Father the Deposed Emperor; as
it ratifieth the Position that Popes do allow of Princes Murders (for they that
execute their rage upon a dead corpse, it is questionles they pursued (in heart
at least) that man to death, and are more then glad when he is dead: so does it
put this Antapologer to much trouble, and many shifts, both fond and false, to
transfer as well this barbarous rage and profane Exhumation from their Holy
Primate, as also his incensing the Son to Rebellion against his natural
Father; which two points are warranted by their own Writers, some of them
living about the same time.

18. For the first, the digging him out of his grave, that is compassed with a
whole cloud of Witnesses; some writing, that tanta seueritate Dominus Papa in
ipsum vltus est, The Pope pursued him with such implicable revenge, that
Helmold. hist. Slau. cap. 33.
being dead, HVMARI NON SINERET, he would not suffer him to be buried:
Another, The Bishop of Liege, with others of his sort, were received into the
Communion of the Vrspergens. an. 1106.
Church, (who cast them Out but the Pope?) upon Condition they would DIG OVT
of the grave the Corpse of the Emperor, which he had BEFORE BVRIED in the
Monastery. The very same, another Historian verbatim relates, both for the
Fact, and Reason of the Fact; They Naucler. vol. 1 genesis 37.
be the very last words wherewith Sigonius ends one of his Books; His body lay
unburied in a Desars Cell for five years, PONTIFICE ID SEPELIRI VET ANTE, De
regno Italiae. lib. 9.
because the Pope had forbidden the Interring of it: For, being put into the
Earth, (says a late Compiler of their own) HORTATVPAPAE, by the Popes
persuasion, EXHVMATVM, Binnius, Tom. 3. Council. vita Paschal. 2.
it was DUG out again, and remained above ground five years.

19 Yea, but Cuspinian (whom the Apologer in the Margin quot eth) his words
are clean contrary (says this Censurer) for thus he writes; when Henry the
Father was dead, and buried in a Monastery at Liege, his Son would not make
peace with the Bishop of that place, except the dead body were pulled out of
the grave again. Surely, this was an oversight of the Apologer (for want of
well understanding his Gra^mer) to make such an Escape, seeing that the words
are so plain, Filio procurante, non potuit reconciliari Episcopus Cuspinian.
in Henr. 4.
Leodiensis, nisi exhumaretur Cadauer: That is, By the sons procurement, (At
whose hands but the Popes, For what need any procurement by himself to
himself?) the Bishop could not be reconciled, (to whom but to the Pope, who
had accursed both Church and Church men at Liege for putting the body of the
deceased Emperor into the grave?)

Cunctaque Leodes mox ANATHEMA ferit, Viterbien. Panth. part. 17
All things at Liege were blasted with the Popes Thunderclap, for discharging
that Christian (at least civil and last) duty to their Master: Whereupon,
Mandato Pontificis e Coemiterio Idem ibi.
cijcitur, By the Popes Mandate his Corpse was thrown out of the Churchyard,
and all Christian burial denied it, says the same Author who lived in those
times, and was (by his own testimony) Notarie and Chaplain to three
Emperors: so that the Reconciliation or Peace to be made, was with the Pope,
not the young Emperor, who (perhaps) did procure the stay thereof.

20 Why then, All this proceeded from the Son, who PROCVRED the Pope to do
it, and therefore it is falsely ascribed to HIS HOLINESS. Yet this is nothing
to any jar between the Son and the Bishop. But would the Pope yield so
much to the ungracious and unnatural despite of a Parricidious Usurper,
making a request so barbarous and beastly? Perhaps the Son was importunate,
and so the Pope, like the good natured Judge in the Gospel, though he neither
feared God, nor regarded man, yet says he, Quiamolestus est mihi hic
Imperator, because Luc. 18.
he so importunes me, be it as he will. And that the Son was so instantly
importunate, is most clear; for Filius ossa Viterb. vbi supra.
patris DOLVIT fore cum sceleratis, says the foresaid Writer, It VEXED the
Son to the heart, that his Fathers bones should be CASTOVT among Malefactors:
which doubtless is an evident Argument, that he sued hard, that his Father
might not be buried, because men use to plead hard, that they may obtain what
they utterly dislike. Therefore, for a further confirmation thereof, that it
was the Sons impiety, not the Popes malice; when the Emperor and Pope came
to parlee upon Conditions, this was Annal tom. 12. an. IIII. ex Paulo Diacono,
lib. 4. cap. 38.
One, as Baronius (who, you may be sure, will write all that he can which may
sound to the Popes disgrace) sets it down: POSTVLAT Imperator, vt Patris sui
CORPUS in Ecclesia SEPELIRI permit^ at: The young Emperor earnestly REQVIRES,
that his FATHERS CORPSE might be INTERRED: To which demand the Pope, that the
world might know, that the keeping him out of the grave was against his will
(good man) presently yields, with a strong Negative, and tells him IT MAY NOT
BE; and gives him his reason, for that HE had received a TERRIBLE Iniunction
from the martyrs deceased, and in those places shrined, that he should suffer
no WICKED PERSONS, to be BVRIED within their Churches, for THEY WOULD not
endure it. And therefore the Reader must needs see, that this Censurer had just
cause to say that ALL this is falsely ascribed to the Pope.

21 The Second thing in this Story, wherewith his Majesty charge the Pope,
is, that he Stirred up the Son against his Father, and procured his ruin;
whereof this Epistler would also ease their Holy Father, and that by the
Apologers alleged Author Cuspinian, who writes, that it was REPORTED, how
Hildebrand had absolved the Emperor before his Death, but that his SON never
left SOLICITING the succeeding Popes, to EXCOMMVNICATE him again. First, this
is written but for a report, then which there is nothing more uncertain, says
the Orator; but yet what follows hereof? Philippic. 2.
Therefore the Pope stirred not up the Son against the Father: A weak
Consequent: Absolution of the Emperor from the Curse, freeth not the Pope from
his Instigation of the Son in pursuit of his Father; therefore the same
report which Cuspinian records, does add (which the Jesuit, according to his
common honesty, leaves out) and set down the cause why the Pope absolved the
Emperor; namely, because Hildebrand the Monk (otherwise Gregory the Seventh)
was much grieved in mind, quod Henricum Cuspinian vbi supra.
Imperatorem inique molestasses, that he had vexed and molested Henry the
Emperor WRONGFULLY and UNJUSTLY; and in that anguish of mind confesses (as a
Friar witnesses) that he did it at the instinct of the Devil: and among
other, he raised up Rodolph Count of Reins Sigebertut, anno. 1085.
field, against the Emperor his Master, Cui omnia debebat, to whom he owed all
that he had, and sent him a Crown Imperial circled about with an Inscription
of S. Peter's Cuspin. Hen. 4.
name and gift.

22 But what is this to the inciting of the Son? Nothing; for Pope Gregory or
Hildebrand, who in distress of soul absolved the Emperor, died before this
his Son Henry the fifth rebelled; but yet by the means of Mathilda the
Emperors kinswoman, and the Popes too near neighbor, (Pontificis latericomes
indiuidua adhaerebat, she stuck close to the Pope at all assaies and seasons)
Conradus his Idem ibid.
eldest son was instigated to rebel: for which cause the Father disinherited
him, and appointed Henry his younger brother for Heir apparent but then came
Paschal the second into the Sea, who cursed him and re-curst him, iterum atque
iterum, says Cuspinian. And after that, from the Conuention of Mentz, were
sent two or three Bishops in the Popes name, to fetch from him his Regalia, and
Imperial Ornaments, that his Son (who was then in Arms against him) might
be invested. What Author can the Apologer bring, that avouches this, says
the Epistler? No better then the messengers themselves, the Bishops of Colen
and Wormez, who told the old Emperor to his face, Pontifici Principibusque
Germaniae placuit, It seems good to the Pope and the Prince of Germany, that
thou be Sigonius de regno Ital. lib. 9. anno. 1106.
deprived of the Communion of the faithful, and deturbed or tumbled out of the
possession of thy Kingdom. This says Sigonius; and Genebrard comes not short
of him, who says, that this was done, Iussis Paschalis Pontificis, at the
Genebrar. li. 4. anno. mundi. 5206.
Commandment of Pope Paschal: and yet, says Fa. Parsons, Here is much said
against the Pope with little proof. Not so much as the Pope laid and laid
against that Emperor, with less warrant; Excommunicating him for Symonie, and
the proof, because he had taken a Sword in lieu of his favor, for bestowing
^ree Bishoprics. Indeed the Bishops which came to diuest him, they laid it
foul to his charge; for the Emperor asking them of Colen and Mentz (the
richest and amplest Prelacies of Germany) what great matter he exicted of them
when he conferred those dignities upon them? they stuck not to tell him
plainly, that he had neither exacted, nor taken ANY THING: yet this was the
huge Simonist, so pursued Sigonius vbi supra.
with the Popes malice, and their Parasites pens.

23. The Second Instance which his Majesty brings to confute the Cardinals
general negative, is a recent, and extant Panegyrike, in extolling the
Murderer and Murder of King Henry the third of France, made by a Pope: who,
Job. 32. 19:
as if he had been another young E^hu, and his words within him like new-wine
in a bottle boiling and working with the joy thereof, does with such open
mouth, and stretched fides, and glorious terms, hyperbolize both the Author,
Manner, and Fact; that his Oration had like to have received in the Consistory
an Herod's Plaudite; not only verbal for Deifying the Pope (the voice of God,
not of Man) but actual also, for Canonizing the Friar MVR DERER into an half
God, and an whole Saint. To the first part whereof this Epistler answers,
Numb. 30. that there is no Record of Credit in Rome (if he had staid there,
he had said true perhaps) or elsewhere, that Pope Sixtus ever made any such
speech. Is it not time well spent to deal with such dishonest Shifters? In the
first exampleof the Emperor Henry the fourth, when Benno the Cardinals book is
quoted of Hildebrands notorious and extreme pursuing, plotting and insi^iating
his death, Bellarmine the Cardinal turns that off, with saying that Benno
never wrote any such thing, but some Lutheran in his name, affixing De Roman.
Pontif. lib. 4. cap. 3.
the Cardinals title: Or else, if Benno did write it, it was but the exercise
of his wit; as Xenophon wrote the life of Cyrus for an Idea of an excellent
Prince; so he, for a pattern of an absolute wicked Pope, not for truth of
matter, the Book is so full of impudent lies. Now this second Example, famous
to the world, being yet fresh in memory, and the Oration in print translated
into diverse languages, with the day of the month and year, and place prefixed
with this inscription Sixti Quinti Pont. Max. Oration habita, etc. On the second
day of September. Anno. 1589. in the Consistory at Rome: Now this (I say) is
shufled off with an Ignoramus That there is no record of credit to be found;
belike then there is a Record, but because it does not accord with their
desires, and remains there ad perpetuam Rei infamiam, to the eternal renown
of the Popes zeal and piety, for celebrating assassinats and Mutherers of
Kings, the Credit thereof is called in question.

24 A cleanlier excuse had been, that because Pope Sixtus was so extremely
hated after his death, that his B^nnius and ^racalla in ^us vita.
Statue of Brass (erected in his glory at his first entrance) was cast down,
and an Act made, never any (for his sake) to be set up again; that this
Oration of his also, and the Records thereof, were defaced and torn: For, that
there was an Oration to that purpose, by him made, both Tortus and this
Epistler are forced to confess, which they divide into two parts, an
admonition and an admiration; that (forsooth) it was not in commendation of the
heinous fact, but, that a Monk in his Could should perform such a valiant Act,
an ADMIRATION of GODS STRANGE PROVIDENCE, A fit Epithete doubtless, and fetched
from profound Divinity; for can Gods providence be Strange, which, in the
universal governance of the world, and guidance with protection of prrticular
creatures, is daily and continual? or is anything Strange to his Providence,
which sees things to come, as if they were present and existent? or can Aquin.
summa. contra Gentiles.
visible acts, be called Gods providence, which by the school men's definition
is so far forth called Providence, as it remains in Gods secret Counsel,
nondum rebus impressa not yet appearing in any thing? (for when it is Explicata
and shows itself in effects sensible then it is called Fatum not Providence)
or because it was (as the Prophet Esa. 23. 2^.
speaks) opus alienum and peregrinum, a strange and Barbarous Action, which
the Pope so admired; by what figure in Rhetorike does this Jesuit call it Gods
providence as if that did cooperate with the bloody mind of a desperate Monk,
to a parricidious Murder? did David so in the Murder of Abner? which is the
very case, save that there was no Sanguinary Priest party in the Act, when
Ioab under pretense of saluting him, stabbed him to the heart: did thereupon
David make a speech in admiring Gods 2 Samuel 3. 27.
STRANGE Providence, in that Abner was so treacherously slain, because not long
before he had killed Asahell? (as here pretense is made of the Kings slaying
one of 2 Samuel 2. 23.
his Subjects?) No, but uttered a funeral oration in praise of the party
murdered, both for his Prowess and nobility; with a detestation of him that
did the Fact, and a prayer to God to reward the dooer according to his
wickedness: 2 Samuel 3. 34.
and at last gave a charge to his Son not to suffer the Treacherous murderer
to end his days without Blood. This, or the like, if the Pope had done, it had
been a 1. Reg. 2. 6.
speech more fitting a Bishop and a Divine, and have left Gods providence in
such specialities to himself, to whom it is best known: which, (we speak
not of his foreknowledge, but of that which they call prouidentiam
Dispositionis) (...). (...). (...). 35. Aquin. 1. 1. q. 10^. art. 7.
whether in his universal regency gubernatiue or executiue in particular
actions, does always Operari per bonum and in bonum tendere, work by that
which is good and tend unto good, say the Schoolmen: (for with the wickedness
in the means God has not to do, save to turn it to some good) if therefore
the Pope had been acquainted with Gods inte^tion; or after the Murder, had
seen that some really true (not partially supposed) good had been effectuate
by the parricide, THAT should he truly and only have ascribed to Gods
providence, as Joseph applied his being in Egypt Genesis 45. 5.
for the relief of his kindred, unto Gods mission, not his Bretherens Sale; for
so far forth as in their treacherous and unnatural cheuisance there was a
premission of him into Egypt, and a preservation of them in his being there,
that was Gods providence, who in his secret Council decreed this so to be, and
foresaw that it should so be, non studio mali, sed bono populi, not approouing
their ill, but intending their good: Otherwise Balbus the Emperor, and the
Caian Heretics are more justifiable then the Pope, for they Zonar Gr. c. fab.
lib. 1. Epiphan Aug. etc.
commended Judas for the betraying of his master, because he fore-sawe it to
be the only means of man's Redemption.

25 But yet, if we should examine this bald excuse, what was the strange and
admirable providence in this murder? had the Monk come into the Camp like
another Scaeuola, and (being a professed enemy, entered the Kings Pauilion, I.
in. lib. 2.
in the thickest of the crowd standing about the King, and not discovered by
habit or otherwise) had struck at him openly with his weapon; that had been a
more manly and a more strange Act, and far more honest, for there it was hostis
hostem, one enemy striking another: or had the Friar challenged the King to a
single Combat, unarmed in his Coule, with a weapon only, and had slain the King
by fine force, or some Raven or Foul of the air (assisting the Idem lib. 7.
Friar in the Monomachy) had still been bearing in the Kings face, as a
Frenchman was served in the Roman story this had been a plentiful theme for
the Pope to have dilated upon Gods strange Providence, to have said with Liny,
Dishominesque illi assuere pugnae: but that a Priest (not secular but retired)
professing more then ordinary mortification, should nourish such rancor,
blood, and Treason in his inner parts, and arm himself with a two edged
knife, and the same poisoned, that so the blow might be speedy, but the death
with Torment; and should make God to he the Author and Abettor of his
Parricide (for night and day he prayed his assistance, by their own report
Mercur. Gallobelg.
and praise) and in his Friarly garments (habits of peace and piety) craving
access to his Sovereign (who never denied it to men of his sort) under
pretense of Letters and Message of importance, while the King graciously
stoop't to him for receipt thereof, should villanously and cowardly stabbe the
Lords anointed; and a Pope (the huge Divine of the Christian world) should
admire this as an Act of Gods strange providence, being so contrary to
religion, honesty, and the very light and law of Nature, it does argue either
this Jesuit to be of a strange boldness, to refer the Popes Oration to such
an high Common place; or else the Pope to be a strange Divine to attribute the
treasonable Murder of an anointed King (by a Popish Friar) to Gods
providence; which David celebrateth for Rescuing, not destroying Kings: for it
is he that gives DELIVERANCE unto Kings says the Prophet in the Psalm. 44.
Psalm.

26 But in the second part of the Popes Oration, as they do sort it, and call
it an Admonition, (that the manner of the Murder, (and one circumstance
thereof e specially) WHEN NOTHING WAS LESS EXPECTED, might be a spectacle unto
Princes to be more moderate in their power) this one thing alone we will
observe, that if the POWDER PLOT of the Jesuits had taken effect, what whole
seluses of Rhetoric had been opened for Orations in this kind, to all
Nations Christened, for Kings and Princes to have been more Moderate in their
Laws and penalties; for that the King of Great Britain with his dearest
Queen and eldest Son, environed with his chief Officers of State, compassed
with all his Nobles and Peers of all sorts, attended with the choice flower of
the Lands Gentry, and Comminaltie, in that very place where those rigorous
Laws were enacted, should be blown up on the sudden, with the touch of one
hand of a silly fellow, WHEN NOTHING LESS WAS EXPECTED? And this also must
have been ascribed to Gods strange providence, that so many barrels of
Gunpowder, being at several times couched, were never discovered before the
blow was given. But this in conclusion you see, that what they would deny,
perforce they confess; that a speech there was made by the Pope; and be their
Glosses never so cunning or impudent, the Oration extant (never yet controuled)
will remain for a perpetual monument, to show that the Pope rejoiced in it, as
a retaliated revenge upon the Kings person, for some ^cedent Act, disliked by
him.

27 And little there wanted (such comfort there was taken in it) of Saincting
this wicked instrument of Gods strange providence: howsoever Father Parsons
says, that there can be nothing more improbable and ridiculous; yea, rather if
it were such a strange providence of God, comparable Sixtus (...) Panegyr.
to Iuduhes beheading Holofernes, and Phinees his transfixion of the
adulterouscoople: it is more the^ PROBABLE that the execution of an Action
semblable, should receive a memory proportionable with that inscription, Et
reputatum est et in iustitiam, it was accounted to Psalm. 106. 31.
him for Righteousness to all Posterities for evermore. RIDICVLOVS it might
have been, for such jests are not strange in Romes conclaue; money and friends
have easily made Saints: which when a Cardinal of Rome saw, and considered
what manner of persons (men of singular and Bessarion apud ^odinum method. hist.
rare abominations) were Canonized there, he began to doubt an vera essent
quae ab antiques prodita fuerunt, whether those things were true, which were
written in ancient times about such matters. There is no doubt but the Popes
teeth watered to have Friar Clement inrol'd, but that some of the Conclaue
wisely considered that which one of their own side afterward observed, quod
Haereticis occasion (...) ded^rit calumniands non Hommem solum sed Ordinem,
that the Heretics had already taken ^ccasion to detest, not the Bar lib 6.
cont^arch ^8. (...)
MAN only but all his whole ORDER.

28 The third Example confronting Bellarmines Negative, is our late Queen of
precious memory, set up by the Popes Bull as a Butt to be shot at by all manner
of Conspirators; hartned to their Treasons by their Confessors Injunctions; and
authorized plainly by the Popes allowance: where of were there no other
Argument (says his Majesty) this ONE is indefeizable, that the Pope never
called any Churchman into question for meddling therein. The Censurers answer
to this is foure-fould; first, by Interrogations; Secondly, by an experience;
Thirdly, by an Apology; and fourthly by a challenge. His first Interregation
is in scorn thus;,. And needs no more (SIR) but this? There needs no more
(CVRR) but that; for continued silence, after cognizance of a fact, implies
allowance; defer^d reproof may argue wisdom in men, and sometimes mercy,
oftentimes Justice in God: that long forbearance may ei there aggrauate the
penance or operate conversion, but if still prorog'd, it argues a delight, or
consent at least. So God himself reasons in the Psalm (read it, and see in
three verses, your picture Pa^ Parsons, and your Cope-Traytor Psalm. 50. 18, 19.
etc.
Garnet lively described) which he concludes, These things thou did and I
was silent, whereby thou though^st (wickedly) that I was like thyselfe [to see
evil, and by silence to approve it] but I will reprove thee, and set them all
in order against thee: and what silence was this, for he begins that very
Psalm with Deus Deorum loq^us est, the God of Gods has spoken? namely his
Silence from Exec^ing, not denouncing his judgments; which made Sa^e August
(...) to break out as in an amazement vnde ista (...) whence sounds this
terrible I rumpet? Non silet; and silet Aug. (...) (...).
he is silent from revenge, not silent from reproof: but this has been the
Popes double fault, which must needs imprint into his M^. a persuasion of his
allowance, that he has bin sile^t a precepto, and a iudicio, and a monend^;
and vindican do, from monishing and punishing, either from (...) the fact, or
chastising the Malefactors. And this silence being continued, as well Divinity
as Law have concluded it, to argue either Consent to the crime (...) a Content
with it.

29 This the Epistler strives to fling off with his second Interrogation,
consisting upon three WHAT IS, drawn from the Popes intellectuals and sensibles;
wherein he shows some small grace, purposely to avoid a positive denial,
simply to say that the Pope neither knew or ever heard of any such thing; but
thus he propounds it, WHAT if he knew not? WHAT if he heard not? WHAT if he
saw some ridiculous devises? There is no such insensibilitie as that which is
wilful and of purpose; and some men will pretend to be deaf, save when they
hear what they like of. Rome belike is desolate from resort; and sequestered
from Intelligence; and England so void of Romish Agents; and the Pope so
destitute of busy Informers, that it is no marvel if HE were utterly
ignorant of such occurrences: but according to the proverb, there is none so
blind as he which will not see. Gallio in the Acts, saw Sosthenes the chief
Ruler stricken in his Act 18. 17
presence, and in the face of the Court, but the text says, Gallio cared not
to take knowledge of these things; which is the Popes very case in this point:
and yet it seems HE could SEE some fained Devises against Priests to affright
the Queen, (especially that of Walpoll and Squire,) which he descried to be
a MONSTROVS FICTION. Like enough; for a false glass will present deceiving
Vide Catech. Jesuit.
objects: perhaps the Pope did look through Parsons spectacles. But the party
himself confessing the Fact; the Jury finding the Gilt; and the Priests of
Rome acknowledging it, and writing it to be true; how comes it beyo^d-sea to be
but a fained devise? Some will not believe a man is bald unless they may see
his Brains; nor the Pope conceive that the QVEENE should have been poisoned,
except She had been seen to swell and dye presently. Had Squires poison taken
the effect intended, it then had been an act of a Martyr, but being discovered
and defeated, it is now become a Fiction like a Monster. The best is, that the
Records of English Courts come not within the reach of Index Expurgatorius; the
fact is too evident to be denied; the Evidence too substantial to be devised;
and the proceeding more just then can be controlled.

30 His experience follows Number. 33. that HE never knew it proved that any
Pope ever 'PROCVRED or CONSENTED to any private violence against her person.
This Jesuit makes himself Them^stocles his Plut.
Son, for English matters; either HE must know them more then any in Rome, or
they cannot be true; but yet he must borrow his fellow Garnets answer to
justify this speech, and say with him, if Aequiuocation help me not, I have
ouer-lashed therein, for to omit all other conjectures of his knowledge, is not
the letter of a Cardinal sufficient Proceeding against the late Traitors.
proof; and being in print both in Italian and English (in the answer to
Allens Apology) can it be unknown to him, that the Pope was particularly
acquainted with the private and personal Murder of QVEENE ELIZABETH intended
by Parry? does he not make S. Peter's Keys open the widest gate in Heaven to
Parrie for accomplishing it, absolutely approouing the Intention, and
graciously absoluing the murderer from all his Sins for acting it? does not
the ^etter begin thus? Sir, The holiness of our Lord the Pope has seen your
letter, with the ore dence thereof, and cannot but praise your good disposition
and Resolution, etc. And was it not Subscribed to Parrie, yours to dispose of
N. CARDINAL of HOMO? Press the Cenjurer with this, and if he do not
Aequiuocate with his knowledge, or the Proof, that he either knew it not, sc.
to impart it; or else it was not proved, Sc. to his contentment; if he have one
spark of modesty, he will revoke what he said.

31 But the third and most impudent, is his Apology, that if the Popes did
proceed against Her as a MALEFACTOR, (as well by SPIRITVAL as by TEMPORAL
Arms also) for her REMOOVALL, who, being ILLEGITIMATE by Parliament, did as
THEY were persuaded) usurp the Cronne, to the prejudice of his Majesty's
mother and himself, they might IVSTLY do it. Tam Marti quam Mercurio, is (it
seems) the Inscription upon the Popes Keys; Law or Wars, to Rifle the
Titles, or Ruffle with the Thrones and in the Realms of Princes, are at the
Popes choice: but a man would imagine at the first reading and hearing of a
Popes proceeding against a WOMAN malefactor, that some Curtizan in Rome had
appeared before him in his Ecclesiastical Consistory for her unlawful lust;
but when he comes to Temporal Arms, and sees it touch the Remoouall of that
Lady QVEENE ELIZABETH (the Diamond among Princes, the glory of Royal Majesty,
and the joy of the Christian world for her Sex, while she lived) he might with
just disdain ask, What had the Bishop of Rome to entermeddle in England, or
with HER Crown? And bid him look home to his own usurping claim; because
there are more Evidences to prove HIM to be that Antichrist then ever could be
to show that She was illegitimate.

32 Yes (says he) Her Father, the Arches, and Parliament did Sentence her SO;
And the same Father, Arches, and Parliament, (upon better grounds, within few
years) renounced the said Sentence, and repealed that Act, as before was said.
But being once true (quoth he) no humane power could make it untrue, to the
prejudice of another, If the Illegitimation had been in her Blood, no Law
could make it good against the right Heir; but that being sound, seeming
allegations and plausible inferences might for the time dazell (not alter) her
Right; but they being cleared and reuersed, these second Deliberations did not
so much establish her Right (which was inhere^t in her Blood) as make it more
apparent and sensibly incontroulable. As for humane Acts, the rule of ancient
law has been, that (...), after-Lawes and Constitutions are more strongly
binding the^, the former are. Yet hereby (I hope) the Argument does as well
hold on the contrary, that if a King be once truly legitimate and rightly
possessed, no humane Power (and take the Pope at the highest, he is but S.
Peter's humana Creatura) can Dispossess or Depose him, under what pretense
soever; much less to the prejudice 1. Pet. 2. 13.
of another: and yet it is one point of Iesuitisme, that the Father may be
Deposed for an Heretic, and his Son and Heir al^ excluded from claim of
Succession, unless he be a Catholic of the Roman si^e. (...) tit. 64.
Sect. 75.


33 But who was that other person, prejudiced by Q^eene Elizabeth's reign? His
Majesty's Mother (says this Epistler) and consequently himself, who (by
right) should have inioyed the Crown 44. years since; and the fawning Apologer
cannot, without open untruth or manifest ini^rie, AVER THE CONTRARY. HE that
wrote the Apology, of all other vices abhors Fawning, both actiuely in
himself, and passiuely from others; his nature is to Royal and noble, to be
a Sardonian: Fawning and Chrouching he leaves to such base bonegnawers as Fa.
Parsons; for his Majesty has long since, in his own person, not concealing
his name in that his Golden Book, auerred the contrary to this, and signified
(...). Preface to the Reader.
that he was no way prejudiced in his claim or right by Queen ELIZABETH'S
reign: For first He acknoledgeth her to be a lawful Queen, governing with
wisdom and felicity: Secondly, for the State of England, he professes,
that it could no way become him, to be a busie-bodie in an OTHER Princes
matters, nor to fish in OTHER folks water^, as the Proverb is: Thirdly that
during HER time, it became him LEAST OF ANY to meddle therein.

34 Doubtless, had his Majesty seen his Right encroached on, or impeached,
much more detained, he was neither so careless of his Interest, nor so soft
of nature nor so weakly armed with force and friends, domesticke and foreign,
but he would and might have (if not (...) Her, yet) grievously molested Her,
and exhausted both her strength and treasure. How far he was interested in
this State, none knew better then himself; and although HE were silent (as
himself speaks) his Blood and Descent did sufficiently proclaim it: but
knowing the Vbi supra.
(...), that his just appointed time by God and Nature, was not yet, till the
Almighty had called her to lay her with her Fathers, his Majesty with
undaunted patience and unpassionate haste, expected that, which (to the mutual
comfort of himself and his Subjects) with peaceable entry glorious Inuestiure,
and Regal Majesty, he now enjoys: and Long and Long may he do so, in
despite of such Fawning Counterfeits as Parsons it.

35 For what a cogging and shameless companion is this, now to curry favor
with h^s Majesty, as bewailing his 40 years greeuance and wrong endured, So
long kept out from his actual right due to him in Conscience; when of all
other, this very Epistler (under Dolemans visard) utterly disabled his Majesty
for having any title or interest in this Kingdom* not only under protext of
conscience for his Religion, auowing that whosoever should consent (...) (...).
patt. 1. pa. 216.
to the Succession of one faulty in Religion, (that is, in his sense a
Protestant) should commit a most gri^uous and d^able sinna: and such an one was
his Majesty, in this mates opinion (as the Priests record) for He had
pronounced of King James, to be a most obstinate Heretic, of whose conversion
Quodli. p. 218.
there was NO HOPE* nor that only, but Operfidious Hypocrite) he would there
make his Majesty utterly incapable, by a plain fr^sh Statute (as he^ calls it)
(...) Associat^n, as therein foiled by Law through that Death D^lem. part. 2.
page 1^7. cap. 5.
of his Mother* which he there inforceth to be an argument that admits
neither Solution ^r R^ly* Were it within the compass of the Apology* or to
the purpose in hand, he should find that it might easily (...) (...); and had
not he at all times prostituted his ^en and Soul to write any thing (though
never so false) neither would he have cited this Statute, nor pronounced it, so
unanswerable; for the plain words of the Statute do confute him: because THEY
ONLY are in the Act excluded, by whose means her Majesty's life should be
taken away (not sought) and that it should not touch their issues (yea An. 27.
Elizah. Statute for provision, etc. cap. 1.
though she had died by such violence) except they had been any ways ASSENTING
or PRIVY to the same. And what is this, either to his Majesty's Mother or
himself? but that he would take any occasion to regorge his malice against our
Gracious Sovereign. But hereby it may please his Majesty to observe in this
passage of pretended Illegitimation urged against Queen Elizabeth (conferring
it with this last clause out of Dole-man) that they which under color of a
Statute, made (as it is well known) in King Henry's indignation and displeasure
conceived against her mother (though afterward repealed) do so often reiterate
it as to HER prejudice and disgrace, will not stick if occasion may serve for
them (either to vent their rancor, or wage their forces) to twit his Majesty
and his posterity (upon the advantage of this Act of ASSOCIATION, as he calls
it) with the like ^pprobrious calumny and in dignity: but his Majesty is wise
as an Angel of God, vt intelligat omnia supra terram. 2. Sam. 14.


36 His Challenge is the last (though thrust in before) Number. 32. wherein he
taxes the Apologer for his facility (...) ouerlashing, when he speaks of
Sau^ders and Bellarmine, in saying of the first, that his books are full of
parricidio^s doctrine against Princes; of the other, that his volumes are
filled with Contradictions? for Saunders, he appeals to a conceit of
improbable impossibility, that, there being so many of them, and of a diverse
argument, they should AL be filled with such Doctrine. What need Conjectures
when the Books are extant, which who so reads, shall find in them all, that
where this doctrine of Deposing, and Depriving; of Detbroning, and Decapitating
Princes, is canuassed, Vide lib. de M^ar visi^. and de cl^. D^.
he is in no theme so vehement and large as therein. A^ therefore in compounds
and mixtures, the rule of Philosophy, and practice of Art, is, to denominate
things according to the quality which does predominate in them; Aristot. de
generat. and corrup.
so this doctrine in all Saunders his Books, being the most prominent (as most
principally intended, and most fully handled) may justly give the name to all
the rest of the Discourse whatsoever. But this being his Majesty's second
proof, that Popes do manifestly approve of Princes murders, or else they
would not suffer Saunders his books (that are filled with such Rebellious and
Parricidious doctrine) to be by authority diuulged, and neither call them in,
nor purge them thereof, the Censurer labors not one whit to disprove it, but
from Saunders he steps to Bellarmine.

37 Over whom, as if the Cardinal were gasping for breath, under the blow he
has received for his Contradictions, after the Epistler has a while brau'd it
with some Rhetorical flourishes, as, I cannot but marvel, etc.and, I am
ashamed for my Countries sake, etc.(he means, that his Country is ashamed of
him) and, If my judgment deceive me not, etc. and, Though I mean not to
discuss, etc. with diverse such round-abouts; at last, of the eleven wounds by
Contradiction which were given the Cardinal, he takes upon him (as Surgeon
of the Camp) to cure 3. or 4. of them: and first he begins with that of
Confidence in good Works, Numb. 35 etc.

38 The crossing Proposition in Bellarmine is this; For the UNCERTAINTY of our
own Righteousness, De Iusti^ic. li. 5. cap 7.
and the peril of vain^glory, the SAFEST course is to repose our WHOLE
confidence in the ALONE mercy and bounty of God; and this, says his Majesty,
is a conclusion Contradictorie to his whole five Books of Justification. This
the Epistler endeavors to cure two ways; first, by thinking it strange, that
FIVE Books should be Contradictorie to ONE Proposition. He should rather
have thought it to be a very strange conclusion, which in so small a roomth,
should have matter to cross a discourse so large; as that is a strange poison,
one scruple whereof infect's a whole river; and that Engine of Archimedes, a
very strange instrument, which being but of a little compass, Plutar. Marcel.
with one wrest by a small force, would overthrow muniments and Bulwarks of
many days work, and the royal strength of an whole Army: so THIS, a very
strange proposition, which is of such force, as that it contradicts so many
preceding reasons advanced to the contrary; and that it is so, is manifest. For
the chief and maine scope of al those Books is to prove, that the
righteousness wherewith we are justified and for which we shall be rewarded is
both VERA, true justice, and inherent in us; and also PERFECTA, able to stand
and abide the trial of Gods judgment; for to these two principal heads may
all the ^hief questions in that bulk of controversy be reduced; e^ther to the
quality of our justice, that it is inherent, not imputative, or of the merit,
whether it be rewarded for the value of the work, or of mere grace? And both
these, by the first word of this Proposition, are directly cut off, for the
uncertainty there mentioned, is either Rei, or Personae, either of the
righteousness it self, or of him which has it: If of the thing it self,
then is it no true righteousness; for truth, whether of essence or propriety,
cassieres all uncertainty; and it is hypocrisy, not righteousness, which is
not true, if not righteousness, then not inherent. If it be of the Person,
then the second part is cut off; for Merit raises a Considence, but where
there is no Comfort, there can be no Confidence, and in uncertainty there is
no Comfort; for reliance on that whereof a man doubts, causes rather a fear
to be deceived, then a confidence to be relieved; which also crosses the very
next precede^t proposition, Bellarmin. Eodem capite.
that SOME Confidence may be reposed in our own righteousness and good
works, if men be ASSVRED that they be good works: but by this proposition in
hand it seems none can be assured; if they may, why does he call it inc^r
titudinem iustitiae nostrae, the UNCERTAINTY of our righteousness? If they
may not, where is then their confidence, or how may they settle it? If some
may, and others not, he should have described and distinguished them; or else
that foregoing proposition might well have bin spared, which affoords little
use, and less comfort; and in that regard, is directly opposite to this last
which is full of confidence and consolation; and is the very same which the
Prophet David, renouncing all other helps and hopes, (both in heaven and
earth; in heart or flesh) pronounced Psalm. 73.
of himself with joy, Mihi autem adhaerere Deo bonum est, etc. It is good for
me to cleave fast to God, and to put my trust in the Lord God. So that any
Scholar may see this his Majesty's assertiue challenge, to be defensible in
the nature of a true Contradiction, howsoever this Epistl^r p^remptorily denies
it to be possi^le; for that it is the first property of a Contradiction, to
be omnium oppositorum fortissi^, the most forcible of all oppositions: and
where is greater force seen, then that a Proposition of three lines should
overthrow the maine strength of sieve long Books?

39 See we then, if his second Cure be more Souereign; in appearance it should
be, the Emplaster applied is so large: for as before in the Council of Toledo,
so here he comes about, and fetches in a whole chapter out of Bellarmine, by
Questions, and Solutions, but neither faithfully for the contents of the
Chapter, nor soundly for the defense of his Master, nor sincerely for
satisfaction of the Reader. For first, whereas he says, Number. 38. that the
Chapter consists of three Questions, about Confidence to be placed in good
works, it is not so: there is but one only Question propounded in the rubric
or title, and in that Chapter discussed, namely, QVATENVS, HOW FAR FORTH a
man may place confidence in his Merits: Which he explaneth by three
Propositions, that may very fitly be compared unto the three fatal Sisters
Clotho. Lachesis. Atropos.
which they call Eumenidas, the last cutting off what the first carries, and the
second twists.

40. The first Proposition is, that the confidence toward God, which is in
holy men, arises not out of faith alone, but out of their own good works and
merits also. The second, that in good merits, which are TRVELY known so to
be, SOME confidence may be placed, if pride be avoided. The third (which is
the Atropos, and cuts off in a trice, the whole labor of the two former) is
this crossing Proposition, by reason of the vacertainty of our own
righteousness, and hazard of vainglory, it is most safe to repose our WHOLE
Confidence in the ALONE mercy and bounty of God; then which there cannot be any
thing more violently contradicting, yea totally euerting the very principal
question: For Quatenus implies that SOME confidence may be placed in merit,
but with a limitation tenus qua; this last admits no confining, but draws our
WHOLE confidence from man's merit to Gods mercy ALONE, and carries with it a
double contradiction, both Subiecti and Obiecti (so to speak.) The Subject,
TOTA fidu^ia, Man's WHOLE confidence, this excludes all partition in it self:
it must be entire, take it either as totum quantitatis, because Confidence may
be extended or remitted, be greater or less; or as totum rationis, as it is
defined, an hope corroborate Aquinas
and perfect; or as totum potentiale, seu virtutis, Confidence of this or that
nature and quality, as Bellarmine himself describes it in the two first
Propositio^s, whether nata ex meritis, raised out of our good works, or
reposita Eodem capite
in meritis, reposed in our good works, tota, THE WHOLE, says the Cardinal,
whether greater or less; whether weak or strong, whether one or other, is
WHOLLY to be cast on Gods mercy. Even as our Savior when he commands us to love
God with our Whole soul heart, and strength, includes therein all the faculties
of Matthew. 22.
soul and body, parts inward of understanding, will, affection, etc. and parts
outward, all the members of our Romans ^2. (...).
body to be made S. Paul's WHOLE burnt sacrifice; because God, though he love
Cor contritum, a broken heart, Psalm. 51. ^7.
torn with sorrow, yet he cannot abide Cor diuisum a cloven heart parted
within it self, which may make a Ose. 12. 2.
man to be (as S. James calls him) (...) a man with two souls: which Saint
August: also implies in that his short (but effectual) prayer, To TVM meum
absumat ignis tuus, let the fire of thy spirit consume me WHOLE; In Psalm.
wherein he exempts no part nor faculty of himself, from that sanctifying
and clensing power.

41 The Object also affords a strong Contradiction, SO LA misericordia, mercy
ALONE; which, being (as Aquin. 1. q. 31. 3. Aristo. Elench. lib. 2 cap. 3.
Mat. 4. 10.
Schoolmen observe) an exclusive speech, admits no participation with any
other; for SOLVM est, quod cum alio non est. The very force of which word, put
the Tempter to silence and to flight also, Ei Soli, him ONLY shall thou serve.
Had the Cardinal said in the first place, man's Confidence must or may be
reposed in his own MERITS and afterward subioyned, man's Confidence must or
may be placed in Gods MERCY, these had not bin contradictorie but
communicatiue; merit might have parted stakes with mercy: but when he adds in
mercy ALONE; merit, and Saints, and Angels, and whatsoever beside, are
abandoned and Cassiered for Solum admits no consort, says Aquinas. Which Vbi
supra.
made David to profess directly, Memorabor iustitiae tuae SOLIVS, I will
remember thy righteousness ONLY; and Psalm. 70. 16.
Saint August. to insist upon the same, both with an admiration, o SOLIVS, and
also with a question, Rogovos: I pray Aug. ibid.
you, why should he add this word SOLIVS: had it not bin enough for him to
say, I will remember thy Righteousness? No, but SOLIVS prorsus, it ALONE
altogether I will remember. Why so? Vbi meam non cogito, for in so saying I put
out of my mind any righteousness which is mine own. So then, TOTVM, WHOLE
confidence, that takes away the particular ALIQVA, in his former proposition;
SOLA excludes MERITVM in both propositions.

42 What is then the cause of this Epistler his confidence, to say that it
cannot be any way defensible in the nature of a TRVE CONTRADICTION? Ignorance I
think, which is the Mother (in the opinion of Fathers and Philosophers) of
audacious assertions and undertakings. HE perhaps, thinks there is no
contradiction, but where Nazian. Thucyd. and Plutarch.
an universal (if negative) is crossed with a particular affirmative; as thus,
No Jesuit is a Traitor, Some Jesuit (as Parsons by name) is a Traitor: (if
affirmative) with a particular negative; as thus, All Jesuits are
Machiauel^sts, Some Jesuit is not a Machiauel^st. Whereas in Loguke we find
two manner of contradictions; one expressed, the other employed, and both of
equal force: the first, Logician^ calla contradiction in negato; the other, in
apposito ^el adiecto; of the first sort, are those examples aforenamed, wherein
the negative note is expressed, as Omnis est; Aliquis non est: of the second
sort are such as this in hand, where the note negative is omitted, and yet one
member overthrows an other. Take an instance which will please the Cardinal
well; let the proposition be, Every Bishope of Rome is (under Christ) the
immediate and sole chief 'Pastor of the whole Church in the Christian world;
this may be contradicted two ways; first, expressly, Some Bishop of Rome is not
the immedi ate and sole chief Pastor, etc. This is a contradictory with the
negative: Secondly, it may be crossed by implication, as thus, the Patriarch
of Constantinople is under Christ, the immediate and sole chief Pastor of the
Eastern Church; this though it be a Contradictio^ in apposito, yet does it as
mainly oppose the former general proposition as if it had a negative note; and
Bellarmine would take it so, and as much derogatorie to the High Priest of Rome
as the other; yea more, for there is in this a double contradiction, both
Subiecti and Praedicati: The Patriarch of Constantinople crosses the Bishop of
Rome, the Eastern Church and the whole world contradict each other implicitly.

43 And this is our very case in hand; had the Cardinal said, MAN'S WHOLE
confidence is to be reposed in the ALONE mercy of God; and cro'st it with an
other, thus: SOME confidence of man must NOT be placed in Gods mercy ALONE,
this had been a manifest negative contradiction: but uttering it thus: SOME
confidence of a man must be placed in his OWN MERITS, though it do not so
Negatiuely confront the former, it does as powerfully overthwart it, and as
thoroughly overthrow it: take them then severally; WHOLE by it self, and ALONE
by it self, the contradiction is irreconcilable: join them together, the
jar and dissonance is redoubled; for TOTA admits no partial distribution in
it self, and SOLA reiects all consorting participation with another. Therefore
his Majesty's observation was justly made, and Logike confirms it to be a
violent contradiction; for these two propositions, Man's WHOLE confidence is to
be placed in Gods mercy ALONE, and SOME confidence is to be reposed in MAN'S
MERIT, will no more agree (as being most opposite) then a new piece with an
old garment, which our Savior says to be an incongruous impossibility. Mat.
9.


44 And thus stands Bellarmines case in it self, but his Proctor the Epistler
has made it worse: for he, supposing the Cardinal to handle the controversy
by questions and answers (whereby it seems he never read the place himself)
sums up the Chapter by way of interrogation, and Solution, and makes
Bellarmine, first to say, That good works in a Christian man, joined with the
promise of reward, do IN THEIR OWN NATVRE increase hope and confidence; there
being in the whole chapter no such thing. The Cardinals first proposition is,
the considence which a Christian has toward God, is not raised by Faith
only, but also by the good works which he does; for no Divine (either
Protestant or Papist) will say, that good works increase considence IN THEIR
OWN NATVRE, that opinion of a recent, but nameles Doctor, was condemned long
since by the Bull of Pius Quintus, as Bellarmine De Iustific. lib. 5. cap. ^2
reports; which causes him often in those books of Justification, to
distinguish between good works and merits, because all good works are not
meritorious, Si enim considerentur, ex NATVRA SVA, for if in THEIR OWN NATVRE
they should be considered, without respect both of the promise made unto them,
and also of the dignuie PRINCIPII OPERANTIS, of Gods spirit, the original
worker of them, they could carry NO MERIT with them, says he, therefore by
necessary consequent no considence could be raised by them, nor comfort taken
in them Of their own nature.

45 Secondly, he makes Bellarmine to assoile another question thus A man may
place ANY confidence WITTINGLY in his own merits, so he beware of Pride. The
Cardinal says not so; but his second proposition is limited both in subject
and predicate, that SOME confidence may be placed in a man's good merits, if he
be SVRE that they be TRVELY SVCH. For man is a self-louing creature, and
because that affection interprets the own actions partially, confidence may be
wrongly placed, if the goodness of the Act be not thoroughly discerned and
assured: the want whereof condemned the Pharisees, supposing his works to be
just, which were not so; but the knowledge Luc. 18. Job. 9.
thereof made Job to pronounce of himself verebar omnia opera mea, I feared
ALL my Works: and good reason says Gregory, because the best works have
attending on them, Grego. Moral. 9. cap. 26.
two worms, which gaster and infect the goodness of them, Defidiam and
Frandem, Sloth and Deceit; either negligence in them, or pride of them, or
some corrupt affection mingled with them.

46 Now then join the last proposition of the Cardinals (from whence this
debate arises) with these of the Censurers, and see how he will make them hang
together: First, our own good works have such AN UNCERTAINTIE in them, as
that our WHOLE confidence must be referred to Gods mercy, says the
Cardinal: Our good, works, IN THEIR OWN NATVRE, are such, as that they may
give hope and considence of THEMSELVES, says this Champion. Secondly, man's
WHOLE confidence is to be placed in the mercy of God ALONE, says Bellarmine:
A man may WITTINGLY repose ANY confidence in his own good works, says Fa.
Parsons. Between them both, they have broched a goodly Doctrine, and very
comfortable, no doubt: First, good works, of THEIR OWN NATVRE, may raise up
our confidence toward God, and yet a man is UNCERTAIN whether they be GOOD
or no: Secondly, man must be ASCERTINED that the works he does be TRVELY
GOOD, or else he may NOT trust in them: and yet no De Iustificat. li. 5. cap.
7. Explico. proposition De verlo Dei. lib. 1. cap. 2.
man can ASSVRE himself that they are SO, unless he have a REVELATION, says
the Cardinal: then which what is more UNCERTAIN? Sape fallax, semper incerta,
are his own words. For that which seems a Revelation, may be an illusion: and
as some superstitious people take that fire for a walking Spirit, which is but
Iguis fat^us, an illuding Meteor; so Pharisaicall and melancholic conceits,
may think them to be infusions of the Holy Ghost, which are but speculatiue
Imaginations of their own Ghost.

47 It was well done therefore of the Cardinal, to add this last Proposition,
though it overthrow all his precedent Doctrine, whereby he leads men to the
nearest and safest way, the alone mercy of God, oblitos meritorum
praeteritorum, forgetting all their bypast merits; rather then to let the
former stand uncontrolled, to procure despair to distressed souls, as needs
it must: and better were it for the Cardinal to acknowledgan oversight in a
long discourse, then to overthrow one souleredeemed by Christ's blood.
Contradictio^ in assertions wounds but one opposite member; but unsoundness in
doctrine, concerning Salvation, does wound the weak conscience of a Christian;
that may be amended by repeal, retracting it; but a wounded Spirit, who can
bear it, says Solomon? And if the wound of the Soul cause violence to the
Body, who can recall it? And nothing sooner Prou. 8. 5.
causes it, then a wavering UNCERTAINTY for aff^ance in the particular case of
a man's own state touching his Salvation.

48. The Courteous Reader will pardon the length of this Discourse, by reason
that the Censurer sets up his Crest and Rest upon it; that if in THIS there be
any CONTRADICTION, he will yield, that the Apologer has not OVERLASHED in the
other, Let the impartial trial be the severe Judge either way: and so we
come to the Second.

49. Where the Cardinal says in one and the same Chapter, that God does not
incline a man to evil, either naturally or MORALLY; and yet again, that God
inclines a man to evil MORALLY; which is a manifest contradiction; De amiss
grat^e. and stat^ p^. cat^. lib. 2. cap. 13.
even that by the Logicians called Contradictoria in negato, an affirmative
crossing a negative in the same subject and predicate. This Antilogie the
Antapologer, Numb. 41, would salve by a figure in Grammar called Acyrologie,
and would scarre up the wound by an improprietie of speech; for that Morally in
the second proposition is taken improperly: which if the Cardinal meant, he
expresses not: and then (like a Sphinx) he propounds Riddles, he reads not
Lectures: but that it was not his meaning, is most plain; because what the
Epistler calls an IMPROPERLY moral inclining or commanding, is (as the
Cardinal sets it down) not subordinate to that which he before had simply
called MORALLY inclining; but membrum diuidens, a several member by it self,
distinguished and diverse from the former.

50. For thus Bellarmine makes his Division: All impelling or inclining others
to evil, is, first, either NATVRALLY, by ^ouing the will immediately; or
MORALLY, by truly and PROPERLY commanding: or else secondly, PERMISSIVELY, by
suffering an evil to be wrought, which is a TROPICALL kind of command: or
else, thirdly, DESERTIVELY, by leaving those open to the evil, which are
proposed and appointed to be ann^iea therewith: or fourthly, ORDINATIVELY,
which he takes from Hugo, by disposing the will of an evil man to this or
that Act; not positiuely, but by permission. From the first hoe exempts God
wholly, that he neither NATVRALLY nor MORALLY inclines; the three last may be
verified in him: to which he also adds (Super podij loco; as an ouer-weight) a
distinction out of Aquinas, His autem addipotest, etc. that Ia Romans 9.
if the other will not serve, God yet may be said to incline a man unto evil
OCCASIONALITER, indirectly and by occasion not naturally moving the will, but
MORALLIE immitting and senaing in some good thought, whereby the wicked man
takes an OCCASION to do this or that evil. If then the Cardinal, when he
spoke of MORALLY inclining, had sub-diuided it into MORALLY PROPER, and MORALLY
OCCASIONATE or IMPROPER, and had freed God from the first, but laid this last
upon him, then had the Apologer wro^ged him, and himself had not been so
wrung, as by his name (Tortus) it seems he is; but this he did not, nay, he
meant it not: for he makes truly and properly to be the difference
constitutiue of MORALLY inclining, as if otherwise it were not so to be
termed: for proprie makes it differ from the permissiue, which Bellarmine
himself says to be a figurative and IMPROPER inclining or Commandment:
whereby lie is also fallen into a gro^le absurdity in Logic confounding
members divided, and making disparatum dici de disparato.

51. Whosoever reads the place, even with partiality for the Cardinals credit, may
thus perhaps explain the Cardinals sense (and the Epistler slutters about it)
that God does not MORALLY incline man to evil in GENERAL, but to do THIS
evil rather then THAT, he does MORALLY incline the will; not as Author of the
corruption, but disposer of the order. For example, that Clemens the Monk
should rather stab a King, then poison the Pope (for the Priests say he left
that to the Jesuits;) which is as much, as if he should say; it is impiety and
blasphemy to auerre that God Morally incliues the will to murder in general,
but to murder Kings rather then ordinary men, or this King rather then an
other, God does Morally incline: (the Doctrine we examine not; we are now to
try Contradictions, not to handle Controversies) this, I say, may expound the
Cardinals meaning, but it no way reconciles the Contradictory propositions:
much less are they salued by the Censurers aduerbe Improperly; for whether in
the Order, or in the Matter of the evil, MORALLY inclining is that only (as
Bellarmine describes it, and was touched before) which is truly, properly, and
directly: and yet, lest the Cardinal should seem thus to distinguish without
his Author (as he does indeed) he cunningly thrusts in Moraliter, and ioines
it in Aquinas his speech (who has no such word in that place) with
Occasionaliter; which two will as well agree together, as Moses his Ox and
Ass in one yoke. Deuteronomy. 22. 10.


52. The third and fourth follow, which the Epistler crowds up together in one
Numb. 44. the first, That Bishops do succeed the Apostles, and yet Bishops do
not properly succeed the Apostles; and least any should think that this
Bellar. de cler. lib. 1. cap. 14. De Romans Pontif. li. 4. ca. 25.
is no Antilogy because in the last proposition the Aduerbe [properly]
qualifieth it, the Cardinal himself has in the very next precedent Chapter
prevented that, where he says, that Bishops do PROPERLY succeed the
Apostles: then which, what more strong counter-shock can De cler. lib. (...).
cap. 13. est tamen.
there be between any two? notwithstanding, this Epistler thinks he has
broken the force thereof with a Distinction namely, That they succeed in power
of Episcopal Order, but NOT of JURISDICTION; and the Judges thereof he makes
the Places quoted: which either this Censurer never read, or if he did, the
Poet gives him Horace.
good Council Nauiget Anticyras, for sure his brain wants purging.

53 The controversy canuazed in that Chapter which has the affirmative
proposition is, Whether Bishops and Priests be equal or no? that they are
not, but that Bishops are Superior unto them, Bellarmine shows three ways.
First, in respect of order; Secondly, of Jurisdiction; Thirdly, of the
principality and precedencie in all ancient Sessions and assemblies of
Priests. Having ratified the first (for Episcopal ORDER) he comes to the
second, concerning their Superiority in IVRISDICTION, Quod ad secundum, etc.
For confirmation whereof, he brings his first argument from the Analogy and
pattern of the Priesthood in the old Testament; but the second reason he
fetches, is, for their power of Jurisdiction, out of the new Testament:
because they have THE SAME which the Apostles had, Nam episcopos Aposto lis
succedere, that Bishops do succed the Apostles THEREIN, is not one man's
testimony alone, but constanter docent omnes patres, says he, all the
Fathers do hold it with one consent, without varying in themselves, or
differing from others.

54 If he stand upon the other place where the negative is, there indeed the
Cardinal (driven to his shifts) is forced to coin this distinction (but how
unfortunately, he, whose name (though dead) like Zisca his Drum, is a Whitaker
de Romans Pontif. Qu. 8. Contro. 4.
terror to Bellarmine, does at large discuss:) but yet that salues not the
Contradiction, but makes it greater; for therein he shows that he manifestly
opposes both himself and all the Fathers: for in superiority of
Jurisdiction, Bishops (by the testimony of all the Fathers) succeed the
Apostles, as himself confesses, proves and approoueth in this place.

55 The fourth is concerning Judas; of whose qualities to discuss, whether he
were just before his Election, or made good by the choice, and how long he
countinued so; whether (as Tertullian says ad loculorum officium, till he was
made both Almosiner and Purueyor; or till he was exasperat by his Master for
repining at the expense; or Tertul. Brixicas. tract. 13. Hieron. contra. Pelag.
3. Cycil. (...) Ioa^. lib. 9 Ioh 17. 12. Ioh. 6. 70.
till the first entry of the treachery in his heart: it is but periculosa
questi^, as the Fathers well term it; nor that only, but curious and
frivolous. It is enough for so much as concerns his state, to know that the
Son of God called him the Child of Perdition; and that the Savior of the
world pronounced him a Diueli; and for our Document, both to admire in our
Lords choice his gracious kindness, Qui (...) apud nos Iudicium suum, quam as
sectum vol^it, That had rather appear to fail in his judgment, then in his
affection; and by his patience also in Judas his Ambros. in Luc.
salt, to learn and tollerat, Si de socio erret iudicium, and in cum pereat
beneficium, if in our choice of a consort either our judgment of him be
deceived, or our benefit toward him be miscarried to our own hurt. The
question is not about his condition, but whether this in Bellarmine be not a
Contradiction? that Judas BELIEVED NOT, and yet that Judas was VERE IVSTVS,
JUST and TRVELY GOOD.

56 If Just be taken in the larger sense, to name him, a righteous man, that
is so quo ad praesente^ Iusticia^, for the time Cyril. Ierosol. Catec Nazian.
etc. Arist. Eth. 2.
that he does some actions of a Just man (as somewrite that Judas did) the^ he
and Saul, and Cain, may be so called, and the co^tradiction will not be harsh;
for hypocrites and Infidels may do as much; yet the Philosopher in the light of
nature, will not admit, even that title to be given, unless a man do iusta
just, that his actions proceed from a good ground; and be directed to a good
end: but our Savior notwithstanding Matthew. 7. 23.
all their preaching, Devils casting, and miracles whatsoever, calls such Just
men plainly workers of iniquity; because all those without faith, are (as
Prosper speaks) falsa virtus in optimis moribus, the shining of Saint Paul's
Prosper^sen. August. 1 Cor. 3. Matthew. 7. 27.
Gould upon Saint Mathewes sand, making a glimmering show without sure ground.
But the joining of the aduerb vere, that he was TRVELY righteous, and CERTAINLY
good, and yet NOT believe, makes it a Contradiction incurable, because he cannot
be rectus (says Saint Bernard that is, VERE iustus, which diuides those two in
himself Cant. ser. 24.
at the same time.

57 For the works of a Christian must be Sacrifices of Righteousness, says
the Prophet; a Sacrifice it cannot be unless it be offered, says Chrysostom;
the oblation is by Psalm. 4.
action, which makes it acceptable to God and before men, says our Savior;
acceptable it cannot be except it be lively Chrysostom. in Romans 2. Mat. 5. Romans
12. Abac. 2.
says the Apostle, Faith gives it life: sever these two, Righteousness from
Faith, the Sacrifice is but munus mortuum, a dead present, take Faith from it,
it is but Corpus exanime a breathless lump: non est profecto RECTVS, qui tam
NON RECTE diuidit, says Saint Bernard, he that offreth such a divided
sacrifice, had as good knetch a dog, says Vbi supra. Es. 66.
God by the Prophet: but Judas believed NOT says Bellarmine, there' ore he
could not be UERE iustus; for being without Faith he was without Christ, Et
quicquid in to est sine Christo, Satan est, says August: because without says
it is impossible to please God; and whatsoever is not of Faith In Iohannem.
Hebr. 11. Romans 14.
is Sin. All this the Epistler takes upon him to cure with a short and
present remedy, and that is, by Aequiuocation of Times, for in THE BEGINNING
(says he) Judas BELIEVED, and then he was TRVELIE good; but after that, he
fell both from Faith and goodness.

58 Yet well fare an old acquaintance, a friend at need; Aequiuocation has a
faculty to make treachery and perjury appear no vices; Judas and Jesuits
to be honest men: but yet he that will make a concord of a iarr by
distinguishing times, should particularize the difference into their se uerall
seasons: which the Epistler did well to omit, because he could not do it. For
though it be but a coniecturall calculation what in that time should be spoken
(there being no direct place of Scripture for it) yet to justify his Evasion,
he should have taken that course, or have sought some other remedy. But if
Scripture might determine, it is probable rather, that Judas NEVER believed,
and take no other but that very place which Bellarmine quotes, for the time of
his vn-beleefe, namely when Saint Peter made Mat. 16.
that confession, Thou art Christ etc. which was not long after our Savior had
begun to show himself by preaching and miracles unto the world: which because
it was new and fresh, it raised an admiration and extraordinary fame of him,
concerning which our Savior then made an inquiry with his Disciples, (for long
continuance of any thing, slakes the wonderment, and makes the wings of report
to flag) De Pontif. Romans li. 1. ca. 12.
yet even THEN Judas believed NOT, says the Cardinal: nay before that time
(as some in their H^rmonies do place it) when S. Peter in the name of the
rest, made that Ioh 6. 69.
profession, Nouimus and Credimus, WE know and believe that Ibid. ex Chrysostom.
thou art Christ the Son of the living God; the opinion of some Fathers is,
and Bellarmine approues it, that he spoke not then in the person of Judas, nor
that Judas his heart did agree with Saint Peter's word, nor gave his consent to
that nos Credimus.

59 When was then that BEGINNING wherein the Epistler says, Judas believed?
There is a place available (at least probable) for the contrary, that there
was no beginning of his Relief, for the Evangelist says, that Jesus knew Ioh.
6. 64.
from the BEGINNING which they were that BELIEVED NOT, and who should betray
him: which beginning take it either for Moses his Bereshith a beginning
temporal, Genesis 1
the Incarnation of our Savior; or Saint John's in Principio Ioh. 1. In Joan.
6. Mat. 4.
his beginning without beginning: (for Tolet referres it both ways) or Saint
Mathewes exi^de when our Savior began to preach and chose his Disciples, he
then at all these times knew who believed not, and who should betray him: the
not believing he puts in the present tense (as if he should say, he then knew
who did not presently believe, not who should or would not believe) and this
he imputes to all the flinchers that forsook him; but upon Judas he lays a
double load, both of a present incredulity, and of a future Treason: and both
these he knew to be the beginning, scil. that Judas did not believe, and that
he would betray. Yea, it seems that Judas believed rather in the END then in
the beginning; for^, with the Halter in his hand he confessed more then when
he had the bag in keeping, namely that the blood which he had betrayed was
innocent and guiltless Mat. 27. 4.
blood. If the Censurer had had but the shadow of such a place for Judas his
belief in the beginning, we should have heard of it with a Triumph, as of
Nicholas Deaconship, and Saint Paul's conversion.

60 But grant it true that he did believe at the first; was his faith FORMATA,
that which is formed by grace, and works by love, and is the true life of a
just man (Iustus ex fide viuit?) surely in him which has that, says Aquinas,
Abac. 2. In Romans 14.
nihil inest Damnationis, for being once had, it cannot be totally and finally
lost; nor is it more separable from him, then the essential form of any thing
from the subject which it denominates. Was it fides INFORMIS a general
apprehension, an Historical Faith? (as it was indeed) that could not
denominate him to be a Just man, much less VERE Iustum; for such a Faith is
common both to unjust Hypocrites, and unjustified Reprobates, and in sound
Divinity NO Faith at all.

61 And so much for the Contradictions; for here the Censurer thought good to
leave with his fellow Judas; transmitting that of Antichrist to the Cardinal
himself, with the rest of the Antilogies. The wisest part that ever he plaide,
for these are no matters of State; but being points of learning (and so out of
his element) he is weary of them. Yet, least he should seem to do it for want
of skill, he gives a double reason thereof: First, That he should WRONG the
Cardinal; it is very likely, for if Bellarmine can understand what great pains,
and little ski^l this Emperike (the Romans were wont to call such, Medicos
Parabolanos) a true Mountebank, has bestowed in Cod de. Episc. and Cler.
binding up his wounds, thus loosely and vnsauourly, he will take up the old
orison for ever after [a Medico indocto libera nos, etc. Secondly, that he
should wrong himself, that is as true also; no man knows what is in man better
then the spirit of man which is in him; and it is a point of wisdom to
discern, 1. Cor. 2.


-- quid valiant humeri, quid far recusent.
The Cuman creature strouted it a while in a Lions Horace.
skin, but feeling it too unwieldy for him, and how il it became Eras. Chili.
him, he cast it off with some shame, but for his ease. Father Parsons is wise,
and knows himself to be a more sit instrument to kindle Contentions in
States, then to reconcile contradictions for a Cardinal.

62 And therefore from his didacticall, we must now follow him to his
Historical skill. For, his Majesty, to give some answer to that Sarcasticall
objection of Bellarmine concerning that imputation of CAVSELES FEAR, for that
no Christian King is, or ever was afraid of the Pope, shows by diverse
instances (ancient and modern) what other Emperors and Kings have done, who in
fear of him have indecently stooped (whether voluntary by themselves, or
compulsiutly by means) to the Popes proud insolences. In citing whereof, this
Censurer says He finds such a deal of exaggerations, wrestings, additions,
and vnsincerities, that he is not able to refute them; and yet that he may
confute them, he begins at the wrong end first, scil. with the Example of King
Henry the fourth of France that now is.

63 (For this you must know to be Parsons vein, if it be matter of ancient
Story, whereof there are substantial Testimonies, by authority of Writers,
(their own specially) them he casts off, as the fellow in Athenaaeus did his
spectacles, these are too true for my false eyes: his Rhetorike cannot there
roll, to add, or deprave, or detort, or defalke, because he shall be espied:
but if it be a modern Pl^t.
story of any thing lately done, and that at Rome, then he cries with Cato
when he had got his sword (though therewith he killed himself) now I am mine
own man, and where I would be; wherein, if there be any thing that may touch
the Popes tyranny, all the excuses, blandishments, extenuations, and pretenses
that may be, are heaped together for the qualifying thereof; for he may safely
do it, in that there is no author extant to control him, and the
eyewitnesses at Rome must vnderpin any tale for the Apostolic credit.)

64 And that made him begin with this particular of the French King, whom his
Majesty (for a demonstration of his fear, in regard of the Pope) instanceth,
that to have the excommunication revoked, he suffered his Ambassador to be
WHIPPED at Rome for penance, Which the Epistler hooteth at for a manifest
untruth, and propounds is to be laughed at for a monstrous assertion, and which
will overthrow (in his Mathematical imagination) the PVNCTVALL sidelity of the
rest: for that there are eye witnesses, at Rome, which can testify that the
Ambassador was not WHIPPED with a Rod, but a white WAND was laid on his apparel
SOFTLY, in token of submitting himself to Ecclesiastical Discipline. Which
answer of his has more disgraced his Holy Master, then his Majesty's
assertion: for was it not for penance that the Ambassador was so ceremoniously
strooken? and is not penance the seuerest part of Ecclesiastical discipline?
veniam ad vos in virga was 1. Cor. 4. 21.
no sporting threat of the Apostle. If in a ROD there be Severity, wherein was
it showed? the end of Church Discipline (by Saint Paul's rule) is the very same
which Uegetius gives for war; Vt ad omnes METVS, ad paucos 1. Tim. 5. 20.
PAENA perueniat: that all which behold or hear of it may FEAR, and that some
may SMART. Who felt it here: De re militar. lib. 3. cap. 4.
the King himself at home, HE felt it not: his Ambassador had a wand SOFTLY
laid on, that smarted not. To give Offices by White wands, is an ancient
ceremony in great states; and to hold a White rod in the hand before the
Congregation, as old a ceremony in penance: but that the rod of
ecclesiastical Discipline, should be turn^d into a White wand SOFTLI laid on
(as if l^ke Moses staff it might be a Serpent when he list, and a a rod when
he would) that is such a Metamorphosis as Exodus 4.
neither primative Church, or ancient father ever dreamed of.

65 But hereby a man may conjecture what the selfewhipping of the Jesuits and
Romanists is; for they which (...) so tenderly kind unto then public
offenders, such as will stand out to excommunication; will they not say to
themselves, when they have the whip in their hands, as Saint Peter to his
Master, parce tibi be good to your self, Sir; Mat. 6. Ep^. c. 5 29.
for no man ever yet hated his own flesh, but nourished it? which is a better
place of Scripture against selfe-whipping, than the Pope has any for turning
the Rod of Correction, into a wand of Ceremony.

66. His Majesty therefore did the Church of Rome more credit than it
deserves, in calling it Whipping, which is the original and true form of
Displing, whereof the wand is but a ^ymbole: for who would think that the Pope,
and a Conclaue durst dally with Church discipline, and make a mockery in a
dumb show of Ecclesiastical penance! and which adds to the sport, that
Penance should be performed by a Proxy; which makes it a more ridiculous jest,
then that Assertion of his Majesty to call it whipping In Temporal affairs,
for message or imploiment, Kings are to have their Ambassadors, to whom what
honor is done, or disgrace offered, the Kings in person do take it as done unto
themselves: but that they should have Ambassadors to be displed for their
Masters offenses (as they use to tame Lions, Plin^at. hist.
by whipping Mastiues,; or to chastise Kings children, by correcting their
play-fellowes) is a childish act, and the ready way to weaken the strongest
Sinew of the Church, and to bring all Religion into Contempt.

67. But were it Wand or Rods; lashing hard, or laying on soft; the name
which his majesty gives of Whipping, is justifiable: for to call a figurative
presentation by the proper term of that which it expresses, is neither
absurd, untrue, or unusual, either in humane or divine learning; Significa^a
and significat^ ijsdem vocabulis censentur, says S. Cypria. de unction.
Chrism. Exo. 7. 12.
Cyprian. Moses called Aarons Rod, while it was a Serpent, and then devouring
the rest, by the name of a Rod, and not of a Serpent; and (which sits this
Tragicomicall play best) the Poets, bringing Hercules upon the stage, do call
that which he has upon his shoulder, and is but a light compound of painted
cloth and reed, by the name of his Clab, and describe it for the weight,
compass, and stiffness thereof: so also this assertion, that the sending of
his Ambassador to be thus handled in his stead, argued THAT Kings fear and the
Popes tyranny, is PVNCTVALLY, lineally, and in all dimensions true, though the
Penance were played but superficially. For that which drove the King to that
submission, was nothing else, but fear of those usual Earthquakes, which
concomitate the Popes Thunderbolts, and are the concurrent Meteors of the
Romish Region either his Subjects Revolt, or populous Tumults, or intestine
Insurrections, or defeizances of Succession, or personal Assault (whereof
Bariere gave him some taste, and Chastile another, as the Priests declare at
large.) Catechism. Jesuit. li. 3. cap 3. and 6.


68 Neither was the Popes ouer-awing Surquedry any whit the less, that the
smarting rod or whip was turned into a wand, or ijrking into stroaking (a
change which French Crowns might easily make) no more then Galba his cruelty,
when, being entreated for a Gentleman condemned, Sueton in Galba. cap. 4.
that he might not die the death of ordinary Male factors, he willed that the
Gallows should be dealbata, whited and colored for him, quasi solacio and
honor aliquo poenam le^aturus, as if the painted Gibbet might add solace and
honor to his death Neither does it allay the fearful submission of the King
any more, then if a Magistrate of a Corporation, who for some great offense is
inioined (and all his Successors) to take their Oath with an halter about their
necks, in token of their submission, should obtain the favor to have the
Rope changed into a Ribben; the silken lace shows their servile homage, no
less then the hen penhalter. For the principal end of Discipline is SHAME,
the smart is not so much; and that was as great and as famous by the wand laid
on, as if it had been the Iash of Rods: yea more terror would it have stricken
into Christian Princes (since they will needs stoop to such indignities, and
debase that threefold Image of God in them; in their birth, of freedom; in
their baptism, of Christianity; in their place, of Souereignty) and more
credit for the Popes discipline to have it done in the right kind, and upon
the offenders own body; for the Kings of Israel and Nineue did the penance
themselves: and more wisely had this Censurer and his Master Tortus done, to
have let his Majesty's word of whipping pass uncontrolled, that the world
might have known, that the Pope will not suffer the contempt of his fearful
Anathema to be redeemed so easily (I will not say so cheap) with the tap of a
Wand, upon another man's cloak that never offended. But hereby Christians may
see, that in Rome, as the Sacraments, so the Discipline is made but a mere
pageant; they to allure the senses of carnal men, this to fill the Treasury of
an insatiable Priest: both of them to establish the monarchy of an
oultrecuidant Pope.

69 But be it as it was, whether a Mummery or a Penalty, his Majesty's
assertion is true, that the Pope drove the King into that fear, which made him
send his Pr^e to Rome, there to be displed for him. If the Pope commuted for
gold, that neither qualifieth his Tyrannies, nor the French Kings fearful
submission: for it was as much on either side, sin the cause of King Henry the
Second of England, who (...) the very smart and rods upon his bare skin in
the Church of Canterbury; which is the last, but two, of the (...)* that his
Majesty gives, and the second in order (...) (...) encountering Cersurer
insists upon: (for of the (...) King his great Grandfather (...) by the Pope of
half the Kingdom of Nauar (which is the next upward in the Apology) therein
he is hush't.)

70 From which ijrking Penance this Epistler would feign rid the Pope; first,
by Houedens authority, who shows the contrary: and secondly, by Baronius
(cited aright for the Author, but not quoted truly for the year) Baronius,
Arr^ 1174.
who resutes it as a fraudulent narration: both of them arguing it to be the
Kings VOLVNTARIE CHOICE. So then, of the Kings Body (sacred by holy unction)
that it was whip't by the Clergy there assembled, with 40. strips H^ueder.
Matthew. Paris. I^end. Angl. Nubrige^. etc. Ba. Vbi supra. 2. Cor. ^1.
more or less, there is no question, so many Stories concur therein and
accord; and Baronius himself (out of diverse) confesses and commends the same,
comparing the lashes with the Apostles stripes, mentioned by S. Paul himself,
and avouches out of one Author, that they were above 80. But whether the
Penance were Uolantarie, or enjoined the King, who makes the question? His
Majesty moved it not neither says any such thing; only repeates the Fact:
and yet had he so said, there are great probabilities to confirm it; for the
Cardinals, who were sent from the Pope to examine the murder of the
Archbishop, besides THAT Iniunction which is in the Charter of Absolution (as
the Censurer calls it) commanded him other Penances, not there specified.
Genebrard insinuates so much, when he says, Iniunctum est, INTER CAETERA,
Anno. 1174.
specie pae^itentiae, etc. It was enioy^ed vato them, in token, or for the
manner of his Penance, this, among OTHER THINGS; what were they? quae
adcommun^m aud^ntiam non peruenerunt, which came not to PVBLIKE notice, In vita
Thom. lib. 4. cap. 5. In Alexand. (...).
says he that writes Beckets life: After the Kings humble promise for penance,
says Platina, additum est, it was ADDED moreover, that he should do this or
that; it seems the Iniunction went first for his Corporal Penance, and the
addition followed for Romes satisfaction. But the Legend of England, if it have
credit (he was a Papist sure that wrote it) says, that, over and beside those
publicly noted, the Legates privily enioined him fasting and Alms, and OTHER
certain things; and that the Kings answer was to them, Legend. Angl. fol.
292. de S. Thom. Cant.
Ecce Domini Legati, CORPUS meum in manu vestra est: Lo Lords Legates, my BODY
is in your hands, whatsoever you INIOINE, I am ready to perform it: or, as an
other reports it, who lived in those times (whom Baronius cites and approues
therein) the Kings answer was thus, Disciplinam Neubrigens. lib. 2. cap. 25.
non recuso Christianam, I refuse no Christian Discipline, decernite quod
placuer it, deuote ampl^ctar, exequar que DECRETVM, I will devoutly embrace and
perform that you DCREE.

71 Yet his Majesty charged not the Pope thus far: but showed that the cause
of this dei^ction was the Kings fear of the Pope; wherein the most Authors
concur. For the Pope was so enraged against the King about the death of
Becket (that most unthankful Prelate, wholly made, and raised only by the
Kings grace) that when the king had sent his Ambassadors to Rome to clear him
of the guilt, either by command of it, or consent to it, the Pope would not
admit them to his Kiss, not to his Feet, not to Mat. Paris. in Hen. 2
his Sight: and being sent the second time, the Cardinals enterteined them with
words only, no other welcome; but so far they were from being admitted to the
Popes audience, that he was determined (having the consent of some Cardinals)
upon Maundy-Thursday, then at hand, to have ACCVRSED the King by name at the
high Altar, and to have interdicted his Realm, had not some other Cardinals
assured the Pope, that those Ambassadors were sent of purpose to take an Oath,
both to clear the King their Master from that murder, and also to signify
that he would obey whatsoever the Pope and his Cardinals should enioine him:
which notwithstanding the Pope was so far from believing, vt etiam contra at
que illi dixerint, that, being Polydor Virg. in Hen. 2.
persuaded that all things were clean contrary to that which they auowed, he
sent his Legates into Normandy, with full authority both for examination of the
Fact, and mandate of Satisfaction by penance. This was all that his Majesty
intended, and which he undertook to specify; that it was the fear of the
Popes Interdiction, that made the King thus to stoop, and deiect himself:
which because the Censurer could not control, he frames a Question where none
needs, Whether the Pope INIOINED the WHIPPING Penance, yea or no?

72 For the third Example of the Emperors lying agroofe upon his belly, and
the Pope treading on his neck, without further answer (and for his own ease) he
remits us to Baronius (as in the Contradictions he put us off to Tortus, for
these are his two Oracles; Baronius is his Phoebus for Story, and Bellarmine
his Apollo for Doctrine) who by many reasons and authorities has refuted this,
as he says,

73 -- aut me PHOEBI cortina fefellit, he should Iuuenal. Anno. 1177.
have said for Baronius brings not one authority to confute it, nor any reason
to discredit it. He takes, indeed, a great deal of pains, to set down the
whole proceedings with the circumstances, in that conclusion of peace between
the Emperor and the Pope at Uenice, out of an Author chosen to his own humor
(if there be any such) for it is out of a Manu-script in the Popes Library, of
one Ronwaldus, not yet extant in view, and, for ought is known, may as well be
forged as true. And is not this good dealing, when there are so many authors of
credit in print to auow the Story, one Manu-script, uncouth, obscure Writer must
encounter the credit of them all cited by Baronius (a very sincere Relator, no
doubt) to salve the reputatio of his Masters Holiness? Stapleton insults upon
Doctor Whitakers, for citing a Manu-script, and calls him (even for that) a
Barbarous Divine, and seems to be eagerly Author. Eccles. desens. lib. 3.
cap. 19.
angry with any that take that course. But why should not Bessarion a Cardinal
carry as much authority, who avouches the same, and has for his warrant (as
Baronius confesses) ancient Monuments? Vbi supra.


74. Yet welfare B^us, in that he professes he knows no more but ONE
Author, that is, Nauclerus, C^l. tom. 3. p^s altera, pa. 1345.
which writes this Story; but thereby to infer such a necessity of
fabulositie upon the report, as he does, shows him to be more peremptory and
partial, then judicious and learned: since that (besides Nauclerus) there are
an heap of Witnesses in print, all concording in the truth thereof; as Petrus
Iustinianus, Philippus Bergomensis, Papirius Masonus, Alphonsus Cyacouius, etc.
and (of all other the most In Censur. Orient. an^ at. in cap. 13. sect. 6.
Psalm. 9^.
forcible) Gennadius the Patriarch of Constantinople, who does particularize
the Fact, with the manner of Conculcation, and the words there with uttered out
of the Psalm, Thou shall go upon the Lion and the Adder, etc. with the
Emperors answer thereunto, and the Popes reply upon it.

75 If exception be taken against HIM, as if of envy or malice he should
speak it (being of the Eastern Church) it is in that his Tractate, which of
purpose he made for the extolling and magnifying of the Popes Primacy,
diuulged, not by any Protestant Writer, but put into the Oriental Censure,
dedicated to Gregory the thirteenth, translated by Socolonius. with his
Annotations capitular, and Feuardentius his notes marginall; premised with this
reason of affixing Gennadius his testimony to that Book, vt and istorum
Socoloui. ibid.
(that is, the Protestants) and aliorum oculi confodiantur: and even in that
piercing Tractate, which should thus dig out their eyes that would abase the
Popes sublimitie, is this Story (with all the circumstances) alleged for the
adua^cing thereof. If HIS credit sway not, what say they to a Venetian
Historian, who wrote in Italian the full discourse Girolam. Bardi. victoria
Naual. impress. anno 1584. cum priuilegio.
of the Sea-sight between the State of Uenice, and Otho that Emperors son? a
partial Writer for the Pope, bitter against the Emperor, and a rank Catholic
(as Rome intitles Her Professors) who describes the manner of that
Conculcation, and recites the words uttered by both the parties, only differing
in the Popes alleging the text of the Psalm: for others repeating it (as in
the Scripture it sefe) in the second Person; THOU shall walk, etc. HE for the
Popes glory, makes him pronounce it in the First, Ambulabo, I shall or will
walk upon the Lion and the Adder. Notwithstanding all these, we must appeal
to Baronius; to whom if we should go for trial (let al things be impartially
weighed) the Relation of so many Authors will be more probable, then the
omission of that particular (by an obscure corner-creeping Relator, presented
like a Puppet to speak what his Prompter will have him; yet therein lies his
maine force of argument) will be available to the contrary.

76 For first, in his entry to that Narration, he much bewaileth the blending
and mingling together of truth and fallhood, by diverse Historians; and gives a
Caveat, that men should not be carried away Numero, but delectu testium, by
the number, but by the choice of witnesses, (a good warning, if followed by
himself, and in this very case:) but this argues that something appeared to
him in his reading about this matter, that did distaste him, as making little
for his Lord, the Popes commendation. Secondly, in his censure of the Story it
self his argmments are all (without wresting) easily retortible against him;
as first, Ronwaldus who was present at the Acts, and wrote the story, does
NOT MENTION it; a weak reason: for a narratiue discourse, is no forcible
confutation, and an omission of a circumstance by One single man, falsifieth
not the credit of many men's Relations; and to argue from authority negatiuely
is but a silly piece of Logike: three Evangelists omit the story of the
repenting thief, yet is Saint Lukes Luc.. 23.
narration, and the thief his conversion truly uncontrollable. Thirdly says
he, If the Pope had so done, it had been an action monstrous for the
vnseemclinesse, wonderful for the strangeness, singular for the Nouelty:
therefore the more beseeming and likely for the Pope, who, being THAT
Antichrist, exalts himself above all that is called God. Fourthly, that had
been the way to have exacerbated the Emperor, and driven him from penance,
says he. True, but rage expels discretion, and revenge admits not of religious
Cautions; the Pope was then thoroughly incensed* for having taken Uenice (in a
Cooks habit) for his refuge, and being thither pursued by the Emperor, and
having fast in custody the Emperors Son, who (contrary to his Fathers
Commandment) fighting before his time limited, was taken captive; it is most
probable, that (having gotten this start) by the Sons restraint, he would
handle the Father somewhat coursly, upon his former pursuits, and this present
advantage: as Hawks seize upon those fowls with most eagerness, which have
put them to the longest flight, and the oftnest retriues. For had not the
Emperor, upon the sons entreaty, and tendering his present state, yielded to
the peace, he must have returned a Childlesse Father. His fifth argument, which
is by admiration of Gods providence (for stabbing and trampling upon Kings is
al now referred to that lofty Commonplace) that could make so CRVELL
APERSECVTOR, who hadset up an Anti-pape thrice, and promulged DEADLY EDICTS
against the Popes authority, should be brought so LOW, as to hold the Popes
STIR-VP after the Reconciliation, makes it more likely that the Pope would
debase him yet more vilely in the very Act of his Submission. Sixtlie, his
Insultation upon the Emperor in those high terms and unsitting comparisons, do
make for the punctual truth of the Popes Conculcation: for if Baronius, being
but a Cardinal, a Story-writer, and a Library Keeper, cannot (without
indignation) pass his Censure of the Emperor, now dead 500. years since
almost, nor forbear to call him Tyrannical Persecutor, comparing him to
Pharaoh, to ^roaring Lion, and to Jobs Leuiathan (that is, in Gregory's moral,
the Devil) calling him the King over all the children An. 1160. n. 35.
of Pride; it is most probable, that the Pope himself, who felt the rigor of
the Emperors puissance, and was but newly stripp't of his Cooks apparel (not
at all from his choler and former terror) would, when he had him at his feet
(kissing and licking them, as Baronius himself confesses else where, and
triumphs in it) not stick to compare him to a Lion and a Basiliske, having a
Text (as he thought) fi^ for it. But that which he adds, of the Emperors
Revolt Ibid.
after Reconcilement, is an invincible demonstration, that either the former
Submission was forced and inuoluntary, and only in respect of his Sons
redemption: or that he was indeed (though for the time he suppressed it)
exasperate at the insolent Conculcation and usage of the Pope in the acting of
his penance.

77 And so much for that story, and Baronius too; unto whom the Censurer
remitting us, (if his authority be so irrefragable) it has wrought us this
benefit, that we shall abridge the next Instance which his Majesty brings, of
the Popes putting on, and striking off (with his foot) the Emperors Diadem at
his Coronation. For howsoever this silly Antapologer would glide it off,
because it has but two Testimonies, one borrowing it from the other (that's
more by one, then the Lybrary-Cardinal brought to confute the former stories)
yet Baronius assumes it for a truth, and graceth it with a Symbolical
Hieroglyphik, expressing what the Anno. 1191. sect. 10.
Pope should mean in doing so: but still all this makes for his Majesty's
purpose and argument, that both the Emperors did what they did, in awe and
fear of the Pope.

78 The next instance which his Majesty brings, is of Philip the Emperor,
elected against the Popes liking, in the minority of his Nephew Frederick the
second. And that the Pope liked him not, there are two proofs; first his proud
threate, that either HE would wear no Miter, or Philip should wear no Crown;
Secondly, that he set up Otho the Duke of Saxony against him, whom he abetted
in his pursuit, and crowned him after he had SLAIN Philip. This in two words,
breefely, but smartly the Epistler calls a MERE SLANDER, because not Otho
the Emperor, but another Otho of WHITLESPACK, a PRIVATE man, did SLAY him.
Mistaking of a person, where two of one name concur in the same story (if it
be not wilful may be censured for a negligence, but not improoued to a
Slander. And who so reads that history of Garboile caused by the Pope (for
therein all that write, consent) may easily be deceived in the two Othoes;
neither of them both being a private n a^ the one Duke of Saxony, the other a
Count Palatine, or (as Fascic. tempor. an. 1204.
some will have him) a Lantsgraue: both of them espoused to one and the same
Daughter of Philip, and each of them so near allied to her, that they could
neither of them Naucler. Genesis 41. 1208. Krantz. sax. lib. 7. cap. 29.
lawfully marry her: which circumstances considered, it is an easy matter to
mistake the word, ab Othonedolose interfectus, he was deceitfully SLAIN by
OTHO; and without attentive diligence, hard to say unto which of them both to
ascribe it.

79 But yet his Majesty is not so incurious in perusing stories, as to commit
even such a slip; for he did not say he was slain by Otho the Emperors
HANDS, but that Otho SLEW him; which may be referred to his means as well, or
rather then to his hands: even as when Eliah reproved Ahab about the death of
Naboth, and asked him with indignation, Have THOU SLAIN and also taken
possession? when as Ahab meddled not therein, 1. Reg. 21. 19.
further then consenting to his wives wicked plot, (if so far:) did the Prophet
thereby reprove him as the Actor or as the procurer thereof? And that it was
by Otho the Emperors underhand means (as things then stood) there are strong
presumptions: First, their hatred in pursuit each of other was for an Empire:
Secondly, it issued out into blood, and with open and often battles eagerly
followed, still with Otho his overthrow and disgrace. Thirdly, their
Reconciliation was but fresh and newly made; wherein, by Salomons rule, there
is not much trust to be reposed; for hatred Pro. 26. 25. (...)
(of an enemy reconciled) is easily covered by deceit, and his fair pretenses
do usually conceal Seven abominations: Fourthly, one condition in the peace
was, the continuing of the Empire unto Philip, DVRING HIS Sigonius de reg.
Iraliae. lib. 15. Anno. 1207.
LIFE; and such Tearmers are quickly dispatched; especially (which is the fifth
presumption) when the second condition was, that Otho should be his NEXT
successor: for hope deferred is an affliction to the Soul, says the wise
King; Pro. 13. 12.
and where there is but One life in the way to hinder from a Crown, the
afflicted soul will seek her ease, by what riddance soever, S^ violandum est
Ius, has too current a passage in every age, especially where Coronation and
Possession have preceded, and blood has been spilt for the keeping of it;
which was the case of Otho.

80 Add to these, that long after this new agreement, Philip was slain; and
what sitter instrument could Otho the Emperor use, then Otho the Palaine? for,
though Philip espoused his Daughter simply upon Otho his conditionate successor
(as a pledge for more assurance of his life and peace,) yet the Duke knowing
that by alliance he could not marry her, and assured that the Count (to whom
she was before betroathed) would be enraged at this Sl^ and mockage, took her
the rather for his spouse, as the mean^ to shorten her fathers life, and hasten
his own way to the Crown, by the PALATINES revenge, whereof he needed not
doubt, the nature of the man being so irefull and bloody, as all that write of
him do observe in him. For thus Otho saw he might be rid of two obstacl^s at
once Philip, that stood in his way for the Empire; and the Count also, whose
life must needs be an eyesore to him, as having a kind of interest in his
wife, before by promise as sured to him. And this may truly justify his
Majesty's assertion, that Otho the Emperor SLEW Philip; as King David did Uriah
by Treachery; though neither with his own hands, nor to the worlds knowledge;
and yet Nathan 2. Sam. 12: 9.
told the King that HE had slain him.

81 But not to let it pass so; there are not presumptions only, but
authorities also to confirm it. Nic. Cisnerus (who by his place in the State
had easy means to be acquainted with the Records of the Empire) in his
Tragical Orat. de Freder. Imperat.
History of Frederick the second, spares not to say, that, not long after
the peace was concluded mutually, What by the Pope, What by Otho, between them
BOTH Philip was murdered in his Chamber and Slain: If he may not pass for
current (being a modern writer) what HE says Conrad. a Lichtenaw.
he justifies by the testimony of an Abbot of Vr^erge, living at that time,
whose name being for a long while not known, his Annals were ascribed to him
whom we usually call Urspergensis, till the error was espied and amended, and
he directs Cisnerus to say as he does.

82 Yea, but the Author (says the Epistler) whom ONLY the Apologer cites,
is plain for his murder by the COUNT, not by the EMPEROVR. For the Count he
is plain; of the Emperor he says nothing. Silence omits the relation,
excuses not the guilt: neither does his Majesty cite him for IT, but for
that comminatorie speech of the Pope, that either he would loose his Miter or
Philip should loose his Crown. Urspergensis writes that but for a REPORT,
says the Epistler; no more did Cuspinian THAT, when he says, that Gregory the
seventh absolved Henry the fourth, before he died; and yet Parsons Numb. 29.
insisteth upon that (though but an Hearesay) as a strong argument to rid the
Pope from being reputed as a Persecutor of that Emperor.

83 But to this Report Urspergensis adds (quoth he) quod non est credendum,
which is not to be believed: that is not so; he says, that what he heard was an
hard thing to be related, and UIX credendum, SCARCELY WOULD be believed. But
does that excuse the Pope, or exempt him from so saying? yea rather, it does
exaggerate the Popes pride and malice, that would deliver such a speech, which
being written and TRVE, yet men would HARDLY believe it: (not that it is any
strange thing with Popes to utter words, and perpetrate facts, for their
Abomination, INCREDIBLE) (...) that reads that whole Chapter to the end [De
Gestis Philippi] shall find that the Abbots VIX credendum was not inserted as
suspecting a Apud. Vrsperg.
defect of truth in the REPORT; but to express the Hyperbolicall arrogance of
the Pope, as if HE were THAT God by whom Kings must reign or stoop at his
pleasure.

84 Neither does the Abbots relation only, but the Popes Acts also, verify
the report. For first, that he never loved Philip, in that ALL writers do
agree: Secondly, he deprived the Archbishop of Colen for Crowning him, and put
Bruno in his room: Thirdly, he denied to give any Archbishop Krantz. Saxon.
li. 7. ca. 15. 26.
the Pall, nisi OTHONI inhaereret, unless he would take OTHOES part against
Philip: Fourthly, when Philip had committed Bruno the Popes Archbishop for
deturbing the other, the Pope sent him word, that if he did not deliver him.
Graujoribus IPSE vinculis teneretur, he would lay sorer and heavier bonds upon
HIM: Lastly, Quamuis NON sit credendum says Urspergensis, although men will
not believe that the Pope would utter that strangely proud threat above
mentioned, as if thereby he would pin^on the divine providence to his own
Will; yet he sets a Constat upon this. It is manifest that all his life long,
the POPE was an HEAVY enemy of Philips, and his continual opposite: yea,
even for that small time he possessed the Crown, Baptist. Egnat. lib. 3. in
Philip.
it was indignante Innocent^o Pontifice, says Egnatius, with the Popes dislike
and heavy displeasure.

85 But if the Pope should so speak; why is ther^ no Vrsperg anno. ^198. de
gestis Philippi.
more to Witness it but one? Nauclerus (who repeats it in the Abbots words)
gives a reason for it, Quia Res est non parum odiosa, for that it is a very
UNPLEASING and an ODIOVS matter; (for truth begets hatred) and yet with all he
confesses; that he found the fame, apud Naucl. genesis 40. an. 1198.
alios quosdam, in some OTHER Writers: but he that reads Cusp^ian shall see the
very words by him also repeated and closed with a pretty glance at the Popes
charity, and In Philipp^.
humility for so speaking. And now what is become of this mere SLANDER, which
is grounded upon such strong presumptions, as well for Philips death by Otho
his Competitor, as also for the Popes Insolence in making such a proud vow?
both which do still ratify what his Majesty intends, the Awe that Popes
kept Emperors in at those times; for it was only the fear of him that made
Philip to release Crantz. lib. 7. Sax. cap. 26.
the intruded Archbishop of Colen, and condescend to a parlee with Otho the
Popes darling.

86 That other of Emperor Frederike the second, poisoned by the Popes corrupt
means in Apulia, whereof then escaping, he could not avoid the other by one
Manfredus, hired by the Pope to do it, but thereof he dyed, This he calls a
TALE; and a MALITIOVS tale; a TALE, that the Emperor died of the Poison; a
MALITIOVS Tale that the Pope procured it. And herein, as thinking he has
gotten an advantage, He spends three whole Numb. 52, 53. 54. First, That of
all the Authors which wrote the Emperors life, the most part mention NO
Poison; and Six of them he marshalleth in the margin. Be it so; yet his
Majesty had good ground for that which he said, if some of them do so write
(for Clockes will sooner agree, then all Historians concur in the same
relation;) but sure they, (whom his Majesty grounds upon) were no
Protestants: and that he was poisoned, Cuspi. Fred. 2. Vineis. Ep. lib. 2.
Paris. Hea. (...).
there are as many for it, as otherwise. Cuspinian Petrus de Uineis, and
Matheus Parisiensis; of which, the two last lived in that Emperors time: yea,
two of the authors marginated by the Epistler, incline that way. Nauclerus
mentions the poison, but will not determine it; not that Genesis 42. Anno. 1247.
it was not so, but because diverse Authors report it diversely, so that a man
knows not which is the truest, says he: and of that mind is Binnius, seeing
the variance of writers, de Council. Tom, 3. par. 2. vita Innocent. 4. De Reg.
Ital. lib. 18.
mortis genere, about the manner or kind of death which he died. But Sigonius
is direct, and says that in Apulia UENENO est mortuus, he died of the POISON
in Apulia.

87 But all, or most agree, says the Epistler, that he was STIFLED with a
pillow by Manfredus the Emperors base Son. Not all, nor the most, for they
cannot agree either of the person, place, or kind of his death; but grant it
true, what then? Therefore he dyed not of the POISON: that is no good
consequent: for a man's death may be effectuate by two means, though one more
speedy and visible. Abimelech was slain by a Woman, and yet his Judge. 9. 54.
page thrust him through: she gave him his death: he sped him. So was Saul
said to be slain by his own hands, and 1. Sam. 3^. 5. 2. Sam. 1. 9.
yet an Amalekite rid him of his life. Certain it is; (and therein most agree)
the Emperor was drench't before, and had Parisiens. vbi supra.
taken in the poison, potionatus Venit in Apuliam; but Manfredus thinking the
time long, and fearing his recovery, shortued his life with the pillow, which
had the deaths wou^d before by the poison, So says Sigonius, he dyed by
poison, Vbi supra.
and Manfred was shrewdly suspected for it; by whom (it is reported) he was
CHOAKT with a pillow. In Apuliam Epist. lib. 2.
rediens UENENO peri^ says Petrus de Uineis, returning into Apulia he
perished by POISON. Sieve morbo, sieve veneno, extinctus est; whether by a
disease, or by Poison, he dyed, says Nauclerus: And Cuspinian agrees with
them, that Anno. 1247. Cuspi. Fred. 2.
the Emperor recovering by the help of Physicians from the poison, Manfrede
took a shorter course with him; and (as Hazael scrued Benhadad with a cloth)
stopped his breath 2, Reg. 8. 5.
with a pillow. Where is now then the Fabulosity of this assertion? and what
audaciousnesse is this, to entitle that for a Talewhen his Majesty has so
many Authors (and all of them Papists) to direct him to this auerment?

88 But belike, the malice of this tale is inexcusable, by laying it upon the
Pope, who was free from it. No Author freeth him, the only freedom which they
give him, is their silence of him; save only one who acquits him thus, that
Matthew. Paris. in Hen. 3.
indeed the Enemies of the Church gave it out that the POPE HAD HIRED ONE
(what with money what with Promises) to POISON him? but does he free him
thereby? God knows says he, Whether it were true or no, but absorduit Domini
Papa fam^ per hoc no^ mediocriter, the Pope got him a FOVLENAME by it, quoth
that very Author. And the presumptions are very strong for it; for sure it is
that the Pope hated him so extremely, Vt noctes, diesque (says Cuspinian)
that day and night he devised how to DE STROY him. Saul not more eager in the
pursuit of David Ubi supra.
(yet he eyed him and followed him as the Hawke does 1. Sam. 26. 20.
the Partrich) then Pope after Pope was in pursuing that Emperor, more like
Devils then Christians, if their own stories be true.

89 He is Excommunicated and deprived of Crown and allegiance; upon slight
pretenses by them; he is procured by them to promise in person to go into the
Holy-hand (...) (...). 3. (...) (...) om^ (...) V^perg.
against the Turk (even as Iaso^ by Pe^as into Colch^ for the Goulden-Fleece)
that in the mean time they might r^fle his Territories in his absence, and so
they did indeed. The Emperor by reason of the dangerous sickness, was forced
to stay his Journey one year; the Pope took it for a dissembling, and excomm
^nicated him for his delay; the Emperor sending his Ambassadors to Rome with
their affiduit, to make faith for his sickness, the Pope would not admit
them to his presence. Next year, to satisfy the Pope. the Emperor determined
his journey, but before his going, he called a Counsel of his Princes to
Rauenna: which he appointed also for the place of Rendrevous for some of his
Soldiers to attend him. The Pope caused the^ to be stayed from that meeting,
way-laying the Coasts of Uerona and Millan, and took order that the Soldiers
should be spoiled, that were prepared for that expedition against the Turk;
which, ^las is a shameful thing to speak of, says the Abbot that wrote it.
The Emperor being in the Holy Land, and in battle against the Turks, the Pope
(in his absence) enters Apulia (part of the Emperors Dominions) surpriseth and
takes it to his own use, and keeps back all supply of Soldiers that
should go for aid of the Emperor in that holy war: and (which is the height
of all impletie) the Emperor having performed his promise by that his journey,
requesting absolution from the Pope, he, not only with contempt, denied it, but
commanded the Christian Soldiers in Asia, to leave the Emperor Naucler. genesis
4^. (...). 1228.
to the Turks malice, as being a public enemy of the Church; and dispatched
secret Letters to the Patriarch of Jerusalem, and the Soldiers there, to
Rebel against the Emperor, as Blondus (the Popes soothing flatterer is forced
to confess: And by private Letters (which were intercepted by the Emperor, and
whereof he complains) dealt with the Saracens to make no truce with the
Emperor, nor to deliver the Crown of Jerusalem unto him, though he should
win it by Conquest: And when the Emperor sent Letters of joyful
advertisement to the Pope, of his victory and truce taken with the Turk, the
Pope threw away his Letters in disdain, and caused it to be given out through
the Empire, that the Emperor was d^ad; upon which rumor, there grew a defection
of many Cities from the Emperor to the Pope; and those valiant soldiers (the
Almaines) which were returned from that Christian expedition against the Turk,
into Apulia, were designed to be slain by the Inhabitants, upon this rumor.

90. What is this (will he say) to the Popes consent for his POISONING? Surely
they are violent inducements, that he thirsted after the Emperors death which
way soever: for he which would arm the Emperors own Soldiers against him;
cause a treacherous Revolt from him while he was fighting the Lords Battles;
betray him into the mouth of Christ's sworn enemy; (...) his possessions in
his absence; dispers^ false rumors of his death, contrary to truth and his
own knowledge; and by contempts and Anathemtes do his best or worst to break
his heart: would make little account or conscience to drench him out of his
life, if opportunity and secrecy would coucurre.

91. And yet, that presumptions may not only carry it, Cuspinton having
Authors for both reports, ^lates the Procurers thereof doubtfully, but the
(...) certainly, that Manfredus POISONED him, without c^ntrouersie; In Fred. 2.
Sieve ab hestibus, sieve a Pontifice corruptus: (...) ^ther corrupted by the
enemies of the Emperor, or by the Pope, he will not say, but so he died. Yet
the Emperor h^selfe having discovered a Poison intended and prepared for him by
his trustiest attendants, as he thought them, upon ex amination, found it to
be the Popes doing, and makes a Matthew Paris. in Hen. 3.
lamentable complaint thereof. Being very sick (whether poison^d or diseased)
he sent to be reconciled to the Pope; Sed Papa laetificatus est de
aduersitatibus suis: But the Pope Idem ibid. Paulo post.
REIOICING at his misery and distress, refuses to accept the offer, which
made many (the Peers of France especi ally) to love the Emperor, and SVPERBIAM
Serui Seruorum Dei detestari, and to detest the PRIDE of him that calls himself
the Servant of Gods Servants. Not long before that, four Conspirators were
apprehended, that should Cuspin. vbi supra.
have made away the Emperor, and they all confessed, that the POPE had set them
on. Had Urspergensis continued his Story to the death of the Emperor, he would
not (as is probable by his free delivery of the former part) have spared to set
down the truth, with the circumstances of his death, more then he did the
aggreeuances above specified, offered by the Pope.

92. But what better witness and of more credit can there be, then Petrus de
Uincis, who lived in those days, and was continually about the Emperor; and,
as Cuspinian says, has truly related the occurrences of that time? It seems
by this Censurer, that three exceptions may be taken Ibid.
against him. First, He is but one for Cuspinian borrowed what he had for
that point, from HIM, and none else. True, and he gives a good reason for it;
because the Italian Writers (being DELICATIORIS STOMA CHI) disdaining to read
the Germane Stories (as rude stuff) do make many and foul ESCAPES in their
relations; Et multa (...) digna praetereunt, and OMIT many things worthy of
knowledge. Secondly, they are the Popes Vassals, therefore (as Tully once said)
Gentis suae vilia silent^o obruunt, the things which may discredit their
Nation, and the Head of their Religion, they pass over in silence. Thirdly,
this Epistler, in the case of Fred^rik the first, remits us to Baronius, though
but ONE, and he foists us off with ONE (...) a Vaticane Desk creeper, never yet
extant; and he, being but ONE, must foil the credit of a whole Jury in Print,
and we must take him for good, only because he lived in that time, and was
present at the conclusion of the peace: but Vineis, who (being Secretary to
the Emperor) was ever about him, wrote truly, and is an Author approved, must
be cassiered in the case of Frederik the second, because he is ALONE; in whom
Cuspinian, an authentical Writer, verifies that Proverb, Omnia Strabo Geogr.
lib. 10.
sub vnam Myconum, that HE ALONE may stand for all the rest.

93 His second exception thereof is, Petrus de Vineis was a servant to
Frederick, and a professed enemy to the Pope; so were Surius and Baronius, two
sworn Supporters to the Papal See, and professed enemies to the Religion which
we maintain; yet in every example the one is intruded for confutation of
whatsoever out of history we object, and the second obtruded for every
fabulous Story which they approve. Secondly, Servants do not always speak
the best of their Masters, even when they make their fairest semblance; for a
man shall often times hear his own servant cursing him, says King Solomon: and
no fitter instance can Eccles. (...).
be given, then of this Emperor in that case, for HE differed (...). In Henr.
3. vbi supra. Some think it was the same party, but it is no^ probable.
not much from the Historians name, whom the POPE hired once to poison this
Emperor Frederik (if Parisiensis do not err or deceive the Reader;) for HIS
name (being of near place and trust about the Emperor, even for his soul) was
Petrus de U^ea, that was so HIRED, and plot ted withal. Thirdly, neither did
Vineis write that discourse as a Servant, but as an Historian, who in all his
Tract must have an eye to the truth, without which, an History (as Po lybius
well resembles it) is like a living body with all the bones taken out: which
(it seems) this Gentleman did well know; Lib. 2.
for, as it appears by Cuspinian, he dissembles not even the foul vices of
the Emperor his Master.

94 Which might prevent the third Objection of this Epistler, who says, that
he wrote so partially in this matter, that the Pope was feign to write LIBROS
APOLOGETICOS, BOOKS of APOLOGY to clear himself. And HIS books must go
for current without contradiction, being in defense of his own particular
acts; but his Majesty writing an Apology against a defaming Inuectiue of a
Cardinal, about the OATH of Allegiance, framed by the Council and wisdom of
the whole State for his Majesty's safety, and trial of his true Subjects, that
must be encountered with a Tortus in Latin, and a Traitor in English, and may
not pass uncontrolled. But who can witness that the Pope wrote those Books?
Blondus, says he, recorded it. And HE the most glozing Recorder that ever the
Pope had; who for his extreme flatteries of the Papal Miter, is usually called
Blandus, the only painful Pseudolus of any Historian that writ many a day;
Secretary to a Pope, and living two hundred years after Innocentius. But did
the Pope write those Books in defense of himself, to confute Petrus de
Uineis? Surely that is an argument that he was guilty: Suspi^onem mihi facit
nimia diligentia, says S. Hierome, Promptitude of excuse implies Ad Pammach
Epist. 61.
a consciousnesse of the f^ult: Yea what says the same Father of Judas the
Traitor, when our Savior told his Disciples, that one of them should betray
him, and all the rest of the Apostles Matt. 26. 23.
(as stricken with grief) plucked their hands from the dish, for bidding meat
to their mouth, and Judas ONLY thrust in his hand? This he did, vt audacia
bonam conscientiam men^retur, that thereby he might dissemble, and Hieron. in
eum.
think to persuade his INNOCENCE by his BOLDNESS. The Prophet describes one
kind of man, that flattereth himself in his own mischief, until his
wickedness be found out, and appear to his own detestation; but being
depren^nded, then verba oris eius iniquitas and dolus, Psalm. 36. 2. 3.
the words that he speaks in defense of himself are impiety and deceit. Pope
Innocentius did see that his Acts could no longer be hid, descried they were,
and it was time for him to speak: and then if he would not make the best for
him self wit^ his own pen, he might have been begged for an Innocent.

95 And now all this while, where lies the Apologers mali^ in this Relation? No
where, unless it be that he did not make a Concord^nce of all Authors for one
Story; which were a harder task then the torment of Sysiphus in Hell,
described by the Poet. It was his Majesty's exceeding humility, that he would
grace Bellarmine (being but a Cardinal) so much, as to vouchsafe him an
answer; it is his eminent commendation, that he can readily understand all
Stories written in this kind or any other; it argues his singular industry,
that after so many hours spent in the higher affairs of the Realm, he could
take the pains to peruse these which he did; it is his pregnant d^xteritie,
that he contrived and abridged the Discourse with that method and sincerity;
but it was his admirable judgment and wisdom, in forbearing variety of other
Authors which wrote but By hearsay, and deli^red what they wrote upon the
second hand, in this Example to pitch principally upon him who lived in that
time, and saw and wrote what passed between the Emperor and the Pope, in every
particular. True Christians, and well affected to Godward, would rejoice to see
so great a Monarch, so learned and so expert, considering what the ignorance of
Kings has been heeretosore: but this is the Catholic envy and vexation, that
not Eld^d and Medad, but Monarchs Number. 11. 26.
also can prophecy, and discover their weakness; s^ that whereas now they
cannot (as in former times) ^hral them by superstition, and insult upon their
ignorance, they are enraged against their knowledge; accounting their learning
forgery; and their truth-telling malice.

96 Another instance obicted by his Majesty (which pincheth their Holy Father
to the quick) is of that Pope, who, when Emperor Frederik was in the holy land
fighting in Christ, quarrel (fearing that his return would be some annoiance
to the Romish See) betraide him to the Sold in, to whom he directs his private
Letters, and with them also sent the Emperors picture, in case the Sold in
should mistake his Person. Unto which, this Epistlers grave Answer is, That it
is a Calumniation, for there is (...) such thing in PAVLVSIOVIVS. Had Saul, in
seeking his Fathers Asses, returned such an answer, or himself retired,
because he found them not in (...) and Salim, he had never proved Sa^linter
Prop^s; for who directed this Censurer 1. Sam. 9. 4.
to Iouius? The Apologer (since he) quote^ hi^ in the margin. True, for the
NEXT Story immdiately following, but the Printer misplaced him, giving him a
higher room by five lines in the page then he should have. An error or slip at
the Press, is not a Calumniation in the Author; if it be, then Medice teipsum;
for if the Reader turn but only one leaf back (in page, 100. of this
Epistlers Censure) the very like escape, for all the world, will appear in
himself: for in Numb. 49. speaking of King Henry the Second of England his
WHIPPING at Beckets Sepulcher, the marginall note wills us to See BARONIVS in
Anno MCLXXVII. there to receive a Confutation of that inioned Penance:
searching the place, we find no syllable of any such thing; for that point he
discusseth in An. 1174. so that the note of Anno 1177. is to be brought down
to the next Instance of Frederik Barbarossa, for that is the place indeed, where
Baronius does tumble himself in that Story. And yet examining thereof, and
finding a wrong direction, we revile it not for a Calumniation, nor sl^r it off
with an Ignoramus, nor pronounce it untrue, because we found it not where we
were directed; but sought the right place, alight upon it; and discuss't. So
that, had there been any grace or good nature in this Antapologer, if he read
(as he faith he did) the second book of Iouius, and found not this, but the
next succeeding Story there, he might presently have discovered the Printers
slip, given a touch at it, and confuted the Objection: but because, in
likelihood, he saw it uncontrollable, all the Answer he makes, is, it is a
Calumniation, for he finds it not in IOVIUS. The Reply therefore must be
semblable; that, since he searcht^t not the right Authors, the Story must stand
for true, and he must pass on for a Wrangler.

97. As he does manifestly, in the very next example; with the evident and
confirmed truth whereof being convicted, that Pope Alexander the Sixth caused
the Turks brother to be poisoned, he first confesses, that THIS has MOST
APPEARANCE of truth, only because OTHER Authors, besides Cuspinian, who is
quoted in the margin of the Apology, concur therein, Belike then if it had
come alone, though Iouius be a Popish Bishop, and do at large particularize
every circumstance, it must not have past; for even as it is, he makes it but
an APPEARANCE; whereas the rule of Almighty GOD is, that if the testimony of
two witnesses speak with one mouth, in Deuteronomy. 19. 15.
ore duorum, it shall be an Establishment, and that is more then an appearance
of truth. In the case of Frederick the Second, Vineis and Cuspinian were both
produced to confirm one Story; that could not serve the turn, because they
were but One (the last borrowing what he said, from the foremost:) In this
Instance there are two different Witnesses, which concur in verifying of one
and the same fact; and this, though thus seconded, is slightly turned off, as
making but an APPEARANCE. But it will be found, that with this their Appearance,
they will also give in such Evidence of an irreligious treachery, as could not
be imagined would enter the heart of any that professed Religion: scz. that the
High Priest of Christendom (so he would be called) at the request of a
Mohammedan Turk, for a bribe of money, and (which is a horrible, yet a
ridiculous thing Paul. Iouius, lib. 2.
to hear) in exchange of Christ's unseamed Coat (for we must think the
Soldiers, at our Savior his passion, cast lots to have it kept for the Great
Turk, to be reserved by him for a Relic 1500. years after) should poison a
Prince committed to his refuge and protection, to satiate the thirst of a
blood-golofer, and secure him in his Tyranny: for did he not hereby give a
just occasion to the Turk, bothrto blaspheme our Savior, and scoff at
Christianity? that, as once his own Disciple betrayed him to death for a piece
of money, his dear Vicar would now poison an innocent man (and in whose life
remained great hope for the good of all Christendom, as their own Writers
record) for the exchange Onuphr. Alex. 6.
of a mock roabe; a Relic which must needs perform great wonders, being
thus purchased with the price of blood: as also brag that Christendom was
beholden to him for her principal Relics; for before, he had sent the Spear
that S. Longies pierced our Savior withal, and Iouius, ibid.
now they should have THIS Coat. His second answer therefore is, that Writers
set it down doubtfully and suspitiously.

98. It seems he has read them; but which of them isit? for Cuspinians
words are, that Zizamus (so he calls In Bajazet. 2.
Gemen the Turks brother) died of poison, Pontifice haud ignorante, the POPE
not unacquainted therewith; eratque constans fam^ (says Iouius) and it was the
CONSTANT and uncontrolled report, that ALEXANDER the Pope mingled powder with
GEMENS Sugar, which should not Ubi supra.
END him presently, but WASTE him by little and little. The most doubtful
Reporter is Sabellicus, who says that there were that BELIEVED he died of
poison, and that the Pope caused it, etc. which doubt (if it be any) must not
only be referred to the Author that procured his death, but to the matter also
that caused it, which was never questioned; for all agree that it was poison,
save only Onuphrius, who, indeed, mentions not the poison, but names a
disease as an effect thereof, a disentery or continued looseness^, the true and
designed operation of the poison, as Ubi supra.
Iouius describes it; which was so prepared, as that it should spend him
slowly, but speed him thoroughly. But Guicciardine stoppes not at it, who auers
it for undoubted that he was poisoned, and by the Popes means too. Yea, says
the Epistler but he gives a reason why it was so reported, because the corrupt
nature of the Pope made any wickedness to be believed of him. (Christ had a
good Vicar in the mean time, and Saint Reter a worthy Successor; might not the
Church truly have then complained Caput meum doleo?)

99 It is true that Guicciardine gives many reasons, not of the report, but of
the ground thereof, why the Pope should do it; and they all make singularly to
the excuse and credit Hist. lib. 2.
of the universal Bishop. First, the Turk allowed the Pope for his brothers
maintenance 40000. Ducats yearly; This Gobbet the Pope lost, being enforced to
part with Gemen to the French King, and that vexed him into the purpose for the
poison, and into the practice too. Secondly, he took pleasure with himself
(so much good it did him) to think how he had co^sened the King that got him;
who looking for the same annual allowance, should so quickly be eased of it by
Gemens death. Thirdly, he envied at the glory which the French-King should
get, having that Prince in his possession, by whose means he might con quer
the Turk so easily and speedily. Fourthly, he was in bodily fear that the
French-King succeeding well in those wars against the Turk, (whereof there
was little doubt, Gemen being with him) would after the return from that
battle, set upon his skirts, and look into the Reformation of the Church: the
abuses wherein (it being wholly aliened from the ancient deuotion-custome, and
purity of the primtiue state) had brought the Religion of Christ into Contempt
Lastly, because the Pope had good cause thus to fear, therefore he also
thought the poison was very necessary (for nothing preuenteth Reformation more
speedily then poison does): His entry into the Papacy by wicked means, made
all the world expect no better, but a more corrupt state of the church, day
after day, and that the Pope knew well enough. These are the reasons which that
faithful Historian coucheth together; and are by him alleged, not so much to
justify his speech that there was such a report, but to necessitate the
author, that it must needs be the Pope that acted it.

100 After which, a joint fame being spread de Motore, that some body should
instigate the Pope to do it, and the opinion concurring that it was by the
great Turks motion, who had corrupted the Popes Legate Bucciardin to solicit
his Master thereunto; Guicciardine adds to this (for Vbi supra.
that it was so horrible) that the nature and ha^or of the Pope was so Wicked,
that there was no conceit (though never so detestable) but Alexanders WICKEDNESS
was capable of it, and able to make it sound true. And yet for all this, the
Epistler says, That this matter is but doubtfully and suspiciously related,
then the which, there cannot be of any in Story (to use his own words) a more
assertiue affirmation, then Cuspinian, Iouius and Guicciardin have made; who,
both categorically and constantly, do avouch it. And here, as before with that
trusty Disciple IVDAS he ended his contradictions; so with this honest Pope,
ALEXANDER, he closes up these Instances, which his Majesty rehearses to
Justify his own wari^es, rather then fear; since so many Emperors and Kings
have felt with smart (and sometimes their ruin) the rage and revenge of the
Popes MALICE.

101 As for all particulars of those plunges, which our late Queen of happy
memory was driven into by succeeding Popes; as also of his Majesty's own
motives to this warines, by the Pope both his engines of cruelty, and
indulgence of lenity; the first, his debarring Bulls at his Maisties entry,
and his barrelled Bullets after his inuestitute: the other, that though the
principal Agents and plotters thereof were the Popes Mancipia, Jesuits, (so
confessed by some of that sort that died for it) yet neither the Pope would call
them that sled away and escaped, to account for it; nor fasten any note of
Obloquie or infamy upon them which acted it, and were executed for it: Of all
this, I say, (his own conscience bearing him witness it is too true) he is
wholly silent, and so passes to the third part of the Cardinals letter. But
first he must give a parting blow, by a ijrking Comparison of Kings with
Popes, that as (...) Moses Chair, and Saint Peter's See, there sit Scribes and
Pharisees, so in Throanes may be placed wicked Kings, and yet the Authority of
neither be either discredited or pr^iudicated by their wickedness.

102 Wherein first, is verified that speech of Seneca, Ne^opersonam diu f^rre
potest, Art cannot long estrange Seneca.
nature. But as the Apologue describes VENUS trans^fors med^aiting maid, who
being trick't up like a Gentlewoman, mink'st it a while til she spied a Mouse,
but the^ made it known she was a Cat: So this Censurer, who all this while
would make the Reader believe that he confuted Eras^. Chil.
Only one T. M. the younger, and would seem to take no knowledge, that our
Gracious Sovereign had to do in the Apology; now being exa sperate with
this round canuasing of the Pope, and knowing that it will be descried, for the
style and vein of more then an Ordinary man, he forgets his dissembled
adversary, and, like a persit Jesuit, retort's upon Kings. For if T. M. (whom
he makes but an Inferior Minister of small account) were the true Apologer the
Para. 1.
recrimination had been more fit, both in respect of these precedent instances
of Popes, and that supposed Author, to have made the comparison by Bishops and
Ministers; that as not al Popes, so neither al which wear the habit, or are
invested into holy orders amongst us, are free from notorious vices, and
scandalous to the world: but he was pinch't, and the Egiptian Ape could not
forbear to break out of the Mask, to show himself in his right kind.

103 Secondly, what Insolency is this, to compare Popes with Kings, Subjects
with their Superiors; for even Priests (as well as others) are subject to their
Souereignes, In Romans 13.
by Chrysostomes rule; the Popes Sublimity exempts him not; it is usurped.
Kings are enthroanized by Divine ordinance, Popes advanced by hu^ane Arrogance,
per me Reges regnant is the Text for Kings, spoken by the wisdom of God, and
vtered in the book of God, by the mouth of the wisest King that ever breathed:
the Text for Popes Priestly preeminencie none at all; for their Temporal
principality, none other but UNAM SANCTAM, a text Bonifac. 8. in. extrauag.
com.
in the extrauagants from a Popes own Decretall; and HE one of the worst that
ever sat in Rome, described commonly by the name of three Beasts.

104 Thirdly, does he not hereby offer some disgrace to their Holy Father?
For if Popes and Kings were to be compared together, in respect of their
eminent places as the world finds them; yet, for integrity of life and
freedom from Sin, there should be a great disparison between them: for it
were a shame to Popes, that Princes should be so free from vices, as THEY who
profess themselves the abstracts of sanctity, and are SO entitled; make
themselves Christ's Uicars: take upon them to be the ONLY Censores Morum
through the whole world; and challenging the highest place, should give the
best example: whereas Kings have many occasions which may allure them to sin,
especially having that Privilege in Scripture, whether exgratia or de facto;
whether by exemption from God or fear in men, that NO Man may say unto them
Why do you thus? And yet never could this Eccles. 8. 4.
Censurer have made a more untimely and unfitting retortion then at this
instant: His Majesty's endowments and cartage being such (as if their own
Historians deceive us not) few Popes will be found less tainted then his
Majesty will appear in the stricktest search; for, as some of their own
Authors do testify, Popes are usually praised for their GOODNESS when they
SVRPASSE not the WICKEDNESS Guicciard. lib. 6.
of other men; and some of them confess, that a Pope has been trised away on
the sudden, because it was suspected he would be OVER-GOOD. Fourthly, if that
Genebrard. lib. 4. Chron.
be true which he says (as it is indeed) that the wickedness of Kings does
not preiudicate their princely right, either for power or dignity; what
Doctrine then is that which teaches, that, be Kings never so virtuous, if they
acknow ledge not the Popes primacy, their right is NONE, either in hope if they
expect, or hold if they possess a Crown: but their persons are liable to
Deposing and killing; and their Subjects excitable to Insurrection and
Rebellion? So that all Blasphemies and prophanations; all murders and
oppressions; all concubinacies, namelesse, innumerable; shamelesle,
unmatchable, shall not impeach or Subvert, a Kings Right; ONLY the denial of
the Popes authority, shall be able to turn him out of his Throane and life.

106 And now is it time that we come to the

Third part of this Paragraph.
Which is spent in the examining of the Sentences and authorities of the
ancient Fathers cited by the Cardinal in his letter to the Archpriest. Among
which (as he closes up the other part with Alexander the 6. an eminent Pope
for singular wickedness; so, be like because Pindarus would have in the
beginning of a Treatise (...) some glorious Pindar.
personage to be fronted) he singles out Julian to be the foremost, an excellent
Emperor for famous Blasphemy; unto which impious Apostata, it pleased
Bellarmine (the Ienocinating Pander to the Whore of Babylon) to compare our
gracious Sovereign: hereby insinuating, that as Julian to beguile the
Christians did insert the image of Devils (which is Nazianzens word) or false
Gods into his own picture, that they, according to the Roman law, bowing to
the Emperors image, might unwittingly also adore those cunningly included
Idols: so his Majesty in the OATH of allegiance, has mingled with some
Articles concerning his own Souereignty, other clauses touching the Pope and
his authority; to the end, that as the ancient Christians discerning that
fraud in the pictures: so they also, which, discovering the Mixture in the
OATH, forbear to take it, might both be drawn within the compass of TREASON.

107 In which comparison, his Majesty observing (as Homer in Thersites head,
no countenance of a man, and Iliadae.
the tongue of a Scrpent) both venomous malice in the personal, and a total
diversity in the real resemblance, vnrippeth this Similtude; and by diverse
particularities shows, that whereas all comparisons are (like Iaakob after
his wrestling,) (...) sinew-shrunke in the thigh, halting Genc. 32. 31.
of one leg; this, not only like Mephibosheth is (...) lame of both the feet,
but, as the Physicians describe some 2. Sam. 4. 4.
diseased, it is (...) and has a general luxation in all the ioints and
members, not agreeing in any one point for which it is brought, save only
(which his Majesty well observed) that our Sovereign is a King, and Julian
was an Emperor: which thing alone reueales the malice in the Cardinals choice
of that Example. For if he had meant to touch the OATH, only for the mixture,
and left the persons alone; even in that very place of Nazian* whence he
borrowed that resemblance, he might have fitted his purpose better, in
comparing the blending and tempering of those MIXED articles, unto the
compounding of (...) wholesome meats and rank poison together Nazianz. (...). in
Iulan.
(for so that great Divine fitly compares that action of Iulan:) but hereby
he would notify, that it is not the Oath, but the King, which is the eyesore
of the Romish Clergy; his glory prouokes their Envy; his Religion their malice.

108 And now to this, what says the learned Censurer? His answer is an est
long, but not an inch to the purpose. Namely, that the Apologer, being sore
pressed with this resemblance, is forced into a wearying discourse, to show the
diversities in that comparison, which must needs be LOATHSOME to every man of
mean judgment, who knows that a Similitude must be defective in all things
but in THAT POINT wherein the comparison is made; or else many Parables uttered
by our Savior Christ (whereof he cites many) might seem very strange and
impertinent: and so he goes on in a long flagging discourse, whereout the
offalls of scorning terms being taken, to be resumed by himself (as the
eiection which he has once voided, with Solomon's loathsome Creature) all
comes Pro. 26. 11.
to this one profound conclusion, that a Similitude must only hold in that
point wherein it is compared. Of which, if any man but meanly learned had had
the handling he would have reduced it all briefly to that rule of Isidor,
Pelusiot. epist. 175.
that in Parables we must not take (...) nor sit matter to every circumstance
thereof, for that were to wring the Scripture by wresting it too violently, and
to wrong Divinity by forcing in many a fancy (which is Gregory's speech,
alluding to the place of Solomon, of wr^ging the Nose till the blood come);
because if a comparison Pro. 30. 33.
should hold in ALL, it were an identity not a resemblance.

109 For which cause, Divines have reduced all Parables to four heads, either
(...) wherein the nature only of the thing does make the comparison; as in the
parable of the Seed sown, the variety of increase by the word preached, is
expressed by the multiplying Mat. 13. 19.
or failing of the grain, according to the several soiles where it alights;
or 2. (...) wherein the disposition or affection only is resembled; as when our
Lord compares himself to children piping and whistling, to express the mild
and comfortable means which he used for the winning Matthew. 1^. 7.
of Souls; or thirdly, (...) wherein a passion or perturbation is only
assimilated, as the second coming of Christ is resembled to a thieves
burghlary, and a woman's 1 Thessalonians. 5. 2. 3.
travel, for the suddenness and affrightment; or lastly, (...) wherein the
action only is to be regarded for comparison, without respect to any other
Circumstance either of person or manner, as in the Par^ble of the unrighteous
Steward, who made friends with his Masters money Luc. 16. 6.
against an hard time, as we (of the goods lent us) by Alms to the poor, whose
prayers may help us against the day of trial. To which last, this rese^blance
that the Cardinal has brought, is to be referred; produced by him for no
other purpose (as is pretended) but only for the Mixture of diversities (as
there in the Banner, so in the Oath with us:) and therein has he m^nifested
more malice then judgment. For even in that very point, his Similitude (as
taken with the Crampe) halts downright: because in the Imperial pictures,
though there were different features, yet they all concurred to one end, and
for the same intent, that is for Adoration, though to the one more openly, to
the other more covertly: for so says Nazian. in this action of Julian, there
was (...) AMIXT ADORATION Ubi supra.
communicated both, with the Emperor, and with the Idols also; In the OATH it is
clean contrary, which is so far from being a MIXTVRE of Allegiance, that it
separates all acknowledgement of any temporal right, or right of any temporal
acknowledgement from Pope, or any other else; but to his Majesty alone within
his Realms. And if this be a Mixture, it is such as Philosophy will not
acknowledge, [mistio secernens] and no other but that which King Solomon
speaks of, REMOOVE the wicked from Pro. 25. 5.
the King; and his Throane shall be established in judgment; which is the
sum of that part of the Oath that is thus said to be tempered, so, to abjure
and abandon that wicked doctrine, and that usurped authority of the Papal
claim for Deposing of Kings: and so Princes Throanes will be established, they
shall rule in peace, and live in safety. And that's no other Mixture then fire
makes in the Finers furnace, dispergens heterogenea, to clear the dross from
the Gold, says Ibid.
the wise King.

110. Had the Oath been so cunningly framed, that with the recognition of his
Majesty's absolute and unmatchable right, there were secretly couched a covert
acknowledgement of some other person; whereby, in swearing allegiance to his
Majesty, he that takes the Oath, should at unawares swear also to the support
of some other exoticall authority; then had the resemblance been very pat, and
fitly applied, even in the very point: but seeing those modifications (as the
Cardinal calls them) be all EXCLVDING ones, the Oath may be called any thing
rather then a mixture; or if it be so, it is only because the Pope is
eftsoons named in some clauses where his Majesty is inserted, and so indeed
the resemblance in that circumstance may hold of the Imperial Picture and
Image of Devils. But though the King and Pope be named in One OATH (as Christ
and Belial in One TEXT by the Apostole) yet is it not for 2. Cor. 6 15.
joint Adoration (as in the banner) but for Recognition of the One, and
Abiuration of the other. Whereupon, his Majesty, to show the virulent malice
and vnlogicall argumentation of the Cardinal, by fetching in this sinister
Comparison, advisedly expresses, how it fails not only in the very apodosis
and assimilatum for which it is brought, but that in EVERY circumstance
besides, thereis a manifold difformitie and disparison: a labor as it now
appears, by way of prevention necessary; for Tortus; according to his name,
plays the wire-drawer, and will needs stretch the resemblance, into an
identity, forcing it to agree in every point.

111. And yet THIS the NASTY Censurer, taking the savor by his own breath,
calls a loathsome labor of his Majesty (but adds withal, saying more truly
then he was aware of, it was LOATH SOME to men of MEAN judgment, he knew that
by himself) but endeavors not to confute it: only with certain inkhorne
terms (of Euacuating, and Shifting, and Tristing, etc.) and a few Postilar
notes of Scripture-parables (so dully and iniudiciously laid out, that a man of
any learning would LOATH to read them) at last he pitcheth upon this stale and
triuiall conclusion, that a Sim^litude requires not parity in all points;
which his Majesty denied not, yea, he said as much before him; and thereupon
displaieth the absurdity of this resemblance, which varieth (as the Logitians
speak) in ratione instituti, in that very poy^t to which the Cardinal would
maliciously apply it; and has no conformity either with the manner, or with
the intendment of the Mixtures (so to call them.) For the manner THERE, was
covert, and purposely dissembled; HERE, open, and advisedly revealed: the
intent THERE, was a colorable worshipping of BOTH the features; the intendment
in the OATH, a diametrall renouncing ONE of the parties. And grant there were a
MIXTVRE in both; yet THERE it was real, for a mutual adoration; HERE, but
verbal (at most) for a real separation.

112. The second authority which the Cardinal allegeth to rectify the
Arch-priests judgment in the nature of the Oath, is an Apocryphal of Eleazer,
that as he would neither eat, nor feign to eat Swines flesh, lest by his
simulation 2. Maccab. 6. 18.
he might make others to preuaricate; so should not the Archpriest take the
OATH, upon the like reason of giving offense. Which his Majesty answering, she
weth, not only that the ground of Refusal is different, because THAT eating was
expressly for bidden in the Law of God, THIS Swearing warranted by Scripture,
and commanded by the Magistrate: but also retorteth it upon the Cardinal, that
if a man should choose to die rather then break a Ceremonial Law, or feign the
breach thereof for fear of seducing others; much rather should a man hazard his
life, then either Refuse an OATH (which the Law of Nature, God, and Man, do
justify and inioine) or pretend the Refusing of it to the scandal of a
Realm, and the just offense of his Sovereign. This being a knot -- Vindice
dignus, Horace.
which the Epistler cannot tell hastily how to unloose; therefore as the Orator
notes of Poets in their Tragedies, Tulli. de not. deorum.
that being driven to an exigent, they will have Deum ex improuiso, some God in
an Engine, which must give them a list, and help them out cleanly: so this
Censurer, whenever he is at a stand (wanting another answer) presently winds
in his old commonplace of Conscience and Catholic Religion; for thus he
speaks, That if a man in his OWN Conscience think the OATH to be against
the CATHOLIC Faith he ought to be as shie of it, as Eleazar was of eating
Swines flesh.

113 But what if there be a false assumption, or an untrue application by the
Conscience? then is it erroneous, not binding: as put case the conscience
either assume that to be sound and Catholic, which is false and unchristian
doctrine; or apply that which is true and vnchallengeable, to a wrong end: then
is it not Conscience but Error; and this is their very case which refuse the
Oath. For first, they assume the Popes power of deposing Princes to be
Catholic Doctrine, which has no ground for it in warrantable Divinity:
Secondly, they avoid a Recognition of mere Temporal Allegiance, as applying
it to be a denial of a Spiritual Supremacy. A pattern of both these errors,
in another case, may be seen in S. Peter himself; first, when he forbore Gal.
2. 12.
to cate with the Gentiles, lest he should give occasion of offense to the
Jews, assuming THAT his abstinence for avoiding scandal, to be warranted by
Divinity, which S. Paul not withstanding, to his face, told him was not the
right course; there was his false assumption: the other was Matt. 16. 21.
his undue applying of our Saviors prediction touching his trouble and death;
which S. Peter referring to a Temporal pressure, not a Spiritual redemption,
was therefore persuaded in his Conscience, that he ought to diswade our Savior
from it, by using means to prevent it; but thereupon he procured to himself
the name of an Errant opposite to be called Satan. Therefore, as it has been
often said, (for the Epistler his frequent Palinodie causes irksome
reiterations) either make the doctrine sound, that the Conscience directed by
it may not err; or else if that be corrupt, this will be Leprous.

114 And it were well, when such as He plead their Conscience, they would
withal define what it is in them, seeing, that (as the Elephant uses her
probos^is or trunk) it is extended or contracted (as it seems) at the Popes
pleasure. For in the year 1580. Campian inlargeth it, assuring the Catholics,
that not withstanding the Pope had excommunicated Queen Elizabeth, yet with a
safe conscience they might obey Her in all Temporal Causes. About eight years
after (upon the Invasion) Allen does streighten it; though THAT Holy Father,
says he, did then permit obedience in some cases to the Queen, yet THIS Holy
Father discharges all men from it; and therefore with a safe conscience they
may not obey her in ANYTHING. In such diversity of Science, how can there be
a settled persuasion of Conscience? And this puts the maine difference betwixt
Eleazars abstinence, and their refusal; that he had, for the warrant of his
Conscience, Legem scriptam, an express Commandment from the Law of God, and
therefore did forbear: they, having none other but either a fansied conceit of
their own, or a Tyrannical Iniunction from an intruded Usurper, pretend
conscience for refusing that which the Law of God allows. For proof whereof,
his Majesty instanceth the Oath inioined by K. Saul to his Army; the
punishment whereof. God himself took in to 1. Sam. 14. 24
his own hands, for the breach thereof. But that example, -- reddidit
Harpocratem, has put the Censurer to silence.

115 And so he passes to the third authority alleged by the Cardinal, and
recorded by Theodoret, concerning S. Basil; who refused to yield his consent
in the points of Eccles. hist. lib. 4. ca. 17. lat. 19. Graece.
Arrianisme, at the (...) request, made unto him in the Emperors name for that
purpose; and gave his reason for it, that rather all kind of Torment should be
endured, then one syllable of GODS WORD should be corrupted. In his Majesty's
answer thereunto, the Epistler o^ serves (as he calls them) three Shifts (for
lightly an Impostor will speak in the phrase of his own occupation:) the
first whereof (where his Majesty taxes Bellarmine for one of his old and
usual tricks, in cutting off and leaving out that piece of the sentence which
should make most against himself, and for the requisition to the Oath) he
calls, a Calumniation in two respects; first, because the sentence left out
does nothing avail the Apologer, but sits the Cardinals purpose directly. How
proves he that? Nay, Dixit and obmutuit, ye must take his word for an Oracle;
for, proof he has none. Examine it notwithstanding.

116 The words of S. Basil (added by Theodoret, omitted by the Cardinal,
called for by his Majesty) are; that he much regarded the Emperors
friendship, SO FAR FORTH as it was joined with PIETY: but if THIS be
wanting, the OTHER is dangerous: which words do thus make for the Apologer;
that seeing the Oath consorts in all points with Piety, both toward God and
the King, the Archpriest (by that speech of S. Basil) should embrace his
Souereignes love by taking the OATH, and submitting himself unto that which
true godliness does warrant: But that being wanting in the Emperors request to
that Reverend Prelate, it caused S. Basil to make small account of his Deputies
message. If the Cardinal had soundly proved the same defect to be in the
Oath, the example had been proper: but the contrary being manifest, he both
reueales a falsitie, by coupling a conclusion which makes against him; and an
indiscretion also, by citing an example that auailes nothing to his purpose.

117 And this the Censurer calls the first shift, in answer to this ANCIENT, or
rather ANTIC; for so, both in his gibing vein he profanely terms that
grane and holy Bishop, and with his ignorant boldness scoffs at his Majesty for
calling the Fathers ANCIENTS, which is (in truth) their most proper term. For
first, to denominate persons of eminent qual^e by the concrete, is usual in
every language. The Hebrews do style men, notable for valor and courage, in
the adjective alone; for Benaiah is said to have his name among the three
STRONG: so the Graecians do entitle men singular for Sanctity above others,
2. Sam. 23. 22.
by the name of Holy or Saints: and so, men for years multiplied, or by
authority advanced, the Latins Romans 1. 7.
do call them Seniors, Elders, or ANCIENTS of the Numb. 11. 16. vulgar.
people. Secondly the title of FATHER is always understood relatiuely to the
sons which he has; and so in spiritual sense it cannot be proper to those
great writers alone. For, if it be given in respect of begetting men to Christ
by preaching the Gospel, so, both the Apostle challenges 1. Cor. 4. 15.
it to himself, and every Preacher of the word, or Rector of a Congregation,
deserves that name: if in regard of Ordination, so is it proper to Bishops
only, in the opinion of Epiphanius and S. Augustine; and then all those Holy
Writers cannot appropriate that name of Father unto themselves Aug. in Psalm. 45.
because Tertullian, Origin, and Clemens Alexandrinus, three of the nearest
(almost) unto Christ's time, that are extant, and S. Hierome, one of the four
principal in account, were not Bishops but Priests, and Justin Martyr a
Philosopher only entitled: The word ANCIENT therefore, whether we respect their
authority in the Chruch, or their antiquity of time, is the more suitable:
albeit for the most part, in Scripture, they signify the same thing. For the
Text, whereby they use to arrest us, and force us to make those Fathers Judges
in our Controversies, combines them together. Ask thy FATHER, says Moses,
Deuteronomy. 32. 7.
and he will tell thee; thine ANCIENTS, and they will show thee: So S. Paul,
Rebuke not an ANCIENT or Elder, but exhort him as a FATHER: And the mighty God
1. Tim. 5. 1.
whom S. James calls the FATHER of lights, the Prophet Daniel intitles him
the ANCIENT of days. Yet Iac. 1. 17. Dan. 7. 9.
such is the inbred gibing nature of this Ismaell, that he cannot forbear
his ^ering vain, though to the disgrace of the holiest Writers; but, because
his Majesty calls them ANCIENTS, he will stout them into ANTICKS.

118. Indeed, were they (whom his Majesty mentions) such ANCIENTS as those
foisted upon us by the Romish Church, such as Abdias and Amphilochius (cited
Hardi. contr. Jewel.
for the antiquity of their Mass) the one of them (as they say) being of man's
years in Christ's time, in his Story then written, mentioning Egesippus who
lived an hundred and sixty years, after him: the other writing the Story of
Beckets life seven hundred years before the sullen Saint was borne: These,
with their Clement and Dyonysius, and those of that fry, he might have called
ANTICKS, covering young faces under old deformed visards, and presenting
nothing worthy view but moppish toies, in ridiculous fables. But let him go;
for what credit can a man win with incountring such a mate? sithence he that
reproues a Prouer. 9. 7.
Scorner, gets himself a blot, says King Solomon.

119. To the point it self. Is his Majesty's pressing challenge of the
Cardinal, for slicing of that piece of the sentence which might make against
him, a SHIFT? Then have all the Fathers turned off the Devil with a shift for
that is it of which they challenge Satan in his Temptation of our Savior, that
under pretext of a Scripture Text he would have our Lord to break his neck:
which had not the Devil mangled, by leaving out the words that would have
choked him, the very same Text had co^suted him, even for that very motion:
for thus he cites it to Christ, He shall keep thee, that thou shall not hurt
thy foot, Matthew. 4. ex Psalm. 91.
the original being, He shall keep thee in ALL THY WAYS that thou sh^lt not
etc. and so is it a contrary Scripture to that temptation, and against the
throwing himself from the Temple-pr^cles: for that is not via TV A; because the
right way from the top of a Church is down by the greeses or stairs, not by
tumbling over the Battlements: and this was Bellarmi^es case in that his
mutilated ci tation of Saint Basil.

120 The second reason why he calls it a, Calumniation, is, by occasion of those
general words of taxing the Cardinal with that his usual (...): which had
it been sitting to the matter in hand, would with ease have been justified
out of all Bellarmines works; both his CVTTING of Fathers when he cites them
for his advantage; delumbating the positions of Protestants, to make their
doctrine odious. Take one Instance of each: citing a place out of Saint August:
to prove that the Scriptures (...) de (...) D^ (...). cap. (...). S. (...).
are so deep and profound, that if from a man's you^h to his decr^pit age, he
should seriously apply them, yet he could not attain to the perfect
knowledge of them; the honest Cardinal CVTS off the ver^e next words that
follow (and touch the controversy indeed) that yet for all that, those
things Aug. Epi. ad Uol. (...). 3.
which are NECESSARY TO SALVATION, are not WITH SVCH DIFFICVLTIE to be
attained. ^ll. de gr^. and (...). (...). cap. 1^. P^. (...). Ex (...) (...).
Elsewhere fetching in a place out of the same father, that after grace is
increased, it is perfected by the will of man not leading, but following it: as
the hand m^, not as the Usher thereof; now says the Cardinal, Calum, audacter
re^, iudiciously REJECTS Saint Augustine for this speech. AS ^E cuts him off,
it is true, but he that reads Calum, shall ^d him alleging that saying of
Saint Augustine, and concluding it with the words that would have throtled
Bellarmine, quod non male a sancto viro dictum, PRAEPOSTERE detorquet Pet. etc.
Which being no ILL I^t (...). lib. 2. (...). 7.
speech of that holyman, PET. LOMBARD has DEPRAVED, and PREPOSTEROVSLY
detorted, and so goes on to justify S. August against Pelagius and Lombard.
And many such might be produced, were it now pertinent; but let us come to his
second imputation, and that is his challenge of the Apologer for mistranslating
the words, and this he calls an cluding of the Reader or Author. THAT then must
be tried.

121 The words of S. Basil are: they which have been thoroughly nu^tured and
brought up (...) in GODS WORD, will not suffer one Sylable (...) of GODS
DOCTRINE to be betrayed. The Slight, which the C^r here observes, is that
his Majesty has translated this last part with reference to the former; thus,
they which are thoroughly instructed in GODS word, will not suffer ^ne syllable
of THE SAME etc. which is the natural Interpretation in the sense, though not
the grammatical reddition of the words. But how does the Epistler mend it?
first, by a translation, They that have been nourished(says he) in SACRED
LEARNING cannot suffer any one Syllable of DIVINE Doctrines: secondly by adding
a Parenthesis, not in the Text [OF THE CHVRCH] to be violated. CORRECTOR,
quoth Terent. Phor.
he in the Comaedie of such another; this is just the very botching which our
Savior speaks of, whereby the rent is made worse: first, for the Translation,
to make a glorious show, he has placed the Greek in the Margin for his credit,
which indeed is as the flag of confusion to himself; for first, who ever read
(...) used by the Fathers, or translated by faithfully-learned Scholars, for
any other but for the holy Scripture? yea, even Christopherson (whose
interpretation he follows) translates it scarae literae; and those words are
never attributed to any writing but those which were penned by the Holy Ghost.

122 For those things are only and properly called (...) wherein there is
something either of Gods divine nature, or his attributes included* and so the
mysteries of our salvation (the Sacraments) are called (...) divine mysteries:
or where the spirit of God is the penman (if it be for writing) and so the
Scriptures only are caled (...) Gods writing; both these in one place of
Cyrill. And Dionysius the Areopagite (as he is entitled) speaking of his
Master Hier^theus, a mong other his praises gives him this, that (...)
Cateches 4. De diui. nomini. cap. 2.
which the Greek Scholiast expounds in Saint John's word out of the Prophet,
that he was (...); taught of God, as having it by especial Revelation; and a
Papist examining Maximus ibid.
that place though he vary from that interpretation, yet says as much to our
purpose, that he which frames his life according to Gods word, may truly be
said (...). Billi. in Isid. Pelus. lib. 1. cap, 36. Eccles. hist. li. 1. cap. 7.
Seek no further then Theodoret (the Author now in hand) who manifestly
expresses the same in that excellent speech of Constantine the Emperor, whose
words are, that seeing the Evangelical and Apostolical Books, and the
Oracles of the old Testament (which S. Paul in the abstract Romans 3. 2.
calls (...) the words of God) do plainly teach us whatsoever we ought to
know or learn (...) of any thing that CONCERNS God (that is, either his
Divine nature, as S. Luke uses the word; or his attributes and qualities, as
S. Peter applies it; or his Law and Religion, as the penner of Act. 17. 29. 2.
Pet. 1. 4.
the Machabees takes it; all which, the Emperor had before 2. Macca. 4. 17.
called (...) Gods business) away therefore (says good Constantine) with all
strife, and seek for the Solution of these matters, (...) out of the
Scriptures inspired Theodoret. Ubi supra.
by God himself. And els-where also the same Theodoret making the orthodox
Christian to check his fellow disputant, for adding something of his own to a
Scripture-Text, tells him that (...) to DIVINE writings nothing must be added;
which must be understood of Gods word only; for it is the perogatiue of it
alone, to be exempt Theodoret. I^mpati. Orthodox.
from adding or detracting; a privilege which no other writing, be it never so
holy, can challenge.

123 But none can better expound Saint Basil then himself, who in the
controversy, about the manner of speech concerning the Trinity, resusing
custom or any other learning, wishes that the Scripture inspired by God,
might judge between the Adversaries and him, and that the truth for ever might
be decreed to be theirs, whose opinion shall be most consonant (...) unto Gods
word, here is the very phrase that he used to the Emperors Basil. ep 80. ad
Eustath.
Lieuetenant, which this profound Jesuit cunningly translated Sacred Learning,
lest Saint Basil should be thought to attribute over much authority to the
Scripture, and thereby should imply unwritten Traditions: and to make this the
more probable, very honestly he forces in a Parenthesis [of the Church] upon
the Text, and translates (...) Divine Doctrines, as if that holy father had
understood Decrees or Canons Ecclesiastical concluded by the Church in some
Synod.

124 Which gives occasion to the second question, that will appose a better
Scholar then this chattering Censurer, where it was ever read that the Church
constitutions or opinions, resolved by Councels or Fathers (not having their
warrant from the express word) were called diuina dogmata: Bellarmine, in his
division of Traditions, implies De verbo non scripto. lib. 4. ca. 2.
the contrary: for sorting them into three kinds, Divine, Apostolical and
Ecclesiastical, THEM only he says to be Divine, which, though they be not
written, Christ himself with his OWN mouth delivered unto his Apostles. But
had he been silent, ONE of more antiquity and Credit then he is, has long
since interpreted Saint Basils Epiphani. lib. 3. haeres. v^.
words, making these three, Diuina Dogmata, the holy Scripture, and the word of
God all one: yea, even in this very Chapter, Theodoret uses it twice in that
very sense. So that his Majesty translating it with a reference to that former
part, did it not either with prejudice to any party, or superficially through
neglect, but upon good warrant; for they that betray the Doctrine which God
has delivered, (that is, (...)) they do also betray the book of God it self
wherein it is delivered.

125 And yet lest it might be thought that his Majesty did this without
precedent or direction, not only Camerarius, whose translation is most rise,
and was known to be a perfect Gr^; but (because He being no Pa pist might be
excepted against) a great Officer among the Parisien Inquisitors has SO turned
it into Latin in his last edition of Theodoret. His words are, The^ which are
nourished DIVINIS LITERIS, eos (...) Syll bam ILLAR^M Johan. Picus. edit. A^.
1608.
in discrimen venire pati posse: if he has done it falsely, then were their
book- Censurers negligent, to let suc^ an error escape; if truly then is
there both malice in this C^r to challenge his Majesty for sh^ing it by a
wrong Translation; and Hypocrisy also to make it a fault in the Apologer,
which is passed for good, and so diuulged by their OWN translator.

126 But of this challenge he gives a reason that it could not be meant of
Gods Doctrine in the SCRIPTVRE, because the controversies then debated, were
concerning HOMOVSION and HYPOSTASIS, and other such names SVBSTANCE, PERSON,
TRINITY, etc. which being not found expressly in Scripture, but determined by
the Church, Saint Basil called DIVINA DOGMATA. Now who would not admire Father
Parsons his dexterity in answering, but special ly his profound skill in
Divinity? Are Dogmata, the Positions and opinions concerning the Coessence,
substance, person, etc. conclusions only of the Church, and not Bible
Doctrine? then was S. Ambrose to blame to triumph over the Arrian with such a
daring question, how is it thou say that homousion is not to be found in
Scripturis diuinis (that is Basils Ambrose de side contr. Arrian. Cap. 5.
(...)) in the HOLY SCRIPTVRES, being that thou see and may know, the
UNITY of substance to be ratified by the authority both of PROPHETS and
EVANGELISTS? whereof Saint Ambrose had cited many in the Chapter before; and
the most of them Theodoret our Author also has couched together in his first
Eccles. hist. lib. 1. cap. 8.
Book. Then was Saint August: likewise too ventrous in appealing for
homousion, both from the Council of Nice which confirmed it, and that of
Ariminum which confuted it, unto the SACRED SCRIPTVRES as the most August. lib.
3. contr. Max. Arrian.
indifferent witnesses in that controversy. But Epiphanius more bold then they
all, who says that the Coessence of the Father and the Son, is in the Law,
in the Apostles, and the Prophets, (...), and in THEM it is MANIFESTLY Haeres.
60.
contained. And so might we cite Tertullian, Athanasius, Basil, Hilary, and
many other, all earnest in the point, that the Coessence, as it is DOGMA, a
Divinity Position, is Scripture Doctrine.

127 Yea, but the WORD it self is not there, what is that to Saint Basil?
that is (...) not (...). THAT, for which the Deputy challenged him, and
requested him to relinquish, was (...) a curiosity of OPINIONS, not of
Divinity TERMS and WORDS; neither the controversy of the Christians with
those Arrians was for the word so much, as for the Substance and Doctrine
Eusebius. hist. li. 1. cap. 12.
and yet it appears by Theodoret (reciting the Epistle of Eusebius concerning
the Nicen Creed, wherein that word is inserted) that those Fathers accounted
even the WORD it self, to be a Scripture term; for in the Anathema annexed by
that Council unto the conclusion of that Creed, it is enioined upon pain
thereof, that none should use any term or WORD not written in the Scripture.
And that is it of which S. Basil himself challenges Eunomius for enforcing
Contr. Eunom. lib. 2.
WORDS and terms not found in any place of holy Writ; which, within a line or
two after, he calls (...) Gods Doctrine, school, or library. So that the
Reader, by this time, may judge, whether of the translations, either that of
his Majesty, or this of the Censurer be more agreeable to the Greek Text, or
the purpose of that holy Father: His Majesty to avoid a repetition of the same
word twice Moral. reg. 26. and 80. Tracta. de sine Reg. breuior. Iater. 1. etc.
[Gods word, Gods Doctrine] translating it with a reference; This Epistler to
make Traditions good (which Saint Basil is the most forward to anoide in all
his works, and so is Theodoret also) by botching in a word [of the Church]
never dreamed or by either of them both, and for which he has no warrant
either from author or interpreter. His Majesty having a translation of their
own, justifying his reddition word by word, and the questions also then in
hand, being to be vmper'd only by the holy Scripture; for that which led the
Fathers in the Nicen Council to the word Theodor. eccle. hist. li^. cap. 8.
homousion was the sole authority of Gods word.

128 From thence he passes to the third shift, (as this Land-le^ per cals^t)
which is his Majesty's counterpoise of Disp^rities between the case of Saint
Basil and the Archpriest; that holy Father being excited to Arrianisme, an
Heresy subuertng the maine ground-cel of our Religion, being no less then
the denying of our Savior his eternal God head: Blackwell urged to thwart no
article of Faith but only to recognize his loyalty to his natural
Sovereign. Which though the Jesuit at the first, calls, a weak argument; yet
he is pleased afterward to try how he can make a conformity between it and
the Oathe; which he does, by a compatatiue supposing; and that two fold:
first of the persons, both of the Emperors Deputy, and our Judges, that, If
Modestus the Deputy, had been asked, infauour of what Religion he made the
demand to Saint Basil, he would have answered, the ORTHODOX: as the Judges, of
England do now, that require the Oath.

129 Which is a su^posall of utter improbabilitie of the one, and manifest
untruth of the other part; for the Deputy, it appeared he cared not which was
Orthodox or heretical he was of the Emperors Religion up and down, true or
false; which by his arguments unto S. Basil was evidently apparent: for the
opinions then controuerted, he termed them but quillets: as Gallio an Other
Deputy, but a question of words and names: either might stand as the Act. 1^15.
Emperor thought good: and for the profession, he told Saint Basil, it was but
yielding for the time, making fair weather for the present: and the most
pressing motive he used, was but the promise of the Emperers friendship: for
THAT (you may be sure) the Deputy thought to be a man's Summum bonum, and to
be preferred before all the Coessences or hypostases, or Trinity or Deity, or
whatsoever. Which made that holy Father to tell him that his arguments were
toies for Children. As for our Judges; which of them amongst us, in tendering
the Oath, does offer it as a matter of Faith or Doctrine; tending one way or
other? save that as the allegiance of a Subject, and the assurance of the Kings
safety is a point of Religion.

130 His other personal supposall is of the forenamed Emperor, and a
Protestant prince, that if any man should hauethen called Valens, Arrian, it
had been no less offensive, then now to call King James (that is his meaning)
a Caluinist or Lutheran. And what is this to the purpose? But that his gall
ouer-flowes, and he must void it by his pen in his icteritious Pamphlet: His
Majesty no further holds with Luther or Calvin, then Saint Paul his Sicut
gives him leave; that is, so far forth as they hold with Christ: and were 1.
Cor. II. I.
not the Romish both Princes and Priests enthralled to the Popes Dictats, --
Iurare in verba magistri, to take his word Horace.
for Gospel, more then King James is to Calvin or Luther, factions in Religion
had long since vanished, and Christianity had been more firmly established,
and floutished more generally. In the mean time, to this scorning Flur, his
majesty answers with the same modesty, truth and learning, that Saint
Augustine did such a petulant Companion (as Contr. lit. Petil. lib. 2. Cap. 10.
12.
this Jesuit) by whom he was charged to be a Manichee It is Petilian, says
he, who judging of an other man's conscience does so entitle me, but I deny my
self to be, which know myself, and speak out of mine own conscience;
homosum de area Christi, I am a man of Christ's floor; if I be naught, I am the
Chafe; if I be good, I am the grain: buius autem Area ventilabrum non est
lingua Petiliani, yet is it not the peevish or lavish tongue of Father Parsons,
that must Ventilate the Corn of this Floor, to try whether I be chasse
(...) Wheat.

131 His second conformity therefore is of the matter that the differences
betwixt Arrians and Catholics in Saint Basils time, are the same which are
between Protestants and Papists at this day. In the Chapter where this Story
in hand is recorded, Theodoret makes mention of Lib. 4. cap. 17.
the Emperors Cook (whose name was Demosthenes) how rudely he railed upon
Saint Basil when he was co^ferring with Valens the Emperor; and all the answer
which that Reverend Father gave him, was a smile, with this touch, now I see an
UNLEARNED Demosthenes: and who will not smile and say, that he now hears not
an unlearned only, but a shameless Jesuit, making this comparison? For it is
known that Arrianisme rased the very foundation of our Faith in Christ Jesus;
whereas there is no principle of divinity, nor Article of Creed, but the Protest
ints (so called) do profess it more sincerely, and maintain it more firmly,
then the Church of Rome has done for these thousand years.

132 But grant all this that has been said by him were true (as nothing can
be more false) yet what is it to the Oath, or to the Cardinals intendment; or
for the Arch-priests refufal, either as Bellarmine applies the Story, or as
the Censurer abbets it? For this is Bellarmines argument (if he meant it to the
purpose in hand); Sant Basil denied his yielding to Arrianisme at the Emperors
command lest there by he should deny the God-^ead of his Lord and Christ:
therefore Blackwell ought to forbear the taking of an Oath, wherein he should
only recognize his Faith and Fealty to his hedge King and Sovereign. The
Epistlers is this: Arrianisme and Caluianisme are both alike opposite to
Catholic truth, therefore Papists may not take the Oath of Temporal
Allegiance to their lawful King. For let it be duly weighed (be the
Circumstances never so many) this is the sum and substance of their applying
and supporting that alleged authority, if they speak to the point. And did
not then the Saduces make as necessary a Consequence upon the Judicial Law?
Seven brethren successively married one woman, as Moses willed; and they Matt.
22 25.
all deceasing she at last died, therefore there can be no resurrection to
another world, lest the marriage there should prove litigious?

133. But by this time now, the Censurer has surfeited of his pains, and is
glad (as it seems by him) that he is come to the REMAINDER,as he calls it,
Number. 68 So that all the the Sections following, are but transitions of S. Peter
and Marcellinus, and Gregory and Leo, etc. Examples produced by the Cardinal,
and refelled by his Majesty with singular d^xterity, learning and zeal. And
yet this (though but a Remainder) the Epistler, as being too heavy for his
weak skill, transmits to the Cardinal: wherein he disfereth from that
railing Cook before mentioned; Theodor vbi supra.
for S. Basil was enforced to cut him off, telling him that his skill was best
in the Kitchen when he was seasoning broth, his Adders ears were not for
Mysteries of Divinity. But Fa. Parsons (though the Priests describe him to be
a most hot and chollericke fellow) has, you see, this grace (or Art at least)
while these points are in hand to dismiss himself, and slip the collar just
as Gallio did in the Acts, and in his Act. 8. 15.
very words, Siiniquum aliquid aut facinus pessimum, o^ Iudaei recte vos
sustinerem: If there be matter of any notable Treachery, Villainy, Conspiracy,
you shall find me ready to support you, Cardinal Bellarmine: but if they be
questions of Gods Law touching points of Divinity, matter of ancient Story, or
reading in Fathers, Uos Ipsi videritis, Iudex ego horum esse nolo: Look to it
your self Sir, I will be no Judge in THESE matters. If any matter of scorning
or reuiling, or fresh intelligence of things never acted nor thought of; then
turn HIM loose. To justify this for a truth. the Reader shall not skip a
Section; for, howsoever he transmits the reply, upon his Majesty's answer to
those authorities, unto the Cardinal, for the substance there of; yet he has
alight upon a SCOFF therein (as he terms it) and there he stays a while.

134. If it be a Scoff, it is that which they call edentata Macro. Satur. lib.
7.
without gall or Contumely: and what is it? Tully said, that Hortensius lift up
Eloquence to Heaven, that himself might go Cic^n Hortens.
up with her; so Leo praised S. ^eter up to the sky, that he, being his heir
(for so he styles himself) might thither also be advanced with him. A
comparison full of Vrbanity and truth: ciuilly taxing, not the Popes arrogancy
so much as his Policy, that could wind himself up into an universal
praeeminence by the Proxy of S. Peter's pretended assumption. But is not this
facete Resemblance retorted (indeed) with a bitter scorn by the Epistler, when
he says, that his Majesty borrowed both that allusion and those subsequent
Collections out of Leo, from M. Reynolds (as if all his Majesty's learning were
at the second hand) and M. Reynolds from M. Jewel? (sure he was as lawful a
Bishop, as M. Bellarmine is a Cardinal, and deserves the Title as well;) which
is not a Scoff only, but a plain Slander.

135. First, for his Majesty: He that hears his ordinary Discourses at every
meal, upon every occasion, in any argument of any kind of Learning, shall find
(according to the ancient Greek Proverb) that he is not Achil^s his son, but
Achilles himself; and that he has not fetched his Learning from any man's
Cisterne, but drunk it Plut. de dis^r. adulat. and amici.
in at the Wellhead from the Authors themselves: and were the great Cardinal
his Majesty's Attendant at board, he should know and find, that, in any
different point of Religion, his Majesty would appear a more perfect Textuary
(and for the Scripture especially) then himself. Secondly, for D. Reynolds,
his Books diuulged are few; but compare them that are, quantity for
quantity, with Bellarmines large bulk of Controversies (let the collation be
impartial) the Cardinal will be found to come as short of him, for variety of
all kind of Learning, admirable memory, uncontrollable Quotations, and true
Allegations as the ^oot-man dragged behind the Lydian Coach, which they say,
was as swift in the flight as an arrow. Thirdly, as Plutar.
Aristotle once applied it out of Homer, Polydamas mihi pris mum? Does Fa.
Parsons tax any for borrowing, who, not Aristot. Eth.
only by the auerment of the Priests, but by the true tracing of his Pamphlets,
is discovered for a more vain crowling, bragging it with his borrowed plumes,
then that Jack Daw, which Aesop describes, and Horace applies in the like
case? For if every Creditor should arrest him for that he has borrowed in the
worlds view (besides his privy debts, he would be forced for shame to say, as
the Leno did in the Comaedie for his stolen Damsels (when he was attached,
and could conceal them no longer) Miratus fui Plaut. Paenulus.
neminem venire qui istas assereret manu; mea profecto non sunt: I marvel that
no man challenged them from me before, for I will swear they be NONE of MINE.
In his Ward word that whole Decade of reasons to d^e the Pope from being
Antichrist, is wholly taken out of Bellarmines Books. In his triple
Conuersions, all his Martyrs and Saints fetched out of Surius and Barouius,
with the Roman Legend. In this Censure of the Apology, those foul
imputations laid upon Lady Elizabeth, THAT QVEENE of precious memory, all
borrowed from Saunders, Reynolds, and Gifford, save some railing terms
wrought out of his own brain, as the Spiders web out of her own substance.
But whatsoever concerns the nature of the Oath, or title of Supremacy,
Allens Apology is his chief Oracle; and that so palpably, that (as he once
said) Hem alterum hunc ex hoc natum dicas: Terent. Eunuc.
But of all other, his Resolution (which is the only praiseworthy work that
ever he did) if from thence, Gasper Loartes Quodli. pa. 71. 173.
should take what is his, a few scraps would remain of Parsons own, if the
Priests say true. Yea Bellarmine himself, that Great Apollo for Controversies
(it will be justified) has no answer to any Argument, nor definition nor
division of any wit or weight, which he has not borrowed from Popish Writers,
that have handled the same questions before him. But it is all-day seen, that
there is none so ready to take a debtor by the throat, for borrowing a pety
sum of four Nobles then he, who himself was in arrerages above ten thousand
Talents. Matthew. 18. 28.


136 And what is that which is thus borrowed by M. Reynolds? Certain
hyperbolicall bumbasted phrases, wherewith Leo sets out S. Peter's authority;
especially that blaspemous speech of his, that our Lord did take S. Peter into
the Fellowship of the INDIVISIBLE UNITY; such an impious and profanely proud
assertion, as a Christians heart would tremble to imagine it, his hand ab horre
to write it. And this (says the Censurer) has the Apologer taken from M.
Reynolds, and he from M. Jewel And will Fa. Parsons avouch this upon his
small credit? Such Challengers should direct the Reader to the places, else
they will be thought forgeries; and make truer quotations then the Epistler
does here, who, for that speech of Leo, sends us in the margin to an Epistle
of his ad Episcopum Uiennensem, there being no such in all his Book, but one
entitled ad Episcopos per Uiennensem Prouinciam constitutos: which, were it
his own or the Printers error, since he will be such a curious Lynceus in
other men's marginall slips, it is good to let him see his own escapes, yet not
as HE does with contumelious insulting. But in what Book of Bishop Jewels is
it; or where has Harding answered it? The truth is, that this may be a double
untruth, both for the challenge and the answer, seeing he quotes no place. For
Bishop Jewel in one Book neither names Leo therein, nor B. Jewel, Re ply,
Artic. 4. Diuis. 32.
reads the words so as Leo has them: but the words by him there cited, are,
that God took S. Peter in Consortium indiuiduae TRINITATIS, into the Consort
and Fellowship of the indivisible TRINITY; and for the Author of the speech,
he quotes Boniface the 8. out of the Sext or Extr. de elect. and elect. potest.
paragr. Fundament.
Decretals. How then could Harding answer him for Leo, when in that case he
mentions him not? but suppose he has answered it, what follows thereof?
Being once answered (quoth he) they need not repeat it so often again: (if
Pap^sts had taken out that Lesson, the world had been eased of many Books, and
Bellarmine might have Epitomized his three Tomes.)

137 Indeed such swelling words of Vanity (or rather of Blasphemy) were better
buried in silence, then revived in print, if the Pope would leave arrogating to
himself Uide Martam and Benedict^ Benedict.
NOW, and his Advocates cease to flatter him in it, as much as that Hyperbole
comes to, though in other words. But insufficient answers must not impose a
perpetual re ^cence from Reply; for silence in that kind, does not only betray
the truth, but also establishes a falsehood, by an implied consent.

138 Hear we then that answer, either made by Harding, or cogg'd by Parsons:
The Unity that Leo speaks of is of NAME, not of ESSENCE. First then, both Leo
and Boniface were to blame, who in the very same place where those words are,
say, that Christ made S. Peter the chief, that from him (as from the head) he
might power Vbi supra.
his gifts into the whole body of his Church: and presently subnects the reason
thereof, for that he had taken S. Peter into the Consort of the indivisible
Unity. This is another manner of assumption into Unity then Names will afford.
But the Gloss is much more to blame, to point us, for the interpretation of
the word Unity, to that Chapter of the Decrees, In Christo Pater; but that
thereby they would have us know, the Unity whereunto Christ took S. Peter, to
be Gloss. ibid. and de Consecr. did. 2. in Christo. Aluar. Pelap. de planct.
Eccles. lib. 1. cap. 37.
the same of the Son with the Father. And do not their own Canonists
plainly say, that Papa participat vtramque naturam cum Christo? Secondly, what
learning will justify that phrase of speech [an Unity of names?] One name may
be communicated between two, or among more, and many names of diverse
appellations may be united in one Catalogue; or, after the custom of the old
Romans, and some Nations, in one man's title: but that the same name, imparted
to several persons, should be called an Unity, le^ all the Onomastiks, and
Nomenclators, or Mathematicians, or Schoolmen be searched, and it will not be
found. Or what Divinity will warrant, that Indiuidua Vnitas was ever
attributed to any but to the holy Trinity, in the eternal and inseperable
essence united? Thirdly, whereas he says, that Hardings answer is according
to Leo his sense and drift, it is an errant falsehood: for his word assumptum
signifying the ^o. Epist. ad Episcop. in. Vi^ens.
time past, thereby he infers, that Christ having first assumed S. Peter into
that fellowship, id quod ipse ERAT voluit nominari, his pleasure was to call
him by the name of that which himself was. Fourthly, the word Rock is none of
the names of our Savior, but Symbolically only; and so is the name of light:
which title notwithstanding Matthew. 5. 14.
he imparted to al his Apostles, which (by this rule) might inuest them with as
high an interest in the Indivisible Unity as S. Peter had; and Moses much more,
unto whom the Almighty gave his own name, telling him that he should be
Elohim, God unto Pharao; another manner of Unity for Exodus 7. 1.
a name, then the Metaphor of a Rock.

139 In brief, let Leo expound himself, as elsewhere he does, when he says,
that our Lord (of his favor and grace) vouchsafed to S. Peter Consortium
potentiaesuae, the great and wonderful consort and fellowship of his own
(...) Sermon. 3. de. ass^mp. sua.
power; among the rest, that there should be no Principality on earth, but it
should be given by S. Peter. And a little after, making Christ speak to S.
Peter of the Prerogative which was granted him, he declares (withal) the
extent thereof, Vt quae mihi potestate sunt propria, because those things ^oid.
which are proper to my 'POWER, are also participated in Common between US
two. And is not this Unity of more inward consort then Names can work? which
(to turn the Censurers words upon himself) if Harding or Parsons would have
equally considered, neither would the one have answered it so slightly and
vn-diuine-like, neither the other be offended to hear it often repeated, that
even for the credit of their eloquently arrogant Pope, it might have light upon
a sounder Apology, or Interpretation at least. But speak insooth (honest
Censurer) is Unity of NAME Hardings own distinction in answer to Bishop
Jewel? Himself denies it* for M. Harding says, that Har. fol. 174. D.
Jewel. def. of Apol. part. 2. fol. 121. Addition.
Leo meant thereby an Unity in Quality, an Unity in Grace, an Unity that is
proper to Christ himself; and mentions no Unity of NAME: for though he were
a corrupt Doctor, yet was he a better Divine then to speak so absurdly, as
Parsons would here make him.

140 After this, like another Lysander, having stripp't himself of his Lions
skin, and spoken for Leo, what he can, and as you hear; now he presents
himself in his Foxes Case, and takes Bellarmines person upon him (for of
Saunders, it seems he is ashamed) in which habit, he has cunningly crept
through seven leaves at once of the Apology, from page 95. to 110. even to that
place where his Majesty does charge the Cardinal (after an excellent
comparison of Contrarietyes between the Scriptures and Bellarmines writings)
that God and Belial, light and darkness, Heaven and Hell, are not more
contrary, then the said Bellarmines estimation of Kings, is to Gods. Which
after this Censurer has imboss't with a name according to his Custom (calling
it A PASSIONATE CONCLUSION) he makes a long relation of the Reverend opinion
that Bellarmine has, and of the high Supremacy which he allots to Kings,
which we may see (he says) in the Cardinals Book, De Laicis (for he is
excellent to lengthen a discourse, when it is prepared to his hand, as Jacob
Genesis 27.
was to commend his cogg'd venison when Rebecka had provided it.)

141. But having read that Book (to which he referres us) what shall we fin
de there? First, that the Cardinal does there respect Kings, as much as any
other, perhaps, has ever done before him: Secondly, that he maintains the
Authority of Princes against Anabaptists Atheists, and other miscrean^s, etc.
In both which, Fa. Rainard show himself what he is, for lest he should be
taken in the first for ouer-lashing (because it will appear that Bellarmine,
in that theme, comes short of many Books both of God and Men, extant before
his) he puts in [PERHAPS] and then what has the Cardinal done equal with
other men? For THAT Word must excuse him, if either his good respect of kings
come short of other Authors, or his base account of the^ exceed any other;
that, perhaps, he respected them as well as they did, and, perhaps, not. Now
sure, M Bellarmine, Quicquid recte curatum velis huic mandes, You have alight
upon a worthy Patron, and his Majesty upon Terent.
a learned Antapologer. And even so he deals in the second. For the Cardinal
maintains Kings (says he) against Anabap tists and Atheists; but he adds
not and against the POP^, unless he rank him amongst those whom he (...)
MISCREANTS; and then what great matt^ has the Cardinal done for Kings? Just
so much as the Saxons did for the ancient Britains who freed them from the
Picts, but inth^alled them to themselves in a sorer s^ruitude Polydor. Virg.
Angl. hist. li. 3. Apthon. progym.
It is an old rule of Rhetorike, in themes comparatiue, (...) to disgrace a
thing by extolling it, and to advance that which an encountering comparison ^hal
debase to the lowest. Such Art has Bellarmine showed, in his lifting Princes
up to the skies, by embroidering their authority; but (setting the Pope above
them) he does turn them down with a more foul disgrace; as the Eagle in the
Apologue soared the higher with the Torteise, that ^he might (...) her in
pieces with the greater fall: Yea so Aesop.
much the Cardinal himself confesses, that all the prerogatives Resp. ad
Venet.
which ever he gave to Kings, was only in refuting of Anabaptists, not in
respect of the Pope.

142. But which are those moun^ing preeminences that he has affoorded unto
Kings? One is (says the Censurer) that the Civil Law of the Temporast Prince,
does no less bind the Subject in Conscience, then the immediate Law of God.
This is (indeed) an eminent Perogatiue; but is it a true position in Divinity,
or false? (take it, for the time, but as a question asked, not now to be
debated.) If false, then without controversy, the great master of
Controversies has fondly erred in setting down such an unlimited Maxim: If
true, why then do not the Romish Catholics of England obey the Temporal
Laws of the Realm, by his Majesty established? or by what Divinity can the
same Bellarmine, di^wade the Archpriest from yielding his assent to the OATH,
which a Statute and Law-Ciuill (confirmed by his Majesty,) does in^oyne? or how
can the profound Antapologist. inti^le THIS Law of a Temporal Prince such an
A^gartation of conscience, as never was imposed upon any (...)? If that
Position stand firm, then have Recusant Catholics sinned against God and
their Consci^nce, in denying the OATH: if it be limitable by their Romish
di^tinctions, then never brag of any Prerogative that Princes have by this
(...) of Bellarmines.

143 Well, but he is yet more kind, and endowes Kings with a more special
privilege; affirming, that un to them belong^ the protection of Religion. And
is this general unto all Kings? first then, that Pope deluded the Kings of
England, when he annexed the l^itle [DEFFNDER OF THE FAITH] ^o their (...), a
of (...) grace, and different from other Princes; making that affixum which is
ad^atum; and an honor o^ favor which is so by nature; and a reward for merit,
which is an office inseperable from Souereigntie Secondly, what kind o^
Protectors does he make them? surely Protectors minors; for, as if they were
in their non age, they are bound (says Bella de laicis. lib. cap 18. pa^ag. at
hic ^rror.
he, in that very place) to protect no Religion but what the Catholic Bishop
(and specially the HIGH PRIEST o^ Rome) do teach to be held and maintained.

144 But yet more then that HE permits them Civil government in Civil matters
over all persons as well Ecclesiastical as Temporal. An high fa^our verelie,
and Princes are much beholden to him for it: but is not this an implicit
Contradiction to the former? For how can a King defend Religion, that is,
repel Heresies, suppress Schisms, and see that the Faith of Christ be
sincerely professed within his Kingdoms, and yet be a Governor in Civil
causes only, and not in spiritual? can a King be a Protector of that, with
the violation and breach whereof he may not intermeddle as a Governor? And is
it not a thank worthy privilege, that he affoordeth Kings, especially over
Clergymen, whom he submits to their Sovereigns only vi^rationis, as if
Discretion, not Religion were the bond of their Duty?

145 Why but this is as much (says the Epistler,) as, reserving Gods right to
himself, a Catholic can give to Caesar. First then THAT Catholic streightens
Caesar more then God himself does; and this is that wherewith his Majesty
challenges the Cardinal, for his vast difference from God in this case; who
in his word has appointed Kings to be Guaraians of both the Tables, to
command Deuteronomy. 17. 18.
and prohibit, not in Civil affairs only, but in Matters also concerning
Religion, says Saint Augustine. Secondly, Cont. Cres. Gram. lib. 3. ca. 51.
THAT Catholic is no less, nor better then the Donatists; whose opinion it
was (as the same Father describes Co^. (...). P^m. lib. 1. Cap. 7.
it) that Princes might not meddle in CASES SPIRITVAL. But Solomon (who
himself was a King, and knew what concerned a Sovereign in all points, for
who might compare Eccle. 2. 12. 13.
with him? says the Scripture) is of opinion that the Pro^. 20. 8.
King sitting in his Throane, does with his look chase away OMNE m^lum, all
kind of evil; and I trow (says S. August) that al Heresies and Schisms are
an evil, I am sure (quoth. (...)) Ubi supra. Gal. 5. 20.
S Paul reckons themamong the works of the flesh: and that speech of King
Solomon, Bellarmine himself cites (...). ^bi supra.
for Princes, in that place where he graceth them with that power, to be
Protectors of Religion.

146 Now we have followed him thus far, we must retire; for this wily
Creature, fearing lest he should be taken by the track or sent, has eathed
himself back a gain into the 92. page and there breaks ground, where his
Majesty showed the Cardinal what wrong he had done Gregory the Great, in
saying that he assumed unto himself the title of Caput fidei, the Head of
Faith. In consuring whereof, the Epistler first differs from Bellarmine* for
that which the Cardinal applies as a personal ^le to Gregory himself, this
Champion of his ^e^erres as a local privilege to the Sea Apostolic (which
perhaps they will reconcile, by making them two, the Pope and See, terms
conuertible.) Secondly, he repeates his Majesty's interpretation, refutes it
not; but labors upon the second answer, where his Majesty said, that if the
interpretation and sense which he had given, would not be admitted, he might
then as well dismiss Gregory (suppose he spoke in his own behalf, as they
would have him) as Bellarmine often casts off many of the Fathers [minus ca^te
locutus est] he spoke not very advisedly, and to that purpose cites two
places. Now heeres work for the Censurer, to tumble over a Book, and see if
he can take the Apologer tripping in the quotations; as for the matter it
self, that, the Cardinal must look too.

147 And what has he found in his search? That the Apologer cannot defend
himself from WILFVLL EXAGGERATION and VOLVNTARIE MISTAKING, because that
speech is used but only in one of those places, marginated by his Majesty, and
there uttered of Lyra a recent Paraphrast, not of any Father. But he that
reads the place, shall find both an explicit contradiction, and Numb. 25. 8.
a double trans-fixion, like that stroke of Phinees (for force, not for zeal)
pearcing with one speech through two at once, For in the very next precedent
Paragraph, Lyra Bellar. de. Romans Pontif. lib. 2. cap. 10.
(says the Cardinal) is of no such authority, as that we should oppose HIM
omnibus antiquis Patribus, to all the ancient Fathers: presently in the next
words, without doubt (says Bellarmine) Lyranus Hieronymum sequitur, Lyra does
follow Hierome in that his opinion; there is the Contradiction: for how could
Lyra thwart ALL the Fathers, when he had what he said from Saint Hierome.
Secondly, he had Hierom for his Author, in saying as he did, although therein
he spoke not so advisedly (says the Cardinal) whereby he strikes them both at
once; and Hierom rather then Lyr^: for if Lyra spoke unadvisedly (having what
he spoke from Hierom) Hier^m was much more unadvised to utter such a thing of
his own head. Briefly, was the opinion Orthodox and true? then was not Lyra to
be blamed: was it unsound and not justifiable? then was Hierom touched by the
Cardinal, and not Lyra. In the other place, the very words [minus caute etc.]
are not at all, but the sense of them to the full; for Bellarmine says there,
that some of the De Christo. li. 2. ca. 2. ad secund.
Fathers do sometimes err, that is, speak unadvisedly or worse, and that
therefore he follows them not in their singular opinions, when ONE crosses
the rest; and I trow that singularity is either an unadvised, or a wilful
error. Where is now the Apologers VOLVNTARIE MISTAKING? the places for
quotation, and the speech for substance being truly alleged.

148 Yea, but it is a WILFVLL EXAGGERATION, to say that he does it OFTEN. And
to exaggerate a truth justifiable against an adversary, is no fault either in
Rhetorik or Divinity, and that it is a truth, a little pains shall be taken
(seeing this Champion of his does exact and challenge them) to cull out of his
works some few places, to show his frequent reiection of the Fathers, with
worse then Minus caute.

149 In one place he casts off Theophylact and Euthymius together, for making
unfit answers, and giving Solutions not De Christo. li. 2. cap. 22.
to the purpose and the first of them a little after, with some disgrace; bothby
comparison, that fathers more learned, holy and ancient then he, were of
another mind; and with scorn also, no^ dubito quin ridendus sit ipse,
himself no doubt will be laughed at if he swerve from their opinion. But it
will be said, perhaps Ibi^ parag. Quart.
that he being a modern writer (not past 800. years standing) might be so
shifted: But Justin Martyr, Irenaeus, Epiphanius etc. HE will regard, if THEY
come in his way it may be so, for of them three he says. Non video quo Lib.
1. de. Bea. Sanct. ca. 6.
pacto ab errore defendere possimus, I see not how we can possibly defend them
from an error: neither can Tertullian (whose antiquity may not be accepted
against) free himself; De Pontif. Romans lib. 4. cap. 8.
for Tertulliano non est OMNINO habenda fides in h^c part. In this case
Tertullian is not AT ALL to be credited, says the Cardinal. Elsewhere of
Saint Hierom; he seems (says Bellarmine) not to be very constant to him
self De cler. lib. 1. cap. 15. De Pontif. Romans lib. 1.
for that his opinion. In another place, Hierom seems to be of that opinion,
which is a false one, and shall in the due place be confuted. Elsewhere, he
crowdes three of them up together, very curstly: Tertullian (says he) was an
Arch-Heretike, Lactantius slipped into many Errors, and studied Tullies De
beatitud. sanctorom. lib. 1. cap. 5.
works more then the Scriptures: as for Victorinus, though a Martyr, yet he
was no Scholar. Briefly, take them altogether: who knows not (says he) that
the Fathers had the gift of interpretation in an excellent manner? and yet, De
verbi dei interpret. lib. 3. ca. 10. para. Dice^.
CONSTAT, it is MANIFEST, quosdam ex pracipuis, that SOME of the CHIEF, among
them have erre^ in some things, non LEVITER and that is more then Minus Caute,
to speak unadvisedly. Now these are but a few among many, and that in one of
his Tomes only, which notwitstanding (for good reasons) might still have been
suppressed, but that the Epistler would needs (according to the Proverb)
anagyrian commouere, have this mixen stirred, which was neither much to the
purpose in hand, nor Erasmus ex Aristoph.
for the Cardinals credit; who is observed to use the Fathers as it was said
that Solon used his friends, and that is no otherwise then marchantes use their
figures in accounts; for thousands if they please him; for Ciphers if they
cross him.

150 But here again the Vermin has out stripped us, and is scudded as far as
pager 08 where his Majesty sets down the base and mean styles and titles
which Bellarmine gives to Kings: and the first is, that Kings are rather slaves
then Lords, which charge by his majesty, the Censurer (according to his
custom) calls an outrageous proposition, an intemperate accusation, and a
shameful. But how does he confute it? even like a vain and frapling surueyor
who taking upon him to make a terrar of some men's lands discribes the
situation, and discourses of the quality of the grounds and meadows that lie
about it, but of the contents of the land it self, he says nothing: for
after the Epistler has spent three whole numbers, to tell us what excellent
Arguments Bellarmine has made in two or three Chapters THERE-ABOVTS to
confirm the authority of Kings against the Anabaptists: (but in no case
against the Pope) and of the difference of Se^uitude, with a great deal of
such stuff; to avoid the imputation it self said against the Cardinal, he
says not a word; but hootes at it, as if there were no such thing: which, if
it be not there to be found, let the Reader judge. For the Cardinal first
laying his division of a twofold Subjection, Civil and De lai^is. lib. 3. cap.
7. parag. Ex his.
Despoticall, this last he says to be propria seruitus the true and proper
Servitude or Slavery: then showing the difference between these two; that the
politic subject serves for his own commodity, not for others, but the true
note of Servile subjection is to serve for another, not for his own benefit;
upon these, the conclusion which he infers is: that if there be any
servitude in a State politic (as there must needs) the King ought to be
called proprie seru^s, and his reason is, because he serves not for his OWN
benefit, but for OTHERS. Now lay these together; HE is PROPERLY a slave or vass
all, which serves for an OTHERS commodity, NOT for his own, but a King
serves NOT for his OWN, but for his SVBIECTS behoof; Ergo, What is this the^
but to conclude Kings to be mancipia, slaves in the right kind, upon his
premised division and difference, if it be right.

151 The second is; that Kings are not subject only to Popes, to Bishops, to
Priests, but even to De acons This is Saint Chrysostomes (says the Epistler)
not Bellar mines. Hom. in Mat. 83.
That Is not so, though the Cardinal will needs fasten it upon him. The
particular instance, which follows of keeping men (though of the highest
place and condition) from the Communion, because therein the Deac^ns power goes
beyond Kings, this indeed is Chrysostomes, but the preamble general is
Bellarmines, when he says, that Chrysostom does subject Kings even to
DEACONS. Therefore unto him may the Poets verse be applied, At male cum recitas
incipit esse tuus.
Chrysostomes speech was good, as it is confined by him to Martial.
such an high Ecclesiastical function; for no man ever denied, that Priests
had more authority then Kings in such Cases of ministerial duties; but is the
conclusion thereupon sound or honest, therefore Chrysostom makes Kings
inferior to Deacons? yet this was Bellarmines Sophistry to put in the words of
Chrysostom, Si indigne adeat, cohibe et coerce, as if that holy Father had
meant indefinitly of any moral access, or coertion civil; whereas he only
speaks of coming to the Lords Altar or Table to receive the Communion: if
THEN the Priest know the King to be a notorious, and publicly scandalous
sinner, and continues therein, to the offense of God and Church, without
repentance, he might in that case, and for that time forbear to minister unto
him. But that Bellarmine meant i^n all Cases whatsoever, is manifest by that
speech, which (out Ia Psalm. 98.
of Saint Augustine) he cites in that very place, that Moses was therefore a
Priest because he was the greatest, nam Sacerdote nemo mayor, for no man could
be GREATER then a Priest; which, as propounded by Bellarmine, he that reads
it, would think that Saint Augustine abased Kings below Priests in all things
(a conceit, which was ever farthest from that holy Father) and yet, distingue
tempora, at that time (in Israeli) it was true, before there was a King for
hereditary Succession: for as the same father shows elsewhere, the State of
Israel was then to be entitled Regnum Sacerdotale, a Priestly Kingdom.

152 And yet thus does he also shift off the third place which is, that an
Emperor must content himself to drink after a Bishop, yea, after his
Chapleine or Deac^n, for, this also the Censurer transmits to Sulpitius Seu^us,
from whom Bellarmine fetched it. And true it is, that Sulp^tius so sets it
down; but he that reads the story, how Martin the Bishop De vita Mart. ^p. 23
Dialog. lib. 2. cap. 7.
of Towers carried himself in his outward behavior toward that Emperor, as
also toward the Queen Augusta, suffering her to stand and wait upon him a^
supper time; to fill him his drink; to minister water to his hands; to eat of
the remainder which he left; and in the mean time, the Bishop to sit in his
chair, and permit all this, with many other such passages, would rather think
that Sulpitius described a Sullen and a Surly Prelate, then either an humbled
Christian, or an humble Saint: first therefore to the story, and after to
Bellarmine.

153 Bishop Martin being at a feast with the Emperor, a ser^itor at the
midmeale (according to custom) offers a bowl of wine to the Emperor, who
comm^nds it to be first reached to the Bishop which sat next to him in a chain
hoping to have received it from the Bishops hands again* the Bishop takes the
cup and his full draught, and passing by the Emperor, Dukes, and other guests of
high place, reaches it to his Deacon. A mannerly Prelate surely, both to
drink before the Emperor, and to balke him after; but the reason added by the
Historian is notable, Nullum existimans digniorem quipost se biberet, because
he thought no man there more worthy to drink after him then the Priest: and
no marvel, for Saint Paul had taught them both that rule, Rom 12. 10.
honor inuicem praeuenire, to outstrip each other in giving honor and
precedence: and elsewhere, that every ^an esteem an other better then
himself; for questionless; the spirit of God Phil. 2. 3.
sets him out for an example of admirable approbation, Esa. 65. 5.
that said of himself, Stand apart, come not near me, for I am holier then
(...) (...) (...) Sto^y, But what is this to Bellarmine, for he must take it as
he finds it?

154. Doubtless, it argues his extreme base account that he makes of Kings,
even in recounting this Story; and especially as he has placed it: for, having
urged two Arguments before out of Scriptures and Fathers, to prove the
inferioritie of Kings to Persons Ecclesiastical (how well applied, this is no
place to examine, the Christian Reader may there judge) he adds a third, which
is drawn from the behavior of Bishops and Kings (so he marshalleth them each
to other; first, how Fabian the Pope excluded Philip the Emperor from the Comm^
at E^ster; Secondly, how S. Ambrose made Th^odosius the Emperor do public
Penance in the Church; and the third is, THIS of Bishop Martin and his
Chaplain, thus uncivilly using the Emperor a^ his own board, openly: and all
these to show the Subjection (as he calls it) of Kings to Eccl^siasticall
persons, and that of the meanest Order. Wherein the Cardinal discou^reth his
mind that not in Spiritual Offices of the Church alone, but even in Civil
behavior, Kings are inferior to Priests; else, as he did cite the Story to
show what was done, so would he either have censured the (...) for that proud
fact; or at least have reproved the Historian for rendering such a reason, so
unchristian and so unsavory: but citing it for a proof, and not confuting it
for a surquedrie, he reuealeth the base conceit he has of Kings.

155. To all this, what says the learned Censurer? As if either the Cardinal
had appointed him to be the Apologies Godfather, or as if he had taken Adams
Office upon himself; he thinks it enough for him to give Names to every
Instance as it passes by; and this he calls, A Gene. 2 19.
VIOLENT INFORCEMENT, which will be found to be a ^turall and necessary
deduction for if the Bishop did w^ll in preferring his C^plaine before the
Emperor, (and the Historian gave a good reason thereof, because he thought
none of the c^mpanie more worthy to pledge him) and Bellarmine infer this as
an Argument, to show the mean account that Kings are of, in respect of Priests;
and not declaring his dislike in the least circumstance, it is a necessary
consequence, that he preferrs the meanest Deacon before the greatest King, even
in Civil comportments. Had Bellarmine excused the Bishop, that his SO doing
proceeded of modesty (as not presuming to drink, either to the Emperor, or
those great Personages) this had been well, but then it had been no good
Argument to his purpose: had he therefore taxed Sulpitius for his vain
aitrologie, and that reason given of the Bishops proud thought, so had he rid
himself of his imputation; yet then the example had not fitted his intent: but
both he and his fellow Cardinal cite and recite the Story, as in a glorious
triumph over Kings; for Baronius premiseth this Story, and that usage of the
Bishop toward Augusta the Queen, with a Non praetermitt^nda, that in no case
they must be concealed. Bar^ius. anno Christi. 386. n. 21.


156 The fourth place is, that Kings have not their authority from God, nor
his Law, but from the Law of Nations; in repeating whereof, the Epistler
SHRIKES as if he saw a Monster, and cries out GOOD GOD, and will not a man
bless himself to se^ such dealing? True, Fa. Parsons, he would indeed, and
desire to be blessed from such a Doctor; who, being a Christian, should write so
impiously; and a Diuinity-Reader, should speak so unlearnedly. But why does
the Censurer thus exclaim? Are they not Bellarmines very words; or are not
the places truly quoted? In the first; Secular principality (...) ordained by
men, and has his being by the Law of Nations, says the De Pontif. Romans lib.
1. ca. 7. paragr Pr^terea. De Cl^icis cap. 28.
Cardinal. In the second place, Orbis terr^, it is within the compass of the
inferior Orb, from whence is given to Kings that power whith they (...). Now
where is the CALVMNIATION to be descried, which the Antapologer talks of?

157 Bellarmines meaning (says he) is mistaken; for thereby he understands
the different forms of government* not the power it self They which read
Books, use not to ^ift Riddles; the words are plain; if this be his meaning,
he dissembles it. But it is manifest, that this is not his meaning; for he does
not say, the diverse forms of secular Principality (as to be an Emperor, or
King, or Duke, according to the custom of several Nations) are by Man's
Ordinance; but simply and indefinitely, Se^lar Pri^cipalitie is from men: and
in the other place, Kings have THAT POWER which they have (he says not the
form of the regiment, but the Power it self) by humane constitution* which is
flat contradictory to the Apostles theorem: that there is no power but of God;
and to our Saviors negative Romans 13. (...).
unto P^late, Thou could have no POWER; except it were given thee from
above: which pla^e meets both with the Ioh. 19. 11.
Cardinal, and his learned Interpreter: for did Christ speak there of Pilates
Power simply (that which Pilate before mentioned his power to loose, or
crucify?) then is Bellarmine gone, who says, that Secular Principality is
from men: did he speak it to him as he was Deputy then under Caesar, and
appointed so by the Emperor? Yet even that his Deputyship, says Christ, he had
from above; there is the Censurer gone: Yea, both of them speak contrary to the
light of nature, for blind Homer could see and say (...), that honor and
principality (what name soever it bear, or Iliad. 6.
what power soever it have) is of God. And if Bellarmines meaning should be as
his abettor makes it, could the Cardinal have said any less of the meanest.
Office in a City, that the execution of his authority is from God; but to be
that Officer rather then an inferior, that is from Men? So to be a King, and
not an Earl by the Cardinals rule is from men; but being a King, to rule and
govern, that is from God. Where is then that other image wherewith S. Augustine
graceth Kings, different from other Christians, and Magistrates subordinate? If
not as he is a King, but as he has power thereby to do this, or prohibit
that, so much the meanest substitute Officer in a State has within his
compass, even the Serieant that a^esteth a Felon or a Debtor: therefore one of
their own rank and sort (a Cardinal, and once a Jesuit) adjudged better, in
saying, that in every Governor there is potestas authoritatis and facultatis;
his authority titular, whereby he is denominated Tollet. in Johan. 19. 11.
annot. 4.
either Emperor, King, or Duke; and his power executiue, either to loose or
bind, to condemn or ^ree: and both these (says he) our Savior told Pilate he
had from above; and yet we know that Pilate was then but Caesar's Deputy, and
at his appointment.

158 And had the Cardinal either true religion, or Christian Policy, he
would not have left such speeches. Religion, because the wisdom of God it self
has said, By Prou. 8. 15. 16.
ME Kings reign, both as they are Kings, and as they reign; their title and
their power both by me; as they are in that place in several names
distinguished, Kings, Consult, Princes Statesmen, Judges; all of them for
Office, for Power, by ME they are. (...), for is this the way to make Kings
Nursing Fathers to the Church? or to win the favor of Princes to Churchmen?
For, if to be Christ*ned, bring Kings into such Slavery under Priests, whether
one or more, Pagans have more liberty (and that is dear to Princes) they will
rather remain no children of the Church, then be Slaves in the Church. And can
Princes either truly love them, or desire to advance them, who, being in
place, shall be the chief to abase them?

159 There is no King truly a Christian, which will not afford both Bishops and
Priests, in their places, their due respects, knowing them to be Gods
Ambassadors, and his Vice^gerents in spiritual functions; but if it once come
to counter-mastering, and depr^ssing Kings to Men's ordinance, the meekest of
them al will say (as the damme to the cursed heiffer) Have I given thee horns to
gore my self withal? And therefore who can blame his Majesty, if (as the
Epistler says) his conclusions be passionate, when he reads such a Letter
dissuasorie to the Archpriest, from acknowledgement of his allegiance to his
Majesty's Right and Royal authority, sent from a man that broacheth Positions
so meanly respecting (yea so contemptibly abasing) the Souereignty of Princes.

160 But let the Reader take comfort, for the Censurer sets him down here to
breath himself, and professes that he is weary to wade any further in these
Objections. And he may be believed in all respects* first, for his (...),
having (as the Prophet speaks) taken a great deal of pains to do wickedly;
and feeling within himself augustiam Ierem. 9. 5.
spiritus (which is the fruit of such toil) he preuents Sap. 5. 6.
the tune, and utters that in a figure of Rhetor^ke by himself alone, which
(without repentance) elsewhere, with gn^shing of teeth he must pronounce
among other company, Lassati sumus, We have WEARIED our selves in the way of
wickedness and destruction: Secondly, for Wading, Ibid.
it is as fit a term to express his shall^w passages, as he could devise;
but if his treading so ouerly has wearied him, how would he have been tired
if he had diu'd into the depth of those points, which he has thus but waded
over? Thirdly, for the Objections, in the front of the Apology it was told him,
he should meet with Wedges too deep Triplex Cuneus.
and strongly driven, for his light tripping or shallow wading pace to find,
much less to remove; which made him, of twelve Propositions to tra^ke but
four and yet for all his wearines, because he will not seem to be tired
downright, he cannot leave, but he must fumble and tugge at three of the rest
at once.

161 The first whereof is that Proposition of Bellarmines, that Churchmen are
as far above Kings, as the Soul is above the Body. And what is the name
which the Onomastical Censurer gives unto this charge by his Ma iestie? A
mere Calumniation, for it is Nazianz^nes, and not Bellarmines. The contrary is
true; for Bellarmine cites Nazian. but misse-applying him upon wrong
translating, and not rightly understanding him, he makes it his own. For
Nazianzens comparison of the Soul and Body is not personal, between himself
and the Emperor, (if it were the Emperor to whom he spoke, or rather a deputy
sub-ordinate, which is the opinion of the Greek Paraphrast) nor between their
two Judicial powers (the Imperial Nicetas.
bench and the Bishops consistory) as the Cardinal would have it, and another
Cardinal (Allen by name) does say it and urge it: but a power spiritual only
in the Pulpit: and so far forth as Freedom of speech extends it self in
preaching of the word; which being the power of God un to salvation, the
highest must submit himself unto it: the word (...), which is usually
translated his Tribunal being no other but that which Ezra had when he read
the Law that is, the Pulpit wherein Nazian. preached, and out of Nehem. 8. 5.
which he spoke at that time; for so, both the Septuagints do call that
wherein Ezra stood, and Nazian. used it in that sense, as in many places, so in
his Apologetike; where complaining of the forwardness of some that thrust
Apologet.
themselves into the Ecclesiastical Function, he says, that before they be
thought worthy to come into holy Orders they strive and crowd about the holy
Table, (...) and challenge unto themselves the possession of the PVLPIT; which
was the Tribunal that Nazianzens in that Allegory meant: and so it is of all
Bishops and Pastors; for that is the place indeed where the Bishops (...)
(that is Nazianzens word) his power and authority is most eminent, and should
be most preualent.

162 Now what is this to the Comparatiue Superiority? A word not mentioned by
Nazian. for the authority which he there describes, he says not to be
superior, but greater or more absolute, as the doctrine of the Gospel, deliuere^
by Bishops and Ministers in the Pulpit (which he calls the Spirit) is more
mighty and perfect then the wrath, revenge, and desire of punishing, and such
other carnal affections, which in the great man there present were
predominant* and that great Divine in that place cal^eth flesh; and is no other
but an allusion to that Text of S. Paul, That the weapons of our warfare are
not carnal, but mighty (through God) 2. Cor. 10. 4.
to pull down holds, and cast down imaginations, and every high thing that
is exalted against the knowledge of Christ: and therefore the Cardinal, in
citing Nazianzen: as making there for a personal preeminence, abuses the
Reader, and misse-leads the Epistler, who takes what he writes, out of Fathers
upon trust, and at the second hand.

163. The other two places he shuffles together; first, that Obedience due to
the Pope is for conscience sake; and the second, that Obedience due to Kings is
only for certain respects: which the Epistler very learnedly would make but
ONE; for his Logique does teach him to put two (...) (...) flat opposite
assertions, into one Categoricall proposition; and yet he grants the first to
be true, the other he terms Calumnious. The truth of the first, he grounds
upon the Apostles precept, Obedite Praepositis vestris; a Text well applied; if
once he could prove that the Pope Heb. 13.
were indeed one of those Praepositi, whom, as a Pope (that is, Universal
pastor) they never yet could defend to be Praepositus: either as Gods
Ordinance by S. Saul; or as by S Rom 13. 2. 1. Pet 2. 13.
Peter, humana creatura: neither Scriptures authorizing him, nor Fathers, nor
ancient Counsels, nay, not all their own Writers so approouing him. The
other, his watching for Souls, God wot it is the least part of his care, not
so much as in the King of Sodoms sense, Give me the souls, Genesis 14.
(that is the persons) take the rest to thy solfe: for he inuerts the speech,
and Give me the OTHER things (says he) and take SOVLE and Body too, who list.
Simony, either carnal for affinity, or pecuniary for ready pay, shall make
Vide Bernard. ad (...). and Al^r: Pe^gium de (...) Eccle siae.
Boys be Bishops, and Idiots accumulate Dignities, and Strangers (which shall
never approach) to h^ape Benefices in foreign parts sans nombre: and this is
the watchfulnes which that grand Gregorian has of the Souls, or the ca^ that
he has o^ account which he must give for them.

164 The other, of Obdience due for certain RE SPECTS (which he calls the
Calumnious Assertion) makes him amazed at the Conscience of the Apologer, for
quoting a place where there is no such thing. With what eyes does this man
look, who being in a grove, cannot see wood for trees, nor respects, in a
Chapter which has nothing else in it? wherein there are at least as many, and
one more, then the son of Haraphah had toaes on a foot, or fingers on a hand.
In causes ONLY TEMPORAL Clergy 1. Sam. 21. 20.
men are bound to obey Princes, there is one respect. To the De cler. lib. 1.
cap. 28. paragr. S^t igitur.
public Laws of the Prince, their obedience is bound, so that THOSE LAWS
CROSS NOT the Church Canons, there is a second. Or that THEY make not AGAINST
Ibid. parag. secunda proposi. Ibid.. Ibid.
the Clericall Function, there is a Third. Those Politic Laws must be
DIRECTING only, not enforcing, that is a forth, and yet to those directing
Laws the Clergy is not bound by an obedience CO ACTIVE; there is a fifth. Ibid.
Their obedience is so tied, that though they BREAK those Laws, yet they may
NOT BE PVNISHED by the CIVIL Judge, or OBEY if summoned to his Audience,
Parag. Tertia. proposi.
there is the sixth, The Clergy is not bound to obey Kings, longer then Kings
are THEIR SVPERIORS Parag. Respondeo negande.
and that is so long as THE POPE WILL: for whom HE EXEMPTS they are all FREE,
that is another. Reckon them now, and it will appear they make up the number of
Mary Magdalens Devils, whereof she was freed by our Savior; but so will not
Bellarmine of these, as long as he has either the Papacy in his hope, or
Popery in his heart, or controversies in Print.

165 Odious matter,the Epistler calls them; and justly too; for God and good men
detest such assertions, but fraudulently laid together (says he) to make
Catholics hateful. T^'s labor not fraud to bring scattered propo sitions
into one Synopsis; the hatefulnes is in the pestiferous Assertion, nor the
Industrious Collectio^: If there be fraud, it is in the Cardinals dispersion,
that the thin conueyance may not so easily discover the contagion* and malice
with all, that every place may have some poisoning infection. His Majesty has
herein done what God himself threats, things Psalm. 50. 21.
acted in secret and in several places, Ordinauit in Oculis, he has brought
them into one view together, and placed them in order to their confusion and
torment.

166 But to whom do they make Catholics odious? Surely to him unto whom they
desire, most of all men under God, to yield most satisfaction, for their
Temporal duties, says he; -- Credat Iudaeus Ap^lla, unless they understand
Temporal for Temporary, that is, till they may have a (...) season, and place
(as a vault under a Parliament house) or that they may be strog-enough to make
their parties good. Otherwise it may be said to them, as a learned Knight said
of his wife to his man, with whom he found her too familiar, and heard her
profess that she loved the fellow above all men, Believe her NOT Sirrah (quoth
the Knight) She has told ME so an hundredth times ere now. The Law presumes
every man to be good till he be apparently naught; but when facts have been
evident to the contrary, fairest words, as they cover the deepest treachery,
so have they not with wise men the easiest passage for credence: and therefore
the same Law presumes him to be still naught, in that kind, who has been
once tainted with a crime.

167 But matters are made worse by these makebate Ministers, who put daily
Iealousies in his Majesty's mind, against us,says this Censurer. They are
Make-bates indeed, that have justly made his Majesty not ieal^us through
fear or suspicion, but zealous to enact prudent laws, and wary to provide
for his assurance; but those are ^esuits, the principal Boutefeaux, and
incendiarie makebates through all Christendom; who laying fuel to fire (which
is Salomons resemblance of such dispositio^s) with their Doctrine kindle, and
with their Counsel inflame both the minds of Princes in iealousies each of
other, and the natural subjects with disloyal conspiracies against their
lawful Sovereigns. Ministers in England have other studies then
State-busines, they confine themselves within the Scriptures limits, which has
prescribed Am^riah the Priest for Gods matters; and Zabadiah the chie^taine for
the 2. Paralip. 19. 11.
Kings affairs; who needs no Ministers to incite his affections, nor descrie
falsehoods: the Apology shows that he can understand 'Bellarmines positions
without an interpreter; and the Jesuits Dur^tean-Horse (the VAVLT Hemer. (...).
of GVN-POWDER) has taught him Epicarmus his rule, to beware how he trusts. He
is no such Nouice in government that he needs be instructed, nor has such
weak Spirits, that they should be excited. Diu^atio in Labijs Regis (says
Solomon) and experience shows both that He can by Prophecy discover intended
Treasons; and Pro. 16. 0.
that he will not stick (in Justice) to turn the Wheel over the offenders.
Notwithstanding, if Elisha do know of any ambush laid for the King his Master,
it is his duty to reveal Pro. 20. 26.
it, and the Kings wisdom, to credit HIM, and avoid IT: and if it move the
Aramite to indignation (as it does 2. Reg. 6. 9. 10.
this Wolu^sh Brood to regrett) that his Majesty has such Watchful
Shepherds, the matter is not great nor the wonder strange. But Vespa
fatiscit, he has now cast his sting and left it in the Apology, which makes
him end like a Dorre in a verbal Epilogue, full of noise and buzzing terror:
and this in great Letters he entitles.

The Conclusion.
168 Wherein there are as many pangs of diverse passions, as there are Numbers
of vncoherent Sections; as if he would have it to be resembled for the first,
to Ezechiels Roll (^s the Vulgar reads it, and some of their own interpretit)
wherein there were Lamentationes, and Carmen and va, a medly of varieties
consisting of Laments of grief, and Ezech. 2. 10.
Songs of praise, and threats of wrath: but a man would think, by thus
writing, he were another Nouatus (as S. Cyprian describes him) Saepe blandus
vt fallat, aliquando saeuus vt terreat, semper curiosus vt prodat, nunquam
sidelis vt Epst. 8. lib. 2.
diligat: Sometimes he glauers palpably; presently he minaceth with terror;
estsoones he prays uncharitably; by and by he insults with disdain; anon he
complains lamentably. Now he is upon Mount Gerazim, and from thence he blesses
our Sovereign; instantly upon Mount Geball, and from thence he curses our
Religion. Here he braues Deuteronomy. 11. 29.
it like a Soldier; there he slatters like a Parasite; anon he weeps like a
Crocodile; every where he speaks in the idiome of a Traitor.

169 First, he lets fly at the INSTIGATORS, so called by him, but names not
who they are; sure by his own description of them, they must needs be honest
men: for he says, that the principal and chief Motors of them are in
general hatred with both extremes of opposites in Religion (that is, the
Puritan^ and Papist.) Certainly, happy men are they; for it seems they hold
a middle course which is both the safest and best: Est virtus medium vitiorum
vtrinque redactum:
The mean between two extremes is virtue. Herod and Horace.
Pilate at opposite jar each with other, and yet both conspiring against
Christ, argue his innocence to be the grea ter: and excellent actions are
hereby commended, says the Philosopher, when nothing can be added or taken
from them; a moderate tracke between a superfluity and a Eth. 2.
nullity of Ceremonies, shows the most religious Conformity of Scriptures,
and Uniformity in a Church. And such, it seems, is the case of these
Instigators.

170 Yea, but these men are interessed in the Rapines and spoils which their
ravenous Purseuants daily bring them home. This, if a true challenge, is a
shrewd imputation; if a false, a devilish Calumniation. DIVINES they be, of
eminent place and note, which use these Purseuants, as public Officers for
search, and forfeiture of Superstitious Relics, Vessels, and Vestiments,
whereunto by just authority they are warranted by Statute; not with any
intention of appropriating the^ to private use, for increase of their wealth;
that is a base conceit of a Malicious Fugitive; it is far from their thought,
who are known to be more religiously wise: For first, THIS, they are assured,
would make them too openly liable (in the mouth of the Adversary) to that
imputation of the Apostle, that they did seek their own, and not that which
is Jesus Christ's. Secondly, they know, better then any Jesuit can instruct
them, that Mammons Service is the basest of all other, especially when it comes
in a religious habit. As for other goods, whether of Money, Plate, Utensils,
etc, they are not in those searches meddled with; if any be (as what man can
answer for the particular facts of all inferior Officers?) who so does it, as
he utterly peruerteth the true meaning of those eminent persons, to whose trust
our most Religious Sovereign commits those affairs: so, upon due proof,
he is severely punished, and the goods safely restored. And therefore so deep a
charge, till it have stronger evidence, must pass (with the like) for an
impudent Slander; and that it is none other, Fa. Parsons his silence makes it
very probable, who is known to be a man, neither so tender of mouth, nor so
charitable in heart, but that, if he could name the parties, he would
proclaim them, though they were the greatest.

171. Now he is at his Prayers; first, for his Majesty, that his eyes may be
enlightened, to see what Inconveniences (many and great) may ensue such violent
co^rses. His Majesty knows how to pray for himself, and desires none to pray
for him that loves him not his precept in this case is the same with
Tertullian: Esto Religiosus in Deum, qui vis illum Imperatori Propitium: Let
him first be Religious to Apolog. cap. 34.
God, that will have God Propitious to his Prince^ and his Prater in this kind
is the same with David, Lord open thou Psalm. 119. 18.
mine (...), that I may see Marabilia Legis, the wondrous things of thy Law; as
for Terribilia Gregis, the threatened fears of a Malcontent and a Treacherous
band: his eyes are piercing enough both to discover them, and to recover
himself from them. He is not (as Elisha his servant) able only to discrie an
host of Aramites beleaguring, and not 2. Reg. 6. 15.
an Army rescuing, but both together, as a treachery enuironing, so Gods host
at hand for defeating that danger, and defending him. As for these minaced
Inconveniences, they can be no greater then some of his Royal Predecessors
have felt, for disturbing their state, and assaulting their life; and his
Majesty also in his time, for treasonable surprises of his sacred Person, with
his hopeful issue, and for utterly extinguishing (though with fire) in a
moment, the brightness of his glory, the glory of his succession, and the
succession of any settled good in the future state. (For present there should
none have been.)

172 But what is the great Inconvenience to be feared or lamented? A pi^tifull
thing to see an house divided within it self, beating, hunting, and pursuing
one each other; and a greater sin to cast in Oil to augment the flame.
Doubtless, here is an Allegory learnedly followed; for what has Oil to do
with beating, or a flame with hunting? But to the point: The Divisions of Ruben
are great thoughts of heart, says Deborah in her Song: and frater^all Judge. 5.
16.
factions, are both dangerous and lamentable: but when the cohabitation is
treacherours, and the concordance unfaithful, safer is a pursuing Separation,
then an intestine falsehood; and better is an open division made by the Prince,
then a tolerated coalitio^ of minds divided from the Prince. I came not to send
peace, but a sword, says our Savior; and therefore happy is that Division
whereby Religion Matthew. 10. 34
is preserved from mingling, the king from hazard, and the state from mangling.

173 He has done with his Majesty's Eyes; and now comes to the Ears, both of
his Majesty, and also of his Counselors, that they could reach beyond the
Seas, and hear the variety of Discourses, concerning the issues of this
pursuit, for that it must needs weaken the force of the Land both at home and
abroad, if there should be (as heretofore) foreign wars. And WOE be to
the Authors both of these inward Divisions and foreign Invasions, that either
cause the one, or procured the other, or nourish both, and desire the last:
whose encamped power, were it answerable to this writing malice, neither should
our walls have peace, nor our Palaces plenty. But doubt not you, Fa. Parsons
of his Majesty's, or his Counselors their reaching ears, whereby they can
easily convey from foreign parts perfect intelligence both of the treacherous
courses and unnatural discourses, which English Fugitives complot and compile
against their native Country and Sovereign; and also of the base account
those Runnagates are in with foreign States, further then they may make use of
them, for Proditorious and Prodigious mischiefs; because otherwise no wise man
will ever trust Traitor, says the Orator. Cic. in ver. 1.


174 O but the Cries and Complaints of these men's afflictions give a strange
admiration; for no such thing was expected from his Majesty, for many causes.
Things strange and unexpected are admired; but what has his Majesty done,
either New, or not looked for? Execution of offenders is no Wonderment in a
just judge; and constancy in the same Religion is no strange occurrent in a
Resolved Prince; and provision for his Security is a matter coincident with
the prudence of a King. His Majesty's course to distinguish the true from the
false-hearted Subject is made a Wonder of Admiration; but the complots of
dreadful designs against his Majesty is but a point of slight regard: such
is one misery which Princes have (says the Historian) that Conspiracies,
though disc^uered, will either not be credited, or impaired in the report, nisi
occisis Principibus, Suet. Domit
unless the Princes DEATH be effected by them: for if they escape and punish,
their executing the Delinquents is a persecution of Tyranny, and an admired
violence: but the villainy complotted, only an Unfortunate enterprise; even the
GUNPOWDER TREASON it self, is styled by this Jesuit, a lamentable attempt at
the (...). of Sir Ed. Cook.
highest: and his Majesty's providence to secure his indemnitie, is by the
Cardinal proclaimed a causeless Fear. The Epistola ad Blackwell.
admiration should rather be of his Majesty's exceeding clemency, that, upon
such a monstrous combination, does not utterly crush both Damme and spawne of
that viperous Brood.

175. Nor that only, but it works a strange alteration in judgment and
affections, says the Epistler. And who are the parties in whom this change is
wrought? If he mean their Catholics, whether Writers or Actors, the
alteration is none other but that the Prophet speaks of in Ier. 13. 23.
the Black-mores skin, and the Leopards spots, the same that has been before;
the positions of the one in their Tractats and arguments, both for contemptible
abasing, and proudly deposing Kings; the complots and attempts of the other for
Murder and Treason (the POWDER PLOT only except, which was singular from all
examples) being as mischievous and dreadful in former times, as since his
Majesty's blessed government over us. For Clement the Pope his Breues, and
vn-Clement Parsons his Doleman, with other his Seditious Pamphlets, discovered
both the same judgment for opinion of his Majesty's Religion, and also the
same affections for disturbance of his possession before his entry, as since
his inuestiture into the Throane.

176. But he means of Princes and People abroad, whose auersion is inward,
howsoever they hold external amity. This is but to intimate his imbowelled
familiarity with Princes inwards; if as a Councellor of State with them (so,
poor Snake, he would be reputed) then is he persidious in revealing them:
Disclosing of Secrecies is the extremity of unfaithfulness in a Councellor: If
as a Confessor to them, then is he Sacrilegiously false, and Canonically
irregular, by their own Jesuitical rules: To reveal what is confess't, is
the height of impiety, for that is to break the Seal which should not be
bruised, say themselves: But withal he proclaims them as well for notorious
hypocrites, that thus carry peace in their mouths, but war in their hearts;
as also for busy Polypragmons in the State of other Nations: for what has any
foreign Prince to do with the managing of another man's Kingdom, either for
Religion or Policy, so that neither himself nor his Subjects receive any
injury thereby? but his enuenomed (...) to lay an imputation upon his Majesty's
government, carries him, perforce, to slander other Princes also with these
despightfull reproaches.

177. Lastly, all this is but a clap out of a Cane, or the crack of an
Alder-stalke, that yields more noise then force: for first, does he think
Princes to be so idle, or simple, that, for the slanderous reports of a few
Fugitives (malcontent either through waiwardnesse of mind, or for
differences in Religion) they will fall at jar, much less to open war,
with their Confederate Princes? Yea rather 'tis-supposed, that such Reuolters
do receive from them, either the like answer which Verdugo (a great Commander
under the King of Spain) gave Sir William Stanley, Estate of Engl. Fugit.
who, when he heard the false Knight transported into violent speeches against
this Realm, wished him to use more moderation of his tongue, for though HE had
offended his Country, his Country had never offended him: or that which Count
Charles (another of the same rank) ^itted York withal, when he breathed
out, at dinner, his blasphemies against our late Queen and State, the Count
bid him hush't, telling him, that his table never gave Privilege to any man to
Ibid.
speak irreverently of Princes. (Parsons were not to be dieted there.)

178. But suppose there should be Kings cast in this Censurers mould, that
would arm themselves (under pretense of Religion) against our Sovereign, it is
no more then others have done before against some of his worthy predecessors:
and his Majesty knows there is a Psalm that begins with Quare fremuerunt,
which is able to lead them all in Triumph, and teach them, that if they Psalm.
2. 1.
band against the Lord, or against his Anointed, he that sits in heaven can
laugh them to scorn. In the mean time, his Majesty's favor (we hope) is
greater with God; and his Conscience (we are sure) more secured in the right of
his cause, and his power more enlarged in the view of the world, then to be
afraid of Paper-threats, yea, or armed terrors; that if the trial should come,
the wills of his subjects (to use the Epistlers words against himself) will
appear so united, as that their forces in their Souereignes defense, shall be
both admirable and dreadful.

179. From Cries of Complaint, he proceeds to tell us of Obloquies and
Prayers. A good conjunction, and proportionable to his own and his associates
affections; whose devout Soliloquies concerning this state, are naught else but
reuiling obloquies of the State. To him (by Scripture rule) all Prayers are
truly directed, who dwells in the light which no man can attain: and, by
Saint Bernards warrant, 1. Tim. 6. 16. Bern. Sent.
those Prayers are to him unacceptable, and in themselves unavailable, wherein
there is either nulla or nimia lux: either no light at all, as a man being in a
dark place that sees not himself (which our Savior checketh in their prayer
that would have fire from Heaven, You know not Luc. 9. 55.
of what spirit you are) perhaps the affections be mudded with earthly things;
or the understanding enueloped with a superstitious darkness; or the
cogitations transported to malicious intents, or uncharitable revenge: or when
there is too much light, men see themselves too well (as the Pharisee that
vi^ified all other in respect of himself) Luc. 18.
such as think no religion or actions good but their own: the prayers
proceeding from both these, whether Cymmerian or ouer-radiant affections, might
better be spared; which, because we take to be the conceits of their
bee-yond-Sea prayers, when they think of us, not deuots, but deuouentes, not
with charitable devotion, but malicious imprecations; we doubt not but they
receive, either the answer which God himself gave by the Prophet, Though you
make many prayers, I will not hear you, for your Esa. 1. 15.
hearts and hands are full of blood; or as our Savior to the Daughters of
Jerusalem (though they better affected) Weep not for them, but weep for your
selves, and for your own Rebellions. Luc. 23. 18.


180. In their Oratories perhaps they pray for our conversion: But what should
be the ground of these general obloquies here mentioned? First, the very
Catalogue of English Statutes extant in print against Catholics, for
profession of their Religion. If this be the offense, the Obloquies cannot be
general; for none in those parts understand the language, but a few English
Fugitives; and their calumnious slanders are no more to be regarded then the
curses of that people, which yearly go out, and very solemnly revile the
Sun for scorching their bodies. Heredot. Melpom.
If the Offender be angry with the Law, it is no marvel: yet he discovers
thereby both a singular impatience, and a bootlesse rage. He that will not
fear the vigor either of Law or Magistrate, let him do well. But perhaps
these Statutes are translated for other Nations to view: if falsely, then not
the Statute, but the corrupt Gloss causes the Obloquie: a pregnant
presumption whereof, Romans 13. 3.
is a modern practice in that very kind; for the place is known, where those
two Statutes made since his Majesty's reign touching such men, were bee-gored
with such bloody additions in another Language, that being compared with the
original, he that reads them, might truly exclaim as the Poet did, Heu
quantum haec Niobe, Niobe distabat ab illa? If truly, neither our State nor
Statutes Ovid.
need fear any Obloquie, except for Clemency; since there is no Realm which
has not more severe Laws for men of different Religions, and treasonable
affections, then all ours are. The speaking of a word, or making the least
sign of dislike to the Religion established, in any point or ceremony
thereof, is Condemnation to the Fire presently, without remission in a Nation
whence Parsons has his best maintenance. And does not Cardinal Bellarmine
both confess and commend that rigid course, when he says that Catholics will
not suffer any among them, qui ostendunt vllo signo, etiam externo, se fauere
Lutheranis? De laicis lib. 3 ca. 19. parag. Septimo.
that shall declare by any outward sign or gesture that he favors the
Lutherans? Yea, he is very peremptory, that it is the only remedy against
such, mittere illos mature in locum suum, betimes to send them their long home:
and gives a Idem ibid. cap 21. parag. Secundo.
reason for it, because to keep them alive (though clapped up in prison, or
banished the land) is no safe course; for that, so they may corrupt their
conuersing neighbors with words, and foreign nations with their books.

181 And yet this Censurer makes that the second part of those Obloquies,
namely the banishing of threescore Priests at one time out of the Kingdom.In
describing of which Lamentable Spectacle, he is very passionately Rhetorical
that men of so good parts, amiable aspects, sweet behavior, etc. should be
cast out of their native soil. It was a grave conclusion of the Senators of
Troy concerning Helena, the worlds wonder for beauty and excellent parts
(which the Philosopher elegantly applies to any vice, seem it never so
delightful) (...) etc. That Arist. Eth. 1. cap. 9. Homer. Iliad. (...)
even though she be such an one, for unmatchable beauty and behavior, yet
for all that, rid her hence, say they, rather then to us and our posterity
(...) She should abide here for a Ibid.
snare and destruction. The Counsel was wise, but the indulgent King refusing
it, her stay brought forth twenty four Books of Iliads, and an Iliad of
miseries. The like resolution (but with a more active execution) was that of
our King and State, when they enacted, that, were their birth, personages, and
qualities never so honorable and admirable, yet having viperous hearts under
their amiable aspects, the Land should be disburdened of them, rather than
nourish them, under pretext of Religion, to alienate true Subjects from their
Sovereign, and make them fit for assistance of any enemy, either intestine or
foreign, as occation fitted. For what was one of Saul's faults, the sparing of
Agag because he was a goodly man, more regarding his 1. Sam. 15.
feature then Gods precept, as Josephus notes: but Samuel Joseph. Antiq. lib.
6. cap. 8.
for all that, hewed him in pieces. And our Saviors charge in the spiritual
sense for the souls safety, willing that if a man's right eye (the most
amiable member that he has) do offend him, he should pluck it out, and cast
it from Mat. 5. 19.
him, rather then keep it to his own overthrow, is as fit in politic advise
for the Realms security: for better those eyes were lost, then the whole
state endangered by keeping them in; if they be eyes, or men so
extraordinarily endowed, as this Jesuit makes them. For were they better,
then any of them yet could appear to upright Judgments, they have left
behind them in all respects (both for outward feature, birth and behavior,
and also for inward qualities of nature, art, and grace) men of different
Religion, their equals at least; and, which is the true commendation of
Christian Priests, of more faithful and true hearts to their Prince and
Country: without which, all the rest (in any man) are but the weapons of
Disloyalty, and impiety even in the Philosophers judgment. Arist. Polit. 1.


182 But here to borrow this man's Rhetoric in his own words against himself
(as phisitio^s do the Scorpio^s inwards against the Scorpions sting) what a
lamentable spectacle to all nations should that have bin (wherein Parsons had
his heart, hand and head) to have seen, not threescore only, but, to that
number, a thousand more at least, in one moment, with one hoisting puff,
without al judgment of law, men of so good parts, amiable aspects, sweet
behavior, natural borne subjects of the Land, the most of them of very
worshippfull* parentage, all, of Learned Education* clear and denoid of
suspicion of crimes, in the Flower of their age: add heereunto the natural
King and Sovereign of the Land, his virtuous and goodly Queen, his hopeful
and innocent progeny, with personages of most honorable place, noble birth,
admirable wisdom, peerless virtues, matchless learning, to be cast out of
their native soil, and up into the air, only for professing that Religion,
which, only, is justifiable by scripture, and only warrantable in all purer
ages? This Sacrifice of so much blood, is, ^elike no ground for Obloquie in
other nations, if it may be called a Sacrifice; not of the old Testament
surely, for that was on mount Sion, of beasts only; this, as in the valley or
Vault of H^nnon, of humane creatures, 2. Cor. 28. 3. 1. Pet. 2. 13. Mar. 9. 49.
even of all for the most part in Saint Peter's sense: nor of the New Testament,
for every Sacrifice, says our Savior, there, must be powdered with Salt, but
this must have been salted with POWDER): Marry for threescore treacherous
Priestlings (condemned by the Law to death) to be pardoned their lives, and
fairly di^mi'st the Land, which they infested deadly, and before time had
left, both vnnaturaily and voluntarily; and with conuoy and safety to be sent
into those parts where their hearts do lie: this is such an obloquie, that the
cutting of Alcibiades dogs tail filled Plutar.
not Athens with more talk, then THIS (forsooth) does the whole world.

183 Especially being seconded With another lamentable spectacle of the like
number of Noble and Gentlemen passing in very good sort through sundry
Countries, being retired out of Ireland their native Country for the same
cause of conscience. There is no Paradox so strange, but some Philosopher will
undertake to defend it, Cic. de divine.
says the Orator: nor any vice so soul, but the Graecians had (...) some
refuge of Apology, to maintain Just. Mart.
it for good, says the Christian Philosopher: but yet, till now never would
any justify or deplore a band of open Traitors: for even enemies, though they
entertained the Treason, did ever abhor the actors. Proditore* etiam ijs
Tacit. Anal. lib. 1.
quos anteponount inuisi sunt, says the Historian. But such a Privilege has
Iesuitish Divinity, that it may commend a banded rout of forlorn fugitives, as
if they were Religious Pilgrims. Sic manus manum fricat, and one Traitor knows
how to bewail another. Only this art the Lamenting Jesuit has in this
height of his Impudency, to conceal the name of TYRONE the chieftaine and
ringleader of the rest; whose Rebellious Insurrections in the time of our late
Queen (who gave him his first Nobility, being otherwise but of a base
original) causing the waste of the Lands treasure, and exhausting the blood of
too many valiant soldiers, cassiered all hope (even in himself) that his life
should be spared, much less his case pitied: yet this last revolt, and
contemptuous out-breach, so exceedingly disloyal and unthankful to his
Gracious Sovereign, who had pardoned him his former treasons; entertained him
with favor; protected him with authority; dismi'st him with honor; and
followed him with all occasions that might give a well disposed man
contentment, does make him so odious and abominable, that even Caecilius
himself that great undertaker for Verres, and of any bad cause else, would be
ashamed to patronize HIM.

184 Much less (as this Jesuit) shroud him under the Cloak of Religion,
whose profane life, and heathenish opinions (expressed by his brutish actions)
are proclaimed to the world, that he made no Conscience of Religion; so far
was he from being nice upon difference in point of Religion: unless to make
murder no sin; promiscuous marriage no Adultery; Rapine no stealth;
oppression no wrong; and Rebellion no disloyalty, be the points of Romes
Catholic Religion. Otherwise his conscience (so called) was set as free for
Popery as his heart could desire, not in Ireland only, but while he was in
England; where he had his Mass and Priest without impeachment or disturbance;
and with such favor, that in a search for others, his Pri^st being taken, and
signifying to whom he belonged; he was presently dismissed, without any further
quequestion or molestation: nor did HE alone obtain this favor, but all the
rest of that Fugitius sort from the highest to the lowest, not one of them
being once questioned for his Religion, or any Oath cendred to him: which, if
they were asked, they will not be so impudent as to deny it. But hereby the
Readers may clearly see, what the Epistler means by that Liberty of
Conscience which he pleades for so often; namely, immunity to sin against
God; freedom to make port-sale of his native Country; license to reuolte from
his dearest Sovereign; conniuence to entertain treasonable consorts;
permission to enrich himself for proiected usurpations; breefly, a general
indulgence to stain the earth with blood, the ayte with blasphemy, the soul
with corruptions, the heaven with luxurious Rapines and incontiuencies: and if
these may not be granted, it is such an Angariation of Conscience, as must
needs break out into these retiring events, says the Antapologer; that is to
say, into these Traitorly Reuolts from his sacred Majesty.

185 Whom this Censurer here vouchsafes to besmeare with his glauering balm,
commending his Majesty's natural inclination to sweetness, peace, and
tranquillity. Which as his Majesty repelleth with that speech of
Ecclesiasticus Eccles. 25. 9.
speciosa non est laus in ore peccatoris, that a good man's praise does no more
befitte a wicked man's mouth, then a ring of Prou. 11. 22.
gold does a swines snowt; therefore thinking of him, as Milo did of Vatinius
(whose name, for detestation, came into a Catullus.
Proverb) does take it for a disgrace, that so lewd a man should offer to
commend him: so he demands with all, why being of a disposition so sweet and
peaceable (as his Subjects find him, and such Fugitives confess him) they
should bewray such bad natures, with small wisdom, to use the means which
must exasperate and provoke him? For the quietest spirits once thoroughly
stirred, are not easily allayed: Macrob. Satur
nay, the neatest wine if it once turn eager, proves extremely keen.

186 And as he praises, ^o he bemoaneth his Majesty, and the State with him,
whom he thinks, by such Reuolts to be cast into perpetual Cares about the
same. Such tender affection issuing from a loyal heart, were very acceptable;
but this being unsound, the other is a coggerie. Kings and Statesmen have
their Cares, many and great; especially a Monarchs Crown, is, unto him that
wears it rather a Diadema Spinarum, then Gemmarum, and circled with more Cares
then Jewels. The more wrong therefore do they offer to their Sovereign, who
by such contemptuous and disloyal out-leapes augment those Cares, which the
breaking out of many more such as these, do not so much accumulate, as the
fomentation of these rebellious practices, by Priests and Jesuits, the
principal instigators to such continual Reuolts and Insurrections. So that
who can blame his Majesty and the State, if, to lessen these Cares, and to
prevent such mischifes, they take order to keep out, and cut off the original
nourishing inflamers, which minister the rechaffment to these disloyal
attempts?

187 But were these Cares more then they ar^, yet are they not dismaying with
terror, but exciting to providence; nor blunting the sword of Justice, but
rather edging it, to execute suchincendiaries. For shall not the corrupt
humors be purged, because at moving of the same, a few pustles will break
out? which though for a time they disfigure the countenance, and cause a little
pain, yet the body is cleansed for along time after, When this Spartacus of
these Fugitives (Tyrone by name) had his Rebels in Plut. Crass.
the field, with his ensigns displayed, and his auxiliarie supplies from a
potent adversary; yet then did he not cast the State into such Cares, but that
in the end it brought him on his knees: being now fled, the Care is the less;
for an open enemy gives more security, then an intestine dissembler; and a
roauing fugitive then an home biding Rebel. For what trust will any foreign
Prince repose in such, or commit to them? but conclude of them (as Mon dragon
did of the like, ^o these that were then in pay Estate of Eng. Fugi^.
vnde* a King, in those days hostile to this Nation) that they were all but
Traitors whence they came, and spies where they came: and it is worth the
remembering which one has observed, that in the famous Invasion of 1588. not
one of our English Fugitives (thou^h some of them men of great valor, honor,
and birth) were trusted so much as with any Idem ibid.
inferior place of command; ^ay scarce suffered to be banded in the company
of the Inuaders: the Land rid of such, does ease the Realm, not fill the
State with Cares.

188 Now has he done with his pair of lamentable spectacles, and is suddenly
fallen into a chafe (for these sections conclusorie, are rather
Counter-passions of Lunacie, then artificial closes of an Epilogue) and his
anger is, that the Apologer will say, that there is no persecution or hand
dealing for Religion, neither in our Kings, nor in the late Queens time. The
auerment of a troath, should not raise choler through impatience, but incline
the mind to believe: neither is it the auowing assertion which mooues his
patience; for in his own conscience (though seared) he knows it, and he
knows that the world, rightly informed, is fully persuaded of the truth
thereof: but the diminishing of the hoped number, (which the Pope only expects,
and they rely on) by diverse Statutes wisely provided for, is indeed, that
Angariatian of their Conscience which he so terms: for raualling of a
Confederacy, where affiance is placed in Number, is a tormenting
discouragement.

189 That pang is past; now he is rapt into an ecstasy of admiration: Wondering
why this late Apology has been so published in English and Latin to the
world? First, for the publishing: to that end it was done, which is the
general intendment of all writing; which in Scripture is twofold, Diffusio and
duratio, that it might both disperse it self to Psalm. 102. 18.
public view: and remain also to posterity. Secondly, for the double
Language; therefore it was done, that both strangers might be therewith
acquainted, and also that it might be freed from corrupt Translations, by which
Iesustish trick our Doctrine and Nation are usually and wrongfully made
odious: for both together; that in present and future age, as well fo^rainers
abroad, as friends at home, might on each side see, both his Majesty's prudent
and clement course, only requiring an OATH of his Subjects, for his own
security in Temporal Allegiance, after so many attempts by that bloody
Generation; and also the Popes frampold dealing, who not only redoubled an
encountering Prohibition, but his Champion Bellarmine also brandished a violent
dissuasion; he to the Catholics in general; this to the Archpriest in
particular; both of them disallowing and reproouing that, which whole Councels
ancient have warranted, and holy Bishops have never denied to any Emperors.

190 Why, but the Popes Breues were written privately to the Catholics of
England. The nature of any writing is judged, not by the Secrecy of the
Conueiance, but by the Authority of the writer; especially, if in a public
cause, and to many persons: Familiar Epistles are Secrets; Breues from Popes
are Writs upon Record: lest therefore the succeeding age, finding such Precepts
in the Registrie, might persuade themselves of the Popes Souereigntie for
England, the Apology, to prevent such mischief, has crush't that conceit,
disclaiming his proud usurpation, and proclaiming him for a busy-body where he
had no command; for what has a Bishop in Italy to do with the Subjects of
Great Britain? To inform their Consciences, says the Epistler, or rather to
infect them; and by a Spiritual Tyranny to countermand with an Interdiction,
what they of themselves were most willing and ready to perform; being before
persuaded, that it was most consonant to Gods Religion, and Christian duty.

191 But Bellarmines letter was written only to a private friend. True, but
neither of them both was a private person; the one a Cardinal, the other an
Archpriest: nor was it written to be kept private; for scarcely was it read by
him, but Copies were dispersed. Wherein his Majesty seeing not only his
Public Act, but his Sacred Person both scornefully and contumeliously handled
(besides the general infection which this Pharisaicall trebled Leaven, though
secretly conveyed, might work by contagion) thought it stood him upon in
honor, both to make the world Judge of these irreligious passages from Rome,
and also to discover as well the wickedness of their purpose, as the weakness
of the arguments produced by this couple of Grand-Clerkes in their several
encounters.

192 Ye but by this publishing of them, first, diverse will hold themselves
obliged, or prouoak't to answer the same. What, after Tortus and Parsons? If
they shall do it better, that will be a shame to the Cardinal: if worse, a
stain to themselves: Only this comfort they have, that worse then the
Censurer has done they cannot answer. Howsoever they do, either better or
worse, let them assure themselves it will not pass with silence: Longus post
me ordo est, idem petentium decus, says he in Liuy. Scaeuola lib. 1.



193 Secondly, The unlawfulness of the Oath will be disputed, and condemned
in all Universities, Schools, and Books of particular men. It Is a good
counsel that the Poet gives, not to take measure of another man's foot by
Horace.
your own Last. Universities have more judgment and discretion then a single
Cardinal, or one scribbling Jesuit. Dispute the Question they may; but before
they condemn the OATH, they will be advised; or if they do, they shall not
be seared: truth has as strong armor as falsehood can show. Yet the Censurer,
being no greater Clerk then the Priests make him and this book shows him,
had done wisely, first to expect such a Schoole-determination: but ignorance
will ever press forward; and a boiling stomach cannot conceal or retain the
enclosed rancor.

194 Thirdly, The unjust violence in forcing men to swear, and notwithstanding
to make them say that they do it willingly, and without coaction, will appear
both to be one of the greatest Contradictions in it self, and most injurious
to Christian men that ever was heard. How often has it been answered, that a
peine upon a Statute is no inforcement of the Conscience, which has liberty
left both to demurre, and refuse? after which demurre to reject it utterly,
argues an ouert disloyalty; to take it, and not willingly, implies a Covert
treachery: the Law punishes the first upon the plain discovery; it
requires the last for the more sure discovery. Where is now the Contradiction
either expressed or infolded? The Law insticts a mulct upon him that refuses
the Oath; there is one Proposition: The same Law inioines him that takes it, to
profess that he swears willingly; there is the other. If the Oath had been
imposed upon a man to take it whether he would or no, and withal required of
him to say that he took it willingly, this had indeed been Contradictorie:
but ill lu^ke has this Epistler, either in framing, or pationizing
Contradictions.

195 What is the second greeuance? It is most i^rious to Christian men (says
he.) Every injury is, according to the name, either an injustice against some
Law, or a wrong offered to some persons right. Now what Law does the taking of
an Oath, to be heartily true unto the Native Sovereign for his Temporal
Security, either defeat, or thwart? As for the persons, a party consenting to
an action, cannot be said to receive a wrong by that Action. But his Consent
is enforced.No; Liberty of choice is no inforcement of consent. But if he do
it not, he incurres the danger. True, that is a punishment for his contumaci^,
no violence to the Conscience; were not the Inquisition more coactiue,
Christians should have less pressure; and Popery fewer Di^ciples.

196 Yet an other fit takes him; for after a few fair pawses, wherein he tells
us by way of Prophecy, That some learned men will answer more sufficiently
then he has done (that is easily credible, for, as Tully said of Heius, he
has rather marred the cause then helped it) because what Act. 4. in Ver.
HE has written, did but occur to him: (so said Jacob of his counterfeit
venison, that it was brought to his hand) after Genesis 27.
this, I say, he falls again to his P^rs, that God would incline his Majesty's
heart to take the best course for uniting his subjects wills, but his Prayer is
with a vengeance, that if God will not so incline, Despair, the mother of
headlong precipitation will enter; for patience prouok't will turn into fury:
Here Is an Herald of defiance, not a Jesuit at his Devotion, the very humor,
or rather heat of him in the Poet, Flectere si nequeo Super^s Acheronta mouebo.
Did our Savior pray so? No, for you have condemned and killed the Just, says
Saint James, and HE has not RESISTED Iac. 5. 6.
you; but hot spirits must have fire from heaven if the Luc. 9. 54.
gates of a City be but shut against them; for they have, belike learned it
of Saint Paul who wills men not to avenge them Romans 13. 9.
selves, but to give place unto wrath; and of God himself, because he says
Vengeance is mine, I will repay; and of his blessed Deuteronomy. 32. 35.
Son, resist not evil, but if a man will angariate thee a mile, go with him
t^aine. Mat. 5. 39. 41.


197 Not withstanding all this, there is no remedy but one, and that is
Tolleration; for freindly entreaty (says he) would bind up wounds bleeding
on all sides, whereas exulceration makes them fester with grief and danger.
Sic Sententias loquitur; and neither of them untrue where the wound is green,
or the cure not desperate: where the cause oppressed is good, and the party
cassier'd is innocent. Otherwise most false; for absence of an adversary does
alleuiate, the concurrence of opposites does exulcerate both grief and wrath:
as the wound dri'de up, will bleed a fresh at the presence of the murderer.
If therefore, that remedy denied, there must needs treake out a desperate
rage; be it so, better that a few be driven into despair then the whole
state raised into a commotion, which nothing sooner then Tolleration of TWO
diverse Religions in one Realm. Interim, these (...), false fires, and
paper-threates Eras Chil. Cent. 4.
are bootelesse, where the wrath is forcelesse, and the denouncer graceless.

198 But is not the very vp-close of all, a plain Contradiction, to these
precedents? To Gods holy providence, (says he) then hole is to be committed;
who for his greater glory, whether to life or death, will dispose of all.
Threats of revenge for pretended pressure, and total committing the same to
Gods providence, are mere opposite. HIS Sacred providence is to keep Kings
Persons, and their authority Sacred: that is, free from touch of disgrace, or
dismay of terror, by any hu mane power. Obedience of the Subject is the safe
guard he has appointed for that immunitie: any Doctrine ^o the contrary, is
adversary both to his holy providence, and that divine ordinance. Patience
with hope are the best arguments of Reliance upon his care and wisdom.
Priests especially, should pray with charity, not threaten with affrightment;
preach to Subjects Loialtie with sufferance, not arm them with impatience; no^
charm them with fraudulence. To affray Kings living and revile Princes dead,
argues neither trust in Gods providence, nor reference to his glory.
Controversies in Divinity, there may, there must be; but Schools and Clerks
have naught to do with Princes Crowns, save in duty to obey, and with
learning to support them: so may the end of all turn to his glory, of whole
glory there is none end. But RELIGION turned into STATISME, will soon prove
AT HE IS ME.

FINIS.

