THE NAVIGATORS SVPPLY.

Containing many things of principal importance belonging to Navigations, with
the description and use of diverse Instruments framed chiefly for that purpose;
but serving also for sundry other of Cosmography in general: the particular
Instruments are specified on the next Page.



They that go down to the Sea in Ships, and employ their labor in the great
waters, They see the works of the Lord, and his wonders in the deep. Psalm.
107. Imprinted at London by G. Bishop, R. Newbery, and R. Barker. 1597.

The Contents.
1. Of the Compass in general. 2. Of the Compass of Variation. 3. Of the
Trauailors Jewel. 4. Of the Pantometer. 5. Of the Hemisphere. 6. Of the
Trauerse-boorde. 7. A friendly Advertisement to the Nauigators of England.
To the Right Honorable, for all parts of true Christian Nobility worthily
renowned, and my singular good Lord, Rob. Earl of Essex, and Ewe, Vicount
Hereford and Bourgcher, Lord Ferrers of Chartley, Bourgcher and Louayn, Master
of her Matesties Ordinance and Horse, Knight of the Honorable Order of the
Garter, and of her Highness privy Council: Long life with increase of Honor.
PLutarch in a Treatise, wherein he shows how a man may win profit by the
malice of his enemies, does manifest his drift and purpose with this
convenient similitude: That men of old, in their encounters with saluage and
wild beasts, thought to have made a great hand, if they could but save and
defend themselves from their injuries and violence: But the succeeding ages
proceeded further, converting the flesh of them unto food, their hair to the
use of garments, and their very gall, and other parts of them, to sundry most
wholesome medicines: Yea the whole outward proportion of their fearful shape,
I mean their skins, which before had threatened man nothing but death, he
afterward addressed to be convenient Armor to save him from harms, and defend
him from destruction. So that the life of man which to the foregoing Ages
seemed to be miserable by having wild beasts, to their Posterity following
should have appeared in part miserable, if they had wanted wild beasts. And
Plutarch alleges Xenophon to have been of this judgment; That although some
man can content him to escape the injuries of his enemies; yet is it the part
of the wise and valiant minded to make profit of their malice, by using such
industry in attending his own ways, and marking his adversaries, that the
whole course of his life should seem nothing so happy and commendable, were
it so in deed that utterly he had none enemies at all.

Much in like sort, (my very honorable good Lord) fares it with our
Nauigators; who at the first adventured to forsake the maine land, betaking
themselves to the wide Ocean Sea, upon the credit and fidelity which they
reposed on the Sailing Compass; constantly believing that it had every where
showed the true North and South, and semblably all the other winds. But
dangerous and doleful experience within short time made it plain and
manifest, that where they reposed greatest trust, there was some treachery:
For the vpholder of their life and safety, did sometimes misleade them into
destruction, and carried them in the proceeding of their course far distant
(they knew not whither) from that he in the beginning pretended. This
uncertainty therefore being so dangerous an enemy of their new practiced
art, with might and maine they encountered: And having at length found out
some tolerable means to avoid it, they thought them selves to have done
enough, and rested therewith contented. But in this pregnant Age wherein we
live, the expert and skillful Nauigators have proceeded yet further, and made
of that (as it were) venomous quality of misleading an Antidote against it
self; yea they use it in stead of an armor and defense against error and
perils. So that though in the rude beginnings of former times, men were drawn
by it into many perplexities: yet in the settled experience of these our days
they rejoice therein (being used and ordered accordingly) as in a thing greatly
concerning their good and welfare. But this is a principal secret, only
known unto those that are of greatest skill among them.

A memorable example hereof fell out Anno 1586. when Sir Frances Drake, a
Gentleman of famous memory, in his West Indian victorious voyage, departing
from the harbor of Cartagena, arrived some small time after at the VVestermost
point of Cuba, called Cape S. Antony, and having stayed there some few days,
put to Sea for Virginia, for the relief of our Countrymen that were there in
great danger and distress: Having continued at the Sea sixteen days tossed
with variable winds, they came at last within sight of land: but by no means
could they discern, or give any probable guess what land it should be. So it
was, that one of Southhampton, being an expert and skillful Nauigator (though
of other conditions not so good, but better might have bin wished) for his
frowardness, having received disgrace before, was notwithstanding upon this
necessity called unto conference: where, after Sir Francis had bestowed on him
some part of his eloquent persuasions and fair promises, at length he
undertakes to do his best. And having made his observations according unto
Art, he pronounced in laughing and disdainefull manner (because his advise was
not taken in the setting of their course) that look what land they had bin at
sixteen days before, the very same precisely was the land that now they were
at again. Which assertion of his being rejected, as a thing impossible, by
all those of skill in the company, and especially by Sir Francis himself not
without reproachful words; he still perseuered therein, and assured them, that
upon his life they should find it so: like as in the end they did.

This could he never have done without his knowledge of the Variation of the
Compass; as the party himself more then once with great earnestness has
protested unto me in conference that I have had with him concerning those
matters. Yea besides the particular knowledge of Places, the expert Nauigator
stands in great hope hereby to attain unto good helps for the finding of
Longitudes, and according unto the Poet, Non fumum ex fulgore, sed ex fumo dare
lucem Cogitat: vt speciosa dehinc miracula promat.

But this is a matter somewhat dainty among the chiefest of them: As for the
rest, in all their conclusions about the Variation, they may as yet (for all
their fair shows) be well likened unto Chapmen, that are merchandising for
the skin of a wild beast, before the beast be taken.

The great necessity hereof, and the singular love that for many years I have
borne to that laudable faculty, and to the industrious practisers thereof,
has at length persuaded me, not only to contriue certain Instruments fitted
for sundry their purposes, and especially for taking the Variation of the
Compass; but also to set forth diverse other principal uses of them, together
with the Descriptions of the Instruments themselves. All which I do the rather
Dedicate to your Honorable Lordship, both in regard of my private duty, as
also of an earnest desire to do them the more good: who by that means (I am
right sure) will the sooner be induced to peruse these short Treatises with the
more willingness, and to consider of them with the less prejudice. So that my
good hope is, few of them will be found, in whom reason shall have so weak
ankerhold, as to think that a man of my profession would seem to intrude
himself into the mysteries of their Art; and especially belonging to your
Lordship, durst offer to the view of the world under your Lordships name, any
thing that he knew not assuredly to stand grounded upon infallible certainetie
of truth.

Touching experience in these matters, of my self I have none: For, (besides
the diversity of my calling,) by natural constitution of body, even when I
was young and strongest, I altogether abhorred the Sea: howbeit, that antipathie
of my body against (as the Italian termed it) so barbarous an Element, could
never hinder the sympathy of my mind, and hearty affection toward so
worthy an Art as Navigations is; tied, I confess, to that Element, if you
respect the outward toil of the hand, but clearly freed therefrom, if you
regard the apprehension of the mind: And in the mind only, pure and true
Art, refined from the dross of sensible or experimental knowledge, is to be
found. Which when I perceived must needs so be, and that the great skill of
our Seamen was not performed either by rashness of chance, or strangeness of
miracle, but according to certain universal precepts or documents, derived
from the fountains Mathematical, being the substance of that Art; so far
as the studies of my profession, and other my necessary affairs would permit,
I endeavored by little and little to understand somewhat thereof: And that
which I thus learned by speculation, I have conferred off with some of the
skilfullest Nauigators of our Land; with such as have bin principal Actors in
our furthest Northeast and Northwest discoueries; with such as have bin in the
South Sea, and at the Cape of Bona Speransa; and also with Naturalists of the
East Indies. I have entered into the consideration of the making of all their
Instruments, together with the manner of their observation by them both on Land
and Sea: And as I have by conferring with them from time to time learned what
they most desired and stood in greatest need off so framed I mine instruments
accordingly; answerable for all purpose of practice unto theirs, but for
commodiousnes thereof, somewhat better, I doubt not, (if sincere trial be
made) and for certain points of chief importance, perfourming that, which all
theirs hitherto in any common use never could do. Wherein I have already the
allowance of some among them, whom I have esteemed to be of the greatest skill
and practice: And very willing am I to stand to the judgment of the rest of
like skill.

A true proverb it is; he which builds in the marketplace, shall be sure of
many controwlers of his work. And that made me stand long in suspense, whether
I should suppress, or set forth these conclusions of mine. Of their truth,
their commodious use, yea and of the good acceptance of them among those of the
better sort, I nothing doubted: But how strange it would seem unto some, that
a man of my calling should deal in this Argument; that in deed did a little
trouble me; easily coniecturing that many would think I have forgotten my
self, and walked herein beyond the bounds of my profession.

As for my profession, I thank God, I have exercised the preaching of the
Gospel now these twenty years, in a Country where both Preachers and
Gospel have some store of adversaries: And I trust that my travail therein
has not bin such, that I greatly need be ashamed thereof, or can justly be
challenged, that I ever, as a man careless, neglected my calling. But recording
with my self, that the dispersion of Nations came by the confusion of
Languages: upon which occasion, they spread themselves over the face of the
whole earth; yea and planted themselves (a thing most strange unto our
Capacity) in many exceeding remote Islands in the Ocean Sea: and considering
that the knowledge of languages grows by intercourse and mutual access; I
perceived that God now toward the end of the world, had ordained the
sailing Compass to be the notable means and Instrument of this intercourse;
even thereby to join dispersed Nations, not only into the Civil or rather
Cosmopoliticall union of humane society; but also (as Christian hope binds
us to think) through the knowledge and faith of the Gospel, into the
spiritual and mystical fellowship of that Heavenly Jerusalem: And so by
means hereof to make mutual amity between people and people, though never
so far separated; and to give this as a leading guide, to carry the sound of
the Gospel, as the band of love, into all dispersed Islands and out-Angles of
the world. (For God (as the Apostle speaks) has made all mankind of one
blood, to dwell upon all the face of the Earth; and has assigned the times
which were ordained before, and the bounds of their habitation, that they
might seek the Lord:) weighing (I say) this with my self, that God of his
infinite wisdom and unspeakable love toward mankind, had appointed this
simple Instrument in show, to perform matters of such admirable importance;
that the wisdom of man wanting this one, with all the other Instruments of
the world could not possibly have done, I did therefore judge it a matter not
unfit for a Preacher of the Gospel, to set to his helping hand for aduau^cing a
Faculty that so much tends to Gods glory in the spreading of the Gospel.
Now if this be not against Divinity, doubtless to preserve men from danger,
and to direct the wanderer, cannot be against humanity: Against the duty of
a Subject it cannot be, to further that knowledge, by which her Majesty's power
is augmented, and her Royal name continually carried to all the quarters of the
world. Finally against my duty in general toward my native Country it is
not, to endeavor what in me lies, the good increasing of that skill, whereon
depends a great part of the prosperity of this Realm.

And if this were a work that in the highest degree performed all these, my
part it were, (though I were a mere stranger,) of very right to present and
appropriate it, rather unto your Lordship, then to any other: Because your
sincere love toward our Country, your duetifull and loyal affection
toward her gracious Majesty, your humanity so full of honor toward all
men, proceeding from the unfeigned fear of God, (which continually increasing,
increases likewise the rest,) does in such plentiful measure aabounde, that
I dare appeal unto him who is the supreme Judge of consciences, and the tryer
of all trueths, I do herein affirm such a truth without flattery, as your
enemies themselves cannot deny, but being ouerpestered with envy.

Vouchsafe therefore mine Honorable good Lord, of your noble disposition,
favorably to accept this small Treatise, (such as it is) which of duty and
good will is offered unto you; protecting it so far forth, and no further,
then the truth of demonstration and commodiousnesse of the conclusions shall
deserve. And thus beseeching the Almighty to bless your Lordship, to increase
his good gifts in you, and to prosper all your Honorable affairs: I commend
your Lordship, and al yours in my humble and hearty prayers, unto the
protection of him, from whom all good gifts do descend, and with whom there
is no variableness, nor any shadow of change; but yesterday, to day, and is
the same for ever.

Your Honorable Lordships in all duty to be commanded, William Barlowe.

Lectori S.
PRaesulis eximij gnatus, multisque verendis
Patribus affinis, pastor and ipse pius,
Hunc foetum peperit: quem si tu (candide lector)
Excipias gremio suauis, amansque tuo;
Dentibus haud metuet Criticorum rodier atris:
Quos tamen, vt tener est, non metuisse nequit.
Perlege, pertenta, bis terque quaterque licebit:
Quo mage creber eris, crescet and ille magis.
At simul hoc vsu matura adoleuerit aetas,
Iam been tutus erit viribus ipse suis.
To the Reader.
THis book was written by a Bishops son,
And by affinity to many Bishops kin:
Himself a godly Pastor, praise has won,
In being diligent to conquer sin.
If to thee (Reader) it may welcome be,
The Critickes censure it will fear the less:
For being young from fear it is not free,
Which otherwise more courage might profess.
Read, way, and try, but read, and often try
The rules of skill whereto it does direct:
Trial may bring as much authority,
As newness hinder it of due respect.
But yet when time shall to it ripeness give,
It will have credit of it self to live.
Uotum Authoris.
SVmme Deus, Coeli terraeque marisque tremende
Conditor, atque idem rector tersancte, patenti
Aure fauens, facilis mea percipe vota precantis.
Ex vno veluti gens est humana Noacho
Orta, vnaque habitans lingua celebrauit eadem
Te solum verumque Deum, Babylonica turris
Quum nondum aethereas caput attollebat in auras;
Sic iterum, o vtinam, miseros miseratus in vnum
Mortales redigas, laceros vt corporis artus,
Quosfuror ille tuus dispersit ad vltima mundi,
Coniunctique ineant sancta vt commercia rursus,
Veliuolis iungas ratibus ceu pontibus ipsos
Mobilibus quamuis disiunctos aequore vasto:
Foelici celeres vento impellente carinas:
Mirandaque agiles moderanti Pyxide clauos:
Inprimis tuus ille tuus, qui cuncta gubernat,
Spiritus, aspiret placidus: Sic, lampade dia,
Verbo Euangelij, toto noscaris in orb.
F. N.
O God, whose power heaven, earth and sea declare,
Which being by thy word, thy word obey:
And in their works, which Natures called are,
Work but that will of thine which all does sway,
Hearken, O hearken for thy Christ his sake,
Unto the prayer which in heart I make.
Look down with mercy from thy mercie-seate,
Upon mankind dispersed here and there,
From Noah's family, which grew so great:
For at the first all but one people were,
Which but one law, which but one language knew,
One God alone to serve, God only true.
As yet man's heart did seek no name of praise
In stately towers, which threaten might the sky:
When pride began great Babel for to raise,
Speech was confounded with variety.
Since then divided tongues divided hearts,
By sea and land into a thousand parts.
Yet since thy Spirit of true unity,
In cloven tongues did on Apostles sit:
That so thy cursing might a blessing be,
And cloven tongues divided people knitte,
Let that thy Spirit breathe in every place,
That all may know the Gospel of thy grace.
And since the Sea does some so far divide,
That they may seem an other world to be:
Teach us our Ships like horses so to ride,
That we may meet in one, and all in thee:
And as the Needle does the North repect,
So all in Christ may only thee affect.
A brief discourse of the Sailing Compass in general.
THE merueilous and divine Instrument, called the Sailing Compass, (being one
of the greatest wonders that this World has) is a Circle divided commonly into
32. parts, termed by our Seamen Winds, Rumbes, or Points of Compass: which
Circle by the touch of the Loadestone shows the aforesaid divisions in all
Horisons between the Poles, according to one and the self same perpetual
position in respect of the true points of North and South in every Horison.
This Circle is commonly described upon Pastbord of 5. 6. 7. or 8. inches
diameter: And has sometimes subdiuisions, with the relation to the 32. and
sometimes has the ordinary division of Circles, namely 360. In the Center of
this Circle is fastened a little Diamond as it were, or a Capital, as some
call it, of Latten, being cinquebored, the point thereof appearing a convenient
space above the Circle, and the hollowed part downward, to be placed upon the
pin. In the bottom of this Circle are glewed two wyars about longer then the
Diameter, bended proportionally the one toward the other in the form of a
loope, so that the ends join close and even together in the circumference:
and the Circle in this manner finished, is named the Fly of the Compass. The
box wherein this Fly is placed, must be covered with clear glass, made
close round about with wax mingled with Rosen, or some other kind of Simmond.
The bottom of this box is to be taken off and on, as occasion shall serve: in
the Center whereof stands the pin of Latten of a reasonable height, for the
Fly to have sufficient scope. This box is to be hanged in two Circles of
Latten within an other greater Box, that the Fly, which way soever the Ship
swayeth, may always stand upon his pin parallele to the Horizon: to which
end they fasten a piece of Lead to the bottom of the lesser box.

As for the touching of the wyars of the Fly with the Loade-stone, I would
wish it to be performed after this sort. First of all, have a great care of
the goodness, the quantity and the form of the Stone: for if he be never so
good, and very small therewith, he can give but small force unto the Compass:
And again, though he be never so great, yet if he be of base quality, his
Touch can be but faint. An ouall form, or somewhat longer, reteining a like
proportion from the middle to each end, is very good. Always provided, that
the length of the Stone lie according to his own line of North and South: for
a stone of this form gives forth his virtue in the Touch a great deal more
forcibly then it can, if by reason of the evil shape thereof, his force in
himself be confusedly dispersed, and not jointly directed to his due points.
The wyers before they be touched, ought to be polished and made very clean,
and fitted unto the Fly, and then touched after this manner. With the North end
of the Stone, press each wire, beginning at the middle, and so along unto that
end, that you would have turn Southerly: And with the South end of the Stone
do the like from the middle of each wire, unto the end that you would have
turn Northerly. Then glewe them in such sort, that the Fly may stand equally
upon his pin, having both the North and South ends of the wyers uncovered,
that their Touch may be refreshed, as occasion shall require.

After all this is accomplished, that the Instrument thus furnished may truly
perform his office, there must just regard be had of the Variation, as also of
the diverse Set of the Compass: And likewise that it be not placed near any
Loade-stone, iron, or steel. By the Variation is understood the difference in
the Horizon between the true and the magneticall Meridian. By the Set, is
meant the setting or placing of the wyers in the bottom of the Fly, which
sometimes you shall find standing right under the Flower de luce, representing
the North point, sometimes, etc. toward the East of the Flower de luce.

The Compass being artificially made and fitted as he ought to be, with all his
just regards: we must conceive every line drawn from the Center unto each
division, to represent always the semidiameter of an Azimuth, bearing the same
name with the division of the instrument. The line of North and South is every
where the intersection of the Meridian with the Horizon: and the line that
crosses him at right angles, is every where the intersectio^ of the East and
West Azimuth with the Horizon. The like is to be understood of every one of the
other, according to their natures: so that every point of the Co^pas, when the
line thereof is by imagination produced in the Horizon unto the Heavens, is
understood to be the base of a Quadrant of some one Azimuth or other: and the
line falling from the Zenith, to the Center of the Compass, is as the
Perpendicular common to them all. Wherefore which way soever in any situation a
ship does sail upon any point of the Compass, it must needs be that she
sayleth within the plain of one Azimuth or other, in as much as every point is
the Base of an Azimuth: and so performs always her course upon the Conuexe
of the Sea, in a portion or portions of one great Circle or other, because all
Azimuthes are great Circles. Albeit therefore a voyage were to be made from any
place in any Latitude, more or less (it skilleth not) unto any other of the
same Latitude, and that according to the common trade (which should not be, if
great Circlesayling were known and brought to perfection) keeping as near as
may be under one Parallele, from the beginning to the end of the voyage: yet
because in all this Ships motion, the Compass is considered as equidistant
always unto the Horizon, it must needs follow, that all the points of the
Compass (his Variation remembered) continue their mutual respect to those of
every Horizon: the line of South and North, being still the Intersection of the
Meridian with the Horizon: the line of East and West being still the
Intersection of the East and West Azimuth with the Horizon, crossing one an
other always at right angles: so that the situation of the ship continually
altering, does never alter the properties of the Compass: whose nature is to
derive those his divisions unto every new Horizon that he approaches unto;
all the lines of his points ever remaining Semidiameters of Azimuthes and Bases
of their quadrants: the line falling from the Zenith through his Center, being
still the perpendicular common to them all. Whereby it is manifest, that in as
much as the direction of the sailing Compass is always some one Semidiameter
of an Azimuth; and the ship (being the body moved) ever stemmeth in the
plain of the self same Azimuth: also the wind, being the efficient that
moves, of his mutable property drives foreright diametrally upon the plain
of the Horizon: which cannot be but according to the intersection of the
foresaid Azimuth: it is therefore impossible, if the ship be moved, that is,
transferred or changed from place to place, that the line or tracing of her
course comprehended between those places, should be any other, but only such
as is composed of great Circular portions: of which, the length of the ship
it self is always a segment. And so describes she by that means in her
course before mentioned, not a Parallele properly so called (as common opinion
does wrongfully imagine) consisting of one continual lesser Circular line; or
otherwise, a Spirall line truly so named, consisting of a continual uniform
winding, answerable to the nature of the said line; but a course ( quibusdam
diuerticulis, as learned Nonius terms it) with certain turnings in and out,
consisting of small segments of great Circles; keeping always as near the
precise parallele, or Spirall line, as art can aid them. Wherefore it is
confessed, that those several courses have some show or resemblance of the two
sorts of lines aforesaid: but by no means are they the very lines themselves
in deed.

Who was the first inuenter of this Instrument miraculous, and endued, as it
were with life, can hardly* be found. The lame tale of one Flauius at Amelphis,
in the kingdom of Naples, for to have devised it, is of very slender
probability. Pandulphus Collenutius writing the Neapolitane history tells
us, that they of Amelphis say, it is a common opinion there, that it was first
found out among them. But Polidore Virgil, who searched most diligently for the
Inuentors of things, could never hear of this opinion (yet himself being an
Italian) and as he confesses in the later end of his third book de
inuentoribus rerum, could never understand any thing concerning the first
invention of this instrument. Most men suppose the finding thereof to be very
new, and hardly to be proved that it has been in any use in these parts of
the World full 200. years agone. But whether this property of the Loadstone
was first known in the West or East parts of the world, it is very doubtful.
The East Indian histories are pestered with such monstrous reports and
Legendarie tales, that as yet they are but of very small credit. Their
fabulous genealogies and Frierly discourses, do breed a lingering expectation
of some halting Post, that making not so much haste as good speed, may with
more sincerity inform us of the state of those Countries and matters unto
them belonging. Some few years since it so fell out, that I had several
conference with two East Indians which were brought into England by master
Candish, and had learned our language: The one of them was of Mamillia, in the
Isle of Luzon, the other of Miaco in Iapan. I questioned with them concerning
their shipping, and manner of sailing. They described all things far different
from ours, and showed, that in stead of our Compass, they use a Magneticall
Needle of six inches long, and longer, upon a pin in a dish of white China
earth filled with water: In the bottom whereof they have two cross lines, for
the four principal winds: the rest of the divisions being reserved to the
skill of their Pilots. Upon which report of theirs, I made present trial how
a Magneticall Needle would stand in water, and found it to prove excellently
well; not doubting but that many conclusions of importance in Marine affairs
will thereby more readily be performed.

I find that as the Portugals traueiled in their very first discoueries for
the East Indies, they got a Pilote of Melinde, that brought them from thence in
33. days, within the sight of Calecute, and had even then in use the Compass,
the Card, and the sownding line. Ludouicus Vartomannus testifies, that in his
voyage from Bornco unto Giaua, the Pilots of those Countries had the use of
both Compass and Card, and had skill to take direction from the South Pole, as
ours do from the North, even in those days, when it was a very dainty matter
for any of our Pilots to have performed the like: being as then possessed with
an opinion, that the Compass would turn round, as soon as ever they came under
the Equator: as some do yet surmise it would do under the Pole, or near the
fantastical Rock of the purest Magnes. Philander in his annotations upon
Vitruuius, shows that some men deemed it not a new, but an old invention,
and took it to be that Nauticall instrument which is called by Plautus in
Trinummo and Mercatore, by the name of Vorsoria. But this Adrianus Turnebus in
no case will allow, affirming it rather to be a kind of tackle, wherewith
they turned their Sail.

If of old time they had not this Instrument, it seems impossible that ever
they could have performed such voyages as they did: And if ever they had it,
then were it as strange, that all memory thereof should be utterly suppressed,
and that Ptolomey had not found some mention thereof made in Marinus Tyrius, or
other Cosmographers, whose works were extant in his time. Experience
testifies, that this began to be in common use about the time that Printing
was invented, and the making of Gunnes. Both which, although they are of very
excellent use and great wonderments to the world, yet does this far excel
and exceed. For all things performed by them, are marshalled within the
limittes and bounds of humane reason; and therefore their causes being known,
their wonder cease. But this being incomprehensible unto humane reason,
carries it away captive unto the astonishment thereof, and leads it to the
admiration of him, whose wisdom comprehends all things, and distributeth
knowledge and understanding among men, according to such measure, times, and
means, as seems best unto himself; opening the eyes of the blind, and
giving understanding to the simple, destroying the wisdom of the wise, and
making the understanding of the prudent for to hide it self.

Considering the foul abuses and errors that daily are committed in the making
and framing of this worthy Instrument, I have thought good here briefly to
note the faults, and therewithal to show the way how they may be amended. Let
no man mistake me: I speak not save only of ordinary Compasses (being the
most that ever I saw) such as are in common use, and are sale-ware for Masters
and Pilots. What some discreet skillful men carefully do provide for
themselves, I speak not of. First therefore for the most part, the Card of
the Fly is negligently divided, not only in the Compass which they ordinarily
sail by, having the 32. common parts: but as great negligence may be found in
the double Fly, for their Compass of Variation: where the uttermost Ring
which they make moveable about the ordinary Fly, is divided into degrees: and
there a degree or two odds breaks no square with them. The wyers of the Fly
are as rudely set together, having their ends not sitted even and close (as
were meet) but starting a side each from other, not so much as filed smoothe,
but rough even as they were broken: whereby they are also disabled from taking
so strong a touch, as they would, if they were made smoothe. For remedy hereof
it were good, to draw the ouale lines upon the Card of the Fly, in such
sort, that the ends being even with the circumference of the Fly, both the
middles and the ends may have an equal distance from the Center: Then
according to those lines bow and cut the wyers, fitting their ends smoothe,
and so closely joining them, that they may both seem to be but one. After
that, holding them together, dippe the ends in a little moulten Tin, or if
at the first they be welded together, it is the better: and with the edge of a
dull knife, scrape off the Tin again as much as you can come by, which will
be all in a manner, saving only a very little that keeps the ends together:
and that will hold them so fast, that you may conveniently handle them at your
pleasure, and fasten them on their place, according to your desire. (But before
they be set on, let them be touched as abouesaid, and being set on their
touchings at the ends must be refreshed.) Thus shall your Fly stand and turn
equally upon his pin: if not, in stead of the ordinary dawhing with wax, two
or three drops at the most will counterpoyse any swaruing: and many times you
shall not need any at all; which is most commendable. ^


The Capital is commonly wide from the Center of the Fly; and likewise the
pin whereon the Fly stands, from the Center in the bottom of the Box:
both gross and absurd faults, and yet easy to be avoided. ^


The glass that covers the Box is commonly crackeled and snarled by the
sides; and diverse times also too little. These faults they cover with their
thick border of Rosen: but better were it to amend them with a little heed
taking. The Glass ought therefore to be somewhat thin, smoothe, and of even
thickenesse; having the edges smoothed on a grinding stone, or by some other
means, and made very fit to the Box. So shall you need but little
quantity of Simmond, only to keep out the air: which is the better, both
for the clearer view of the Fly, and that your Box may hang the steaddier:
and that will it not do, if your Glass be much thicker on the one side, then
on the other, or else being too little, be thrust nearer the one side, then the
other, and the void place filled up with Rosen, according to ordinary custom.

The Box is hanged in two Circles, the one within the other, having the pinnes
that they turn on, a quarter of a Circle in the one distant from the other.
But these Circles are commonly so unhandsomely made, and ill fauouredly hanged
upon their pinnes, that you should offer a Tincker discredit to compare his
work with this. Add hereunto the riuetting of the Circles with iron, and
hanging the bigger of them upon iron nails: which although they be but little,
yet you must esteem a little in this case to be a great deal too much. And if
they had any care of that they have in hand, they would not commit such a
needelesse gross absurdity, only as it were in despite of Art, to make
expense of wit without gain or profit. ^


The piece of Lead that is fastened to the bottom, ought to be round and of
equal thickness, the pin passing through the Center thereof. If you have it
otherwise, then mark the Box and the bottom when it hangs aright: and
whenever, having taken off the bottom, you will set it on again, see that
you make your marks in the Box and bottom agree, or else it can never with
any certeintie hang as it should. Although it be exceeding loathsome unto me to
deal in these mechanical base practices, yet the necessity is such, that one
must needs deal therein. For of all the Instruments that the Nauigator uses,
this is far the most excellent: and yet of all others this is most
negligently and vnartificially made. Their Staves and Sea Cards made in
England are neat and fine. Their Astrolabes are tolerable: but these are even
such, as I have showed unto you, which I could not so well have showed, but by
this anatomizing of them: that the blame may be apparent, either in those that
make them, or in such as buy them, that will not go to the price of better:
wherein folly would show it self very eminent, if when a ship with her
lading may be worth many thousands of pounds (besides the inestimable value
of the men's lives that are in her) half a pound should be thought much to be
bestowed on a perfect Compass; upon the goodness whereof many times, both
ship, and goods, and lives of men do take their trial: yea all these do
they ieopard (as it were) upon a wager that their Compass is true and perfect.
To conclude, I would wish in any wise, that Artificers of these Instruments
should make even great conscience of that they have in hand; and not slightly
to pass them over after the order of dozen ware. Also that such as exactly
make them, should be rewarded and esteemed accordingly. And finally that they
which are to use them, do well examine their goodness, before they buy them.

Moreover, it many times falls out, that the hollow side of the Capital is
made too narrow in the bottom: and then will the Fly never play well, except
the pin be exceeding small and sharp: which as soon as by use it is a little
dulled, the Fly will never show his points truly, though he were touched
with the best stone in the world. And very oftentimes the oversight herein, is
imputed wrongfully to the weakness of the Touch.

And therefore take care, that the greater Box being square, be not set
together with iron nails. But if it be round, then see that it be handsomely
turned. And in any wise that the lesser Box, wherein the Fly stands, be
well and exactly turned, of seasoned wood, and having the inside colored with
some white glistering color: and not according to the common custom rubbed
about with a piece of Chalk, or a little white lime.

Furthermore because it is very necessary, that whosoever sayleth by any
Card, ought diligently to foresee that the Set of his Compass be answerable
to his Card, of the like Set (I mean) unto that his Card was made by; And for
that the wyers being once glewed on, may not well be altered, or removed; And
the double Fly by reason of his unwieldy corpule^cie is nothing nimble, I have
framed one after this sort; a brief description whereof I thought not
impertinent here to insert. The ends of the wyers must be welded together.
The wyers themselves are half round, with the otherside flat to be placed
upon the bottom of the Fly. The Capitell has two thin narrow Stays of
Latten reaching to the wyers on each side and fast soldered unto them. The
top of the Capitell must be skrewed on the outside, and a little square
piece of Latten with a small hollow bent fitted for to skrewe upon him; unto
this end, that the Capitell being put through the bottom of the Fly in the
Center, and the skrewe on the upper side, being turned on the top of the
Capitell, the Fly and wyers both, may by this means be closely combined
together without any paste or glewe, and be left bare throughout, to the most
advantage at any time for receiving the touch of the Stone, and more easily be
kept from rust, being the greatest enemy that the touch of the Stone can
have: unto which, all your pasted or glewed wyers are necessarily subject:
insomuch as you shall very seldom and (as I think) never, in the whole many
of your usual Flies see any one, that is not infected herewith: being far
more noisome then Garlike, or Oil, and all the rest of those fondly surmised
conceits. If the skrewe come not close enough upon the Fly, a little piece of
pastboorde put on before the skrew, will be a remedy sufficient therein. When
the wyers are thus fastened unto the Fly, you may at al times remove them to
any point or part of a point at your pleasure, without anoyance unto any thing.
In such as I have caused to be made for this purpose, I have used a narrow
form of a loope, the distance between the wyers in the middle, being little
more then the fifth part of their length: and have abated also the metal of
the wyars about the middle of them, and allowed somewhat the more toward their
ends.

The Compass of Variation.
THe Compass of Variation is made in all respects like unto the ordinary
sailing Compass, and is the very same in deed, excepting these two Additions.
The one is, that on the inside of the lesser Box round about, just with the
height of the Fly, either upon the Box it self, or else upon Paper or
Pastboorde, fastened to the side thereof, there be a Circle divided into 360.
parts. And at every 90. let a line be produced both upward to the top, and by
the space of half an ynche downward. At any one of which lines make a Flower
de luce representing the North; and there begin your numbers on both sides
thereof from 1, unto 90. do the like also from the opposite part, betokening
the South. The other is, that a thwart the upper face of the Glass, there be
placed a Ruler of Latten in length answerable to the Diameter of the Box,
bearing in breadth the third part of an ynche or half an ynche, if you think
good, for a very great Compass. In the middle of which Ruler there must a line
be drawn according to the length of the Ruler* And toward each end of equal
distance therefrom, fit two Sights of three inches or longer (as your
Compasis) and about a quarter of an ynche broad at the top, waxing broader
toward the foot; where they are to be ioynted in such sort, that they may for
handsomeness sake be folded the one close upon the other, and stand erected at
right angles. In the one of these along the middle thereof cut out the metal,
beginning a little beneath the top, down to the foot, of convenient breadth;
that a Lute string having a small pearl or bugle on it to slide up and down,
may be fastened precisely in the middle throughout from the top to the foot.
The other Sight being made after the same proportion and form that the former
was, has only a fine small slit pierced from within very little off the top
down to the foot, and must in his thickenesse be abated, that he weigh no
more then the other. The Ruler thus furnished with his Sights, in the space
between the sights and the brimme of the Box, ought to have two loopes cut
out in decent manner to look down through them upon the Fly. And this Ruler
must be divided into many equal small parts; as 20, to an ynche, or such
like; the numbers beginning from the Lute string sight unto the other; and from
the foot of that other to the top. When the Ruler is finished, as before I
have specified, it must a little be let into the brimme of the Box, that it
may stand fast having the middle of it right over the line of North and South
in the Box; and the Sight with the Lute string, over the South. But let it in
such sort be fastened, that you may conveniently either take it off, or set it
on as occasion shall serve. So that the Ruler being taken off, it is a Sailing
Compass, being set on, it serves for the Variation in manner following.

The Fly of the Compass having at opposite parts directly over the points of
the wyers some marks on the upper side easy to be discerned (if it be a
Meridionall Fly, it needs not, in as much as the Flower de luce and the
South point serve the purpose) turn the Box toward the East in the foorenoone
with the Ruler on it, till the Lute string do cast his shadow right upon the
middle line of the Ruler, or on the slit of the other Sight. Then mark
immediately where the shadow of the pearl does light, upon what division, if
the lines be divided, otherwise mark it with a pen; And also what part the
Southend of the wyers, or, (which is all one) the Northend does point unto in
the side of the Box. In the afternoon do the like toward the West, with the
pearl still vnremooued, turning the Box, till the shadow of the pearl
falls full upon the place that it did in the forenoone: And note then also
what part the ends of the wyers do point unto. Then if the number of parts
observed in the forenoone, be alone with those in the afternoon, there is no
Variation at all: for the ends of the wyers do show the true Meridian. But if
the one exceed the other, subtrahe the lesser from the greater; And half the
remainder is the Variation of the Compass toward that side, which had the
greater number in his observation.

This Compass serves far better to set the land withal, and to describe
any Harbor, Coaste, Haven, Town, or Country, then any before in common use;
by looking through the slitte, and bringing the thing that you would note, and
the Lute string both in one; withal marking what parts the wyers do show at
that instant. Likewise for taking of distances.

All this may also be performed with a Circle of Latten about one quarter of
an ynche broad, having a stay going athwart perced through with loope holes
(that it be no hindrance to view the Fly) and a Ruler moving upon it in form
like to the former. Which Circle must be divided, as that within the Box was,
from the Flower de luce, which is to be placed a quarter of a Circle distant
from the line passing along the middle of the stay, and have his numbers
reckoned toward the ends of the same line. And so must the other half of the
Circle be divided from the South point. Being thus divided it must be placed
even fast and very fit, close above the Glass. And when you will use it,
turn the Box about, till the flower de luce of the Circle stand right over
the Northerly ends of the wyers: And the Box so standing, set the Ruler
according to the forenoone and afternoones observation, doing all things else,
as before. And you shall find the self same effect.

I have tried at land the Crosse-needle in stead of the Fly, and do like it
exceeding well. Whether is the better at Sea, I do refer it unto their
judgments that shall make due trial of both. The Crosse-needle I call two
needles, the one of Steel, and the other of Latten, joined together in the
Capitell, where they cross each other at right angles; and so made, that they
be of one length, very straight, and equally standing upon the pin, no end
ouerweyghing the other. This Needle well made and fitted as it ought to be,
will besides his proper use, supply the use also of a Perpendicle, (a matter of
great importance) to show the upright standing of your Instrument, which the
single Needle cannot do; neither yet the Fly any whit comparable unto this.
But you are diligently to note, that in continuance of time as the force of the
Touch of the Stone does decay, so will the North end of either Needle or Fly
rise somewhat higher, and the South end sincke lower. For this is one of the
wonderful properties that the touch of the Magnete has, that a needle as yet
not touched standing equally upon his pin, being once touched with whether
end of the Stone you list, the one end thereof shall be reared higher, and the
other fall lower: The difference whereof, as the goodness of the Stone is
greater, will accordingly the more appear. And in process of time as his
force still decaieth, so returns he more and more to his even standing
again. By reason of which property the Artificer is constrained, that he may
make the Needle lie even, to abate somewhat of the falling end, that the other
by virtue of the touch raised up, may through this abatement, be brought down
to an equality of situation with his fellow. When therefore you perceive the
rising of the North end (as aforesaid) assure your self the Fly or Needle is
weakened in strength, and has need to be refreshed with the Stone. Otherwise,
if it were at the first well touched, be not too busy with it, but let it
alone; except you be well assured of the goodness of the Stone, and of the
right manner of touching. If the Northend rises not any thing at all, and yet
the Fly plays not, then is it to be remedied with sharpening of the pin.
The commodity of the use of this Needle for a Perpendicle is, that because it
is within the Box, the wind cannot hinder it, as it will any other
Perpendicle (especially being small) that is in the open air.

The Traueylors lewell.
THIS Instrument is a Circle about a quarter of an ynch broad, having his
diametrall stay, Ruler, Sights, and all things else, as is last before
described; saving these additaments. The Compass Box of this Instrument must
be of Latten, of what depth or shallownes you please. Only so prepare it, that
the Needle or Fly want not in any wise space enough at liberty to play in.
Let the Circle have a Quadrant firmly sowdered to his uttermost circumference,
making right angles with the superficies of the Circle: whose semidiameter let
be about the length of the semidiameter of the innermost circumference of the
Circle, or somewhat shorter. Divide the Quadrant into 90. degrees: and the
numbers of those parts, placed in two several borders, must be reckoned
contrary ways, the one beginning, where the other ends. Upon the edge of the
utter Circumference of the Circle, where it and the Quadrant meet, there must
be a strong and firm joint fastening the Circle and Quadrant in that place
unto the Box in such sort, that as the Circle continually rises, so the
Quadrant may still sink in the Joint. For this Joint must issue from the Box
with a neck somewhat longer then the semidiameter of the Quadrant, standing at
right angles upon the Box and Circle both: having in the middle a slit of
capacity sufficient to receive the Quadrant, moved therein up and down
according to the motion of the Circle itself, with a little screwe pin on
the one side to stay the Quadrant therewith, and so consequently the Circle,
wheresoever you will have it. And on the other side an Inlet must be
handsomely filed, that the lower part thereof, (being of a convenient quantity
to contain within it both the borders of the Quadrant) may precisely make one
right line with the middle of the Axis of the Joint, and the neither
semidiameter of the Quadrant erected. So shall it always supply the use of a
fiduciall line, and distinctly show the numbers that are cut in the borders
aforesaid. Thus much concerning the description. The use is briefly this. When
the Circle is not elevated, it is the above mentioned Compass of Variation: The
middle line of the diametrall Stay, representing East and West, and the Base of
the Quadrant produced, serving for North and South, etc. But when it is
elevated according to the height of the Equator (whose angle by the fiduciall
line of the Inlet, the Quadrant shows in one number, and the height of the
Pole in the other) it performs the use of an Equinoctial Dyall generally
throughout the whole world. For, supposing the Circle raised as apperteyneth,
let the Needle (and a Crosse-needle seems the best) keep his due place
agreeable to the Variation: Then turn the Ruler with his Sights about, till
the shadow of the Lute string being toward the Sun, do fall upon the middle
line or slit of the opposite Sight, being perpendicularly erected on the Ruler
like unto the other. So shall the uppermost end of the Ruler directed toward
the Sun, declare the true hour, either in the upper superficies of the
Circle, to be reckoned by 15. degrees continually from East to South in the
Forenoone, and from thence to West in the Afternoon: or else for more
expedition in a peculiar Border of hours drawn according to every of those
15. degrees in the void superficies underneath.

I had once purposed to have written somewhat of an Instrument devised by
Robert Norman: who although he was not learned, yet was he a very expert
Mechanician, of an honest and good mind, and found that by his own industrious
practice, concerning a strange property of the Magneticall Needle, which no
man (I think) before him did ever find, and which (the more is the shameful
sloth of men) very few Nauigators have practiced ever sithence: Although the
Instrument be very easy to be made, and the property no doubt in Navigations
of great consequence. But understanding by conference with a man of rare
learning both in Physic, his own profession, and in diverse other laudable
knowledges, besides that, he many years has labored in the consideration of
the properties of that Stone, and minds now out of hand for the common
benefit to publish those his labors, I surceassed altogether from that
purpose of mine, assuring me that he (if any other) will be able most exactly
to handle that Argument: For I found him excellently skilled, far beyond any
thing that I either knew or imagined in that matter. Albeit I had read all
that I could hear to have written thereof, and had practiced as many of their
Conclusions, as I made any reckoning of. But I found mine Authors, even of the
best account, in many things very frivolous and vain, and ignorant of the
chiefest properties of importance. He that seems to have written most
learnedly is a Neapolitane, whose footesteps I followed, and found his
Assertions erroneous in six several Conclusions.

The Pantometer.
The Authors purpose in this Treatise.
THis Instrument, that in respect of the Cap. 1.
manifold and general uses thereof, I call the Pantometer, I have framed
chiefly for the Variation: And that principally to serve at land: yet some
parts of it shall be employed on practice of good importance at Sea; both by
helping the Hemisphere (wherewith hereafter you shall be further acquainted) in
some things, and by performing other some for it self. And although the
universality of the Pantometer would have ministered matter of very large
discourse: yet for as much as my maine purpose is, as in the rest, so in this
Treatise likewise, to be ayding and assisting the Nauigator by all good means
possible: To his principal and most necessary uses I have therefore directed,
and as it were, contracted the diffused nature of this Instrument.
Notwithstanding, whatsoever Master Thomas Digges has written of Measurings
with his Topographicall Instrument, may be done as well, and better with this.
How convenient it is for observations Astronomical, the expert will soon
perceive. Al which, and many other Mathematical Conclusions easy by this
Instrument to be performed, I must leave to the diligent trial of the studious
delighted with those noble Sciences.

The Declaration of the parts of the Pantometer.
THe chief parts of this Instrument are two: Cap. ^
The Horizontall, to be placed always equidistant to the plain of the
Horizon, which it represents: And the Vertical, perpendicularly erected upon
the former, and therefore in power any Azimuth or Vertical, whereof also it is
named. In the Horizontall there are two Semicircles; The one has the ordinary
Points of the Compass: the other the common degrees of a Circle, both of them
meeting in one Diameter. The round void space in the middle of the
Horizontall, must be filled up with the Centre-pinne thereof, in such sort,
that being from underneath fastened thereinto, the one half and more of the
said Pin, somewhat beyond the Diameter of his thicknes, shall be cut away, and
be made even with the upper side of the Horizontall: But the other part
remaining, shall stand directly upright of a convenient length above the
Horizontall: And this I term the Axis of the Vertical: because by means of
it the Vertical is turned round about upon the Horizontall, and made to take
any manner of position.

The Vertical has in it a Quadrant as big as it may receive, to be drawn
not after the common fashion, but according to the description invented by that
famous Mathematician Petrus Nonius in his Treatise of Instruments and Rules for
Navigations, and of the Twilight: which Quadrant, in respect of the kind of
working thereby, I call the Proportional Quadrant. And on that side it has
nothing else, saving the Alhidada, or Sight Ruler (as the manner is) fastened in
the Center, and carrying in his margen above the Fiduciall or Leuell-line all
the several numbers of the inner Quadrants underneath, for more readiness and
certainty sake. For the speedier dividing of the inner Quadrants, do thus*
Part the Fiduciall line of the Sight Ruler into halfes, from the innermost
circumference of the Limb unto the Center. The medietie next unto the Limb,
divide into 45. equal parts: setting down their several denominations by
fiues or tennes, upon the Ruler rightouer the divisions: their numbers
decreasing from the Limb toward the medietie after this sort. The division
next unto the Limb is accounted for to be 89. the next 88. then 87. 86. etc.
until you come unto 46. next unto the medietie it self. According unto these
divisions precisely answering unto them, draw so many inner Quadrants upon the
Center of the great Quadrant of 90. Then must you with a pair of dividing
Compasses very exactly take the quantity of a degree in the Quadrant of 90.
and that will perfectly divide every one of the inner Quadrants into their
assigned numbers. Only you are carefully to foresee, that when the Vertical
on the back part thereof through the hole of his Border is firmly fixed upon
the Axis of the Center-pinne, the neathermost edge on the forepart of it (being
equally distant from the lower side or Base of the proportional Quadrant) do
in any case precisely light upon the Center of the Horizontall: to the end
that it may always serve it in stead of a moveable Diameter.

The back of the Vertical has these three necessary Implements. The first
is a Compass, with his line of North and South parallele, to the Vertical:
And the same must be handsomely and fitly let in to the border of the Vertical
beneath, that the Axis of the Center pin, passing through both the handle of
the Compass and the said Border, may claspe it exactly close unto both the
back of the Vertical, and the plain of the Horizontall, in such sort, that
as the Vertical is moved round about, so jointly together with it and in it
shall the Compass likewise.

The second is the Directory, so named, because it guides the eye-beame
directly forth unto the Horizon. And this consists of two parts: The Ruler
and his Sights. Whereof the Ruler being of a reasonable length, straight, and
even, shall be drawn to and fro athwart the back of the Vertical in two
loopes standing parallele to the Horizontall, or (which is all one) to the
Border of the Vertical. The two Sights, which ought to be 2. or 3. inches
long, are moveable likewise but upon the Ruler: the one beyond the Vertical,
the other behether it toward your eye.

The third is the Perpendicle or thread, with a little plummet hanging thereat,
requisite for the due placing of the Horizontall: which turn the Cross-needle
also will serve. Last of all, when you are to use the Vertical alone by it
self (as hereafter shall be showed you) there is a handle belonging thereunto,
having the lower end of what form you will, (the best is which may best fill
the hand) but the upper end must be of the same fashion and bigness that the
Axis of the Centre-pinne is of: for it has (as you shall perceive) the same
use, and must be fastened likewise in the same place.

The Mechanical Description Cap. 3.
of those Parts.
The Horizontall. The Compass. The Back of the Vertical with his Border,
Inlets, Loopes, and Perpendicle. The Centre-pinne. The Vertical and his
Sight-Ruler. The Directory. The handle of the Vertical.
The exact finding of Altitudes or Heights.
FOr as much as the usual Quadrant of Cap. 4.
90. degrees only does very seldom yield the precise elevation sought for in
a known and certain denomination, because most commonly the Sight Ruler, or
Alhidada (as they call it) cutteth not exactly at a full degree, but upon the
space between the beginning and ending of a degree (which is infinitely
diuisible) the proportional Quadrant of Nonius, by drawing and dividing many
inner Quadrants (as before you have seen) shows that easily within a narrow
circuit; which otherwise a very large, yea a huge Instrument with no small
encumbrance would hardly do in a mighty circumference. For the parts being
so many, in a continual train following one an other, and the Ruler every
where in a manner crossing them, it must needs cut some one of the inner
Quadrants upon a full degree. And so by this means, that part of the uttermost
or great Quadrant, which before was but confusedly coniectured, without any
determinate denomination, is now distinctly made known under a certain name,
by the ready help of the Golden Rule, after this manner. When the Ruler shows
some portion of a degree in the uttermost Quadrant, whose certain value in
minutes, seconds, etc. you would gladly learn, observe at the same instant
what whole degree in one of the inner Quadrants it precisely cutteth: And
market therewithal in the side of the Ruler the entire sum of all the parts
whereinto that Quadrant is divided. So have you of four proportional numbers,
three given: namely, the whole inner Quadrant, his part cut, and the whole
uttermost Quadrant of 90. Wherefore to find out the fourth, multiply 90. into
the parts of the inner Quadrant that the Ruler cut, and the Product divide by
the whole inner Quadrant, the Quotient shall tell you the degrees of the
uttermost Quadrant together with the portion sought for, in a fraction
distinctly known: which to reduce unto the usual denomination of Minutes,
Seconds, etc. do thus. Multiply the Numerator of your Fraction by 60, and
divide the product by the Denominator: the Quotient shows your Minutes. And if
any remainder be, again multiply that by 60. and divide in like sort as
before, this second Operation brings forth Seconds. And in the same manner
still working, as often as any thing is left of the former Operation, you may
proceed on to Thirds, Fourthes, Fifthes etc. till you have obtained a most
sufficient preciseness.

The Observing of the Variation at Land by the Sun.
SEt the Instrument upon a Staff prepared Cap. 5.
for this purpose, his Horizontall being parallele to the Horizon of the World:
And placing the Vertical upon the line of North and South in the Horizontall,
turn the Horizontall about, till the Needle stand equidistant to the
Vertical: Then fasten the Horizontall to the staff with the skrewe pin of
his Socket: which in that sort remaining steaddy and immovable, turn the
Vertical in the Forenoone toward the East, moving the Sight Ruler up and
down, till the Sun beam does pearce both Sights: and immediately note what
parts the edge of the Vertical does cut in the Horizontall: Also what part
the SightRuler falls on in the Vertical: where if it light not on a just
part in the utter Quadrant; mark where it does upon one in any of the inner
Quadrants. Again, in the Afternoon, the Horizontall continuing still in his
former place, and the Ruler likewise abiding upon the foresaid part
unchangeable, turn the Vertical toward the West, till the Sun enters in
at both the sights: And note therewithal what part the edge of the Vertical
cutteth in the Horizontall. If then the parts cut by the edge of the Vertical
in the Forenoone, and those other in the Afternoon, be equally distant from
the South point of the Horizontall; then is there no Variation at all. For the
line of North and South in the Horizontall, is one and the self same with the
true Meridian. But if the parts of the Forenoones observation be fewer then
those of the Afternoon, subtrahe the smaller number from the greater: and
half the remainder discovers the Variation from the South Westwards to be
so many degrees: and the Northerly end of the Needle to decline so many parts
from the true North toward the East. Wherefore the line of North and South in
the Horizontall, does not possess the true Meridian: but swarueth therefrom,
as the parts observed do show. Lastly, if the parts of the Forenoones
observation be more then those of the Afternoon, subtrahe (as before) the
smaller number from the greater, and half the remainder shows the Variation
of the South end of the Needle to be so many degrees Eastward, and the
Northerly end thereof to vary so many parts Westward. Now for the more
certeinetie in your working, you must ever be mindful to make 3. or 4.
several observations in the Forenoone: that although a Cloud should hinder
you of your first in the Afternoon, yet some one at the least of the other may
be clearly observed: where otherwise, if you miss of one, all your labor for
that whole day is lost.

The observing of the Variation at Land by the Stars.
THe Variation of the Compass, (and so Cap. 6.
likewise the Latitude) may be taken as well by the Stars in the night, as
by the Sun in the day. And sith the Almighty has ordained but one Sun,
and a great multitude of Stars, Nauigators should offer themselves much
wrong, if they would not make their benefit of these, as they do of that: And
so much the rather, because the Sun is South but once in four and twenty
hours: The Stars come to the Meridian continually one after another all the
night long. The ordinary instrument for the Variation, is not of any use at
all in respect of the Stars, no not though he have his Astrolabe to help
him: whereas this instrument by it self, without the aid of any other,
performs all things exquisitely by the Stars: And by the Sun so exactly
with all advantage, that when many Instruments can do nothing without a clear
Sunneshine; this in a mystie or foggie weather through a Cloud, if that you
may but only discern the body of the Sun, craves no more to accomplish
your desire.

The manner of observing a Star is this. First prepare a little Notche or slit
of equal deapth in the two sights of the sight-Ruler, parallele to the leauell
line thereof: And the Instrument being placed (as before is specified) turn
the Vertical toward the Star, being on the Eastside of the Meridian, moving
the sightRuler up or down, till you may perceive the Star even with those
two Notches. Then note the parts that the sight Ruler does cut in the
Quadrant: And those also that the edge of the Quadrant or Vertical cutteth in
the Horizontall. Afterward do the like again when the same star is on the
West side of the Meridian. And for the rest, following the same manner of
Operation that above I delivered, you shall here obtain the self same truth
of Variation by any star that there you found only by the Sun.

Touching the Latitude, the like kind of working is to be used for the taking
thereof by a star, as is by the sun: I mean the observing of his Meridian
height, and subtrahing, or adding, as the nature thereof requires.

And for this cause is the Vertical so placed, that about an ynch of it (more
or less, according to the proportion of the Instrument) at that corner, where
the Ruler is fastened to the Center, may always in the turning about reach
over the Horizontall: that you may conveniently apply your eye, by the sights
to discern any star, or epsy the top of any body erected, whose height you
would measure: which otherwise you could not do, if the Vertical were but
even with the Horizontall. As for the other end of the Base of the Vertical,
it is no matter how far it be extended, but only according as the quantity
and comelines of the Instrument shall require; so that the Border, wherewith
the Base of the Vertical is lengthened, do reach precisely straight, and
even unto the edge of the Horizontall, for the cutting of the parts thereof.

Moreover, if the half Circle of the Horizontall, which is parted into
degrees, were divided also into a pair of Proportional Quadrants: then both
for the former uses, and infinite others, would this Instrument prove most
exact and persite. But those that are willing to bestow so much cost, I wish
they should do it in metal, and not in wood. If in wood, then let the same
especially be chosen, whereof Cypers chests are made: For that I take to be
best, as being most free from warping, and receiving any work very easily and
fairly. The imperfection of bricklenesse, a little the more care must amend
and strengthen. And thus much for the use of the Pantometer complete.

The manner of observing the Variation at Sea.
WHen the Vertical of the Pantometer together Cap. 7.
with his Compass is fitted to the handle, hold it directly toward the Sun
in the Forenoone, in such sort, that the Perpendicle keeping his due place, the
Sun may pearce both the sights: And noting the height of the sun, mark
also at that instant, what Point or Degree the Needle does show. Again when
the Sun comes to the same height in the Afternoon, observe likewise what
Point or Degree the Needle is at: And then working in all respects (as before I
declared) the Variation is made known unto you.

If you have a Crosse-needle well made, it will serve in stead of the
Perpendicle, better then the Perpendicle it self: In as much as it is not
subject to the whirling of the wind, but is quiet therefrom, being defended by
the Glass close symmond round about.

The taking of the height of the Sun at Sea.
PLace the Vertical upon his handle, the Cap. 8.
limb toward you, and his perpendicular side over against you, and turning
your back toward the Sun, keep the two sights of the Directory, even with
the parting of the water, and the Element over right against you. Move also the
sight Ruler of the Vertical up or down, till at one instant you may see, both
the Sunne-beame through the upper sight to fall upon his due place in the
nether, and jointly therewithal the parting of the water and Element: Then
have you the degrees and minutes of the suns height, by means of the
Proportional Quadrant, as heretofore is specified.

This may in like manner be performed by looking toward the Horizon directly
under the Sun, placing the Perpendicular side toward you, and the limb
from you, and thrusting the Directory with his long sights from you, or else
drawing it toward you, as you may most conveniently discern the sunne-beame
of the upper sight to be upon his just place in the nether. For the better
effecting whereof, it is requisite to have a third square sight, forked on the
nether side with a couple of small peakes to be placed, the one on the one
side, and the other on the other side of the Center of the sight Ruler, ready
to be taken off or on; and having a little mark with two Crosse-lines of
equal distance to the holes of the other two sights, and the Fiduciall line:
To the end that this third sight, being fastened right over the Center of the
sight Ruler, (with his lower edge somewhat aslope, and not at right angles with
the Fiducial line) you may the more easily discern, by means of the said
mark, when the sunne-beame has perced the other two sights above: And then
have you all things as before. Wherefore if two observations be made together,
the one from the Sun, and the other toward it, and both these agree in one;
The whole Operation must needs be exact and without any doubt of error.

The ordinary staves (so that they be well made, and good regard had to the
Eccentricitie of the eye) be very commodious for so much as they can perform:
which cannot be much above 45. degrees: because the eye at one view is scarce
capable of a larger Angle. And therefore in great Altitudes of the Sun, they
are unserviceable, the Astrolabe or searing, (as some term it) coming in
place of them: And yet the use of this also in a hie Sea is very uncertain.
But with the Instrument that now is described unto you, you may take the
height of the Sun at what angle so ever, yea although he be vertical.
Herein, this and the staff agree, that both of them have a special respect to
the Horizon: but they differ in the danger of the Eccentricitie of the eye;
whereunto the staff is subject, but this is not so, and never requires any
Angle in the eye of the Obseruer, that shall exceed the capacity of 20.
degrees. Somewhat also might here have been added of the diverse placing of
the sights upon the Directorie: but for brevity sake, I refer it to the
consideration and choice of the Practiser, upon diligent trial thereof.

The Hemisphere.
The Scope of this Treatise.
TWo things there are in every Instrument Cap. 1.
of special and most necessary consideration; the one the body (as it were)
and substance of it: the other, the end or purpose whereunto it serves. The
body or substance of every Instrument, and namely of this (whereof now we
treat) I call the Material parts of which it consists, together with their
peculiar forms, such, as whereby that end may be best atteyned: best, I mean,
with the greatest both certeintie and facility possible. The purpose or end, I
term the manifold commodities to be reaped thereby, and especially in this
Instrument, the singular most pleasant and profitable uses whereunto it is and
may be applied. All which fully to discourse of, would require far more
leisure, then either my vocation, or other many affairs of importance, may
permit me. I shall therefore sufficiently content my self in this behalf, if
first I deliver to the skilfuller and more industrious sort, a brief and
perfect view of the Instrument by a particular and evident description to the
eye of all the Members thereof: which once conceived, the thing of it self
without any further words of mine, will most easily and readily unto them,
declare his own use from point to point in Astronomy, Geographie, Navigations,
and such like excellent faculties. But because that the Nauigatour is the man,
for whose sake chiefly I have taken these pains: And among those of that
trade, the most part are, though commendably perhaps furnished with experience,
yet but weakly assisted with fit Instruments: and of themselves, for want of
some contemplative knowledge Mathematical, not able either to invent fitter,
or to reform and better those that presently they use: I thought it requisite
for them, together with the description and frame of the Instrument, to add in
the second place some few principal admonitions, concerning the several most
necessary uses thereof upon sea or land. And in so doing, I will leave many
things to the Readers own ingenious practice: Many also will I omit, or rather
presuppose as already known, namely what a Pole is, an Equinoctial, a
Meridian, etc. being such as are the first Principles of this Art, wherewith
every man is commonly acquainted, and by diverse in our own vulgar speech
have in the largest manner oftentimes be handled.

The names of all the parts of the Hemisphere.
Now if any desire to know what this Cap. 2.
Hemisphere is by it self, (and so must he first, if he will orderly proceed
to the getting of perfect knowledge in the use: for no man can well handle an
Instrument that he knows not) a general declaration of the parts
accompanied with their Mechanical description, and a brief comparing of them
with the Globe, may so thoroughly suffice, as more herein is not to be required.
There are therefore in this Instrument two sides to be considered, the one more
principal, which I term the Face; the other less, which I call the Back. The
Face consists of whole Circles and half Circles. The whole Circles are two
in number: whereof the one being the Base (as it were) of all the Instrument
and immovable, is the fixed Meridian, because that turn most commonly it
serves: the other, moveable, I call the Deferent; for that it carries up and
down upon and in it self, according to any greater or lesser Elevation or
Latitude, the Equator and Axis of the World, with the two extreme points
thereof being the Poles. The half Circles being four in number, are all
belonging to the former two entire Circles: For either are they placed upon the
great Meridian aforesaid; and then, if fixed or moveable thereupon, it is the
half Horison; if moveable, it is the Semicircle of Altitudes, to be turned to
and fro upon his own Poles, equidistant on all sides from the Horizon: or else
they are situated upon the Deferent; and those two likewise in number having
the self same differences between them that the former had: For one of them
is fixed or fastened upon the Deferent, and that is the Semi-equator: the other
is voluble, which I call the Moveable Meridian.

The Back of this Instrument needs not any thing, but the usual Mariners
Compass to be artificially annexed thereunto with the line of North and South
parallele to the Back.

The Mechanical Description Cap. 3.
of all those several Parts.
1 The fixed Meridian. 2 The Deferent with the Axis and Poles. 3 The half
Horizon. 4 The Semicircle of Altitudes. 5 The Semi-equator. 6 The moveable
Meridian with the two Sight-Rulers. 7 The Back, with the Mariners Compass.
The agreeing of the Hemisphere with the Globe.
BY that which has hitherto been spoken touching the Structure of this
Instrument, Cap. 4.
may soon be discerned the original descent thereof to be from the Globe. For
the better conceauing whereof, vouchsafe I pray you a little to remember with me
the chief Circles belonging to the Globe; as the Horizon cutting it in two
Hemispheres, the Meridian wherein it is hanged, the Quart of Altitudes whereby
it is measured: And then those other two not adjoined only as the former; but
continual therewith, being described in the superficies or outface of the Globe
it self, the Equator, I mean, and the Zodiake, with their appenda^ts, the two
Colures, one Equinoctial, and the other Solstitiall. All these to make and use
together in this sort with the Globe, when experience had taught to be a matter
of great difficulty, the learned of former times, and of these our days, have
labored how without the Globe by sundry rare inventions to represe^t the
Globe, in seperating those necessary Circles from the massines of the
Instrument: wherein the Astronomers Ring (commonly so called) does justly
deserve right worthy commendation. And I now the rather make mention of it, for
that it first gave occasion of devising, and ministered good help toward the
framing and perfecting of this Instrument. Both of them are (as it were)
Anatomeis of the Globe: But whether in all respects the more absolute let
either speak for itself, and let the skillful Reader judge. Touching the
Hemisphere, if you imagine the Meridian of the Globe to be a Plain, it shall
pass through the Center thereof, and cut it together with all the great
Circles thereunto belonging in two equal parts: The self same does the
Meridian likewise in the Hemisphere: And therefore have you here the Equator,
Horizon, Moveable Meridian, and that of Altitudes, all these half in stead of
whole Circles. As for the Zodiake, it is not here wanting: for since all great
Circles, and so their medieties are equal the one unto the other, the half
Horizon here, may well be used for the half Zodiake, when the Equator is
placed according to the greatest declination: or contrariwise the Horizon to be
the Equinoctial, the Semiequator shall be the half Zodiake. Thus have you the
Zodiake both ways: that I say nothing of the little one in the limb of the
Moveable Meridian. For the two Colures there, serves the two Meridians here:
the fixed for the Sostitiall, the Moveable for the Equinoctial. The little
Circle for the hours there, is here the Equator it self, and so it is also in
effect in the Globe. The Index there, is the Moveable Meridian here, and so
must you likewise understand it in the Globe. Of the Axis and Poles you have
heard enough before. To conclude, here is presented to your view a
Halfe-sphere in name and show, but a whole or entire Sphere in deed and
practice. For proof whereof (omitting many other) I refer you to these few
Propositions ensuing. Only by the way, in the behalf of the Instrument I am
to request the Reader, that he be circumspect to foresee that the Circles and
Semicircles be perfect in any case and truly divided, that they be exactly
placed upon their right Center, that the hanging of the instrument be
exquisite, having the Horizon thereof parallele to the great Horizon of the
world. Finally that all things be accomplished accordingly, as above by the
Pattern is signified, before he proceed to any experimental handling of it:
least otherwise the work be unjustly blamed for the errors and imperfections
of the workman: let (as reason would) the fault there lie, where the fault is.

To find the place of the Sun.
THe day being given, the Place, that is, Cap. 5.
the sign and degree of the Zodiake, wherein the Sun is, may thus be found.
Seek in the uttermost Circle described upon the Deferent the Month and day
given; whereupon if you place the linea fiduciae, or level line of the Ruler,
the same shall in the lower or inner Circle thereof being the Zodiake, show you
the thing sought for: And the opposite point thereof shall be the Suns Nadyr
for that day. But if the year be leap, wherein the place of the Sun is
demanded; then must you from the 24. of February, till the end of that
year, add always one more to the number of that day which you seek for: as
if the day required be the 2. of March, set the Ruler at the 3. if the 3. then
at the 4. and so forth.

The place of the Sun, being given to find his Declination.
FOr as much as all the Declinations of Cap. 6.
the whole Zodiak may exactly be considered in one only Quadrant thereof, thus
briefly shall you work by the Hemisphere. Let the Horizon be in stead of the
Zodiake: Then number in the fixed Meridian (which now must be taken for the
Solstitiall Colure) the Suns greatest Declination, and thereat fasten the
Equinoctial: So shall the pin, whereupon the two Semicircles cut one an other,
be the beginnings of Aries and Libra, and the point of the Horizons meeting
with the fixed Meridian, the beginnings of Cancer and Capricorn: Between
which two extremes, the space of every 30. degrees in the Horizon of the
Instrument shall be as a whole sign in the Zodiake, to be reckoned in order
thus. From the pin to 60. is Aries, from thence to 30. Taurus, from thence to
the fixed Meridian Gemini: Then back again from the Meridian to 30. Cancer,
from thence to 60. Leo, from thence to 90. being in the Intersection, Virgo.
The self same order must be used in the other half of the Zodiake: For the
reason is like in both. Having therefore found the true place of the Sun in
the Horizon of the Instrument (now the Zodiake) turn the Moveable Meridian,
till it exactly agree therewith: so shall the degrees thereof intercepted
between the Equinoctial and the Horizon, (now the Zodiake) show the
declination demanded. Or supposing the Equator of the Instrument to be as the
Zodiake, and the Horizon as the Equator, you may after the same manner also
find the same declination in the Semicircle of Altitudes. Or finally, if you
set the Ruler on the place of the Sun found in the little Zodiake of the
Moveable Meridian, his end in the uttermost limb or border of that Semicircle
shall point out unto you the true declination.

The Longitude and Latitude of any Star being given to find his Declination.
LEt the Horizon of the Hemisphere be as Cap. 7.
the Equator of the World; and the Equator of the Hemisphere as the Zodiake, by
seperating the one from the other, according to the Angle of the Suns
greatest declination: so shall the Zenith of the Instrument be as the Pole of
the World, and the Semicircle of Altitudes, fit to express any declination.
Again, the Pole of the Instrument shall be in stead of the Pole of the Zodiake;
and the moveable Meridian shall truly represent any Semicircle of Longitude.
Wherefore supposing in the Instrument the one Quadrant of the Equator (now the
Zodiake) from the pin to the fixed Meridian or Solstitiall Colure upward, and
so down again, to be the Northern half of the Zodiake, containing ^^^^^^
And the other Quadrant thereof from the pin to the same Meridian or Colure
downward, and so up again, to be the Southern half comprehending ^^^^^^ in
this sort have you by the continual addition of 30. according to the number of
the Signs, the whole Zodiake given withal his degrees of Longitude. So that
first seek the degree of Longitude supposed: After bring the Semicircle of
Longitudes, or the Moveable Meridian to that degree, and in it number the
Latitude of the Star given: Lastly apply the Semicircle of Altitudes in such
sort, that it may exactly agree with the same Latitude: then shall the Arc
thereof comprehended between that point of Latitude and the Horizon of the
Instrument (now the Equator) precisely show the degrees of declination of the
Star in that point.

The Declination of Sun or Star, being given to find the height of the
Pole or Latitude.
THe Latitude by Sun or Star to be Cap. 8.
found, is either when they are in the Horizon of the World, or above: And if
above, either in the Meridian, or without. When the Sun or Star is in the
Meridian, take by some Instrument the precise height of them: After, place the
Moveable Meridian in the Hemisphere parallele with the fixed Meridian, toward
either the South or North there, according as the height observed was in the
Meridian of the World: And close unto the Moveable Meridian join the
Semicircle of Altitudes: Then seek the point of Declination given, in the
Moveable Meridian, and raise the same so many degrees in the Semicircle of
Altitudes above the Horizon of the Hemisphere, as the height observed was above
the Horizon of the World. So shall the Pole of the Hemisphere have one and the
same Elevation with the Pole of the world in the place supposed. But when
either Sun or Star is in the Horizon rising or setting, in stead of
observing the height before, now only take the distance thereof from the true
point of East or West: This done, remembering that the pin whereupon the
Equator cutteth the Horizon in the Hemisphere, stands for those points of
East and West, turn the Moveable Meridian to or fro, and the Deferent with the
Pole therein up or down, till the Declination of Sun or Star noted in the
Moveable Meridian, do exactly agree with the Horizon, at such a distance from
the Pin aforesaid, as by your observation the Sun or Star did differ from
the true East or West. Then shall the Pole of the Hemisphere show you the
Latitude. Lastly if the Sun or star be elevated between the Meridian and
the Horizon, then shall you need both the former obseruatio^s, the one of
height, the other of distance from East or West, that is, in what Azimuth the
sun or star is, or as the seaman terms it, upon what point or part of the
Compass: which with a fit Instrument is easy to be performed. And for that
the Semicircle of Altitudes expresses any Azimuth, set that in respect of the
Pin before mentioned, according to the distance observed from East or West;
And in the selfsame semicircle also mark the height observed: whereunto
having brought the Declination in the Moveable Meridian, you shall ever find
the Pole in the Hemisphere of equal Elevation with that of the World.

The Latitude being given, and the Declination, to find very readily by the
Sun beam without any help of the Magneticall Needle, the hour of the day,
the height of the Sun, and the true point of the Compass whereon the Sun
then is.
FOr the perfourming of this Problem, Cap. 9.
raise the Pole of the Hemisphere agreeable to the Latitude or Elevation given:
and place the Ruler in the little zodiake, upon the degree of the suns
Declination: Then move the Moveable Meridian higher or lower, that is, nearer
or farther from the fixed Meridian, till the Sun beam pearceth through both
the sights of the Ruler: So shall the middle edge of the Moveable Meridian
show you in the Semi-equator the the just hour Antemeridian above, or
Pomeridian underneath it. And if beyond the full hour, it falls upon any of
the 15. degrees between, multiply those odd degrees by 4. and the product
thereof shall be horary minutes. Afterward the parts of the Instrument
standing still without any alteration, apply the Semicircle of Altitudes to the
point of Declination, then shall the portion thereof contained between that
Point and the Horizon, discover the true height of the Sun for that time. And
withal the self same Semicircle of Altitudes in the Horizon, shall exactly
declare upon what point of the Compass the Sun then is: And in the Equator
it shall further show upon what point of the Compass the Sun truly is in
respect of the Parallele of his daily Revolution.

The Latitude and Declination being given, and the Height taken by any other
Instrument, to find the residue before specified any time of the Day.
SVpposing the Pole at his due Elevation Cap. 10.
in the Hemisphere, and the Sun upon his point of Declination there, turn
the moveable Meridian and the Semicircle of Altitudes to and fro, till the
height observed in this, do precisely agree with the point of Declination in
that: Forthwith in the Semi-equator the Moveable Meridian tells you the
hour, and the Semicircle of Altitudes in the Horizon, makes manifest the true
Point of the Compass.

The Latitude being given together with the Height of any fixed Star of
known Declination, to perform all the former any time of the Night.
Observe first the height of the Star above Cap. 11.
the Horizon of the World, and on what side of the Meridian it is, whether East
or West. Set then the Equator in the Hemisphere, according to the Latitude
given: And having marked in the Moveable Meridian the Declination of the
star, whose height you found, move that Semicircle with the point of the
stars Declination, till in a correspondent Quarter of the Hemisphere, to that
which it possesses in the Heavens, the star obtain his precise equal
height from the Horizon: which is soon measured (as before we declared) by
turning the Moveable Meridian and the Semicircle of Altitudes to and fro, til
both cut each other in the point of Declination. That portion of the
Semicircle of Altitudes, comprehended between their Intersection and the
Horizon is the stars height: And immediately therewithal appears upon what
point of the Compass the star is: Also in the Semi-equator the moveable
Meridian shows you the stars hour. Howbeit, because all distinction of time
proceeds originally from the Sun, that is not the true hour of the Night
sought for; but an other must be found by the distance of the star from the
Sun: And for this purpose serves the Zodiake or Circle of right Ascensions
described in the Deferent. Seek therefore therein the place of your star (if
it be of the number of those that are there set down) otherwise the degree of
your stars Coeli-mediation; which by the help of the Ruler, make perfectly
to agree with the hour of the star, now to be reckoned in the Circle of
hours in the fixed Meridian: Finally, keeping the said Circle of right
Ascensions in this sort immovable, look therein for the place or degree of
the Sun for that Day, and thither move the Ruler till it lie directly
thereon: Then shall the end of the Ruler in the Circle of hours upon the fixed
Meridian, show you the true hour of the Night required.

The Latitude being given, and the Declination of either Sun or Star, to
find how long they appear above the Horizon, and at what Point they rise or
set: also the Amplitude Oriental.
SEt the Equator of the Hemisphere according Cap. 12.
to the Latitude given, and apply the degree of Declination to the Horizon:
Afterward, the Instrument thus standing, note upon what hour, or part of time
the Moveable Meridian falls in the Equinoctial: For that shall be the precise
time of rising, to be nu^bred in the hours above; or of setting, in those
underneath: And the Arc of the Equator, contained between the Moveable and
fixed Meridian, being doubled, declares how long either sun or star
continues above the Horizon. Now touching the Point of the Compass, it does
presently offer it self, to be seen in the utter margen of the Horizon,
ouer-right against the point of Rising or setting aforesaid. From which point
to the Pin (being in stead of the true East or West) the degrees contained
in the Horizon, represent unto you the Amplitude Oriental or Occidentall.

By the Sunne-beame to draw redily the Meridian line, and to find the
Variation of the Compass.
FOr more speedy and certain operation Cap. 13.
herein, if the Sun be in the East half of the world, turn the face of the
Hemisphere Eastward; if in the West half, then Westward; altering a little the
situation of the Pole, and consequently of the Equinoctial, that the Pole and
semicircles of the Instrument, may agree and be equidistant unto those of like
denomination in the Heavens. Then hold it perpendicularly upon or over any
flat and smooth superficies, lying parallele or even with the Horizon of the
world: and that directly toward the Sun, that the beam thereof passing
through both the sights, may show the exact minute of time. Now since the
fixed Meridian of the Hemisphere is in the Meridian of the world, the foot of
the Hemispheres said Meridian must needs be so likewise. Draw therefore
either by direction of the foot it self, or of the shadow of it, a straight
line, and produce it in length as you think expedient. This shall be the
Meridian line required, with his two extremes pointing out the true South and
North: whereunto if you draw a perpendicular crossing it, that shall be the
Line of the true East and West. The variation is thus known: when the hour is
found (as immediately before you have heard) at that instant turn your eye
aside toward the Back of the Instrument, and mark what Angle the Needle of
the Compass makes with the line of North and South underneath it: For this Line
being by the structure of the Instrument equidistant to the fixed Meridian of
it, is understood to be in the great Meridian of the world* as the fixed
Meridian is* And therefore look how much the Needle swarueth from the same
Line, so much it declineth from the true Meridian. The quantity of which
declining (being nothing else but the Variation) is forthwith made manifest by
the degrees of the Circles circumference underneath, contained between that
Line, and the end of the Needle.

To find when the Twylight begin neth, and how long it continues.
THE Suns depression under the Horizon, Cap. 14.
may soon be known by the manner of finding the height thereof above: And
thereunto belongs this observation of the Twylight: The beginning whereof in
the Morning, and end in the Evening, is commonly supposed to be, when the
Sun in a Vertical Circle is by the space of (...) under our Horizon. Move
therefore the Moveable Meridian, and the Semicircle of Altitudes both together
toward the North part of the Horizon (the Pole before being raised
accordingly) till the point of the Suns declination and the end of 18.
degrees, being reckoned from the Horison downward in the Semicircle of
Altitudes, do meet jointly in one: And straightway note what hour the
Moveable Meridian lights on in the Equator: for that is the time when the
Twylight begins in the Morning, if you look on the upper side of the
Equator, and ends at night, if on the nether side: Again turn the Moveable
Meridian with the declination or place of the Sun in it, till it be just in
the Horizon, and forthwith see what hour it shows in the Equator: That
segment of the Equator which is comprehended between this point of time and
the former, declares the quantity or continuance of the Twylight.

The true measuring of any distance upon the Globe of the Earth.
THe Geographicall measuring of mighty Cap. 15.
Distances upon the Globe of the Earth, is a thing not only of marvelous
pleasure for knowledge, but of singular commodity for practice, serving to
many excellent purposes both bysea and land. And although the Computation
Arithmeticall, used herein by the learned, and grounded upon the doctrine of
Sphericall Triangles, is absolute and exquisite, yet is the deducing thereof
(especially when Places differ in Longitude and Latitude) not void of great
obscurity; and the operation, both by reason of so many multiplications,
divisions, yea and extractions of roots, exceeding tedious; and for the
slipperie mistaking or omitting now and then of but one poor little figure
(which may soon fall out) somewhat doubtful and hazardous. In regardwherof
the Globe has ever, not without due desert, been admired as a principal
necessary Instrument for the readiness, certainetie, and eminent perspicuitie
of demonstration. In which very respects, present trial shall prove this
Instrument, the Hemisphere, to be nothing inferior to the Globe it self. But
to come to the purpose, because that upon the Globe of the Earth, the true
distance of one place from an other must be measured by the shortest line that
may be drawn from this unto that; and the shortest of all other that there
possibly can be described, is always the portion of a great Circle; Therefore
by it, and by none other, all exact Geographicall mensuration ought to be made.
Again, sith the Hemisphere consists of nothing else but great Circles,
being divided all of them into their degrees, and moveable in such sort, that
any manner situation may precisely by them be represented, no doubt can remain
of the sufficiency of this Instrument for the perfect perfourming of this
Proposition.

The diversities of situation of one place in respect of an other, are three in
general: For either have they one and the same Meridian, though not one
Parallele; and these are from the West and East of equal distance, but
unequal from the Equator, and differ therefore only in Latitude: or else have
one Parallele, and a diverse Meridian, and these are of unequal distance from
West and East, but equal from the Equator, differing only in Longitude: or
finally have a diverse both Meridian and Parallele, and therefore differ
accordingly both in Longitude and Latitude. Places of the first situation are
most easily measured without any Instrument at all. For the two several
Latitudes of either being given, whereof always the one must needs be
greater, the other less; subtrahe this from that, and the remainder shall be
the distance between both places in the degrees of a great Circle: which,
according to the common supposition of 60. miles English answerable to one
degree, may soon be converted into miles.

Distances of the second sort, such I mean as are under any Parallele without
the Equator (for there the operation is all one with the former, because it is
a great Circle like the Meridian) are not altogether of the readiest to be
found by other ways, but most easy and ready with help of the Hemisphere.
For the doing whereof, you are to suppose the fixed Meridian of the Instrument,
to be the Meridian also of either of the two places, whose distance you seek:
Likewise the Zenith of the Instrument to be the Zenith of the same place, or
rather that very place in deed. Then bring the Equator of the Instrument, and
set it at such a distance from the Zenith aforesaid, as does exactly agree
with the Latitude of your first place: So shall the Pole have his true
situation in respect of the sa de former place; And the Moveable Meridian
issuing from it, shall be in power any Meridian, that can be drawn from the one
Pole of the world to the other, according to any Longitude in the Equator
assigned. Number therefore from the fixed Meridian in the Semi-equator,
(remaining, as before it was placed immovable) the difference of Longitude
between both places, and at the end thereof fasten the Moveable Meridian: This
then shall be the Meridian of the second place: In which reckoning from the
Equator toward the Pole the Latitude known, you shall take the extreme point
thereof for the true Zenith of the second place. Last of all move the
semicircle of Altitudes (now it may be called of Mensurations, being in power
any great Circle that may be drawn from Zenith to Zenith) till in the
Moveable Meridian it precisely lights upon the Zenith of the second place.
The degrees of this portion of that semicircle contained between the two
Zenithes, is the exact distance sought for. Here it is to be observed, that if
the places be separated one from an other, not by the segment of a Parallele,
but by the one half thereof, then are both their Zenithes in one Meridian, and
the Pole in the middle: so that the space between both zenithes, and the Pole
being doubled, shall yield the distance demanded. And this is the greatest
direct distance that can be of places under one Parallele.

It remains, that we speak of the third sort of places, differing both in
Longitude and Latitude. The finding of whose distance is a matter intricate and
laborious otherwise, and yet often, yea most commonly occurring: which if by
the Hemisphere, with all demo^stratiue certainty, it shall be no more hard to
find, nor less ready to follow, then the wide beaten high way, my good hope
is, that the better opinion will be conceived of so faithful a guide. To be
plain therefore and short: He that knows the former kind of operation,
cannot be ignorant of this, being both one in effect. For setting the
Semi-equator so far from the zenith of the Instrument upon the fixed
Meridian, as is the Latitude of one of the places; And fastening the Moveable
Meridian, so far likewise from the fixed upon the Equator, as is the
Difference of Longitude between both places (which is soon known by abating
the less Longitude out of the greater:) Afterward, when in the Moveable
Meridian, above, beneath, or just in the Equator (if it so happen) the zenith
of the other place is truly noted according to the Latitude thereof, apply
thereunto the Semicircle of Altitudes, or Mensurations: And his portion
comprehended between both zenithes, shall in the parts of a great Circle,
make manifest the exact distance required.

Moreover, if you desire to know how the one of those places bears from the
other: The Semicircle of Mensurations still remaining, as before it was
situated for finding the distance, observe in the Horison upon what point of
the Compass it falls: for that shows the true bearing of the places
proposed the one from the other.

The Longitude and Latitude of any two Stars being known without any other
Observation to find the Distance of the one from the other in the Heavens.
THat which hitherto has been spoken Cap. 16.
for the finding of Distances between place and place upon the outface of the
Globe of the Earth beneath, may serve as well for observing of them between
Star and Star in the Sphere of the Heavens above; with the Longitude and
Latitude here to be given in respect of the zodiake, like as there it was and
is always to be considered in regard of the Equator. And albeit I know it
would have been more agreeable with the suite of our discourse to have handled
this matter before, yet considering the near affinity, or rather identitie
and selfesamenes of these two operations, I thought it best to join them close
together. Suppose therefore the Equator of the Hemisphere to be the zodiake,
then shall the Pole thereof be the Pole of the zodiake: The fixed Meridian
shall be one Circle of Longitudes, and the Moveable Meridian any other of the
same sort: And every degree of the Moveable Meridian, shall be the Intersection
of any Parallele defining the Latitude either Septentrionall or Austrine, and
therefore the place of one of the Stars proposed: The other star shall be
in the zenith of the Instrument: And finally (as before) the Semicircle of
Altitudes shall serve for Mensurations. Now then according to the Latitude of
one of the stars (which for distinctions sake I call the first) remove the
Equator (now the zodiake) from the zenith of the Instrument (now that first
star) And the zodiake thus standing immovable, number therein from the fixed
Meridian, the degrees of the difference of Lo^gitude, and at the end thereof
fasten the Moveable Meridian: In which Semicircle beginning from the Zodiak,
reckon the Latitude of the second star either upward or downward, as it is
either Septentrionall or Austrine: And unto the end thereof, being the true
place of that second star, fit the Semicircle of Mensurations aforesaid: So
shall that portion of it, which is intercepted between both points, be the
precise distance in the heavens between the two stars demanded.

And of the Hemisphere thus much. Hereunto might Cap. 17.
I have added the doctrine of right and oblique Ascensions, together with
Dialling and other matters Gnomonicall: But because the fruit and use of the
doctrine of Ascensions consists in the measuring of the true quantity of
time, whereof you have before sufficiently heard; I thought it not expedient
any further to enlarge this Treatise therewith: The rather, considering my
principal purpose, namely the Seamans Commodity; who little needs that
doctrine: and Dialling less then that. Yet whosoever desires to be doing in both
of them, shall by that which hitherto has been delivered and diligent
practice withal, find the Hemisphere very able to satisfy his desire. And
not only so, but to minister unto him many rare and goodly conclusions of
further invention. Among which I earnestly wish that chief secret of
Navigations, the sailing, I mean, by a great Circle, to be always principally
remembered: Not doubting, but this Instrument (if any other) will prove a most
apt and serviceable one for that purpose: which knowledge, because it requires
long, learned, and very painful experience, joined with singular dexterity,
I willingly leave unto those that make special profession of that Art.

The description and use of a Trauerse Board, serving readily to set down the
Ships way, according to the usual account, and at all times to prick in the
Card accordingly, the true place that she comes unto.
LEt there be a Table prepared after the Cap. 1.
form of a long square, of 16. inches in length, and 12. in breadth, or else
20. long, and 16. broad, (as you think good, more or less) plain and
smooth, with Angles precisely right; and having a square border enclosing it to
keep down a sheet of Paper, like as Surueying tables have. Divide the four
sides of the border into equal divisions of 8. unto an ynche, or any other,
(as may be most convenient) reaching all a long the inner side of the square,
and number them by fiues, the figures of every side being twice set down to be
reckoned both ways (as occasion shall serve.) Again, subdiuide every of those
divisions by two pricks into 3. parts, not adding any numbers. If these
divisions be wrought upon Latten plates being laid on and riuetted to the
Border, it will be a great deal the fairer. Your Table thus finished, you must
provide a Ruler and a Quadrant, as necessary furniture belonging thereunto.
Let the Ruler be as long as the Diagoniall line of your square, that is,
reaching athwart from corner to corner, having the oneside handsomely abated,
and both sides perfectly divided from within half an ynch of one end
throughout, into the very same diuisio^s wherewith the Border was parted, with
his numbers also redoubled and (as that) both ways to be accounted in such
sort, that the divisions be drawn down to the lowermost edge of the sides of
the Ruler, that lies close on the Table.

The Quadrant is best of Latten, with his semidiameter of 3. or 4. inches (more
or less) somewhat thin, having all the middle of his substance cut away, save
about a quarter of an ynch breadth reserved for his Circular limb, and there
about also for the breadth of his two right sides. Divide the limb into
ordinary points of the Compass, expressing them in siphers 1. 2. 3. etc. Let
those numbers be twice set down to be reckoned forward and backward, and
between every Point let there be halfes and quarters. All which parts (as
before in the Ruler) must be produced to the neathermost edge of the limb.
Divide also the two outsides of the Quadrant into such divisions as the Ruler
has, so far as they will reach, placing the numbers along from the
Center-corner, to the meeting of the sides with the limb, and drawing those
divisions likewise to the lowermost edge of the sides.

Now must you consider, that the Nauigator has three helps to find out the
place of his Ship, that he may set down the prick thereof upon his Card, viz.

1. The Angle, on which the Ship makes her way: which is given by the
Compass. 2. The quantity of the Ships way, to wit, how many leagues she
sayleth in an hour, or a watch: which they term the dead reckoning, and is
learned by often experience. 3. The Latitude, taken by observation with
Mathematical Instruments.
Any two of these being given, this Instrument makes the third manifest, and
gives the prick in the Card very readily. Except it so be, that the Ship
does run upon the Points of East or West: for then all three are necessarily
required.

You are further here to note, that the place from whence any course is begun,
is called a Radical place: And so is every place in the proceeding of the
voyage named, whereof the Nauigator either by his own, or by other men's
practice, has learned the true situation. And now to approach unto the use,
spread a sheet of large papervpo^ the Table, fastening it with the Border
placed thereon, to keep it even and smoothe: And set a Flower de luce, or any
other note, for the North, hard by the edge of any one of the sides (which your
course shall show to be most convenient) about the middle thereof. That one
mark is sufficient to determine all the other sides, toward which of the 4.
principal winds they do bear: for his opposite must needs be South, and
the other two East and West. So that the divisions in the sides of East and
West, do al of them in power represent so many Paralleles: and those of North
and South in like manner so many Meridians.

The use of the Trauerse Boorde.
FIrst of all mark by the view of your Cap. 2
Notes of the Ships way and course, whether it be Northerly or Southerly from
the Radical place, and likewise whether Eastwards or Westwards: and according
to discretion set your Flower de luce, as may best fit the way of your
course. And therefore if it be most South or North, let the longer sides of
your Table stand in stead of those parts: if it be East or West, then name
the sides accordingly. For example, if it be Eastwards Northerly, set down a
prick betokening your Radical place upon the West end of the South side: if
it be any other way, set down your prick as may be answerable thereunto: and
placing your Ruler square upon equal divisions in the sides East and West, with
the edge thereof touching the said Prick, draw a line representing the
Parallele of the Ships Radical place, and hard by the point or prick of your
Radical place, note the Latitude there of in degrees and minutes: Then set the
Center corner of your Quadrant unto the Radical point, eleuating the limb of
the Quadrant above the Parallele, according to the quantity of that Angle,
whereon the Ship made her first way, and reckoning in the edge of the Quadrant
the leagues of the Ships way, at the end thereof make a prick as close unto
the edge as may be. Lastly fastening your Ruler directly upon the prick, and
square with the sides of East and West, draw a line, which shall serve for the
Parallele that the Ship at that instant is in. And this order of working must
from time to time be iterated, till at length opportunity be offered by your
Instruments Mathematical to make an observation of Latitude. But if it so fall
out, that the Ships way do conteyne more leagues, then there are divisions in
the side of the Quadrant, then applying either side of the Ruler close unto the
edge of the Quadrant, by that means you may prick down the number. Having
upon shift of winds (as it happens) made diverse Trauerses, if you desire to
know how the place your Ship is in bears from your Radical place (which is
called the Angle of position) and likewise the distance from it, as also the
Latitude, together with the Difference of Longitude (when you have made as yet
no observation) do after this sort. Set the one end of your Ruler where the
numbers do begin to the Radical point, and directing the other end toward
the prick of your Ships last place, cause the edge to lie just and even upon
it: Then reckon how many divisions you do find between the two points, and
so many leagues distance there is. If it fall not full upon a division, but
upon one of those pricks between, they signify English miles. Look how many
divisions are contained between the two Paralleles, the one of the ships
Radical place, and the other of her last place, every twenty of those do
make a degree; every several division, 3. minutes; and every prick one
minute. Moreover as occasion serves, you may account 4. or 5. divisions for a
league, or more, or less: yea every prick for a league, if you find it
requisite, as experience in diverse shifts of winds will show you to be most
convenient.

To know how much the Ships last place does differ from his Radical place
in Longitude: also the Angle of Position.
SEt the Ruler square North and South, Cap. 3.
so that the Radical place may touch the side thereof, marking what divisions
the Ruler does cut in the North and Southsides. Again, set the Ruler in like
manner square, touching the point of the Ships last place: the number of parts
contained between those two places of the Ruler in either of the two sides
North or South, is the difference of Longitude. If the ships last place from
the Radical be Easterly, the Longitude is so much increased: if Westerly, it
is lessened. Always have you respect to the Meridian, from whence Longitudes
do begin to be reckoned, that you may express the number answerable
thereunto. Moreover place your Ruler where the numbers begin, at the Radical
point, and the side thereof upon the point of the Ships last place: Then apply
the Center corner of the Quadrant unto the Radical point (the Ruler still
keeping his place) in such sort, that the side of the Quadrant do lie even
with the Ruler: Look how much of the elevated limb above the Parallele, the
Parallele it self cutteth off, that is the Angle of Position upon which the
last place of the Ship does bear from the Radical places. But whenso ever
you have opportunity to observe the Latitude, draw your Parallele upon the
Trauerse boorde according thereunto: and where the line of the Ships course
does cross the Parallele, you must conclude that to be the place which your
ship was in at the time of your observation, correcting by that means the
other Parallele and distance taken by the dead reckoning, so far forth as it
does differ from this. For of those three helps before specified, the Latitude
is only certain: The Angle of the Ships way is reasonable good: but the dead
reckoning is an uncertain guess; And if you please to call it a probable
conjecture, you shall grace it with the uttermost: notwithstanding it is
admitted into Art for want of better helps.

In considering the Angle of the Ships way, by all means you must have
careful regard both unto the Set, and the Variation of your Compass.
Otherwise, assure your self, you shall make but wide reckonings. I have known
a very expert Nauigator, that making his reckoning without regard of the
Variation (which for all that he observed, though he did not reckon by it)
ouershot the way of his Ship 70. leagues, in a voyage not of so far distance
as hence to Cape Verde. Whereas casting over his reckoning with due respect of
his Variation, he made a perfect good account of of the very same voyage.

Having found the place of your Ship in the Trauerse-boorde, how to prick it
in your Card.
FOr the conclusions to be performed upon Cap. 4.
your Card, it is requisite, that you have a Ruler of some fine wood made very
thin, of an inche and a half broad, and of sufficient length: also a
Quadrant like unto the former, saving that his two sides must have their
divisions agreeable to the Scale of leagues expressed in your Card: and
finally 2. pair of Compasses. Being furnished with these, seek out your
Radical place from whence you did proceed: Apply the Ce^ter-corner of your
Quadrant unto it, his limb, respecting the way answerable to the Angle of
position in your Trauerse-boorde. Set one foot of your Compass upon any
Parallele of convenient distance from it (on which side it skilleth not)
reaching the other precisely unto it in the nearest distance. Then remove one
foot upon that Parallele, the other keeping his scantling, until the division
of the Angle of Position in the limb, and the point of the other foot do
meet exactly together, the Center-corner still abiding in his place, but moving
the limb to or fro, and likewise the Compass (as before I specified) til they
meet. Last of all, reckon from the Center-corner your observed number of
leagues upon the side of the Quadrant, and there set down a prick or note for
the place of your Ship. So shall the Radical angle of Position be limited by
the other foot of the Compass in the limb; and the quantity of the way that
the Ship has made, by that prick in the side of the Quadrant.

Though you have not any Quadrant with his sides divided according to your
Card, but only that which you used for the Trauerse Boorde, and also the same
Ruler: how to perform all this with the help of two pair of Compasses.
Search in the Card your Radical place Cap. 5.
from whence you did proceed, and apply the Center-corner of your Quadrant
unto it, the limb thereof respecting the way answerable to the Angle of
Position in your Trauerse-boord: After this, with the one pair of your
Compasses take the shortest distance from your Radical place to some one
Parallele or other, as you may conveniently: and with the other pair, take the
distance in leagues, according to the Scale of the Card. Remove the limb
(the Center corner keeping his place) to and fro, and also the Compass
(keeping still his scantling) with the one foot a long the Parallele, till the
other foot, and the division agreeable to the foresaid Angle, do meet
together. The Quadrant remaining in that place, let your other Compasses (being
extended according to the number of leagues found out by your Trauerse-boorde,
but answerable to the quantities of them which are described in the Scale of
your Card) have one foot set upon the Radical place, the other along the
side of your Quadrant, marking it with a prick or some other note, for the
place of your Ship. And after this manner may you find how any one place in
your Card does bear from any other, having regard unto that which has bin
before declared.

Being in a Ship at Sea, to know any places in your Card (that are within
your kenning) how far they are from you.
SEt any two of them by your Compass, Cap. 6.
(so that they be not in one right line) and observe according to what Angle of
Position they do bear from you; thereby collecting how you also bear from
them. Then place your Quadrant upon one of them, agreeable to his Angle (as
before has been taught) and lay a Ruler to the side of the Quadrant that
points out the Angle. That Ruler so remaining, remove the Quadrant unto the
other place, giving it the quantity of that Angle: and placing a Ruler
likewise close unto the side of the Quadrant which points out the Angle,
thrust this Ruler directly forward along that side of the Quadrant, till his
corner does touch the edge of the other Ruler: where the touch is, set down
a mark, signifying the place of the Ship. And then measure by the Scale of
your Card, how far that mark is from either of those places: so have you
the distance desired.

All these Conclusions of the Trauerse*boord may be performed (with a little
more pains) by the help of the before mentioned Quadrant and Ruler upon a
fair sheet of large paper, having only a plain Square consisting of four
straight lines meeting at right Angles, without any divisions at all: for all
the divisions above mentioned, the Ruler applied to those lines will presently
supply. And when your operation grows so large, that it surpasses any side
of the Square, you may easily paste on the Square of an other sheet of paper,
and so join both squares together, that your line of the second become all one
with that of the first. And thus may your work be continued for the tracing
out of any whole voyage, not omitting any Trauerse, and noting (if you think
good) whatsoever accident you shall judge to be needful. It is convenient to
have two of those Quadrants, the one of 5. or 6. inches semidiameter, and the
other scarce half so large: The greater for the Trauerse-boord will be the
more commodious, and the other for the Card.

How to describe the Spirall line of a Ships course.
WIth a quadrant of this fashion it is a very Cap. 7.
easy matter to describe the spirall line of a ships course, from any known
Longitude and Latitude, after this sort. The Meridians and Paralleles first
supposed to be drawn as the spirall Card requires, set the Center-corner of
your Quadrant upon that point where the Meridian and Parallele of the place,
from whence you first departed, do cross one an other: And directing the side
of your Quadrant along the Meridian, either Northward or Southward (as the case
shall demand) note in the Meridian next adjoining, where the Angle of the
Ships way cutteth it: And there making a small prick, trace a line from the
former point unto this. Again place the Center-corner (as before) on that
second prick, and mark the Intersection in the third Meridian, continually
proceeding after this manner, from Meridian to Meridian, till you have finished
the whole course. The thicker your Meridians are drawn, the more perfect will
your Card be: but this may be also supplied, with a thin Ruler moveable upon
the Pole or Center of your Card. The manner of the draught of the Spirall
Card, I will show in the next Treatise.

A friendly Advertisement to the Nauigators of England.
THe duties of a Friend, and the properties of a Flatterer do differ so
greatly, that a man cannot perform the office of the one, but he must renounce
the practice of the other. And a very fountain it is, from whence many
mischiefs do spring, and ouerflowe the wretched life of mankind: That the
true dealing of friends is most commonly unpleasant and hateful, but the
soothing of Flatterers is become plausible and much set by. In resemblances
they bear many times like show, but in purposes they do always differ. A
true Friend will sometimes commend and praise diverse things in his friend: And
so also will the Flatterer in those whom he flattereth: The one commends that
which in judgment he thinks commendable, and unto that end that the party
commended should still proceed in actions worthy of commendation: The other
commends even those things many times, which in judgment he does detest, and
unto that end, that he may sooth up the humor of the party, and make his
own profit thereby. Moreover, a Friend will dispraise in his friend those
things which in judgment he does disallow; and the greater the faults are,
the more earnest will he be: to the end that the party may amend and give no
advantage to his enemy. The Flatterer sometimes (though seeldome) will also
discommend, but evermore trifing matters, and therein will he be very vehement;
but in great faults he is both blind and dumb: fearing to offend the party,
if he should touch them; and in the other counterfeiting sincere love (the
badge only oftrue friendship) And so leaves he the party thus abused, to the
scorn and reproach of the adversary, reaping the commodity which he looked
for, as the only end of his travail.

I do not think there is any man that either regards Gods glory, or
esteems of humane society, but holds your Art worthy to be numbered with
the most excellent, that are exercised among men: And therefore is it of very
due right, that you the practisers of it, should be had in great reputation.
Neither is there any other Art, wherein God shows his divine power so
manifestly, as in yours; permitting unto you certain Rules to work by, and
increasing them from time to time, growing still onwards toward perfection, as
the World does toward his end; And yet reserueth still unto himself the
managing of the whole: That when you have done what you can, according to the
skill you already have, or shall do, by any that you may learn hereafter: yet
always will he make it manifest, that he alone is the Lord of the Seas, that
all storms and tempests do but fulfill his will and pleasure, and that all
the waves of the Sea are continually at his commandment: finally that it is
he, who oftentimes administreth many helps beyond all expectation, when the
Art of man utterly fails. All which in the CVII. Psalm is so lively
expressed by the Prophet David, that in all writers, whether sacred or profane
that ever I read, or by any reports that ever I heard, or in the liueliest
pictures that at any time I beheld, it is in my judgment, pierlesse and
vnmatcheable: describing the whole in brief, and yet in the brevity omitting
nothing that was necessary; and affirming nothing but that, which the
continual experience of our days does proclaim to be most true. O that
Nauigatours therefore would praise the Lord for his mercies, and show forth
his wonders before the children of men. That they would once learn that, The
fear of the Lord is the beginning of Wisdom. Most undoubtedly then would
their Art flourish, their voyages prosper and have better success: yea
themselves would be more esteemed and honored of all men. Whereas now the
profane lives and brutish behavior of diverse of that trade, does somewhat
eclipse the glory of the profession it self: And, besides other manifold
punishments, God strikes them with such blindness, as no men living of any
trade whatsoever are to be found so ignorant, as many of them are of theirs; so
senseless in their own defect, or so little desirous to amend them. Yea, and
some of the greatest skill and practice are so loathe to give God his due
glory, that many times laboring to suppress it, they make shipwreck of
their own credites and reputations, which otherwise of right might accrewe
unto them. When they have performed along voyage of great difficulty, wherein
many a time and often they have been at their wits end, and knew not which way
in the world they should turn them selves, God delivering them beyond their
own expectations, as their consciences can witness: yet when the danger is one
past, and that home they be come, they take it as a blemish of their
estimations, and great impeachment to their credites, to give God the praise,
and to yield him thanks, imagining that would derogate too much from the
admiration, which they so greedily hunt after among men.

I have heard a merry report: Ships of sundry Nations lying in a harbor in
fair weather, the young mariners were climing and showing feats of actiuitie,
one of one Nation to outbragge the other. At length a nimble yoncker gets
him to the very top of the Foremast, and raising himself boult upright,
turned round upon his foot without any stay, chalendging his Antagonist, or
any of the Nation to do the like. His Antagonist presently undertakes the
chalendge; but having turned scarce half about, fell down, and (as God would)
in his tumbling by good hap caught hold of the shrowdes: and as soon as ever he
had a little recovered his spirits, being half dead for fear, yet set a bold
countenance on the matter: and he also again with a loud voice dared his
adversary or any other of that Nation to do the like; as though that which
befell him by his error, he had done of very purpose. Even so diverse that
have performed long voyages, God knows how, but not they themselves; yet
will swear and stare, crake and boast, that they have done all things
according unto Art: and tell us of such Gulfes and swift Currents, more by a
great many then ever God made, and are but devised by themselves for shifts to
shadow their ignorance, and to rob God of his praise: the thing being as
strange a matter, and as much according unto Art that ever they came home
again, as that was, which the fellow before specified wrought his feate by.

Petrus Nonius makes mention of one in his days, that had ten times passed
from Portugal to the East Indies: And yet diverse times when he should have
subtrahed his declination, did add it, and when he should have added, did
subtrahe it.

But for you the Nauigatours of England, this I do verily think in my
conscience, that diverse of you do fear God unfeignedly, and do as much
dislike the dissolute course of the common sort, as any men can. And I do
nothing doubt, although the number of such are too few in our Nation, yet are
they more then any Nation in Christendom can show besides. And albeit your
skill is not such, but that amendment may become it well enough: yet do I not
judge that either the Spaniards or Portugals, who are accounted the best, do
better yours: and for their life and behavior I take it to be worse then the
worst among you, reserving still for them, that which Horace long since imputed
unto them:

Nauis Hispanae magister,
Dedecorum preciosus emptor.
For notwithstanding their first Nauigatours were men of good skill, these now
a days for the most part are grossly ignorant: And a great folly it is in
diverse of our Nation to have such confidence in Portugal Pilottages for long
voyages, having far more skillful of our own Countrymen at home, both
better to be trusted, and more valiant and present minded in any danger. And it
is a thing very certain, that ours do increase in skill, and better very much
their Ancestors, whereas theirs for the most part are a great deal worse:
And if they be once any thing out of their ordinary traded course, they are the
seeliest fellows that do floate upon the Seas. Their Cards are decked with
much Gold and little Art, out of measure false (as I have heard by men of
good experience) even upon their own coasts, and are but transcripts new
furbished. Their other Instruments very simple, especially their Staves most
contemptibly naught. I have seen diverse of them, even as unfit for the
purpose they should serve, as an Ox is to wear a saddle. But we are very
much addicted to admire strangers, and contemn our own, according to the old
Proverb, For soothe it must needs be true; for I have learned it of a Jew.
Two things therefore there are greatly wished by all your well willers to
increase in you, The true fear of God, and a careful diligence in things
belonging to your Art. Where the fear of God is not, no Art can serve the
turn: for that were to make of Art an Idol. And yet all those that fear
God, must take heed, that they do not tempt God: And therefore ought they to
use Art, as the means that God has ordained for their benefit, and be
thankful unto him for it.

These Instruments, that, for the assistance of your Art, it has pleased God
to give me a small portion of knowledge to compose, whether without pains and
chardges they have been finished and brought to this pass, I commit to your
judgments. For mine own part, I am one that in any private respect has as
little to do with the Sea, as any other; and in particular have no cause for
to hope that I shall reap any manner commodity thereby. And for these my
travails and expenses, although it should be well accepted according to my
desire among Nauigatours; yet have I no reason to think me one jot to be
benefited thereby, no not so much as in any credit (which notwithstanding, if
it were one of an other profession, possible he might obtain.) Nay, if I may
escape handsomely from mockes and scorns, usual with some Contemners of
laudable Sciences, I must think that I have made a fair hand. But I thank
God I have bestowed neither pains nor charges, more then I was willing and
might well do. And if it may by Gods grace prosper to the end that I have
purposed, that is, to some of your good, little do I esteem what every Idiote
does think or judge of my labor. I know right well, that among the vulgar
people, there are many thousands, which going unto market, do bring home with
them a peniworth or two of Cloaues or Mace now and then; and yet never asked
the question where they grew, nor by which way they were transported from
their Native country unto us, whether by the way of Ormus through Persia, or
of Arabia by Carauan unto Alepo, or by the Red Sea unto Alexandria, and thence
out of the Leuant unto us: or whether they came through the huge Ocean by the
Cape of Bona Speransa. They take no knowledge of such matters: The
consideration of any dangers in the Streights of Cincapura, or of the Showldes
of Maldiuar never troubles them: And yet it relisheth even as well and serves
their uses as commodiously, as if they had all the before mentioned knowledge.
Albeit I hope that men of understanding and wisdom will easiyly perceive,
that Gods providence in his works is only manifest unto those which do
consider them, and of others is nothing at all discerned, and as little
regarded. If it were only among the common sort, that Cosmographie should be
so contemned, it were the less to be meruailed at: but that any which profess
learning of any faculty whatsoever, should altogether neglect it, and be
utterly ignorant of it, it is to be more then pitied, and especially in
Gentlemen and Noblemen is it no small defect: who diverse times in this our age
have some occasion or other, at the least to talk and discourse thereof.
Wherein I could wish they would have in remembrance a saying of Apelles unto
Megabysus a Nobleman of Persia* who coming into his Shop, although his
knowledge was but small, yet was he loath to have it appear that he was
ignorant of any thing; And therefore began to question and dispute of lines, of
shadows, and of such like matters belonging unto that Art. But Apelles
entreated him to make more spare of his speech: for says he, my youths
which grind my colors, hearing your idle discourses, do deride them, which
before had you in great admiration for your gallant and glittering attire. If
it were a thing possible, that they which are altogether ignorant of
Cosmographie, could be persuaded how easy a matter it were to attain unto
some competent knowledge therein, I do verily think, that among those that
are of wit and judgment, somewhat more then they of the very vulgar sort,
you should not find one among a thousand, that would be ignorant of it,
whereas now you have even scant one among a thousand, that has any
understanding therein. For I am well assured, and do speak it upon some
experience, that one but of mean capacity, so that he be of a willing mind,
and have a sufficient Instructour, with fit Instruments, may very easily in
one months space attain unto great contentment of knowledge, yea such, as
they commonly imagine, could not be learned in seven years. Now as it is
seemly for all men to have at the least some taste in such knowledges, so unto
Nauigators it is necessary in the highest degree. And I do nothing doubt, but
that any one of them, with a two months learning of a skillful Teacher, and
three years practice in a few good voyages (God blessing his labors) shall
get more perfection in that Art in so small a space, then he could otherwise
with twenty years experience, according to the ordinary ignorant practice.
Although such Instructours are in number but few, yet I think there are more
then are greatly employed; and would be many more, if they were in request, and
better esteemed, especially about the City of London; whither there is so
great repair and concourse of men addicted unto those affairs: where possible
(though unknown unto me) there may be diverse, yet know I but one, whose name
is John Goodwyn, dwelling in Bucklers-burie: A man unskillful in the Lattin
tongue, yet having proper knowledge in Arithmetike, and Land-measuring, in the
use of the Globe, and sundry other Instruments: And has obtained, partly by
his own industry, and by reading of English Writers (whereof there are many
very good) and partly with conference with learned men, (of which he is
passing desirous) such ready knowledge and dexterity of teaching and
practicing the grounds of those Arts, as (giving him but his due) I have not
been acquainted with his like. And great pity it is that in so populous a
place, many such were not employed: But greater is the grief unto diverse well
willers of that noble City, and lovers of good Arts, that where as not many
years since, there was a Mathematical Lecture publicly erected for those
purposes, and furnished with a learned man of sufficiency answerable, of very
honest and courteous behavior, affable to resolve beginners of their doubts;
the party was afterward dismissed, and the thing (that began to be so great
a commendation to the Founders, so principal an ornament to the City, and a
commodity (both unto it and the whole Realm in general) was notwithstanding
without all regard, basely suffered to sincke and vanish in the end unto
nothing. Surely in all equity and reason it were fit, that every City
standing upon merchandise and marine trades, should be ayding unto those
Faculties, whereby the greatest part of their well gotten goods does accrewe
unto them: And especially that honorable City, which is not only made rich,
but by the means of Navigations is growe^ famous also throughout the whole
World. As therefore I unfeignedly acknowledge that in diverse good respects no
one City of the whole Earth is comparable unto it. so do I heartely wish an
increase in all commendable actions, (among which this was none of the least)
and not a decrease: The rather since the augmentour of the public benefit in
that behalf, shall thereby highly commend his own true love toward his City
and Country unto all Posterity, and become more renowned by such actions,
then by any painted glorious Tomb, or the like kind of monuments.

The only good method of teaching and learning Cosmography (after a few
principles of Geometry and Arithmetike first known) is, to begin with the
Celestial Globe, and to be perfect therein, before you deal with the
Terrestrial: for this depends on that, and the former being once reasonably
understood, the other is not two days work. After you have thus received a
sufficient impression of the Globe (whereunto all true Mappes and Cards have a
necessary reference) then will the consideration of them become exceeding
pleasant and easy unto you; but never before. This I mention, because I have
heard ere now, of certain Teachers, that undertaking men of good ability to
be instructed by them, have been a great while about a little; spending the
time about diverse pretty particular toys, which full easily would have been
known of themselves without any teaching, if they had taken the course that I
speak off: But such imitate ill disposed Surgeons, which love to protract a
cure, of purpose to suck the more gain therefrom.

Mappes and Cards of the Globe of the Earth are of three sorts most usual,
distinguished by their several kinds of Meridians and Paralleles. The first
has his Meridians and Paralleles described by Circular lines: And among those
I take that manner of Proiection, which Rumoldus Mercator has used (proposed
long before by Orontius in his French Cosmography, as I have heard) to be of
all other the very best, having the Meridians and Paralleles drawn according
to the Matter of Gemma Frisius general Astrolabe. The reason that I so greatly
like of this, is, for that the proiection is very Regular, and therein the
native Geographicall description may nearest of all others obtain their due
situation.

An other sort there is, wherein the Globe of the Earth is divided in two
Hemispheres, the Center in both of them being one of the Poles, and the
Circumference the Equator. In this the Meridians are straight lines drawn from
the Poles unto the Equator; and the Paralleles are Circles. These Paralleles
may be described after two ways: The one enlarging the lands described
toward the Equator, the other, toward the Poles. The former is thus
delineated. Set the one end of a Ruler upon the end of one of the Diameters or
Meridians aforesaid, and the other part of the Ruler 90. degrees from that:
And keeping the former end fixed upon his place, remove the other to every
one, or fifth, or tenth degree of the next Quadrant, till your Ruler passing
through the Pole, becomes all one with the same Diameter, noting continually
in the Semidiameter of 90. degrees distance, whence you first began to move
your Ruler, where it cutteth the said Semidiameter: Then placing one foot of
the Compass upon the Center or Pole, the other upon any of those divisions of
the Semidiameter, describe a Circle, which shall be a Parallele answerable to
that division: And so may you draw as many, or few, as you think convenient.
The other is thus described. Begin at the end of any Semidiameter where it
touches the Equator, and numbering still equal degrees on each side thereof,
mark what intersections your Ruler applied unto them makes in that
Semidiameter: Then may you draw the Paralleles here also, even as before. The
former of these two is represented unto you by the figure A. the later by the
figure B. This kind of Proiection serves most aptly to express in a Card
the Spirall course of a Ship, which some term Paradoxall. But whether of these
names (being both as yet strangers) shall best deserve to be freedenized, I
leave to other men's judgments: Only I say, (Paradoxall) is beside the
purpose, and astonisheth with an empty sound: but (Spirall) apperteineth
directly to the matter, and declares the true essence of the thing signified.

The third sort of Cards have both their Meridians and Paralleles of straight
lines equidistant, and these only are in ordinary use with Sailors. Of these
I need not write any thing, they are so commonly known, and their
imperfections in long voyages so manifest, though in short they may well serve
the turns. And yet I cannot here conceal one great secret concerning these
Cards, namely, that there is a certain draught of them very Artificial and
regular: which being well understood, redresseth the errors of the other; and
(as far as I can discern) will so satisfy the Nauigators expectation, as
no Card hitherto invented was ever comparable unto it, neither (as I think)
any that shall be hereafter, will in all respects surpass it. Although for the
Geographicall descriptions, they may and must alter from time to time, as newer
discoueries by light of truth shall make them better known unto us.

This manner of Card has been publicly extant in print these thirty
years at least, but a cloud (as it were) and thick myste of ignorance does
keep it hitherto concealed: And so much the more, because some who were
reckoned for men of good knowledge, have by glauncing speeches, (but never by
any one reason of moment) gone about what they could to disgrace it. The Card
(which I mean) is the same, that was set forth by the excellent Cosmograpber
Gerardus Mercator, in show resembling ordinary Sea Cards, save that the
degrees of the Meridians in it do proportionally increase from the Equator
toward each Pole, upon good reason and firm Demonstration: thereby showing
the true Position of any one place in respect of an other: which the usual
Cards in a far distance cannot do, being yet the very principal point that
the Nauigator desires.

For the better understanding and making of Sea Cards of that sort, I have
here immediately ensewing set down a Demonstration, which I obtained of a
friend of mine of like profession unto my self, evidently showing the
proportional increasing of those degrees, wherein consists the excellency
of that Card.

First determine the degree of the Equator, in respect whereof you would frame
the Meridian of your Card: for example, the little line a. Next describe the
Quadrant of a Circle, so large, that it may perfectly and distinctly receive
every of the usual 90. degrees, into which it must be divided. Then from the
Center A. toward B. take in the Semidiameter A B. (from whence the degrees of
the Quadrant begin) a line precisely equal unto a, namely D F. And from the
points D and F. to the Semidiameter A C. raise two Paralleles D E. and F G.
Again from F. toward B. at a distance convenient, take the second line K H.
equal unto a. And from the points H K. raise other Paralleles, H I. and K L.
equidistant to the former. Afterward applying the one end of your Ruler to
the Center A. and the other to every the degrees of the Quadrant B C. draw
lines athwart between the Paralleles aforesaid: so shall all the lines thus
drawn contained between the Paralleles, be the degrees of the Meridian sought
for, taking their several Denominations of their correspondent degrees in the
Quadrant, as by the figure here ensuing is manifest. Of what sort soever your
Cards be, you must always remember, that the knowledge of the use of the
Globe must be a moderator unto them: and that thereby you shall still become
master over your Card, to epsy and amend his faults; whereas otherwise you
shall be mastered by your Cards, blindly embracing their errors. By means
hereof it was, that the famous Nauigators of the World performed their
discoueries and renowned voyages, having no manner of Cards to sail by. And an
easy matter it is, for a man that already has ordinary skill and practice in
sailing by usual Cards, to learn in one fourthnight so much of the use of
the Globe, that upon his observations he may either keep or change his Points
for his best advantage; And of any places, whose Longitudes or Latitudes are
known, may tell without any Card, upon what point they lie, and how far
they are distant from you: Also upon what Point they lie each from other, and
the distance between them, with diverse other things that are necessary, and
held for rareties in that faculty. For in very many of them Envy does so
reign, that almost every one keeps his own knowledge to himself, without
imparting it unto others: whereas they should all profit a great deal more,
if they would communicate their knowledges one with an other, for the public
benefit: But in so much as each one affects to be singular, disdayning the
knowledge of others, they have far less knowledge among them all, then
otherwise they might have: for of necessity many men's practices must co^curre,
to make experimental knowledge exact. It were greatly to be wished, that many
of them might be found so well minded toward their own trade, as was that
notable Pilot Steven Burrowes: who for his skill, industry, and performance,
may justly be reckoned among the chief of our Nation, and of the world also;
if we respect that only, in stead of al, which he worthily achieved in the
first Moscouian discovery by the Scythian Sea: who if he had bin employed one
Summer more again toward the River of Obbe, I doubt not, but proceeding with
his former success, he would have performed more in that Summer for trial of a
Passage (any or none) that way unto Catthay, then for the space of these 40.
years all Christendom has done besides; not having (asitseemeth) added unto
his, 40. leagues of good discovery, ever since. The good mind he bare toward
his profession he testified herein, that by his very earnest means he procured
that learned and easy Treatise of Martine Curteise, concerning the Art of
Navigations, to be translated into our English tongue. The which doubtless has
given great light unto all of skill in that faculty, that ever were since of our
Nation: And is more almost, then all our Nauigators have helped the Art of
Navigations withal besides. A great help also would it be for the furtherance
of skill, if those that are practisers in that Art, and such as are Students
of the Mathematikes, might often confer together. For except there be a
uniting of knowledge with practice, there can be nothing excellent: Idle
knowledge without practice, and ignorant practice without knowledge, serve unto
small purpose. But certain it is, that all the good parts which may be wished
for, or aimed at, shall never absolutely concur in one man. And therefore if
there be but some convenient mixture of them in any, that party is to be
esteemed. For although many things appertayning to Nauigatio^, may be learned
and taught by rules of Art, yet some necessary points (without which all the
rest is nothing) are beyond the compass of Art: As for a man to be of a ready
and valiant mind; to handle and order those things, that are within the reach
of his knowledge, with dexterity upon every present occasion: These and such
like are justly termed the gifts of God: For although all things termed by
Art are the gifts of God (since even Art it self is given by God, who is the
Author and fountain of all knowledge) yet these are termed his gifts more
peculiarly: because the other are given by means, and these without means.
Suppose that a man have all the knowledge that may be wished for, and be
notwithstanding faint hearted, and his wits (as they say) to seek, when he
has most need of them, his knowledge will aid him very little. Again, if he
be of never so bolda courage, and want discretion, knowledge, and judgment, he
is very unfit for the government of a Ship: But if such a one be also (as most
commonly they are) wilful, taking it for a glory to be foolehardie, this is
as great a mischief, as all other dangers of the Sea, if they were all set
together. Where therefore boldness of courage, directed and moderated by
discretion and judgment; also a body enhabled to brook the Seas, are matched
with a willing mind unto Marine affairs, and endued with the fear of God;
wheresoever I say, these special gifts of God are to be found, there the
ornaments of Art, as necessary additaments, will always most effectually take
place, and are most easily attained unto. But where those former, at the least
in some comperent measure, are not, all the rest is vanity. It is even a most
irksome and woeful sight, to behold a company of courageous young Gentlemen to
be led on blindfolded (as it were) in marine actions, by such as have no fear
of God before their eyes; and many times by those, that are very ignorant of
almost any thing that good is if any thing might be accounted good, where the
fear of God is not) but only can tell of their own experience, how they
have dissimboched from Terra Stolida, making their voyage toward the Isle of
Pickery: gracing themselves (as they suppose) with swearing and staring, and
wishly looks. A few such monsters having the chief government in Ships, and
voyages, are a great deal more dangerous, then all the monsters in the Sea:
And for every one that is bereft of life by these, a hundred at the least are
destroyed by the other.

The serious consideration of these things have occasioned me of a friendly
mind and entire good will, (wherein toward your profession, I will give place
unto no man living) to admonish you of these points, which I have thought
necessary; Beseeching Almighty God, (who is the Lord both of Sea and dry Land)
by his holy Spirit of true wisdom to govern and direct you in all your
actions, that employing your diligent endeavor in your Art in his fear, and
calling upon him in the time of trouble, he may hear and deliver you from all
your distresses; And that being delivered, you may accordingly glorify him,
yielding praise and thanks for his mercies before the sons of men.

Let Staff, Card, Compass, Ship, and Skill,
Depend upon Gods blessed will.

