ENGLANDS IVBILEE, OR IRELANDS JOYS IO-PAEAN, FOR King CHARLES his Welcome.

WITH The Blessings of Great-Britaine, her Dangers, Deliverances, Dignities
from God, and Duties to God, pressed and expressed.

More particularly, IRELANDS Triumphals, with the Congratulations of the
English Plantations, for the preservation of their Mother England, solemnized
by public Sermons.

In which 1. The Mirror of Gods free Grace, 2. The Map of our Ingratitude,
3. The Means and Motives to bless God for his blessings. 4. The Platform of
holy praises are Doctrinally explained, and usefully applied, to this secure
and licentious Age.


By STEPHEN JEROME, Domesticke Chaplain to the Right Honorable Earl of Cork.

DVBLIN. Printed by the Society of STATIONERS, Anno Dom. M.DC.XXV.

TO THE WORSHIPFUL, HENRY WRIGHT, ESQVIRE, Sovereign of the Borough and
Corporation of Tallaugh: together with Master Recorder, the Burgesses his
brethren, with the whole body of the Corporation of the English Plantation
there adjoining.
GEntlemen, and my Christian friends, and welwillers, as this Text from which
I extract this Gratulatorie Tractate, (as is well known to the best and most
of you) was sent me to preach upon, the very day before our solemnities, by
Gods providence, and the choosers prudence, coming to my hands speedily
without much seeking or searching, like Genesis 27 v. 20
Jacobs Venison, so I have as I could on a sudden, like your running
banquets, catered and cooked it, ( Rebecca like) however not costly, and
curiously (for time permitted not) yet so cauteously (though cursorily, that if
you have not left or lost your spiritual gust (as Numb. 11.6.
Israel was once cloyed even with Manna it self) these my mental dishes
added to your corporeal, shall be (which is the Cooks chief commendation)
both wholesome and Omne nilit p^nctum qui miscuit utile dulci.
toothsome. And now as the chief of you in this place, as the head and eye,
and mouth of the rest sent and lent me this Scripture, as that great Master in
the Math. 25.14 15.
Gospel, put forth his Tallents to his servants, to occupy and traffic
withal till his coming; so by labor and industry, vehement and violent
(perhaps) for the time, desirous to be found neither unfaithful, nor
unfruitefull at the great Auditory. In the summoning of my best powers and
spirits, by paralelling, uniting and annexing other Scriptures, as digging in
those best Mines, I have regained this treasure as you see, which as a cake
from your own meal, as the flower of your own Corn (grinded only by my
Milne) I have sent you home, as your own: bagged and wrapped up, in these
printed sheets: And indeed as these lucubrations were first hatched at your
motion, and by your means pressed abroad thus public souldier-like, to do
service to their Prince and Country; so, of whom should they have a spect and
respect, but from your selves: from whom they have both their first trayning
forth, and their principal pay? Besides as at my first planting in these parts
(by the mind and means of our ever Honorable Earl) the very Nerves and
Sinews (under God and his Majesty) of these parts, with the Eagled eye of
his far famoused wisdom, ever vigilant (as a noble Centinell, for the
spiritual as well as temporal good of these Plantations) I was at my first
arrival, (coming over with my Honorable Mecenas the Lord Beamont Viscount of
Swords) here first desiredly entertained, and by some of you ever since (till
now) lovingly and liberally retained amongst you: I see not but that, both in
reason and religion, you should receive the first fruits of my public pains,
since you have already paid for them aforehand by your pension. Moreover since
I am here, a stranger amongst you, why may I not challenge for these my
mental issues and legitimate of springs of my understanding part, the
privilege of our England, granted to the corporeal issue of the poorest
Parents, to be cast on the charges of the Parish where they were borne? Lastly,
you know it is our Irish fashion, (as indeed in many things we are too much
hybernified) to expose our Children to foster-fathers: in which stream of
custom, (though corrupt) I now swimming, as carried with the time and Omnia
secum ventus and unda rapis.
tide, as providing many strings for one Bow, least some break; I have
chosen many fosterers to one Orphane, and though it be not so worthy that you
should contend for it, (as some Cities were said to do for Homer) yet such is
my judgment (or opinion) of you all that love me in truth, and for the truth,
that I think the meanest of my friends (in the best bound) in Town or
country, to whose strong loves to my person and profession I am indeared and
indebted) worthy enough to cherish this fruit as they have demonstrated their
affections to the Tree. But to leave this descant) which perhaps with some that
can find a knot in Nondum in Scirpo quaerere.
a bulrush, may subject me to construction) as your desires and mine sympathize
and concur with our best hearts, and affections, powers and performances, to
congratulate with all true English hearts (that un Iesuited and unleavened from
Rome) are loyal to God, and to Caesar, this double blessing, (as two streams
meeting in one brook, to make our joys brimfull from one Ocean and and
fountain of mercy. First the merciful marvailous and miraculous preservation
of the breath of our nosthrils, our Sovereign King, with the Peers, Nobles,
Prelates, and whole body of the Land, together with the Gospel and Religion,
from that hellish, horrid, barbarous, bloody (had it been effected as
affected) Popish powder plot: as it is christened and called. Secondly his
preservation hitherunto amongst us, as the very Atlas and pillar under the
supreme Majesty of Heaven, of our Church and Commonwealth, as also the safe
reduction of our Illustrious Prince from Spain, anchored and fixed here
again, in his own country the English Court, every way as sound, as at his
departure, in his body, soul, spirit, so calming and baming our grieves for
his absence in the midst of the fluctuations of our fears, blessings great
and unspeable, in which we here dispersed in this land (as the Christian Jews
once in Asia, and Pontus) even from Vlster to Connaght, as all in great
Britain, even from Dan to Beersheba, from Barwicke to Dover, from Edenbrough
to the utmost Orcades, have such interest, as Israel had in their David and
Solomon 2. and as you that were the heads (imitating Limericke, Yoghell, and
other well governed places, who set you a copy, and gave you a perfect
president) were not vvanting by your cares and costs, your pains and
providence, by feastings, festivities, discharging of Guns, advancing of pikes
(for you cannot ring The want of ^^ls, one of our ^rish eye sores, and ear
sores: bloody Bellona ^attering our ^els and our bel^rayes: our Towns and our
Temples, laying them as level in many places as Rome did Carthage, the Greeks
Troy, and Titus Jerusalem, is the greatest object of pity my eye ever beheld:
Oh that God would stir up some Ezras, and Nehemiahs to repla^t and repair the
ruins of the goodliest kingdom of the world for fish, flesh, foul, and
wholesome air wanting nothing, but Religion, Money, and Munition. Ah si fas
dicere, sed non fas.
Bells, unless you had them) Bonfires and other solemnities to testify your
affections: after which motions also, the country moved by their presence,
approving, not emulating your performances; so I thought in my willingness of
spirit though corporeal weakness, as you know, not to be behind hand in
acting my part according to my place, and profession, discharging my
conscience, my calling, always in judgment and practice, approving,
delighting in, as desiring that best of Musicks, the harmony and wished
correspondencie betwixt Moses and Aaron, David and Nathan, Solomon, and
Zadocke, the sword and word, the Magistracy and Ministry, powers Civil and
Ecclesiastical for the performance of any good work, Moral, Polliticall, or
Religious, of piety toward God, of Charity or Christianity toward man.

In which golden yoke, as you Sir Apostrophe to the Sovereign.
have begun to draw, that are as this year, our Annual Sovereign,
subordinate to three other sovereigns, (as I told you when you were installed
in your place) First to God the sovereign Monarch of heaven and earth, by whom
Kings Prover. 8.15.
Reign, and from whose ordinance is all rule and authority, all superiority
and Romans 13.1.2
subordination, in all conditions, Secondly the Kings Majesty the Lords high
Steward and Vicegerent over us our terrestrial Psalm 82.2, 1.6.
God. Thirdly, to the R. Ho. Richard Lord Boil, the Earl of Cork the prop of
these parts our best De harmonia Politica, Arist. lib. 8 politic. cap. 3.
states-Musitian, under his Majesty, to tune all right what is disioynted, and
luctaite: our Quomodo convenient Medicus, Minister, Magistratus, vide apud
Berchorium, in suo reducterio Morali, lib. 4. cap. 28. page 106. 107. 10^.
stats-physitian to purge out our worst humors, and preserve us in sound
loyalty to our Prince, and love and unity amongst our selves, as our whole
country who finds the sweetness of his prudencie and providence, so improued
in public and private, for the peace and prosperity of all in general, and of
every one in particular, cannot but subscribe unto and acknowledge, unless
blinded by papisticall prejudice, or possessed with that hellish Hagge, the
Devils eldest daughter Envy, or his grandchild detraction: I say, as you
even already have by your bounty, providence, and circumspection, given some
good glimpses, and promissing prologues, of your succeeding government; so all
that I will recommend unto you, at this time, for incouragment or further
direction is this, Perge pede quo coepisti: Sparta^ quam nactus es, ha^c orna,
I, bone: virtus quo te tua vocat, I pede fausto: go forward as you have begun:
do not extremo actu deficere, fail not in your last part, for the Finis and
honum convertuntur.
end is the perfection of every work, both moral and spiritual. The praise
and the palm of every race that is atcheiued, whether performed by man, or
beast, horse, or greyhound, is not only speed of the hand, and then to lagge
and dragge in the midst, but truth to hold out to the end, though the course be
long and strong. It Is nothing for a new Beesome to sweep ^^eane, for a new
knife to cut sharp, for a new servant to be industrious, for a new Bride to be
loving, whilst it is honey Moon: for a people to be new fangled of a new
preacher, as the Jews were of John the Math. 3.5. Luke 3.7 8
Baptist, as children are of flowers, and after to throw them away, and reject
them, as the Jews did 1. Sam. 8.5
Samuel, Ierem. 18.18.
Jeremy, yea to hang and head them, if they could, as Herod did with Mark
6.20.27.
John. I could apply this to the Magistracy, but verbu^ sat, etc. a word (a
wink) is enough to the wise. Continuance and perseverance crow^es every
action, therefore let your last works be better still then the Revel. 2.19.
first, (as Aleinious Garden) let your last fruits relish the ripest, the
sweetest, reserve your best Wine for you last Vt apud John. cap. 2.10.
feast, use aright those fasces Apud Livill and Fenestellam.
magistratus, those rods of rule fetched from the Romans, those worthy Patriots
famoused by all writers. Use aright as I publicly prescribed you, those ^ods
of beauty, and of Zeh. 11.7.
bands, in the right mixture of ^^^thie and justice (as of white and red, in
the damask Rose) I will not give you now, Cramba bis cocta, Coleworts twice
sod; only thus much: Vindicate Gods glory upon Drunkards, Swearers, Idolaters,
profaners of the Saboth chiefly, against these Cormorants (or Cornvorants) that
forest all the Markets, inhau^ce the price of Corn in gross, (and so purloine
from the poor: so the bellies of the poor shall bless you as they did ^^b.
29.13.
Job. Stand for God, as well as for Caesar, as did Exodus 32 v. 29 Levit. 9.23 24
Numb. 14.39.40 41. verse.
Moses, Nehem. 6 ve. 10.11. and chap. 13. v. 11.25.17.
Nehemiah, David, Josiah in Scripture, Justinian, Gratian, the two Theodosij,
Co^sta^tine, in histories, in whose glasses see your own faces: knowing that a
Governor must be custos utriusque Tabulae, having oculum cum Sceptro, an
Eagles eye, and a Lions heart, to spy, redress and remove (at least the
mulcts reprove) sins both against God and man, in the breach of the first and
second Table: otherwise (as in the Church and family, so in Cities and
Corporations, in the commonwealth) the sins of inferiors untutored,
unpunished not corrected are set upon the score of the Superiors, as the sins
of Elies sons, were the taxations of Eli the 1. Sam. 2.29
father, as indeed if the garden be overgrowen with weeds, the Corn with
Tares, where is the fault, but in the Gardener, and in the Husbandman? But hoping
that you, and all that shall succed you, here in the Magistracy, (as we in the
Ministry, and Masters in Families) will have a care on the main chance to
wash your hands, (not in hypocrisy as Math. 27.28
Pilate) but in sincerity, as once Act. 20.26.
Paul, free from blood of all men, in Gods great day of retribution. I rest

To all and every one of you, even in that nature you are to me, and to my
Ministry affected. Stephen Jerome.

TO THE INGENIOVS, (INGEnuous) Judicious, and well affected Reader.
FOr to such I purposely write; as my Leaves and Lines come from such, so they
tend and bend as to their right Center, to such a spirit, such lettice, such
lips: to such (if to such any needs) I satisfactorily apologize, that if
ever the Proverbes proved true: that Haste makes waste, as the hasty bearing
Brach, brings forth blind Canis festina^s cacos parit Catulos.
whelps; they are verified in me, who sent out these lucubrations (or rather
not as active but passive have them) by importunities pressed from me, from the
Pulpit to the Press, even by hasty extrusion, as Israel out of Exodus
12.33.34.35.
Egypt, to our Church and Commonwealth, only with their staff of sincerity,
in the hand of humility, traveling as holy Pilgrims, desirous of company,
to the heavenly Canaan: Yet even in this haste, for ought that I am conscious
to the contrary (without any sinister end to speak unpartially) laden both
with Israelitish Jewels of Theology, and Egyptian Jewels of Humanity, which
according to De Civit. Dei de doctr. Christ. and alibi, etc.
Augustines allusion, I borrowing from the Pagans, the usurping unjust
possessors of them, have used in the service of the Sanctuary. If any marvel
why by so many Marginall quotations, I lay so much Lace on this Suit, (which
suits and sueth only as Gods Vt Orator, u^tinam exorator, ut olim Paulus. 2.
Corin. 5.19. and Moses Deuteronomy. 5.29. Vt Solomon Prove. 23. v. 26.
Orator, for the heart) and run this descant upon the plain Song of a
grateful heart, (the English-Irish Harp, which with all the strings of
affections, I desire to Tune) my answer is ready, and satisfactorie: First,
that I never knew any such discrepance betwixt Humanity and Divinity, the
great book of Nature, and the little book of Grace, the World and the Word,
as by uniting them, as many have done before me, in natural and symbolicall
Inter patres, Ambrosius, and Basil in Hexameron, Augustinus de Civitate Dei,
and Lodovicus Vives interpres: praecipue in libr. de verit. Christ. fidei Inter
Scholasticos, Aquinus contra Gentiles, Raimundi de sabunde, in Theologia
naturali: Bradwardinus de causa Dei, and Valesius de sacra philosoph. inter
nostrates, Morneus de veritate Religion. August. Eugebinus de perennis
philosophia. Zanchius de operibus Dei, Alsted in Theologia natural. inter
Fother by his Atheomastix, Inter Pap^sta^ Geminianus, summa exemplorum
Berchorius in reductoriae.
Theology, I should fear to mar the Music: since indeed a holy heart,
and sound brain, that in, by, and from the creature glorifies the Creator,
knows how to delight his Soul from them in an harmonious comfort, more
ravishing and refreshing, then any Lidian Doricke, vocal isntrumental
strains, from an Orpheus Amphion or Arion. Secondly, since Divinity is a
Mistress as the Fathers allude, and our Moderns conclude, and none denies, but
Ignoramus and Dulman: I see no reason, but this Sarah, should have her Hagar,
this Rebeccha, (according to the English, Irish, and French fashion) should not
go abroad thus publicly without her hand-mayde Of the lawful use of
Humanity Bishop King at large in his Lectures on Jonas: M. Asquits, in his
Brotherly Reconcilment. yet limited by Master Tailor on Titus, Comment. in cap.
1. v. 12. How far to be used in Sermons. Lege de his plura apud Augustinum,
libr. 2. de Trinitate in Pr^^emio T^m. 3. page 260, Et Alsted. Theolog.
Natural. part. 2. page 247.
Humanity. Thirdly, I know I write, as in a curious, a carping, catching age,
so many Readers, so many Controulers of Magnificate, Correctors of the Press,
every Son to Master Shallow, presuming to be another Joseph, or Julius
Scalliger, a Cato censorious, a critical Aristarchus, (or starke-Asse:) I know
too, some in envious spleen or emulation to the work, or the writer, will do
with us as Mice or Rattes do in walls, or as Hunters and Hawkers in
Quicke-sett hedges, they will make holes in our Coats, gapps and slippes in
our best connexed and contexted Mental fortifications, where they find none,
or if they find any, they shall be as knots in a bulrush: Now if any
carpe-fish desire to nible at my Lines, with my fairest and freest Baytes, he
shall swallow the Hook also of some Authors, to make him gut-sicke or
gall-sicke. If Momus or Zoylus, Bavius or Mevius will needs cast his
Satyricall squibbes, vent his sulphurious powder, I have here set him fair
marks, to be spurt and besprinkle, Augustine, Ambrose, Hilarie, Bernard,
together with Orators, Poets, Historians, Philosophers, chiefly Aristotle,
Albertus Magnus, Pliny, Vincentius, Isidor, Aelianus, and our Neototicke Simon
Maiolus: These let him hit and hurt, wound and phlebotomize if he will through
my The like to this has that resolute french Mounghtaine in Essays.
sides: and more then these I had afforded him: had there not, in this my
voluntary exile, from mine own Ithica, been a sea, betwixt me, and my
Books, as betwixt the Artificer and his Tools: those gleanings (wanting mine
own Harvest) which I have, as the Prophets Axe but 2 King. 6.9
borrowed, as the Crow her Apud Aesopum.
plumes, in this little bookish country; as I could, I have squared, hewed,
and trimmed this Scripture with them. My chief Library indeed being that,
which is living, and walking, carried about with me, as Byas did his Omnia mea
mecum porto.
goods, by that portion of memory, for which, I am thankful to the God of
Nature, as my chiefest Treasury. I have extracted the most of my illustrations
and amplifications, in which though I may perhaps punctually fail in some
particular quotation, (as what memory can retain, contain) all that he
reads, but as water out of a vessel something leakes; I crave the Candid
censure, of the Ingenious and Judicious: chiefly since the opportunity of the
subject, and the importunity of some of my chief auditors and friends, did
hardly permit, a second Synopsis or Survay, to lick and pollish these Emb^^^^,
as the Bear is said to form her Lambendo ofsingere.
whelps, and Virgill to frame by continuated pains his exact Aeneidos: being
limited within the Circuit of a very small time, as hundreds can witness
(besides Sabbath labors and week Lectures) both for the preaching, penning,
inditing, writing, and Presse-sitting, these my Mental issues; which if in my
absence from the Press they incur any stains, by misplacing, misprinting,
transporting words or syllables, in Leaf or Margent, as my former Books have
been Origens repentance and my seven helps to Heaven
used to my no small grief, and Priscianus despite: Candedly, set the right
Saddle on the right Horse: which in equity and humanity desiring, with these
Persian paper presents, I present thee my best affections. Vale.

The Authors Apostrophe to his Book.
Court, there free commence thy Suite,
Admittance plead thy Prince to resalute:

His welcome home to Peers, Plebeans, State.
Io paean sing
For his arrival safe, (chief for thy King)
Blessed Centinell, whose eye did watch
To keep them, (us) from Powder, Plot, Fire, match.

(As snowes in Summer, or in Harvest rain,

Apologize, it is well thou came thus Est aliquid prodire tenus si non detur
ultra.
soon.
Time, which lent thee speaking breath
Thou staidst for press, well nie, till pressed, to death;
2. Sam. 16.3.4. chap. 18. verse. 24.25.26.
Mephibosheth, thou bringst a heart,
Better then Ziba, though he act first part.
Time, so clipped, swift Fames, flig wing:
That till Novembers fifth, she scarce did bring
Hibernian coast,
Of Charles return, which we desired most.

By flying (Lying) Fictions, News, Tales, Toys.

As feathers pendent, in the winds, and airs:

We scarce durst trust our ears, without our eyes:
Prince was come, Plebean crew
Vox populi, cries still, too good for true:
Trumpe, by vulgar breathes was blown
Our Joys revived, as out of Fears dead sown
Phoebus, gleames, to life does bring,
Hymen's dead seeming Sylphae Culex Scarabei Cicada cancri, saepin^ mori and
reviviscere censentur ab Aristot. anim. lib. 8. c. 17. Idem affirmat Vincent.
de Pulicibus lib. 20 ca. 151. Idem Isidor. lib. 12. cap. 8. Aelian. lib. 2. ca.
29. De Muscis alij de alijs infectis.
infects, Batts, in spring
Sun reshines from that eclypsing cloud,
Of doubts, and dangers which her lights did shrewd,

Our Irish Muse, wakes, laughes, who erst had wept
Cyntheas circuit. (Circle of one Moon)
Mournful Melpomine, mirthfull is become
Corybant she praunceth
In our Joys Jubilees, she friskes, Trips, daunceth,

Fre'd from winds, (waves) of doubts, which tossed her breast
Pegassus,
To mother Albions coast, to scattered us,
Hive whom Time Hibernifieth,
Live King, Live Prince, our glad Thalia cries:
Caesar, Charles, enroule,
Their names, Fames, facts, Fates in eternal scroule.
Nestors years, desired days,
Our poor Plantations, may their hopes (helps) raise

(As they plant us) great Jove plant them, in Heaven.
IRELANDES IVBILEE, OR JOYS IO PAEAN.
1. Chron. Chap. 29. Verse. 20.21.22. 20 And David said to all the Congregation,
Now bless the Lord your God. And all the Congregation blessed the Lord God of
their fathers, and bowed down their heads, and worshipped the Lord and the
King.

21 And they sacrificed sacrifices unto the Lord, and offered burnt offerings
unto the Lord on the morrow after that day, even a thousand Bullockes, a
thousand Rams, and a thousand Lambs, with their drink offerings, and sacrifices
in abundance for all Israel.

22 And d^d eat and drink before the Lord on that day with great gladness,
and they made Solomon the son of David King the second time, and anointed
him unto the Lord to be the chief Governor, and Zadok to be Priest.


SECTIO. I. The Preface or Prologomena to the whole.
AS we have heard by true, certain, and infallible report, the news of the
Prince his arrival, which we most delighted, most desired to hear of all
others; in which before time we were wonderously divided and distracted betwixt
hopes and fears, as a Ship driven too and fro with contrary winds and waves,
by reason of the uncertainty of rumors and flying, (lying) Fama malum quo non
velocius ullum.
fame: every man speaking as he would have it, rather then as the truth was, as
they were well affected or infected, demonstrating themselves (as the Damsel
told Peter) their very tongues bewraying them, Mark. 14.17.
as Shibboleth and Sibboleth, distinguished betwixt Ephramites and Gileadites
Judge c. 12.5.6.
: as the proverb is, As the man is thinking, so is the Bell still ringing. As
now (I say) it is certainly writ, and fixed on the columns of truth, that the
Prince is prosperously and safely (in the outward and inward man) arrived out
of Spain, to the English Court: of which we have so many testimonies from such
a cloud of eye and ear Oculati and au riculares testes.
witnesses, as the Apostles and Disciples had (to the exhilerating of their
formerly sadded Math. 27. v. 7.8.9. Mark. 16. v. 1.2.6.7. Luke 24.36.41.
hearts) of the resurrection of their Savior. he now being more incredulous
then that Didymus, John. 20 v. 25.
which will not believe his ear, in that which is vox populi, without the
sight of his own eye. So as we already have solemnized his arrival with our
heartiest gratulations; we are here again assembled to resolemnize it and to
renew our commemorations, by the addition of another succeeding (exceeding)
mercy; the merciful, marvailous, and miraculous protection and preservation
of our Sovereign King, our now Illustrious Prince, our Noble Peers, the
reverent Prelates, the Gentry, the Clergy, the Commonaltie, the whole body of
the Kingdom, our lives, our wives, our Children, together with the Gospel and
Religion, who all at one blow had perished We had lost, rem Regem, gregem
legem, Regimen Religionem.
in the Powder Treason, had that fatal blow been given, that was intended:
which blow the Lord Protector of great Britain, the Watchman, Centinell and
Shepherd of Psalm. 35. v. 1.
our English Israel prevented, by putting a manacle on the bloody Traitors hand
by a special and peculiar providence, even in an instant, as once a hook in
the nosthrils of Sannacharib, 2. Kings. 19.28.
in the like exigent, a halter about the neck of Haman Esth. 7. v. 9.
, a gagg and a boult on the tongue of Balaam, Numb. 23. ve. 7.8.
a moussell on the mouth of Tobiah, and Shanballat, Neh. 6.14.
and a dart from heaven into the bowels, of the Apostate Julian, In his war
with Sapor the Persian King, wounded with an arrow from heaven, he threw his
blood into the air crying, vicisti Galilee, vicisti. Thou have overcome, o
Galilean. apud histor. tripartit.
when they in their damnable resolutions, intended mischief to the Church and
people of God. To teach all the proud, pestilent, and perverse spirits of the
world, what it is to kick against the prick, Act 9. v. 5.
swim against the stream, for flesh and blood, to contend against God, 1 Cor.
10.22.
who sitting in the heavens, knows in a trice how to confound them, and their
devices, to crush their Cockatrice eggs, to sweep down their Spiders webs, to
break them as a potters vessel Psalm. 29.
, as easily as a brazen head breaks in fitters a head of glass; Impar
congressus apud Al, ciatum in suis Emblem.
all their Counsels, plots, projects and conspiracies, perishing as an Embrio,
withering as the grass on the house topp, dissolving as the wax before the
fire, Ps. 58 6.7.8.
as the snow before the Sun, and scattering as the dust and chafe before the
wind. Psalm. 1.4.
There being neither power nor strength against the Almighty, who can turn
even the wisdom of a Friarly and Iesuited Achitophell 2. Sam. 15.31.
into folly, and the curses of the great Balaam of Rome against his Christian
Sion, Numb. 23.20
into blessings: he that rules in heaven Psalm. 2.4.
laughing all the enemies of himself and his Church to scorn, the holy one of
Israel (as appears in the experience of this day) having them in derision. It
being as probable, as possible, for that Antichristian man of Rome, according
to his projects and the Thrasonicall bragges of his Canonists, and Gnatonicall
claw-backes, to depose Kings, dispose kingdoms, The Pope Sycophants make him
believe, that he may deponere Reges, as Iehoida did Achaliae, and disponere
regna as when he proudly deposed King Papin of France, with Petrae dedit Petro,
Petrus Diadema Rodulpho with such pranks as these.
unless the Lord first depose them, as he did Saul, 1. Sam. 15.26.
Balthazar, Dan 5 26.
and Nabuchadnezar, Dan 4.34.
using him as he did Tamberlaine, and Ashur, Esai. 10. v. 5.
and now the Turk, as the rod of his wrath; as the Judge and the Shiriffe may
use a hangman to execute follons, as God himself has used the Devil to
torment the first King of Israel. 1 Samuel 16.14
I say, unless God let loose his chained mastives whether Turk or Pope, to
the punishing the sins of the King, or of a Kingdom, all their attempts
against the Lords anointed are but to fight against God, as the Centaures and
the old Giants in the fable, were said to wage war against Jupiter. Apud
Lucianu^ in Dialogis.
They may as well endeavor to turn the Sea to dry land, to turn Jordan
backward, Vt olim Elisha 2. King 2. v. 14.
to pluck the Sun out of the firmament, yea, God himself out of heaven, as
to pull any Christian King, Gods Lieutenant and Vicegerent, (of Gods setting
and planting) out of his throne, unless they have (as the Devil sometimes
has, but the Pope never had) a special commission or permission from God, as
a trial of a righteous Prince, or the punishment of the reprobate. Oh well may
Traitors, like them, undo themselves by their doings, as did Absalon 2. Sam.
18.14.
Adoniah, 1. Kings. 2.25
A^halia, 2. King. 11. v. 1.14.15.
Sheba, 2. Sam. 20. v. 22.
the Roman Cateline, Apud Salust.
Seianus, Apud Plutarchum.
the French See both their tragedies polished in our English tongue.
B^ron, Lopus, Ravillack, the Belgicke B^rnwell, our English Squire, Parry,
Babington, the Romish Garnet, Campian, and these unfortunate English Gentlemen,
as their own call them, Digby, Catesby, Winter, Faux; bringing as did Ioab,
the blood upon their own head, which they thought to shed from others, falling
into that pit which they dig for others, Nec lex aequior ulla est, quam necis
artifices art perire sua.
scorching themselves like the fond Flea Pyrausta De Pirausta, vel Pyrali, vel
Pyrogono. Plin. libr. 11. not. hist. c. 36. Aelian. lib. 2. cap. 2.
at those flames they thought to quench; shooting, like him that shootes up at
the Sun, arrows to fall on their own pates: the wildfire balls of their
treasons, as cast against an Iron wall, rebounding back again upon
themselves, to their breaking or burning as he that gripes thorns or the
prickling Vrchin, or the edge of a sharpened steel, pricks his own fingers and
bloods himself, but hurts no man else. Themselves coming to their immature
and unglorious ends; like Haman, cum cede and sanguine, as is usually seen,
with that blood and slaughter upon their own nocent heads, which they intended
against the innocents and innocuous: like the inuentor of Perillus his Bull,
first hanzelling and acting in that tyranny which their treachery intended and
invented against others: So let thy enemies perish o Lord, Judge. 5. v. 31.
so let them perish that rise up against thee, and against thine anointed,
that draw the sword of war (as did Ioab against Abner 2. Sa. 3.27.28
and Amasa 2. Sa. 2.20.10
in the time of peace. Let them perish with the sword that strike unlawfully
with the sword: Math. 26.52.
if any rebel against God and Caesar, let him be Anathema Maranatha, execrable
and accursed; let him die ungloriously Ier. 22. v. 24.28.
like Iechonia, let none say Alas my brother, as the old Prophet did for the
young: 1. King. 13.30
let his name here stink, as a Fox or a Poulcat, or a Carrion, after and rott
with his carkas, buried in the Leth of oblivion; let him like 1. King. 21.20
Ahab, 1. King. 16.26
Jeroboam, Genesis 4.14.15.
Caine, Balaam John. 17. v. 12.
Judas and our English Banister, Servant to the Duke of Buckingham,
trecherously betraying his distressed Lord to Richard the 3. Speed and
Hollinshed in Chronicis.
never be remembered, but with some brand and mark of obloquie, some addition
of infamy; Let his wife be a widow (as David sings of his, and Christ's
enemies prophetically) his children vagabounds, Psalm. 22.
his seed fatherless Judge. 8.7.
and his house desolate, yea let them perish like smoke, and the, untimely
fruit of a woman. Let them be like Zeba, and Zalmunna, and them of Penuell
whose flesh Gideon tore with the briars of the wilderness; or as the
ungrateful Ammonites, 2. Sam. 10.19
whom David brought under with Iron Sawes: as Pharaoh and his Egyptians, that
were drowned in the redd Sea; Exo. 14.25.26
as Iabin and the host of Sisera, Judge. 5.21.
whom the river Kyshon swept away, yea that ancient river, the river Kyshon:
But let them that love and fear thee, say always (as we this day) The Lord be
praised: Praised be the Lord out of Sion, which dwells at Jerusalem.

And sure the concurrence of these two extraordinary mercies: the reflecting on
the one as by past; his Majesty's preservation: the present fruition of the
other; the generally welcomed reduction of our Illustrious Prince kept safe by
that Bonus Genius, or good Angel, who went along with him, as once with Jacob,
Genesis 28. v. 16 and 48.26.
with Abraham's Steward, Genesis 24.7.
and that Apocryphal Tobiah, and those Eastern Magi, Matthew. 2.9. Bosquier in
his Echo concionu^ disputes, that the star was some good Angel, but
concludes, that it was stella de novo creata.
in all incident perils by Sea, and by Land, in the Spanish expedition; These
two mercies, I say, meeting in one Center, as Chrystalline brooks in one
Torrent, running to that Ocean and Sea of mercy, from whence they flow, should
so water (as Nilus De Nilo, Aelianus hist. lib. 10 cap. 44. Seneca nature. libr.
4. c. 2. Plin. lib. 5. c. 9.
does Egypt,) all the Israel of God; that they should cause even the most
barren heart to be abundant in blessings, and fruitful in thankesgivings.

SECTIO II. The division, or Logical Analysis with the Theological
explanation of the Text.
But not to make in these preparatory prologues, the door too great for the
house, nor the gates for the city, for some Cynick Vt olim Diogenes.
to scoff at and deride, from these prefacing generalities, I come to the
strict particular enclosures of my Text: which being the expression of those
Eucharisticall Gratulations of David and the Elders, and people of Israel, for
a double mercy received from the Lord, as we have already intimated. that I
may, according to my tallent, as God shall give the door of utterance, speak
by it and from it unto your brains and understanding part, by explanation:
and, (in which the chief Soul and Genius of preaching Vide Kickermannum in
sua rethorica Eccles. Perkins. nostru^ de art prophetandi. Hunnium and
Zepperum de Methodo concionandi.
consists) unto your hearts and affections, by useful applications, fitting it
(as I may) as the Shoe for the right foot, and the Glove for the right hand,
to the solemnization of this day. Because Method is the mother of memory,
Methodus memoriae matter.
to lay down some Basis and foundation to build upon: observe with me the
fountain of this Scripture, running into these five streams, or Tree-like
budding and spreading into these five maine Branches, with some sprigs of
divisions, or subdivisions.

First, the subjects of these Eucharisticall gratulations, and those be: 1. and
Primarily, David; as appears both here, and verse 10.11.12.13. where both the
Matter, Manner, Method, and parts of his thankfulness is laid down. 2.
Secondarily the whole Congregation, moving after his motion, consisting 1. Of
the heads. 2. The Captains of thousands, and of hundreds. 3. The Rulers of the
Kings works: verse. 6. 4. The whole body of the Congregation, blessing the
Lord: verse. 20.



Secondly the expression of this their Gratitude, and Thankfulness: and that
four ways.

1. By blessing the Lord: 2. Worshipping.
1. The Lord: as internally in their hearts, so externally by bowing down
their heads. God: as creating, preserving, saving, redeeming; so requiring both
Body and Soul in his worship.

2. Worshipping the King: not by any Religious or superstitious adoration, such
as the Listrians would have given to Paul, All. 14. v. 12, 13.
Cornelius unto Act. 10.25.
Peter, Revel. 19.10.
John to the Angel. which as the Devil exacted of Christ: Math. 4.9.
so the Pope, that Saul or Paul of Rome, that pretended Peter, Satan's
Lieutenant, exacts, expects, and accepts of the Kings and Rulers of of the
earth: as Alexander once of Frederick in Saint Marks Church. Its no such
Idolatrous worship as our popish Proselites, give to their dead Saints,
Antichristian man of sin, dumb Images, painted shrines, erected Crosses,
carved Crucifixes, feined Relics, and breaden God: All which they would salve
with their worne-eaten, threed-bare distinction of Latria and Dulia, which by
often cashiering is shaven more bare and balde, then any of their Friars
Crowns. But (that I may scour the passages, and explain and pave the way as
I go: By worshipping the King, is meant that Civil reverence and veneration,
which the ancient Persians, Turks, those of Morrocho, China, and of the
country of Prester John, and the great Mogull, give to their Emperors and
Kings to this day: Such as we also give to our Princes and Rulers that are
Christians, even such veneration and reverent respect as Abraham gave to the
Hethites, Genesis 23 7.
as Jacob to Pharaoh, Genesis 47.7.
and to his brother Esau, Genesis 33.3.
as Abigail 1. Sam. 25.23.
the woman of Tekoah, 2. Sam. 14.4.
Bethshebah, and Nathan 1. King. 1.23.
gave to David.

3. They testified their gratitude by Sacrifices and oblations, described.

1. For their Nature: burnt offerings and drink offerings. 2. Their Matter,
Bullockes, Lambs, Rams, 3. Their Number and Measure.
1. Generally, in abondance.

2. Particularly: a thousand Rams, a thousand Lambs, a thousand Bullockes.
They did not (as we now) scant Gods part: they thought nothing, (as we the
least things) too dear for God.

3. They had Faith to believe, that though they offered thus much, yet God could
and would still increase their store, as indeed it was unto them as they
believed: for it comes home with the holiest happiest interest, multiplying as
the widows oil 2. King. 4.5.^.
that is given or lent to the Lord.

4. The end of their sacrificing is expressed; and that is for all Israel.

4. The fourth expression of their gratitude is by feasts and festivities: they
did eat and drink: which is not meant of the ordinary use of the creatures,
but more fully and freely, as in their solemn feasts.

Thirdly, the object of all this Blessing, Worshipping, Sacrificing, Feasting
is laid down; and that is before the Lord, for so the Text runs.

1. They blessed the Lord, with his added attribute, the God of their Fathers.

2. They Woorshipped the Lord.

3. They Sacr^ficed to the Lord. 1. There was not a Pagan amongst them, that
worshipped any strange God, as did Jonas, his Mariners. Jonas. 1.5.
neither Jupiter, Juno, Mercury, etc. the host of heaven, or any created
nature, in the heathenish, divelish diversified Idolatries; 2. Neither any
Idolatrous Jew, to worship Baall Asteroth, or any of the Gods of the Nations;
3. Neither was there any Papist hatched in these days. Popery is a Cockcatrice
egg of an after clecking: it was as Nilus incertis orius fontibus Plin. libr.
5. c. 9. Et Seneca nature. lib. 6. c. 8. Petrus etiam Alvares de origin Nili.
lib. hist. 18.
Nilus his head, unknown, unshowne, as that Terra incognita, or the
Philosophers Stone, unfound out; there was not so much talk of it, as we of
old Brasil, or Guianahs gold. but no sight nor apparitions of it in David's
days, nor in the days of Adam and Abraham, Patriarchs or Prophets: how ever
they gull the credulous world-deluded ignorants with their old Religion, old
Religion, old Law, etc. as the Gibeonites deceived with their old Shoes and
old Bottles. Iosu 9.12.13
There was not a Cananite, an Egyptian in all this goodly-godly Company, that
offered to any God save Jehovah: There was not a Papist in the whole
Congregation, that offered any sacrifice to any Angel or Archangell, except to
Jacobs Angel, Genes. 48.16.
the great Angel of the Covenant, Iud. 9.
Michael that overcame the Dragon, Christ the head of Angels: there was not a
prayer made to any departed Real or Imaginary Saint: there was not a Dirge
sung, nor a Mass, to fetch any Soul out of Purgatory. These knew, that
sacrifices either for the dead, or to the dead, were vain, that Abraham was
ignorant of them, and that Esai.
Israel had forgotten them.

4. They eat and drunk before the Lord; which Heluobs and Gluttons do not:
for they eat and drink as did Luke 17.28.
Sodom and the old worldlings, verse. 27.
as though, besides their Belly, Philip. 3.19.
there were no God to eye them, spy them, and to revenge their abuse of
themselves, of the creatures, yea even of the Creator himself.

Fourthly the qualifications of these subjects, thus Blessing, Worshipping,
Sacrificing, Feasting: and that was joyfulnesse and gladness of heart; the
Text gives an Emphasis to their joys, even great gladness: for the godly have
their Sun-shines as well as clouds, their calmes as storms; they are not
always (nay, never but physically for their souls good) dieted with the bread
of affliction. Besides, they have their affections, their passions; they are
not See the book of human passions, translated out of French, page 63.64. to
page 76. Proving learnedly against the Stoics, that passions are to the mind
as the sinews to the body.
Stoics or stocks, but sensible of the causes of joy, and of sorrow: how ever,
their affections are sanctified that they are not infectious; their passions
seldom turn such perturbations, to the eclypsing of Reason and Religion, the
forgetting of God, and themselves, of duties Moral and Theological, as it is
in the wicked. But of all other affections, the godly have most cause of
gladness. Psa. 32.11. On which see Master Tailors comment. Sic Lorin. Iesuita,
and Musculus in locum.
the Saints most occasion to sing, to triumph, and to rejoice, See a sermon of
M. Rogers on Philip. 4. v. 4
as here Gods people.

Fifthly and lastly, the occasion of all this Iubilee and gratulation, was a
double blessing; to which Ianaus-like it looks, as both ways.

1. To the Cordial free-heartednesse of the whole Congregation, head and
foot, Princes and Plebeians: so liberally, largely, lovingly, contributing to
the building of the Temple; ten thousand, eighteen thousand tallents
(according to their states) of Gold, Silver, Brass, Iron, together with
abundance of Pearls, and precious stones: verse. 7.8.9.

2. To the renewed and seconded more solemn Investing, and Inauguration of
Solomon to be Prince and Governor over Israel, (as Zadok to be Priest) to
which worthy, and wise Prince (as we this day to ours) their loves were so
linked, and hearts united, and of whose graces, and excellencies in himself,
and good to them by his government, their hopes, and persuasions (in which we
also sympathize) were so strongly grounded and fixed.

These are the Logical parts, with some Glosses and Paraphrasticall clearing
of the Text, as we have gone: which I have done the rather thus laconically,
and succinctly, because perhaps like some Father that has many Children, and
is not able to give Portions and Dowries to all, or not willing to give all
alike, but (as did Genesis 25.5.6.
Abraham, and Genesis 48.7.22.
Jacob, to some more, some less, as reason or affection leads him; so I, in
likelihood having many points to prosecute, (like Legacies, or promised
pensions to pay,) may give some of them little more portion of pains, then
setting them thus on a clear ground. how ever, dissipating thus briefly some
clouds of doubts, removing some stumbling blocks of error, in every part and
passage, we may proceed without peril, scruple, or disturbance. Now as to
show a large country in a little Map; all these may briefly be epitomized in
these three parts, which we will orderly prosecute: 1. David's Devotion. 2.
Isreal's Gratulation. 3. Our English-Irish Application.


THE FIRST PART.
CHAP. I.
SECT. I. David's devotion.
ANd first to begin with the eldest and best, the chief and choice subject of
this gratulation, King David. The consideration and serious animadversion of
his practice in many both substantial and circumstantiall points, speaks to
our understandings and affections in many pleasing, profitable, and useful
observations, for our instruction, edification, imitation, resolution, and
redargution: In whom, still for methods sake and memories sake (ere we come to
see how the Peers and people insist in his steps) let us view David, not to
scoff his zeal as Micholl, 2. Sam. 6.20.
but to imitate him as Christians, acting his gratulatorie parts, in these six
pees or particulars.

1 Piously. 2 Personally. 3 Publicly. 4 Primarily. 5 Perswasorily, or
prescribingly. 6 Powerfully or politically.
First I say (Piously) he prayseth God, and religiously: for in the linking and
connexing of graces, a thankful heart is always the inseparable companion of
a holy, humble, and sanctified heart Jacob, Genesis 32.10.
Moses, Iosuah 1.2.
Joshua Josh. 22.6.
the son of Nun, the servants of the Lord; Samuel the faithful Prophet 1 Samuel 3.20.
of the Lord, Simeon, Luke 1.28, 29
Zachary, Luke 1 68.
yea Elizabeth, Luke 1.44, 45
the Virgin Mary, and all that looked for the redemption and consolation of
Israel: Peter, Paul, Jude, John, the holy Apostles and Disciples of Christ
Jesus: the two Anna's, the mother of Samuel and the Prophetess; yea Augustine,
Ambrose, verse. 46.47. 1. Pet. 13. 1. Cor. 15.57. romans 7.25. 1. tim. 1.17. 2.
tim. 1.3. Jude, verse. 25. 1. Sam. 2. Luke 2.38. Psalm. 148.11, 12, 13. John
12.13.
and these famous lights in the primitive Church (as we shall see more at large
hereafter, in particularizing what we now epitomize) with all the faithful
that ever have been from the beginning of the world, men and women, old and
young, yea even children and babes, out of whose mouths God has ordained
strength, so soon as they are able in the powers of reason and religion to
pronounce Hosanna, glory to the highest; have been found thankful. There was
never heart full of grace but full also of gratitude, as inseparable the one
from the other as heat is from the fire or Accidens inseperabile.
light from the Sun: that David penning his Psalms practically, and
experimentally, unites often in one line the service of God and the praise of
God, in several Psalms; as Psalm. 104. v. 1 psalm. 134. v. 1.5. psalm. 135. v.
1. with many mo. He calls upon the servants of God, to bless and praise the
name of the Lord: he calls upon the Israel of God, the Zion of God, psalm. 149.
v. 2.3. the Saints of God, ver. 5. those that dwell in the Sanctuary of God,
psalm. 150. v. 1. to be joyful in God, to praise their King with Timbrell and
Harp, with sound of Trumpet and Psalterie. As if they only, and none but they
that are the servants of the Lord, Saints by calling, would (could) do this
task: as he makes it plain, psalm. 145. v. 10. Thy Saints, says he, shall
bless thee, they shall speak of the glory of thy kingdom, and talk of thy
power. They only indeed can do it; they will do it. As unpossible for a heart
possessed, a spirit replenisht with grace, not to bless God, as for a man to
have a living soul and not to breathe, a sound heart and yet never to move nor
work: there being (unless 1. in some sickish fit of weakness; 2. 2. Sam.
12.9. 2. sam. 24.1. 1. chron. 21.1. 1. King. 19.4. 2. Chron. 32.24, 25.
in some dead swoune of temptation, as once in our David; 3. some distemper of
impatiencie, as once in Elias; 4. some surging oppressing overflowing humor or
tumor of spiritual pride, some Tympanie of inflation, as once in Ezechiah; 5.
some Lethargy of security and forgetfulness, psalm. 106. v. 13 21.
as in Isreal's prosperity; 6. some brawninesse or fatness, as in deuteronomy. 32.15
Iesurun) I say, unless in such cases; there being as swift, as nimble, as
enargetical and operative a motion in a sanctified heart to move spiritually to
the praising of God, as for a natural and fleshie heart to move in any
natural motion: yea as the less grace, the more ingratitude (it being
impossible that an Esau should be truly thankful for his birthright, gen
25.33.3.4 math. 26.23.47. Luke 12.18.19. 1. Sam. 25.10.11, 15.
which he sells for broth; a Judas for such a master as he sells for silver; a
churl for his full barnes and bags; a Nabal and a Laban (which is Nabal
backward) for any blessing of sheep and goods they receive from God, or for
any kindness from a David, Genesis 31.7.
or a Jacob, or any man the instrument of their God, so long as they carry
about them these their poisoned, cankred, serpentine hearts, unpurged,
unpurified from the venom of original and actual sin: as for a dead man to
walk, a dead trunck to talk, or a leaden Organ-pipe to make any music
without blowing, they wanting the best bellows and breath of the spirit of
God) so, on the contrary, the more grace there is in any man, the more his
heart and tongue abounds (redounds) with the praises of God. even as the
greater the fire, the greater heat, and the fuller the fountain the freer
flow the streams. This holds both in the Saints in earth and heaven, and in
the Angels; who as they are most holy, so they are most heavenly in sounding
and singing their continued Hallaluiahs, Rev. 5.8, 9, 10, 11, 12.
to the glory of the Lamb upon the Throne.

SECT. II. Further prosecuting David's gratulation.
YEa, as it holds in the nature, humane, and angelical men and Angels, Mark.
14.32, 35
so it holds in Christ himself, the head of the Angels: who in the days of
his flesh, as he had the spirit without measure, so, as sparks from his
heavenly fire, ascending upward, as he did pray continually, he did rejoice
evermore, and in all things give thanks; 1 Thessalonians. 5.16, 17, 18. Luke 10.17,
18, 19, 21.
as for the propagation of the Gospel, the subjugation of Satan, the faith of
his elected ones, yea (as a shame to unthankefull Christians, who as Hoggs and
swine trample the best blessings under their feet, John 17.24, 25. John 6.13.
luke 9.16. Luke 22.17. 2. cor. 11.24. 1. Kings 19.14 john 2.17. 2. Sam. 17.10.
and 16.10. job. 1. ult. iam. 5.11. Number. 12.3. 2. Sam. 14.7. 2. Sam. 11.
never elevating tongue, nor eye, nor heart to the donor and giver of their
food and life) he never used the creatures, either bread common or
sacramental, but first he blessed them. But to pretermit all other instances,
and to keep me close to this excellent president in my Text of a gracious and
grateful heart: we shall see this holy Prophet David, for zeal another Elias,
for courage a Cure de Lion, for patience another Job, for meekness another
Moses, for wisdom as an Angel of God, for sincerity a man after Gods own
heart (not so mainly vainly culpable in any thing, except in the matter of
Vrias:) we shall see this David never wanting to his God in gratitude, as God
was never wanting unto him, in pouring out his benefits and blessings. For as
a pattern of a pious Prince, to all Princes, of a holy and heavenly heart;
look in the first and second books of Samuel, in the books of Kings, and of
the Chronicles of the Kings of Israel, and you shall see (beneficium postulans
officium) a dignity requiring a duty: that God never had a mercy in store
for David, of adornation or preservation, temporal or spiritual, general to
the Church and Commonwealth of Israel, or special to himself; but he had a
holy Hymme, an Eucharisticall song, a spiritual Psalm again, as a
gratulatorie retaliation, to the glory of the donor. like these Euchonnastick
Verses, usually in our College Chapels, in the praise of the Founder. Above
all other places, 2. Sam. 7.
ponder and peruse the second of Samuel and seventh chapter: where David
resolving with himself to build a Temple for the Ark of God, dwelling within
Curtains, ver. 1.2. and revealing this resolution to the Prophet Nathan, and
receiving a placet, and an approbation again from Nathan, verse. 3. but they
both reckoning without their Host, God contradicting the execution of this
resolution in the subject, because David had been a man of war; but yet not
in the matter, appointing that to be performed by Solomon his peaceable son,
which was projected by his martial father. yet the Lord accepting in David, as
in all his children, the Est aliquid voluisse, si non voluisse.
will for the work, the affection Apud Deum affectus cordis, pro effectu
operis. Genesis 22.15, 16. Luke 21.3. 2. Cor. 8.12.
for the action (as he did in Abraham's sacrificing of Isaac, the poor widows
myte, the alms of the poorest Corinthians as well as the richer Achians, the
Goats hair and Badgers skins of the meanest, as well as the gold and purple of
the mightiest, to the building of the material (as spiritual) Temple) he
sends David a comfortable message by Nathan, in such a gracious acceptance,
what mercies both temporal and spiritual the Lord will accumulate both upon
David and Solomon, verse. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. that David surprised, in an
ecstasy of joy and gladness, and ravished in spirit, not able longer nor
further to conceal his hidden flames, he resolvedly sets himself before the
Lord, and offers there with his heart, soul, and spirit, and tongue and all
(as he professed in some Psalm. 111. v. 1. Et 136 ver. 1. Et 148. verse. 1. Et
psalm. 103. v. 1. Genesis 8. v. 21. John. 12 v. 3.
Psalms) such an Eucharisticall and gratulatorie sacrifice, as (like Noah's
offering) smelt as a sweet perfume, or savor of rest (or as that box of
Alabaster, broke by grateful Mary Magdalen, on Christ's head) in the nosthrils
of the Almighty, for, as you may see, verse. 18.19.20, to the end of the
chapter (as one says of the Epistles of Cyprian, Referunt pectus ardore
plenum. Erasmi ce^sura.
) every word is emphaticall, and shows a wondrous ardent and inflamed
affection. But especially peruse all the Psalms of David (so denominated of
him, because he penned the greater and better part of Denominatio, sequitur
maiorem partem.
them, though some were penned by Moses, Vide prafat. Lorini ante Comment in
psalmos.
Asaph, and others) and you shall see, besides those that are doctrinall,
precatory, deprecatory, prophetical, penitential, as they are distinguished
by the learned Vide Musculum, Mollerum, and Bellarm. praefationib. ante
Comment. in psalmos David.
, more then half of them are Eucharisticall, or Psalms of gratulations, now,
for this mercy positive in good received; or privative, in evils prevented,
or removed: yea throughout the whole Book of Psalms, the whole Syntagma or
body of it, almost in every psalm (in the beginning, middle or end of it)
David's thankful heart, runs all along (as the blood within the veins, the
marrow within the bones and the waters within the Crannyes of the Earth.)
Ponder and peruse, with David's heart and spirit, for thine own edification and
consolation in the serious Soliloquies of thy Soul, Psalm
9.18.23.31.33.34.40.57.66.81.89.95.96.103.104.105.106.107.108
113.116.118.135.144.145 146.147.148.149 150 together with many more which I
purposely pretermitt, and thou shall find by comfortable experience the
verity of that which I have observed.

SECTIO III. Still urging David's thankfulness.
YEa indeed, the whole life of David, is nothing else but a practical Comment,
of that which is prescribed by James. 5.13.
Saint James, and which should be practiced of every Christian, namely, Is any
one afflicted? let him pray. Is any man merry? let him sing Psalms. For is
David afflicted in his outward man by 1. Sam. 24. v. 11.14.
Saul pursuing (as the Hauk the patridge,) by 2. Sam. 15.30
Absalons rebelling verse. 31.
Achitophels complotting? or moved or grieved in his spirit by 2 Samuel 6.20.
Michols mocking, 2. Sam. 16.7.8.
Semeis railing, 1. King 2.5.
Ioabs murders, 2 Samuel 3.33.
Abners death 2. Sam. 1.23.
Ionathans untimely fall, his 2. Sam. 13.21.
daughters deflowring, verse. 14.
Ammons works and wages, incest and verse. 29.30.
death? or, by the like crosses. Is he in spirit perplexed, Ps. 38.5.6.7.8
roaring as a Lion by his anxieties? first, for his filthy pollutions. Psalm.
51.3.
secondly, bloody murder. verse. 14.
thirdly, presumptuous pride in numbering his people. 2. Sam 24 10.
fourthly, his rash vows against 1. Sam. 25.22.
Nabal. fifthly, his partiality and injustice toward Miphishbosheth, 2. Sam.
16.4.
syding with sycophantizing Ziba, 2. Sam. 19 29.
sixthly, dissembled madness in a heathenish Court. 1 Samuel 21.13.
seventhly, and for like transgressions, slips frailties and infirmities, to
which Satan's temptations, his own corruptions, and sinning condition
subjected him. In these exigents (upon these causes) and in these afflictions
in the outward and inward man, he powered out his Soul to the Lord, (as
appears in his penitential Psa 6. psalm. 38. Psalm. 51.1. Vide Vegam in psalm.
Poenitentiales.
Psalms) in humble, hearty, faithful, fervent, penitent Prayer: he
supplicates, entreats, pleades for pardon, as a guilty selfe-accusing fellon,
before his strict Judge: he takes that course which Exodus 14.15. Exodus 17.11.
Numb. 16.22.
Moses, Aaron, Jacob, 1 Sa. 1.13.14
Anna, 2. Chro. 1^.11
Asa 2. King. 19.15.16.
Ezekiah, Da. 6.10 and chap. 2.16 17.
Daniel Esth 4 16.
Esther Nehem 2.4.
Nehemiah, 2. Cor. 12.8.9.
Paul, yea Luk 22.41 42
Christ, himself took, with all his verse. 46.
Saints, namely to call upon God, in the time and day of his trouble: in the
depths of his miseries he has recourse to the throne of grace, and of Ps. 5.1.
ps 7.2 and 17.1. et 22.2 et 28.1. et 31.7.
mercy, as he psalm. 32.5.
professes, and prescribes to verse. 6.
others. On the contrary, (as an excellent pattern of right imitation,
virtuous emulation, to all great men, to all good men) does the Lord loose his
bonds, Ps. 116. v. 16.
free him from his troubles, take him out of the Nett, free him from the snares
of these Fowlers, the gins and traps of these bloody hunters, which pursue his
soul, envious bloud-thirstie 1. Sam. 24. 1. sam 26. v. 21. 1. sam. 23.27.
Saul, matchavillian 2. sam. 17.14
Achitophell, dogged 1 sa. 22.9.10
Doegg, the factions of the sons of 2 samuel 16.10. and 19.22.
Zerviah, the treachery of the 1. sam. 26. v 1
Ziphites, etc? Does the Lord rid him of his enemies domesticke and foreign?
bring under the 2 samuel 5. v. 20 and 25.
Philistines? cast out the ibid. v. 6.7.8.
Iebusites? subdue the nations? bring him back to Jerusalem, after he 1. sam.
19.13.14.15.
was exiled by his own unnatural bowels (that fair (foul) viperous
Absolon?) yea, does the Lord every way hedge and inviron him in with his
mercies? advance him from the dust? bring him from the sheepe-hooke to the 2.
sam. 12.8.
Scepter? set a Crown of pure gold upon his head? let him see his desire upon
psalm. 54.7
his enemies? sweep away their plots, as Spiders ps. 58.6.7.8.
webs; confounding them that come about him, like Bees and Hornets? Does he
make his sword ever victorious against the Philistines, Ammonites, 2. sam. 8.
per totum and cap. 10
Amalekites, etc? Does he recover Ziglah, with his wives and 1. sam. 30.17 18.
children? does he bless him with the rarest of Jewels, so faithful a friend
as 1. sam 20.42.
Jonathan? But especially, Does he ponder the mercies of God, of adornation or
preservation, to his Church, his Sion, his people Israel, over whom he was
Prince? does the Arc return safe from the 2. sam. 6.
Philistines? is there a stone directed to the forehead of blaspemous 1. sam.
17.49
Goliab, the terror of v. 24.
Israel, (as Tamberlaine once to the Turk, and Tawbut to the French?) does he
see the Temple likely to go forward, by the large contributions of the Peers
and 1. chro. 29.8.9
people? does he see the willingness of his Subjects, to go up to the house
of the Lord? does he see, with his own eyes, and (as in my Text) his son
Solomon, on whom were all the eyes and hopes of all Israel sixth, the second
time He was invested once before. 1. King 38.39.
more solemnly and publickely, by the united hearts, votes and desires of all,
invested into his own Legal, Regal, Royal Throne? Oh in the experience of
these and all other his mercies, general and special; how is he vocally,
cordially, really, thankful! with his heart, tongue, mind, soul, spirit,
affections, blessing, lauding, praising, magnifying, extolling, glorifying the
great and glorious Name of Jehovah his God: acknowledging him his psalm. 18 1.
Rock, his refuge, his Asylum, his Sanctuary, his King, his God, his guide,
his leader, his Psalm. 23.1. and per totum*
shepeheard, his sure salvation; leading him to the pure pasture, spreading his
Table, Crowning him with mercy, protecting him in all perils, causing his lot
to fall in a fair ground, giving him a goodly heritage. He attributes nothing,
(like the proud, presumptuous, foolish, profane men of our age, who sacrifice
to their own Nets) either to his own sword and spear or to the valor of his
own men, the thousands of his Israel, the prowess of his Adiuo the Eznite
Eleazar the Ahobite Shammah the Hararite, Abishat, Benaiah, Asahell, and other
of David's worthies: 2. sam 23 equalizing Hector, Achilles, Hercules, Thesius,
Caesar, Pompey, etc or any amongst the heathens.
worthies, the policies of his Counselors; much less to that heathenish Idol
Te facimus fortuna deam caloque locamus.
Fortune, the Chymera of ignorance, and the addle egg of So crushed in fitters
by S. August. in his boks de Civitat. Dei, by Vives his co^mentator and
Lactantius in his Institutions.
Folly, nor to chance and good luck, those serpents bred in the brains of
unthankefull men, whereby Gods glory is stung and wounded: but (as tutoring
us) as the Rivers which come from the Sea, return to the Sea, from whence they
flow; and as the beams which come from the Sun, reflect back again from
the Earth up toward the Sun; as the clouds which are extract in their
uapours from the earth, being dissolved, fall again upon the Earth: so all the
mercies which David received, he did thankefully reflect them back again, to
the honor and glory of the giver; the Lord himself, the Mecenas of the
Church, the great Ezekiel. 36.25.26. Ier. 31.33. Zach 12.10.
Patron of all the Adwovsons of his gifts of Grace, unto the sons of grace.
Oh vade, and tu hac similiter; whosover thou art, high or low, that have
received thy tallents Math. 25.
from thy master, from thy maker, go, and do thou the like that David did:
bless that God who blessed thee, thou so shall be blessed (by the happiest
usury) as David was. Bless God, I say, as you should: do not (as too many
graceless godless men do) blaspheme him, as you should not.

CHAP. II. David prayseth God personally.
SEcondly, as discharging my next Bill: David blesses God; as Piously, so
Personally, in his own person* though a King, he is not ashamed to do his
homage, and fealty, and service to the King of Kings: even as some other
petty Kings (as once in See Stowes chronicle epitomized, pa. 44.
England; and in Persia, to Esth. chapter 1. v. 1
Assuerus; in Babylon, dan. 4.22.
to Nabuchadnezzar; in Greece, to Alexander) have yielded their tributarie
subjection to greater Kings, (as at this day to the great Turk, and the great
Mogull:) So David, as once that Saint In aurea Legenda, made by a man plumbei
cerebri, as one of their own notes.
Christopher, in the Legendarie Fable, will serve the greatest: he will here
in the Earth, as the Angels and Saints in heaven, revel. 4.10.
throw down his Crown and his Scepter before the Lamb: he will fall down,
and worship before the Lords footestoole. psalm. 95 6.
Though he have a heart like 2. sam. 17.10.
a Lion, yet he will bow like a reed, melt like wax, weep like a whipped
Child, bleat and cry out, like a forsaken Lamb, when for some sin to be
corrected, or physically prevented, he is under Gods Ferula, dieted with the
bread of affliction. Though he be as a Lion Rampant, when he is in the midst
of his and Gods enemies; yet he is couchant when he is before the Lord. So
again; though he be a wondrous wise man, an Oracle (as his Son Solomon, a
miracle) of wisdom, as an Angel of God, to discern cases and causes, as the
woman of 2. sam. 14 17
Tekoah told him: yet at the return of the Ark of God from the Philistines,
he is so overjoyed, that forgetting himself, or rapt beyond himself; in
zealous gratitude to God, wrapped in a Lynnen Ephod, as a Child before a Pipe, or
as a Morris Dancer (as Micholl thought) he daunced before it, withal his
might. But it was not in a vain, profane, promiscuous dance, as amongst us;
such as the worst of the De diversis saltationibus and tripudijs Ethnicorum.
Lege Iul. Pollucem libr. 4. Onomast. c. 13. c. 14. Atheneu^. lib. 1. c. 8. li.
14. c. 12 and libr. 4. c. 24. Syntaxeon artis, li. 12. c. 19. p. 207
heathens used, from whence we borrow it, and the best have Inter Patres,
Chrysostom. hom. ult. in Col. ho. 2. in Genesis hom. 49. in Math de filia Herod. et
Amb. l. 3. de virginis. Aug. contra Petil. c. 6. and in psalm. 32 inter
nostrates Petrus Martyr in locis. Viret. Instit. in praecep 7. Taffin of
amendment of life, li. 2. c. 18. inter ethnicos Cicer. pro Murena. erat. 25.
Seneca, Plat. Plutarch.
reproved: but it was before the Lord (as he told that ill egg of a worse Mali
corvi, mau^m ovu^, est in equis, est in filijs paterna virtus, and paternu^
virus
Crow, that mocking daughter of a persecuting Father) who had elected him, and
rejected Saul, and all his house. Thus punctual, thus personal, is David in
his services, his sacrifices: David is neither so proud, nor so profane, as
all the Moral men of our times, that cannot, will not, serve God themselves;
but if at all, by a Deputy: who, even at their full Tables (sometimes at their
rich and ryotous Naball-like feasts, as I have seen and observed both in
England and Ireland,) either gracelessely pretermit Grace, or saying (rather
then praying) of Grace as they say; using, abusing the creatures, without ever
sanctifying them more by Tit. 1.15.
Prayer then the Ox does his hay, the Horse his provender, or the Swine his
draffe or ackorns: sitting down and rising up, as genesis 25.34.
Esau did, when he ate his deere-bought broth, for which, his sold Birthright
was the shot, without ever blessing God, like a carnal careless wretch as
he was. Or if this duty, for form and fashion sake be performed, it is put
to a Schoole-boy, a young Son, a little Gyrle, as the mouth of the Table, to
speak to God for them, to intercede as their deputy: though the parents can
be content sometimes (to the robbing of Levy, and Mal. 3.8.
God in Levy,) to play the Parsons part, and to take tithes; yet their
Children, forsooth, must play the Vicars, to say Grace, and give thanks. Not
that I absolutely condemn it, as unlawful, for Children to be by degrees
trained to this task, when by Catechizing in the grounds of Religion, they
come to exceed Parrats, by understanding what they say: or that I deny, but
that at their own repasts, and meals, they are to be taught to give thanks;
even as to pray, when they rise and lie down, as Abell from genesis 4.4
Adam, Sem and Iaphet from genesis 8.20.
Noah, Isaac from genesis 22.7.8
Abraham, were taught how to sacrifice; Timothy taught from his Mother and 2 timothy 1.5. and 3. verse 15.
grandmother; as was Constantine Apud Eusebium in vita Constantini.
of his mother Hellen: Or I deny not, but that they, at the same time, the
same Table, may give thanks when their parents or tutors precede, and begin
first; then, I praesequar, they may well follow, as the little Cock-boat swimes
in the same stream, after the great Ship, and the little tantling Bell, that
rings sometimes after the great Bow-bels, in some Church, or Cathedral. But
for the Father to take all the burden from his own shoulders, and to lay it
on the Childs, (as to take the Saddle ftom a strong Stallion, and set it on a
young Colt;) to make his Child his Attorney for him in Gods service, as though
he were ashamed to do what David, our Savior Luke 9.16.
Christ, the Vt antea chapter 1 sect 1.
Apostles did, in their own persons: is not only a breach of the deuteronomy. 8. v.
10.
Commandment, that the greater shall bless the hebr. 7. v. 7.
lesser, as Melchisedech did genesis 14.19.
Abraham, and Jacob his genesis 49.
Son; but shows a dead or a profane heart and a maine, a vain contempt of
God.

So for another duty; Family Prayer, singing of Psalms, praising of God,
practiced by the 2 Samuel 6.20.
Saints, enjoined, (as the observation of some penal Statutes) by the
denuntion of a great and grievous Ier. 10. v. 25.
curse, an Anathema, as terrible as the Thunder or thunderbolt, which hangs
over that house and family where God is not invocated (even as the naked sword
of Dyonisius did hang over the head of that flattering Damocles; yea as the
cloud of fire and brimstone over Sodom and Gomorrah: as sure to fall one time
or other, (unless prevented by practical repentance,) as that flying book of
Zaec. 5. v. 1.2.3
vengeance shall fall, and has fallen, as histories and experience relate, upon
the He that reads the Theater of Gods judgments in 40. M Perk. of the
Government of the tongue, in fine. M. Knewstubs his abuses of Engl. M. Fox in
diverse passages, and his abridgeme^t of the ends of blaspemous persecutors,
Minerius, Ioh. de Roma, Eccius, Laton Bomel, Card. Cres. fol. 380. 382. 383
Lonicer. in his examples in 3. praecep. The histories of our time in 4. p. 319
320. 321. 322. 323. shall see gods heavy hand on blasphemers
persons and places, where God is blasphemed; even as sure, as the Chamber
called Jerusalem fell on the head of that Nicromanticall Sylvester, and as
Dagons house has now twice fallen on the heads of Idolatrous Philistines.) I
say, even this duty; how many either wholly, (unholily) pretermit it, or post
it off to their servants, prentices, Iourneymen, deputies, atturneys, they must
pray for them, the inferior must be the mouth of the superior, the man, must be
the tongue of his master, by reading or praying, or (as they call it) saying a
few prayers Morning and Evening: directly against that Apostolical Canon,
Hebr. 7. verse. 7. thus making an Historon proteron of all Religion. Others
again, are so proud or so profane that wanting the spirit of zach. 12.10 Romans
8. v. 26.
prayer, the Heart or Art to pray, they only desire others to pray for them:
some good man, or Preacher (as Pharaoh intreates Moses and Exodus 8.8. etc. 8.2^.
Aaron, Simon Magus requests Act. 8.24.
Peter) to pray, for them: but for themselves, they have joints (unlike the
Elepha^t. enim Rege^ adorant. genua submittunt. ceronas porrigu^, test. Plin.
l. 8. c. 1 Arist. lib. 9. c. 46. Albert. l. 8. tract. 5. c. 2. et Aelian. hist.
l. 13. c. 22. Hi aute^ profani, gennua non flectunt Psalm. 14. v. 4. An Ovidean,
or Virgilean fiction, or Pythagorean dream, as Master Perkins draws
Purgatories pedigree in his Problemes.
Elephant) that cannot bow; hearts like Gaddes of steel that cannot bend;
tongues, and speak not as Idols: the mute or dumb Devil is in them, (as in
some unpreaching Ministers*) they pray not for themselves, they will not, they
cannot. Others again more foolishly and preposterously, trust all to the
prayers, dirges, and suffrages of others when they are departed, to sing and
bring them out of their Europaean purgatory; indeed, real hell: as though they
hoped a Physicians physic should revive them after death. These are as
preposterous in their prayers, as those that think to satisfy for all their
usuries and extortions by alms, and elymosinarie works after their death, by
their executors. I would not be mistaken; I know its lawful to desire the
prayers of others; as Paul did of all the Col. 4.3. 1. These. 5.25. and 2 Thessalonians. 3.1.
Churches, as Ezeckiah did from 2. King 19.2.
Esaiah, as Esther desired the prayers of Est. 4.10.
Mardocheus, and the Jews; Daniell of his three Dan. 2.17.18
Companions, and so Luther, Calvin, Grineus; the Martyrs, Ridley, Latimer,
Bradley, entreat the mutual prayers of their friends in their zealous Letters.
I know also its lawful, laudable for noble men to have their Chaplains for
Preaching, Praying in their families: their Nathans, their Levites may be
employed, yet so, as high and low, great and small, every Individuum that will
be saved, must with David personally worship God; as the Scriptures injone
duties particularly, and Act. 2.22. Heb. 3.12. and 4. 1. Esa. 55.1. Psalm 2.10,
11. and 148.10, 11, 12.
personally.

CHAP. III. David prayseth God publicly.
THirdly, let it not pass our animadversion, that David does not only praise
his God religiously, piously, personally, but also publicly before all the
Congregation of Israel. He is not ashamed to serve that God before all Israel,
that in the sight of Israel and of the Sun, had so served his turns and needs;
saved and preserved him in his exigents and dangers by so many and several
means, improving his power, his justice, his peculiar and special providence
so often, for David's deliverances and his enemies destruction, (or at least
distractions) seeing God so marvellously, so miraculously fight for David, as
often before, in the days of Moses and Deborah, he fought for Israel, against
Exodus 17.11.
Amaleck, Moab and Judge. 5.20.
Iabin; for Constantine, Theodosius, Athanasius, and Chrysostom against the
Pagans and Passim apud Centuriatores, Magd. and Osiand. epitom.
Arrians: for England in the year Oh fortunate nimium cui militat ether, and
coniurati veniunt ad Classica venti.
88 for Rochell (as once for Jerusalem, in the days of Ezekiah) when strictly
besieged: for Grineus, against the plots of Faber Apud Manliu^ in suis
Calloquijs.
Stapulensis: for Luther, against that roaring Leo, that barking Apud
scriptores vitae Lutheri, and apud Sleidanum.
Eccius, and all the malignant fry of the Romish Synagogue. Now, as David's
preservations were public, so, proportionably, were his praises and
benedictions: as God honors David, so mutually and reciprocally, in the sight
and eye of all Israel, David honors God again: So did Moses the servant of the
Deuteronomy. 32. Deuteronomy. 33.
Lord, Ioshuah the son of Nun, advanced to be leaders of Josh. 24.1.
Israel; Samuel, 1. Sam. 3.20.
called to be the Lords chief 1. Sam. 12. per totum.
Prophet; Joseph, Gen 41.41.42
honored in the Court of Egypt; Mordocheus, in the Ester 6.11.
Persian, Daniel in the Babylonian Dan. 2.47, 48.
Court; Nehemiah, preferred to be the Nehem. 13. per totum.
Prince, Ezra to be the chief Scribe Ezra 11. and 12.
in Israel; Jacob, advanced from a poor Shepherd, to be a mighty man Genesis
32.9.
in means; Othniel, Judah, Iephte, and other religious Judges in Israel; Asa,
Josiah, Iehosaphat, Ezekiah, and other religious Kings in Israel: to omit
Constantine, so praised by In vita Constantini.
Eusebius; Theodosius, by In vita Theodosij.
Ambrose; Alphonsus of Aragon, by Panormitan In vita Alphonsi.
the Canonist, with all other religious Kings, Kesars, Tetrarches, Monarchs,
Princes, Peers, Legifers, Rulers, Governors recorded and renowned by the
unerring pen of the holy Ghost in Scripture, by Civil or Ecclesiastical
Historians in former or latter times. As they have received their Crowns,
dignities, diadems, rodds of magistracy, rule and superiority from Romans 13.1.
Tit. 3.1.
God, by whom Kings Prove. 8.5.
reign, and the poor are fetched from the dust, to sit with Psalm. 113.7, 8
Princes: so by their speeches, tongues, actions, wholesome laws established
and executed, their planting of religion, their supplanting of Idolatry, and
Idolaters, their discountenancing of sin and sinners, their gracing of the
sons of grace, the upright in the land (as outward demonstrations of their
inward inflamed thankful affections;) they have been ever studious to
improve, what honor, dignity, glory, authority, they have received from God,
even before the whole world to honor, glorify, dignifie, and extol that
great and glorious God with it again. This has been their mark, aim,
desire and endeavor, to magnify the grace, to propagate the glory of that God,
from whose free mercy, without their demerits, they have received their lives,
their honors, their tallents, their places, their graces: A Glass wherein all
Rulers may see their own faces. In which, as the best may have occasion to
rejoice, if they find their actions and affections to answer these recited, as
face answers face: so many Athisticall persecuting, Popish, profane, carnal,
careless, sleepie, secure Magistrates of the former, and in these present
evil times, may, in the consciousnesse of their guilts, seeing their spots,
hang down their heads, being ashamed (as the huge De magnitudine Elephantis.
Plin lib. 8. ca. 1. Arist. lib. 2 ca. 1. and lib. 3. cap. 9.
Elephant, that is sad when he reflecteth upon the hideous vastness of his own
bulk, in the clear waters,) chiefly such as even publicly fight against Act
5 39. Acts 7.51.
God, (as once the Nimrodian Genesis 11.3.
Giants) opposing and persecuting the Gospel and all Gospellers as they call
them; by their laws and edicts suppressing religion and the religious,
defacing, mangling, mingling, poisoning, with their own dreggs and druggs of
superstitious traditionarie vanities, toys, blasphemies (if not quite
abolishing) the pure and sincere service and worship of God; so wounding God in
his glory, his Saints, his servants, his Ministers, members, even with his
own weapons, these swords and rodds of authority, Fasces magistratus, apud
Livium, and Fanestellam.
which he has put into their hands. In the numbers and ranks of these, were
Ahab and Iesabell that persecuted 1 King. 19.2.
Elias, imprisoned 1. Kin. 22.26.
Michay, fed and maintained (as too many Popish Princes their whipping
Baalites, and fatt Abby-lubbers, since) at their own tables the Prophets of 1.
Kin. 18.19.
Baal: as also Jeroboam the son of Nebat, that caused Israel to 1. King. 14.9.
sin; Solomon, that by permission (if not approbation) so long as he was in
his adulterous and Idolatrous slumber, as too uxorious in pleasing his wives,
built Temples and Altars, for the Gods of the 1. King. 11.5, 6, 7, 8.
Sidonians, Ammonites, and Moabites, with other Idolatrous Kings of Judah and
Jerusalem. And such as these (omitting Nero, Commodus, Decius, Severus, Traian,
etc. and other bloody butchers of millions of See the Acts and Momuments, of
the Church epitomized, fol. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
martyrs, as Pagans that know not God) were Valens, Constans, Constantinus, and
other Arrian Hist. tripart. passim. and apud Eusebius and Socr.
Emperors, opposing by their swords the Dietie (as Arrius, Aerius, Eumonius,
Nestorius, Paulus, Samosatenus and other blasphemous De quibus omnibus, apud
August. and Epiphan. de haeres.
Heretics; some the Divinity some the humanity, some the will, some the two
natures, some the person, some the offices) of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ. And not to wade further then our own times, and times of our
forefathers: that French Henry the second, slain by tilting in midst of
jollities; with that Apostate of Navarre, who from a seemingly religious
Protestant turned (as another Julian) by the persuasion of the Duke of Guize,
and the Cardinal of Lorraine his brother, a professed See the French
Chronicles of Hen. 2. Also the Acts of the Church abridged, fol. 385.
Papist: that Duke de Maine, and the Guizian faction, that bound themselves by
a sacramental oath, to ruinate and root out the Protestants, whom
disgracefully they styled Lutherans and Hugenotes: that Duke d'Alva, who by
cruelty and treachery, so raging as an evening Wolf, in the low Countries,
by his bloody massacres; and Farnestius, that vowed to make his horse swim up
to the belly, in the blood of the Apud Sleidanum.
Lutherans: that John Miners, President of the Council of Aygues.
that so heartily and desiringly executed that Acts of the Church abridged,
fol. 203.
decree, writ (like Dracoes laws) with blood, which went out from the French
King, by the procurement of the Bishop of Aix, and other blood sucking
horseleeches, against those of Cabriers and Merindoll (as the decree of
Asuerus, against the Jews in Persia, by the means of Haman that cursed Est.
3.9.
Amalekite) whereupon the poor Merindolians, their wives and children, were as
poor sheep slaughtered pell mell, hunted into the woods as wild beasts, torn
and devoured by Mastives, fired out of some caves (into which they crept) like
the firing out of Foxes: with such barbarous butcheries, as have not been
heard of amongst Turks and Pagans. as also their succeeders (exceeders) in
bloud-thirstinesse, Gardner, bloody Bonner, Weston, Story, Hopton, Morgan,
Tonstall, Steward, who used, abused, not only Peter's keys of strictest
discipline, but (as once This Julius threw Peter's sword into Tyber, and took
Peter's sword for the wars.
Julius a Pope of theirs, and This Julian caused the young Polonian King to
break his faith with the Turk, by which he perished Knoll^ hist. of Turks.
Julian a Cardinal) even Peter's pretetended (usurped) sword, to smite
unlawfully. not for Christ, but against Christ, kicking against the Act. 9.6.
prick, persecuting and prosecuting him, with fire and fagots in his members
maliciously, as once the Pharisees (not ignorantly, as once 1 Timothy 1.13.
Paul) for five years together, in that quinquennium Mariae, bloody reign of
Queen Mary; effusing, in that short space, more Protestant blood (as is plain
by computation) then there has been for Religion, effused (unless for
Treason) Popish blood, these threescore years, in our Albion. I say these, and
all such as these (which might infinitely be enumerated) as birds of that
black, base, and bloody feather, Eagles, Crows, Vultures, Harpies, flocking
from Rome, to be drunk and drunk again with the blood of the Rev. 17.6.
Saints, (as drunk before with the cup of the Whores Rev. 14.8.
fornications:) I say, did such as these give any demonstration, that they were
ever possessed with David's heart, David's spirit, affection, resolution, to
advance publicly before men, the glory of that God who had advanced them? By
the best retaliation to stir up Gods glory, who had set up them; to honor
God by their graces, who had honored them by their great and eminent places?
Nay verily. If persecuting of Christ, in the Church his body, be the praising
and lauding of Christ their head: if (as did once persecuting Acts 22.3. and
Gal. 1, 13.14. and Acts 26.11.
Paul their predecessor in blind bloody zeal) the causing of the Saints to
Acts 26.11.
blaspheme, as much as they could by their exquisite tragical tortures; If this
be in the sight of the sun, and of all Israel with David to bless God, then
I shall unweave what I have woven, recant and recall these apostulatorie
taxations. And if these things were not plain and undeniable, they might hold
them (as we hold their Popish Bulls, excommunications and execrations) even See
the book in octoavo, called Brut. Fulme^.
Bruta fulmina, as mere squibs and paper bullets: yea, they might account
these imputations (as I hold their Masses, Trentalls, Dirges, Purgatories,
Limboes, but chiefly their satanicall accusations of our doctrine and Doctors,
See their railings in G^ffords Calvin. Turcism. in Kellisons survay in
Feuerdentius upon Jude; their hellish slanders in Coccius Bolsterus writing the
life of Luther: chiefly their calumnies, laid down in our Wallets Tetrast.
Papismi, and answered in D. White his way to the true Church in fine libri; and
by his apologizing brother (since his lamented death) al. o, in fine libr.
Luther, Melancton martyr, and other our famous English and Belgic lights)
mere toys, tricks, chimeraes, fictions, and fables.

SECT. II. David's profession, animating and directing professors and profession.
But that which I further urge, is this: That David publicly and purposely
prayseth God. I say, professedly, that I may from David's practice and
president, honor this word and term of Profession, which is almost verbum
obsoletum, worn out of request, banished (like zeal and conscience, to whom
it professes friendship and affinity) well nigh out of the country, (as was
once Themistocles, and some well-deserving Roman Patriots) as it were by
ostracisme; or at least entertained and welcomed of most, as water into a
ship, or rain in harvest: I am sure strangely and sternely entertained;
examined (like some outlandish disguised man) whether it be the kings friend or
no. Others whoot at it as at an Owl or an Arabian Monster: others flying from
it, (as some roving Orators, from their Theames and Texts) as though the very
plague were in it, or on it; standing aloof from it, as Jobs friends from Job
2.13.
Job, as though it were so distressed and persecuted, they might get much
prejudice by their acquaintance with it. Well, what strange conceits and
imaginations soever we have of this profession; the term of a Professor being
to every moralist and profaner amongst us distasteful (as was the term of a
Galilean to Apostate Julian; of a Christian or Cruciferian, to the Pagans; of
an Orthodoxe, to the Arrians: of a Protestant, held a Lutheran, a Hugenote, a
heretic, to a professed Papist; of a disciplinarean Brownist, or Anabaptist,
to a conformitant; of a Calvinist, to a ridged Such as was Hunnius, Huberus,
Eccardus: in Thessibus and in Fasciculo controversiarum, and other such hot
spurrs, who more rail upon and revile the Calvinists, as they term them, then
they do the very Papists or the Turks. Psalm. 1.9. per totum.
Lutheran.) yet nevertheless David is a Professor; herein my Text, he
professes and proclaims by his tongue and act, his words and practice, the
service and worship of the true God: he Heralds and trumpets out the praise of
Jehovah, in the eye and ear of all Israel. The like profession he makes
elsewhere, chiefly in the 116. Psalm. v. 16. Oh Lord, says he, truly I am thy
servant I am thy servant; with an ingemination, and resolution not to flinch
from that he had said, but to stand to it to the very death: with a grateful
acknowledgement of some honorable favors he had received from the best
Master; Thou have loosed my bonds, freed me as a bird from the snares of these
bloody hunters, which by their plots and stratagems thought and sought to
entrap me. Yea what are all the Psalms, penned and published to be sung by
Asaph and the chief Musicians, before the thousands of Israel in the great
Congregation; but loud proclamations to the Church, to the whole world, to
present and after times, of that near and dear necessitude, union and
relation betwixt his God and him: he receiving the influence of mercies from
God, he returning tribute of praises again unto God? Chiefly in the 119.
Psalm, which of all the rest, for matter, manner, method, quantity, quality,
is as the Eagle or Phoenix amongst The Commentators exceedingly extol that
Psalm. both for the matter, David's love to the word; and manner, there being in
it as many parts as letters in the Hebrew Alphabet, every part being an
octonary, consisting of eight verses, begins with an Hebrew letter. Observatio
Lorini Musculi, Molleri, Strigellij, and Cowperi scoti.
Birds, as the Sun amongst Stars, or Lillies amongst Flowers; in every
line, verse, staff in a wondrous elegancie, and emphaticall expression of
himself, he professes and protests his love to the Word, to the Law, to the
Precepts, the Judgments, the Statutes, the Testimonies, the Commandments of
his Lord. which as in his judgment, he prizeth, and in his affections he loves
above thousands of gold and Ps. 119.127. and 72.
silver; they being to him (as they ought to be to us) sweeter then the honny
and the honny verse. 103.
comb: so he resolves to stick and stand to them, (as the Martyrs did in the
primitive, and our modern times) notwithstanding all the might and malignitie
of his persecuting verse. 95.85.16.23.
enemies. Yea and he will not only meditate of them verse. 12, 15.
privately, for his own edification and consolation, in the soliloquies of his
own verse. 14.24.47.54.
soul, as the chief balm and oil to all his verse, 143.162.165.
affections: but even before Kings and Princes, and the great Potentates of the
earth, he will (what we will not, list not or dare not do before the meanest
vulgars and plebeans) speak of them, and not be verse. 46.
ashamed. Oh David (as bullets of one metal, cast in the same mould) was
possessed with the same spirit as the type, that was in Christ his antitype,
who witnessed a good profession before 1. Tim. 6.13.
Pontius Pilate: David's beams came from that Sun, his sparks from that
fire, his streams from that fountain which was in his Savior, he was as
bold as a Lion, to testify his love, fealty, and obedience to the Lion of the
Tribe of Revel. 5.5.
Judah: with Romans 1.1. and Phil. 1.1.
Paul, 2. Pet. 1.1.
Peter, Jude, verse. 1.
Jude, Luke 2.29. See my Sermons extant on this Text, called Simeons dying Song.
Simeon he professes his Master; he shows as it were his liverie, coat,
and cognizance, and pinneth the very badge of his profession upon his sleeve,
to be viewed of God, men, and Angels. He cares not who view and review him, in
cute and in cord, in the inward and outward man, turning his very inside
outward; which no hypocrite nor formalist can endure. And herein David's regular
practice, blames and shames our irregularities. There needs no other means to
make a foul woman blush, that is conceited of her beauty, but to set a fair
woman (indeed) besides her: nor to make a selfe-conceited fool keep silence
(as Roscius did in Catoes company) but to bring a solid wise man into the
presence. I need not redargue our times: David's profession confutes and
confounds our claudications, in which we are so heteroclite and deficient, for
matter and manner, in what David both professed and practiced as

First, David here is not indifferent what Religion he is of; whether he serve
the gods of the Ammonites, Moabites, and Philistines, or the true Iehovab:
whether Baall, Astaroth, Dagon, or the true God: whether he praise the Gods of
gold and of silver, as the Pagans did, even shrines, Crucifixes and Images, as
our Papists do; or the living God: But he resolves with Josh. 24.15. See M.
Bernard on this text called Ioshuahs resolution prefixed before his Catechism.
Joshua, that he and his house, he and his heart will serve the Lord. He
knows there is but one Vna via, veritas, and vita.
way, one truth, one life, one God, as but one Sun, one soul in man, and one
Phoenix in the world.

Secondly, David keeps not his Religion to himself, in hugger mugger, as a
miser keeps his gold from the sight and light of the Sun: as the great
Indian Magnitudine canum secundum Melan. li 3. c. 4. eadem Solinus: ^ Isidor.
li. 12. c. 2. Vicent. lib. 20. c. 134. dubitat tamen Albert. lib. 26. at
asserit Aelianus etiam li. 3. c. 4.
Ants, and Gryphons are said to keep some Mines, that none can discover them:
as many Key-cold carnalists, or lukewarm nevtrall Laediceans, and
Machiavillian pollititians amongst us, that lurk so close as Serpents under
the green grass, that none can discover them, whether they be Ephramites or
Gileadites, Israelites, or Canaanites, hot or cold, Protestants, Papists or
nevters; hanging as feathers in the air as poyzed in equal scales, fit to be
cast with the least sway of the Times up or down: to be fish or flesh; to cast
their old sloughes and Bills, with the Theologice applicat Aug. ser. 4. ad
fratres (si sint Augustini) and Chrysostom. hom. 34. in Math. tom. 2.
Serpent and the Mistice haec etiam applicat August. in ps. 66 and in psalm. 102.
Eagle, to peerenize and pinibletonize, turning their old Coats and notes,
their Tones and Tunes with the Times: mere Hermophradites, changing readily
their unresolved Religion, as the Apud Aelian. lib. 13. c. 12. Mas Lepus
praegnans suit.
Hare or Hyena, change their Sex: mere vertumnian weather-cockes.

Thirdly, David here is not ashamed to praise God publikly: He hangs not down
his head, nor blusheth at the business, as many shame-faced (shame Grace) men
of our generation, that are not any whit ashamed of the service of sin and
Satan: their Oaths are heard as loud as thunder, they breath or bellow out
curses and execrations in their anger as Dragons spit fire. In their drunknesse
they are not ashamed to be seen toying as Apes, or mad as Tigers, spewing as
Dogs, or as Crows that have eat Nux vomica; reeling in the streets, as
Horses that have the staggers, Calves that have the sturdy, yea perhaps,
wallowing as Swine in the channel etc. Yet these men, are ashamed to serve
God, ashamed to be heard, or overheard (in which predicament too, are all our
Civil, Moral honest men, till Grace come with power to their hearts) singing
a Psalm, or reading a Chapter in their families; but above all to weep at a
Sermon, which the penitent Jews did so plentifully, so publicly in the days
of the Judges. 2.4.5.6.7.
Judges of Ezra. 10. v. 1.
Ezra, and of 1. Sam. 7. v. 4.5.6.7.
Samuel.

But fourthly, David though he were once mocked before by his Sawlite 2. Sam.
6.20.
wife Michell for his profession, yet he desists not here for that: he is
neither daunted nor discouraged though then distasted; nay he was and is more
more zealous, according to the nature of true Grace, to rise like the
Palm Tree, the more Nititur in podus sic Arist. 7. problem. and Plutarchus in
septimo Symposaicorum, and Aulus Gellius noct. atticis lib. 3. c. 6.
suppressed; to burn and break out like the fire, the more pressed Quo magis
premitur eo maegis aestuat ignis.
down; to spread like the Camomile, the more spurnd and trod: as it was with
the Apostles and Disciples, the more Pharisaicall beating and threating they
were restrained, the more by the spirit they were constrained to preach Act. 5.
v. 17.18.19.20.21. sic verse. 28.29.
Christ. As in the primitive times, the more that suffered by the Pagans and
Arrians, the more like spiritual Soldiers, stood in their ranks, and doubled
their fyles, as their fellows Apud Eusebius. and Centuriatores passim, sic
sanguis Martyrum seme^ Ecclesiae.
fell. And though they were mocked and branded with the nicke-names of
Cruciferians, in derision of Christ: (for Hell and irreligion had not then
hatched the names of Puritanes and precisians) yet, (though they met not in the
nights, as one well Lorinus Comment. in cap. 2. Actuum.
notes, to avoyde scandal, and construction) they desisted not either for
bloody or unbloudie persecution by tongue, or sword, to meet in their Preter
Tertull. in apolli. sub finem de Corona Militis, asserunt Eusebius. libr. 3 cap.
26 Orosius libr. 7. cap. 12. Nicephorus lib. 3. cap. 17. Cyprian. de Orat Dom.
Cyrillus Catechismus 6. Imo Plinius Secundus libr. 10. Epist. 97. ad Traianum.
Temples early in the morning, even in Tertullians time, and before. Oh
where is this zeal, courage profession, in the milkesoppes and mole-harted
Christians of our Time; who having by the Ministry and the spirit, sometimes
some good sparks kindled in them, the least disgraceful word from a Father, a
Mother, a brother, a husband, a Naball, a neighbor, a nebulo, quenches all
again? As Snailes they pluck in their heads again in the least storm of
opposition: they look back again with Lots Luke. 17.32.
wife, and return again to the fleshpots of Exodus 16.3.
Egypt, to open professed profaneness in the least let and disturbance they
have to the heavenly Canaan.

Oh that we could be heated with David's fires, to profess and practice every
man in his place as David did. Oh even this outward profession, if in
sincerity (else its Pharisaicall and double Simulata sa^ctitas, duplex
iniquitas.
iniquity) what glory would it bring to Math. 5.16.
God? what an adamant to draw on the weak? what a real confutation of the 1.
Pet. 3.16.
wicked? what a gagg and muzzle to the mouths of 1. Pet. 2.15.
blasphemers? what an argument of the fire of Psalm. 116.10. and To. 10. v. 10.
faith and inward Grace, if it would show it self thus in outward heats and
smoakes? whereas the want of this heat outwardly, shows our hearts but dead
coals. Yea joining profession and practice together, leaves and fruits, words
and works (else our estate were no better then Cains, Saul's Herod's Judas his,
See Doctor Wakemans sermon called the true professor.
or Demas his) we should inwardly rejoice in life here with Romans 8.
Paul, have more peace in death with 2. King. 20.3.4.
Ezekiah, and Nehem. 13.
Nehemiah, and in judgment Mark. 8.38.
Christ would not be ashamed of us, no more then we here of him.

CHAP. IIII.
SECT. I. David prayseth God Primarily.
Fourthly, David does not only thus Piously, Personally, Publickely bless
God; but Primarily* he begins himself to lead this heavenly dance, and by
example and his authority, (to unite these two in one) provokingly and
procuratorily, he excites and stirs up others; even the whole Congregation to
do the like, to move after his religious motion: he (as a pattern still to
all zealous Magistrates, faithful and fruitful Ministers) like unto the
Gallus vigilantis Magistratus typus apud Rensner. et Alciatum in suis emblem
ac, etiam Episcopi: apud Maiolum in diebus canicularib. col. 6. page 210.
Cock, by the clapping of his own wings, first awakens and stirs up De
Gallo haec vid. apud Plin. l. 10. c. 22. and apud Albert. libr. 23. Litera, G.
himself from sleep, saying, Awake Lute and Psalm. 108. v. 2
Harp, awake my Heart, awake my Tongue, my Glory: I my self will awake right
early, etc. And then by his Crowing, his Heraulding, Trumpetting and
proclayming the mercies of God; he awakens Psalm. 32.5.6.
others, as here and in several Psalms, Come ye Children says he, hearken
ye unto Psalm 66.16.
me, and I will tell you what God has done for my Soul: as Moses told Iethro
his Father in-law, what God has done for Exodus 18.8
Israel in their eduction out of Egypt, and preservation in the red Sea. Thus
ought we that are public persons to have heat in our selves, and to inflame
others; to have salt in our Math. 5.13.
selves, and to season others; to have light in our verse. 14. ibid.
selves, and to lighten others; to be as Candles on the Tables, as Beacons on
a Hill, to illuminate the Countries where we preach, chiefly the Places,
Parishes, Houses in which we live; to shine to verse. 15.
others as stars in a dark night, as Lots in Genesis 19.7. 2. Pet. 2. v. 17
Sodom, as Dan 4.8.9
Daniels amongst Babylonians, as Jobs amongst the Job. 1.8.
Vzzites, as Abraham's amongst the Gen 23.6
Hevites, as Isaacs amongst the Genesis 26.28.
Philistines. We must be as the Northern Pole to the Seaman, as the Card and
Compass to the Mariner: yea, as the Steare-men in Ships, as Sentinels amongst
an Army, to give aim to the rest, and to have an eye over all, and every one
of those that depend on our charge; as a father over every Child old and
young; a Captain over every Soldier, trained and untrayned; a Schoolmasters
over every scholar, apt or unapt; as a good Bonus magistratus pastor populi,
ut olim, Homerus de Agamemnine: frugi pastor vt Suetonius de Tiberio: plura
autem de officio Patris, praeceptoris, magistratus, vide apud Alstedium part.
2. page 711. 721 732. in suae Theologia naturali.
Shepherd over every sheep weak, and strong, Rams, and Lambs: not
willing that any should perish by the craft of the Fox, or their own
default, in eating Rot-grasse; yea, we should be as the loving De amore
gallinae circa pullos vide Glossam in Math. 23. v. 37. Arist. Palludiu^ and
Berchoriu^ reductorij, libr. 7 page 202.
Hen, who having a natural storge to every chick, both fights for it against
the Hawke and Kyte, and clockes it, with the whole brood, after her.

Thus David stirs up all and every man of the Congregation, from the heads
and the elders to the youngest and meanest, to bless God; as he often Psalm.
134.135.147.149.150. chiefly 148. per totum.
excites in the Psalms He would have high and low, young men and maids,
old-men and babes, all and every one to perform this task; yea, the Creatures
animate, inanimate, sensitive, vegetative, celestial, terrestrial, to join
together with all the servants of the Lord, to praise the Name of the Lord. And
sure as the Roman Scipios, the Carthagenian Haniball, the Greek Meltiades,
and of latter times, the Turkish Bashawes and other valiant Generals; by their
Orations and exquisite speeches of encouragement, (often viewing and ryding
through their Armies themselves, as did that resolute French Henry the Sea the
book of his wars in 4. extant in English.
4. of famous memory, Charles the Paulus Iovius and Thuanus de Carolo Quinto.
5. Henry the 7. of See his exact history in folio, pend by our English Tully
Sir Frances Bacon.
England, with other vigilant and valiant worthies) put vigor and courage in
their Armies, vivacitie and spirit in the feeblest soldier, and according to
the policies of war, by sounds of Trumpets and Shalmes, beating of Drums,
and other Martial instruments sought to inkindle sparks of valor, even in
those that were as natural Cowards as that Clineas, or Dametas in the Arcadia:
So a good and godly Superior by his expostulations, as once Nehem. 13. v,
17.18.25.26.
Nehemiah, Ezra 8.17. Nehem. 8.4.5.
Ezra, and that Judges. 2. ver. 3.4.5.
Angel that was sent from Gilgall to the Jews: 2. by his exhortations, as
Josh. 24. per totum.
Joshua, and 2. Chro. 20. v. 15.
Iehosaphat to the Israelites: 3. by his provocations and excitings, as David
here, and often elsewhere, ought to stir up all and every one of their
depending inferiors, to fight the Lords battles, not to yield cowardly to
sin and satan; to march valiantly, like 2. King. 9.20.
Iehu: to use dexterously all the parts of that spiritual complete furniture,
prescribed by the Ephesians. 6.13.
Apostle: to go forth against that triple Cerberus, the alluring flesh,
deceaving world, deceitefull Devil; daily armed, as David against 1. Sam. 17.
v. 45.
Goliath, Abraham against the five Genesis 14. v. 14.19.
Kings, Ioshuah against Exodus 17. v. 9.10.11.
Amalek, with the power of the might of God Almighty* and when we have got
the least victory, to be unfainedly thankful as were the Israelites in the
days of ibid. v. 15.16. and Exodus 15. per totum.
Moses, Judge. c. 5. per totum.
Deborah, 1. Sam. 11.15. cum Isralitis.
Saul, 2. Sam. 6.5.
David, In apocryphis Holoferne occiso.
Iudeth, to the Lord of hosts, the God of battles; testifying this
thankfulness in our words, works, lives and loves, as David's Congregation
testified theirs in my Text, by blessing God, and by offering Sacrifices and
oblations.

SECTIO. II. Application of the premises to Magistrates, Ministers, and
Masters of Families,
IN which duties, as we prescribe and persuade them, so we must precede in
practice: Kings in their Courts, Magistrates in Cities and Corporations, Bishops
in their Diocesses, Ministers in their Churches, Cures and charges, Masters,
Mistresses and Dames in their houses, and families; must go before, as the
greatest male Euntes, velnatantes in Cypru^, and in Corcyram fortissimi
praecedu^t secu^du^ plin. li 8. not. hist. c. 32 Solix. 21. and Aelian. li. 5.
c 56
Dear before the Heard; as the bel-weather before the flock; as the
courageous Captain before the Soldiers: giving the first onset. The superior
in every place, in every case which concerns Gods glory, the spiritual,
corporeal, public, politic or private good of any; must say to the
Governed, as Abimelecke in another Judges. 9. verse. 49.
sense, As you see me do so do you: and that Apostle of the Gentiles, Estote
imitatores, Be ye followers of me, as I of Christ We in the Church, you in
the Commonwealth, and family, in every duty, Moral and Theological, must
set a good pattern, write a good copy, draw a fair sample to those that are
under us, even in our own particulars, for their writing, imitating, and
following: Yea, we must also lend them pens, plucked (like the quils of
Turkeys and Porcupins,) even out of our own wings; we must by our right lines,
rule their books, and by our right lives, lead their hands; yea, their hearts:
we must lend them also working silks, extracted like the silke-wormes De hac
Bombice vel ver^t Indico, multa Albertus libr. animal. 26. and Vicent. lib. 20.
cap. 138. pracipue quae retulis Vincent. c. 67. prater Basilium in exem. hom.
8. applicat Ambrosius pie and Theologice Laemeron. l. 5. cap. 23.
clew, out of the bowels of our practice: we must excite, exhort them by our
word; but chiefly allure or lare them by our works: draw them, though
iron-hearted, by the De vi and us^ Magnetis nigra, habes apud Plin. lib. 6.
hist. c. 22. apud Vicent. nati. li 8. cap. 2 and apud August. de Civit. Dei li.
21. c. 4 etc. ut magnes: sic magnus.
adamant of our practice, to every duty commanded in the word, commended by
the practice of the Saints, as David here by speaking, as an Orator pleades,
but by his example, as an exorator, prevails with the whole Congregation to
bless the Lord. We in the Ministry, as we are called lights (as Christ
called his Math. 5.14
Disciples, and as the Jews called John the Lucerna ardens, etc. vide apud
Pontanum in Bibliotheca concionum and apud Bosquier. in Marcum, c. 6. v 20. in
his echo concionum in initio de laudibus Iohannis.
Baptist, and the primitive Orbis terrarum Doctor, oculus Ecclesia, and atlas
fidei dictus ab antiquis: ut August. alius mallens haereticorum, etc. cum alijs.
times, Athanasius) so we must by our lives and learning (like those lights
that are hung up in some tradesmens shoppes, which inlighten those without
doors, as well as the journeymen and prentices within) both have light within
our selves, and shine to others. We must be like those lights or lanthornes,
hung out in some Havens in a dark night, to give the Mariners aim, (every
passenger over the Mundus mare, Christiani viateres (ut cursores in cursu)
Ecclesia navicula: de quibus eleganter alludu^t, Pontan. tom 3. Bibl. Gord. in
postill. Dom. 4. post Epiph. praecipue. Hugo de Sancto Vict. in postillis,
part. 1. p. 297. and 359. cum alijs.
Sea of this world,) how to steare from the rocks of sin, and to come safe
to the port of Grace: you in the Magistracy, and you masters (petty Kings to
rule, Priests to pray, and to sacrifice praises, Prophets to instruct in your
Rev 1.6. vid. expositionem loci apud. August. de Civit. Dei, lib. 20 cap. 10.
families; as Divinity rightly terms De spiritualibus hostijs nostris, Id.
August. passim, praecipue Sermon. 152. de Tempore, and in quest. vet. et. nov.
Test. q. 112. Lege Bachmad. in qu. Theol. Centur. 1. quast. 57. page 136.137.
sint ne omnes Christian. Sacerdotes.
you.) You, I say, must be like the first moving wheel in a Clock rightly
ordered, after whose motion the rest of the depending wheels move right or
wrong, true or false, regularly or irregularly. Which particulars to press a
little further, since we have brought the point to this perfection already,
aiming at a perfecter peryod; I offer to our considerations only these specials.

1 What honor or dishonor we may do unto God.

2 What good or what evil to the souls of the people.

3 What credit or discredit we reap with men.

4 What peace or terror we bring to our own souls.

5 What blessings or what judgments from God, upon our selves or seed, as we
are rightly tuned with the hand of grace, or untuned by corruption; rightly
affected, with David's heart and spirit, to do as David did; or infected or
leavened so with the world and her ways, that David's duties are posted off,
and slighted, or pretermitted, as though they nothing concerned us, in these
secure and sinful times.

To give you these as several pills, or as simples compounded together
(perhaps, as physically) I would have this seriously pondered: first, That the
common people move after our motion, that are the heads; insist in our steps,
and write after our copies, whether right or wrong, in which, it stands us in
hand to look to our selves, and to our station, which way we draw or incline;
because, as generally we lead millions after us, either to victory, as David
led his men in the recoverie of 1. Sam. 30.17, 18, 19, 20.
Ziglah, and Abraham his house-trayned-servant-souldiers, in the rescue of Genesis
14.16.
Lot: or else (as 2. Sam. 20.1.
Sheba, 2. Sam 18.7.
Absalom, our once Northren Earls of Westmerland and Northumberland, rebelling
anno 12. Elizah.
Earls Anno 1 Maria, Ian. 25.
Wyat, Drury, Conspiracy in Norffolk, anno 12. Eliz. de quibus omnibus, vide
apud Hall, Hollinshed, Speed in Chron. and in libre dicto. Anglorum praelia.
Jack Straw, Tyler, and other Traitors) we lead the common people as deluded
followers, even to their slaughters, as beasts to be butchered. We are like
great Allusio Geminiani in sua summa exempl. and similitudinu^.
pillars, or great stones in great columns: if we fall, we bring down and
ruinate a great number of pibble stones, common stones, coble stones, with all
the fillings of lime and mortar. We are as great Cedars of Libanon, or the
great Oaks of Zach. 11.2.
Bashan: if we be blown down, oh how many low shrubs, what a piteous deal
of rubbish and under wood do we shiver and crush and spoil all to fitters!
We are as guides to an army, through deserts and thickets: if we go wrong,
how many disperse and scatter? how many fall by thirst and famine, or the
jaws of wild beasts? If Cato compared the common people of Rome to Apud
Plutarchum.
sheep, who if once one break out and leap wrong, all the rest follow (as in
the Kentish rebellion, after Jack Straw and Tyler; in the Southern, once after
Who called himself the poor man's protector, slain in Bow church in London.
vid. in Chron.
William Longbeard; in the Scythian, after Tamberlaine See the book extant in 4
to, of the life of Tamberlaine.
; in the Sarazen, after Mahomet, when they once turned thieves and pirates: as
in the bloody rustic Belgic wars Vide apud Calvinum and Bullingerii contrae
Anabaptist. See the book called Bellum Rusticanum: but chiefly of the issues
and effects of these Rusticks, read the second volumne of Simon Maiolus, de
dieb. canicular. tom 3. coll. 3. page 467, etc. Also read the history of John
of Leiden, in the modern Histories, exta^t in fol translated out of Du
Verdiers, Sansovino, and others.
after these phantasticks, John of Leyden and Knapperdolim) I say, if one
common man have power sometimes over a multitude, to draw together such ryotous
routs as we have read: one Scythian Shepherd to many shepherds one Of the
original and impostures of Mahomet, besides Bodin, Voleteran, and Arab N^b in
confutat Aleor. read chiefly the preface before the Alcoran, in the Italian
edition, with our painful Purchase in his pilgrimage, lib. 3. c. 3. page 199,
120.
Impostor by the help of one Monk, so many millions; one Simon Magus to
poison with his doctrine, Act. 8.9. one Demetrius to disturb by his faction,
even great and populous cities, Act. 9.24. what power then is there in public
persons to lead virtuously to heaven, or vitiously to hell, so many souls,
as some Popes have done?

Besides, when I consider how much good has been done sometime by one private
man, or woman; as one Philip, Ioh. 1.45, 46. by one exhortation, wins Nathanael
to Christ's acquaintance: one Andrew calls his brother Peter to Christ, Ioh.
1.40, 41. one Samaritan woman brings the whole city to hear and see Christ,
and so to believe in Christ, Ioh 4.28, 29. one little silly damsel, 2. Kin.
5.3. persuades her Master Naaman to seek Elisha the Prophet of Israel, whereby
he is healed both of his corporeal and spiritual Leprosy: one Ethiopian
Eunuch (if Histories be Brevitatis causa, vide authors, citatos per Lorinum
Comment in Act. Apost. c. 8. page 390. in folio.
true) preaching and planting the Gospel in Ethiopia: one Paul, the Apostle of
the Gal. 2.7.
Gentiles, planting the Gospel amongst the Romans, the Corinthians, the
Thessalonians, the Ephesians, the Philippians, the Macedonians, Achaians,
Galathians, the Collossians and diverse other 2. Cor. 10.16.
regions, even from Jerusalem to Illyricum: one John founding most of those
Asian Churches of Smyrna, Pergamus, Thiatyra, etc (which are now, by their
heresies in doctrine, corruption in life, pride, ambition and emulation of
their De hu^ passim Osiand. in epitom Centuriatorum Magdeb.
Teachers, given up to the bodily and spiritual power of Mahumetisme:) one
Peter converting and building up so many thousand Jews, dispersed in Asia,
Pontus, Bithinia, 1. Pet. 1.1, 2.^
Cappadocia, etc. one Thomas, planting the Gospel in India: one Matthew in
Egypt, and in Ethiopia: one Mark in Mentz, and Trevers: one Joseph of
Arimathea, or, as Niceph. hist. ecclesiast. lib. 2. cap. 4.
Nicephorus thinks, one Simon Zelotes in this our Great Britain, even before
the times of Lucius or Elutherius; as others Of the lives, deaths, graces and
several places, where the Apostles, Evangelists and Disciples dispersed the
Gospel, read various authors, recited by Aresius, in locis, tit. de Cruce, de
Evangelio, de persecutione Ecclesiae, etc. chiefly in Lorinus, in his comment
on the Acts, ca. 1. page 40. 42, 43, 44. 45, 46, 47.
elsewhere. One man the means of the conversion of whole households, as Peter
converting the household of Cornelius, Act. 10.44. Paul the household of the
Philippick Iaylor, Act. 16.31, 32, 33, etc. of 1. Cor. 1.14, 16.
Crispus, Stephanas, and the rest: yea, one man by one Sermon the means of the
conversion of some thousands, Acts 2.37, 38, etc. Yea when I consider, how much
good one man's endeavors has done in the Church, in suppressing and supplanting
Idolatries and Idolaters, heresies and heretics, either by the authority of
the sword, as did Constantine, Theodosius, and other Christian Emperors in
their time; or by the power of the word, as Athanasius did the Arrians,
Augustine the Called malleus hareticorum, the hammer of heretics.
Manichees and Pelagians: Epiphanius the Nestorians, Eutichians, and the rest
of that hellish rabble: as James the Apostle is said to confute Philetus and
Apud Abdiam, in eius vita.
Hemeneus: John, Appolonius, Apud Lorinuni, en Dorithee, locis ^itati^.
Tyaneus (besides what Peter by his Apostolical authority did against Simon
Magus, and Paul against Elymas the sorcerer; recorded by Ecclesiastical Simon
as a second learu^, attempting to fly, at the prayer of S Peter fell, and broke
his neck, as is testified by Irenaeus, lib. 1. cap. ac. by Tertull. in Apologes
c. 13 Cyrill. Cateches. 6. by Eusebius. hist. lib. 12. cap. 13. yea by Sueton. in
Nerome, cap. 12. by Lucian in Philopseud. by Dio, and other heathens.
writers.) Yea, when I ponder how one man, even a private man, as that Waldo or
De istis Waldensib. Aeneas Sylv. hist. Bok. et Concilium Toletan. an. dom. 355.
Waldus of Lions, by reading the Scriptures coming to the knowledge of the
truth, catechizing and instructing, not only his own family, but even his
neighbors (as Chrysostom counsels, according to the best use of his
tallent: by this means propagated the Gospel through the whole Realm of
France. Oh when I seriously think, that one man may be the organ and
instrument of another, though even a lay man, as S. James tells us: Oh, think
I again, what good might be planted, what sin rooted out and supplanted! how
much might God be glorified, the Church increased, Satan's synagogue ruinated?
Were many lay men, but chiefly many Ecclesiastical men, learned men, great
men, public men sanctified with this spreading grace, and seasoned with the
salt of the Sanctuary.

SECTIO III. The blessing or bane of inferiors, the piety or profaneness of
the superiors.
MOreover, when I consider, how much mischief sometimes one man has brought to
the Church: one Fax and Fex Ecclesia.
Nestorius, being the firebrand of the world: one Arrius, so spreading his
damnable Arrianisme, that in S. Ieromes time, the whole world groaned, that she
was an Totus mundus conquestus est, sefactum esse Arrianum.
Arrian: one Nicholas, so far spreading his impure Factum eius ut recitatur,
excusatur a Clemente Alexand. stromat. 3. c. 15. ab Eusebius. lib. 3. c. 23. a
Theodor. de Fab. Graecor. and a Neceph. l. 3. c. 15. attamen ab eo multi impuri
Nicolaitae, de quibus, and contra quos Iren. lib 1. cap. 27. Epiph har. 15.
Tertull. de prescrip. cap. 46. Hilar. can. 25. in Matthew Hieron. epist 1. et 48.
Nicholaitinisme: Eutiches, his Eutichisme: Manes, his Manichisme: Mahomet, his
Mahumetisme, as in latter times that smoothe and strict Arminius, his Condemned
by the late Synod at Dort, by our Aims, and the learned French Moulins,
confuted.
Arminianisme, etc. When I consider how one Boniface, by taking to himself
that proud title of Universal Bishop (as they say, the voice from heaven Hodie
venenum effusum est in ecclesia, vid. Morneum de progressu papatus.
affirmed) brought such poison to the whole world: one Dominicke, one Francis
(superstitious Friars) so multiply their disorderly Orders, that from their
spawnes are proceeded so many croaking Revel. 16.13.
Froggs, so many swarms of Grasshoppers and Locusts, as eat up all the green
leaves, the fattest and best things in every land, whereon they come: how from
one Ignatius Layola, are issued so many ignified fiery Jesuits, Iebulites,
See the face and form of these Jesuits in the Jesuits Catechism, and in
Watsons Quodlibets: made by the faction of the opposing priests.
Iudasites, world-disturbing Davus es, non aedipus apud Comicum.
Davisses, as they bragg of their numbers and Vide praefationem Pelargi, in suo
Iesuitismo: de domibus and Collegijs Iesuitarum in India, Peru, alijsque
Insulis, Regnis, Provincijs.
powers; their names, like the Devils in the possessed, being called Legions. I
say, pondering these things I have justly thought, That as some good and
gracious men (such as formerly I have specified) being eminent in gifts and
graces, have been the organs and instruments of the glory of God, of the true
information of men's judgments, the reformation of their minds and manners; by
their pains, endeavors, authority, preaching, ruling, doctrine, discipline,
chiefly their life and example, drawing the plebeians and common people, to
virtuous and holy living; withdrawing them from vice: so on the contrary (as
it was in Jerusalem, of which the Lord so often complains) from the Rulers and
the Esai. 5.13. esai. 10.3. Ier. 5. v. 5. et 17 20.21. etc. and 26.10.11.
Ezech. 33. etc.
Prophets, the corrupt magistracy, the carnal, careless and unprofitable
ministry in most places in Christendom, (as armed Greeks out of the Troyan
Virg. aneid.
Horse, as did diseases out of Lucianus in Dialogis.
Pandora's box, have proceeded all those vices and enormities, which as
Gan-grines and Leprosies spread, and as plague sores infects the whole body of
the common people. The vices or vanities of the rulers, tending (as the folly
of that Ov^d. Metamorph.
Phaeton,) to the combustion and confusion of the whole universe: vices, like
malignant Planets, moving in the Spheres of superiority, having ever a
pestilent and poisoned influence upon these inferiors of the observing apishly
imitating Laytie the commonaltie (as the body after the head, the shadow after
the body) ever moving after their rulers; the body De sympathia inter
Naturam, and Politiam, lege totam Epistolam Alstadij, Senatui Reip. Norimb.
conscripta^, and praesi^am ante Theologiam suam naturalem
polliticall as in other things, so in this sympathizing with the body
natural. Of which, that we may still give further demonstration, let us
observe, and pervse all histories, reflect upon times past and present,
historically, experimentally: and we shall see, that in these three States of
the Church, Commonwealth, Oeconomie; the governed have been ever (and still
are) ciphers or figures in Gods Arithmetike, seals or blanckes in Gods
account, well affected to peace and Religion; infected with faction, divisions,
or Idolatrous superstition: according to the temper, qualifications, and
dispositions of their governors, Civil, or Ecclesiastical; they receiving,
as soft wax, usually their impressions from these, of good or of evil,
seasoned sweet or sower, ever as Quo semel est imbuta recens, servabit odorem,
testa di^. Horat.
Caskes from their liquor. Yea, it being betwixt the heads of the Church, and
the Commonwealth and family, and those bodies of people that have depended on
them, as betwixt the head of a great fish and the body of the Sic alludant
Geminianus in summa exempl. lib. 4. de not. and volat. and Petrus Berch.
reductorij Moralis lib. 9. c. 1
fish: for if the fish-head smell well and sweet, the bulk and body of the
fish smells well too, be it never so great: if the head stink and be corrupt,
the body does so too. The application is obvious to every one, with half an
eye: demonstration seals it. For first, look upon the state of Judea, in the
days of 1. King. 18. v. 21.30.
Ahab, 1. King 14. v 9.16.
Jeroboam the son of Nebat, 2. Chro. 33.6 7, 8.9.
Manasses, 2. King. 1.16.
Ahaziah, 2. King. 3.1.
Iehoram, 2. King. 13, v 1:2:
Iehoahaz, 2: King: 15: verse. 8.9:10:11:12
Zachariah, and other Idolatrous Princes, and you shall see Gods Altars broken
down, the true Prophets banished, or butchered, altars to false gods erected,
the worship of the true God defaced: why so? in a promptu causa: their rulers
were Idolaters, Baalites; the fishes head stunke. Again, look upon the state
of the Church in the days of 2. King: 14 verse: 3
Ioash, 2: Chro: 30.31 32, Chapters.
Ezekiah, 2 King: 22:1, 2,
Josias, 1 King 22: v 43:
Iehosaphat, 1. King: 15 verse: 3
Asa, and this our David; you shall see the Groves of Baal burnt, his altars
demolished, his worship and worshippers abolished, his Priests sacrificed,
Religion planted, Gods Altars repaired, the Temple purged, the people
conformed, Priests and Levites for preaching and teaching instituted, the
Passover solemnly kept and observed: why so? the Magistrates were religious,
the Scripture gives this testimony of them (how ever with many mixtures of
infirmities, in which the good God be merciful to all his Children) they did
that which was right in the sight of the Lord. 2: Chron: 30. verse: 18:19
Such force you see has example, that Regis ad exemplum Regis ad exemplum
totus componitur orbis
, the whole world follows the example of Kings, which held even amongst the
very heathens: for in the times of Alexander and of Julius Caesar, (as the
Macedonians, so) the Romans were warriors: in the times of peaceable
Augustus (as in the days of Solomon) men were studious of Pacem te poscimus
omnes.
peace, Ianus his gates were set open: in the times of Commodus, Heliogabalus,
Nero, and other such luxurious Goats, Rome was as Observatio Guavarrhi in suis
Epistolis familiaribus, sic and Cassianei Iurisc. in suo Catalogo gloria mundi.
a stews: in the days of Marcus Aurelius the philosopher, all were studious
of Philosophy; as in the Ecclesiastical histories, in the days of religious
Constantine, the Court, (yea the Camp) was as a Church, a center of zealous
divines: in the days of Julian that accursed careless Apostate, his Court was
full of Apostolical turncoates. So are the common people blown as Ignobile,
and mobile vulgus.
weathercockes, even as the winds come from their governors; East, West,
North, South, changing (as that Quo te queram mutantem protea nodo.
Proteus, Colorem mutat Polipus piscis, ad similitudinem loci: sic Arist. li.
9. de anim. c. 37. Solin. c. 32. Olaus lib. 21. c. 21.
Polipus, or De Camelione, haec Plin. hist. li. 28. c. 8. and Aelian. li. 2.
hist. c. 14.
Camelion, even as the De Hyena, haec Aelian li. 1. c. 26
Hyena is said to change sex) according to their rulers colors, being ever,
as our common peoples proverb is, and as their practice has been, and ever
will be on that Religion which the King is of: as we say of dogs, ever
taking the better side. If David bless God, as in my Text, the people bless
God too. If Calling Christ in derisio^ a Galilean, the carpenters son, with
the like vituperations, apud Theodoretum.
Julian the Apostate, Rabshakah 2. King. 19. v 10.11.
and Senacharib blaspheme God, and prefer the gods of the Gentiles before
him; so will the people blaspheme him too. If Pharaoh Exodus 8. v. 15
harden his heart, and distaste Moses and Aaron, his Courtiers and the
Egyptians will harden their hearts too, as the nether millstone pursuing after
Israel, till they sink like a stone in the midst of the Sea. If the popish
Princes persecute those of the reformed Religion, the Prelates are more
malignant, (as the Luke 22. v. 2. luke 23.13.18 et c. 24. v. 20.
Pharisees were more spiteful against Christ, then Luke 23 v. 20 22.
Pilate himself: and if Princes and Prelates prove dragons, to devour the
poor Saints, the plebeians will be at least serpents to sting. The Bishop of
Aix with the president Cassane, the Archbishop of Arles; with others, had no
sooner apprehended a Book-binder, for selling of Bibles, which they vilified
and undervalued, below some lascivious pictures, (which themselves had bought)
but presently the common Acts and monuments of the Church abridged, by M.
Mason, folio 203.
people cry, (like the howling of so many wolves, like the barkings of so
many dogs,) A Hugenote, a hugenote: a Lutheran, a Heretic, to the fire
with him, to the fire with him; let him fry a faggot: An invincible Achillean
argument, concluding in ferio, which Christ himself and his Apostles, could
never have answered, had these men had them in their power. Such impressions,
the ring-leading examples of the superiors work in the common people, even
more monstrous and hideous, then those that are wrought by the force of
imagination: of which we have so many wonders related by Lodov. Vives, in his
3. book of the Soul, speaking of fear from imagination.
Lodovicus Vives, Libr. 6. Des. Richerthes de la France, cap. 8.
Pasquier, In Comment. de monstris c. 17
Winrich, the french In his first book of his Essays in folio, chapter 21. sic
in lib. 3.
Montaigne, and Vives in Comment. in c. 25. lib. 12. de Civitate Dei, sic
Ambros. Part. in praedict. Comment. Winrichi. cap. 17.
others both Physicians and Historians. Come from the generality to
particulars: look into our country Towns and Villages, in that reference and
relation betwixt Landlords and Tenants; and you shall easily see them draw
both in one yoke, to good or evil, Religion or superstition, piety or
profanesse. We need no other witness of this, but our eyes and ears, in this
our Ireland; in which we that are Protestants, are planted as some handfuls
amongst such swarms of Papists, as Israelites amongst Egyptians, as Jacobs
seed in the lightsome Genesis 47.27.
Goshen of the Gospel, it being popish Exodus 10. v. 23.
darkness round about us, horrid and fearful, more then Egyptian, or
Cimmor. oppidum, in Bosphoro secundum Plin. lib. 6. c. 6. c. 11. c. 13.
velinter Baias and Cumas in Jtalia, secundum festum, and Ciceronem academ. 8.
vbi raro aut nu^quam Sol splendescit, vel secundum Solinum c. 21. ibid. Sex
me^ses perpetua nox una, die una nocte, totus volvitur annus: Oiaus, li. 1. c.
1. Hinc adagium Erasmi mutuatu^ a Mela, Plinio, and Lactantio lib. 4. Iustit.
Cimmeriae tenebrae, sic Ponticae tenebrae, at magis formidabiles papisticae.
Cimmerian: See we not our selves in respect of them, like the army of Israel,
in the time of Ahab, as some little flocks of Kyddes here and there scattered;
they being as those Syrians that filled the 1. King. 20.27.
country? has there not been means used, both by Word and Sword, to purge
their popish leaven, to bring them (as once the Gentiles) out of the power of
Act. 26.18.
darkness, to annoint them with Rev. 3.18.
eye salve, to pluck them as brands out of the Iud v. 23.
fire, to bring them to the knowledge of the 2. Tim. 2.25
truth, but all in vain? have we not lost our oil and labor? are they not
settled worse then Moab in their popish dreggs? are they not like Babell See M.
Crashawes zealous and learned sermon on that Text and subject.
incurable? do they not yet (as if they were possessed with deaf Devils) stop
their ears with the deaf In psalm.
adder, and will not hear the voice of the Charmer, charm he never so wisely?
Do they not fly our Churches and congregations, worse then the serpent flies
the Ash; or as Moses fled from his Exodus 4.3.
rod, as though there were some serpentine venom in our doctrine or discipline?
can they be brought into our spiritual Luke 14. v. 23.
feasts, by any reasonable compulsion? are not their hearts (like clay in
Summer) grown harder and harder, even as Exodus 10.20,
Phraohs? as their eyes more Matthew 13.13, 14. ex Esa. 9.
blind? their wills more perverse? their minds more Romans 11.8.
malignant? Now from whence grows all this obstinacy? obduracie? refractorie
perverseness? Besides the common plea, which, as a pair of Shipmens hose, or
as a nose of wax, fits them at all assayes, That they must do, and will do
(for wickedness is ever Ier. 18.12. Psalm. 12.4.
wilful) as their predecessors, fathers, and forefathers have done, (Popery,
like frenzy, madness, and some lethargicall sicknesses, running in a blood,
and being like their intaled lands, hereditary.) As though some northren
blew-cap borderer, should argue, My father was a taking man, and never died in
straw, but went up Hemp-street, and down Gallows gate; and therefore I Will go
that way too. Or as though some young Dalilah should argue, My mother was a
good Catholicall universal woman, and did good service in the Stews, both to
the Seculars and Clergy of Rome; and therefore I Will do so too. Besides I say,
this pestilent and peevish plea; the chief Echineis piscei qui sistens
navigio, detinet; adversus and ventot, and velas. Aelian. li. 1. cap. 27. Plin:
li. 32. c. 1. Albert. lib. 24. anim. ex Arist. hist. anim. lib. 2. cap. 14.
recitat. and Basil. in Exemero, hom. 7, Instat. Plin. in praioria navi Anthonij.
Remora, that holds them from obedience to God and Caesar, the chief block in
their way to Religion, the chief filme and scumme which is over the eyes of
the multitude (even that fax fex populi, the promiscuous common people) is the
practice of their superiors, the example of their Landlords: for so they vent
and reveal themselves in plain terms. And so we see indeed in their
practice, that if their Landlords go to the Church, the tenants will go too:
even as Baruch said to Deborah, If thou will go to the Battle, I will go too;
if thou will stay I will stay Judges 4.8.
too, (as Ruth said to Ruth. 1.16.
Naomi: as Ittai 2. Sam. 5.21.
said to David.) Surely whithersoever they go, these will go too; they cleave
like burrs to their Landlords: so that bring them to Church that are heads, and
the commonaltie follow, as the shadow the body: the practice of the great ones
(as the needle draws on the thread, as the aule or bristle draws on the
shoomakers tach) draw on the mean ones; yea (for ought that I see) our common
Irish depend on their Landlords, for their bodies and estates (as on their
Priests for their souls) for religion or superstition, heaven or hell, more
then on the Word, on Moses, the Prophets, the Apostles, more then on Caesar, or
on God himself. Either of The Seminary Priests, and their La^dlords wholly
sway the body of our Irish Papists.
these, are as Magus dictus, non quia scrutator naturae; qualis magus fuit
Apollonius Tyanaeus, apud Justin. q. 24. and Philastrat. in eius vita, quaies
and magi perfici, apud Philon. lib. de legibus. apud Proclum, lib de Magia
qualis magus noster Cardanus (inno ipse Solomon) Alverius Magn. cum alijs, sed
Magus Demoniacus, ut olim Elymas, Acts 138. Iannes and Iambres, Exodus 7.11.
Faustus, Cornelius Agrippa, and diverse Friars.
Simon Magus to the Samaritans, as Diana to the Ephesians, Act 19.28. as the
Penates or houshold-gods to the Gentiles, even all in all, Instar omnium, their
Delphick De Delphico, vel Dodonei Apollonius oraculo, cum responsionib.
ambiguis Creso, Cambysi, Agamemnoni, Amilcari, Epimanondae, Eschilo, Philippo,
Dionysio, cum alijs. vide apud Valerium lib. 1. cap. 8. Pauson. in Arcadicis
Heroditum. lib, 3. Diodorum, lib. 20. lib. 15. apud Ciceronem de Fato, Suidam
and Plutarchum in Alexandro, praecipue apud Maiolum in diebus canicularibus,
part. 2. coll. 2. page 96 97. 98, 99, etc.
Oracle, speaking ex tripode, their Pythagoras, their ipse A^tos epha.
dixit, their Domine (dic) factotum, on whose sleeves they pin their souls, to
carry them whither they please; either to heaven, as the Angels did Luke 16.12.
Lazarus; or to hell, as Mephastophilus did their Doctor Faustus; or to
Purgatory, as they think the Paganish Traian Helped out by the prayers and
suffrages of Gregory the great.
went. So that, get the Landlord to the Church, as he that pulls but one link
of a chain draws all the rest, we shall draw our (otherwise obstinate) Irish
to our Church, as if chained and linked by the ears: but without removeall of
their Priests which poison them, and by mulcts or what else, moving their
Landlords to conformity; all our pains, preachings, persuasions, impositions
upon the Comminaltie, is but with the Dolphin and Salmon, to swim against the
stream, to wash an Ierem. 13.23.
Ethiopian, to white a Blackmore, to take out a Leopards spots, and by water to
clean a piece of clay; (as Gardner said in his policies, in another He meant,
La: Elizabeth should rather have been cut off, as he and Bonnet labored: the
meaner people martyred. Fox Mart.
case) to strike off the branches and to leave the roots; according to the
allusion of Anacharsis, to seek to catch the little flies in the webs of our
laws, and to suffer the great ones to break through.

SECT. IV. More special application to Masters of families.
LEaving them, look into private families, and we shall see, like Master
usually, like man; like father, like son; like crow, like egg: yea of (as in
Ahab and 1. King. 19.1. and 21.8.
Iezabell, Ananias and Acts 5.1, 2 3, 4.
Saphira) like husband, like wife; either combined in evil, (as Simeon and
Levi Genesis 49.5.
in blood) or, as Zachary and Elizabeth, Luke 1. v. 6.
Aquila and Act. 18. v. 2.
Priscilla, united in good. Yea generally, such a governor, such a family: if
Abraham believe, his whole household, at Gods commandment, are Genesis 17. v. 23
circumcised: if he sacrifice, Isaac of a child is acquainted with Genesis 22.7.
sacrificing, and is able to discourse of it: if Adam sacrifice, Abel offers up
too, the best of his Genesis 4.4.
lambs: if the Jews spread the high ways with boughs, in the honor of Ioh.
12.13.
Christ, the children will cry Hosanna to the highest: if the father bless and
praise God, and sing Psalms in the family, as Praecentor beginning the quire,
the rest (yea the least) follow in their holy anthems; even as the Congregation
here follow David their first mover, who sets the rest on work, as the
Philomena, sic dictus a Philos quod est amor, and mean, defectus, quasi
deficiens amore cantandi etc. De tuius cantilenis vide apud Plin. lib. 10. cap.
29. and cap. 42. Theologice applicat Berchorius reductorij moralis: li. 7. c.
30. fol. 199.
Nightingall by her prick in her breast, first awakens her self, and then by
her carrolling sets a work the Marle, the Finch, the Linnet, the Lark, and
all the quiristers of the woods and fields: Where on the contrary, where the
Governors or Masters, usually make no bones of oaths, no not of the wounds and
blood of Christ, which in their madness sometimes they tear, as Dogs do
Kydds or Lambs; you shall hear the servants, yea the children, as the
croakings of so many Toads, the hissings of so many Snakes, casting out of
their mouths squibs and firebrands against the Almighty: the young Cock
learning, as the old crow; as the young Nithingales are said to repeat and
crowd such tunes alone, as they learn from their males. So that you shall as
easily discern by the tongues of children abroad, how their parents are
affected at home, to Religion, to the Word, to the Preachers, the Ministry,
yea whether Protestants or Papists; as you shall discern fire in the house, by
the smoke of the chimney: For why do those forty children (deservedly
devoured by two Bears) blaspheme the Prophet 2. King. 2.23.24.
Elisha, with Come up thou bald pate (as some profane impes abase and abuse the
Ministers of these days,) but that their irreligious parents had given them a
preceptorie practical lecture of imitation? So for servants: Abraham has a
servant as faithful unto him as his own Genesis 24. pertotum.
souls, why so? Abraham himself is faithful to God, and trains him, and the
rest, in Genesis 18. v. 18
religious (as well as military) discipline Genesis 14. v. 14
. The Centurion has his soldiers obedient unto Math. 8.8.9.
him, its no marvel for he himself is obedient to Christ, even in the
obedience of verse. 10.
faith. Cornelius has his soldiers fearing Acts 10.7
God, whom he sends to Ioppa for Peter: but the Encomium of himself is first,
That he was a verse. 1.2.
devoute and religious man. So on the contrary: Is Pharaoh churlish against
Moses and Exodus 10.28.
Aaron? his Courtiers thrust them out of his presence. Is Absalon bloody
hearted against 2. Sam 13.22
Ammon? his servants upon the least verse. 28.29.
motion, are bloody handed. Is that rich churl cruel against Lazarus, giving
more to his hounds and spannels, then to the poor? we shall see his servants
so too: there is more mercy in the medicinable tongues of the Luke 16.21.
Dogs, then in either Master or men. Yea lastly, does Joshua serve the Lord?
then all his household will serve the Josh. 24.15.
Lord. Does Zacheus believe? then salvation (because justification and
sanctification) comes to his whole Luke 19.9.
house. The convert Iaylor baptized? then is his whole house Acts 16.31, 32, 33.
baptized. There Is a Church said to be in the house of Chrispus, Stephanas,
Philem. v. 2.
Philemon, in respect of religious duties: why so? their masters are religious,
whereas in some houses there is no more show of religion, then in the house of a
Turk, a pagan, or a savage Barbarian (unless idle and vain jangling,
rybauldrie talk, hellish contentions, Thebane Invented at the siege of Thebes,
and condemned, in their either superstitious abuse, as lotts, or covetous
abuse, in getting and gayning, both by Cyprian, and our Daneus, in tractates
writ expressly against them: as also by the civil and common law, as appears
in the Digests, lib. 11. tit. 5. lib. 1. and Cod. lib. 3. tit. 43. and C epist.
35. c 42.43.
carding and dycing, racketting and bandying of blasphemous oaths, be
religion.) Why so? There Is no life in the head, no heat in the heart, no
zeal, no grace in the Governors: therefore the governed be either lukewarm
Rev. 3.15, 16.
Laodiceans, or key-cold, even altogether, godless and graceless. Not that I
deny, but that an Abraham may have to his son an Genesis 21.9, 10.
Ismael; an Isaac an Genesis 26.34.
Esau; a Jacob an incestuous Gen 35.22. and 49.3.
Reuben, a bloody Genesis 34.25.
Simeon; a No^ha Genesis 9.22.
Cham nor that I am ignorant that an 2. King. 5.26.
Elisha may have servant a lying Gehezai; a Philem. v. 11,
Philemon a runna-gate Onesimus; the best Master the worst servant, even Christ
himself a John 6.71.
Judas: or that the worst Master may not sometimes be Genesis 29.20.
blessed in, and by a Genesis 30 27.
good servant; as Laban in Jacob: or that a Nabal may have such about him, as
are honestly affected to 1. Sam. 25.14, 15.
David, and to such as fear God. Which instances prove thus much only: That
God is a free spirit, and gives his grace freely, to whom he will, as he Rom
9.15.16.
will; neither tied to Read my Origins repentance, extant, in fine libre.
blood, affinity, consanguinitie, nature: and that the work of grace can no
more be hindered, then the shining of the Sun, the motion of the heavens, or
the flowing of the Oh quam velox sit spiritus sancti gratiam sriba non egens
tempore, ut predicant patres.
sea, in those that are his servants; though they may perhaps by the hand and
tongue-persecutions of carnal masters (as too many religious servants and
prentices in our cities, towns, and corporations experimentally and bleedingly
feel) be too too much oppugned, opposed, discouraged, clouded, and eclipsed.
It holding true in the general and in most particulars for all this;
notwithstanding that in every state and condition (some few rarely excepted)
the Governors and those under their charge, either in good duties, as David
here, and his subjects: or in mischief and wickedness, as did Absolon and 2.
Sam. 15.12.
Achitophell against David; the elder and younger Genesis 19.4.
Sodomites, against just Lot; the Priests and the Ier. 18.8. and 20.1.2. and
28.1. and 37.15. et 38.4.
people against Jeremy; the Scribes, Pharisees and Synedrini of the Jews
against Matthew. 27.1.39.41. Mark 15 11, 13
Christ; Abimelech and the men of Judge 9.4, 5, 6, 16, 17.18.
Sychem, against the seed of Gideon; Iezabell 1. King. 18.20.
and her Idolatrous Prophets, against Elias; 1. Reg. 22.8.
Abab and verse. 24.
Zedekiah against Michay; Ephraim and Manasses against Judah; the Seminaries
and the Jesuits against the strictest, and greatest, and sincerest of the
Protestants; Gardner, Bonner, with their Officers, Officials, and bloody
Bayliffes, Summoners, Sheriffs, and Sargeants (such as Sheriff Woodrooffe Of
the tragical ends of both these, as also of Geffrey, Clarke, Dale, Coxe,
Beard, Brown, Baulding, Bradway, Foxford, Pauy, Long, Honer, Elerker, Capon,
Sardine, with many more persecuters. See at large in Martyrol. and in brief, in
the Acts epitomized, fol. 378, 379.
and the Bayliffe of Crowland) against the slaughtered Martyrs in the time of
Queen Mary.

SECTIO. V. How the godly or ungodly Minister leads many to heaven or to hell,
by his life and doctrine.
But of all the rest, as we have shown in the Magistracy and private
Families, this holds most authentic in the Ministry: that, according to the
Prophets phrase, Like Priest, like Ier. 2.8.26.
people; like Pastors, like parishioners. Seldom shall we see a flock thrive
under a careless Pastor, who feeds and clothes Ezech. 34.2, 3
himself with their milk and wool, leaving them to the Lion and Wolf.
However I know that God can work, as by weak means, so in and by wicked
means; feeding Elias even by a 1. King. 17.6.
Crow, as not tied to any instrument, worthy or unworthy; bringing water even
out of Exodus 17.6.
Rocks, good out of evil, and causing a prophesying Number. 23.18, 19. and
24.1.2.3.
Balaam, even whether he will or no, to bless a people: yet nevertheless in
all probability, he that is ignorantly blind and cannot see, a dumb Dog
that cannot (will not) open his mouth (as being full, fatt, and crambd with
Steeples and tot quots) a cloud without Jude, v. 12.
rain, seldom dropping, a dry nourse without milk, a mute fish, a
tonguelesse Ambassador, a blind leader of the Matthew. 15.14
blind, a dark Lantern in a darker night: adding to ignorance or idleness,
a dissolute life; sitting in Moses chair, but neither preaching nor practicing
the doctrine of Moses, or of the Messiah; aiming at the bag, John 12.6.
with Judas; seeking silver, not souls; the fleece, not the flock; the place,
not the grace of a Minister; (praeesse, non prodesse) his own Cuius seeds
prima, vita Ima. Greg de pastore.
preeminence, not the peoples profit; (otium cum honor) a lazy life, a large
command (which Luther taxes in the Popish Prelates, and more then he, Passim
in Colloquijs.
Erasmus.) It is as probable (I might say, possible) that such a guide as this,
should work grace in a depending people, thus graceless himself; as to bring
water out of a flint, oil out of a stone, light out of darkness: to excite
to praise God, when our own hearts are as hard as adamants, as congealed as
ye, without any spiritual life or motion: to exhort others, as David here
this people, to bless God and yet we in every Alehouse and Tavern, to belch
out most horrible blasphemies against God, as some do; I speak it to their
Phil. 3.18.19
shame: to thunder out woes and anathema's, against the drunkenness of others,
Esa. 5.11, 12. and 20.5: See M. Downa^ against drunkenness, in is four treatises
by which God is dishonored, the creatures profaned, Gods Image * defaced; and
yet our selves to make the Alehouse, or Tavern, or Tobaccho-shop our study,
the Cards our books, the Indian weed our Ink, the pipe our pen, extracting
our Sermons from the fume of the grape, the froth of the tap, the smoke of the
quiffe. This makes us worse, and more monsters, then ever Africa bredde, then
In his Cosmography.
Munster, Mandevill in his travells.
Mandevill, or Textor in sua Officina, finished by Zwinger, and enlarged, sic
Lycosthenes de prodigijs, multa and mira narrat de monstris,
Textor ever writ of: to be even all voices, like Heptaphon Echo, apud Plin.
lib. 36. cap. 15.
Echoes, all tongues, Stentor-like, to cry and command; no hands, no hearts,
to execute ought. And sure when we say to our people, as the Matthew. 8.9.
Centurion to his servants, Do this, but do nothing our selves: when, like
Church-bells or Innkeepers signs, we direct and call others in, to feast with
Christ, as did his Disciples at the marriage feast, Ioh. 2.2.
and yet hang out our selves, as marks and crosses by the high way: when we
direct others how to journey toward Syon, and yet stand still, as the Jews at
the corpse of 2. Sam. 20.12.
Amasa, and never march foot forward our selves: when we set true notes to
others, yet sing jarring notes our selves: seeming to steer from the rocks of
sin, yet making daily shipwreck our selves: giving caveats and cautions
against these sinn-poysons, which we gulp down our selves, the people, which
look at the lives which we lead, more then at the doctrine which we teach;
our lives being to them, Plus oculatus testis, quam auriculares december.
ocular and real Sermons, our words but verbal: thinking we speak but for
our pensions (as Lawyers for their fees) but practice according to our hearts
persuasions; seeing us to have Esau's hands, though they hear us to have
Jacobs Genesis 27.12.
voice, as though we our selves knew another way to heaven then what we teach
them, (like some Vintner, that keeps a better cup of wine for his own tooth,
then that he draws out to his customers) they are so far from being moved
with our doctrine, which they see crossed and contradicted by our doings, that
in their hearts ever (sometimes with their tongues) they bid us Physicians, Luke
4.13.
Cure our selves, and then they will follow our prescripts: otherwise they will
neither be phlebotomized by such Quacksalvers, nor be dyeted by such Empericks.
And indeed, to look more curiously into the point, is it likely that we should
draw others unro good, when our selves are so bad? is he probable to be a good
steward to another, that never knew how to thrive himself? (nemo dat quod non
habet) can he bear others on his back, as Aeneas his father Apud Virg. AEneid.
Anchises out of the Trojan flames, that like Mephiboshe^h 2. Sam. 9.3.
or Asa, is lame or 1. King. 15.
gowtie himself? can he guide others amongst Cole-pitts or Lime-pitts, that is
blind himself? can he, in whose affections there is death to any good, and in
whose life dissolution, kindle in others devotion? can a dead coal kindle
green wood? can any light his candle at a stinking candles snuff, that has
only (like hell fire) heat without See Master Green-woods tormenting Tophet,
but chiefly B Bilson of Christ's descension into Hell, in folio alleging the
Fathers, and scholemen concerning hell fire.
light; stink to offend, no light to delight? can one drink pleasingly at a
puddle? can one bring that which is clean, from that which is unclean? can
the poor people gather the Math. 7.15.
figs of nourishing edification, or the pressed grapes of right application,
from the thorns and thistles of an unholy and vain conversation; or not
rather the grapes of Sodom, the gall of Deuteronomy. 32.32.
Gomorrah, such unsavorie rotten Ier. 24.2.
figs, as will surfeit the soul, and such sower grapes as will set the teeth
on edge? Therefore, to conclude this point, these premises considered, let all
us, whom God has fixed in higher orbs, move regularly, that we may have a
sweet and gracious influence upon these inferiors, that our persuasions
joined with our practice, may fall, as the first and latter Deuteronomy. 32.2.
rain, upon the tender herbs, yea, as the dew of Hermon, upon the fruitful
Vallie. Oh, we know, that masters work goes best forward, which says not
only to his servants, Do ye (for so his trust and credulity way be abused)
but, Do we such and such a business; that sets his own hand to the work.
The walls of Jerusalem are like to be reedified, and their decayed houses
rebuilt, by the remainder of the captivity, when there is such a
superintendent as Nehem. 7. verse. 1.2.3.4.5.
Nehemiah: and when the Princes, and Peers, and Elders contribute so largely
and verse. 70, 71.
liberally, as here in this Chapter, in David's time, the work is likely to go
forward: so when the great Architects, the maine master builders, in the
Church, Commonwealth, and family, set to their hands and hearts, to the
building of Gods spiritual Temple, to the setting forward of Gods plough, to
the planting of Religion, supplanting of profanesse, and superstition; then are
we likely to have many spiritual Temples erected, Dagon, and Baal dejected;
then may we hope to see, as in the days of David and Solomon, a flourishing
Church, and weale-publike; then may we hope for Ioviall and Saturnall times, a
golden age, not an age for gold, Halcyon days; expect a happy harvest of
peace, mixed with grace, when we have such seeds-men. When there is such light
in the eyes, the whole body is like to be Math. 6.2^.
enlightened; yea this triple body, Oeconomicall, Polliticall, Ecclesiastical
enlightened, inliv'ned: chiefly, we in the ministry, when our lights shine
before men. This tends to the glory of the Father Math. 5.16.
of lights; this shows others, the way out of the darkness of Popery, and
profanesse: Oh our light of holy life, and learning, like the pillar of fire in
the Exodus 40.38.
wilderness, leads many out of the deserts of Zin, of sin, to their
celestial Canaan; as an adjunct to the light of Grace, taking light from the
word of Verbum praedicatum.
light, or that word Verbum incarnatum. John. 1. v. 1.
Christ, who is the verse. 4.
light; as the Moon from the Haurit lucem a sole, ut spongia aquam: Melichius
in lib. 2. ca. 9. Plinij ergo ab Arist. libr. 4. de genesis anim. c. 10. alter Sol
dictus.
Sun: as the Star did the Eastern Math, 2, 10, 11.
Magi, we lead many to Christ. Oh when such a man as Moses, and Aaron go
Exodus, 13, 18, 19.
before, what Israelite will not follow after, and come cheerfully out of the
Egyptian bondage of sin, and the power of the spiritual Pharaoh the Devil,
to the constant resolved service of the true God, in the wilderness of the
world? When the general is a Lion, it will put valor into the Soldiers,
though but Hearts and Hares. The name of a Scipio, or Caesar, does Romanize, and
Masculine the most effeminate spirit. Oh, when such an Angel or Revel, 2.1,
and 3.1.
Scarre, is fixed in a settled Ministry, of whom the hearts of Gods people can
give such testimony, as Saint Luke does of Act, 11, 24,
Barnabas, Paul of Tit. 1, 4.
Titus and 2. Tim, 1, 5
Timothy, Augustine and Chrysostom of De landibus Pauli hom.
Paul, Possidonius of In vita Augustini.
Augustine, Basil of In orat, funebri.
Nazianzen, Beza of In vita Calvini,
Calvin, Melancthon of Luther, the Church of Geneva of Beza, Virell, Faius, and
Farrell Zunch of Zuinglius, Tygare of Gualter, and many Churches and
Commonwealths of that zealous Zanchy, learned Peter Martyr, solid Bullinger,
acute Bucer, with other laureat As that deep Whitakers, learned Raynolds,
zealous Perkins, eloquent Humfrey, quick Fulke, melifluous Playfere, holy
Greenham, deering Dent, painful Willet, etc. cum multis alijs,
English, German and Belgicke lights, shining in illumination of knowledge
and sanctification of life: Such a man, such a Phoenix, such a messenger one of
Job. 33.23.
a thousand, shall declare unto man his righteousness, bind up the broken
Esaias, 61, v, 1.
hearted, speak a word in due season to him that is weary, turn the hearts
of the Fathers to the Children, as was said of John Luke, 1, v, 17.
Baptist. Where such a one is, his very fame, as an ointment powered Cant, ch,
1, 2.
out, gives a sweet perfume, draws hearers to him as the Adamant, Iron; as
the Caecian winds the Plin. lib. 2. ca. 43. and Aulus Gellius ex Arist. noct.
Attic. lib. 2. cap. 22.
clouds: yea, as Orpheus his Harp drew Syntax. artis mirab. li 11. c. 18 page
206.
Trees, and Arious the Plin. li. 9. c. 8.
Dolphine. Yea as the sent, and odor, and beauty of the specious Aelian.
libr. 8. cap. 40.
Panther draws the admiring beasts to admiration, imitation: the majesty of
virtue being such, that even the vicious that cannot attain her, yet admire
her, Si videretur mirabiles amorea excitaret sui. Cicero and Plato.
as the Greeks did Hellen and gaze on those virtuous ones her favorites, which
are in eminent places, as the Owls and Beetles upon the Sun. There needs no
other Cummin-seed, to bring the Lords Doves to the Coats and windows of Gods
house; yea to build in the sanctuary, then Gods voice uttered by a sanctified
organ. Yea whereas a wicked life, (as the smoke, and Rats, and Mice, and
stink drives Bees from their hives,) drives men from our assemblies, and makes
them withdraw, to their own Heb. 10.39.
perdition: On the contrary, there should need no other law, nor compulsion,
nor Ecclesiastical discipline, to bring to the means, whether Popish or
Prodestant, Athisticall or Papisticall refusants, or recusants; if there were
in all our ministry, which (hinc illae lachrymae) in many places there is
not, mortification and sanctification. Oh if such a one as John the Baptist,
which was a burning light, preach even in the desert, in the obscurest corner
of a country, he shall not want hearers, even the proud Scribes, the
Iustitiarie Pharisees, the sinful Publicanes, Luke 3.7.8.9. Math. 3.5.
and the very soldiers (though very seldom too zealous) flock to him, as
the Ants to the Barn, and the Bees to flowers. And sure, (at last to conclude)
he that in the eminency of his place, can with David's heart and spirit, exhort
others to bless the Lord, and himself begin this spiritual song; shall have
the hearts of a religious people to answer again, as an echo, as the
Congregation here did David, They blessed the Lord.

CHAP. V. David prayseth God as a Prince: Politically, and enioyneb others.
LAstly (as the discharge of my last Bill) David as we have heard, does not
only praise God, Personally, Publicly, Primarily, Perswasorily: but to
express my self in the most significant phrases I can excogitate; Politically
or Princely. For as he was Gods Lieutenant, and Vicegerent here on earth, as
he had received his Crown, his Scepter, his Diadem from As he acknowledges,
psalm. 21 l cum multis alijs.
God: So he knows it does belong to his Regal office, and function, to
establish, ratify, confirm, and propagate, what did belong to the service and
worship of God. He knew (what we know and acknowledge, as Christians; and as
true Protestants, profess, and protest, with all the reformed See the Harmony
of Confessions in 8 to.
Churches in France, Bohemia, Germany, Saxony, Scotland, Geneva and the whole
Christian world,) that the Kings Majesty is within his Realms and Dominions,
in all causes, as well Ecclesiastical as Civil, and over all persons, as well
Ecclesiastickes as Laickes, next and immediately under Christ Jesus, supreme
head and governor. There was no contradiction of this point in David's time,
except 2. Sam. 20.21 and 2. King. 12.16
Sheba, 2 Samuel 15.13
Absolon, and some such like traitors, as would have made David officiperda,
devoyde of all rule, and regencie, either in things spiritual, or temporal.
Nor is there any question made of it in our time, except by De visibili
Monarchia.
Sanders, In his principles, and in promptuatio Catholico passim.
Stapleton, In his Libels and letters to diverse discontented spirits.
Cardinal Allen, libelling In his Dolma^
Parsons, the late Eudemon, (or Cacodemon) Becan, and other modern Chiefly the
opposers of the oath of allegiance.
Jesuits and Friars; who more then in the former Schoole-mens times, beat
their brains, in hatching this addle-egge: which produced, has proved the
most dangerous cokcatrice or killing De mortifero aspectu Basilisci. Isid. li.
12. cap. 3. Aelian. li. 2. c. 5.
Basilisk, to the depriving of Kings of their Crowns and lives namely, that
the power and authority of Christian Princes is subordinate to the Pope; in
spiritual things absolutely, as to Christ's Vicar, his Legatus a latere, his
Substitute on earth, the head, yea the Husband and Brid-grome of the Sea all
their blasphemous titles, they give their Pope, with their several authors
quoted, by Pelargus in his Iesuitismus, tit. de Pon. Our D. Sutcliffe de Pon.
Romans M. Powel de antich.
Church: and in temporal things too, in ordine quoad Did. Bell. de Pontif.
Romans
Deum, as they have relation toward God, (as their great Goliath
distinguishes,) And that Kings, Emperors, and Monarchs, are to receive their
Crowns and Diadems from the Pope, as the Moon her light from the Sun, as
Innocent the third very innocently, or rather nocently, collecteth from a
corrupted Genesis 1.16. co^^^r^^g the Pope to the Sun, the Emperor to the Moon.
Text, (which as his Friars do with other Texts, he wrings, as a man does
blood from his nose, or rather plays with, as a Child with a Rattle; as
though they made Gods sacred Bible, but a babble.) So that the managing of these
Crowns, the use and exercise of these swords is limited to the Church, and by
the Church, (as the Sea that is kept within her bounds) disposed to the sons
of their Antichristian Synagogue (which falsely they call their Church: as the
Harlot in Salomons time pleades for the 1. King. 3.21.22.
Child that is none of hers) who must have their direction in the improvement
of their authorities: yea and their corrections too, (as had the French See
Sledan in his chronicles, as also Charions Chronicle, finished by Melancthon.
Henry's, the German, His neck was trod upon in S. Marks Church in Venice, by
Alexander the sixth
Frederick, our English King He resigned his Crown to Randolph the Popes
Legate, Anno Dom. 12 13 See Stowes, and Speeds Chronicle.
John, with hundreds more) from his Holiness, their spiritual father: With
whose eyes they must see, with whose hands they must act, from whose mouth, as
their oracle, they must speak: by whom, if they be not as schoole-boyes
prompted, yea as Hoppes and Vines, in their whole regencies propped, and
supported; their Crowns, yea their heads, (as the Turk with his Bashawes)
must be lopped shorter by the necks, and they wasted, and transported by
Charons ferrie-boate to Hell, or Purgatory, or some such odd place, God
knows whether, to answer their disobedience before Aeacus, Minos,
Radamanthus, or some such odd fellows. Thus these Papal Princely ciphers,
being merely some thing or nothing, as they are joined or disioyned to or fro
their Deified Pope (the true figure and form of Antichrist, as he is By D.
Downa^ B. of London-Detry: M. Powel, the German Sonnius, in their learned
Treatises, de Antichristo.
proved) they must do little in te^porall things in spiritual things,
nothing, without their light and aim from Peter's pretended usurping successor:
to whom they are in submission and subjection, as a wife to her husband, as a
child to his Father, as a pupil, to his tutor, as a schoole-boy (foole-boy)
yea I say further, as a servant, or prentice to his Master; or which is yet
more servile, as a Ward to his Guardian, or a Captive to his Conqueror;
without whose placet, they must either sit still, or rise and fall. Such a
yoke of Romish bondage by their own gross superstition, with which they are
both blinded and bewitched, have Christian Princes laid upon their own necks;
more intolerable then ever those Egyptian, Moabitish, Midianitish, Cananitish
Caldean, and Babylonian yoakes, which for their sins, or trials, the Lord
successively laid on the neck of that untamed Deuteronomy. 32.15.
Heyffer Iesurun, rebellious Israel. David was wiser then thus; he was not as
seduced Israel, as a Dove without a heart: he sends not to Rome for either
leave or light, (though leave be light) to manage what belongs, either to his
Civil, or Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, (as the Council of Trent, that could
not proceed in any of their superstitious, blasphemous conclusions, without
posting, and reposting to fetch the holy Ghost from See the book in folio
called, the Council of Trent, set out by the well deserving pains and perils
too, of M. Breut.
Rome; as a Be in a box, as the jest was, who came at last, and frighted, in
the form of a black dog, one of their chief (e) agents out of his wits.) Or
if David had inquired for a Pope in his days, unless he had found out the
Pagan Annius Rex hominu^, Phoebique Sacerdos. Virgil.
Pontifex, or some high Priest amongst the Jews, he might as well have sought
for a man in the Moon, with a bush of thorns on his back, or for a Needle
(which had been needless) in a bottle of Hay: for we cannot say, as
Polycarpus said of Marcion, that the Pope was the first begotten son of the
Novi te primogenuu^ Sat^anae.
Devil, nay, as they speak of some Toades or Serpents, that breed in the
brains and Plin. li. 10 hist. c. 66. Isidor. c. 4. et Aelian. li. 2. c. 53.
marrowes of dead men; he was hatched since, by the warmth of that cockatrice
the Devil, in the poisoned and corrupted brains of men living, or rather, as
it is said of Gnats and Insects that breed of blood, dung and Cardinal
Cres^ence, writing letters to the Pope, March 25 was affrighted by the Devil,
in form of a black Dog, Sle^da^. Coment 23. He died at Verona. See G^uiar^
french history translated, page 197.
Vt Scarabens in pila, ex fimo facto, masculum gignit. Aelian li. 9. ca. 16.
and Aug. de morib Manic. c. 17. and retract. 2. cap. 7.
putrefaction; blood was his first breeding, (as since feeding,) for from the
blood of Mauritius the Emperor, unjustly effused by that treacherous Phocas,
some gnats of a stinging conscience, gnawing and vexing the Traitor, (as once
Genesis 4.13.
Cain, and most murderers,) he having in this perplexity reference to
Boniface the Bishop of Rome, as Math. 17.1.2
Judas had to the Pharisees, after he betrayed Christ, as to his spiritual
physician: and being superficially baulmde, and his wound skind over by this
Quak-salver, he in requital gave him (what the Devil tempted Christ with, and
what he most gaped after) worldly Math. 4.8.9.
honors, and glories, even this glorious Title of Universal Bishop of the
whole world; his Diocesses extending as far as the Devils. Thus crept he
first out of his shell, in which he had been long enclosed: the mystery of
iniquity, being long a working, by degrees Vide Morneu^, de progressu Papalus
in folio.
commencing, and sitting in the Chair of pestilence But in David's time, and in
the time of the Patriarks, Prophets, Apostles, yea and the first six hundred
years after, (called the Primitive times) as we Bishop Jewel his challenge,
in his apology for the Church of England.
offer the trial; a man might as soon have seen a mil-stone fly in the air,
as either Pope or point of Popery, as now it stands (for all their
vociferations and false lap-wings cries, of their Old Religion, Old law, Mother
Church, and I know not what.) Nay David here asks not leave, either of Gad, or
Nathan, or Abiathar, or Zadok, though he were now Gods high Priest; for the
institution of this solemnity, and for the Congregating of Israel, to perform
these gratulatorie sacrifices, and oblations in my Text. David knew he was sui
iuris, free of himself, and stood on his own legs, and that in all things
that he lawfully commanded, in God and for God (which limits indeed, both the
power of Princes and the obedience of subjects August. sermon. 6. de verbis dom.
and epist. 666. and in Psalm. 124. Basil. reg 7. ex Brev and 114. and 202. and
204. and in Decreto 11.9. chapter 92.93.94.95. habetur ex patribus, restitere ergo
illicitis Magistratuu^ mandatis Daniel, and tres puers, Dan. 3.19. Ambrosius
Theodosio, and Christianus quidam Iuliano, apud Theodor. l 3. cap. 22.
active, though not passive, as the learned discuss and determine,) Nathan and
Zadok were to be obedient and subordinate to him, not he to them; which had
been a gross confusion, and a historen proteron in Theological rhetoric.
Indeed David consults Sam. 7.2.3.
with Nathan about building the Temple (as Saul and 1 Samuel 14.8.
Samuel about sacrifizing): and indeed it is an excellent harmony, and the most
Lidian consort, to see a Moses and an Exodus 4.14. and 5.1.
Aron, a Iehoash and a 2. King. 12.2.
Iehoiada, a David and a 1. King. 2.32.
Nathan, a Baruck and a Judge. 4.8. and 5 1.
Deborah, a Josias and a 2. Reg 22.14.
Huldah, a Solomon 1. Chron. 29 22
and a Zadok, an Ezekiah and an Esa. 7.21.
Esaias, a Nehemiah and an Nehem. 8 9.
Ezra, an Ambrose and a Theodosius, the Word and the Sword, Magistracy and
Ministry, the Prince and the Prophet, consult together; as his Majesty at
this day, as in the high Court of Parliament, and occasionedly since, with his
Lords Spiritual as well as Temporal, about even matters Ecclesiastical, as
Political, about building, or repayring, or purging, or perfecting Gods
spiritual Temple, establishing, ratifying, rectifying his true and sincere
worship. And if this liberty were not given to Christian Princes, to consult
with their Clergy, that are made of their privy Council; they should be
straighter tied, then the very heathenish Romanists, that usually advised with
their Augurists and Flamins, and the Persians and Chaldeans, that advised with
their Apud Cellium Rhodiginum, Aulum Gellium, Alexandrum, ab Alexandro,
Plutarchum, cum alijs.
Magi, and other Pagans with their wise men and Philosophers, both in war and
peace, upon all occasions. But David knows his own strength, how to stand on
his own bottom in this business, though Nathan had been (which he was not)
of such a Popish, proud, usurping Iesuited spirit, to have contradicted this
gratulatorie festival (as Zedekiah 1. King. 22.24.
in the days of Michay; Hananni, Pashur Ier. 20.2.
and other false Prophets in the days of Jeremy, crossed these best projects
and proceedings which were for the welfare of Israel.) David knew, that a
lawful king, as he is called Psalm. 82.
God, is solo Deo minor, only less then God; and that every soul is to be
subject to the higher Romans 13.1.
powers; (and so consequently, Popes, Cardinals, and all Prelates, if they
have souls) and that every Christian Magistrate, as he is custos utriusque
Tabulae, a keeper of both the tables of the Law: so he must look that Gods
plough go forward, in duties religious toward God; as Caesar's, in duties
righteous betwixt man and man. And therefore as Ezekiah will ordain and
institute a 2. Chr. 30.1, 2, 3.
Passover to the Lord, send and encourage the Priests and Levites to teach the
thousands of verse. 22.
Israel, as 2. Chr. 23.1, 2.
Josiah, and Nehemiah, and Neh. 8.4, 5.
Ezra will cause the book of the Law to be read, expounded and interpreted in
the ears of all Israel; and so other religious kings of Judah and Jerusalem,
sitting at the Helm of the Church, as well as of the Commonwealth, steer
both aright: So David here, besides the managing of many worthy and memorable
moral acts, for the good of Gods flock and heritage, over whom he was
superintendent; he also out of his discretion (or rather devotion) institutes
this solemnity in my Text, in which he exhorts and excites the people to holy
and religious gratulations, for mercies temporal and spiritual. Oh, as the
practice is lawful and laudable, against all Antichristian contradiction, as
our English Such as have writ against Becan, Eudemon, and the oppugners of the
K. book, and of the Oath of Allegiance.
worthies have convinced it, from Scriptures and all Histories, in Christian
Kings that have settled religion, rooted out heresies and heretics, placed and
displaced Bishops and Ministers, put Zadoks in the place of Abiathars, called,
ratified and approved general See D. Sutcliffe de Concilijs, contra Bedar.
and provincial Counsels: so I desire it might have, what it deserves; as the
approbation, prayers, and praises of all Christian subjects, so the zealous
imitation of all Christian Princes. that so with David's heart, doing David's
work, they might receive David's wages, double blessings; from God, from man; in
earth, and in heaven.

SECOND PART. Isreal's gratulation:
CHAP. I. From David's spirit.
THus we have seen David act his part Piously, Publicly, Primarily,
Personally, Perswasorily, Politically, and independantly as a Prince (on which
I reflect, for memories sake:) now let us see briefly and succinctly, how the
Congregation here act their parts; and that is obsequiously, readily,
universally. For as they obey David's motion for the matter, blessing God: so
for the form and manner; they obey willingly, speedily, without demurring,
contradicting, procrastinating, even at first motion. and for the extent,
universally, all the Congregation blessed God (as may be hoped too) cordially
and without hypocrisy: their practice in all, and every of the points, as
tutoring and teaching us what to do in the like cases; so redarguing and
reproving what we do not. First then, eye and apply the first act: As David
sets them a good copy, they write after it; they wade, where he breaks the
ice; they dance after his pipe: he is as the primus motor, the first mover in
these visible heavens; they, as depending planetarie bodies, move after his
motion; they receive spiritual sparks, from his fires; they are enlightened,
heated by his example. This is well, when the people are truly religious,
truly zealous, for the qualification and form of grace, as is their Prince or
their Pastor; though they should come short, as the people did here in respect
of David, of their measure of grace: for its something to be in the second and
third place in a run race, As in the Olimpick games; est aliquid prodire tenus,
si non detur ultra.
though one cannot attain the There was difference in the valors of
Iashobeam, Eleazar, Abishai, Baniah, and other of David, worthies; yet all
valiant, 1. Chr. 11.10, 12, 15, 22, etc.
first: its something for the widow to offer her mite, Luke 21.2. though she
have no more; for a proselite Jew to bring Goats hair, or Cammels hair, Exodus
25.9.
or Badgers skins, to the building of the Temple, though (as wanting gold, and
silver, and purple) he can bring no better: its something to shoot near the
mark, and to aim the white, though it be not hit: its accepted, though poor
Joseph, poor Mary, offer up but a pair of young Luke 2.24.
Pigeons, or turtle-doves, when their poverty will not afford Kydds, and
Lambs. All are not strong men in Christ's family; some are Heb. 5.12.
Babes: all are not great Graduates in Christ's College; some are Tyroes, and
but newly admitted: all have not grace in the like measure; There is one glory
of the 1. Cor. 15.41.
Sun, another of the Moon, and another glory of the Stars: for one Star
differs from another in glory, as one man from another in grace. There are
diversities of gifts, but the same 1. Cor. 12.4.
spirit. All have not one faith alike, there is a weak faith in the often
doubting, Matthew. 8.26, Luke 24 38.
often discussing Disciples in the Father Mark 9.24.
of the possessed child. There Is a strong faith in Peter, walking on the
waters; in the Cananitish Math. 15.27.
woman, the Matthew. 8.10.
Centurion, the woman with the sanguinolent Luke 8.49.
issue: all sons and daughters of believing Gal. 3 9.
Abraham. There Is a wondrous gift and measure of the spirit in Dan. 6.10.
Daniel, praying three times a day: this our Psalm. 17.1. and 51.1. and 55.17.
David, with that perplexed Anna, 1. Sam. 1.15.
upon every occasion effusing and pouring out his soul in prayer Vt Psalm.
4.1. and 5.1. and 6.1. and 28.1 and 38.1.
abundant; also redundant in the praises of Vt in Psalm. antea recitatis.
God: his heart ever meditating of good matters, his tongue the pen of a ready
Psalm 45.1.
writer: his inward (f) fires breaking out, in outward flames; not contenting
nor containing himself, but even at midnight he must rise, what to do? not to
light and smoke a Tobacco-pipe (as some that are besotted and bewitched with
the weed) but to praise the name of the Psalm. 119.62.
Lord: Yea early in the morning he will rise, Ps. 5.3. and 8^.13. sic Iudei
Ose. 5:15. and Christiani ^lim, ut test. Plin. Iun. epist. ad Traianum.
preventing the morning watch, what is the business? not to follow
drunkenness, Esa. 5.11.
till he be inflamed; but as spiritually drunk with the wine of Ebria Anna ^st
vino devotionis.
devotion, as was said of Anna* to call upon God, to praise him for his
mercies, to offer sacrifices, as Job 1.5.
Job did, for him and his. All come not thus far, all have not David's
measure: yet its well, if we come thus far as this people here. He that has
a heart to pray, a heart to bless God; let him bless God even for giving him
such a heart, non cuivis contigit, etc. Its a mercy above all mercies, to have
such a heart; a blessing above gold and pearls, the earth and all her
treasures, pleasures, does not equalize it: as it is the greatest plague and
spiritual judgment, to have a Exodus 8.15.
Pharaohs heart, a 1. Sam. 25.37.
Nabals heart, a hardened, a sluggish, a sensual, a sottish Esa. 6.10. Matthew.
13.14.
heart, chiefly a grudging, a murmuring, a blasphemous heart, as the carnal
Israelites had. If thou have rather heart then Art, how to express thy
praises, be not altogether discouraged: a spark of fire is fire, and a spark
of grace is See M. Perkins his grain of Mustard seed his Dialogues. M.
Greenham his consolatory letters. M. Howard his strong help, chap. 19, 20, 21.
M. Downam his Christian warfare, and quastiones Bachman Cent. 1. q. 55, 56.
page 131, 132, 133.
grace, but fuellize this spark; grow in this and other graces, in the use of
the means. For as a dead coal that burns not, is no fire; as a dead trunck
that sprouts nor grows not, has in it no lively sap: so grace that grows
not, that moves not more then a dead child in the womb, is no grace, more then
a painted fire is true fire, its merely imaginay, eutopean and conceited, the
very Idea of the brain, ungrounded in the heart. Therefore strive for
perfection; get thy heart, soul and spirit in tune, to praise thy God. Oh
there is no greater argument of the sincerity of any grace, then that it is of
a growing nature: as the child, that grows in the womb, from an Embrio to
perfection; as the corn, that grows from the seed to a blade, from the blade
to the ear, from earing to a ripening harvest. It must not stand still, like
Joshua's Josh. 10.12.13
Sun; nor go back, as in Ahaz 2. King. 19.11.
Dyall: but forward, as in the firmament. Every Christians motto, must be that
which was Charles the fift's; Vlterius, still forward. And for this cause,
imitate (as Sempsters) the best pattern, write after the perfectest copy. He
that will have a pleasing object for his eye, had better view the Sun then
any Star: he that will Poetize, will rather imitate Virgil or Ovid, then
Bavius or Qui Bavium non amat, odio tua.
Menius: he that would be a good Rhetorician, will imitate Tully, Vid. Institut
Quintil.
Demosthenes, or Osorius, rather then an obsolete and barbarous Such as Menos,
Bartlet, discipulus de tempore or such whose Latin is as barbarous as their
matter often fabulous.
Friar. Oh as we imitate the best in Nature, in Art, let us be as wise for
grace. Now (excepting Christ himself) I know not a better pattern of
imitation, of mere men, then David: therefore as Thesius is said to be
restless in spirit, in his emulation of Apud Cassaneum, in catalogo gloriae
mundi.
Hercules; Achilles, in imitation of Thesius; Alexander, in imitation of
Achilles; Caesar, in imitation of Alexander. And as Themistocles is said to
take no rest, after that he had heard of the Trophies of Miltiades: so I wish
that we, in consideration of that excellent spirit of zealous devotion,
gratulation, sanctified affections in David; might be stirred up to pray (as 2.
King. 2.9.
Elisha once for the spirit of Elias) that it might be doubled, or at least
singled upon us: that with this Congregation ( David preceding us) we might in
some good measure, some sanctified manner, bless God, as David did; since not
one of us in a multitude, but for one mercy or other, we have occasion in
particular (besides generals) as David had. Oh that we would not suffer our
eyes to sleep, nor our eye-lidds to Psalm. 132.3.4.5.6.
slumber, neither the Temples of our head to take any rest; till we found our
hearts the Temple-house and habitation of that spirit, which would cause us to
do as David did.

Expostulation.
But alas, my doubts and jealousies be, that we have frozen and congealed
hearts, turned as hard as crystal, by a De generatione Christalli, lege apud
Plin. li. 36. cap. 22. Vincentium lib. 5. ca. 80. Arist. li. Meteor and
vigitabilibus.
continual freeze; that, as Nebuchadnezzars Image, though we have many
excellent heads of Dan. 2.32.33
gold, both in the Magistracy and Ministry, abounding in this and other
graces: yet the feet of our Commonaltie be of mere clay, hardened rather for
breaking, then dissolved as wax, melting as did once David's mollified heart,
by the Sun of 2 Samuel 12.7.8.13. verse.
mercies.

SECTIO. II. Isreal's obedience, in duties Moral, Theological.
Again see the obedience of this people, how flexible, how docible: David no
sooner exhortes them to praise and bless God, but all the Congregation blessed
God: David prevails with one word, with one motion. This people (a pattern of
all good subjects, in obedience to the Magistracy; of all good Auditors, in
their obedience to the Ministry) are to him as the Centurions servants in the
Gospel: He bids them do this, and they do Math. 8.9.
it: yea I may say, without exception I hope, or construction; they are to him
as the creatures unto God, in their first production, dixit and factum Genesis 1.
v. 11.
est. Such quarters David's people keep with his prescript, that his will (nay
his word) is their work: there is you see, as it were an Identitie of will,
betwixt this best Prince, and these good people, as in perfect friendship, unum
cor, una anima: As amongst the Disciples ^ct. 2. v. 45.46. and primative
^hristians, in that measure and manner vide and Lorinum in ^cum, fol. 142. 1^3.
etc.
one heart, one mind, or (as should be in all Christians) unity, and amity.
They did walk by the same rule, minding the same, thing, as Saint Paul
prescribes his Philippians, Philip. 3. verse. 16. No sooner is the counsel out
of David's mouth, but consent in an instant, in puncto temporis, even in a
trice, is in the peoples hearts. Their minds concur with his motion; even as
Naptha, it suddenly takes fire, at sight of fire. Oh the love, the loyalty,
the obsequious obedience of this people! worthy of living admiration, loyal
imitation, of all good subjects. Much is writ of that subjection, which the
Turkish Begler-begges, Bashawes, and Of all these Turkish Officers with their
subjection, see the Turkish history, passim, and Purchase his pilgrimage, lib.
3. cap. 9. page 244 248. in principio
Timorites, yea even his Mutes and Asaphi, or Plebeians, yield to their
Ottoman tyrant: as, that at his command, they will leap into waters, (as some
of Zerxes nobles, are said to Apud Brusonium, tit. de obedientia.
do, when the fishers boat in which he fled, was over balanced) to save
their Kings life; they will kill themselves, as an acceptable sacrifice to
Mahomet, fill up pooles and ditches, at the siege of some City, for his better
scaling the walls. Which hests, as it is pride in him to injoyne, so it is
superstitious folly, in them to obey: against the light of grace and nature,
any man to be felo de se, a self murderer. So, as wondrous strict rules of
subjection, are prescribed by that Frances, and Dominicke, and De regulis
Francisci, Dominici, Benedicti, and aliorum, vide apud Hospinianum, de origin
Monochatus.
Benedict to their novelists, and young Friars of their Orders, to be performed
to their superiors: so he that reads Cassianus his In Collat. Cassiani, multa
and mira habentur exempla passim, imo vix crede^da de subiectione Iuniorum,
erga inferiores.
collations, and other of their recollections, shall see these Iuniors perform
such subjection to their Seniors in some strict taskes, enjoined, as for my
part, Saepe risum, saepeque bilem vestri movere tumultus. Horat.
saepe risum, saepeque bilem movere, I have sometimes laughed at, sometimes
pitied these deluded ignorants. But quis requisivit? who ever required such
things, either in the active commanding Friar, or in the passive observant
Fool, excepting blinding and bewitching superstition? But in true, and
religious, and rectified obedience, who do we read more forward, and prompt
then this people? Exodus 32.3.
Aaron indeed, as after Judges 8.24.
Gideon, calls for the peoples Jewels and eare-rings; and they as readily part
with them, as the Egyptians did depart with Exodus 11.2.3.
theirs: but to what end and purpose? To make a Calfe, to erect an Idol to
worship: As what will not an Idolatrous people part with, as is seen at this
day, amongst our common Of the force of superstition, eve^ above true Religion,
in Jews, Turks, pagans, papists. See hundred examples in Gorlicius his
Theological axioms circa medium lib. in 4 to.
papists, for such a purpose? not their gold, nor their silver, is dear to
them: it flies as freely as from Michahes mother, though it be eleven hundred
Judge. 17.3.4.5.
shekels, to the making of a graven Image, a Shrine, a Cross, a Crucifixe. The
Priests need but ask and have, if it be the blood out of their veins, much
more their silver out of their purses; which, to the impoverishing of
themselves, to the wronging of their tatered We see to our grief all this
verified in our Gentry, and superstitious Irish Laytie.
backs, I am sure the wringing of their bellies, the wrangling of their hunger
bitten babes; they part withal as willingly, to the maintenance of Idolatry,
and superstition, as these Jews here in my Text, (as also in the days of
Moses, and Ezra. 7.14.
Nehemiah) contributed freely to the service of the true God in true Religion.
So we have read, and seen (besides the dammaging and indangering of their
souls and bloods, the everlasting blotting, and branding of their houses, and
names) how prodigal, how profuse, even to a marvel, some traitors have been
of their goods, their lands, their moneys, their means (as might be
particularized in Winter, Peercy, Digby, and our late digging powder Pioners,
besides all others) for the effecting of their sanguinolent and bloody plots:
when the same parties perhaps are tenacious enough, and as hard to be drawn
and hewn as rocks, to any good duties. But David's Peers, and people here are
as propense, and ready, upon David's first motion, to part with thousands, and
ten thousands of their tallents of gold and silver, lead, and brass, to the
best employment; the edification of a 1. Chro. 29. v. 7.8.9
Temple, more famous, for work, then the Arthemesiahs De isto Maufoleo
Marlinus libr. 6. cap. 18.
Mansolum, the Suns Colosse, the Egyptians De structura Pyramidum. Mela.
lib. 1. cap. 5. Plin. lib. 36. c. 12. Stabo lib. 16. Sic de Colosso Solis,
Strabo lib. 11. Isidor. lib. 14 cap. 6.
Pyramides, Babylons Mira de istis Muribus, Grosius lib. 2. c. 6. Q. Curt. lib.
5. Eus. de prapar. Evang. lib. 9. cap. 4.
walls, Dianas De te^plo Diana, prater Strab. lib. 14. Plin. libr. 36. c. 14.
Aug. de Civit. Dei, lib. 21. cap. 4.
Temple, or the best buldings that ever Of the excellency of Salomons Temple,
vide Ruffin. apud Eusebius. lib. 11. cap. 23. Chrysostom. hom. 86. Senen (Bibl. lib. 6.
Maiolum part. 1. Coli. 24 page 736. praecipue Mogdonetum in Monte Caluaria,
cap. 4. page 2.
were: but more famous for the end, as it was to be a habitation for the
mighty God of Jacob. Yea they part not only with their gold, but with their
goods, with a thousand Rams, a thousand Lambs, a thousand Bullockes; yea they
are obsequious in a greater nature then ail this. For alas the power and life
of Religion, consists not in the abdication of those outward things, in
profession of voluntary poverty, no, nor in abstinence and fasting from the
creatures, nor in afflicting and whipping the body, as the Papists make it:
for then we should have formed the very pith and life of Religion in
Diogenes, Thales, Milesius, Cleanthes, Fabritius; the Indian Bragmans, and
Cymnosophists, who in austeritie and strictness of life, in abdication of
these externalls (to omit the whipping 1. King. 18.28
Baalites) did live as strictly, as any Papist of them all, as any Monosterian;
yea, perhaps as any Hermit whom histories Of the strictness, and austeritie
of S. Anthony, Paulus Simplex, Pambe, Macarius, and other Hermits, read in
Zozum. lib. 4 c. 23. in Socrates lib. 4. hist. c. 23. in Cassian. l. 2.
Gastrim. c. 26 and ca. 40. chiefly Hospinian de origin Monochatus.
dignifie, for their wondrous abstinencie and continency. But the power is in
the inward life of faith, of the life of grace; the life of the spirit, moving,
stirring, animating the very inwards of the soul, to bless and magnify the
Lord in the inward man: rejoicing in the Lord, and expressing these hidden
flames, by hearts breaking out, in sudden extasis raptures, Eucharisticall
thanksgivings, Hymns, Songs, Psalms, as David in the Psalms: as he and his
people here, and as Augustine, Bernard, Anselme, in their meditations, and
soule-soliloquies. This is that pith, that marrow, that luster, that life of
Religion, that power of godliness, See this particular largly and soundly
discussed, and convicted, by M. Bolton his discourse of true happiness, on
Psalm. 1. and M. Dike of the deceitfulness of man's heart, and M. Negus, his
Posthumus book of man's active obedience.
which a natural man, a Civil, a Moral honest man, an Hypocrite, a Pharisee,
a mere outside Christian, a Ceremonious observant Papist, never attained to
by many degrees; never knew it, never felt, never found it in his own soul.
It Is a riddle harder then Sampsons, a mystery, an Aenigma, which they know
not, because they plow not with the best heyffer, the spirit: It Is a mark they
never hitt, a Note above Ela this, which never any sung, but the Lords true
Nathaniels. And this sacrifice of true praise, David's Princes and people, offer
up to the Lord jointly and mutually, with David: which argues they were
possessed with the same spirit, which works the very same effects in several
subjects, Gods several servants, how ever diversified and differenced in
respect of age sex, state, or condition of life; yea how ever, separated in
respect of times, or place: as the same Sun has the same power, heat,
light, influence, (how ever differing in degrees, in several Climates.) on the
scorched Negro, the tawnie Muscovite, the remote Indian, the Russian, Persian,
Turk, Christian, Barbarian, and who ever it reflexeth upon.

SECTIO III. Obedience to God and Caesar, in God and for God, enjoined every
Christian.
THat which concerns our selves, as grapes pressed for our physical drink,
by application, is this: That we should sympathize with David's people as we
that are the heads and eyes, must be studious by governing and teaching; to go
in and out before you wisely and worthily, carrying our selves as David 1. Sam.
18.30.
did, as being on a public stage: God, men, and Angels being our spectators:
our eclipses and slips being too soon discerned, and too fatally presaging
evils to our selves and others, like the eclipses of the material Sun. As
Vide apud Lycostenem de prodigijs.
we, I say, for many reasons premised, must do famously and worthily in Ruth
4.11.
Ephratah, where we are planted, and our candlesticks placed: so you, that are
the Commonaltie, the Laity and body of the people, must be obsequious to
whatever you are legally and warrantably prescribed, and persuaded by us:
first, you must, like this people, be flexible and tractable to what you are
moved in religious duties of piety to God: such as 1. hearing the word; 2.
receiving the sacraments; 3. sanctification of the Sea D Bound of the sabbath.
M. Dod on the fourth Commandment.
Sabboths, you and yours; 4. frequent and fervent prayer, in your own hearts,
in your own houses, such as Josh. 24.15.
Ioshuah, 2. Sam. 6.20.
David, and other religious families used: 5. humiliation for sin, such as is
prescribed by Joel 2.12.17.
Ioell, Zach. 12.12.
Zachary Apud Johan. cap. 3.7, 8.
Jonas, 1. Pet. 5.6.
Peter, and was practiced by Psalm. 6.6. 2. Sam. 16.12.
David, Neh. 1.4.
Nehemiah, the Ioh. 3.20.
Ninevites, Esth. 4.16.
Ester, Mordocheus, 2. Chr. 32.25.
Ezekiah: 6. catechizing your children, as David and Bethshebab did Prove. 4.5.
Solomon; Eunice and Lois, 2. Tim. 1.5. and 3.16.
Timothy; Abraham his Genesis 18.19. c^ 22.7.
Isaac; Hellena her Eusebius. in vita Constantini.
Constantine: 7. praising of God, in the observation of solemn Feasts, and
thankful commemorations of mercies received, and judgments prevented; as for
the coronation of our sovereign Lord the King, the safe reduction of our
Prince, his Majesty's preservation from the Gowries conspiracy, from the
powder Treason; as the Jews solemnized their Purim upon the like Esth. 9.26.
occasion: 8. or it be the observation of public or private Fasts, as the
King of Ninevie enjoined his Ninevites, Ion. 3. Secondly, you must be
morigetous and obsequious, to duties of charity enjoined you to your brethren:
such as giving to the needy, as did Job 29.12, 13
Job, Acts 9 36.
Dorcas, Luke 19.8.
Zacheus; forgiving your enemies, as did Stephen the Acts 7.60.
protomartyr, and Christ himself, their Luke 23.34.
persecuters; David, reviling 2. Sam. 16.11.
Shemei. Thirdly, being hospitable to poor strangers; such as here in
abundance come over, fat and full, like Ruth 1.20.
Naomi, but go back again marah, poor and bitter, lanck and lean, as
purse-purged: Oh relieve such as Genesis 18.1, 2.
Abraham and Genesis 19.1.2, 3
Lot, the pilgrim Angels in the forms of men; as the good old man of
Gabes-gilead Judge. 19.20, 21.
lodged the distressed Levite, as Gaius the Host Epist. Johan. ad Gaium. v. 5.
of the persecuted Saints. Oh you that are as Joseph's here, well planted, do
not forget your English brethren, Amos 6. Genesis 43.
whom necessity drives hither to seek for corn and coin, thinking here be
golden grapes, but deceived, as Christ by the promising leaves of the barren
Mat 21.19.
fig tree. Fourthly, feed the hungry: let the backs and bellies of the poor
bless Job 29.12, 13.
you; let Lazaras have the Luke 16 21.
crummes in your feasts, still remember the afflictions of Amos 6.6.
Joseph. Fifthly, be engaged for those that are approved honest, though poor;
that have willing hearts to pay all creditors, though weak hands: support
them, as Aron and Hur did wearied Exodus 17.18.
Moses. Solomon condemns not all Prove 6.2. See the Sermon extant on this Text,
called a caveat for suerties.
suretiship, but only gives caveats, that a man ensnare not himself for
carnal and careless companions: charity both beginning at home, and standing
with providence and discretion; otherwise, circumstances swaying. Its an act of
charity and Christianity, to undertake for some; as Paul did for Philem. v.
18.
Onesimus, as Reuben for his brother Genesis 42.37.
Benjamin, as the good Samaritan for the wounded Luke 10.35.
Pilgrim Sixthly, comfort the sad hearted; as Beaz did Ruth 2.13.
Ruth, as the Jews did mournful Martha John 11.31.
and Mary; as Christ himself comforted the weeping widow of Nain, the
disconsolate daughters of Jerusalem Luke 23.28.
, and his own dejected Ioh. 16.20, 21.
Disciples: chiefly, if their mourning be for sin, pour oil into their
wounds, bind up the broken Esaias 61.1.
hearted, speak a word to the weary in due season, declare unto them their
Job 33.23.
righteousness, revive them out of their dead swoune, by application of that
true aqua vitae, the waters of life, the promises of grace, made to the Esaias
55.1. Matthew. 5.6.
thirsty. Its more mercy, as the object is more excellent, to comfort a sick
soul; as Christ did sorrowing Ioh. 21 15, 16
Peter, weeping Luke 7.50.
Mary Magdalen, Paul the penitent 2. Cor. 2.6, 7.
Corinthian, Ananiaes humbled Acts 9.17.
Paul, Peter the heart-pricked Act. 2.37, 38.
Jews, Paul and Silas the affrighted and afflicted Act. 16.30, 31
Iaylor: then to help and heal a sick body. Seventhly, pray for all men; 1.
chiefly for Kings and 1. Tim. 2.2.
Rulers, as the Jews did for the Princes of Chaldea, in their captivity, Ier.
20. the primitive Christians for the Emperors: 2. for Ministers and Preachers,
as the Churches of Colossia, Thessalonica, Rome, Corinth, and Rom 15.^0.
Coloss. 4.3. 1 Thessalonians. 5.25. 2 Thessalonians. 3.1.
others, did for Paul: 3. for thy wife and children, as Zachary for his Luke
1.13.
Elizabeth, Isaac for his Genesis 25.21.
Rebeccha, Abraham for his Genesis 17.18. and 18.23.
Ismael, David for his sick 2. Sam. 12.16.
child 4. for thy household and servants, as the Ce^turion for his, Matthew 8.5.
and Abraham for his Genesis 24.
Steward: for thy enemies and persecutors, as Stephen for those that stoned
Acts 7.60.
him, Christ for those that crucified Luke 23.3.
him, Samuel for those that rejected 1. Sam. 12.19.
him, Moses for Exodus 8. so for rebelling Israel, Numb. 16 22. for Miriam,
Numb. 12.13.
Pharaoh that opposed and hated him, lastly, for all men, even Jews, Turks,
and Pagans, except for those that sin unto 1. John 5.16.
death, as did Judas, See D. Deuisons Sermon of the sin against the holy Ghost.
Julian, and the wilful malicious Mark 3.28.
Pharisees; yea for our enemies, as is Matthew. 5.44. Luke 6.28. Romans 12.14. 1.
Pet. 3.9.
commanded, and has been Genesis 20.17. Number. 16.22. and 21.8. 1. Reg. 13.6.
Psalm. 109.4. Ier. 11.13, 19. 1. Cor. 4.12. Exemplo Mosis, Davidi^, Ieremiae,
Pauli, etc.
practiced. Lastly, you must submit your selves, even to perform these duties
moral and political, that are prescribed you: Masters to servants, servants
to masters: Husbands to wives, wives to husbands; Parents to children, children
to parents; Magistrates to subjects, subjects to magistrates, paying scott and
lot, taxes and subsidies, homage and honor, tribute to whom tribute
belongs. All which, because they are very many, and numerous in their
particulars, I refer you to such as have generally entreated of them: only
in all these special and specificall duties, I enjoine your submissive
obedience this day. As David's people yielded themselves to one, so do you to
one and every one of them: To day if you will hear the Lords voice, harden not
your hearts, as in the Heb. 3.15.
provocation. Be not clay, lest you be crushed asunder; but melting wax, taking
the seal and impression of grace: draw like silver threeds in the furnace: bow
your necks to God: take on you the yoke of Matthew. 11.29.
Christ that is easy, and his burden which is light; which we, as his mouth
and messengers, impose upon you. If you consent and obey, you that are here
planted shall eat the good things of the Esaias 1.19.
land: but if you refuse and rebel, you shall be devoured by the sword, or
famine, or other plagues; for the mouth of the Lord has spoken it. you shall
be spewed out and disgorged, as the Judge. 1. and 2. etc.
Cananites, and wiped as a man wipeth a dish, turning it topsi-turvie, upside
down. I set life and death before you, this day: choose life: Deuteronomy. 30.19.
choose whether you will be Oaks, stubbornly resisting God and his ordinances
in the Magistracy and Ministry, as did the Ier. 3.15. and 18.12. 1. Sam. 8.19.
Jews; or Reeds, bowing, bending, flexible, docible, obedient to whatever the
Lord in and by us, shall enjoyne you: as this people were here unto David.
Knowing that the despising and resisting of us, is the despising, yea despiting
of God Luke 10.16. 1 Thessalonians. 4.8.
himself: as the contempt of Ezekiahs 2. Chr. 30.10.
Posts, and of David's Ambassadors, were 2. Sam. 10.6.
revenged as the contempt of these two Kings.

SECT. IV. Obedience Civil, Ecclesiastical, Theological, the life and soul
of Religion.
OH let us know, that as disobedience is as the sin of witchcraft, yea plain
treason and rebellion against the 1. Sam. 15.25
Lord: so obedience is the very life, and genius, and soul of Religion. 1. If
a weeping eye did speak a man religious, then Heb. 12.16.
Esau, Israel, at her worst, had tears at Deuteronomy. 1.43, 44.
command: like the Vincentius ex Physiologo, not. hist. ii. 17. c. 606.
Crocodile or De Astuia, Hyena, lachrymantu, lege Arist. lib. 8. c. 5. Vincent.
lib. 19. c. 61. Aelian. l. 6. c. 13.
Hyena, even when bloodshed and fratricide was hatched in the heart of the one,
and flat rebellion purposed in the heart, practiced by the hand of the other.
2. If a hearing ear did speak and proclaim a religious man, we have Herod
hearing Mark. 6.20.28.
John, yet beheaded John; hearing him as a Saint, living still in his lust as a
beast, butchering the Baptist as a Devil: we have the Scribes and the
Pharisees John's auditors, yet a generation of Matthew. 3.9.
Vipers. 3. If a confessing tongue did always demonstrate a religious heart,
we have Cain bellowing out his Genesis 3.13.
murder, Judas roaring out his own treason, Matt. 27.3.
in the languishing anguish of their souls; Saul himself, with much ado,
bleating out, I have 1. Sam. 15.23.24.
sinned, yet the first branded for a 1, Ioh. 3.12.
Reprobate, Genesis 4 12.
Runnagate: the second, for the son of Ioh. 17, 12. and 6.70.
perdition: the third, for a man ejected, rejected of 1. Sam. 15.26, 28.
God, vexed by 1. Sam. 16.14.
Satan; in all probability, as certainly damned as Solomon was De salute
Saelonionis l^gatur Soto mayor, praef. in Cantic. and Lorinus in Eccl. c. 1.
allegantes Patres and argumenta producentes.
saved: though some Scepticques question both the one and the Praecipue
Bellarm. confut. a Zanchio de preservatione Sanctorum, and nostrum Will^tt in
fine Synopsis Papismi.
other, as if they would find a knot in a 2. Sam. 7.13.
Bul-rush. 4. If praying did always prognosticate piety, we have the Pharisee
Luke 18.10.
prayers, preying upon the poor; under pretext of Fasting and prayer, devouring
widows houses: we have the worst of the Jews, like evening Wolves, in their
extremities howling upon their bedds; yea the proudest Pharisee that ever
showed to the Lord all the Pedlars pack of the trumpery of his own Iustitiarie
works, we have him in the Temple, as busy as a Be, praying, or prating at
the least: Yea that Papist that will eat his breaden god, upon a bargain of
The speech of Northampton extent in print, against the powder traitors.
blood, even when he goes (by a plot as deep as Hell) to blow up the
Parliament house as high as heaven, will pray over and over his Rosarie, roll
out a hundred Aves and Pater nosters, solicit every he and she saincted
friend, that he has in the court of heaven, to prosper his bloody project;
yea this meritorious act must be committed (and commended too) to the prayers
of their Church. So a profane man, whose mouth runs over (as the scumme of a
seething pot) with the froth of all lewd and vicious speeches; banding and
darting more damnable oaths and blasphemies, in the very face of God, in one
hour, then there be pores in his spongie tongue, or teeth in his jaws, or
joints in his hand: this blatrant beast (for God holds him no Wicked men in the
Scriptures are often compared to beasts. Psalm. 57.4 and 58.4. Esa. 1.4 Matthew.
7.6. Luke 13.32. Tit. 2.12.
better) will have sometimes such a fit and good mood come on him, that he will
dribble, or rather Matthew. 6.7.
babble, out a prayer or two; nay you shall have the swinish drunkard, in midst
of as much profanation as Dan. 5.1, 2, 3.
Baltazar, ordinarily jest out such a prayer, God forgive me my sins, etc.
As usually is this in his mouth (but when it is countercrossed with an oath) as
the cough or the phlegm, in the mouth of some consumed old man. 5. Yea
generally, if the outward profession of religion, to knit up all in one word;
did speak and prophecy a man to be truly religious, we should have more ways
to heaven, then to any town or city in Christendom: for the Belgic Dany,
Gorgean Anabaptist, Brownist, Familist, Arminian; as in former ages, the
Arrian, Aerian, Monotholite, Nestorian, Lutichians, with all the rest of the
heretical rabble, professed themselves (as our Papists now) the only true
Catholics: they had many as blindedly zealous in their kinds, as Paul for
his Act. 22.3.
Pharaisisme. Nay, to keep within the bounded mount, the limits of the
Scriptures: Have we not the worst of sinners, professing like Saints? Cain Genesis
4 3.
sacrificing, Balaam Numb. 23.7.
prophesing, the Harlot Prove. 7.14.
vowing, Judas Luke 9.1.2.
preaching* Simon Magus Act. 8.13.
baptized, Demas a companion to 2. Tim. 4 10.
Paul himself, yea Ananias and Act 5.1.2.3.
Saphira as forward in outward formalities, as any of the rest: yea we have
the carnal Israelite, loading Gods Altars with sacrifices, wearying him with
his Sheep, and Calves, and Bullockes, his Esai. 1.11. Psalm. 50.8.9.
Sabaoths, and his new Moons. All which, with the rest of the formal
sacrifices of the Ier. 6.20.21.
wicked, God protests, his soul hates, loathes, and abhorrs, as he does the
offering up of Swines blood, or the cutting off a dogs Esai. 66.3.
neck. the howlings and bellowings of profane spirits, being to him no more,
then the hissings of so many Snakes, the croaking of so many Frogs: all
their sacrifices, with their persons, being execrable, and abominable to the
Lord, yea stinking as Carrion in his nosthrils. Why so? because they wanted the
true salt of the Sanctuary, the life and soul of all, which should vivificate
and animate these their observances, and oblations: and that is in one word,
Obedience, as God himself reveals 1. Sam 15.22 Psalm 50.23. Esai. 58.3.4.5.6.
himself. Therefore I say to thee, to conclude this point; As the Israelites
here in my Text, even before they offered their burnt offerings, and drink
offerings, their Oil and their Wine, their Rams, and their Lambs, they first
offer, as the best Usher and prologue of acceptance, their obeisance external:
yea better, their obedience internal, to God, and the King: So do thou;
otherwise, as Peter said to Simon Act. 8.20.
Magus, though baptized, Thou and thy money perish together: I say to thee,
though a professor, if a profaner, in sins committed (in such duties omitted)
as formerly prescribed, Thou and thy praying, thy blessing, thy hearing, thy
Sacramental receiving, (deceiving,) and all thy professing, confessing,
profaning, disioyned from the obedience of the Law, legal from the obedience
of faith, Evangelicall; perish together. A ^rotestant was once in Popish
cruelty, unjustly burnt with a Bible about his See M. Masons abridgement of
the acts and Monuments, page 203. Genesis 42.20.
neck: but thou may in Gods justice justly burn in hell with Bible in thy
mouth, and profanesse in thy heart and life. Therefore as Joseph said of
bringing * Benjamin; I, of sincere obedience; Bring it, or else, never stand
before the Lord any more in his holy Temple, unholy, unhappie man that thou
art.

I cannot pretermit another observance, without bringing by application, some
of their Honey into our own Hive: These people are not only obedient to the
jussions, and summons of their Prince: but as the grace of this Grace, as a
pearl in gold, their obedience is speedy; as quick as thought, as lightning.
David's word, is the watchword; they are in a readiness: his command gives
fire, they discharge presently a whole volly of blessings. Which promptness of
theris, justly blames, and shames the refractorie obstinacy of many
Christians in all degrees and professions: for many inferiors, wives to their
husbands, Children to their Parents, servants to their Masters, subjects to
their Governors; as they give their Superiors an absolute negative by their
words or practice, that they will not do such and such duties enjoined,
moral, matrimonial, natural, Theological, but rather cross and contradict,
as Ziphorah did the circumcision of her Exodus 4.25.
Son: So when at last, though long first, they are persuaded, it is with such
a haling, and pulling, and drawing, as the Bear to the stake, the Bull to the
ring, the Ass to his burden. What they do, is haled and extorted from them,
as alms from an Usurer, prece, and Nihil car^^^^ emitur, quam quod precibus.
precarie. they are either as Hawks, lured to it by fair words, and promises;
as the Laudando saltant, onera gravissima portant, (...) turres armatat, Atlia.
etc. li. 4 cap. 23. Basilius exem. hom. 9 Albertus lib. 22.
Elephantes, to draw great burdens, by the praises or flatteries of their
keepers; like Wind-mils, grinding nothing, nor once wheeling about, without the
wind of applavses: or won by gifts, (as Children to their Books, by Nuts
and Apples) or whipped and beat to it, as trewantly boys to their schools, or
lazy prentices to their works. How ever; what they do in any prescribed
duty, goes against the hair invita Minerva, as the proverb is, against Gods
forbid. Hence it is, that we see many wives as stuborn against their husbands
as Oaks, in stead of drawing in the same yoke, (as when an Israelite, and a
Cananite (chiefly) match together) like two Sparrowes I have seen tied at the
two ends of a packe-threed; the one draws one way to the Church, the other, to
a Mass; the one to a Sermon, the other to a play; their wills mixing together,
as oil and water: or if Lots wife, post varios casus, after much parlee and
pleading the case, be at last haled out of Sodom, to a saving Genes. 19.20.
Zoar, yet it is neither with heart, nor good will: she looks back again
with an aspect, to what she does respect: Genesis 19.24. aspexit, respexit: vide
Parreum in locum.
her heart has no heart to travel with her body: she has a months mind to
her Mass again: 2. Peter. 2.19.
Canis ad vomitum, etc. So for children: How many do we see perverse and
stubborn against their Parents, not to be bowed more then cold Iron or steel,
as hard wax, unyeelding to any good impression, incapable of counsel, either
from father or friend; swimming without Natare, fine Cortice. Erasmus.
a Cork, disposing of themselves how, when, and where they please, be their
Parents willing or nilling; walking and jetting up and down, as
Iacke-gentleman, or as Masterless hounds, mere Individuum vagums, without any
calling, wandering Iud. 13.
Planets, spending and mispending their monyes and Luke 15.13.14.15. Vide
Bosquerum de filio prodigo part secunda in locum.
means as the Gospels prodigal, without any hoe, Hic and vbique
here, or there: having so many homes (as a hedge-hogge has nests, or a Fox,
starting holes,) that they have no true home, no honey Hive! yea which is worst
of all, some of them so wedded to their Stat pro ratione voluntas, aut voluptas.
will, that they will wed where they will, be their Parents pleased or
displeased: like that profane Genesis 26.32.35
Esau, that will marry with daughters of Heth. though to the grief of old
Isaac, the heart-breake of Rebecca. So for servants: How many be there which
stir like posts at their Masters bidding (nay at their Masters beating!) How
many hasten about their business, as the Ox to his yoke, as swift as
snailes; with as good wills as captives to their Turkish galleys, or fellons to
the gallows! like Miphibosheth his servant, (more lame in his love and
obedience, then his master was on his legs) stays so long in fetching his
Masters Mule, till the tide was past, the opportunity lost of meeting David,
to his no small prejudice, by the scycophantizing of 2. Sam. 19.26.29.
Ziba. Most servants being so careless, negligent, sluggish, and secure now a
days, that what they do in their Masters occasions, is commonly undone; being
by their negligence often unseasonable, as Rain in Harvest, or a pardon after an
execution: their obedience at last, showing it self, like exquisite Music,
in the right managing of occasions; yet being too long in tuning, which
disgraceth all. So for subjects in the Common-welath: How many millions in
many Christian kingdoms (to pass by Jews, Turks, and Pagans) are as unlike
this people here specified in my Text, as Crows to Eagles, as Tigers to
Lambs! who being commanded by their governors, and enjoined these things,
that immediately concern the worship of God; as to break down Altars, pull
down Images, consecrate their hands to the Lord, as Moses commanded the
Levites in his Exodus 32.29.
time, executing Idolaters (as 1. King. 18.40
Elias, and 2. King. 10, 24
Iehu commanded the suppressing of the Priests of Baal, and 2. King. 11.15
Iehoida the slaughter of that usurping Athalia,) or enjoined, as our Irish at
this day, to come to our Church, to join with us in conformity, uniformitie
of worship, as sheep of one fold, with the like particulars: they prevail as
much with their injunctions, mulcts, impositions, (yea in some measure, in
former times, compulsions) as Lot prevailed with his sons inlaw, to leave
Genesis 19.14.
Sodom, or Jeremy with the Jews, to submit themselves to the King of Ier. 37.
and cha. 38.2.3.4.
Babell. Nay, what ever the Magistrates prescribe, or we persuade in public,
or private with them about the work; what ere we can say or do, it moves
them, as colors affect a blind man, or Music a deaf man. Yea (as the Act.
17.32.33
Athenians did with Paul,) when we persuade them to leave these unknowen gods,
which they worship; Saints, Angels, Shrines, Images, Relickes, Crosses, These
seven kinds of Idolatries, are imputed to them by M. Powel, li. 2. de
Antichristo by D. Raynolds, de Idolatria Romana Ecclesiae.
Crucifixes, and to worship the true God in spirit and truth: they now
worshipping, like the John. 4.22.
Samaritanes, they know not what. exhorting them (as Ezekiah by his Poasts and
messengers exhorted his people) at last to awaken out of their Idolatrous 2.
Chro. 30.6 7.8 9.
slumber, and to keep a spiritual Passover to the true God: we reap the
same harvest from this seed, which Paul and these Poast-men reaped; scorn,
contempts, scoffs, and derisions.

So again, laws being established against this biting usurie, against
profaning of the Sabbath, excessive pride in apparel, engrossing of Corn,
against thefts, robberies, rapes, and other breaches of Civil and religious
peace, in sins against God and man: all which are so many Edicts, Statutes,
Proclamations, revealing the will and minds of Christian Kings. Alas how are
they observed, notwithstanding all the annexed mulcts, and penalties against
the infringers (besides the sins, and threatened Psalm. 11.^. Psalm 50.18.20 21.
Job. 20.12.13. 1. Cor. 6.9.
plagues in respect of the soul?) If I should anatomize our times, and rippe
into particulars, I could more then Mathematically demonstrate, that our
Commonaltie grow worse by restrainte; like the fire, that more breaks out, the
more it is suppressed; as some running brook, that more swells, roares, and
rages, the more it is stopped; as Cammonmile, which they say more spreades, the
more it is trod down or as some stearne Colt, and unruly unbroken Stallion,
which more friskes and flings, and plungeth, the more he is curbd and kept in.
Ruimus in vetitum nefas, cupimusque negata.
and yet the restrainte of the laws is not the cause of the increasing
irregularities, no more then fire is cause of cold, or then the Scripture is
cause of heresies, or the chief good, of the chief evil: but only perverse
rebellion, and native hereditarie corruption, breaking out by opposition.

I might here also expostulate, how far differing from this people are these,
which are not only refractorie in things spiritual, to Christian Princes,
having in very truth no King, nay hardly any God but their Pope, whom they
make an other God on Tu es alter Deus in terris, nec Deus nec homo, sed medium
inter utrumque, Leo de Tribu Judah: Such like blasphemous titles, their
Canonists, and Sycophants, give to the man of sin.
earth; with other blasphemies: (as the Jews said when Christ should have
been received their Messiah, We have no Ioh. 19.12.15.
King but Caesar) but are stearne and stuborne also, if not rebellious in
denying subjection in things temporal, as namely, Taxes, Subsidies, Tenthes,
or the like: (which even the whole world in a manner gave to Augustus) About
the exactings, and collections of which; by some factious ring-leading
firebrarnds, it is wondrous to observe in histories, what mutterings,
murmurings, mutinies, rebellions, factious insurrections have been in many
Christian kingdoms; to the effusion of seas of blood, the breach of the
public peace, the weakening and wasting of many States, besides private men's
estates, and the loss of so many Collectors lives: as happened to Adoram, the
gatherer of Roboams tributes, whom all Israel stoned with stones, 1. Kings, 12.
verse. 18.

SECTIO. V. Expostulation with our refractorie, and rebellious times;
disobedient to God, to Man, to Ministry, to Magistracy.
But leaving these, and to expostulate with the multitude of our common people.
How far hetroclite, and defective are they, in respect of this people, in
respect of their Christian obedience to the Ministry, as well as to the
Magistracy? David as a Prince, as a Prophet, prescribes, persuades here the
people to bless God; they bless him: to sacrifice; they sacrifice, Rams,
and Lambs: to rejoice before the Lord; to eat and to drink with gladness of
heart: to contribute, to the Temple; they bring tallents of Gold, Silver, Lead,
and Iron, in abundance. He no sooner speaks, but they perform: he
prescribes, they practice; they work, what he wills. Oh this harmonicall
Music, betwixt a zealous tongue, a circumcised ear, a yielding will, a
consenting heart, an active hand! where shall this consort be heard, or seen
amongst our plebeians? Oh what occasion have we, that are Pastors, and
preachers, to complain, declaime yea exclaim, against the refractorie
perverseness of our people; that we speak (as Orpheus sung) to stocks, and
blocks? that we cry (as Diogenes begd) to mere images of See Staffords
Diogenes, as also one of Guevaras extant Epistles of Diogenes.
men, without spiritual motion? that we do surdo canere, sing to deaf men,
put meat in the mouths of dead men, wash Jer. 13.23.
blacka-moo^es, spend our breath in vain, sowing amongst stones and Math.
13.6.7
thorns, beating the air, plowing (as Apud Homer.
that Ulysses) the sands, casting our seed into bogges and quag-mires; yea
dispersing our lost labors, into the wind, and reaping the Operam and oleum
perdere.
whirle-winde, verba periunt cum sonitu, our words (eccho-like) perishing with
the wind; returning, as some Ambassadors, from great Princes, in some land, or
sea expeditions, without any performance? Our people to whom we call, and cry
for the practical performance of many duties, seem to be like the Baalites
Baal, either a sleep, or 1. King. 18.27
weary, or their wits gone, a wool gathering, that they neither hear us,
heed us, nor understand us. Convince their conscience we may, as Christ often
convinced the Scribes and Pharisees, Paul the false Apostles, Augustine the
Manichees and Pelagians, Beza some learned Papists in his disputes before the
Cardinal of Who wished one day, that Beza had no tongue, or his Auditors no
cares.
Loraine: but till God give the grace, we cannot convert them. We may by
motions persuade them to Mark. 1.15.
repenance, from dead works, (as did our Savior himself, John his Math.
3.1.10
predecessor; the Scribes, Pharisees, Publicanes, Sinners, Soldiers, of their
time) to humiliation for sin, to family duties; to which the Zach. 12.11.12.
command, yea the comination of Ier, 10.25.
God, and practice of the Genesis 18.18. 2. Sam. 6.20. Ioshuah, 24.15.
Saints, injoyns them: to sanctification of the Sabbath, they and their Exodus
20.8. Esai, 58.13.
husholds, in public, in private: to elimosynarie works of mercy; to leave
their brutish and beastly drinkings, their German quaffes, their drunken, A
conttrario ut bellum, quos^ minime bonum, lucus quasi minime lucen: being such
Clie^ts to Bacchus, that they are beholden to Esculap^ut.
unhealthfull healths, their good, bad fellowship, their Goatish, Swinish
lusts, their Lionly oppressions, their Fox-like frauds, their grinding
extortions, biting usuries, shiftings, sharkings, colloguings, cousenings,
cony-catchings, mony-catchings, chiefly their vain, profane, divellish,
damnable swearings, forswearings (which they may as well spare, as the dirt or
parings from their Psalm. 25.3.
nails, the smoke from their Chimneyes, as inexcusable) affording (what other
lusts promise, Genesis 29.25.
Laban-like, without performance) neither profit, nor pleasure: with
mortification of all other sins, as prejudicial to their souls, as
Ratsbaine in their meat, poison to their stomachs, a dagger or a dart,
transfixt to their heart; setting the best edge we can, upon their affections
(by all the preaching rules of Ecclesiastical Rethoricke, prescribed by the
Hunnius de Methodo concionandi, Kickerman in Rhetorica Ecclesiastica,
Perkinseus de art prophetandi.
learned) in our exhortations, to Moral or Theological virtues, or
dehortations from vice. Yet, like him in the Comedian, though they be
persuaded, they will not be Etiamsi persuaseris non persuadibis.
persuaded, being, as it were, mad with Cum ratione insanire.
reason; shutting their eyes against the Sun, kicking against the Act 9.5.
pricks, worse still for the Physic: as in a consumption of grace,
languishing more and more, even when they seem to have good stomachs to their
meat; this spiritual Manna dwining away, as some children that have inward
diseases, even whilst they seem hungeringly and affectingly to suck the milk
of the 1. Pet. 2.1.
Word, from the dugs of the two Testaments; perishing spiritually for want of
digesting practice, even whilst this meat, this milk, this Manna, is in their
mouths: as the carnal Numb. 11.34
Israelits, with their lusted Quails, even in eating filled the graves of lust
Insomuch, that when I read what authors have writ of Mela, Solinus, Gellius,
Plinius, Orosius, Lycosth.
monsters, some with their great huge Sciopedes sunt apud Indos Maiolus col. 2.
page 81 and Hippopodes, Mela. lib. 3. c. 63. Plin. lib. 4. c. 13.
feet, great heads, great Oculis in pectore, (...) fixis Plin. li. 5. c. 8 li.
7. c. 2 Aug. li. 16. c. 8 de Civitat. Dei. Sic Monoculi, and Agriophagoi, apud
Solin. c. 19. c 32 c. 53. and Cyclopes apud I^ido. li. 11. cap. 3.
eyes, great Mela. li. 3. c. 3
ears, great teeth, great lips, great Mela. lib. 3. c. 4. Solin. cap. 32. Plin
li. 6. cap. 30 cum alijs.
tongues; me thinks our common people, the greatest monsters: some of them
being upon our Sabbath and Lecture days, all ears, to suck and sponge up our
Sermons; yet (as other monsters or Serpents, creeping on all four) in their
practice, as drunken men, disgorge again presently in the Churchyard, what
they seemed to gulf down in the Church: or as Lead and Iron, instantly
cooling, as soon as they come out of the fire of the Ministry, and feel the
cold air of the world blowing upon them: though seemingly washed, when they
are in the waters of the sanctuary, stirred by the preaching John. 5.4.
Angel; yet soil again as soon as ever the infected dust cleaves to their
feet. We whip them by Legal terrors, as parents their young children with
rods, when we get them in Gods house, for soyling, spoiling, dabling their
garments (their flesh their natures, their souls) with filthy sins; yet as
soon as ever they are out of our sight, in every Alehouse, and Tap-house,
they are swatling and dabbling again, in the quags, and myres of pollutions,
as little Gooselings, and Ducklings, in their boggy ponds. We in the Church
give them Antidots, Mithridates, Preservatives, and Curatives against sin;
and the world, with her Circean cups, poisons them still a fresh again. We,
with the belowes of our breaths for the time, kindle in them some sparks of
good desires and motions, as Paul did in Act. 26.28.
Agrippa, Christ in the carnal John. 6.28.34. chapter 7.46.
Jews, Peter in Act. 8.24.
Simon Magus, Luke 3.12.
John in the Publicanes and Math. 3.6.7
Pharisees: but the Revel. 12.4.
Dragon, the Devil, with the help of his agents, the flesh and world,
presently quench them again. they are shorter lived then De quibus apud Mela.
l. 3. c. 4. Solin. c. 15 53 Plin. l. 4. cap. 11. li. 5. c. 29. Aug. de Civ.
Dei, l. 16. c. ^
Pigmeyes, yea, then Piscis Ephemero^, vn^ die ortus, and adultus, and mortuus,
Albert. li. ^4 and Vincent. hist. li. 17. c. 47. Maiolu^. col. 9. page 36^.
Ephemerons. Thus what we weave, the spiritual enemies chiefly our corruptions,
Penelope-like, unweave again. Thus we run with them, as in a circle, in
amaze, in a Meandrian Labyrinth; never the nearer, (like him that follows a
seather, or butterfly) then when we begun. We roll, as the phrayses are,
Sisiphus his stone, and turn Ixions wheel: they give us the hearing, as this
people did David, but only the hearing, without the heeding in which this
people did more then they. Oh my brethren, what mould be our hearts of? of
what metal be we made? how are we hewn out of Caucasus? what flintie hearts
have we? what Pumice Oculos habeo pumiceos, no^ possum vna catorquere
lachrimulam, etc. apud Plautum.
eyes? When I compare the docibilitie, the tractablenesse of this and other
people, with our Lyon-like steamnesse, our Adamantine obduracie; me thinks, I
compare again, not worthies, with worthies, as in David's 1. Chro. chapter 11 v.
11.12.13.18.20, 22.
time; (as In Plutarkes lives, now Englished by Doctor Holland.
Plutarch the Greeks with the Romans) but worthies with wretches, with
wicked ones: I seem to poyze, and parallel again Venus with Vulcan, Achilles
with Clineas, Ulysses with Thirsites: yea Saints with Sinners, Devoute
Proselites, with Incarnate Devils.

SECT. VI. Isreal's zeal and readiness approved: our remissness in good
duties justly redargued and reproved.
When I consider how forward some have been, even like Angels to do the will
of God, immediately from God, as Genesis 12 4. Genesis 22.3.
Abraham, Genesis 6.22.
Noah, Exodus 4.18. Exodus 5.1 c 14.27
Moses, Josh. 4. verse. 4. cap. 5.3.
Joshua, Judge. 6.27. chap 7.6.
Gideon, this our David, etc. and mediately from man, in God and for God, as
here this people: withal, how froward and backward we; blockish, in not
knowing, like the Horse and Psalm. 32.9.
Mule; more beastly, in not acknowledging, with the Ox and Esaias, 1.4.
Ass, our own Master, our Maker: when I read and ponder Abraham sacrifizing
his own, his one, his only child, loving beloved Isaac, the son of
blessing, the blessed seed, typical Christ, even with once See Parreus,
Parerius, Calvin, and Marlorate in their Comments on Genesi^. exemplifying all
the circumstances of Abraham's faith, and obcienc, in this intended act.
bidding; and we not to sacrifice one lust, the least sin, a tongue-oath,
etc. with many biddings: how Noah prepares the Arc, with one word; we prepare
no Arc, no spiritual Temple, no Tabernacles fit, no upper room for Christ's
Mark. 14.14.
Passover no chamber of presence for the great King, no inner closet of the
heart, for Gods spirit to inhabit; after many words, many woings,
pulsations, solicitations, pollicitations, and promises unto us, upon his
Revel 3.20.
entrance. How readily Samuel answers the call of God, once 1. Sam. 3.10.
perceived: how carelessly we neglect it, though discerned a hundred times. How
speedily Luk 5.8.9.10 11. Ioh, 1.39 42.
Peter, Andrew, and John leave their ships and netts (the world with her
snares) Math. 9 9.
Matthew his Receipt (deceit) of Custom, following Christ, as his docible
Disciples, even at first call; as did also Luke 19.6.
Philip, Bartholomew, Luke 19.6.
Zacheus, with some others, embracing the first motion of his mercy, call of
his word and spirit: we neglecting, rejecting so many calls; frozen in our
dreggs, as unwilling to leave our ships, our netts, profits, pleasures, and
insnaring lusts, to exchange them for Christ, for his grace, his Gospel, his
spirit, his glory: as Genesis 19.6.
Lot or his Luke 17.32.
wife to leave Sodom, Israel his Egyptian Exodus 16.3.
Onions, yea as the Mole to forsake the earth, the fish the waters, the child
his dugge, the fool his babble, though upon promises of far better things.
How soon Philip won John. 1.45.46 47.
Nathanael to know Christ the true Messiah: how that Samaritan woman, upon once
conference with Christ, perceives him, and receives him her John. 4.20.29.
Savior: how upon one testimony, from that one single (odd) woman, the whole
City upon the first mention, first motion, entertain and receive him as their
desired ver. 40.41.42
salvation: how upon one Text, opened and explaned by Philip, the Ethiopian
Eunuch believes in Christ, is Act. 8.35.36 in Tom. 6. Bibl. Patrum, tota est
historia largius.
baptized; yea as a true (new) Proselite preaches Christ, and plants the
Gospel amongst his Nigroes, as is Iren. li. 3. c, 12. and l. 4. 40. Eusebius. li.
2. c. 1. Niceph. 1. c. 1. Hierom. c 3 Esai, and epistola 103, vbi Sanctu^
vocat, and apostolum Aethiopum,
recorded: how in one Sermon of Paul's, Lidia's heart is Acts 16.14,
opened; one admonition from Paul and Silas, the Iaylor, with his whole
household, is verse, 30, 31, 32
converted; one Sermon from Peter, Cornelius is confirmed, the holy Ghost, by
his friends and household, Acts 10, 44
received; by another Sermon three thousand, even Christ-crucifying Jews,
touched in heart, wounded in Acts 2, 37, 38,
soul and conscience. Yea (still to keep to my grounds, though I run descant
never so often, never so far) how all this people, as heavenly Queristers, in
my text are ringing and singing the praises of God, upon the first begun
strains of David their Precentor. Comparing all these with our secure, and
sensual, and sinful times, that are not wrought upon by any means: not
reclaimed (more then the De feritate huius animalis Pli. l. 28 c. 8. and lib 8
c. 17. tametsi, si cu^ hedo assuefiat, domescit, instat. Aelian. lib. 6, c. 2
Panther can be tamed.) by any mercies: not to be turned from our vain
courses, discourses, more then the Seas out of their channel, by many (by any)
motives* our hearts so crustie, so brawny; not to be pierced and penetrated,
more then the scales of a Dragon, by any edge of the word, the sword of the
Spirit: our diseases so desperate, so dangerous; not to be balmed, salved with
any balm of Ier. ^.22.
Gilead: our hearts so foul, like that Augean One of Hercules his works to
cleanse it, moralized by Maiolus, col. 1 part 1. page 13. And by Natales Comes
in his Mythiologies.
Stable, not to be rensed, cleansed, with all the waters of the sanctuary. Yea
more; when I seriously ponder (what some Historians pen) how docible, how
pliable, how teachable, how tractable, even some brute creatures have been to
As a Heart to Sertorius: Maiolus, Colloq. 7. page 276, a Panther to the father of
Philin. Plin. libr. 8. cap. 17.
man: as B^tephalus Alex. Solin. c 46 Isidor. lib. 12. c. 16 Sic alij aequi
alijs apud Diod. libr. 12. Ael^an. libr. 16. cap. 23.
Horses, De docilitate Canum multa Plin. lib. 8. cap. 40 Aelian. 8 c. 30 and
lib 6, c. 61. li. 5, c. 26. and li. 7. 10. 18 and Zonaras in Tiberio.
Dogs, Apes, Mira de docilitate Elephantis, Aelian lib 4. cap. 9. and 7.39.
Arist. lib. 9. cap. 46. and Albert lib. 8. tract 5 cap. 2 Sic de Camelo, Plin.
lib. 8 cap. 18. and Leonius p 8.
Elephants, Crows; yea, if we believe some writers, how officious even Wolves
and De Leone famulante Androdium apud Gillium de noct. Attic. lib. 5. cap. 14.
Aelian. lib. 7. cap. 43. Sic de Leonibus and Lupis, and Corvis famulantibus,
Sanctos quosdam apud Surium com. 6. and in prato spir. cap. 107. Et in vita
Sanctorum page, 3, cap. 7,
Lions have been to man, their acknowledged Lord: and yet that man himself
should be so hardly tutored and trained (without strayning and constrayning by
the Iron rodds, and whip-cords of many crosses and afflictions, inward and
outward, as Gods last and best Physic) to yield homage, fealty, honor, and
service, submission, and subjection, and all the tributary duties of
invocation, humiliation, gratulation, etc. to his maker, Lord, protector,
preserver, and redeemer. Yea lastly, and to conclude all; when I ponder how
easily we are persuaded by any indifferent friend, to ought that concerns our
moral good, as Moses by his Father in-law Iethro, to admit of a help in his
Exodus, 18, 24.
Magistracy, 2. King, 5, 13, 14.
Naaman to wash in Iordane: or dissuaded from what is prejudicial to us as the
Acts 16, 29, 30,
Iaylor from killing himself, David from killing 1, Sam, 25, 32, 33, ^^
Naball, chiefly how inclinable to our Lawyer, or Counselor, laying our Case
or Action, thus, or thus: moving in this Court, or removing to that, as may be
to our best advantage, but especially to our Physician, that by his prescript,
we take druggs, and pills and potions, though never so bitter as Aloes, Rubarb,
and the like: be content to be dieted, to abstain from what we love, as from
Wine, in the Gout, Milk, in a Fever, Eeles, Porke goose, etc. such stirring
meats, in case of a green wound, for fear of See Gales surgery, and the
General practice of physic in these cases.
Impostumation, yea and for the preservation of health; prevention of
sickness, to part with the blood of our veins. I say pondering these, (and
laying all these preceding paralels in one balance) with the present condition
of many millions, that careless of their souls, (as Esther once of her life,
If they perish, they Esth. 4.16.
perish.) are so hard to be drawn by God, or man, by the Word, or Sword, by
preaching or beseeching, threatening or entreating, either from the leaving, or
loathing of committed sins, or constant and conscionable performance of
omitted duties: I say in the serious meditation, and consideration of these
premises, I cannot but lament the sinners folly, man's native and natural
stupiditie, Ierem. 8.6.
inconsideration and misery, our English Irish sensuality, security,
impiety, impenitencie; that though we have more means, more mercies more calls to
grace, then ever Judea, or these formerly recited; yet we make less use of
them then they, either in the Theorie, or Practice, of such gracious, such
gratulatorie duties, as the Peers and people, after the prescript and pattern
of their Prince here performed.

SECTIO VII. The universalitie of Isreal's gratitude, with our universal
ungracious ingratitude; paralelled, and compared.
MOreover to examine our grounds a little further: this first spring of my
Text, abounding, you see, with spiritual waters to refresh the Israel of God;
there being no word, letter, syllable, or hebrew prick superfluous, or
unsignificant in the language of Canaan: (as in Tully, Demosthenes, Eschins,
Hortensius, and other following Orators humane) as the learned in the Original
tongues have Drusius in suis annotationibus. Ren^etius in suae Pantheologia:
Lelius, de expresso Dei verbo: Merneus de veritate Religionis, Zanthius de
sacra Scriptura.
observed, and from thence argued, the infallible verity and excellency of
the Scriptures, above all humane authors as aqua vitae, and distillatorie
waters above conduit waters. It Is very remarkable here the generality of
their gratulations, the conformity, unity, uniformitie of their worship, their
sacrifices; it is said all the Congregation though great and populous blessed
God, all worshipped, all sacrificed, all feasted before the Lord. There was not
a man of them of a contrary mind, heart, spirit, judgment, will: in the best
of works they all drew as in one yoke, walked as by one rule or line, sung
one note, kept one tune; there was not one cross refractorie spirit that is
taken notice of in the whole multitude, but they join together, their hearts
and voices to the blessing of God: Oh here was a blessed object to David's ear
and eye. I wish our David could see the like, according to his travails and
desires; that all those differences, divisions, contentions, betwixt Prelacie
and Presbetery in our English Israel, about black and white, and square and
round, and sitting, and kneeling, with such ceremonies, so hotly controverted
by the tongues and pens of so many zealists, on both sides, pro and contra,
in our Churches, Pulpits, Houses and private (as sometimes public) Tables;
that all this might meet as right drawn lines in one Center of Read the
extant Treatises of our moderate Cassanders, as D. Sparks, M. Sprint, M.
As^aew his brotherly reconcilement.
peace: that as we agree in doctrine with all reformed Churches,
notwithstanding all papisticall cavils, and calumnies to the contrary: so we
might agree also in discipline, in the circumstances as well as in the
substance of Religion; not dissenting in the color, form, or fashion, shape,
lace of the garment, when we consent in the choice goodness of the cloth. Oh
that as we profess, confess one God the father of all, one Christ the
redeemer of all, one Ephesians. 4 4.5.
Spirit the sanctifier of all the Elect: yea one Faith, one Baptism, one Hope,
one Life, one way to this life, as one Sun, but one Soul in man, one De
Phoenice, etiamsi multi dubitant, asseru^t tamen, Mela li. 3. cap. 4 Herod. li.
2. c. 5. Solin. c. 35. Imo describit Ruffinus enpos. Symbol Isodor. li. 12. c.
7. Aug. ser. 18* allegantur, etiam quaedam, in Council. Aquisg. c. 112 113
Phoenix in the world, etc. so that we would as one, in one mind, by one
Psalm. 3.16.
rule, worship this God in John. 4.24.
Spirit, in truth, in unity, in uniformitie of judgment and affections! And
surely this harmony I desire to see, to hear, as earnestly as Augustine
desired in his time a Timothy, or Paul again in the Augustine desired to see
Christum in carne, and Paulum tonitruantem.
Pulpit to effect with best mental music. Oh that those strings, what ever
they be, which are put out of Tune, would come up to these that are in Tune:
yea (if I may speak it without offense to God or man) as Paul in some cases
wished himself cut Rom 9.3.
off, and Moses his name blotted out of the book of Exodus 32.32.
life, for the zeal of Israel, I wish even my mummiamized earth and dead ashes
might quench at last these unnatural flames and fires in our English Church
about these adiaphora, these indifferent Adiaphorists.
things, as they are called, that like Aetna and that Vetruvius, the f^ogges
and smoaks of scandals and offenses, might no more break out, to the choking
and smothering of the unsettled, ignorant and unstable. But, as was the
meditation once of D. Hall, our English Seneca, in his meditations, quem
honoris causa nomino,
another, I fear as the De mirabili amore Pellicani sanguine proprio, pulloi
resusscitatis, Aelian. lib. 15. Vincent. libr. 16. cap. 127. Et applicant ad
Christum, Aug. enarrat. in Psalm. 101. Gregor. in Psalm. 6.
Pelican in love to her young (about whose nest the Indian shepherds make
fires) thinking to quench the flames, does but scorch her own wings by which
she is taken: so in too much intermedling, by the scorching tongues of
censure, I prejudice my self, without profiting the public cause. Therefore
stearing from these rocks. I desire to reflect upon this meditation, That all
are here well affected to God, and the King, all thankful, for mercies, all
worshippers, all sacrificers. There was not one notified specified Cham in the
Arc, not one Judas amongst these docibles, (if not Disciples) not one at this
feast, without the wedding Math. 22.11.
garment, not a Tobiah and Sanballat that counterfeited their help to the
Temples Neh 4.1.2.3.
building, not a Sheba, not an Achitophell, not a Popish Kerne, not a
rebellious spirit amongst them all, not a Corab, or Numb. 16.12.13.
a Dathan in this goodly (we may hope godly) Congregation, despising Jude,
verse. 8.
government, resisting authority, not a tongue wagges as in former times; We
have no part in the Son of 2. Sam 20.1.
Isai, shall this man reign over 1. Sam. 10.27
us? to thy Tents oh Israel; not one that preferred a foreign Bramble, Judges.
9.15.
before their own Cedar; not a man of them Iesuited, but if the oath of
allegiance had been put to them, would have subscribed with heart and hand;
not one Recusant amongst all these that refused in the same religious manner to
worship God, as his King worshipped; not an infected sheep amongst all this
flock; not a string out of Tune in all this musical Multitude is either an
instrument Musical, or that Bellua multorum capitum.
multitude: not a contradicting superstitious Cananite, an Idolatrous Egyptian,
amongst all these Israelites; but all of them (for as much as man could judge)
with one heart, voice, and spirit, as the rushing of so many waters, as the
sound of so many Trumpets, as the noise of so many Cornets, so many Cymbals,
and loud Cymbals, with united spirits (as Organs and instruments of Gods glory
rightly tuned) resonate, and resound the praises of the Almighty. Oh that I
might be an auditor, a spectator, of such mental Music in these days! Many
musical men have writ Boethius lib. 5. Musices c. 1. Glareamus li. 1.
Dodechacordon c. 1. Athan. libr. 14. Dipnos. cap. 5. and cap. 14. Julius Pollux
libr. 4. Onomast. cap. 8. and 9.10.11. etc. ^elius Rhodig. Antiq. lect. lib 5.
cap 23 25.26. Ottom Luscivius, libr. 1. Musurgia. Plato lib. 3. de Rep diversas
numerans Musicae species, variaque instrumentoru^ genera.
very curiously and exactly of the varieties, excellencies, and excellent
effects of De admiranda vi Musices co^s^^^e, Arist. Job. 8. polit. 5. and Plato
dial. 6. de Legibus, Galenum li. 3. cap. 5 de M^pocrate, Amatum lib. 2. in Dis.
or. ^.50 Gellium noct. Attie. lib. 1. cap. 10. Atheneum li. 14. Di^nos. c. 11.
and lib. 1 c. 7. Infistento, in Ter^^dro Thaleto, and pheo Amphion. and in
Cythar Agamemnon
Music; and have distinguished it, into Vocal, Isntrumental, Lidian,
Doricke, Natural, Artificial, Elementary, Celestial, Regular, Choreall,
Gregorean, Figurall, Mensurall: disputing about the pre-eminence of one of
these before another; most preferring vocal, which they call solemnization,
before isntrumental: But for my part, as much as I prefer the Soul before
the body, I prefer the music of souls and spirit, uno animo, una voce;
with one unanimous concord and consent rightly tuned in the best key, by the
finger of the spirit, with holy hearts (rather the^ musical Harps) singing, as
once the Angels and the Bethelem Luk, 2, 14,
Shepherds, Moses and Exodus 14,
Miriam, Augustine and They are said to be the Authors of that holy hymn,
which call Te Deum,
Ambrose, David here and his people, their holy hymns, gratulatorie praises,
Io Paeans, (as our plantations this day) to the glory of the God of glory, the
giver of all grace. And sure, if ever I saw heaven upon earth, it is when a
religious Pastor and a zealous people, are assembled together in Gods house
upon the Lords Sabaoths (or a religious family as a private or petty Church)
hearing, and preaching the word; as in Paul's time, continued the whole Act, 20,
7
day, expounding Scriptures; as in Ezras Neh, 8.5.6, 7, 8
time, in public prayers early in the morning; as in Tertullians days, and
the Primitive Pliny the Junior testifies so much of them, in epistle to Traian
apologizing for Christians,
times, in some places and Churches in our times, singing of Psalms, as our
Savior with his Disciples at his last Supper. Oh sure here is an Image indeed,
of heaven; here is, in some parts of Gods worship, vita coelestis, vita
celitum, the life of the Saints, in earth and in heaven: here is Bethell, Gods
own Genesis 35, 7,
house, the place is holy Exodus, 3, 5,
ground, God himself here is present, Mark 14, 26
walking in the midst of the Revel. 2.1.
golden Candelstickes; (as he was with Sydrach, Mysaach, and Dan. 3.24.25
Abelenago, singing in the Babylonian flames; and with these joyful Saints,
Saunders, Apud Foxum in Mart. ^ilogi^.
Gl^ver, and others, who rejoiced and triumphed in the midst of that Romish
Babylonian flames, in which the Martyrs were tortured in Queen Maryes days:)
here Christ himself is present and president too, as he was with his
Disciples after his Luke 24.
Resurrection and Ascension, in the days of Act. 2.1.2.3
Pentecost, according to his promise. Whether there be natural Music in
nerves, arteries and sinews, the simularie or dissimularie parts of the body
of Opinio: Heripinli Medici, Albere^, Durer^. and Tyurdei, l 2. Musices, vide
and Tolosaeuum Syntax. ar^is Mirabil^, l. 12 c. 8 page 189
man; or whether elementarie music in the elements, as In Tymeo, and in
Platonem Marsil. Ficinus.
Plato, In sonno Scip. and Macrob. in Ciceronem lib 2. c. 1
Tully, Matrobius thought; or whether celestial and heavenly music in the
Spheres, as Py^hagoras first Apud Athen. lib. 14. cap 14.
imagined, and to which many learned men since in all ages, have in some Vt
inter Philosophos, Plat. li. 10. Reip. pa. 670. Macrob. lib. 2. de somn. Scip.
c. 3. p. 90. Plutarch. de musica tom. 2 pa. 707. Inter Poetas Aristoph. in
nubibus act. 1. scan. 3. pa 169. Virgil. Aeneid. page 167 Manilius l. 1. pa. 25.
Iuter Theologes Anselm. demundi magine, ca. 24. tom. 3. page 300. Beda de
musica practicit, tom. 1. p. 417. Ma^imus T^ius, sermon. 21. p. 256. and ser. 23.
page 280.
sense subscribed, though by others contradicted, others disputed, others
doubted: these musical controversies to me are not much material. Here is
that music which as David said of Goliahs sword, 1. Sam. 21.9.
there is none like unto it: Here is the music of musickes, as Salomons
Canticles are called, the song of songs, to which the Quier of heaven, joins
with the Chorus of Saints in earth. At this the Angels rejoice, Luke 15 verse.
10.
as at tht conversion of sinners; With this God himself is delighted, his
spirit ravished, refreshed, more then ever Alexander, or any other was wrought
upon, by modulations of any earthly man. Where on the contrary (to make
application to our own times) if ever I saw the very image, and picture of
hell; it is when a careless Emperick of Souls, a doltish Sir Iohn-lack Latin
a blind Pholypheme, a profane Esau, one of Ieroboams priests, 1. King. 12.
verse. 31.
is placed over a people of Sodom: Isay 1. v. 10.
as a Wolf over goats; whereupon Gods own Saboths, which should be
consecrated as glorious days to the Lord, Ier. 17.27.
are perverted and profaned rather to the service of Bacchus, Priapus and
Venus, as once the heathenish Floralia, and Bacchanalia, etc. that the Devil
should so rule and reign in the popish or profane parish, keep such a
rackett, as the chief steward, both with Pastor and people; that neither
barrel being better Hering in stead of preaching, there should be pyping, or
idle prating, playing, as the Israelitish wantons once with the Moabitish
women: Numb. 25. in stead of Devotion; dancing in stead of singing of Psalms,
discharging of oaths, like vollies of shot, and roarings of Canons, with
full, fool, foul mouths, even in the very face of the Almighty. Oh the
difference betwixt David's days and ours, those Ioviall, Saturnall golden
days, in which he lived; and our Iron irefull times! David's people, had they
acted, such public parts of Gods praises in our days; worshipped God, so
seriously, so solemnly, so sincerly now; they had been counted and called
Puritans, Precisians, every mothers son of them: many an Genesis 21.9.
Ismalite would have scoft them: many a 2. Sam. 20.6.
Micholl mocked them; yea had but part of this Congregation assembled in the
night, as the persecuted Christians were sometimes occasioned for their
security, and the Disciples after Christ's Acts 12. v. 12
Ascension; had there been any religious Chiefly a Damsel Rhoda, as Act.
12.13 She would be counted and called too, an ^^rodias.
women amongst them, though Mary Magdalens, Salomees or Susanas. they should
all have been taxed, and traduced to have been of the Family of love, or
lust; Adamits or Anabaptists; they had been censured every one; their
devotions had been turned on the tipp of malignant tongues, into promiscuous
daunces; they had escaped no better then the Primitive Christians, or then the
sincerest in those days: at least they had been counted more precife then
wise, more hypocritical then holy, thus public to praise, and worship God,
which they might have done well enough in private, without this Heraulding, and
Trumpetting Gods praise (and in his, their own) perhaps they had not escaped
the imputations, which Festus gave unto Acts 26.24
Paul, and 2. King. 9.11
Iehues consort Captains to the annoynting Prophets, even of mad men.

SECT. VIII. David's times, and ours, further balanced; inrespect of
multitudes, then Religious, now Irreligious.
THus David and his people were, as in a plurifie or burning fever of zeal,
carried up, as 2. King. 2.11.
Elias, as in a fiery Chariot: we are now in a cold palsy, frozen as Esops
snake, yea, as De frigiditate Salamandri, Discorides lib. 2. c. 5. Galenus de
Temper. lib. 3. cap. 4. Et Aug. de Civit. Dei, lib. 21. cap. 4.
Salamanders not to be heated, extinguishing all sparks and fires that are put
in us by good motions from God, or put to us by good motives from man. Oh the
difference betwixt their blessing Shibboleths and our smoakie, stinking,
blaspheming, Judges. 12.6.
Sibboleths! Reflect on my Text, and at first blush you see all this numerous
and populous Congregation, blessing and worshipping God, to be blessed and
praised for ever: reflect on our times, and it would make any true Nathaniel,
that has but a glimpse or dram of grace; his face to blush, his heart to
bleed, his ears to tingle, to hear in thousand Parishes, and Congregations in
England and Ireland (except some few, which fear an oath) the most part,
chiefly in Alehouses, Taverns, Innes, and Tippling houses, when the Devil and
strong drink is in, and the wit's out, not only with tongues poisoned, as
Aspes, blaspheming the best of men, as the drunkards, that made songs of David:
but even setting their mouths against heaven, barking against the sovereign
Majesty of the Almighty, as the Egyptian dog against the Moon, tearing (as
the Lion a Kydde, or the flesh Wolf a sheep) the heart, wounds, blood, yea
nails, feet, guts, yea all the parts of Christ's humanity, as though like
Cannibals, they would eat his very flesh again (not as our Mass Priests and
Papists in a blind devotion, but) even in despite, as though with the Jews
they would Crucify again the Lords glorified body, and wound his wounds a
fresh. Oh, the blasphemies of the multitude (in stead of blessings) for which
the land mourns! Can a man come to any public assembly (unless in Assizes,
Sessions, and such Courts where silence is enjoined) and, as I have purposely
observed, at Horse-races, Dogge-races, Men-races, in Markets, Fayres,
Marriages, occasioned Feasts, and all public meetings, from Nobles to Pages,
from Knights to Plow-men, there is not a man amongst Ten (to speak, which
swearers do not, within compass) that makes conscience of an oath (chiefly of
their faith and troath, which pawn they upon every trivial occasion) more
then an Ape, as they say to crack nuts? And as it holds in other places, so
chiefly (as I see too experimentally in these our Plantations, in my
observance) great men, Knights, Gentlemen, Yoemen, Husbandmen, Servants,
Serving-men, Prentices, Pages, yea Women and Children, Matrons and maids, and
old wives too (whose tongues wanting the garrison of Teeth, hang as loose as
the rest) have no oftener the use but the abuse of their tongues in this
needless, unpleasing, unprofitable sin, chiefly when heated with wrath, and
words, or in the bickerings of contestations, how do not only great, but even
base spirits, revenge themselves upon God himself? wreaking their Teene by
oaths upon the Creator, when they are any way provoked, by the creature; as if
a spirited mastife, being whipped by another, should fly in the face of his
master? as King Henryes fool, that being struck by any is said to stricke
again, ever his next fellow, whether he hurt him or no? But come now to our
rascalitie, or riffe-riffe of the route, of the basest of the common Mobile and
ignobile vulgus.
people, and you shall hear them, in their ordinary talk, conference,
commerce, working or walking together (besides what they act upon the Tribunal
of their Ale-bench, in which these Serpents turn then Dragons) rapping,
darting, yea laughing out, more oaths in an hour, then ever they did good
deeds all their days, croaking like so many Frogs, barking as so many
Dogs, as so many Adders spitting their very venom and poison so in the
very face of God, as a man would think he were amongst so many Devils, and
Hell Hounds. I pretermit the curses, execrations, imprecations of our people,
blasphemings, dallyings, jestings with Ite procul, ite profani.
Scriptures and Sermons as with edge Non est bonu^, ludere cum Sanctis.
tools, mutterings, murmurings against God, as once rebelling Exodus 16. Numb.
11. Numb. 16.
Israel, gruntling as Swine, if but touched with the least crosses, hissing like
Snakes and Serpents, in the least fire of afflictions: Oh this is to speak
the language of Ashodd, as accursed Cananites, whereas we should speak the
language of Canaan, as these blessing Israelits. If I should press the
practice of this Prince, and people further, and lay ours to it, in an equal
balance comparing what they did with what we do not, as black compared to
white, seems more Contraria iuxta se opposita, magis ^lucescunt.
black; as the Heathens Vulcan, compared to their fair Venus, seems more
foul: so our Congregation and Commonaltie, seem as more sinful, compared
with these Saints, in David's days; They are all dutious, devout* obsequious,
thankful, religious, at least in the outward man (for God only knows the
heart and searches the Ier. 17.9.10
Reins and knows, whether there were amongst this Congregation (as amongst
ours) any gilded Luke, 11.39 40.41.42.
Posts, painted Sepulchers, Sodoms Solinus cap. 36 Tacitus libro vltimo
animalium, Aegisippus lib. 4 ca. 18. Imo de his Pomis Sodomiticis, Mira refert
Tertul. apol. cap. 39. O^osius lib. 1. cap. 6. August. de Civitate Dei, lib. 6.
cap. 30. and 21. cap. 5. Praecipue Cyprianus de excidio Sodomae.
Apples, rott at the Core, hollow hearted Hypocrites. But hoping the best, when
we can only suspect, (not detect) the worst: even the generality of our
plebeans, our vulgar people come short of these, in that they have hardly so
much as shows; they come not so near heaven, as did sacrificing Genesis 4.4.5
Cain, weeping Hebr. 12.16
Esau, the vowing Proverb. 7
Harlot, the carnal Even Doeg himself, 1. Sam 22. will offer a sacrifice.
Israelite, prophesing Numb. 23.8.9
Balaam, preaching Acts 1.23.24.
Judas, the praying Luke. 18.13
Pharisee, the foolish Matthew. 25.
Virgins, the fasting Esaias 58.
Jews, the humbled 1. King. 21 vltimo.
Ahab, the Herodian hearer, the devoute Jewish women, the temporizing
Hypocrite, and other retchlesse reprobates; for these had at least shows of
religion, as had Coll. 4.14. 2. Tim. 4.10.
Demas, 1. Sam. 11.15 and chap. 14. v. 33
Saul himself, and many more; a name at least to live, like the Church of
Revel. 3.1.
Sardis, how ever, like those wanton widows in 1. Tim. 5.6.
Timothy, dead whilst living in sins and Ephesians. 2.1.
trespasses; yea buried and stinking in Gods nosthrils, as John. 11.39.
Lazarus in man's: But our common Christians, for the most part, their courses
are so lewd, that pleasing God, as a common woman does her husband, they have
not so much as a show to live; they have not so much as figg-leaves of outward
profession, much less the fruit of practice; they want both stock, and that
which (as they say) shows any substance of grace; they do not so much as
seem religious, they have not even shadows, their whole profession is
profanation. I know God has his elected ones in every place and people,
chiefly where the means be planted (as where also they be unplanted or
corrupted) I know God had his Lot in Genes. 19.2. Pet 2.
Sodom, his Noah amongst the Luke. 17.26. Genes 6.8.
worldlings, his Elias and seven thousand more unseene amongst the 1. King. 19
18.
Baalites, his Sydrach, Mesach, and Daniell in Dan. 3.13.
Babylon, his Ezekiell amongst Ezekiel. 2.6.
Scorpions, his Abraham in Act. 7.2.
Mesopotamia, his David's in the very Tents of Kedar and in Psalmis,
Mesek, his Joseph in the Court of Genes. 41.45.
Pharaoh, his Israel in Exodus 3.7.
Egypt, yea such as hated the Babylonian whore, and by their pens and
tongues discovered her filthiness, even in the darkest times of See them
expressed and nominated, by that learned work of the B. of Mead, De statu and
successu Ecclesiae, out of all Records and authors, ancient and Modern.
Popery. I know, as the Lord had a John 1.44.
Philip in Bethaida, a Nathaniel in John 21.2.
Cana, a Lazarus, a Martha, a Mary, even in that little John. 11.5.18.
Bethania, a Simeon, a Joseph, a Zachary, a Joseph of Arimathea, that looked
for the Redemption and Consolation Israel, even in the midst of a bloody and
sinful Jerusalem; a Cornelius, a devoute Act. 10.1.
Centurion, even amongst the bands of Roman soldiers; yea, a thundering
Christian Legion in the camp of a heathenish Of this legio^ who obtained Rain
to the saving of the Emperors army, and how from the power of prayer, they
were called Legio fulminatrix, we read in Text ad Scapul. and in apol. ca. 5.
in Eus. l. 5. c. 5. in Justin. apol. 2. ad Auto. ad finem in Alsted. Theol.
^^t. sect. 3. page 731.
Emperor, even a Church in the house of Nero himself: so in the profanest
Places, Times, Cities, Towns, Parishes, yea sometimes Families, there be some
that fear God, that keep themselves free from the contagions of the times,
hate the garment Jude 23.
polluted by the flesh, save themselves in the midst of a sinful generation,
stand in the gappe, as Moses and Aaron by Numb 16.22
prayer, to prevent deserved plagues; yea, I say, even in the profanest
housholdes there be sometimes some holy ones, sometimes a Genesis 39.1.2.
Joseph in the house of Putiphar, a Jacob in the house of Genesis 29.
Laban, a religious young maid in the house of Naaman the 2 King. 5.1.2.
Syrian. I say there be even still some come amongst chafe; but alas these
Godly ones are thin sown, here one, and there one, as vnious; here one of a
Tribe, and two of a Ier. 3.14.
City, as pearls amongst pibbles, compared with the multitude of blasphemous
swearers, Goatish adulterers, Swinish drunkards, biting usurers, Thieves,
profane Sabboth-breakers, and others, given over, like Ahab and Iezabell, to
commit all wickedness with greediness. Alas, the true Nathaniels, compared
with these Nabals, these sensual, sinful Ps. 14.1. prove. 7.7. Proverb 8.5.
Luke 12.20.
fools, as God calls, and accounts them, which swarm as the Locusts and
Grasshoppers in every place, as Egyptian frogs in Court, Country, City;
they are so few, that thus shine as Stars in this our dark night of Popery
and profanesse, so many are carried away to all sinful courses, with the
very stream and torrent of the times that we may say (as we see) that all are
not so much; as seemingly religious, as here in David's Court and Camp: But as
David complains in the Psalm. 14.1.2. Romans 3.10.11.12
Psalms, we may say our Congregations comment, That all are gone out of the
way, all, for the generality, are corrupt and become abominable: their throat
is an open sepulcher, their feet ready and swift, to shed blood. So little
do our multitudes parallel these people, so praised in my Text, for praising
God and other religious duties.

THE THIRD PART.
CHAP. I. Application of all, to our English-Irish Israel.
HItherto we have seen David act his part; in his Gratulatorie praise, on the
public stage; Piously, Personally, Publickely, Primarily. The people theirs,
Innitiatorily, Propensly, Obsequiously, Universally, after their Prince his
pattern, and jussion the several points and passages have been made ours, by
application: but as the marrow, and quintessence of all, that may be extracted,
which concerns our meeting, and the solemnization of these days; take this
for the conclusion of all, as my aims and ends, in all that is spoken, without
which, there is but a confusion of all; That where God blesses, he must be
blessed again: a dignity requiring a Beneficium postula^ officium.
duty, a benefit from God, a blessing of God: all that has been said (as the
hand in the Dyall to the hour) points to this point; every part opened
already, and applied, being commixed as several drugs, that in joint
operations they may purge our ingratitude. Which because it is as a humor
viscous and glutinous, (like Duodecim filij superbia, vide inobedientia,
ostentatio, ^nri^fitas, and cum cateris, ingratitudo, lege apud Bernardinum de
B^stis, in concioribus, Titulo de Superbia.
Pride the mother of it, and like the Devil the father of it) having once got
deep possession in the hearts of our Nation, is heard to be dispossessed,
pleading many years prescription; since also as a Rebel and Traitor against
God, being unconfronted and not incountred, it daily waxes stronger, and
stronger, and gets head more and more; to the ruin of Kingdoms and Realms,
and supplanting of all where it gets dominion (as the usurping Turk with his
He that reigns puts the rest to death, as Amurath. dispached his five
brethren, and Maho^^et had murdered Ze^^s; had he not f^ed; of which and many
more. He that will be satisfied, let him read the history of Scanderbeg, the
Turkish history, Pl^^thi^f^ his Pilgrimage, lib. 3. cap. 8. and Mi^ha^l ab
Iss^l^ Comment. Anno 1555.
brethren, as Athalia with the Kings seed) putting to death every grace,
keeping out especially (as a Tyrant in an usurped Throne,) the true King, this
Regal and Royal grace of gratitude: therefore for the suppressing of this
Hell-bred Tyrant, and for the inthronozing this Tetrach, this Heaven-bred
Monarch into his true seat, his legal Throne, the heart of man; chiefly to
help it to regaine his Monarchy in the spirits of our Britanicall Nation, and
of us their offsprings here Hybernified; I will not be wanting, according to
my tallent, to cast this Cananite out of our borders; to crush the head of this
Serpent, this viperous ingratitude; and to bring back again joyfully, (as the
Jews their exiled David from Hebron to 2. Sam. 5.2.3.
Jerusalem) this true grace of gratitude; as the Athenians at last, reduced
their worthy Themistocles, and the Romans their Tully, from their ostrocisme,
etc. which that I may effect, as my heart desirously affects: I will use
motives, as my chief spiritual weapons; Secondly, prescribe means, as the
ordering of my Ranckes; Thirdly, remove Quod primum in intention, ultimum in
executione. I have not fully prescribed the means, nor removed the lets or
remoraes as I intended; because the book contrary to my first project swells so
great already: but quod defertur non aufertur, I promise them God willing, if
ever these be thought worthy reprinting: otherwise, satis est voluisse, and
vl^ru posse, non est esse.
impediments, as the discovery of Ambushments. and these will we do, as God
and your patience shall permit.

First for the motives, (as aiming still method,) take them either general, or
more especial, 1. General, as they concern all Christians to be thankful,
of what sort, sex, quality, conditions soever they be; for all mercies, of
what nature soever, reiterated, or renewed, to their souls or bodies; and
above all things, to steare from this rock, of ingratitude either to God the
principal author and agent: or to man, the mediate organ and instrument of any
good, to them or theirs. 2. Special, as they concern the solemnization of
these late mercies, in which we promise, and purpose to commemorate, and
congratulate (as David and his subjects here in their times) the mercies of
adornation, or preservation, to our English Israel, in which even we, now
English-Irish, have deeply shared, 1. For the first; if any soul here
present, or to whom soever these presents shall come, find himself infected
with this leprous disense of ingratitude; which as a fellon or gangreen, has
spread over the whole body almost of our Nation, and as poison corrupted the
bloods of so many. Let him take these physical purgatives for the cleansing
and purifying of his infected spirits, the killing of the humor and tumor of
pride, (the original of it,) together with some Iulupps, and Cordials to
corroborate his heart against it, and to breed and increase in him this good
spirit, this good vital blood of true gratitude, the fair daughter, of a
fruitful mother true grace.

CHAP. II. Motives to thankfulness.
FIrst let him know that this thankfulness has his special mandate, and
injunction from God in several Psalm. 50.15 Psalm. 107. 1 Thessalonians. 15.16.17.
Scriptures; it has his warrant and sign in the great Court of heaven; it
comes from the great Monarch of the world, to every Microcosme, and little
world; it is enacted in the highest Parliament, as Gods Statute law, and upon
penalty to the contrary to be executed, by every one. It Is that tax, and
Subsidy and spiritual tribute imposed, and exacted upon every subject, not
denied crossed or contradicted by any, unless by some that like stuborne
Forts, and Castles, stand in opposition, or as Kearnes come out in rebellion,
against the supreme and sovereign Majesty of God himself, The King of Kings
yea this must be paid in our own persons, of high, low, rich, poor, learned
and unlearned, Prince, Peer, Potentate, Duke, Marquess, Earl, Baron, Knight,
Gentleman, Yeomen, Husbandman, Labourer, Plebeian, Common-beggar; we cannot
do this duty by a deputy or attorney, none can make affidavit one for
another, as in our Civil Courts; even David a King is not exempted from this
homage, neither other Kings, much less the vulgars, if not Senators,
Magistrates and Patritians.

Secondly the easiness of this task if neglected, and unperformed, admits no
apology, no plea, nor excuse: great Subsidies and Customs imposed, as
appears in our Chronicles, and all Histories, have occasioned mutterings,
murmurings, mutinies, rebellions in the Subjects as perplexed Israel against
perverse 1. King. 12.18
Robeam, and so in See Stowes and Hellinsheds Chronicles.
England about paying of Poll-money: and Peter pence. But this imposition of
gratitude to God (if God give grace) is as easily performed, as enjoined What
great inconvenience was it for Naaman the Syrian, to wash in 2. Kings. 5.
Jordan? for the halt to wash in the Poole of John 5 4.5.
Bethsaida? for the Leaper to go show himself to the Luke, 17.14.
Priest? for the poor widow to throw Luke, 21.2.
a mite into the Treasury? for a man to open his mouth, and the door of his
lips, or rather of the heart to God, (as the Marry-gold opens to the Sun)
and shewforth his praises? if the Prophet had commanded thee some great thing,
say the servants to that Syrian, thou ought to have done 2. King. 5 ^^.
it: So if the Lord should command us, in requital of all his mercies, to give
to the poor, not only half with Luke 19.8.
Zacheus, but (as he tried that young Iustitiarie in the Math. 19.11.
Gospel) even all our goods: we ought to give all to him (for him) that has
given all to us: If he injoyne us to sacrifice our sons, as once Genesis
22.1.2.3.
Abraham; to give our bodies to be burned, as once the Martyrs in the
Paganish, Arrian, and Popish persecution; we should not grudge the Lord our
goods, our bloods, our sons, yea our very souls; as was once the case of
Exodus 32.32. See D: Wills his Comment. in his Comment. in his Hexapla: in
L^cadum in locum.
Moses, and of Romans 9.
Paul himself, to vindicate and redeem the glory of God, to which every
creature, in heaven and earth must be subordinate: but now he injoynes us a
more facill and ready way, which we may honor, and glorify him, and that is
by our Thankfulness, our Cordial and hearty acknowledgement of his mercies:
a yoke that is not heavy, but easy; a burden not laborious, but Math.
11.29. Psalm. 33.1.
light: a thing not unseemely but seemly, a thing not incongruous any way or
undecent, but exceeding good: Psalm. 92.1. Yea pleasant and comely: Psalm. 147.1
Now how can we be wanting to this Eucharisticall, spiritual duty, that has
in it all the requisites of the Pagans moral Vtile honestu^ in^undum, Cicero
in Offic. E^ omne tuli^ pu^ctum, qui miscuit utile dulci.
good, being honest, pleasant, profitable, unless we will be a wanting to Gods
glory and our own goods? 1. had God commanded us only to sacrifice our eyes,
blind Bartimeus and such as had been borne blind, (as he in the 9. of John)
could not have offered this sacrifice. 2. or only our ears and tongues: the
deaf, and the dumb had been excluded his service: 3. or our wealth and full
bags, the poor had been to seek for his sacrifice (as that poor Persian
for his Apud Alexandrum, de Alexa^dro, Fusius.
gift, when suddenly he met with his King) But now since the Lord requires
neither thousand Rams out of the flock, nor the Goats from the hills, nor
the Bullockes from the stalles, nor such Hecatombs; Psalm. 50.
nor the ear, nor the eye, nor tongue; for these the hypocrite and temporizer
give him: but only a cordial and a grateful Deuteronomy. 5.24. Prover. 23.26.
heart, actively, passively, constantly, conscionably, universally obedient to
God, (the very life and soul of all gratitude) since Christ the princely
Aelian. 6. hist. cap. 28. Doctores autem, ut Ambr. in Math. 24. ho. 49. August
super Johan. tract. 36. in principio, and Jsidor. lib. 12. ca. 7. Aquilam
applicant, ad Christum, and ad Christianos.
Eagle ascended, (as it is writ of natural Eagles) chiefly delights to pray
upon the heart; he that gives not this, gives nothing as God would, nothing as
he should.

Thirdly there be many gracious promises made to the thankful, as goads of
the sanctuary and pricks, to excite and stir up to this duty; as golden
cords to draw and allure us to it: as also many threats and menaces, as so
many thunderbolts against the unthankefull, besides other Scriptures the whole
28. Chapter of Deuteronomie, and 26. of Leviticus is spent in this argument.

CHAP. III. Further motives to thankfulness, from the blessings it brings and
continues.
Fourthly, let us consider the blessings and good things which gratitude brings
or continues, with the inconveniences and subsequent prejudices of ingratitude,
as arguments which not only Divinity but even heathenish oratorie, has used;
both persuasive, and disswasive from A pre^^io a periculo.
rewards and Oderunt peccare boni virtutis amore. Oderunt peccare mali,
formidine poenae.
punishments. First, to begin even with the least; the mighty and merciful
God, takes this gratitude, exceedingly kind at our hands, gives many
encomions and commendations on the grateful, as he did on Solomon: 1. Kings 3.
v 6.7 8. (even as a man that has but a glimpse and spark of that justice and
mercy, which are attributs essential in Quicquid est in Deo, est Deus.
Zanchius, de attributis Dei.
God, wonderously approves and applaudes a thankful person where ever he
meets with such, as a black Swan, or white Rara avit in terris, nigroque
simillima Cygno vera gratitudo.
Crow, in any condition) whereas again God sharply and severely taxes and
redargueth, not only the ingratitude of the Ierem. 5.7
Iewess, of Revel. 2.22.
Iezabell, of Rev. 3.15.16 17.
Laodicea, as to be such indeed which his soul loathes and abhorrs, and his
stomach cannot digest, more then luke warm water; preferring even the very
brute beasts, the Ox, and the Ass before Esai. 1.4
them: but even lays open detects, (and detests) the ingratitude of the very
Gentiles themselves, that had no guidance but the dim spark of Rom
2.22.23.24.
nature. Now if a Courtier would be in disgrace with his King, as Esther. 7.9.
Haman once with Assuerus; a child with his father, as Genes. 9.25.
Cham and Canaan with Noah; a servant with his master, as Ioh. 6 70.71.
Judas with our Savior Christ; and sycophantizing treacherous Ziba with 2.
Sam. 19.26 27
Mephib^seth; a friend with his great friend, as David's treacherous companions
were deservedly in disgrace with Psalm. 41.9.
David. If we would live in Rome, as the Proverb is, and contest and contend
with the Pope (if that impostor may be named in that line, where God is named)
then let us continue still (as we do) in our obstinate rebellion and viperous
ingratitude.

Secondly, let us consider and lay to heart, that gratitude and thankfulness,
is the very means to perpetuate and continue mercies, of what nature soever
in any measure received; yea intayle them as it were surer then our lands, and
revenues to us, and to our heirs for ever, if they walk worthy of them: God
being the God, not only of Abraham, but of his seed Isaac and Math. 22.32.
Jacob; often in mercy, remembering distressed Israel, the offspring of that
Patriarchall root, even for his Covenant sake with Abraham, for his servant
David's 1. King. 11.34
sake; as indeed to speak my thoughts and opinion freely, if not judgment, if
without touching or prying into the 1. Sam. 6.19.
Arc, entering into Gods secrets intruding to be of his privy Counsel, from
which rocks I steare; we may make any scrutiny or search into the reasons of
Gods progress and proceedings with a nation, the Lord being holy in all his
ways and righteous in all his works; his judgments, though secret, yet never
Secreta esse possunt iudicta Dei, ^uinsta esse on possunt.
unjust: Considering great Britains many and manifold mervailous and
miraculous deliverance, plucked often (as in the year 88. especially, and the
Powder treason and plot prevented (as abrand out of the fire as Lot out of Genesis
19.16. Dan. 6.
Sodom, as Daniel out of the mouth of Lions, yea and of digging Foxes too, who
though they digg nigh us, yet they digg by us; preserved, as David and his
company, from Saulites, Nymrodian bloudy-hunters, together with other positive
mercies, as the reshining once again according to that zealous Latimers (our
English Luthers He used in his prayers and ejaculatory mental desires to
reiterate this Iterum Domine, iterum Domine: once again, once again, send the
Gospel to this untha^kfull land.
prayers) of the Gospel, breaking as the Sun out of that dark Popish cloud,
of conglomerated English In that Quinquenium Mariae.
blood; the continuance of it still, the going forward of our spiritual
Temple, notwithstanding the disturbances, scoffs, and plots of so many
libelling, lying Popish Tobiahs, and Neh. 4.1.2.3.
Sanballats; the reduction of our Illustrious Prince amongst us, better beloved
of us then whose death was so lamented that in any disaster which befalls the
Turk it is proverbiall: Mortuus est Mustapha.
Mustapha, amongst his Ottomans; with as much joy rewelcomed as Isreal's return
from Ezra 1.5. and 3
Chaldea, as Isaacks birth was to laughing 2. Ezr. 10.12
Sarah and rejoicing Abraham: together with that which I cannot pretermit
(least if we hold our tongues, and be silent the very stones should speak)
that visible and remarkable judgment, to speak in verity and charity both
at once, if fame ( Battus like) do not babble, which lately befell upon the
adversaries of our Judah; the Lords own immediate hand, (for as trial has
experimented, it cannot be fathered as the powder plott should have been upon
any Puritan as they impurely call them, no Sampson, no Protestant Nazarite,
their pestilent policies may perhaps give out having either hand in, or heart
to this tragedy:) But I say Gods own hand which shot from heaven against
Throwing his blood into the air with vicisti Galileo, vicisti, thou have
overcome o Galilean, thou have overcome. Theodoret.
Julian, fought from heaven against Amaleck and Judges 5.20.
Iabin, cast a thunderbolt from heaven against that Arrian See in the end of
Zegedins Tables in folio: Gods judgment against several heretics.
Anastasius, threw the chamber called Jerusalem upon the head of that Apud
Manserium and Bergemensem in supplemento Chronicetum.
Nicromancer Silvester the second, drowned Pharaoh in the Exodus 14.16.
Sea, smit proud Herod with Act. 12.23.
worms, devoured Hatto of Mentz with Recitat historiam Sifridus prasbiter lib.
1. Epitomes anno Dom. 923. Et Maiolus de diebus Canic^l. col. 7. page 254.
quanquam author Chronologia computationi, sub Ann^ Deuteronomy. 914. non M^^i^^s
tribuit sed Damonibu^.
Rats, that hand which often as a shiriffe apprehends, and as a general by
Martiall-law executes wrath on the wicked ipso actu in the very act of sin,
as on the blinded Genesis 19.11
Sodomites, presumptious Dan. 4.30.
Nabuchadnezzer, the Gospels Luke. 12.20.
carnalist, that hand pulling down Dagons house upon the head of these
Philistines, these Dagonites, in the very midst of their Idolatrous sacrifices,
by a visible sermon, and as by an audible voice from heaven, I say speaking to
us, how much he honors that Arc of his truth fixed amongst us; and to them
how much he detests their abominations, paying home at last their provocations:
by this fall also prolonging the fall of their Bell, their Babell, tutoring
them also in their bloody projects, as once Saul, what it is to kick against
the prick; to contest with the Lord Protector of Israel; I say in all
probability, leaving Gods secret justice, or mercy we are in a great part to
attribute, the continuation and succession of these mercies, to our English
Israel, as partly even to the piety, constancy, patience zealous prayers, and
tears of our Queen Maryes In that quinquenniu^ Maria, as it is called.
Martyrs: so more specially and particularly to the gracious humiliations,
fasts and tears of the faithful of the land, in our distresses and dangers
and fears in the absence of our Prince, as also to their cordial and hearty
gratulations, for his joyful and triumphall reduction, both the positive
blessings we enjoy, and the privitive evils that have been kept from us, both
the one, and the other are to be ascribed more to the prayers and
thankesgivings of the upright in the land, then to all the powers and policies
of man, or the arm of flesh: for as God blesses even private families, for
the cause of some one, as the house of Laban for Jacobs Genes. 30.27
cause, the house of Genesis 39.5.
Putiphar, the Iaylers, Ibid. verse. 23.
prison, yea the Court of Pharaoh for Joseph's Genesis 47. v. 25
cause: preserved by rain Antonius his army, being ^. days without water, on
the mountains of Germany, by the prayers of a Legion of Christian soldiers
was relived by Rain from heaven, whereupon as we have already alleged from
Justin Martyr, Tertul. Eusebio, it was called the thundering legion.
sent in a wondrous drought, the whole army of an heathenish Emperor, for the
cause of one Christian Legion: saved all that were in the Ship with Paul, Acts
27.24. for Paul's cause, how much more does the Lord power both precious
mercies, and reprive a land from deserved plagues, depending judgments for the
cause of many Noah's, David's, and Daniels that are upright in the land, who
upon all occasions, are both humbled for judgments, and thankful for mercies,
herein God imitating man, who is willing ever to do most good where he finds
the recipient parties most thankful, casting like the husbandman ever his
seed most willingly, in that ground which has recompensed his former labors
and pains in former years, with the most grateful interest: thankfulness
for one mercy, ever drawing on another, as one circle in the water makes
another, that a third, and that a fourth, as one lincke in a chain draws on
another, lincke after lincke; as indeed why did Jehovah accumulate so many
mercies upon David, one after another, as one beam of the Sun reflecting
after another, making his cup to overflow, his lot to fall in a fair ground,
giving him a goodly heritage, Crowning him with long life, spreading his Table,
leading him still into the green Psalm. 23. and per totum in alijs Psalmis.
pastures, but because he was ever so thankful to his Shepherd? As for
further instance; David is preserved from a raging Bear, a ramping 1. Sam.
17.34.35.36.
Lion, he is thankful for this deliverance: after he is rescued from 1. Sam.
23. chapter 24. chap. 26.
Saul, more raging, roaring, ramping then they Homo homini Lupus: Imo homo
homini Demon.
both. After from the Iebusites, after from Achitophell, from Absalon, after
from Sheba: he is thankful whilst he reigned in Hebron, as a petty King;
therefore God inlargeth his Territories, and plants him in 2. Sam. 5.1.2.3
Jerusalem (as Gods high Stewart now among us) being found faithful in
governing the younger Scotland, espoused him at last to the elder sister
England; as Jacob after his faithful service prudence and patience, at last
enjoyed (joyed in) his fairest Genesis 29.28.
Rachell; as that good servant in the Gospel, that was faithful in a few
Tallents, was made ruler over many Matthew. 25. v. 20.21.22.23.
Cities: thus Joseph also delivered out of a pit by Genes. 37.28.
Ruben, no doubt being thankful for that, God delivered him out of a deep
Prove. 23. v. 27
ditch, a more dangerous pit (the traynes of a whorish Mistress) the prison of
an ungrateful Master: So Moses being thankful, for his deliverance from
Exodus 15. per totum.
Pharaoh and the pursuing Egyptian host, God after takes his part against
Exodus 17.11.
Amalek, against Moab, and vindicates his cause against his sister Numb. 12.6.7
Miriam, aeiuulating Aron, being ever ready at all essays, as a friend at
need to bestead him in all his exigents.

Thirdly thankesgiving sanctifies unto us every blessing, yea every creature,
every action, every calling, yea what ever we set our hands too, our meats,
our drinks, our exercise, recreations, studies, marriages, journeyes, rests,
primacies, companies, yea what not: as it is a speeies and part of Vide
Sculteth de Oratione, vel precatione, page 2.3.
prayer without which, every thing we intermedle with, is like our selves
impure and 1. Tim. 4.1.2.3
unclean. We handle them, (as Colliers or Smiths sometimes eat their meat)
illotis manibus, with unwashen hands, yea, we use, abuse every blessing, as
usurpers, incrochers, yea purloyners, where we have no right, nor title, more
then a thief to a true man's purse; leave is light, but without thankfulness
we take leave, we ask none, we are not only unmannerly, but without
question more bold with God then welcome.

CHAP. IIII. Ingratitude a sin against grace, and nature, condemned by the
very heathens.
FOurthly a thankelesse heart is an evident signal and demonstration of a
graceless heart, where there is no gratitude, it is certain there is no grace: for
as thankfulness is conjoined with other graces, as with prayer and spiritual
1. These. 5.16.17.18.
rejoicing, as the inseparable companions and adjuncts: so as Hypocrates twins,
they live and die together, as relatives, they depend one upon another, as it
is often with some woman and her conceived child: the death or life of the one,
is often the death or the life of both. And indeed, as this is a true rule in
the aggravation of any sin, that the more unnatural that any sin is, the
more odious, horrible, and unmeasurable sinful, it is; as fratricide and
brother butchering (such as Cains against Abell, Absalons against 2. Sam. 13.3^
Ammon, Alphonsus his A proctour in Rome that came very far, to perform a
meritorious act, the murder of his brother in bed with a hatcher, because he
was a protestant.
brother Diazius, is worse then homicide or man-killing; as incest such as Genesis
35.22.
Rubens with his mother in law, Ammons with his sister 2. Sam. 13.4.^
Thamar, and that of the incestuous 2. Cor. 2.5.6.
Corinthian is worse then adultery or simple fornication, because more
unnatural: so it is with ingratitude the hagg is more ugly, and deformed, in
that she is a monster-bred against the very light course, and kind of nature,
much more against the Sunshine of grace.

Fifthly to illustrate this a little further, as another motive, to set an edge
upon our affections toward this beauteous Helena, this excellent grace of true
gratitude, and to hate that foul Thirsites, that Atae or hellish hagg
ingratitude, to make that positive which we have made comparative: Let it not
pass our animadversion, and consideration; that (to the shame and obloquie of
ungrateful ungracious Christians) even Pagans and Heathens have been found
thankful, yea by the erecting of Tropheys, Images, Statues. De istis flatuis
and imaginibus multa habemus, apud Ciceronem, and Tranquillum Perseum, and
Iuvenalem, sic de Corona Murali, Castrensi Nav. li, ovali oleagnia. Civica
obfilionali, populea, etc. Reliquisque honoribus datis bellic^sis, lege apud
Plin. lib. 10. c. 22 apud Guevat. in monte. Caivariae, and Cassaneum in
Caetalogo part. 1. page 8. Praecipue apud Iosephum in 3. and 4. antiq. and apud
Cel^^ Rhod. lect. antiq. lib. 13 cap. 6.
Pictures, they have expressed their gratitude to their Eupaters, Patriots and
Benefactors of their countries, as the Romans to their Sciptoes, Decians,
Horatians, Curtians, the Athenians to their Codrus, the Egyptians to their
Ptolomees, for freeing their countries of enemies, themselves of fears,
preserving their peace, their goods, wives, children, and such blessings
received by their means.

Yea they have thankefully honored the memorial of those that by their
prowess and valor have rid them of poisonous and noisome Serpents, Lions,
Dragons, fierce and ugly destroying monsters; thus they gratefully honored
their Hercules for subduing Cacus the robber; Sph^nx, Cerberus and Gerion:
Perseus for killing the snakie Medusa: Bellerophon for conquerin that Chymera:
Regulus for destroying that great and terrible Plin. not. hist. lib. 4. cap. 14,
serpent at the flood Bragada: Capadox for quelling the Affrican snake, Corebus
for overthrowing that Grecian monster: Alcon for shooting the Dragon of Creete:
Meleager and Acastius for killing the Calidonian Bore: Cadmus, and diverse
others for subduing other Serpents, Dragons, Minotaures recorded in histories,
as much honored by them, as our S. George, Bevis of South-hampton, Guy of
Warwick, and others amongst us, whose fabulous stories in such exploits as
these, are received as Gospels truth by the credulous Popish (I doubt too much
too of the Protestant) Laytie.

So these Pagans have honored such living by erecting their pictures to
living, lasting glory; deified them dying amongst their gods: placed them
above the stars, by whom Arts and Sciences for their experimented good have
been invented or perfected, as Ceres Triptolemus, Saturn, the invention of
Corn by tillage, Bacchus for planting Vines, others for other inventions,
particularized by Polidor Libris de inventione rerum.
Virgil, no less prodigal and profuse have they been gratefully distributing
large honors to those, by whom Letters were first found, and invented, or good
laws have been acted, and established: Thus to this day Lycurgus amongst the
Lacedaemonians Zele^chus amongst the ^ocrensians: Mynos amongst the Cretians,
Philo amongst the Corinthians: Zalmosis amongst the Scythians, as once Romulus
amongst the Romans, with other legifers and lawgivers or interpreters of
their Laws, in other nations, as the Druides amongst the Gauls, Mahumet to
this day amongst his Saracens: the Brachmans and Gymnosophists amongst the
Indians, the Magi amongst the Persians have their names praised and perpetuated
even to these times, in which honors also Menno the first founder of Letters
amongst the Egyptians, Rhadamanthus amongst the Assyrians, Nicostrata amongst
the Romans, Phenices amongst the Grecians have deeply and deservedly shared.

Yea these heathens have been in their kind, not only thankful to their
best deserving men; which they have counted their Heroes, yea as semedians, or
half Gods, but they have been more thankful to the multitude (stultitude)
of their imaginary gods, whom in their blinded superstition they have
acknowledged as authors of their good, preservers of their safety, preventers
of their evils, or as appears by their own Authors, their Apud Poetas Virgil
lib. 1. Georg. li. 5.6. aneid. Ovid. lib. 4. Fast. and li. 6. Metam. H^mer lib.
22 in fine Tibul. eleg. 1 5. libri primi, Pro pertius li. 4. eleg. 9. and
Juvenal. Satyr. 2.
Poets, Cicero de Divinat. and Vat. li. 4. linguae Latinae
Orators, Livius lib. 2.3 4. and 22. Herod. li. 7. Festus Pompeios, li. 14.
Halic. li. 4. Cato rei rust. li 41. Plin. li 35 cap 15 Cyprian. li 5 belli
Civilis.
Historians, Proclus de sacrificijs, Plutarc. in Brut. and Mac. li. Saturn. 1.
and 3
Philosophers, Gal. l. 1 de sanit. tuend c. 7. Avice. l. 1. fen 3. and Alsar.
l. 2. pract. tit. 26. cap. 2.
Physicians, as they had diverse and different lustrations and purging
sacrifices, for their Cities, Camps, Fields, Courts, Houses, Ships, Families,
Functions, after different ways and ceremonies: so had they Eucharisticall and
gratulatorie sacrifices, wherein to honor their Gods the more, they caused
their Priests to sing solemn Hymns, and Sonets to their praises as Io^ Pa^n
to Apollo, amorous songs to Venus, martial hymns to Mars, others to Cereri
Iulos.
Ceres, Dianae hipingo^
Diana, Dionys. Tythir. Maiol. de diebus canic. part. 2. col. page ^6.
Dionysius, etc. And as they placed and assigned them (as our Popelings this
day their deified adored Saints) their several functions, as tutors and
guardians over several things, as Ceres over fruits, Idem par. 2. col. 1.
page 23.
Triptolemus over Corn, Bacchus over Vines: Ch^orus over flowers: Vertumnus
over apples: Aristaeus over honey, their Lares and Paenates over their
households, etc. as also over several places assigned their powers, as Jupiter
in the Heavens: Juno in the Air: Neptune in the Seas: Pluto in the infernal
hels: the Fawnes and Satyrs over the Woods: the Driades over Trees and
Mountains: their Naides over fountains: as also (in which still our See a
conceited Book called the Beehive of the Romish Church, one M. Emerod his
picture of a papist, chiefly D. Sutcliffe his Turcopap^smus, against Giffords
Calvino Turcismus.
Papists sympathize) over several professions and functions Liberal,
Illiberall, Military, Physical, Mechanical, as Minerva over the learned:
Phoebus over the Muses: Aesculapius over physic and Physicians: Vulcan over
smiths: Venus and Cupid over love and lovers: Mercury over Cheaters, and
Cuni-catchers: Mars and Bellona over wars, and warriors: Lucina over women
in childe-bed: and so of the rest: So when they perceived or but conceited,
that any thing prospered better, or any feared or felt evil was prevented, by
the tuition and protection of their titulary gods: So (in imitation of the
Jews, in their sacrifices to the true Jehovah) they have showed their
thankfulness by their Eucharisticall oblations and De diversis sacrificijs
Romanorum, vide apud Fenestellam, and passim apud Livium and Graecorum, and
Aegyptioru^ apud Maiolum de diebus canicular. part. 2. col. 1. page 55.
sacrifices, yea by the presenting of gifts unto them (as our Papists still
loading, the Altars, before Images, and Shrines) and by significant Emblems and
symbols, representing their powers, inclinations and operations, as appears,
by the assigning unto Vulcan a hammer: to Pan a pipe: to Sibill a Bell; to
Bacchus a Tiger: to Venus a Swan; to Saturn a Serpent: to Aesculapius a Snake:
to Minerva an Owl: to Mars a Wolf: to Mercury a Caducean wand: to Diana a
Heart, and dogs: to Phoebus a Crow: to Bacchus a Panther: to Pallas a Spear:
to Jupiter an Eagle: to Cupid bow and arrows; to Juno a Peacocke: to Hercules
a club, etc. and so the rest. Now shall superstition be more thankful to her
false Gods, then true religion to the true God? Shall the Devil deluding these
Pagans, (as at this day our Papists) by his sleights, and operations, working
(as by once speaking in Edens Serpent, Dodons oak, Apolloes Oracle, and often in
Images) by and in these imaginary dieties, his own ends? Shall he (which as
Gods Ape, and emulator, he above all things desires) obtain more honor of
these Idolaters, then the true God of us, his professed servants? Shall Pagans
be more thankful then Christians? (as purposely, by more pains I have
expressed) sure, as the Ninivites, the Queen of Matthew. 12.41 42.
Sheba: and the Sodomites themselves against the ungrateful ungracious Jews:
so these Pagans shall testify against us at the great Tribunal, in our
omissions of these gratulatorie duties to the true Jehovah: which they blindly
gave to their Imaginary Quomodo Gentiles gratias egerunt dijs suio sacrificijs
vide apud Mercurium Trismegistum, in Pimandro cap. 1. Gale. de usu partiu^, and
apud Alsted. in sua theologia natural.
Gods, their well deserving deified men.

CHAP. V. Chrstian and Heathenish ingratitude exemplified.
Sixthly as these heathens, have been themselves grateful and thankful to
their gods, and to their best meriting men; so they have from the light and
spark of nature, wondrously distasted, detested, and declaymed against the
ingratitude of others: holding an ungrateful man, the veryest viper, the
ugliest monster in the Ingrato homine, terra peius non creat.
world; the most unprofitable bulk, and burden of the earth: the Center of
all injustice, the compendium, and abstract of all that can be called ill in Si
ingratum dixeris omnia dixeris.
a man: yea as the best Moralists, chiefly In Moralibus.
Plutarch, De beneficijs l. 4. c. 21. and 27. and libr. 5. passim.
Seneca, Libr. 1. Officiorum, sic plurima apud Stobaeum, tit. de beneficijs.
Tully, have given many rules and motives to gratitude, telling us that for the
benefits we receive either from God or man, we must in imitation of the
fertile ground, render more then we have received: no more grudging to repay
thanks back again, for good turns done, then to redeliver back again, the
pledges, and pawnes we have had in our custody; not forgetting the good, that
from any, we have received, but the good we have done: with many such
particular counsels, cautions, and caveats. So these with other grave and
learned Historians, have severely censured, and branded with a perpetual blot
of obloquie, and infamy such persons, yea such Provinces, Nations, and
Kingdoms as have been unthankefull, to well deserving men, much more to their
gods, making ingratitude the canker in the Rose, the Cantharides in the
ointment, the soil and stain of many other excellent gifts and parts, of such
as otherwise excelled in Arms or in Arts: Thus they Satyrically, and sharply
tax the ingratitude of that Paris (or Alexander Phrygius) in stealing away the
wife of Menalaus, and treacherously killing the King of Sydon, of both whom he
was courteously entertained, against the laws of nature, of Nations and
hospitality, thus also Appian. lib. 2. de bello Civili.
Appian, and all Roman historiographers since lay load upon the vile
ingratitude of Cassius and Brutus Caesar's son in Et tu mi Brute, cries Caesar
when he was stabd in the Senate house.
law, Domitius Trebonius, Tullius Cymber, the two Servilij, Casca, Hala, with
other confederats, in bewitching stabbing Julius Caesar, with bodkins in the
Senate house (as dispitfully, as Gerson was stabbed by his ungrateful
scholars, by the instigation of emulating-Fryers, or as Fulvia Tyranized over
Tullies tongue with her needle) notwithstanding this worthy Caesar had
pardoned some of them with many others of the Pompeyan faction, out of that
clemency which Oratione pro Roscio, pro Rege Detotaro, and alibi.
Tully every where so commends: So, who can with patience read in Livie, and
Plutarch, the ingratitude of the Romans toward the two Scipioes, the Affrican
and the Emilian, the first whereof, though he were their fortress in so many
fights, perished in Leviterium? The second for all his Conquests over the
Carthagenians and Numantines, found in Rome a murderer but not Plutarchus in
vita Scipionis occisorem invenit non iudicem.
a revenger? The ingratitude of the Athenians toward their Theseus, and Solon,
and Themistocles whom they banished? toward Miltiades, whom in remuneration of
freeing them from the Persians in the expedition against Darius, they
imprisoned and famished? as also toward their Ten Pretors, whom in stead of
deserved and expected honors after their victories over the Lacedaemonians,
they condemned to death: The ingratitude of the Carthagenians toward their
eloquent Hamilcar, whom in guerdon of his well performed Embassage with
Alexander the great, they butchered at his De his and alijs pret^r Fulgosum,
Bruson. exempl. libr. 3. page 8. in quarto.
return? So he that reads, how that fair famoused Tully, was stung with
ungrateful vipers, as banished by Aulus Gabinius, being Consul, whom he had
so fairly cleared from many great and greiuous imputations, Secondly emulated
and opposed in all his aimed dignities by P. Vatinius, whom he defended and
brought of with credit in two publik judgments which else had past against
him, Thirdly, but chiefly detruncate, and beheaded by that Popilius, for whose
life he had so pleaded and prevailed, in a capital and criminal cause: he
cannot but be driven to commiseration and admiration; so I confess when I
consider the ingratitude of diverse others, both Christians and Pagans, as that
bloody Caligula; the sentencer of the death of Macro and Eunia; by whom he was
chiefly help in the De his omnibus vide apud Fulgosum, Valerium Maxim^^,
Diogenem La^^tium, tit. de gratitudine, and ingratitudine.
Empire of Maxaninus the Thracian, the murderer of Alexander Severus, from
whom he was advanced to so many honors: Plantianus his favorite, who
attempted (though being revealed executed not) so much as the other, hi^ heart
as bloody as the Read Guevarah, that eloquent Ch^onologer, of the life of
Severus c. 16 page 319.
others; of Macrinus the butcherer of his Lord and good Master Bassianus, who
had preferred and entrusted him as general of his Idem, in vita Bassiani, pa.
369. cap. 16.
army of that pestilent Tuncius: and the pretorian Soldiers in killing that
excellent Pertinax so pertinaciously, by whom they were so well Idem cap. 10.
page 245.
regarded, guarded and rewarded.

Of Sextilius that was the only betrayer of C. Caesar the Orator, by whom he
had before been so stoutly protected against the accusation and faction of the
Scyllaneans: of Callias Antisthenes, that in requital shamefully killed a
Barbarian, that showed him a great Mine of gold, so for ever curing the
jealousy which he had of his blabbing and venting unto Brusonius lib. 3.
exemp. pa. 189 in quarto.
others of Zerxes; who in stead of deserved and expected preferment, cut of the
hopes of that boate-man upon the shore, shorter by the head; whose care and
providence prevented the otherwise inevitable shipwreck, in that unhappy
expedition which he made into Idem ibidem.
Asia: of that treacherous Ptolomey, who sent the head of his poor perplexed
friend Pompey to Caesar, as a present, flying to him for shelter, as the Sheep
into the jaws of the Wolf, or the hunted Hare into the fangs of the
shepherds Vide apud Zwingerum in Theatro humana vita, titul. de ingratitudine.
dog: But chiefly when I reflex upon Christians, reading and revolving how
beastly Michael Thranlius, deprived his good Master Leo the Emperor both of
life and honor: how that bloody Phocas (that great Papal Apud Morneum, Fusius
in suo progressu Papatus.
friend and founder) dealt with the Lord and Emperor Mauritius, from whom he
had received some undeserved favors: how Justinian the Emperor dealt with
that heroicke Bellisarius, the very Hercules and Atlas of Italy and Lumbardy,
who had freed them, (as the Sorkes some Cities of froggs and the Dogs some
countries of Wolves) from the invasion of the Goths and Vandals, over whom he
was so often victorious, by the emulation of a woman (chief actors, that sex,
in the Tragedies of the greatest spirits) depriving him in a trice of all his
offices and honors, putting out his eyes, exposing him to the misery or mercy
of the merciless world, constrayning him for pure need to beg a half penny
to buy bread to his Date obelum Bellisario. Procopuis de bello Go^torum, libr.
2. and Kramzins de bello Vandalorum.
belly; as that Tygresse Empress would have served the valiant Eunuch Narses
with the same sauce, but that the cursed Cow having short horns, he did
countermine her mischief. Besides in our own Chronicles, pondering how that
viperous Banister betrayed his Lord the Duke of Buckingham, for which he is as
deservedly branded, as infamous as ever was Z^pirus for betraying Babylon,
Sinon for betraying Troy, Judas for betraying Christ. When I reflect upon these
and other examples amongst Christians and Heathens of such ungrateful persons,
as have been as the Iuy to the Oak, killing those by whom they have been
propped and P^rima exempla recitata, lege apud Bartholomeum Cassaneum, Catalogo
gloria mundi, part prima, folio 41.42.
prospered; as De hoc partu Viperino, Plinius libr. 10. cap. 62. Aelianus libr.
1. cap. 25. Isidor. li. 12. cap. 3. Arist. libr. 5. cap. 34. Imo Divus Basillus
exemp. hom. 9. and Chrysostom. in 3. Cap. Math. homil. 12. approbant and
Theologicae haec applicant.
vipers, gnawing out the very bowels of those that have bred them: I cannot but
lament that this monstrous and hideous hagge, ingratitude, has got a regiment
over so many, and has enlarged her Territoryes further then the Turkish
Ottoman: Prestber-Iohn, the Cham of Cathay, or the great Mogul. But chiefly
when I consider how like the Centaures in the fable, and like these Gygantean
Nimrodian hunters in the Genes. 11.2.3.
Scripture, she has mantayned fight so fiercely and furiously against the
Majesty and mercy of the great God of heaven, to her own destruction, and
the ruin of these Subjects in which she is resident, it is lamentable and
deplorable: Oh the massacres and tragedies she continually makes more ruefull
and piteous then these of the Roman Sejanus, the French Byron: our English
King Leir: the Arrian Valens: the Italian Iulio: the Jewish King Saul: the
Machabean Antiochus: or what ever else most commands a passion, always as
fatal to her possessors, as that Sejanus his horse to his C^e^, Seio, Antonio,
Casiio Dolobella, Sciano fatalis: Aulus Gellius no^t A^tis. libr. 3. cap. 9.
Simon Maiol^s col. 7. page 287.
Masters.

CHAP. VI. Ingratitude blamed and shamed, even from the thankfulness of
Brutes and Beasts to their Benefactors.
But to leave the beastliest of men, ungrafefull persons, detected you see as
detested, contemned and condemned of the very Pagans, as Schoolmasters and
Tutors to degenerate man: we may be taught gratitude and thankfulness to our
God for all his blessings and benefits past and present, even from the very
brute beasts; who as they have been found very thankful unto man, their
Psalm. 1.6.7.8
Lord and superior, of whom they have had their dependence, and from whom they
have received their food and relief: so they teach and tutor man to be
thankful to that Superior Essence, on whom he depends, in whom he lives,
moves, and has his Act. 17.28.
being; and from whom he receives food and raiment, health, life, liberty,
peace, plenty, protection, and what ever is needful for his being or well
Adesse and been esse, omnia ad victum caliumque necessaria. Cicero in Officijs.
being.

Thus to enlarge my notions and motions historically: when I consider how the
very brute beasts have been faithful and loving to their Masters, in their
brutish kind, more then one man to another: as those three famous Horses:
Alexanders Plin. lib. 8 ca. 42. Solin. cap. 46
Bucephalus: Caesar's horse, and the horse of Antiochus King of Syria, who (as
Emblemes of faithful wives) would suffer none to intermeddle with them, but
their own Masters. Yea the very dogs (to the very shame of all temporizing
sycophants: treacherous Zibaes: trencher Parasites: false hearted Ioabs:
viperous Iudasses: hollow-hearted friends, that have the Ave of honey in their
mouths, but the gall of Cave in their Multis annie iam transactis: nulla fides
est in pactis: Mel in ore verba ^actis: Felin cord fraus in factis. Sphinx
philosophica.
hearts, that are unthankefull to their professed friends, as many millions,
and my self amongst Jonathan and Judas ere long to be printed.
many, can give a probatum est:) I say the very dogs that have been
faithful to the very death to those Masters whom they have loved and followed:
as the dog of Ulysses that was to him in his kind, as firm as his Penelope,
knowing and acknowledging him when he returned home from the Troyan war. The
dozen dogs of Masinissa the Numidian King, as safely guarding him, as the
French, or Scottish, Guard their King: The Athenian dog Caparus, that kept the
treasury in Aesculapius his Aelian. hist. li. 7. cap. 13.
Temple, better then the gagling Sentinels the Roman Capitol: The dog of
Lysimachus called Druides, that died with his Master Plin. lib. 8. c. 40
Lysimachus, as the dog of Hiero, that (like an Indians best beloved The
beloved wives of the Indians, burn themselves quick in their husbands
funerals, Mazius and Acosta in histor. Iud.
wife) leapt into the same slame, which burnt his Master: The dog of Titus
Sabinius, who never forsook his Master, no, not in prison; nay that brought
meat to his Masters mouth when he was dead, and fetched the dead body of his
Master out of Tyber, into which it was Plin. libr. 8. ca. 40. and Zonaras in
Tiberio.
cast: The dog of Darius, who (in his fight, and flight from Alexander, being
murdered by his treacherous servant Blessus) stayed with the dead corpse of his
slaughtered Aelian. lib. 6. cap. 24.
Lord with other dogs, which as we know by histories and experience, have
either died with their Masters, as Aelianus Instances in the dogs of Polus
the tragedian, and of Theodorus the Musician, who leapt into the funeral
flames of their Aelian. libr. 7. cap. 33. and 35.
Masters, like loving curres as they were: or else for their masters, famishing
themselves upon their Masters graves, as did the dog of Eupolide mortuo in
aegina cauis media, extinctus est. Aelian. lib. 9. cap. 42.
Enpoldes, and some in our See some instances also in this kind in M. Topsell,
our English Gesner, de Quadrup. in ^^l. De Cunibus. Also the book called the
Pilgrimage of Princes in quar^o, page 103.
times. These, and all these faithful, grateful brutes, to their breeders, to
their feeders, cry shame upon ungrateful man, that for all mercies he has
received to his body, to his soul, is not so loving, so loyal, so thankful
to his maker, his heavenly Master, his Creator, preserver, Redeemer, as horses
and dogs for Grass, Hay, Oats bones and crusts, have been to mortal man.

Again when I consider how submissive and obedient not only domesticke and
house creatures; but even these that have been more sylvane and wild, have
been unto man, once won and trained and lured by meat or music, or by
teaching made docible and tractable: as namely when I read how a Nightingall
would ever sing at the command of De his omni^^s apud Zwin^er^^, in Thea^o
vitae hu^ianae, ^lin. Anl. Gell. ^lexand. ab A^^xandro, Celium ^hodigin. Camer.
(...) Maiolum* etc.
Stenchorus only to pleasure him: of Marthes his Crow, if we credit Celius
Rhodiginus that would carry letters which way soever the King directed Sic de
Columbis and Hirundinibus literis portantibus, lege plutima enempla apud
^i^ce^t. l. 16. c. 54. Plin. l. 10. c. 37. etc. 24. apud Fabium Pictorem in
annalib. Et ^rantium Vand. l c. 7
her: Of the Dragon that attended Hera^lides the Philosopher: Of a Serpent that
waited upon Ajax in Locresia a Thrush on Agrippina the Empress: a wild Bull
on Pythagoras at Tarentum: Of another Bull, as also a trained Dove, that would
come at a call, to that impostor Mabomet: Of a Lion, that as a Page followed
that manumitted Androdius, his whilom Physician up and down the streets of
Rome: Of a Seal fish, that would come at a call from the Sea to the shore,
and take meat of a man dwelling at the Shieldes; as I credibly heard when I
lived, (where my As Queen Mary is said to say of Callis, that if she were
dead, it would be found writ in her heart. etc.
heart still lives) at Newcastle on Tyne: me thinks man, is more brutish (as
Esaias himself, or God in Esai. 1.4.
Esaias complains on him,) then the most savage and sylvane of brutes, that is
disobedient to his God, that is more refractory then the wild Job 39.6.
Ass that snuffes up the wind, then the wild Nec vult Panthera domari: semel
tamen cum Hoedo domestice fuit educatae Aelian. li. 6. hist. c. 2
Heyffer that will not admit the yoke, then the wild Panther that will not
be tamed.

Even as when I consider the mercies of some beasts to man, more then of one
man to another; (as of that she Bergomensis histor. libr. 4. Coepella tractat.
de Imper. Milit. elig col. 12. Cassaneu^ Catalogo gloriae mundi part prima,
page 45.
Wolf, which fostered Romulus the first King of the Romans: that she bitch
which fed Cyrus when he was exposed by his cruel grandsire Apud Zenophontem in
paedag.
Astyages: that she Bear, which sustained Prince Alexander, when destined to
death by his father Priamus: those Bees which fed Plato with honey: those Ants
which are said to feed Midas with grains, when they were in their cradles:
those Ravens which fed Elias the persecuted 1. King. 17.6.
This bite: with the De alijs per creaturas mirac^ lose praeservatis, lege apud
Procopium de bello G^thorum lib. 2. apud Lugerum, in epistola ad Ri^fridum,
cap. 10. apud Surium 10.2.
like,) comparing these with the cruelties of a Nero, a Domitian, a Dionysius,
a Caligula and others such, which Canniball-like feed upon man, (as birds and
beasts and fishes of pray,) the greater upon the less, the stronger upon the
weak, I have thought that one man is a wolf to Homo homini Lupus.
another, yea a Devil to Homo homini aut Deus aut damon
another; and that there is more mercy in beasts then in beastly men. So I say
comparing the subjection, submission, subordination of even the worst of brutes
and beasts, to man their superior (every creature by a natural instinct
fearing the very face of Observatio Magiri in sui^ Comment.
man, as their deputy King, and superintendent under God) with the rebellious
and indomable heart of man himself, to the sovereign Majesty of his maker,
whose Image he bears: I find more obedience in beasts to man, then in man to
God.

But to come still more punctually to my proposed points when I consider, how
not only loving, faithful and merciful, but even grateful Birds, Beasts,
and Fishes have been to their breeders and feeders, their friends and
benefactors; and how ungrateful man is to his God, in walking unworthy of his
mercies: in turning his grace into wantonness, in sinning presumptuously, and
proudly that grace may Romans 6.1.
abound, abusing the patience and long suffering of God that leads to Romans
2.5.6.7
repentance, heaping sin upon sin, as once the feined Centaures, Pelion
upon Apud Lucianum in Dialogis.
Ossa: And so consequently, wrath upon wrath, God giving him as he did to
Revel. 2.19.
Iezabell, Jonas. 1.
Ninive, and Matthew. 23.27.
Jerusalem, a space of repentance, in this day of grace and of the Gospel, yet
he not knowing the day of his Luke 19.42.
visitation, neglecting Gods call, hardens his heart as the nether millstone,
makes his brow of brass, and his spirit of Ierem. 5.3.
flint: I say comparing and paralelling the gratitude of beasts to man, whose
pride and lust, yet subjects them to Romans 8.20.
vanity, (The Horse by his traveling, the Ox by his toyling, the Cow by her
milk, the Sheep by her mike, wool, flesh and dung, the Be by her Sic vos
non vobis mellificatis aves: Sic vos non vobis vellera fertis ov^^. Virg.
honey, recompencing and gratefully remunerating the petty costs and pains of
man toward them, with a full and a fertile usury, such as the fields yield
the husbandman, for his plough, his pains and his seed,) with the
ingratitude of man, to God, whom God has made little lower then the Psalm.
8.5.6.
Angels, crowned him with glory and worship, made him ruler over the works of
his hands: that he should yet be, by sinful rebellion as unthankefull as the
very Devil and damned spirits: Oh hinc illa lachrymae, this thought confounds
my thoughts! plungeth and perplexeth my soul, makes me even Quoties cogito,
toties contremisco ut in alia meditatione olim Cyprianus.
Planet-strucke: Oh it is man's misery, by an unwise an unworthy walking, thus
to abase, thus to abuse Gods mercy!

Oh when Psalm. 8.4.
David considered the privileges and prerogatives of man, he breaks out
emphatically, Lord what is man that thou art so mindful of him, etc. But when
I consider man's dignities, of which some have writ whole See the french
Academie, in fol. praefa. in partem primam, in the french Author in octavo. See
page 1.2.3.4.5. (...) per totum lib^um. Et apud Cassantum in catalogo pa 51. 52.
Tracts, paralelling this Microcosme with that Apud Alsted. pulchra image in
Theolog natural. p. 2. page 643. 644
Megacosme, man's perfections with the whole world: with man's neglected duty of
gratitude. I say by an inversion from man's perversion, Oh ^an what is God that
thou art so unmindefull of him, or the Son of God, that thou so little
regardest him? So vainly, so mainely forgetting him and all his benefits and
bounties, his works and wonders, as once Psalm. 106.21.
Israel, as the Ostridge forgets her Job. 39 14. Plin. lib. 10. c. 1.
eggs, and as some have forgot their own Vt Messala Corvinus Orator apud
Plin^^em li. 7. hist. cap 24. and apud Solinum, cap. 6.
names, thou forgets the great and glorious name of the Lord thy God. Oh do I
believe mine eyes and ears, that Lions, Eagles, Panthers, yea Dragons,
Elephantes, Aspes, Dogs, Wolves, Apes, have been thankful to their
Eupaters and Benefactors, and shall man their petty sovereign, be claudicant
and heteroclite? Is he made of a worse metal, his mind cast in a worse
moulde then the rest, then the best, (yea then the worst) of beasts? To add
(according to my renewed readings and meditations) something to my former
instances, shall there (as In exem. ho 9
Basil and Apud Maiol. col. 7. p. 1. page 228
Ambrose themselves have observed) be for some few crusts, or crummes, such
gratitude in dogs to their Masters, to a marvel if not a miracle; such
fidelity that they have kept their houses, their Apud Aelian libr. 7. cap. 13.
and lib. 9. cap. 42.
treasuries, yea their very wives, as if they had been Turkish Eunuchs: Have
they found the lost Treasures of their Masters? Have they defended it from the
incursion of thieves? Have they laid, by their Masters lost purses or wares,
till they have famished, as once the dog of a Colliphonian Aelian. lib. 1.
cap. 30.
Merchant? Have the revealed the wrongs done to their Masters by their
adulteress Mistrisses, as the little curr of a Sycilian by whrining and
scraping at a secret door, is said to discover a hid Aelian. libr. 7. cap. 21.
adulterer an armed intended murderer? Have they revealed murders? Have they
known and flowne upon their Masters murderers? where they have after found
them even in public Markets, till they have caused their apprehension and
execution? as instances are in Idem lib 7. c. 13. Plin. libr. 8. ca. 40
Authors and some in experience in our times.

So for Lions, those heroicke creatures, it is certain, that a Roman slave
Hanc historiam Fusius recitat A^lus Gellinoct. Attic. lib. 5. cap. 14. Aelian.
li 7. cap. 43.
Androdus, flying from a cruel Master into the woods, meeting with a Lion,
whose foot he leached, and paid out the thorn, after both he, and the Lion
being taken; and he according to that bloody sport of the Romans when his
turn came, as his deserved punishment being exposed to fight with even that
Lion: found his enemy so favorable and friendly, that knowing him that was
his former surgeon, in requital of his surgery, he licks his hand, fawnes on
him; a spaniell of rampant to others, is of a sudden couchant to him: to the
astonishment of the Emperor, and all the plebeians spectators? Did another
Lion show the same gratitude, to Elpis the Samian Mariner: that he every day
hunted for him, and brought him a pray to the shoares, for the good turn he
received from him, in pulling a bone out of his Plin. lib. c. 16.
throat?

So for Panthers, did a Panther show her self so thankeful to the father of
Philo the Philosopher, for pulling one of her young ones out of a pit, that she
would not leave him till she had safely convayed him out of the woods from the
danger of other Bruson. lib. 1. exemp. page 54. in 4to.
beasts?

Was a Dragon so thankful to Thoas a boy, who had brought him up at home and
and fed him: that afterward this feeder falling into the hands of thieves in a
desert, the Dragon knowing his voice, with winged speed rescues and delivers
him? Was an Eagle so loving to a virgin at Sestos, that at her burial, she
threw her self with her into the funeral Idem ibidem
flames? as a Robbin-red-breast as we call him, would needs flly into the
grave of one Hopkinson the clearke of Hutherfield in the West of Yorke-shire,
(as there be yet living witnesses) who in his life had used him to his hand and
fed him in the Church with It was credibly related to me, by my worthy and
worshipful friend, Sr. J.R. at my last sojourning at Longly.
bread.

Was even an Aspe so thankful for the good entertaynment she had, being fed
at the Table of a certain Egyptian, that one of her young ones ungratefully
stinging to death a Child of her hosts, she was so just and respectfull, that
killing that young murderer, she laid it dead before them at the Table, and
was never after she nor hers seen more to haunt the Apud Bruson. ibidem.
house?

Are Haec omniae, and his maiora, non solum Soli. c. 43. and Plin. libr. 10. c.
23. Sed and Basil memorat de Cicorijs in exem. ho. 8 applicans parentibus and
filijs.
Storkes so thankful, that (to the shame and confusion of unnatural Children)
they feed their aged parents, when they are unfeathered and unplumed, (which
things the Crows likewise are said to do) yea, cover them, brook them, and
keep them warm with their own feathers in the storms and coldes: and as
tradition is, (as good Emblemes both of grateful guests, and just tythers) do
they in requital of their house-roome, throw one young one out of their nest,
as their hosts part, to the German Bower in whose house they Mirae etiam de
gratitudine huius avis, erga benefactores Aelia. lib. 8. cap. 21.
build?

Yea have even Wolves (whether naturally or supernaturally, I dispute not)
been found so respective and indulgent to humane nature that (if Tom 2. meuse
Aprili.
Surius be not unsure, and Guagnin. libr. 10. and Gregor. Turon. histor. Fran^.
lib. 2. c. ^4
Guagin deserve no gagg, for fabling,) even young children, as they instance in
some, have been suckled with their milk, fed with flesh and restored again
to their own mother, in their wolvish courtesy? Nay from beasts and birds to
come to fishes. (that I may speak nothing traditionarily, or legendarily of
that thankful Ape, who when he could nothing else, skips up into Trees and
knaps down boughs to the speedy loading of a poor old man who lived by
selling of wood in requital of his pulling one of her cockered young out of
the pit.) Even Dolphins have been so enamoured on boys that have fed them
with bread, that at the call of Sinion, in which name Pliny says, they
delight; they have come to the shore, and in grateful sport as sea horses,
(as once that Arionis fabulam, memorat Olaus Magnus lib. 20. cap. 12. Sic
Albertus anim. cap. 24. cum multis alijs.
Dolphin did musical Arion,) they have swim with them into the Sea, brought
them back again to land: one of them above the rest drowning his over
burthening burden in a sudden storm, in revenge of himself lays and dies
on the shore, and would never more return to the Sea again: as Animal. libr.
9 cap. 48.
Aristotle, Albertus Animal. cap. 24. in Delphinis.
Magnus, Part prima, colloq. 9. page 325
Theophrastus, Libr. 9. histor. cap. 8.
Simon Maiolus, (e) Pliny the elder, and Pliny the younger Instance in many
particulars at Hyppo, Puteolum, Tarentum, Naupactum, and other places where
such pageants were played.

Oh? have beasts been thus grateful to men, even the irrational creatures
by an instinct of Dame nature? and shall man, endued with reason and
understanding above the brutes, (the very Sun irradiating his Microcosme and
little world,) be so destitute both of grace and good nature, as we say, as to
be unthankefull to well deserving men, but chiefly to the all meriting mercy
of God?

Yea I say more as beasts have been gratefully respective to man, so have men
showed a kind of gratitude to beasts: as Alexander (though heathenishly)
bestowed burial on his dead Plin. libr. 8. cap. 8.
Bucephalus, as a Mass priest did once on his dog, as is The french Stephens
in his Apology for Herodotus called (as translated) the world of wonders.
related; yea lamented his death, as Crassus did the death of his M^crob. lib.
3, cap. 15.
Murena, as I have seen some, and heard of more, that have fed their old
horses, and eldest dogs even Mastives, Greyhounds, Spaniels, setting dogs,
Hounds, Braches, Beagles, when they have been spent and done, as old
Almanacke^ past date: yea of some, that have bequeathed not only their
rational, but irrational old servitors, legacies, pensions and portions to
keep them, even after their old masters deaths for the good service which they
have done: Some being of a better mould, then to cast of their old friends and
favorits, (as Bawdes, Panders and Whores do prodigals) when they have spungd
and sucked them dry; as a man casts of his cloak after rain, and the spaniels
shake of the waters on the shore, when they have no more use of them, and have
served their needs turns and ends by them, and with them: Like a man that
cares not for the best dish of meat, when as a helluoh, he has glutted
himself with it: no; some men's respect is as the ^yome virescit and nascitur
in marirubro Plin. libr. 13. cap. 25.
laurel green even in Winter: shrinkes not like some ill wrought western
cloth in wetting: but is more to them that have once well deserved, more at
the last, then at the first. Now shall there be such mutual gratitude from
beasts to men, from men to beasts, as we have heard? and shall not man be
thankful to man, for benefits received? and all and every one thankful to
God; from whom, as all blessings flow, so all kind of reciprocal blessings
back again are as due, and deserved, as exacted and enjoined? Oh shall man be
like the horse and mule without Psalm. 32.9.
understanding? nay worse; so dull, so dead hearted, so stupid, so blockish,
that he has no show, no demonstration, no expression of thankfulness to
God, either vocal, real or cordial, as is seen in too many Miriades, and
millions of men? Which unless Swinish drunkenesse, So domitish uncleanesse,
Esaus profanesse, Jewish usury, Cannibal-like cruelty, execrable and horrible
blasphemies, against emulatitions, against all that have any show of religion,
with other transgressions, perpetrated and resolvedly committed against God and
man, be thankfulness: (all which indeed, with the like, show and speak an
unthankefull tongue, heart, and life, as the Ivy bush shows the Tavern, the
blew spots the plague, biles and carbuncles and ploukes in the body and face,
the inward infection of the Liver: and the smoke and sulphur the inward
brimstonely matter, that is in Etna, and in Pliny choking De Vesuvio Solinus
cap. 40. and de eo nihil Plinius, praesaga forsan mente, jude sibi exitium
futurum, de modo mortis. Lege in epistola Plinij Iunioris, ad Cornel. Tacitum
hostoricum.
Vesuvius, and the like, etc. I say unless this may stand for thankfulness,
(as if counterfeit coin shall stand for pay,) there is no further glimpses and
sparks of further thankfulness, in our promiscuous multitudes: though we see
here the inflamed zealous fires, of David and his Congregation.

CHAP. VII. Gratitude to God for all his graces pressed from the practice of
all the Saints in the Church Militant.
THus as Solomon sends the sluggard to the Aunt or Proverb. 16. v. 6.
Pismire, to learn De cuius prudentia and dilige^tia tam Mira, vide apud Plin.
libr. 2. cap. 41. and lib. 11. cap. 30. and Arist libr. 9. cap. 38. and
Basilium in exem. homil. 9.
providence and diligence: to the Connyes, the Locusts and the Spider, to
learn wisdom, and Prove. 10. verse. 25.26.27.28.
prudence: to the Lion, the Greyhound, and the hoc Goat, for constancy and
Chapter 30. v. 31.
courage, as Jeremy sends the Jews to the Almanacke of the Storkes: The
Turtles, and the Swallows to learn the circumspect observation of times and
Ierem. 8. v. 7.
seasons, as Christ himself our Savior sends his disciples, (and in them us)
to the Math. 10. v. 16
Dove, to learn simplicity, to the Serpent, to learn (not matchavillian) but
religious De mira serpentis solertia, pracipue in capitis custodia, and in
pollis (...), vide Plevius Plinium libr 8. cap. 27. Aristot. lib. 8. cap. 17.
August. de Civitat. Dei libr. 8. cap. 15. Et Theologice applicant idem
Augustine. sermon. 4. ad frat. in Eremo, and Chrysostom hom. 34. in Matthew. tom. 2.
policy: So I have according to my Tallent sent this ungrateful age,
according to my ministerial mission, and commission from God, as to the
Pagans, so even to Birds, Beasts, Fishes and Foul, to learn that gratitude
to God for all his graces, which as I have prescribed: David and his people
here in my Text, piously, publikly, (much more privately) practiced. Now the
effecting of this grace, being that which purposely premeditatingly,
projectingly, I do affect, that I may roll every Omnem movere lapidem.
stone, touch every string, attempt every means, use every motive, to bring
our English-Irish Israel parallel, with David's Israel: changing my form of
speech, modulating now in another Tune and Tone, I desire that every man that
desires to have an Isreal's heart, to be a true Israelited John. 1.47.
Nathaniel indeed, to consider, that if the practice of the worst of men the
Pagans, the worst of beasts too, yea the worst of animate creatures (except
the very Devils, and infernal spirits) shame not his ingratitude; yet that he
would be lured and allured, by the imitation, virtuous emulation of the best
that are or ever were of created natures either in earth, or in heaven, to the
performance of this tributary task, which God imposes upon every soul that
has the organes and instruments of reason, rightly For God requires no praise
of fools, naturals, madmen, young infants, such as have yet no use of reason:
nor may be admitted to the Eucharisticall Supper.
fitted even to praise his great and glorious Name, (as David and these
Davidicans did here) as they will answer the contrary to their peril at the
great day of audit and great Court of Parliament before the King of Kings.

And herein first to begin on earth, and then by a Theological Climax or
gradation to ascend up as high as heaven: let us look to the Saints militant
here on earth, and we shall see a cloud of witnesses, like the cloud and the
pillar of fire, going before Israel to Exodus 40.38.
Canaan, as the new created star, or the Angel moving in the star, or in
form of a star, going before the Eastern Magi, as their conduct and convoy
unto De hac stella, ut de Magis ipsis multa disp^ at Bosquerus in echo conom.
in locit Math. 2, 1.2.3.
Christ, preceding and going before, in this (never to much pressed, till
practiced) duty; inviting inciting us to insist in their steps. Repetens ab
origin prime: to begin (as they say) from the beginning: we have Genes. 4. v.
4.
Abel in true gratitude to God; surpassing ungrateful Cain, as the Sun
exceeds the pitchy cloud) sacrificing the best of his Lambs the first fruits,
the chief and choice of his Sacru^ pingue dab^ no^ macru^ sa ^rificabo. Sphinx
Philosophica. Theologica.
flock, as a free will offering for a blessing upon the rest: though I know
too, it have a special See Moses unvailed in octavo extant.
reference to the oblation of Christ, the true Paschall John. 1. v. 29.
Lamb. so Genes. 24. verse. 17. we have Abraham's servant blessing the Lord for
his mercies to his master Abraham, and for making his journey prosperous, verse.
26.27. so Genes 32. verse. 10. we have Jacob, acknowledging himself unworthy
of the least of the Lords mercies which he specifically and specially
enumerates: So in token of gratitude for renewed mercies, as an everlasting
testimony to them and their seed for ever in all succeeding generations, how
much they poyzed and prized (as Courtiers from their King) the least mercies,
and favors from God; and to oblige them and theirs in an eternal indissoluble
bond of obedience, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and the rest (the best) of the
Patriarchs, where ever they came, built Altars, set up stones and pillars to
the honor of the Name of the Sir Abraham Genesis 11.8. Genesis 22.14. Isaac Ge. 26.
v. 25. Genesis 28 17. Jacob Genesis 31.13. and v. 53. Genesis 35.1. v. 7.
Lord, as the Egyptian Kings in their Mela de his li. 1. c. 5. Strabo lib. 16.
praecipue Pli. l. 36. c. 12. describit and deridet ut vanas and etiosa^.
Pyramides, Nabuchadnezzar in his Dan. 4. v. 30.
Babel, the Nymrodians in their Genesis 11.1.2.
Tower, Absalon in his 2. Sam. 18.18.
pillar, Cyrus in his sumptuous De hac demo non meminit Pli. ut observat Aldus
in Indicae ad Plin. naturalem histor. describunt tamen alij authore^ apud
Maiol. col 23. tit. morabilia page 703.
house, and other proud and ambitious spirits erected monuments, and memorials
to the glory of their own names. So in the fifteenth of Exodus, we have
Moses, Aron, Miriam, and all the Elders and people of Israel, triunphing and
gratulatorie rejoicing before the Lord, (as we this day, for the preservation
and reservation of our King and Prince) for their safe eduction out of Egypt,
reduction from tyrannizing Phraoh production and protection through the red Sea,
which was to them a walking garden, to their enemies a devouring grave. In the
33. of Genesis, we have the same Moses, when he had received the gracious
summons of his blessed dissolution, as a second Simeon, singing his Cygnean and
Swan-like Cantater Cygnus funeris ipse sui.
song, blessing the Lord, and the thousands of Israel in their several
Tribes, the people of the Lord. To proceed in the first of Samuel, Chap. 2.
we have that devout Annaes gratulatory song for her Samuel, as Bathshebaes
Prove. 31. v. 2.
Lamuell, the son of her desires: yea in his corporeal birth, as Augustine
was to his mother Monica in his spiritual, the son of her Vt olim Ambr.
Monica de Aug. Manicheo, etc. non potest perire filius ta^taru^ praecum and
lachrymarum.
prayers, and of her 1. Sam. 1.13. and verse 26.27.
tears: So in the fifth of Judges, we have Deborah and Baruch and all Israel
tripudiating and triumphing before the Lord of Hosts, the God of Battles, for
the overthrow of the Troops of Iabin and Sisera, whom the river Kishon swept
away, yea that ancient river, the river Judge. 5.20.21,
Kishon, the stars also fighting from heaven as once the Sea for our English
Eliza, and for a Britain Drake, that gave an overturne to a swelling Dragon,
as once also for Theodose the like, as the Sun too for Ioshuah. So in the
first of Kings Chap. 3. verse. 6.7 when God appeared unto Solomon in Gibeon, as
he sacrificed before the Lord, as a prologue to his fervent prayer for a wise
and understanding heart, he first thankefully acknowledges the unspeakeable
mercy of God to his Father David, as also (by a corollary and consequence)
unto himself: and not to enumerate all particulars which are infinite for this
our David, besides the Book of the Psalms, which are in their golden chayned
linckes, continuated praises, (as one calls the very lives of just men like the
alms of Act. 10.1.2.
Cornelius, if seasoned with grace, and not soyled with sins, perpetual Bona
vita perpetuae preces.
prayers.) So in the second of Samuel Chap. 7. verse. 18.19.20.21. etc.
omitting all other places, to fix on this: when God sends to David by Nathan,
the acceptance (as in Abraham's sacrificing of Genesis 22.16 17
Isaac, and in the desires of all his Saints and Servants of his will for the
2. Cor. 8.12.
work, his Respicit Deus affectum cordis pro affectu operis August.
affection for the action in building of the Temple, reiterating and renewing
many large and loving promises concerning Solomon his son, in what privacie
and neerenesse he should be to God, even as a son is to a father: David upon
this Embassage, as a second Niobe melting and dissolving, his heart wholly
liquifying as wax and Ice before the Sun of these mercies, in the most
zealous and fervent expressions of his soul, as fire breaking out long
smothered in the soliloquies of his soul, (such as we read proceeding from
Augustine, Bernard, Basil, and other zealous spirits in imitation of David)
he thus bespeaks his God: Who am I Lord, and what is my house that thou have
brought me hitherto, and this was yet a small thing O Lord God, but thou have
spoken also of thy servants house, for a great while to come, and is this the
manner of man O Lord God? and so goes forward to the end: every word having an
emphasis, every phrase, as is said of the Epistles of Referunt pectus ardore
pleum
Cyprian showing a heart brimfull of grace of gratitude. So come to the new
Testament indicted by the same spirit, what ere the blaspemous Manichees blatter
to the Contra Manicheos, praeter August. and Patres erudite scripsit
Granatensis in suo symbolo: and Bernardinus de Bustis, in concionibus and
postillis in quarto in Initio libri pen^.
contrary, the Saints pertaking of the same grace, have expressed the same in
their gratulations. To begin with Simeon he had no sooner Christ that expected,
incarnate Shiloh in his arms, as his spirit in his heart, but he breathes out
his gratulatorie (blessing) blessed, Nunc Luke. 2 28.29
dimittis.) So Zachary being long struck Luke. 1.20.
dumb, as the fruit of his incredulity, had no sooner his imprisoned tongue
unjaled, but he improves the first fruits of his speech to Gods Luke. 1.63.64
65.
praise: darting out as a pellet out of a Gun in the sudden flashes of the
spirit, the inward conceptions of his soul, by the outward modulations of his
mouth. I might instance in that Luke. ^.36.
Anna, in the two best mothers of the two best sons that ever were borne of
woman, the Virgin mother Mary, and her cousin Elizabeth: who visiting one
another, in the most warrantable journyes, (not gadding to a trotters feast as
our common Gossups) and for the best ends: (not to tattle and talk, and
prattle and prate like Parrats and jangle like jayes, and chatt like Dawes and
Pyes on this subject and that abject, not to calumniate and vilipend the
absent) but to comfort and corroborate one another in the mercies of God; at
first encounter, as two instruments rightly tuned in the best key by the finger
of the spirit, in a holy and heavenly harmonious melody, resonate and resound
the praises of Luke. 1.42.45 46.47.
God, as did also all the rest which looked for and expected, the now exhibited
Patriarke-promised prefigured Messiah, the consolation of Israel: which
pretermitting without further enlarging, view the Apostle Paul, the inspired
Doctor of the Gentiles, and we shall see that as he had as holy, and as
sanctified a heart, (except his crucified Master) as ever was enclosed and
included in a body of flesh, he has, as so many Epistles, (yea in some places
as so many leaves and lines) so many breathings, yea breaking out and
eructations in the praises of God. Yea in every Romans 1.8. Romans 16.27 1. Cor.
1.4. 2. Cor. 1.3. Ephesians. 1. v. 3 Phil. 3. v. 20. Col. 1.3. 1. These. 1.2. 2.
These. 1 3. 2. Tim. 1.3.
Epistle it is observable, that the Alpha and Omega, the beginning and end of it
is prayer and praise, oftimes both in the antecedent and concluding consequent:
the subject or matter of which petitions and thankesgivings, being the happy
success of the Word, the propagation of the Gospel, the faith and patience of
the Saints, their grouth in grace, their forwardness in zeal their readiness
to distribute, their constancy in profession, their perseverance in the truth,
together with Gods merciefull proceedings with himself in turning him in his
name and nature, from a Saul to a Paul, from a Wolf to a Sheep, a persecuter
to a professor, a Preacher, a Canniball to a Christian, a blasphemer to a
blesser of 1. Tim. 1. verse 12 13.14.15.16 17.
Christ, yea from a Cater-piller to be like James John and Cephas a pillar,
from a confounder a founder, from a supplanter, a planter of the Church of
Christ. These mercies together with that Tallent of preaching of tongues, of
knowledge above his fellows, of parts, of 2. Cor. 9. 2 Cor. 10. Paulus de ipso
per totum
pains, of patience, in doing suffering more then the rest, that door of
utterance opened to him so abundantly, were (as they should be, to all in Paul's
place, of Paul's spirit) the ground, not of Thrasonicall ostentation, luciferian
pride and presumption, (as in Ierem. 20.1.2.
Pashur Hanany, 1. King. 22. v. 24.
Zedekiah, the Romish Jesuits and Baalites, as formerly in The intolerable of
Arrius, Samosaetenus, and other heretics Gent. Magd. where Caesar as Pelargus
our Jesuits praefat. ante suum Iesuitismum.
Arrius, Nestorius, Paulus Samosetenus, and all other Pseudoprophets,
Pseudopostles, Pseudomartyres, Pseudochristians, Heretics and Schismatics)
but of holy and humble thankfulness. I might enlarge my meditation in this
point, if I would wade into ancient and modern history, from the practice of
all other Saints and holy men of God, that ever were, chiefly millions of
Martyrs, Confessors, recorded by Eusebius the Tripartite, and the rest of
Ecclesiastical historians: Fox in his Martyrologie nominated by name and
described by their states and callings, whose faiths, like the Arist. libr. 5.
cap. 19 Etiamsi Discorides libr. 2 cap. 50. and Galenus lib. 3 de tempor. cap.
4. contradicant Salamandrum in ignem vivere and ignem extinguere: asserit tamen
Plinius libr. 10 cap. (...) Plin. (...) Civit. Dei lib^ 21. cap. 4.
Salamander and that Pyralis or Ce^astia living even in the fires and hotest
persecutions, even in the midst of flames (as Paul and Silas in the lower
prisons) have sent out the sparks of holy praises in hymns and Psalms, and
spiritual songs, etc.

But above all, which is instar omnium in stead of all, as the best president
to us Christians, we have the un-erring as precept, so practice of Christ,
every action of his humanity being our Omnis Christi actio nostra est
instructio.
instruction, as he prayed continually, rejoiced evermore in all things, gave
1. These. 5.16.17.18
thanks, chiefly for the propagation of the Gospel, the subjugation of
spirits to his disciples, the falling down of Satan like lightning: yea in
the very benediction of the creatures, abounding with praises to his heavenly
Matthew. 11.25 Matthew. 26.30.
father: so should we, if we be Christians in truth and sincerity as in name
and profession, imitate our Christ as members of his body, branches of his
Vine, and docible disciples to that best of Masters: otherwise as Augustine
once noted, that it was incongruous under a thorney head to look for soft and
delicate and effeminate ^ub spinoso capite, non debe^t membra esse mol^a.
Augustinus.
members; it is as incongruous under a blessed blessing head, to have (as many
Christians have) execrable execrating, cursing accursed blasphemons members.

CHAP. VIII. Gratitude further proved and pressed from the Saints and Angels in
the Church triumphant, with thunderbolts against this blaspeming in stead of
blessing Age.
But if the examples of the Saints on earth move us not, I wish that sursum
corda, we would lift up our hearts and eyes a little higher, (paulo maiora
canentes) unto the Saints and Angels in heaven: looking to the souls and
spirits of the just, in the nature Angelical and humane, we have a fairer
coppie to write after, a more resplendent white to shoot at in the Church
Triumphant, then we can have in the Church Militant, where the whitest Swan
has his black feet, the purest gold his dross, the fairest face of grace
his moale, the most eminent light his cloud, or eclypse; as may be instanced
besides Gen 19. v. 36.
Lot, Genesis 9.21.
Noah, John 10. v. 25.
Thomas, Math. 26.70.72.
Peter, etc. Patriarks, Apostles; even in two of the best, for great men, good
men, the world ever had; in David and Hezekiah, the one committing such 2. Sam.
11. 2. Sam. 24.1.2.3. 2. Sa. 16.1.2.3.4.
sins, the other omitting such 2. Chron. 3^.24.25.26.
a duty; as both soyled their graces, and put them to wash away those
tinctures and stains with penitential Psalm. 6. v. 6. 2. King 20.3.4.
tears, by the heat of renewed love, drawn out of the best distillatorie
limbeckes of broken hearts and compunct spirits: so that it is dangerous to
imitate the best men that ever were, (except the sanctifier and Savior of men)
in every point of their practice, least like the motion of that Materia
compacta in instina acris regione, noctis frigore constipata, vent^rum vi
aliquando a malo Angelo agitata. Simon Maiolus de diebus caui^. p. 1. c^ll. 1.
page 9.
ignis fatuus or transient fire, called in my country: Maude with wispe, they
lead us wrong in the dark night of some errors into the Devious by paths of
irregularities. But to imitate the Angels and souls and spirits of the just in
heaven, their example is the right cynosure, the straight line of our actions
and affections, the right Card and compass of our conversation, the very Pole
according to which to steare our practice in our manifold fluctuations, and
dangerous aberrations in the Sea of this world: because they being inseperably
united unto God, to be like unto them is to be like unto God: even partaker of
the divine 2. Pet. 1.4.
nature; they are fixed in their port, and haven, (their heaven,) not subjected
now (like us in our surges) to any shipwreck of faith or 1. Tim. 1.19.
conscience; therefore it is good for us to cast anchor as near them as we
can, to build our Tents and Math. 17.4.
Tabernacles as near theirs as we may, to ascend up the Mount, to them by
meditation, contemplation, imitation, as in other things, so especially in this
duty, in singing and ringing forth here below, as they above, the praises of
their God and our God, in joining our quire to theirs in this holy Anthem,
Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Sabbath, Heaven and earth are full of the Majesty
of thy In Te Deum.
glory. If we look into that mysterious revelation, we shall see what the
very life of the Angels is: in what the spirits of the glorified Saints are
eternally uncessantly employed; namely in standing about the Throne of the
Lamb Revel. 5. v. 15 12.13.14. E^ch. 7. v. 9.10.11.12.
Christ, clothed with white robes and Palms in their hands, (as Emblemes of
victory over that triple C^rberus the flesh the world the Devil,) and crying
with a loud voice, Salvation to our God which sits upon the throne, and unto
the Lamb, Blessing and glory, and wisdom, and thankesgiving, and honor, and
power, and might be unto our God, for ever and ever. Amen. This is the
continuated voice of the Saints, of the Elders that serve God day and night in
his Temple: Thus they sing Haleluiah in heaven for the judgments upon the
great Romish Revel. 19. v. 1.2.4.
whore which hang over her head, for avengment of the blood of so many of Gods
servants, innocent Martyrs, which causelessely she has effused: Thus they
rejoice too, at the marriage of the Lamb, and for the graces already given to
the Bride the Church, chiefly the Jewels of the Gospel, by which she is daily
fitting her self for the solemnization of her espousals in Vide Bright-mannum
nostrum in locum.
heaven: This indeed is vita celitum, vita coelestis the heavenly life, their
life in heaven, who are ever standing before the Lamb: yea according to the
distinction of Zanch. de sex operibus, de Angelis. Distinguit, in ministrantes,
and assistentes.
Zanchie and Casmannus in sua Angelographia.
Casman, this is the life too, of these that are ministrantes, ministering from
God: For as the Devils where ever they be whether limited or confined to the
earth, or dispersed in the Air, or in the fire, or in the waters, or in the
Mines, or cranneyes under the earth, or in the Center of the earth, or below
the center, (as some think there is local hell, as most probable, because most
remote from heaven) or confined to some climate, some Province, some Town,
some Circuit of ground, some mountain, some fountain, some Court, some
Palace, some chamber, some Nunnery, or Monastery where they have played reakes
and Instat Cardan. in lib. 4. de parie^ c. 176. Langius li. 1. epist. an. 1539
Wier. de prastig. l. 4 ca. 9.10.11.
pranckes, yea or to the bodies of some men, as once in the Called ventriloquisis
by Text contra Marrion. c. 25. by Chrysostom. in 1. Cor. 12. by Oecumens in Act. 16.
v. 16. because the devil spoke within their bellies, as once in the Serpent.
Pythonists and ordinary in the days of Christ, and extraordinary now: where
ever according as the learned discuss and determine these As Delrius discus.
Magicar. lib. Tyareus de locis infestis. W^er. de praestig. daemonu^, Perer. de
Magia. Laur. Ananias de nature. daemonu^ cum alijs.
intricates, he be permanent or transient, he carries still his Hell about
with him, as murderers, traitors, adulterers and blasphemers his darling sons,
carry their petty Hels in the gnawings of their consciences: So on the
contrary, the good Angels where ever they be, whether in Bethle^s fields with
the Shepherds, or in Daniels Dan. 6. v 22
den, with Daniel, or in the fiery furnace with Sydrach, Misaach and Dan. 3. v.
25.
Abednego, or in Sodom with Genesis 19. v. 15.
Lot, or in the door of the Tent with Genesis 18.2.3.
Abraham, or whether with Manoah and his Judge. 13.9.
wife in the fields, or with the Virgin Mary in her Luke 1.26.27.
Closet, or where ever else, they ever carry their heaven about with them,
they are still in heaven, or heaven in them, in respect of Gods Luke. 1. v. 19.
presence which fills them, as the Moon is filled with the light of the Sun:
and in this fullness of joy, which they have in and from God, they cannot but
resonate and resound back again their praises to God: for even when these
heavenly soldiers are on earth with Bethlems Luk 2.13.14.
Shepherds, as if they had been in these highest Emperyall heavens into which
Paul was 2 Cor. 12.2.
rapt, they sing Glory to God on high, on earth peace, and amongst men good
will. Now to act our parts, as we pray in that best of The Lords prayer
preferred by Cyprian, by Daneus de Orat. Dominica, and by Alstedius in Theolog.
Catech.
prayers in respect of the Author, matter, manner, and method: Thy will be done
in earth of us mortal men, readily, promptly, Math. 6.10. See Brimsley and
lately M. Bernard in their plain paraphrases upon the Lords prayer.
sincerly, etc. as it is in heaven of the immortal Angels* so (unless we
mean to prate and prattle rather then pray, as did the Math 6.7.
heathens, and our vulgar ^n their Tantologies, Battilogies, Latin prayers.
Papists, unless we will take Gods name in Abuse of prayer by M. Perkins in
his Golden chain, by Alsted. Theol. Catech is made a maine breach of the third
Command.
vain, and abuse this primary and principal part of Gods Genesis 4.26. Vide
Scultetum de praecatione, page 4 5. etc.
worship, unless we will verba dare, dally with, deceive and delude the
Almighty,) we must strain and study, desire and endeavor to practice as we
pray: we must bless God on earth, as the Angels do in heaven, we must not
blaspheme on earth, the God of heaven, which the Angels do not, dare not,
cannot do: we must praise God, not pinch God, (as the angry Curre may the
stoutest Lion) We must magnify God as the Angels do, not martyr God, murder
God, tear and crucify over and over again (as Augustine alludes) the
glorified humanity of Christ, worse then the Jews on the Cross, as hellish
and profane spirits do: not sparing his wounds, his blood, his heart, his
head, nay not his feet, his nails and his guts, as our roarers, our
rake-hels, our rascalities and ragga-muffins do: such as in their practice
have turned just renegadoes, Iulianists, Oecebolians, Apostaites, worse then
Turks and Mahumetans, forsaking Christ (nay opposing Christ) more fearfully
then Witches and Conjurers. Oh this is indeed to be like unto the Angels, like
unto the Gods, as the Devil Iesuitically The Devil first taught the doctrine
of equivocation: the Jesuit in it is not a scholar to Jesus: non cu^
Iesuitis, qui iti^ cum Iesuitis, etc.
equivocated with Adam and Genesis 3.5. Eritis sicut d^ ludit deludit in hoc verbo
d^, id est, eritis sicut Angeli dij dicti: sicut daemones, id est, sicut mali
angeli dij vel daemones dicti a scientia.
Eve. But what Gods? What Angels? even Angels of darkness, not Angels of
light. For surely to curse tear, blaspheme God, is the very life, course,
practice of damned spirits, the tortured ghosts of Devils, and men, reprobate
Angels and reprobate men: Cain, Judas, Esau, Saul, Pharaoh, Nero, Caligula,
Heliogabalus, Holofernes, Apostate Julian, whorish Pope Ioane, Nicromanticall
Sylvester, Alexander the sixth, athisticall Caesar, Borgias, treacherous
Absalon: serpentine Achitophell: soul poisoning Mahumet, blasphemous Arrius,
Michael Burned in Geneva, vide in fine Aretij locor. communium.
Servetus with millions more. Would you know what they are now doing? Their
bodies are jayled and imprisoned in the grave till Gods general assizes. But
what of their souls? Thus in the midst of their exquisite tortures in hell,
(unless God gave speedy grace to some to die, better then they lived) even
with their father the Devil (whom they sympathize, as in sins so in Math.
25, 41
sufferings) they rave, they rage, they fret, they fume, they revile, they
blaspheme, they execrate, they curse the Majesty of the Almighty, they wreake
their Teene and wrath on God, as that madded Bajazet cope't up in an iron Cage,
did upon See besides Knels his Turkish history, the history of Tamb. extant in
quarto.
Tamberlaine, even by raging and reviling like madded dogs tied up in iron
chains, they bark and foam at the mouth and belch out blasphemies (as the
condemned miscreant that curses the Judge, the Jury and the Bench:) when
their malignant malice and mischief can proceed no further. And indeed as
wicked men are by the spirit of God called the sons of 1. Sam. 1.16. and 1. Sam
9.27.
Beliall, the children of the very John. 8. v. 44. and 1. Ioh. 3. v 10
Devils, so, Do they not patrizare? are they not as like their father, as if
they were spit out of his mouth? Do they not look as like him, as egg to Non
^v^^m ev^ similius.
egg, snow to snow, or rather pitch to pitch? Do they not resemble him as face
answers face in a glass? He blasphemes God in hell, they blaspheme God here
on earth: He is the old Revela 12.9.
Dragon, they are as yet but Rev. 16. v. 9.
Serpents, yet growing to be Dragons, and as full of venom for their measure as
he is whose names they bear, whose nature they have. Should such die in this
state and condition blaspheming the name of God, as so many thousands do in
the world, especially if they be never so little crossed or touched by the hand of
God, or tongue, or hand of man, then letting their oath-pellets fly from their
hell-heated mouths as did Michaes Judge. 17.1.2.
mother, the contesting Isralite in the days of Lev. 24.10.11
Moses, and these accursed carnalists prophesied of in the Apoc. 16.9.
Apocalypse? I pray you, to let such reflect a little on their case and
condition, Math 5 35.36 and August. ad consentium de mendac. cap. 15. and
Chromat. in locum.

James 5.12 Psalm. 25. v. 3. Zachar. 5.3. Deuteronomy. 28.58 and in Apocryph. Eccles.
23. v. 11.


if God would please to open their hood-winckt eyes, besides the Scripture
that is infallible true, firm above heaven and Matthew. 5.18.
earth irrevocable above the decrees of the Meedes and Dan. 6.8.
Persians, to be verified in every letter, title and syllable according to
qualifications of objects in works of justice, as of mercy: I say besides the
verdict of the word, which must in due time be verified, else God were no Numb.
23.19.
God, and the word but a fable like these of Esopes or Lucians, (which were
blasphemy to imagine) I say yet again and again, besides the thunderbolts
from Gods own mouth that strikes the swearer as low as Psalm 9.17.
hell, the center of profanesse, nothing keeping him out of it, but a small
twine thread of life, every day and night as a black worm and a white,
gnawing this thread, and at last a blatrant M. Perkins allusiue simile, in one
of his Legal motives, in his Treatise of repentance.
beast called death perhaps suddenly lopping, and cropping this thread, and sends
the customarie swearer into the lower pit without ever bail, or maineprize,
remission or redemption: If there were no word, or if the word were, as carnal
(life) (heart Psalm. 14.1.
Athists account it, of no more certainty, then mother Hubbardes tales,
Bebelius Bebilij facetiae extant in octavo
jeasts, or Melanders Alelandri Iocoseria extant in decimo sexto,
jocoseria, yea then the lying legend of the (k) Papists, their Limbo Patrum,
and pick purse Purgatory: yet even in reason, let me expostulate with an
impious and profane spirit, and whisper but some few words into the ear of a
blasphemous swearer, how fit he is for hell, and how unfit for heaven if he
should die suddenly as some of his predecessors have done? and be swept away as
dust and Psalm. 1.4.
chafe in an instant, as were reveiling Corah, Dathan and Numb. 16.32.33. So
Anastasius, the blasphemous Arrian Emperor was struk with a thunderbolt from
heaven as also Olympius the Arrian (like Ioab) with three darts, blaspheming
the Trinity. See in the end of Zegedine his Common places in folio, de his cum
multis alijs.
Abiram, for alas what should he do in heaven being conditioned and qualified
as he is? what work is there for him that he could do, that he would do? In
heaven there is perpetual sempiternall blessing of God, as we have proved,
which task he is as fit for as yet, as an Ass for Asinus ad Lyram, Sus
Minervam. Erasmi chiliad.
a Harp, a Sow for a Sack-bot: he that cannot sequestrate one minute of an
hour, one hour in a day, one moment of time to praise God, he that has as
much heart to this or any other spiritual duty, as a Bear to the stake, the
Bull to the ring, the coward to the battle, or the Ass to the race, he that is
weary in the Church or in a religious family to bear one part or burden in
a Psalm (which is indeed his burden) or chayned but to a Sermon or a
Sacrament for an hour, has his ears taken up as by commission, sore against
his will, his heart being As Ezechiels auditors. EZche. 33. verse. 31.32.
a wooll-gathering, rogeing and straggling like Dinah perhaps in the Genesis 34. v.
1.
fields, in the Town, in the Tavern, in the Theator, the tappe-house, the
Tobacco shop, the brothell-house, perhaps in his baggs, in his Barnes, in his
coin, his counting house, his corne-heapes: or amongst his sheep and brutes;
Is it probable or possible (judgment finding a man just as death leaves him,
the Tree lying as it Ecclesiastes
falls) that this man, should dying in this tune and temper, be fit to join his
untuned spirit with the heavenly Quire of Angels, to bless and laud the Lord,
for ever and ever? Oh less fit is this man for this spiritual motion, then
Saul to be amongst the Estne Saul inter Propheta^. 1. Sam. 19.24.
Prophets, then drunken Philoxenus to be in the school of Soler, Socrates,
then Judas to be at the Lords John. 13.26.27
Supper, or Cham in the Genes. 7. v. 7
Arc, yea less fit then for a Iayz to sing amongst Nightingals, for a fool
to sit on the bench with Judges, for a Quacke-salver to consult in the College
of Physicians, or the rural fiddler to join his Pans pipe, or Oaten reed,
with the Quire of the Muses, the chorus of the musicians, or (to add one
more,) as though Qui Bavium non amat, odit tua carmina Mevi.
Bavins or Mevins, or a ballating Poetaster should intrude amongst the heave^ly
Est Deus in nobis, agitante calescinius illo.
inspired spirits of a Virgill, an Ovid, a Homer, a Hesiod, a Chaucer, a
Spencer, a Ben-mont, and such lettered Laureates, etc. Alas what delight has a
plow-boy, a Cow-boy to handle a pen, that knows not a B. from a Bulls foot
as the phrase is? What delight should I take to be amongst the Dutch or Welsh,
or wild Irish, 1. Cor. 14.11
whose language I understand not, to whom I am as a Barbarian, and they to me?
and so, what a good year should a swearer do in heaven, where there is nothing
but blessing God with everlasting Hosannahs and Halelluiahs; with which he is
altogether as unacquainted as a poor pre^tice with the mysteries of of his
trade, the first day of his admittance, or a child with Greek and Hebrew the
first day that ever he handled book? how to speak the language of Ashdod, the
language of hell, cursing, swearing, swaggering, ryoting, reveilling, etc, a
profane spirit knows well, (or rather ill) enough, It Is natural to him, as
for the fire to burn the Sea to foam, etc. He swims without Sine co^ti^e
natare.
a Cork, he takes these (as some do the the Art of cunny catching) at his
own hand, he needs no tutor, no prompter but the Devil and corruption: But
for the language of Canaan the language of heaven, the tongue of 1. Cor. 13.1.
Angels, how to bless God, how to express with the inspired Apostles magnalia
Act. 2. v. 11.
Dei, the wondrous works of God, how to set forth the glory of God, as did
Augustine and Ambrose, when in heavenly responsories is said, one answering
another, as Cherubin, Cherubin, they alternatly in Alterius vicibus: amant
alterna Camenae canentes amenae. etc.
courses compiled that holy hymn called Te Deum, or We praise thee O God, etc.
I say though a profane person should have more tongues then King of Pontus that's
said to have spoke 22. languages.
Mithridates, Scaliger, or Whose dictionarie consists of eleven languages.
Calepine, yet till God scrape or wash his tongue from oaths and blasphemies,
give his mouth a physical, (or rather a metaphysicall) purge, heat his tongue
as the Disciples with celestial Act. 2. v. 3.
fire, as Esaias 6 v 6.7.
Esaias, with a coal from the Altar, he never can speak to any purpose, except
in hypocrisy as did John. 12 4.5.6.7.
Judas, 2. King. 9.32.
Iezabell, and 2 Samuel 14 v 3
Ioab, (like a horse that goes a forced pace) any thing Theologically good,
tending to Gods glory, and the good of others. And if he be as a fresh man
untrayned for any part of Gods service, as he is, (or should be) a soldier
militant here on earth: is it probable that he is fit for a higher office and
place to serve the Lord jointly with Saints and Angels in heaven?

SECT. I. The blasphemer fitted for Hell.
BEsides the profane blasphemer, is not so unfit for heaven, but he is on the
contrary as fit for hell, as a cut purse is for the Pillory, or a traitor for
Tyburne: yea as a good Grammar Scholar is fit for a higher school, even the
University: for Satan by the help of native and hereditarie corruption, as a
wily nurse, having herein earth trained up the blasphemer in the language of
Ashdod and other abominations, (as sin never goes bird alone) like some
father that teaches his son, his own trade, and makes him more expert and
exquisite then himself, his purpose is, to prefer him to a higher (or rather
to a lower place) even to be a free denizen in the low countries, the
nethermost hels, his own Dukedomes, and Demaines, where whenever the earth
by a commission from the God of heaven is weary of Telluris inutile futile
pondus, Horat.
him, and casts him out, as once she did the Judge. 1. and Ge. 15. verse. 16.
Cananites (as the Sea casts out her froth) there he may as free as any in
great Belzebubbs territories, in a trice set up, (or set open) his mouths shop,
and have free vent for all his blaspemies, were they ten times more and more
abominable: yea and he shall have too, such pension and pay as they deserve:
abundance of fire and brimstone, storm and tempest shall be his portion to
Psalm. 11.6.
drink; And sure as he that knows the language, and the fashions of a
country makes less bones at it, to travail thither, and has more hope of
entertaynement in France, Italy, Germany, Polland, Hungary, Slavonia, if he
can speak well and perfectly the French, Italian, German, Polonian,
Hungarian, Slavonian tongues: So he that speaks, in his horrid oaths,
imprecations and execrations the language of hell, (as I persuade my self were
the Devil himself (as he assumes shapes) truly and really metamorphized into
the heart, the habit and speech of some man, he could not act worse pageants
then some do, slander more maliciously blaspheme more boysterously, etc.)
such a man when ever God by his sergeant death sends him a passport, may
travel in a trice into the Devils Dominions, and have work at will, and
abundant wages, even more then he desires, but large as much as he deserves;
yea me thinks as by a man's speech it is easy discerned what countrie-man a man
is, English, Irish, Scottish, a Germane or the like: so a man, (a Minister
chiefly) may even here this day give a great guess at thousands as infallibly,
as the two Damsels did of Math. 26.72. and Rhoda: Act. 12. verse. 13.14.
Peter, what country you as yet belong to: and whither you set your faces to
Sion, or to Satan; even your tongues bewray you whether you speak Sibboleth
or Judges 12. verse. 5.6.
Shibboleth as Ephramites, or as Gileadits, as Angels or Devils. Oh as I begun
this pressed point I end it. If ever you desire to be like the Angels in glory,
sympathize with them, (though you cannot equalize them) in grace: chiefly
consecrate as they their whole powers, you your least member to the glory of
God, else that part unreformed, all your James 1. v 1^. Read all these
excellent means and motives against swearing forswearing M. Down^^^ four
Treatises: page 26.27.28.29.^^ 49. etc.
Religion is in vain. And know further, what I have heretofore more enlarged,
that a man begins either his heaven or hell, in this Hic vita aeterna tenetur,
a^^ amutitur.
life: Here he is in the suburbs of one of the two of Saint Augustines Aug. de
(...) vit.
Cities, either Jerusalem which is Gal. 4.26.
above, or Sodom whcih is here below: Here by grace a man has Charter and
interest after liverie seizure and possession of glory. Here it is easily seen
which way he walks, even by what he Loquere ^t t^ videam. Socrates ad Ephebum
quendam.
talks. A man need not wish with Momus a window into a man's heart let him
look into his mouth, there he has the best prognosticatum of his mind, as
the un^erring truth it self has Math. 12. ver. 32.33.34.35.36
determined. Figs never grew from Thistles, nor Grapes of Iam. 3.12.
Thorns: nor sweet streams ever came from a poisoned, corrupted Iam. 3.11.
fountain: let us make the inside clean then all is clean So shall we be
able in earth as the Angels in heaven, in sincerity, without hypocrisy, in
filial love not in servile fear (incident to the Iam. 2.19.
Devils and reprobates) with purged and in good measure purified spirits, even
here on earth inchoatively, and after in heaven perfectly, to make one Quyre
with the Angelical spirits, to the ever blessing and praising the God of
spirits.

SECT. II.
I Do not deny indeed but a wicked and a graceless man may sometimes speak
good words, not only savouring of Moral wisdom, of experience and deep
observance (as the sentences sayings and Apothegmes of Socrates, Solon, Bia^,
Thales, etc. and the Greek and the Roman Recorded by. Valerius Maximus,
Diogenes, Laertius, Brusonius, Lycosthenes and others.
Sages, yea the expostulations of 2. King. 9.31.
Iezabell with Iehu, the disswasives of 2 Samuel 24 3.
Ioab to David, the speeches of some, even of the unbeleeving John. 7.40.46
Jews, the censure of Gamahel concerning Act. 5.35.36.
Paul, the counsel of Pilates wife concerning Math. 27.19
Christ, which many such specialties do demonstrate) but he may speak words
even in outward show and appearance savouring and relishing of grace, as
appears in Balaams Number. 23.10.
wish, Agrippaes Act. 26.28.
flash; the first to die, the second to be a true Christian, besides the
Pharisees Luke 18.11.
prayer, the foolish Virgins crying Matthew. 25.11
Lord, Lord, the carnal Jews desiring the John. 6.34.
bread, the adulterous Samaritane desiring the waters of John. 4.15.
life, with many more: It cannot be denied also, but the best men may sometimes
speak words at first blush savouring of a carnal spirit, such as have hardly
the prints and impression of grace; as appears in Abraham's Genes. 12.13.
simulation, or dissimulation, Joseph his swearing by the life of Gen 42.15.
Pharaoh, Eves tempting of Genes. 3 6.
Adam, Iudahs soliciting of his incestuous Genes. 38.16.
Thamar, David's murtherous vow against 1. Sam 25.22
Naball, his folly in commanding his people to be 2. Sam. 24.1.2
numbered, his bloody jussion in the slaughter of 2. Sam. 11.15.
Vria^, his unjust verdict against 2. Sam. 16.4.
Mephibosheth, in Peter's Math. 26. Luke 23.
denial, his disswasion of Christ's Math. 16.22.
passion, the culpable request of James and Mark. 10.35
John, the incredulity of Saint John. 20.25.
Thomas with many more, verifying that of Saint James. 3.2.
James, that he is a perfect man indeed, which offends not with his tongue:
yet nevertheless that is true in Divinity which the eternal truth has
revealed, that words justify or Math. 12.37.
condemn, that the mouth speaks the man either good or bad, as it either
blesses or blasphemeth God, or James. 3 9.
man: For first this is to be presupposed, that usually the just and pure, have
pure Proverbs.
words, their hearts, their consciences and their spirits being Titus 1. v. 15.
pure. Abraham prays for Genes. 18.25.
Sodom, for Ismael Genes. 17.18.
Isaac, for Genesis 25.2^^
Rebeca, Moses blesses the children of Deuteronomy. 33.1.
Israel, Jacob blesses his Genes. 49. and 48.15.
sons, and the sons of Genesis 48.20.
Joseph, Samuel and Ioshuah exhort to the service of the true 1. Sam. 12.13.
Ioshuah. 24.
God, Lot exhorts the Genes. 19 7.
Sodomites, Boaz comforts Ruth. 2.11.12
Ruth, Eli reproves his 1 Samuel 2.23.
sons: Gideon pleades against Judge 6 31.32
Baall: the Prophets pray and prophecy, the Disciples preach, all that looked
for the consolation of Israel, bless with Zachary the God of Israel, for the
incarnation and exhibition of Jacobs Shiloh, the promised Messiah, as David
calls his tongue his In psalmi^.
glory. So all the godly have made, do make, (except in some temptation or the
breaking out of hereditary sinful corruption) their tongues, organs and
instruments of the glory of God: as again the wicked when they speak, usually
(unless when they feign and strain to the contrary pronouncing Parrat-like
such words, of which they have no feeling, against the heart and against the
hair, coldly coming from them, as from sick men, or are over ruled by a
special hand as Numb. 23.5.
Balaam, and John. 18.14.
Cayphas in his prophecy, Pharaoh Neco in that which he told 2. Chro. 35.21.
Josias, or out of common gifts as Judas in his preaching, Saul in his 1. Sam.
10.6.
prophesying, (the wise men amongst the Heathens from Moral Philosophy, or
the very Ethickes, of nature) I say usually, except in these specified cases,
when the wicked speak, their words speak them wicked, even as what bitter
streams the fountain sends forth, these streams speak the fountain no
better, then bitter: since nemo dat quod non habet none can give what he has
not, or show better stuff, then he has within him: the mouth of a good man
being as the opening of heaven, which never opened, but there was always some
remarkable good thing happened, as either Christ Act. 1.11.
ascending, or the spirit John. 2.32.
descending or the like: the mouth of a wicked man, being as the opening of
hell, out of which never proceeded, as into which, never entered ever ought that
good was, or it is as the opening of the Tryoan Horse, in which were armed
Greeks, fatal to Ilium, or as the opening of Pandoras box, out of which flew
all leprosies and diseases, or as the opening of Curtius his gulf of the
Sicilian Plin. lib. 2. cap 106. August. de Civit. Dei, lib. 3. cap. 31.
Aetna, or that Pliny choking Orosius, lib. 7. cap. 9. Procopius. lib. 2.
Bell. Got. Nicepher. libr 3. cap. 12.
Vesuvius, out of which proceeded nothing but filthy foggs, and sulphurious
stinking streams: as appears in Ismaels Genes. 21.9.
scoffing, (or as the Apostle calls it) tongue Gal. 4.25.
persecuting, Michols 2. Sam. 6.20.
mocking, Rabsakees 2. King. 18.28 29.30.
railing, Simeibs 2. Sam. 16.5 6.7.
revilings, the sons of Belials disdainings and dispisings of 2. Sam. 20 1.
David, and of Saul, 1. Sam. 10.27.
Saul's profane execration and 1. Sam. 14.39.
swearing, Senacharibs and Goliahs 1. Sam. 17.36.
defying. The cursing of that carnal Levit. 24.11.
Israelite, and Michaes Judge. 17 2.
mother, Corahs Numb. 16.3.
dispiting, the ungrateful Israelites rebelling and Numb. 11.1.4.
murmuring against God Moses and Aaron: to omit the Pharisees Mark 3 22.28.29.
blaspheming against the holy Ghost, their vilifying and vituperation of John
9.24.
Christ, Ananias and Saphiras Act. 5.3.
lying, Gehezies 2. King. 5.25.
dissembling, the old Prophets hypocritical 1. King. 13 18.
haulting, Simon Magus his Act. 8 9.
Magic, and monstrous mistakings in his ver. 19.20.21
stakings, Elimas the sorcerers Act. 13.8.
disswasions of Sergius Paulus from Paul's preaching, and as is manifest by the
multitude of oaths and blasphemies, which as thick as the the Atomie or Sun
moathes, (besides talk wholly composed of rebauldrie, folly, dissimulation, and
treachery) come from the multitude, which testify that there is no grace in
their hearts, since there is no good in their words: they rule not the least
member, how much less the greater? therefore all their religion and profession
is James. 1.26.
vain. Therefore as thou would be persuaded that with the tongue of Angels
thou shall glorify God hereafter, get a cloven tongue, a fiery tongue (not
from hell as the Iam. 3.6.
most, but from Act. 2.3.
heaven as the best, to be an instrument of Gods glory here: which if thou
attain, thou may infallibly conclude that here thou art holy in the Church
Militant, and art tending and bending to be happy in the Church Triumphant:
else know that a swearing, a blaspheming, an execrating and cursing tongue
shows an unholy heart, as corrupt streams show a corrupt fountain, as sower
fruit shows such sapp, and such Iam. 3.11.
root, as ulcers in the body and fiery ploukes in the face show an unsound
or inflamed Liver. Yea as the black spots shows the Pox, and the blew spots
the plague, fristed hair, mannish attire, a rouling eye, gadding Prover.
7.10.11.
feet, a tempting tongue, painted face, naked breasts, and uncovered dangling
duggs (the Ivy bushes, that proclayme what Wine within is to be had for love
or money) not more demonstrating a very whorish 2. King. 9.50.
Iezabell, then a tongue which makes a daily trade of evil and cursed speaking
shows an evil and accursed Math. 12.35.
heart, a sensual and unsanctified soul, yea that the very Devil speaks in
and by such men, (as he did once in the Vide Pareum and Parerium in Genes 3.1.2
Serpent, in Apollos De ludebrijs, and illusionibus diabolicis in hoc oraculo,
vide apud Herodot. lib. 1. and 3. apud Valerium lib. 1. and 9 c. 12. Et apud
Maiolu^ de vaticinijs, col. 2. page 99.
Oracle) in many Vide apud Delrium disq. Magie. and apud Lorinum Commentarijs
in Act. 16. page 628. 629. Ex Hieronymo.
Pythonists and possessed persons (even as Gods spirit speaks in and by the
elect, as once in and by his Prophets, or Evangelists and disciples:) and so
for thee, in this state, fate and condition possessed (or rather plunged,
poisoned and pestered) with such a filthy heart and foul mouth, that is
altogether as unfitted, untuned and unprepared for holy Hymns and songs,
Divine Anthems, and heavenly praises, as an Ass for an Harp, as the adage
Tanquam Afinus ad Lyram.
is: For thee I say to imagine in this predicament, to die and not be damned,
but to pass without any change or conversion in heart or life, words or
works from a sathanicall life, to an Angelical life in heaven, is a sweet
deluding slumber, a brave golden dream, a bewitching conceit, an Eutopaean
Paradise, a mere Castle in the air, without any warrant, foundation, 2. Pet.
1.21.
from the God of truth, from the Scriptures of truth.

CHAP. IX.
SECT. I. Motives here to begin the life of the blessed.
I Still desire to add more fuel to this Celestial fire of true Gratitude
which I labor, (as I have I hope already instrume^taly kindled) further to
inflame in the hearts of our English-Irish Israel, (like that once material
Apud Maiol. col. 22. de eleme^to ignis.
Vestall fire) never to die, or extinguish, but to live and last, to burn and
blaze, even when the sparks of nature are quenched, and the radical moisture
of all and every one of you drunk up and consumed. Oh I desire that when your
earthly, and elementarie part is dissolved, your dust turned to dust, and to
mummiamized earth, that then your better part, your souls more pure and
subtle then either fire or air, may with the Angels and the Reve. 5.11.
Revel. 7. ver. 11.
Elders, clothed in pure white before the throne of the Lamb, yea with the
Vide de ordine, and natura Cherubin and Seraphin, apud Cassantum in Catalogo
gloria mundi, par. 5. p. 79, 80.
Cherubins, and Seraphins, wholly fired and inflamed with the love of God, (as
inchoatively and initiatorily here on earth, so) perfectly, constantly,
perpetually in the Emperyall heavens, laud, and praise, and bless, and
magnify and glorify that great Tetragrammaton, the mighty Jehovah, De his
nominibus cum significationibus, vide apud Zanchium de tribus Elohim, and de
attributis Dei.
El, A donay, Elohim, etc. in all his great and glorious titles, names and
attributes for ever; and for ever, without any persecution of the world,
opposition of tongues, scoffing of Ismaelites, flouting of Michols, or any
external interruption, and disturbance from the sons of Beliall, which
labor the extinguishing of all the sparks of spiritual zeal in any devoute
Proselite of the house of David, of the new Zach. 12.10.
Jerusalem, yea without any internal suggestions and temptations from Satan,
but above all, without any distraction of mind, division, or divulsion of
thoughts, alienation by these externalls, or any other molestation in the
outward or inward man from your selves: as having there a full and free
exemption, and infranchizing manu-mission from all this dullness of flesh,
deadness of heart, lumpishnesse of spirit, corruption of nature, pressures of
crosses and losses, exigents and straites for these outward things, cares and
distractions of families, encumbrances from your callings, and what other lets,
disturbance, impediments and remoraes whatsoever, which do every way in this
your warfare here, imbondage and inthrall you, from the performance of this or
any other spiritual duty, in that measure and perfect manner, that you would
or should, of which you daily complain with the Romans 7.23.
Apostle and all the faithful, and against which, you daily strive and fight,
in the Christian conflict, and bickering Gal. 5. v. 17.
duel, betwixt grace and nature, the flesh and the spirit. Oh let it be your
living dying, (yet never dying) comfort, that you that begin cordially and
Christianly to bless God here, after this short life is ended, which is as
brittle as Esai. 40 6. 1. Pet. 1.24.
glass, as wavering as the wind, as frail as the Ice, as swift as a poaste,
or a weavers shittle, as melting as snow, as fading as smoke, or the fields
flower, as vanishing as a dream, you shall join your spirits, to the spirits
of the just, to sing and ring forth your everlasting Hosannahes and Haleluiahs
to the God of spirits: for which end, as Paul's wish and hearts desire was that
Israel might be Romans 10.1.
saved, so my wish and hearts desire is, that all of you might here be so far
sanctified, that innitiated in this life as prentices to this heavenly science,
or as journey-men or journing men (even strangers and pilgrims with 1. Chr.
39.15.
David, the Patriarchs and Hebr. 11.13. 1. Pet. 2.11.
Prophets) traveling and peregrinating in this veil of misery in your few
and evil Genes. 47.9.
days ere you sleep with your 1. King. 2.10.
fathers, you would so learn to speak the language of Canaan with the tongues
and Tones of Angels, that at the last as free Denizens, free Citizens
infranchized and privileged in all the liberties of grace, and glory, you may
keep a perpetual Iubilee, an everlasting Sabbath, of praises and holy
expressions in that heavenly Canaan, celestial Jerusalem, Mount Sion, which is
Gal. 4.26.
above: to which my hopes be, that you are, (my desires be that you may be)
traveling, breathing and aspiring.

SECT. II. Motives further urging here to begin the l^fe of Grace, after of
Glory.
OH suffer the word of exhortation. I beseech you as heavenly Quyristers begin
even here, even now, even this day, the Quyre on earth: It Is not thank worth
to be eternally thankful in heaven, you must do it, you can do, no
otherwise, if you once come there: It Is as natural (if I may use that word)
for the blessed spirits to bless and praise the Lord, as for the fire to
burn, the Sun to shine, the waters to move, the Seas to ebb and flow,
Aelian. hist. li. 10. c. 44. Plin. li. 5. cap. 9.
Nilus to overflow, or any other creatures celestial or sublunary, animate or
inanimate, to move and work, and produce effects according to their natures,
and several proprieties. But to praise God here, joyfully, cordially,
constantly, to break here through all impediments, as David's three worthies
through the Garryson of the Philistines, to fetch the desired waters of 1. Chr.
11. verse 18.
Bethlem, to strive here against all discouragements, as in the Olympicke De
his ludis multa apud Celium Rhodignu^ historicos, and Poetas sunt quos
curriculo pulverem Olympicum collegisse iuvat. etc. Horat.
games for Masteries, to swim against the stream (of all oppositions) as is
said of the Arist anim. lib. 9. cap 48.
Dolphin and Samon, to be resolute against all repugnances of the false and
flattering flesh (that bids the spirit as Peter bade Christ, favor it self.)
The tempting Devil, the persecuting world, who by the imputations of
hypocrisy, humorousnesse, fantasticalitie, singularity (at least of
Puritanisme and Precisnesse) seek to quench in every zealist, all sparks of
Devotion, as soon as ever kindled; yea as Math. 2.16.
Herod, and Exodus 1.22.
Pharaoh, to drown and murder even Christ and Christianity in all the
Israel of God, as soon as ever newborn, I say those that can thus digest
all those bitter pills, as physical, and can be (as was David's 2. Sa. 6.21.22.
case with Micholl,) more zealous in this, and all other duties, the more they
are opposed, like the fire that burns the more, the more it is Quo magis
premitur, eo magis astuat ignis.
suppressed: this indeed is praise worthy: every inferior bird can chippe and
croude it in the spring, and can sing in the Sun shine; that is a bird
indeed, that can sing in the storm, and charoll it in the Winter: every fish
can play in the calm, the Dolphin and some more can play in the tempest: every
man can bless God in the Sunshine of his prosperity with full bags, full
barnes, full bellies, and clothed back: But to bless God in adversity, in
the storms of affliction with Job on the Job. 1. v. 21.
dunghill, Daniel in the Lions Dan. 6.21.22
den, with the three companions of Dan. 3.23.
Daniels in the furnace, with the Martyrs at the Many had that strength and
grace given them, in the paganish Arrian popish persecution nominated in the
Martyrologie, but chiefly by him who has epitomized all the book of Martyrs,
fol. 3.4.5.6 7.8.9.10. to fol. 18. etc.
stake to sing songs of Sion, here in a strange land, this is that which is most
acceptable to the Almighty. Oh then, that my words might prick and fasten like
the goades and nails of the sanctuary, that I might plead and prevail with
you: Even now with Noah's Genes. 7.9.
Dove to enter into the Arc, to leave the carrion and fleshly lusts of the
world, on which the worlds Crows, Dogs and Vultures prey and glutt themselves:
here to be at rest in God, and on God. Oh let my counsel be Dan. 4.24.
acceptable, here strive to enter into the Bride-grome Math 25.10.
chamber, to rejoice as Paranymphs and friends of the Math. 9 15.
bridegroom, to sing with Solomon a divine Epithalamium, in honor of the
spiritual espousals, betwixt Christ and his Church Oh that you could here
sleep in quiet rest and tranquillity of the soul, in heavenly contemplations,
(as that Endimion is said to have slept with the Apud Natalem Comitem in
Methiologijs.
Moon in the phylosophicall speculations) here be conversant in the mount with
God as Exodus 19.3.
Moses, get a glimpse of the glory of Christ in the mount, with Peter, James
and Math. 17.4.5. 2. Pet. 1.17.
John for in the mount of high and heavenly thoughts and meditations God will
be seen, Christ will be found in Luke 2.46.
Jerusalem, which is the vision of Visio Paci^.
peace: Oh that we could ascend up from earth to heaven with 2. King. 2.11.
Elias in the fiery chariot of zeal, that we could strive even in this life,
to enter at least the suburbs of the heavenly City, that we had our Phil. 3.20.
conversation even in Heaven, our Heaven begun here on earth: Sursum corda,
that being risen with Collos. 3.1.2.
Christ, we might seek those things that are above, placing and planting our
affections, not on things in earth, but on things in heaven, that we could send
our hearts, as the Disciples their hearts and Act. 1.11.12.
eyes after Christ that is ascended, that A man in his incarnation, a Lamb in
his passion, a Lion in his resurrection, an Eagle in his ascension
Eagle high mounted at least, that we could soar up to his Cross in Golgotha,
in the meditation of his passion, not to breed compassion toward him who now
from sufferings is entered into Luke 24.26.
glory, (as the superstitious Friars as may be seen in In his mount Calvarie.
Guevara, Lodowicke de In his Soliloquies grounded from several Gospels.
Ponte, and His meditations.
Granado, etc. make that the chief end of their mental meditations, of his
sufferings, and of their Idolatrous crucifixes) but to resolve to suffer with
him, that we may be glorified with him; to feel the power of his death, to die
to sin; the power of his Romans 6.8.9.10
resurrection, to rise again to newness of life, to bless and praise the
Apoc. 5.9.
Lamb, because he has redeemed us from all the nations and kingdoms and
kinreds of the earth. If for this end we tract, and trace our incarnate
crucified savior, from Jerusalem to Matthew. 27 Luke 23. Mark 15. John. 19.
Golgotha, with his sword pierced weeping mother, the doleful daughters of
Jerusalem, Joseph of Arimathea and the Centurion, and for this end look upon
him whom our sins have Zach. 12.10.
pierced with the Eagle eye of our faith, as the Antitype of the Brazen Serpent
whom Moses erected in the Numb. 21.9. John. 3.14.15.
wilderness, looking on him also in the glass of the Gospel, where we may
see him as the Apostle of the Gentiles, tells the convert Corinthians, even
crucified amongst us, if by this sight of him, we can get unto him by saving
John. 1^.3.
knowledge, into him by Epi^^. 3.16.
faith we grow up with him as planted in Io^^. 15.4.
him by the sap of the spirit, we make a blessed speculation of his passion.
Oh that besides the fruit of his passion, we could get here some glimpse of
his transfiguration, a true type of his glorification, some glimmering and
reflection of the heavenly Canaan, as Moses a perfect view and Synopsis of the
Deuteronomy. 34.1.2.3.
earthly, here seek some glimpse of heavenly light, (as the prisoner the
gleames or beams of the Sun, through some crannie in the wall or door or
keyhole) through the veil of thy flesh, as the spouse in the Canticles, that
had a glimpse of her Cant. 5.4.5.6.
welbeloved, looking through the hole of the door, and her heart was
affectioned to him: Here in thy greatest pressures of body soul and spirit
get some refection by reflection, with that primitive Protomartyre Act. 7.56.
Stephen, and the rapt 2. Cor. 12.4.
Apostle on Christ crucified and glorified, and of the glory of Christ,
prepared purchased, laid up as revealed: Here get some warmth and heat in your
hearts as the Apostles and the two disciples that went to Luke 24.32
Emaus, by often talking and communing with Christ, by the word, and Oration oris
ratio: vel colloquium cum Deo. Isidore.
prayer, and by that means receiving from Christ that best new-yeares gift,
that love token, promised by Christ to all his John. 14.17.18.19.
elect, and exhibited as once in the Act. 2.3.
form, ever in the effects of The Spirit like fire, etc. 1. Illuminates with
knowledge 2. Heates with zeal and love. 3. Mollifies the heart. 4. Causes
sparks of prayer. 5. Purges dross of sin. 6. Purifies the heart. 7.
Changes with, what it meets with, in to it own nature. Geminianus in summa
exemplorii and similit.

fire. Oh that we could break off company and society with man, (chiefly
wicked men) so much as our callings and charge to be discharged will permit,
that in our meditations and soul Soliloquies in innitiation of Saint
Augustine, Bernard, Anselme, and other heavenly minded men, we might be more
conversant with God. Oh why do we not retire our selves as Genes. 24.63.
Isaac into the fields, as Augustine and Alixius into the Libro Confessionum:
related fully and applied in Parsons Resolution.
orchard, as Joseph of Arimathea into our John. 19 41.
Garden, or immure our selves (according to Christ's Math. 6. verse. 6.
precept, and his Virgin Luke 1.28.
mothers practice) into our private closet, or chamber, for some sequestrated
time, there to meditate of the mercies of God, of the merits of Christ, of the
privileges of grace, of the Christians dignity, of the joys of a better
life, etc there to exhilerate our selves according to the Apostolical
counsel, and command, and according to the president set us in my Text by
David, and his nobles, and to rejoice, before the Lord, and in the Lord, more
then the carnalists, and the moralists of our times in their Corn and Wine,
and Oil Psalm. 4.7.
increased: more then Laban in his Genesis 29.2.
sheep, Naball in his 1. Sam. 25.36.
feast, Balthezar in his Dan. 5.2.
drink, Herod in his Mark. 6.17.
Herodias, Saul in his 1 Samuel 16.16 23.
Harp, Nero in his Suet^nius in Nerone, qualis artifex pereo.
Music, the carnal Jews in their Amos. 6. v. 6.
Minstrelsie, then the Philistines in their Judges 16.23
Dagon and madding mirth: or any other licentious libertines in their luxurious
and sabaritish delights. Oh why do we not retire and sequestrate our souls,
our thoughts, our actions, our affections, from all carnal delights and
desires, more fully, more freely to converse with God? setting times a part
even for the very nonce to praise God, as did Psalm. 55.17.
David, as Daniel did for Daniel 6.10.
prayer, arising with that man after Gods own heart, even at midnight to give
thanks unto the Lord? Oh that my words, like spurs, and goads, (like the
prick under the Nightingals breast, that is said to awaken her in the night
from sleeping to singing) might excite and stir you, to this neglected and
too much pretermitted duty! And for this purpose, I wish we might here use
this world, as though we used it not, (as the Mariner the Seas and his Ship,
as the Soldier his arms, as the traveller his Inn, as the Student his
recreation, as the Spaniell the waters, for our turns, and times, for a time,)
for mere necessity, and conveniencie, not giving it our hearts nor
affections, shaking it of, when we have done with it, for Seeking only, quae ad
vict^^ cultumque necessaria. Cicero.
meat drink and clothes, and embracing in the inwards of our souls more
pure, spiritual contentive, and satisfactorie delights, and desires: Oh be as
much as thou can in the mount of spiritual speculation, rather then in the
vallie of external actions, rather in the lightsome Genesis 46.34. Exodus 10. ver.
23
Goshen, with Gods Israel, then in the darkesome Egypt with the uncircumcised;
rather suffer affliction as Moses with Gods Heb. 11.24.25
people, then enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season; rather desire with
David, to be a door keeper in Gods house, then to live in the Tents of Kedar,
as Lot in Genes. 19. 2. Pet. 2.7.
Sodom, Ezekiah amongst Ezekiel. 2. ver. 6
Scorpions; rather fast with Gods children; the mourners in Sion, as Esther
with her Esther. 4.16.
maids, Mordocheus with the distressed Jews, Ezra 10. v. 1.2
Ezra, Dan. 10. v. 2.3
Daniel, and Nehem. 1. v. 4
Nehemiah, then feast with the profane Balthezars, and drunken Nabals of the
world; rather sing songs of Sion, with Moses, Deborah, Miriam, Zachary, the two
Annas, and the spiritual Israel of God, to the laud and praise of God, then
songs of Sodom to the Lute, and Tabret, and Harp, to the dishonor of God,
with that carnal Amos 6.6. Esaias. 22. verse. 13
Israel. Avoid the company of the wicked, fly from their society, (as Manes
the Calcedon Bishop did from Julian the Apostate, John from Cerinthus, Origin
from Paulus Samesetenus, Polycarpus from Marcion, Athanasius, Chrysostom, and
the Of all these there is ample mention made by Socrates, Eusebius, the
German Centuries, etc. As I have alleged them already in my Origens
repentance.
Orthodoxes Alexandrians and Antiochians, from the blaspemous Arrians) as from
a dog, a Cane poenis and angue. adagium.
snake and a devil. Come no nearer them, then to the plague, who have hot
mouths like Armenian Dragons; hot as Ovens with fire from hell, spitting,
burning venomous sparks of blasphemies in the face of Heaven. For, to converse
with such, is to have our Hell on earth: but to praise God, with the Saints,
yea withal the creatures, magnify him in all his glorious attributes, this is
to have heaven on Vita celitum, vita caelestis.
earth. Oh happy (as holy) is that soul, who (in imitation of the Lark, and
the singing Quyristers of the Air) has his chief delight to be mounting
upwards, and singing above as near to God, as he can get, and uses this
grosser earth but only for food and mere necessaries: making no stay below,
till it soar up again, that it be intrapped (as these incautelous birds) in
the lime-twigs of lusts, in the gins of temptations. Oh happy he, that not
contented with ordinary duties, with our common Protestants, materially and
cursorily performed, such as their stinted tasks, of saying, (rather then
praying) Prayers: reading of Chapters: singing of a Psalm, saying Grace,
before and after meat (as they use to say) by themselves, or children their
atturneys; running daily in these (unless by carnalite or profanesse omitted)
as in a Laborynth or Circle: like a Milne-horse, ever in one pace, without ever
quickening their motion, what extraordinary occasion soever come, either of
prayer in humiliation, or praising God in true Gratulation; those that besides
these ordinaries can sequestrate times, to dedicate and consecrate their very
souls, and spirits to the very God of spirits, extraordinarily, in manner and
measure, as occasion is offered, either of mourning, (such as was in the days
of Esaias 22. v. 13.
Esau, Osee. 6 v. 1.2.
Osee, Dan. 9. v. 1.2.3.4.5.
Daniel, Joel. 1. v. 5.8.11.13. and cha. 2.15.16.17.
Joel, Ezra 10.3.5.
Ezra, 1. Sam. 1.10.
Anna, Job. 3.24.
Job, Ierem. 9. v. 1.2
Jeremy,) or of rejoysing, such as in the days of David, both herein my Text,
and elsewhere when David penned his Eucharisticall Psalms, sung publicly in
the Church, he and the Elders of Israel: (as also in the days of his son
Solomon, Ezekiah, and Josiah after him) exulting and triumphing before the
Lord. Oh happy he, that can marry as some Fathers (besides Stella and Bona
ventura in Lucam.
Friars) have alluded, both Martha and Luke 10. verse. 41.42.
Mary Rachell and Leah, can unite and so conjoyne, the fruitful thoo-bleare
eyed life of action, as less fair, with the more beauteous life of
contemplation, that in his general calling, as he is a Christian can make holy
and spiritual duties, the unbending of his bow, sauce to his meat, his very
recreation, and best preparing to the duties of his special, and particular
calling, as he is a man; such a man is indeed a Phoenix amongst men, Rara avis
in terris as the Hevites said of Genesis 23. v. 6.
Abraham, even a Prince of God amongst men: yea he that can be a regular,
observant of these few rules, by blessing the Lord with his heart, and mouth,
the members of his body and faculties of his soul, here in grace, shall
inchoate and begin even in the vallie of the world, in the veil of his flesh,
the life of glory, such an one shall attain, to more Evangelicall perfection,
then ever did Jew, Papist, or Pelagian in the mere observation of Moses his
Legals, whether Morals, Cerimonials, or Judicials: Yea by these rules he shall
come nearer God, shoot nearer heaven, walk more in the light of the Sun, as
every way more perfect: Yea I say further, he shall inherit and enjoy sweeter
ecstasies of soul, raptures of spirit, comforts of conscience, peace of heart,
joy in the holy Ghost, then ever any superstitious popeling, regular Friar, or
Monasterian in this earth had, (notwithstanding all their Thrasonicall bragges,
and boasts to the contrary, of there feined revelations, apparitions, and
enthusiasmes) by their strictest observance of the rules of their Saint
Francis, Benedict, Dominick, etc. or these that are forged and fathered on
Basil, De regulis Francisci Basilij, Augustini, etc. vide Fusius apud
Hospinianum de origina Monocatus.
Augustine, or any other, recorded by Vide Cassiani collationes Suriu^,
Lippomanum, Pomerium de sanctis, Marulum, Abdiam, and Gregorium in dialogis.
Cassianus, and their own writers. Oh could we try how good and gracious the
Lord is, had we but a spiritual gust of the comforts of grace; If we did but
once eat, the spiritual Manna that is hid from the world; Could we turn the
bread of life, in succum and sanguinem into blood and moisture; Could we be
weaned from the world, to be fed as children truly newly 1. Pet. 2. v. 2
borne, with the milk of the word; Could the world with her bewitching
delights prove bitter unto us, that Christ and his comforts might be Cum
mundus dulcescit Christus amarescit, Cum mundus amarescit Christus dulcescit.
August.
sweet, that we could be as content to sacrifice our false joys as Abraham
his beloved Genes. 22.6.
Isaac, as the repenting Israelites their Idols; Could we pray 1. These. 5. v.
16.
continually, rejoice ever verse. 17.18.
more, etc. In all things give thanks, whether we eat or drink, or
whatsoever we do or excogitate reserving all to the honor of God. Oh could
we attain retain this Math. 5. v. 48
perfection, commended and commanded; Could we thus keep our spiritual
Passover with Luke 22. v. 15
Christ, we should experimentally find as much difference betwixt the
comforts and contents, of Christianity and carnalitie, of the joys of the
flesh and the spirit, as betwixt the clear fountains of Exodus 15. v. 27
Elim, and the bitter waters of 2. King. 2.19.
Jericho, betwixt Honey and Aloes, or as the ancient Pagans found betwixt their
formerly used Gland, and Akornes, and that Corn which was first sown by
Ceres, or Polydor. Virgil. de inventione rerum.
Saturn, or as the Prodigal son found betwixt the husks of the Swine, that
had almost starved Luke 15. verse. 16.17.
him, and that bread in his Fathers house which abundantly fed him: we would
confess with that good In confessionibus.
Augustine, that we found God too late: we would say with that other Ignatius.
zealist, Deus meus and omnia, my God and all things, we would resolve with
David, rather to be door keepers in the house of God, or to nest there with
the very Sparrowes, then to be the Monarchs of the world, without the Word: Oh
could we make melody to the Lord in our hearts, if the Harpes of these hearts
of ours were rightly strung and prepared, to sing and give thanks, this
Music Mental, we would as much prefer it before all the vain vicious
profane madding Eccles. 2. v. 2.
mirth of the world, as an exquisite Lutenist or Organist preferrs the Organs,
the An instrument so called, in which are diverse instruments in one.
Multitude, Orpharian, Bandora, Lute or Cytharin, etc. before the roaring of a
rural Bag-pipe, in which the countrie-swaine delights, because he is
apprehensive of no better. Oh we glut our selves as Vultures and Kytes with
these carrions delights, sensual because we know not, nor try not those that
are more pure, and Ignoti nulla cupido and quod non videtur non concupiscitur.
spiritual, as the stomach that feeds on wind and corrupt humors, when it
wants better meat. (*) (*)

SECT. III. Blessing God, the means to supplant blaspheming and other tongue
sins.
OH if once our hearts like golden Organ-pipes, were blown with the best
Favonian wind, that blessed breath of the spirit, (without which they make no
heavenly modulation) that they could resonate and resound with David the glory
of God, that we could say with that Princely Psalmograph, Awake my tongue, a
wake my glory, a wake Lute and Harp, I my self will a wake right early. If
we could thus Cant and charroll out the praises of God. If we could say with
faith and feeling, Praise thou the Lord, Oh my soul, yea all that is within
me, praise his holy Name, This one Grace would show that we had gracious
hearts, formed and framed in a holy and heavenly moulde. And sure as it is in
the two scales, in a Balance or the opposite spokes in a running wheel, when
the one is up, the other goes down, as is feined of Castor, and Pollux, that
when the one rises, the other sets: So if this grace of true gratitude, did
possess thy heart, how soon would all graceless and profane carriage vanish
and avoyde out of it, as the mists before the Sun, as the darkness and
dampishnesse of a lower room yeeldes to the light of a Candle, and to the
better smell of sweet odours and perfumes which are suddenly brought in? All
thy oaths and blasphemies, thy curses, and execrations, would be purged out
of thy ulcerous and unclean mouth, as the gross and viscous humors out of
the body by Aloes or Rubarb; Christ's wounds, and heart should no more be
chewed, and champed in thy teeth, as thou do the bones of a Lark: all these
tongue sins against the piety of speech, the justice, the equity, the
wisdom, the honesty, the sincerity, the verity of speech laid down by
some In number 30. as they are laid down by Peraldus in his sums virtutum
and vitiorum de peccatis lingua, and by Reneccius in his Panoplia.
Authors, which once more publicly I At Paul's cross Anno Dom. on that Text.
James. 3. verse. 6.
enlarged, all these I say will vanish as the morning mists, yea fall down, as
Dagon before the 1. Sam. 5.4.
Arc: nay I dark say, not only shall this horrible sin of swearing
(whether Civil and Moral oaths, as by Faith and Troath, this Light, this
Math. 5.33.34 James. 5.12.
Money, etc. or greater and grosser not only by the creatures, but by the
Creator, I say it shall not only turn to blessing God, thy self like Jordan
turned backward, but thou wilst no more endure to hear or bear the
bellowings and blasphemies of the multitude, the roarings of the vociferations
of the sons of Beliall, without zealous though discreet reproving of them
according to circumstances of times, places and M. Perkins in his cases of
conscience.
persons, at least without grieving and mourning for them in thy heart, then
Lot could endure the abominations of the 2. Pet. 2.7.
Sodomites, Elias the 1. King. 18.40
Baalites, or our Savior Mark 11.15.
Christ the Simoniacall buying and selling in the Temple, (or Venalia Romae
Templa Sacerdotes.
now of Temples) thou wilst be affected to such soundes, as to the roaring of a
Cannon: nay, thou would with as much patience hear the howlings and yellings
of the damned spirits in Hell, they will be as welcome to thee, as the
gruntling of the Swine to the Aelian. libr. 3. cap. 8. Ignis, Mures, Sues
illorumque grunnitus Elephanti terrori sunt. Maiol. ex Basilio colloq 7. page
252.
Elephants, which so moves them that some battles have been disordered, and
lost by this swinish stratagem. I say more, were this grace truly eradicate,
and grafted in thee, that tongue of thine, that is fired (and oyled too) from
hell, and made glibb with oaths, as the wheels of a Coach, or a Clock, to
run more nimbly, till it have struck all, venting and foming out thy tongue
sins, thick and threefold, as Winters hail, to Gods dishonor, the
Churches scandal, thine own Jude v. 13.
shame, and thy souls Exodus 20 7. Psalm. 25.3. Zach. 5.3.
destruction. Time may come, that rather then thou should blaspheme God with
it, as thou have done, in the least particular, thou would bite it off, more
freely, then the hunted Beaver his Apud Plinium
stones: thou would spit it out of thy mouth (as once a primitive Martyr upon
an Apud Osiandrum in Epitom. Centuriatorum
occasion spit his, in the face of a Tyrant. Yea thou would suffer it to have
more tortures here, then that rich churles in Luke 16.24.
hell to be sod in blood, as Tomiris did the tongue and head of Apud Iustinum
historicum.
Cyrus, to be pricked through and through with Needles, as Vxor Anthon^ inimica
Ciceroni, vt olim Eudoxia Chrysostomo, Herodias, Iohanni, Iezabell Eliae.
Fulvia did Tullies tongue, rather then it should prick and stabb, and torture
the humanity of thy once painefully crucified, now glorified Savior: Nay with
that good Hilarion were the choice offered thee, thou would rather die the
death again and again, then once to blaspheme that God, who has been so
good, so gracious and so propicious unto thee. What shall I say more? what
stone shall I further roll? what string shall I touch? what arguments shall I
further use, to plant this blessed grace of blessing, to supplant this accursed
plant of the Devils own planting, in the ground of thy corruption, of
blaspheming the God of heaven: which is so usual in the mouths of all sexes
and sorts of men, women and children, from the heads to the tail of our
people, to the shame of Read Master Downam in his four Treatises against this
abominable swearing, sect. 8 9. 10. 11. 12. etc. page 21. 22. 23. 24. 25. etc.
As also M. Phillip Knew-stubs his Abuses of England, and a Sermon of little M.
Gibbins: on this Text, The land mournes, because of Oaths.
Christianity, the just scandal to the Gentiles, who more respect their
feined Jupiter and Hercules then we our Christ, and as the stumbling block
before the Jews, who by our little respect of our Christ, and by Popish
Idolatry (which they daily see, for which their forefathers so smarted) are
kept mainly from being Christians? Oh, (that I may still harp on this tongue
string till it be in tune) inure thy self to bless God, thou wilst, by
dissuetude, then cease to blaspheme him; learn to speak the language of
Canaan, thou wilst forget the language of Ashdod, even as the children that are
Spanish, or of the Natives here, our Irish, if once they live amongst the
English, and are Anglified, they forget for want of use their own tongue, as
Pharaohs daughter forgot her fathers house, and Psalm. 45 10.
people. Oh as one nail drives out another, one passion drives out another,
one burning, heats out another, (according to some surgery) so the fire of the
spirit were it once in thee, would eat out all that hellish fire, that Ignis
fatuus in thy tongue, all that filthy and stinking matter, that foames out at
thy mouth, as froath from a Boar, as the sulphurious smell from Aetna, or
Vesuvius, which steames and stinckes in the nosthrils of God, and all good men,
as the stirring of Ajax, or the raking of a buried carrion: all this I say
would be washed, rensed and cleansed, (as were once the uncircumcised
Corinthians in their words and works) from this filthy and putrified matter,
(as sore mouths are washed by Alum and Sage) by the waters which flow from the
sanctuary: the healing waters of the word and 1. Cor. 6. verse 10.11.
spirit.

CHAP. X. To bless God, the only way and means to be blessed of God.
AS Abraham said in another case to Genesis 18. v. 32
God, I say to man, let me speak once more, so have I done my motives to this
Gratitude, so pressed and urged, aiming my conclusion with some diss^vasives
further against ingratitude, this all positively I have to say in this point,
that by this blessing of God, as did David and his Israelites in my Text for
matter, and manner, thou take the best way, the most compendious course, Gods
own prescribed method, to bless thy self, to procure blessings to thy self
and thy seed, to perpetuate, and intayle as did Ge. 12.2. cha. 15. verse. 18.
Abraham, Genesis 17.19.
Isaac and Jacob, even blessings to thy posterity, walking in thy holy ways
and steps, (even as wicked men, cursed spirits propagate (as some do their
frenzies, their leprosies, and hereditarie diseases corporeal) this dangerous
and damnable disease spiritual, of lincked and chayned curses, even to their
seed blood and families, (sympathizing with their cursed sins, and accursing
judgments) Oh the blessed interest and happy usurie of blessing God! it
brings blessings redoubled and multiplied by Gods Arithmeticke upon our selves,
even as he that in the best employment of his preaching talle^t in Divinity,
or teaching tallent in Humanity, reading Arts and Authors to others, gets and
gains by Gods blessing more knowledge to Qui docet indocto^, etc. Ipse brevi
reliquis doctior esse queat Et scire tuum nihil est, and te scire hoc sciat
alter.
himself, both Theological and Moral, by causing others to Habenti dabitur.
Math. 25.29.
know: and as he, that with Job. 29.15.16 17.
Job, as a good Steward in the right dispensing of the unrighteous Mamon, makes
the backs, and bellies of the poor to bless him, causes also God to bless
him, in the increase of his store, as the Harvest to: that seed that is cast
upon the Eccles. 11. v. 1
waters; as the 2. King. 4.7.
oil, and the 1. King. 17 16
meal of the two poor widows were multiplied, that were so respective to
the two good Elisha and Elias
Prophets, as Abedmelech the Ethyopian saved his own life, by saving Ieremies
Ier. 39.15.16.17.
life, as a rich man, even in piety and Christian policy, increases his
stock of money, when conscionably without any usurious contract, or It Is the
compact this pactu^, this covenant to gain, (how ever the other lose) a
certain sum which makes the usury and that which bites too See D. Fentons
Treatise on usurie.
compact, of biting interest, (securing only the principal) he sets up or
helps the traffic of honest and conscionable poor tradesmen, participating
in equity some of their gain, as God gives a blessing to their getting, thus
in helping them, not hindering but helping himself, doing good to himself, as
experience has showed, when he does good to others: so in the fittest
application, according to my first proposition, a man by blessing of God,
blesses also himself by a necessary consequence, even as he that looks upon
the Sun, by the light, sees light; even as is veryfied in all histories,
which are the hostages of speech, that they which honor God. God will honor
them, as he told 1. Sam. 2.^0
Samuel, as he honored believing Gen 12. Ge. 17 Genesis 18.17.18.
Abraham in Chaldea and Mesopotamia, Isaac amongst the Ge. 26.12.28
Philistines, Joseph in Genes. 41.39.40.41 42.
Egypt, Esth. 6.10.11.
Mordocheus, Esth. 2 9
Esther, Dan. 2.46 48.
Daniell, Sydrach, Mysaach, and Dan. 3.28.
Abednego in Babylon, 1. Sa 18.7.16
David 1. Sam. 3.19.20.21.
Samuel and 2. Chro. 35.18 24.
Josiah in Israel, Boaz and Ruth in Ruth. 4.11.
Bethlem, the believing Math. 8.10.
Centurion, the Cananitish Math. 15.28.
woman, the weeping Luke 7.44 45.
Penitent, the flux cured Mark 5.34.
Patient, Devoute Mary Ioh. 12.7. cha. 20.16.
Magdalen, patient Job. 1.8. Job. 42.16.17.
Job, meek Numb. 12.7.8 Iosuah. 1.6.
Moses, publicly before the sons of men heraulding their praises even in the
face of their maligning or contesting enemies, yea against even Satan
himself, and his accusing sathanists. On the contrary shaming and
dishonouring them that dishonor him, as he veryfied as well as threatened,
against Hophney and 1. Sam. 2.33 34.
Phineas, and the house of Israel, against the Sodomites, burning them with
stinking Genesis 19.24.
sulphur, as well as fire, as their sins stuncke against the proud rebelling
Nymrodians, whose Tower he overthrew, and confounded their Ge. 11.7.8.9.
language, against wicked Haman all whose honors were in one hour strangled
at the Esth 7.10.
Gallows, in his dogge-like death, against rebelling 2. Sam. 18.14.17.
Absolon, whose name now stinckes as foul, as his face was once 2 Samuel 14 25
fair, against proud Act 12.23.
Herod whom the worms eat, proud Nabuchadnezar, who usurping more then a man
in his imagination, for seven years was worse then a beast, in state and Dan 4
30 See how this transforming was in D Wills Hexapla in this place
fate, yea verifying this against his own Israel who for their own
rebellions, though they were the head, yet were rhey made the tail of other
people, as they were given over to the power of the Iere. 39.9.
Chaldeans, Judges 6.2.
Midianites, Judges 3 14
Moabites, Judge 13.1.
Philistines at several times but chiefly in Iehoiakim, who as he lived
wickedly, he died wretchedly, and dishonourably, having the very burial of an
Iere. 22.18.19.
Ass, none lamenting him: As it was also with that blasphemous Arrius and
other Of Gods judgments against Arrius, Nestorius and other heretics and
apostates. See in the end of Zegedines tables in folio.
heretics, with Julian and other accursed apostates, with Cain, Act. 1.24.25.
Judas and other bloody murderers, 2. Sam. 20.22
Shebah, 1. King. 2.31.32.
Ioab and other Traitors, with Iezabell, Cleopatra, Messalina, 2. King. 11.16
Athalia, our English Rosamond, and Jane Shore, and all other impenitent
profane ones, who as they lived without grace and holiness, died in disgrace
without honor a debaushed life, being usually accompanied with a dishonorable
death: even so (that from this circumference I may conclude the point in the
right center) that soul that is active in truly blessing God, is also passive
in receiving blessings from God; he is that truly blessed man which is
described in the Psalm. 1. ps. 112. psalm. 119 1. Math. 5.3.4.5.
Psalms, and in other Scriptures; all those blessings shall accrue unto him,
and come upon both him and his seed, which Moses both Deuteronomy. 28.1.2.3 Levit.
26.3.4 5.
conditionally and Deuteronomy. 33.6.7.8.9.
absolutely pronounces upon the Israel of God: even as on the contrary he
that loves cursing, the curse shall come upon him, even as a stone or pellet
of Lead that is thrown up in the air, may fall upon the head of the thrower
and crush it, (as did that stone which an Eagle let fall upon the head of
Eschylus the Poet,) or as a ball that is thrown against an Iron-walle rebounds
back again on the breast or face of the thrower, as the curses of 2. King 1^.
Rabsakah, of 2. Sam. 16.7.8.
Semei, of Balaake redounded on their own heads, not on the heads of Ezekias,
of David, and of the Israelites, as the Popes curses at this See the book
called Brutum ^ulmen.
day against the Orthodoxe Protestants, whom he execrates under the names of
Calvinists, Lutherans, Hugenotes, Heretics, fall patt upon himself, and the
declining Sea of the Papal Hierarchy, who begins to ebb, by the just
revolting of Kings, and Christian kingdoms from Babylon, as fast as ever by
the mysterious working of Read that noble French Morney, now Englished in
folio, of the progress of popery since it was first hatched
Satan it had a time to flow, the causeless curse as an arrow shot to no
purpose in the air, ever returning in vain: So that to draw this point to a
further head, as the Lord is Just lege Talionis, by a just Pana and culpa
protionata.
retaliation in other particulars to punish sin; so to curse the cursers as
most See Gods hand upon those that used to curse and imprecate, instanced by
Kellay lib. 8. and Guicardine lib. 17. in the death of Charles Duke of Burbon:
by Crantius libr. 6. chap. 45. by Wierus lib. 4. de Magia cap. 10. by John le
Gast in his Table-talke volum. 2. page 131. by Benso, in his history of the
new World lib. 2. cap. 17. by Philip Camerarius, hist. Med. cap. 86. in the
Tragical ends accustomed cursers.
accursed, according to that of the Psalmist, As he loved cursing, so let it
come unto him, as he delighted not in blessing, so let it be far from him, as
he clothed himself with cursing as with a garment, so let it come into his
bowels like water, and like oil into his bones, let it be unto him, as the
garment which covers him, and as a girdle wherewith he is girded Psalm. 109.
ver. 17.^8.
continually, so why may we not argue, that by a retaliating proportionable
mercy, (seeing both in mercy and justice the Lord keeps an Arithmeticall or
Geometrical proportion, in rewarding as revenging) he blesses those that
bless him, and that bless his; for if he told Abraham that those who blessed
him he would Genes. 12. v. 3.
bless, and has ever verified this promise, in blessing and prospering the
friends of the Church, the spiritual seed and sons of Abraham: (as some of
our Gorlicius in axiomatibus theologicis ex Mela^cthone, Sarigelli^, and alijs
Neotoricis.
Modernes instance, in the two Theodosij in Constantine, in Gratian, in
Valentinian, and other Christian Emperors, who as they were nursing fathers
and nursing mothers to the Church, the Lord went out and in with them, and was
present with them in all their affairs, in war and in peace, as he was
present with Ioshuah 1.5.
Ioshuah, Judge 6.12.
Gideon, Gen 39.2.21
Joseph, 1. Sam. 18.12.
David, Dan. 4.5 chap. 5.12.14.
Daniell, and other his servants) ever also according to his threat cursing
those that cursed Abraham, and were malignant enemies and opposites to the true
Gene. 12. v. 3.
Church, his Israel (veryfying and sealing all the curses in his flying book
of vengeance, upon Read the curses threatened against Egypt, Moab, Ammon, Edom,
Tire Sidon, Medea, Arabia, and all wicked Provinces and people: in Jeremy th.
25 verse. 15.16.17.18.19.
Moab, Ammon, Amalech, Ieconiah, Ahab, Iezabell, Haman, Nero, Caligula, Julian,
Antiochus, Maximinus, Read the Theater of Gods judgments in quarto, written
by D. Beard, on which in the Titles of Apostates, and bloody persecuters,
these named with many more, are spectacles of vengeance.
Maxentius, and of latter times on Johannes de Roma, Minerius, Gerson,
Cassaneus, Weston, Bonner, Story, Gardener, and other bloody butchering See
Master Fox in his Book of Martyrs, but especially, in a book epitomizing
the Acts of the Church, where you may see the ends of these named with many
more: folio 377. 378. 379. 380. 382. 383. etc. See also Andrew Husdore in his
Theater of examples on the 3. and 4. Commandment in Latin in quarto.
persecutors ancient and modern) then sure (as the argument holds much more,
from the lesser to the greater affirmatively, both Logically and Theologically)
the Lord will bless those, that bless him, as he will curse those that curse
him: If he will bless those that bless Abraham, much more will he bless
those that bless the God of Abraham, since indeed none can bless God
cordially and sincerely, but such as the Lord first inspires with his grace,
and spirit, even as the instrument makes no sound, till it first be tuned and
touched with the hand of the Musician, as the Organ-pipe is not musical, but
dead till it be filled with the windy bellows from the Organist, for none can
say that Jesus is the Lord but by the spirit of God. So that the blessing of
the God of spirits, with upright hearts and spirits, as David and his
Israelitish Elders did here, being but as a spark of the spirits fire, as
streams from that fountain, as reflecting beams from that Sun: it is an
evident demonstration, that such are truly, actually, really blessed already,
and (as a preparative beaver to a greater Banquet, at the supper of the Revel.
19.7.
Lamb) potentially to be further blessed of God, in the highest heavens, the
throne of God, the bosom of Abraham, the prepared mansions and seats of the
blessed.

All which affirmatives me thinks, have their corroboration from this
Theological axiom, that as the seal leaves the impression in the wax, be it
gold or silver, etc. as the Sun by reflection leaves his shadow on the
opposite cloud; so what mercy soever the Lord bestows on us, as a dignity,
he works in us the same grace, demonstrating it self in some proportionable
duty as for instance. 1. Has the Lord elected me to life from eternity? He
gives me grace to elect and choose him again to be my God. 2. Has he called me
to the knowledge of his truth? He gives me his spirit to call him Abba Romans
8.15.16.
father, in spirit and truth. 3. Has Christ died for me, and my sins and
risen again for my Romans 5.6.
justification? He has mutually given me power to die unto sin, and to rise
again to holiness and righteousness of life, mortification of my fleshly
Coloss. 3.5.
lusts, and crucifying my affection by the power of his Gal 5.24.
death, and vivification and quickening of the spirit Ephesians. 2 v. 1.
by the power of his resurrection 4. Is he ascended into heaven really for me?
He virtually causes me to ascend thither after him in my Coloss. 3. v. 1.2
heart and affections. 5. Is he my high Priest to pray for me? He as his
legacy to his Church bequeaths unto me the spirit of grace and Z^ch. 12 10.
Romans 8.26.
prayer to pray again unto him, 6. (So for conclusion) Does he bless me with
all blessing in heavenly things? He gives me the heart by the same grace to
bless him again, as all his Saints have done, such print and impression the
seal of his spirit leaves in my heart as answerable to it self, as face
answers face in a glass. Oh then, as ever thou desires to be blessed, bless
God here, be not so ignorant on idle, as to dream of the kernel without
breaking the Qui vult nucem, nucleum frangat.
shell; of eating the meal without grinding in the milne of the Beneficium
postulat officium.
dignity, without the duty: of ever being blessed but cursed, without
blessing God. Oh think on all these motives in general, every one in
particular, and let them be as goades and spurs to excite thee to this
pressed duty. At least let all and ever of them be so many Bittes and
Bridles, curbs and remoraes to restrain and keep us from ingratitude, the
bane of every grace, yet the ulcer and spreading leprosy and Gangreene of
every place, yea of this Province, and our English here planted, if I might
digress by expostulations.

CHAP. XI. The application of all: by comparing as and our times with Israel
in all times.
ANd now for special and specificall application of all that has been said
unto our selves, to reap the harvest of all this seed, and to drink the Wine
from these pressed grapes, that I may (Bee-like) bring all these rapsodicall
collections home to the English-Irish Hive of our own Church, and
Commonwealth (all these general motives being but preparatives to prolong and
prepare the way to my intended scope, or as a foundation to a subsequent
building:) If ever Nation and people under the cope of heaven, had cause and
occasion, to act the part of David and his worthies, since they left the stage
of life, in blessing the Lord, (as the very words of my Text are) we are the
people; for in the blessings and benefits we have received from God, both of
adornation and preservation, Spiritual and Temporal, external and internal,
general and special, our mother Albion, and we here Hybernified, laid in an
equal scales (I will not so undervalue us to say) balanced with all the
inhabitants of the Christian, Pagan, Papal, Octoman world compared with the
famousest kingdoms European, Asian, Affrican, and American, not excepting the
Cham of Cathy, the great Mogull, the Souldan of Egypt, Prester-Iohn, the
Kingdoms of Fez, and the most flourishing that are, or ever were, but equally
poyzed with the best people (in their prime) in David's and Salomons time, that
ever were, taken even in their best, as answering all their privileges and
prerogatives given them by the inspired 1. Pet. 2.9.
Apostles, of a royal Priesthood, a holy Nation, a chosen generation etc. To
whom were the Oracles of whom came Christ according to the Romans 9.4.
flesh? we do not only weigh and parallel blessings with them, laid in
equal balance, but all things duly pondered, we as far (me thinks)
exceed them, as they exceeded once the invironing Nations; and this will
plainly and perspicuously appear, if we and they; Britam man's and Jews, be
compared together (as In his lives.
Plutarch compared the Greeks and the Romans) both in our best and worst: our
dignities received from God, our obliged (yet neglected) duties, that we owe
to God: we shall be found to bear the bucklers from them. Repetens ab
origin primo, to begin then from the beginning, etc.

First we know the Lord of his mere mercy and Philanthropie entered into
covenant with the Jews, gave them the seal of the covenant Circumcision
(initiated with their father Genesis 17. v. 1.2 7 9.10.11.12. Romans 4.11.
Abraham, he by this Ioshuah. 5. ve. 5.6. Deuteronomy. 5. v. 1.2.3.
covenant elected and selected them from all the Nations, Kingdoms and kinreds
of the earth to be a peculiar people to himself, of them and amongst them, he
had his Church: instituted prescribed and established his own worship: gave
them laws and ordinances Moral, Ceremonial, Judicial, as far exceeding
the laws of Solon, Numa Pompilius, Mercurius Trismegistus, Adraco, or any
other Legifers amongst men in equity, purity, and perfection, as the Gold
exceedes the Brass or Tynne, by these he hedged and limited them within their
bounds: all that he exacted of them again in reciprocal requital of his
mercies was only Deuteronomy. 5.40.
obedience to his laws and statutes. His love he first set upon Deuteronomy. 5 v.
34.35.36.37.38.
them and choose them, (not they him) not for any merit or worthiness that was
in them, but of his mere mercy and paternall good will, adopting them unto
himself, repudiating and in a manner rejecting for a time, all other people
whom he shut up in unbeleefe, in respect of them, as Moses often times urges
unto them.

So to reflect upon our selves, for this our English Israel, has not the Lord
sequestrated and separated us from Pagans and Heathens, yea even from Turks,
(and Jews themselves,) whom for a time he has rejected for their Romans 11.20.
unbelief, to be a Church unto himself, a people zealous of good works? were
we not once, as we may see our faces in the glass of the Romans 1.29.30.31.
Romans, 1. Cor. 6.9.10.11.
Corinthians, Thessalonians, Ephesians. 2. v. 2.3. verse. 11.12. and Tit. 3. verse. 3.
Ephesians, in their pristine estate before their conversion) in the
uncircumcision of the flesh, serving lusts and vain Idols, without God in
Christ, strangers from God, and Aliens from the Commonwealth of the true
Israel, in the power of Act. 26.18.
death, in the power of darkness, having our very understandings Ephesians. 4.18.
darkened, as ignorant of the true God, and of the way and means of life, and
salvation? were we not once even darkness it self, an obscure people even
to the world, divided and cast out as it were, into an unknown corner and
Divisos ab orb Britannos, etc. Virgil.
angle (though now as a Candle on a Table, as a Beacon on a Hill, as a City on
a Mountain that cannot be hid, giving light and luster to the gazing and
admiring world, whose eyes are upon our eminency) De laudibus Angliae nostrae,
lege apud Cassaneum in Catalogo par. 12. page 348. and Beromensem in Chronicis
lib. 4
but in respect of our spiritual estate, we were like other Gentiles, walking
in the vanities of our minds, children of disobedience, in whom the Prince of
the Air ruled, wild Romans 11.24.
olives ere we were ingrafted? But even when we were thus in our bloods, the
Lord past by us, and said we should Ezech. 16. ver. 3.4.5.6.
live by the light of his word, (whether by Joseph of Arimathea, or who else,
or in the days of The Papists contend that this Isle, first received the faith
in time of Lucius Anno Dom. 180. And in time of Augustine sent by Gregory Anno
600. but as appears by some passages out of Bid and Peter Cluanensis, yea by
Tertullian contra Iudaeos, and Origin. homil. 4. in Ezech. we received the
Gospel long before the time of Eleutherius, either by Joseph of Arimathea as
Gildas thinks, lib. 4. de Victoria, or by Simon Zelotes, as Nicephorus
affirms, libr. 2. cap. 4.
Lucius or else when, I dispute not now) I say by this light, by blessed organs
and instruments, we were brought first from Paganish, and after from Popish
darkness, more hideous then the Egyptian, or the De tenebris Chymerijs: in
Oppido illo in Bosphoro sito Multa, Plin. lib. 6. cap. 6. c. 11. c. 13. Et Mela
li. 1. c. 4.
Chymerian, and reduced into the lightsome Goshen of the glorious Gospel,
called to be a people that before (as it were) were no people, gathered to be a
Church, yea a glorious Church, as any in Europe or in Christendom, besides for
the continuation of the Gospel, the propagation and profession of the true
Religion, the zeal and sincerity, knowledge and answerable practice of
preachers and professors, purity of Gods worship, freed in a great measure
from the leaven of Popish and Paganish Idolatry and superstition, holiness of
life, and illumination of judgment, shining in many eminent members, as
pearls in Gold (notwithstanding the nevy, and warts and spots and blemishes in
this of ours, as ever have been in the best reformed Churches, by open profane
ones, and secret hypocrites, as wooden legs to the body, as rotten boughs
to the Tree, in the true Church, like corrupt humors in the body, rather then
of our Church.) I say Churches of Revel. 24. verse. 14.20. Revel. 3.15.
Asia, of 1. Cor. chapter 3.3 chapter 5. v. 1.5. chapter 6. v. 1. chapter 11. v. 1^
Corinth, and the best that are or ever were Militant on earth, till they be
Triumphant in heaven, for the number of, (for the sincerity and measure of
Grace in) our present and pristine Proselites, true Nachaniels, zealous
professors and confessors, constant and courageous Martyrs, since the days of
that Belgicke Elias Luther, who have, and upon trial I am persuaded still
would answer their names of Protestants, protesting and confessing for the
faith till death, sealing the truth with their blood, reflecting on those, I
may well say according to my hearts persuasion, that our English-Scottish Sion,
our Church of great Britain, of all other Churches, is as the Dove amongst
the Birds, as the Lilly amongst the flowers, as the Sun amongst the Planets,
Christ's own Spouse, though Cant. 1. v. 4.5
black, yet fair, yea if comparisons were not odious, I would say as fair as
any of those we call reformed in France, Helvetia, Bohemia, Saxony, Denmark,
etc. or any other in See the book extant in octavo of the Confessions of the
reformed churches.
Belgia, yea I except not Geneva, and we may put in for the armor of Ajax,
with Amsterdam it self.

Secondly, as in the Church of the Jews, multitudes and millions of carnal
Israelites, yea the whole generality, except some few whom the Lord reserved
(as a few names in Revel. 3.4.
Sardis, a few corns in chafe, as some few of Elias his 1. King. 19.18 Romans
11.4.
spirit amongst Baalites) broke and infringed this covenant of God, by
apostaticall revolting, and backe-sliding, as the Lord expostulates with them
by his Angel sent from Judge. 2. verse. 1.2.3.4.
Gilgall, by Samuel in 1. Sam. 7.56 and 1. Sam. 12.6.7.8.9.10.
Mizpeth, and by all the Prophets, after the death of Moses and Judge. 2. verse.
8.9.10.
Ioshuah, and those Elders of Israel who saw the miracles in Egypt, the
wilderness, and the redd Sea, forgetting the Sea Psalm. 78^ throughout.
Lord, that bought them and brought them into that good land, flowing with
milk and honey.

So has not the God of Israel, as just a quarrel and controversy with the
commonaltie and generality of our Nations, for breaking our covenant in
Baptism, by which we were as strictly obliged to his service and worship, to
faith, and obedience, as ever they by their Circumcision? For were ever any
Nation more perfidious, or fedifragous one to another the Carthaginians to the
Romans? the Cretenses semper mendaces. Titus 1.12.
Cretians, Creta fides.
Grecians or worst dissemblers, yea even the very See their perfidiousnesse in
Knols his Turkish history.
Turks to Christians: then Christians unto God? How many miriades, and
millions at this day (to go no further, to former times) by their pledges and
sureties, their Godfathers as they are called, or fathers for God, in the
public Congregations, in the presence of God men and Angels, calling heaven
and earth to record, have promised and protested, to forsake the flesh, the
world and the Devil, to serve and worship the true Jehovah, when they were
initiated and matriculated as it were into the Church by Baptism, admitted
into Christ's College, the number and rank of Christians as soldiers sworn
to their General, who yet have hardly kept their covenant so well, as Regulus
with the Apud Plutarchum.
Carthaginians, and other Pagans, even in things moral? For, if I may in
brief lance, and cut and discover the ulcers and diseases of the times: How
many as yet even serve the very Devil, as really, as once that S. Christopher
fictitiously, in the Popish fable? How many wicked Pseudochristians, by their
lives testify, that as the Scripture calls such as they, the John. 8.44. 1.
John. 3.8.
sons, the Romans 6.16. 1. John. 3.8.
servants, and the 1. Tim. 6.10. 2. Tim. 2.26.
slaves of Satan, so they are at his command and obeisance, as the servant of
Genesis 24.10.
Abraham, and Act. 10.7.
Cornelius, yea of that other Math. 8.9.
Centurion to their earthly Masters. He bids them go, and they go, do this,
and they do it: lie, steal, murder, swear, blaspheme, they are obsequious
their spirits and natures as Tynder and powder take presently the fire of
every temptation. 1. He rules them as the rider, the horse, he rules over them
as a Tyrant in an usurped Kingdom, they obey him as the Jews, that Idumean
Herod. Yea he rules in them inthronized in their hearts, as once in the
treacherous heart of John. 13.27.
Judas, the hypocritical heart of Act. 5.3.4.
Ananias, the envious hearts of the Math. 9.34. Mark 3.22. Luke 11.15.
Pharisees, at the least he takes total possession of their whole man, by his
deputies and Lieutenants, some one or more dear darling sins, ruling and
reigning in them, yea he does not only set them a work, (as he did Judas in
betraying, the Jews in crucifying Christ) but he even speaks in their hearts
athistically, in their mouths blasphemously, as once in the body of some Ex
Imo ventre vox prodit, secundum Originem lib. 7. contra Celsum, and Chrysostom. in
1. Corin. 10. Et exinde damonem Pythonem ventricosum, vocat Origenes libr. 3.
Peryarch. cap. 3. and ventriloquu^ Tertull. contra Maro. c. 25. aut infra cutem
da^on se ostentat, and per pectus loqui videtur, qualem Celius Rhodiginus se
vidisse memorat Ant. Lect. lib. 8. cap. 10
Pythonists, and within that Serpent, which he used (as he uses Serpents,
Foxes and Vipers still, in every country, City, and almost Village) as the
organ and accursed instrument of man's seduction, intended destruction. So the
world, for all our covenant and obligation to forsake it: how many swarms of
earth-wormes, carnalists, and coveteous Phylargurists have we, not only ever
rooting in the earth, as Moales and Swine without ever an eye, to look
upwards, but as trunckes and Trees, even rooted and eradicated in the earth,
turned all into earth, even lumps of earth (as Suetonius in vita Caligulae.
Caligula was, called a lump of clay and blood conjealed) being all for earth,
even for white and red Gold and Silver.
dust, which per fas, and nefas, by hook or crook, right or wrong, Lionly
force, or Foxely fraud, they scrape and rake together (as greedy Harpyes, or
snatching Eagles, their desired prays) all being fish, that comes to the net,
though it break the Net, or like the Eagles coal in the Apud Aesopum.
fable, set all on fire, though they gain by their ill-gotten goods, as Achan
by his stolen Ioshuah. 7.1.21.25.
wedge, as Judas by his Savior selling Math. 27.3.4 5.
silver, as that Mydas, (like our coveteous Alchumistes since:) by his bad What
he touched turned into Gold, ant mentinutur Poeta.
Alchumy, by which they, and all such, in all ages have Infunditur aurum a
Mithridate ere Aquilij ducis Romani. Plinius hist. 33. c. 3.
perished, as if all that is ill got were Toulouse Per aurum Tholosanum, periere
Q. Cepio Consul M. Crassus cum multis alijs: Aul. Gel. noct. attic. c. 9
Gold, carried on Sejanus his Equus Scianus omnibus possessoribus infanstus
videlicet Scio Cascio, etc. Gellius ibid.
Horse, for a sumpter horse?

So for the flesh and fleshly lusts, how many are given, over to all
voluptuousness, lovers of pleasures more then lovers of 2. Tim. 3.4
God, serving diverse lusts and Tit. 3. v. 3.
pleasures, as if they were yet in their natural estate, fleshly minded men,
walking after the Romans 8.2.
flesh, savouring the things of the Romans 8.5.
flesh, as the dog savours carrion, very Epicures and Phil. 3.17.
belly-gods, wallowing in every obsceane lust, as the Eele in the mudd, the
swine in the mire, etc? Thus as a waterie glimmering Sun ends in rain, our
profession of the service of the true God, the Triune Jehovah, ends in
profanation: in stead of the blessed Trinity, which we should worship, we
have an accursed Trinity which we do worship, though we promised to repudiate
and cashire it.

The flattering Flesh, vain World, deluding Devil
It Is Hac tria pro trino numine mundus habet. Sphiux Philosophica.
Trinity adored, by worldlings evil.
In not serving one Lord, contrary to our first covenant, we serve many Ob
quam multa Domines habet, qui unum non habet. Aug.
Lords as an adulterous woman, that forsakes her first Husband, (as God often
complains of Ier. 3.1.2.6.8.
Israel) and follows after many strangers, and unlawful lovers.

Thirdly the Lord used many means to recall and reclaim these Israelites, and
to reduce them to the performance again of the covenant which so blamefully
and shamefully they had infringed, sending his Prophets unto 2. Chro. 36.15,
them, speaking early and late, and pleading about this very message and
embassage, yea to make the word to work more physically, visiting in paternall
love, their sins with rods, and their offenses with scourges, and when
gentler admonitions and castigations would not serve, using more severitie,
whypping them for their refractorie rebellions with rods of whip-cord, yea
with wire and iron, sending upon their Cattle Murraine, upon their bodies
diseases, leprosies and consumptions, into their Tents fiery Numb. 21.6. 1.
Cor. 10.5.
Serpents, sweeping many of them away with plague and Number. 16.49 and chap.
25.9. Judge. 2.15.
pestilence, yea cutting them off by famine at home, or the sword of the enemy
abroad, according to the verification of his severe and vehement Cominations
against their sins and Levit. 26.26.27.28.29. etc.
transgressions.

So to parallel us also in this point, has not the Lord in mercy used as many
and sundry means, to recure and recover our spiritual maladies, as ever he
used toward his Jewish Israel, to receive us out of our dead sownes? to awake
us out of our Lethargicall slumbers? to quicken us in our first love? to bring
us again to the observance of our first covenant? to restore us by a new
covenant of grace, after we have so fearfully broke the first covenant of
works? for which end, he has sent us his word, more powerfully, plentifully
and continuedly, then to any Nation, he has given us his In Psalmis
word, great are the numbers, of the Preachers, as the Psalmist is verified:
This word he has sent to our Cities, our Corporations, yea to our
countrie-Townes, and Villages, as water to wash us, as fire to purify Ierem.
23.29
us, as physic to purge us, as a hammer to break and bruise us, as Manna to
feed us, as milk to nourish 1. Pet. 2.2.
us, as a lantern to our steps, as in the dark night of sin to illuminate
us, as a sword to lopp off our Hydra-headed sins, as a weeding hook to weed
out our corruptions, yea as the wisemens Math. 2.9
stars to lead us to Christ, and as Isreal's cloud and pillar of Exodus 40.38
fire, to conduct us to our heavenly Canaan. But since the word has not come
to us, as once to the convert 1. These. 1.5.
Gentiles, in power and efficacy, but has been received in vain, since the
preachers have spent their strength in vain, amongst the generality and the
multitude, prevailing no more then Lot with the Genes. 19.9
Sodomites, then Moses with Exodus 7, 11, v. 23, Exodus, 8, 15
Pharaoh, then Jeremy with Ierem. 34, 2, 3. etc. 17, 18, and chap. 35.15
Zedekiah, then 1, King, 22, 26
Michay with Ahab, but have been laughed at by some, as Ezekiahs 2, Chro. 30, 10
posts, scoft at by others, as Paul by the Act. 17, 32
Athenians, derided as the young Prophet by Iehues 2, King. 9, 11,
comrades, yea persecuted, as Paul by the unbeleeving Acts 14, 2 Acts 17, 5,
Jews, and abused in many profane places as David's 2, Sam, 10, 4
Ambassadors by the Ammonites, since like the Ierem, 13, 23
Blacka Moore we have been no better, but like the clay much worse for
washing: Since we have been more sick and unsound for our physic: Since the
word was sown seed, fallen into stony and thorny Math, 13, ver 20, 21, 22,
Luke 8, 13, 14
ground, has been choakt with the lusts of the world, since our corrupt
hearts, like a corrupt stomach has changed his spiritual food into bad
humors and made it the favor of death unto 2 Cor, 2, 16
death: therefore to this rodd of beauty, God has added the rodd of Zach, 11,
7
bands, he has laid rods in steep for us: more deeply (as our best
Physician,) he has Phlebotomized us, in our ranckest veins, let us blood in
the tympanie of our pride, and plurifie of our sins, dieted us with the bread
of affliction and waters of tears, turned our Honey into gall and Aloes: he
has come as near us, as to Israel, in drawing the fury and brandished sword
of his wrath, not only hanging it over us, (as that Dionysius, once a drawn
sword over the naked head of a flattering Vide apud Brusonium, de adulatione,
Damocles, by a twined thread) but even smiting with it, for sometimes with the
keenest edge, cutting off many millions, (as the lopping and pruning of our
English Vine, least we grow too rank in this our peace and plenty) and that
not only by ordinary, but (as he dealt with Israel in the wilderness, for
their grievous provocations) by extraordinary deaths, causing the carcasses of
our people to fall, at sundry times, in great numbers, sometimes by gnawing
dearths, and biting famine, sometimes by sudden and turbulent inundations of
Of the b^eakings out of the sea and the damages by these overflowings, Books
are extant.
waters, in our chief Shires, (as the River Kishon that swept away Iabin, and
his Judge, 5, 21
Midianites, yea that ancient River, the River Kishon,) Sometimes by
lightnings, thunders, and earthquakes, sometimes by strange and uncouth As the
sweating disease, etc
diseases, of which Physic and Surgery was often ignorant, both of the cause
and cure, as appears by our Let him that will be satisfied when these several
judgments were sent upon our Land and how far they raged, and how long they
continued, with their effects, and in the reigns, of what Kings since, or
before the conquest, consult with Stowes, Hollinsheds, Speedes, and Lanquets
Chronicles: Since the margent will not bear the expression of every
particular which I purposed to insert.
Chronicles and Chronologers, but chiefly by that be some of his wrath, the all
devouring plague and pestilence, the arrow raging and destroying at noonday,
as he did with Israel in the days of 1. Chron, 21, verse, 14.
David, and of 1. Corinthians, 10, 8
Moses, and with other countries since, in Italy, Austria, Grossius in his
Tragical histories in quarto, about the beginning of his Book, reckoning the
greatest plagues in the Christian world, says of Italy, and Vienna, that the
dead were more then the living.
Viena, and elsewhere he has laid his very Axe to the roots of our English
Trees, and has cut down and lopt off, by many hundreds in one week, tall
Cedars, lofty Pines, green Poplers, strong Oaks of Bashan, white Almond
Trees, of all sorts, from the Peers to the plowman, high and low, young and
old, even in our chief Cities, our Metropolitanes, our mother City,
Troynovant, our corporate Towns, our country Villages, yea even in our
private houses and Cabbins: the pestilentiall fever as a raging torrent of
water, carrying all along with it, that stood in the way.

Fourthly, as Israel was not reclaymed for all these proceedings of God with
them, either in mercy or justice, but still grieved the Lord not only for
forty years in the wilderness, but even in the land of Canaan, when their
sins like ours did increase, in the land of plenty (like weeds and briars
in a fat moist ground, and as fleas and vermin in the hot Summers Sun) either
not repenting at all, hardening their hearts as that Egyptian Exodus 7.13.
Pharaoh, upon the message of his Prophets and summons of his judgments, or
else repenting superficially, dissembling with a double heart, shedding
Crocodiles De his lachrimis, and de proverbio: vide apud Vicentium not. hist.
libr. 17. cap. 606.
tears, and fasting for a fashion as once 1. King. 21.29
Ahab, and another of their irreligious Israelitish 2. King 6.30
Kings, tears being in their eyes and rebellion in their hearts, both at one
Deuteronomy. 1.44.45
instant, like Esau that wept for the Hebr. 12.17
blessing, yet intended the murder of his Genesis 27.41
brother, all with one breath, howling and crying like wolves; when Gods hand
was upon them confessing their sins as traitors on the rack, when they were
oppressed by the Moabites, Midianites, Ammonites, and other Judge. 3.9.13 chap.
4.3.
Cananites, but as soon as ever delivered, by such temporary saviors (types
of the spiritual Messiah) Othniell, Gideon, Iepthah, Baruch, Sampson, as he
sent for their rescue, (as he stird up Abraham to rescue Genesis 14.15.
Lot, they returning again to their former Byas, Idolatry, extortion,
oppression, as the dog to his 2. Pet. 2.19.
vomit, the sow to her mire, provoking him as much as ever by their
rebellions, like the Ice seeming to be thawed, yet freezing and conjealing
again in their dregs, in which, like Moab they settled, they could not be
removed.

Thus it is with us, their case is ours, we, like some impatient Patients, have
been rather worse then better for Gods physic, our sores by our inveterate,
and wellny uncurable corruptions, have been increased by our salves, the Lord
would have healed us, but like the Babell we would not be healed: our disease
is epidemicall, general, and continual, the flux of our sins like the
bloody Mark. 5.26
issue of that woman in the Gospel, is not to be stopped, it is vulnus Vulnus
insanabile ense resecandum
insanabile, past cure as it seems, and so past care. As the land has long
mourned by reason of oaths and other sins, so we have mourned for a time
when Gods hand has been upon us, we have proclaimed general fasts, as once
Jam. 3. v. 6.7.
Ninive besides many an Esther, and a Mordocheus, many a Daniell and a
Nathaniell that have mourned alone, besides the house of Zach. 12. v. 12 13.14.
Nathan, the house of Aron, and the house of Levi, many religious families that
have mourned a part, the Joel. 1.11.
Husbandman, the Vine-dresser, and the tender Virgin, the verse. 13.
Priests and the Elders, yea the bride and the Joel. 2.16.
bride-grome that have fasted mourned and lamented before the Lord, as once 2.
Sam. 12.16
David did in the case of his sick child, when we have either felt or feared
the heavy hand of God: chiefly when the land has been whipped with his rodd
and ferula for her transgressions, when judgments have been threatened, or
executed, when as once Elias in another case we have seen the 1. King. 18.44
clouds, or felt the storm of showred or powered down vengeance, then; as the
De cruentis Ethnicorum sacrificijs, immolationibusque homine virginu^ and
puerorum Marti Saturno, Iovi ira to, vide apud Plutarchum, libellum de
superstitione, Heroditum in Melpomine, Strabonem libr. 11. Ovidiu^ in 2. Fast.
Dionys Halycarn. libr. 1. and Eusebius. libr. 4. praeparat. Evang talibusque
sacrificijs usi sunt Iulianus Apostat. Heliogabalus, vt testantur Hedrenus
Godfridus, and Celius Lampridius
Heathens, the Savages, and the De quibus Benso, Mazius and Acosta in suis
libris, and Purchasius noster, in sua perigrinatione and Lilius Giraldus in
historia deorum Syntagmate 17.
Indians at this day, and in former times, have offered sacrifices in some
common plague to appease some angry Nemesis, some exasperated imaginary God,
so have we offered sacrifice to the true God, but (excepting some few, some
true Nathaniels) hardly in truth we have abstained from meat, but not from
sin, fasted from the creatures as the carnal Esaias. 58.3.4.
Jews, and dishonored the Creator, we have not losed the bonds of the verse.
6.7.
poor, relieved the cause of the fatherless and widow, made restitution of
goods ill got, as Luke 19.8.
Zacheus, and the Jews in the time of Ierem. 34.10. though after they
revolted, verse. 16.
Jeremy, chiefly we have not (as a man from a whorish wife) given a bill of
divorcement, to those sensual sins and belluine lusts, which have made a
separation and Esaias. 59.2. Ierem. 5.25.
sequestration betwixt the Lord and us; and occasioned his hand to be upon us,
etc. Yet we have had many a Moses, an Aron and a Phineas to stand in the
gappe, betwixt Gods judgments and our sins: Such Phoenices our lands have
afforded. Thus have we sympathized with Israel in these particulars in her
blessings received, her sins renewed, and her gratitude neglected.

CHAP. XII. Many mercies recited Temporal and Spiritual, in which we far
exceed the Jews by many degrees.
But to hoyse up my sails a little higher, and to look our faces in the
glass, or theirs in ours both in Gods glass, the Sacred Scriptures, glossed
and commented by experience, and to parallel the Brittanicall and the Jewish
Church and Policy, in many specialties; the Lord has come nearer unto us,
then ever to them, and has been as a kind father both more liberal in his
portion of blessings, and more indulgent in sparing and pitying our sins and
delinquences: and first for the largeness of his mercies, we receive as Isaac
from Genesis 25. v. 5.6
Abraham, as Joseph from Genesis 48.22.
Jacob, as Benjamin from Genesis 43.34
Joseph, a double, yea a trible portion as it were; we seem Jacob like, even
to carry away the Genesis 25.32 33
blessing and the Genesis 27.30.
birthright too from them, and that in these specialties both of temporal and
spiritual blessings, in mercies of adornation and preservation, as they come
to hand, with pretermission of innumerable more.

To begin with the best first, To them God gave the law, in the hand of Gal.
3.19.
a mediator, to us he gave the Gospel by the mediation of Luke 2.9.13.14.
Angels; now in how many degrees the Sun exceedes the Moon, our Messiah
exceedes their Moses: our Jesus, their Ioshuah: our High Priest, their Heb. 7.
Heb. 8. Heb. 9. per totum sic Hebr. 10.10.11 12.13. etc.
Aron: the bloody one, and only propitiatory sacrifice of his body; the
Annual sacrifices of their high Priests, the Typical sacrifices of their
beasts and Bullockes: our Heaven, their Canaan, so far our Gospel which is
a quickening spirit exceeds their law, which without Christ is but a killing
Letter. To them indeed says the Apostle were the holy Oracles committed, they
had the Law and the Testament, Moses, and the Prophets, but we have the
Gospel more plainly, more perspicuously then ever they had. I deny not
indeed, but in their Law there was the Gospel included (besides personal
Types) in their Ceremonial law, Christ was shaddowed, See the little Book
called Moses unvailed.
prefigured, and in their several oblations of all sorts typified, and
represented, as he was promised to Genes. 3.15.
Adam, the promise renewed to Genesis 12.3.
Abraham and the Genesis 28.14.
Patriarchs, and prophesied of by all the Prophets, from Moses to Deuteronomy. 18.^5.
Malachy, so in their several ages and generations he was expected to be
exhibited by all that looked for the consolation of Israel, longed for,
desired, that he would break the heavens and come Esaias. 44.1.
down, as they strongly believed that he should come. Hence according to
Theology, the Patriarchs and Prophets before, and under the Law, in the Old
Testament, were saved by believing that Jacobs Genesis 49.10
Shiloh, the promised Messiah should come, as we now in the times of grace are
saved by believing that he is come: there being but one Ephesians. 4 5.
Christ, but one faith, (as but one Sun to the world) both to Jew and
Gentile, one Acts 4.12. Act. 10.43. Acts 13.39. Romans 10.4. Gal 3.22.
means of life and grace, to all that are justified, sanctified and saved.
Hence Christ is said to be that Agnus occisus in Gods decree and infallible
promise, that Lamb of John 1.26.
God, slain from the beginning of the world, to take away the sins of the
whole John 1.26.
world, of the elect (as Romans 11.12.15. 2. Cor. 5.19. and John 1.2. v. 2.
Scriptures and Distinguit Augustinus inter mundum electorum, ^ and damnatorum,
Tract. 87. in Iohannem: sic per mundum intelligitur sol^^ modo mundus
credentium, per Rupertum in Iohannem, lib. 3.5. 3. Et Comme^s. in 2. Corinthians.
5. and mundus regenerationum: pro quibus Christus mortuus, per Augustinum sermon.
20 sermon. 44. sermon. 109. de verbis Apostoli per Haimonem in Romans 5. per
Prosperum libr. 1. Re^p pro Augustine. obqui. De quo vide plura apud Augustinum
de corrupt. and gratia cap. 12. Tract. in Johan. 2.77. K^midentium de
R^demptione, and Perkinstum de Praedestinatione.
fathers limit that universal.) Hence also is the Theological axiom, that
Christ who is the very end of the Law to which it points, as once John the
Baptist, as the hand in the Dyall points to the Sun, and to which, as a
sharp Schoolmasters it Gal. 3 24.
drives and directs, that this Christ is typified in the Old Christus in Veteri
Testamento velatus, in Novo revelatus. libricus in Clavi script.
Testament, and revealed in the New. Hence it is also, that Abraham (and so
consequently all the believing Patriarchs, the sons of Abraham by faith) is
said to have seen the day of Christ, and to have rejoiced But how was Christ
seen? darkely, obscurely, as under a veil, as the prisoner sees the Sun
through a little chincke or grate, as the Spouse in the Canticles had a glimpse
of her beloved through the hole of the Cant. 5.4.
door; So was Christ seen of them: but we now see him plainly,
perspicuously, as walking amidst the Golden Revel 2. verse. 1.
Candlestickes, as we see the Sun in his solstitium, or at noonday, in the
plain and powerful preaching of the Gospel, we see him not duly and deadly
as the Papist in a stone, or a piece of brass, pictured in a Cross or
Crucifixe, Idolatrously worshipped: but as Paul tells the Corinthians, even
crucified as it were amongst us in the plain evidence of the spirit. Therefore
says the same Apostle, The Grace of God has Tit. 2.11.12.
appeared; this Gospel of grace has appeared, the phrase is observable, even
as the Sun that peepes and breaks from under, and appears from the obscuring
cloud, yea the day Star from an high has visited us says Luke 1.78.
Zachary, yea light is come into the John. 3.19.
world, says he, that is himself the John. 1. v. 4.5
life, and the light, even to inlighten those, that like Zebulon and Luke 1.79.
Nepthaly sat in darkness, and the shadow of death. Here is our privilege
above the Jew.

Secondly, Besides as a Corolarie to this point, God at sundry times, and in
diverse manners spoke in time Hebr. 1. v. 1.
past unto these Jewish Fathers by Iere. 35. v. 15
the Prophets, yea and by Genesis 18.1.2 Genes. 19.1.2 Judge 13. v. 3.
Angels too, by Oracles, by dreams and Numb. 12 7.
visions, by Vrim and Exodus 28. v. 30
Thummim: but in these last days, he has spoken to us by his Heb. 1. v. 1.
Son, whom he has appointed verse. 2. c Exodus c. 3. c. 4. cap 13.
Heir of all things, by whom also he made the worlds.

Thirdly, Moreover to them he stirred up temporary and typical Saviors and
Judges, who delivered them out of the hands of those that spoiled them, Judge.
3. verse. 16. verse. 2. c Exodus c. 3. c. 4. cap 13.
Moses, and Exodus 34.9.
Ioshuah, and Judge. 1.2.
Judah, and Judge 3.9.
Othniell, verse. 15.
Ehud, Judge. 4.4.
Deborah, Judge. 4.10.
Baruch, Judge. 6.12.
Gideon, Judge. 11.5.
Iepht^ah, Judge. 16.31.
Sampson, were raised up upon their Judge. 3.9 15. and chap. 4, 3. etc.
cries in their greatest exigents, to deliver them from the Egyptians, the
Mesopotamians, the Ammonites, the Moabites, the Amalekites, the Philistines,
and uncircumcised Cananites: but to us, (as to the rest of the believing
Gentiles) he has raised Luke 1.69.
up, a spiritual Savior, to deliver us out of the hands of our spiritual
verse. 71.74.
enemies, more deadly, more dangerous, as the soul is more noble and excellent
then the body.

Fourthly, Again they were held as children in their Nonage, under the rod
and ferula, the burden and the bondage of Gal. 4.1.2.3. Coloss. 2.20.
ceremonies in their Jewish Pedigogie, as touch not, taste verse. 21.
not, handle not, etc. This creature is clean, this is Levit. 11. per totum.
unclean: but we now as children that are come to riper years, to full and
perfect age, as no longer under Tutors and Gal. 4.3.4.5.6.
Governors, are now infranchized and set at liberty by says in Christ, and
freed from the yoke and pressure of Mosaicall Gal 5.1.
Ceremonies, which neither they, nor we were able to bear, unless with our
Papists and late Threskites we will resolutely put our necks under the yoke
again of these beggarly Gal 4 9
Rudiments in an unsupportable bondage.

Fifthly, The Lord exacted and required of them, more cost and pains in his
service and worship, then he does of us. For costs, we know their worship was
exceedingly costly in their daily Of all these offerings, and sacrifices,
Levit. chap. 1 2.3.4.5.6 7. vide Theses Senuij de sacrifi.
sacrifices, their Holocausts, their whole burnt offerings, their free will
offerings (as once the vide Maiolum de cultu and oraculis deorum, colloq. 1.
page 55.
Heathens in their Hecatombs, their Hostiae, their Lupercalls, Armilustrals,
Orgyes, Ferrcations, Vinilians, Quirinalials, Bacchanals, Saturnals,
Vertumnalians, Hyacinthians, Novendinalians, Laurentalialls, Solitaurilialls,
and other feasts and festivals in honor of their imaginary Deities, which it
seems they had in an apish and superstitious emulation and See Mourney of the
truth of Religion.
imitation from the Jews) Gods Altars were laden with Oxen, Bulls, Sheep,
Goats, Rams, and Bullockes in great abundance, in their solemn and daily
oblations; as sometimes in one peace offering, (as at the dedication of Salomons
1. King. 8.64
Temple) were offered twenty thousand Oxen, and a hundred and twenty thousand
Sheep; another time (as in Ezekiahs 2. Chron 29.32.33
Passover,) were offered threescore and ten Bullockes, a hundred Ramines and
two hundred Lambs: besides six hundred Oxen, and three thousand Sheep
consecrated: as in the verse after my Text in the Inauguration of Solomon, and
the preparation for the Temple, there was offered in burnt offerings in one
day, a thousand Bullockes, a thousand Lambs, and a thousand 1. Chro. 29.21
Rams: In so much that, but that Gods extraordinary blessing increast (as
the Corn and Oil and Wine.) so the Cattle of that little country of Judea,
and Palestina, which now being under the Turkish Ottoman, by a secret curse, is
as barren as other I have heard travelers honest and judicious so relate it.
countries, a man would as much wonder, from whence they had a continued fresh
frye and supply of Cattle for sacrifices, besides other offices as he would
wonder, of their fresh seminary and supply of men, so many being cut off at
sundry times, by civil and foreign In one battle of Abiah k. of Judah
against Jeroboam king of Israel, there was in Abiahs Army 400000. chose^ men,
on the other party 8. hundred thousand, whereof were slain five hundred
thousand, 2. Chro. 13. v. 3.17 Yea one Tribe sometimes afforded 40 thousand
valiant men, as Ashur, 1 Chronicles. 36. Nephtaly 1000. Captains 37. thousand
warriors, v 34
war, as we read of in the greatest Armies of Caesar, Pompey, Alexander,
Scypio, or the greatest Martialists amongst the We read not of any such army,
as 12 hundred thousand, as this in Judah and Israel either in Iustine, Livie,
Theucidides, etc or amongst the numerous Turks since.
Heathens, and sure for my part I persuade my self, should we in England or
Ireland be enjoined to offer up, Monthly, Weekly, or daily, but the tenth
Sheep, Beeve or Goat, which they offered, (which sure would amount to more,
then to the Levites grudged tyth throughout the land:) Gods altars would stand
unfurnisht of the fire of the Altar, and the Lamps of the Sanctuary would die
out, the one for want of fuel, the other of Oil: for he that is now a Naball,
a coveteous Cremes, full handed for Gold, but empty hearted for Grace, that
has not now a shilling to spare to the mantayning of a stipendary preacher,
for the settling of a preaching Ministry to Gods glory, the conversion, and
consolation of his own soul, the present and future good of himself and
others, him, and his seed after him, without churlish grudging, swinish
gruntling, muttering, murmuring (as once Israel against Moses and Aaron) or if
ought be wrong from him, t^is as the wringing of the blood out of the nose, the
wresting of Hercules Club out of his fist, or the paring of his nails to the
very quick, at least going against the hair and the heart, as when a man
eats the meat, which his stomach loathes; I say he that is as willing to
part with his right hand, or to pluck out as Naash once persuaded the
Gileadites, his right 1. Sam. 1.^^.
eye, as part with his pence for preaching, in that bad exchange, as he
imagines, when the same man will spend and mispend pence and pounds, as oil
and fuel to his lusts, in carding, dycing, drinking, drabbing, till he be
devoured by these lusts, as Acteon was of his own Ovid ^^eta.
dogs: Is it probable (possible) that ever he would make God beholden to him
for a Bullock or a Sheep at once, should he injoyne him such a sacrifice as
did the Jews?

See Moses unvailed in 8.
So for pains, as well as costs, we know that after the building of Salomons
Temple (which was typical in a greater mystery) the Jews were enjoined four
times a year, at the 4. solemn feasts At the feasts of Passover of
Penthecost of Tabernacles, of Dedication.
to make their personal appearance there before the Lord, old and young men,
women and children that were fit for travel (as we know even the child Luke
1^.41.42
Jesus went with his foster father Joseph and the Virgin his mother, to worship
at Psalm. 84.67.
Jerusalem,) yea how ever far distant in place, they must appear even from
Dan to Beershebah, leaving for the time all their moral affairs to hazard of
invasion of foreign enemies, or of domesticke casualties, as carnal good
husbandry would conceit. What inconveniences in the eye of flesh and blood did
this subject them unto, in respect of their outward estate, besides the pains
and perils, the trouble and toil and tediousness of the journey?

Now there is no such task, no such burden imposed on our shoulders, for how
ever we are not strict, (according to the good policy in first dividing and
distinguishing people into several Churches, Parishes and Congregations) to
tie a man perpetually to his own Church, as to his own wife, or wife to her
own husband, her own house, as a tradesman to his own shop, or a bird that
constantly keeps her own Nest, or as a beggar that still keeps his own
stand, (his own circuit, as the Milne horse,) not so jayling or imprisoning
men to an ignorant and profane Ministry, (as some Landlords strictly tie
their Tennants to grind at their own Milnes how ever abused in their grinding
or moulter, by the ignorance or knaverie of the Milner) though I say, I see
neither reason nor religion tying any man so constantly to the Ministry of his
own Parish Priest, to suck at dry dugges, to drink at dry brooks, to seek
food or fruit at a barren tree, but that if Jacob and the house of Jacob, any
true Israelite, want food in his own Canaan, he may seek for corn in Genesis
42.2.
Egypt elsewhere, as the beggar that has no bread at home seeks abroad else
people should be in worse case for their souls, and stricter laced, then for
their bodies, since in free liberty, if they wholly want, or have but the
outcast and refuse of any commodity in any Mart or Market, they may seek
further for better, or what drugge or physical receite one Apothecary shop
yeeldes not, may be sought in another; and from an Empericke and Quacksalver
they may commit their health and life to a learned Physician, yea else Gods
people, should be in worse case for their souls, then Israel once for their
Iron tools, who when there was no smith in See the Sermon extant on that Text,
There was no smith in Israel 1. Sam. 13.19.
Israel; yet went to the Philistines to make or mend their plough-shares, and
other iron works, yea in worse case then the Horse and Mule, who if he wants
water, seeks up and down the pasture, though never so large and wide. The
waters of life, though they be not at home, being better worth our search, then
those which Ahab and Obediah sought from one end of the land to the 1. King.
18.5.6.
other, or those waters of the Well of Bethlem which David so 1. Chro. 11.17,
desired: yet nevertheless though we may go further from home, for better
food in christian liberty ere we starve, or eat meat ill cooked; for all
this we are not so punctually, precisely, and ceremoniously obliged and tied to
any one special place of Gods worship, to this Church or that Chapel, this
Cathedral or that Temple, as the Jews were tied to Salomons Temple, (though
the Papists, who in this as in other things run against the hair, and swim
cross against all Gods Ordinances, will needs in their superstitious folly,
lay on their own necks a Jewish yoke, in worshipping at this stone, and that
shrine, this roode, and that altar, this Cross, and that Chapel, rather at
Rome or Loretto, in Italy, in Compostella, in Spain, at the Roode of Yoghell
in Ireland, etc. yea still in their blinding bewitching superstition, as if
they were turned Read a book in 4. called the picture of a papist, you shall
see it proved that Papisme, is a mere mixture of Iudaisme, Turcisme, Paganism.
Turks or Jews, even in Mahumitanized Jerusalem:) But now as our Savior tells
the Samaritane woman is the time, that we shall (neither Jew nor convert
Gentiles) worship the Father in this mountain, or that, nor at Jerusalem, but
in spirit and John 4. ve. 20, 21.22.23.
truth, in every place lifting up pure 1. Tim. 2.8.
hearts, and pure hands to the Almighty, whether in our own houses with Dan
6.10.
Daniell, or in the fields with Genesis 24.63
Isaac, or in the garden with Augustine and Confessionum lib. 8.
Alixius, or in our beds with Psalm. 6.7.
David, and 2. King. 20.3.
Ezekias, or on the Sea with Jonas 1.6.
Jonas, or on the shore with Act. 20.36.
Paul, or in prison with Act. 16.25.
Silas, 2. Chronic. 33.10.11.
Manasses, Ierem. 38.6.
Jeremy, and our modern Martyrs, or in our private clossets, as the blessed
Virgin, or in and with our families, as Josh. 24.15.
Ioshuah, and that sweet singer of 2. Sam. 6 20.
Israel, or in the public Congregation, as once 1. King. 8.22.
Solomon: it matters not for the place, if we have the grace to worship God
aright, for matter and manner, in which our Papists and all Moralists,
Hypocrites, and profane men are so grossly defective.

And indeed this is a greater mercy, a greater privilege, then we conceive
at the first blush, for should those that trot and trudge, and drudge up from
all the Shires, and countries in England and Wales, every Term time, to
Westminster or Ludlow, or from all the Counties and Provinces in Ireland to
Dublin, to follow the plough of contention, prosecuting wrangling suites, de
lana Adagium e^ Haratio.
Caprina, about matters trivial and of no moment, but only that such waspes
must shoot their stings, discharge their squirte gunnes, in forma pauperis,
sometimes charged only with paper pellets, these creckets and Arist. lib. 5.
c. 19. per ignem ambulat Salamandra, and ^^tinguit.
Salamanders, not being able to live out of the fire of contention; should
these I say be enjoined (as the Jews to Before the building of the Temple, the
Jews worshipped where ever the Arc was: Deuteronomy. 12.13.14. Exodus 25.22 1. Sam.
7.5. 2. sa. 6.2. chiefly in Silo, in time of Judges, and Samuel, after in
mount Sion. 2. Sam. 6.12. But after the Temple built, thither they were
confined. 2. Chr. 7.12. 1. Reg. 9.3 Luke 19.46.
Jerusalem) by God, or Caesar, I will not say four times a year, but annually
once a year, they or theirs all Sam, to come up, to Paul's Cross, or the
Spittles in London, or to Yorke-minster, or to Lincolneminster, or to
Christs-Church in Dublin, or any such remote place in any Kingdom, or
Province, merely to worship God, by hearing Sermons, and presenting their
prayers before the Lord, and offering their spiritual oblations, (as often the
Jews in the days of Samuel, Ezra, Solomon, etc. there corporeal) Oh this
would be thought durum opus; a hard task, as the Disciples said in another
case, durus John. 6.60.
sermo, this were a hard imposition, indeed worse then the tribute that 1.
Reg. 12.16.
Rehoboam exacted of the Jews, or Augustus taxed from the Luke 2. v. 1.
world. They would make hardly such haste as the Bear to the stake, as the
coward to the battle, we should find few Tribes go up with joy: Nay should
none but such as come from far, visit these Temples, we should have (as in
some streets, in some long devouring plague,) the very grass to grow in the
very porches for want of trampling.

And indeed those that are so idle or profane, so perverse, athisticall,
irreligious, that on Gods own Sabaoths, which they are so strictly enjoined,
they and theirs to sanctify, by motives from Esai 58.13 14
rewards and Exodus 20.8. Gal. 3.10.
threatenings, that love God, his word, his worship, and their own souls so
little, that having health and limbs and legs, and no restraint but the Act.
13.8.10.
Devil and corruption, they will not go twelve score to hear a Sermon,
(though twelve miles perhaps to a wedding: As appears in the hoppings in
Northumberland, to which there is such resort every Sabbath throughout the
Summer.
hopping drinking, feasting amongst good fellows, or to make merry with
comrades and carnal friends, or further, even from one Shire to another, a set
match of bowling, shooting, hunting, man's race, horse race, dogs race, or any
such vanity,) but for any stirring more then a stock, or block, to any part of
Gods worship in public or private, their feet are goutie as 2. Chro. 16.21
Asaes, lame as 2. Sam. 9.3.
Mephibosheths, either they keep home as Droanes in their Hives, as Hogs in
their Styes, or if they find legs, it is to the Tavern, not to the Temple,
to Bethaven, not to Bethell, the Alehouse (sometimes Hel-house) not Gods
house, or else with straggling Genes. 34.1.2
Dinah to walk or wander, as wafe or strafe in the fields: would such ever
travel as far as Jerusalem to worship, were they as near it perhaps as
Luke. 24.13.
Emaus, or John. 11.18.
Bethania, a Sabbath days journey? much less, would they ever saddle their
horses as the Sunammitish 2. Kings. 4.22.23.
woman to ride to the Prophet upon the Sabbath or new Moon? or if they were
great personages, they would not use their Bosquier in his E^cho alleges
authors, affirming that the Magi used Dromedaries.
Dromedaries to travel half so far, as the wife men from the East to
Jerusalem to worship Christ: or use their Coaches as that noble Ethiopian Act.
8.27.
Eunuch, to come out of one coast or country to worship in another, they would
not go so far as the Queen of the South to hear the Gospels wisdom
greater then 1. King. 10.
Salomons, nor travel so far for divine Plato and Pythagoras for humane
learning.

CHAP. XIII. The Jews and we Britains in other blessings poyzed and compared.
TO parallel us again with them in blessings of a mixed nature, partly
temporal, partly spiritual.

First, as they were brought out of the land of Exodus 20.2.
Egypt, with a mighty hand and stretched out-arme, by the means of Moses whom
God stirred Exodus 3. Exodus 4.
up, and sent as the instrument: So, are not we reduced and brought out of that
spiritual Egypt, that mystical Reve. 14.8.16 9. and cha. 18.10.
Babylon, that unclean Revel. 11.8.
Sodom, the seat and nest of Revel. 18.9.9 19.2.
fornications spiritual and corporeal, by the means of that worthy and
zealous instrument Martine Luther, that So called oftentimes by Eccardus
Huberus in his Theses, Hunnius and other rigged Lutherans.
Melander, that Belgicke Elias, as some call him, whose eyes being first
opened, to see clearly into the mystery of justificatio^ by faith, which he
so perspicuously cleeres in his Comment chiefly upon the Galatians, he being
converted like Luke 22.32.
Peter, co^verting his brethren, as the Sun breaking through the overshadowing
cloud; he being himself enlightened, inlightens others, and as another Act.
26.18.
Paul, is made the means to open their eyes, to bring collyrium and eye salve
to Saxony, Germany, Denmark, us in England, yea to Belgia and whole
Christendom, which was in a manner inveloped and covered with the fogges and
mistes, and clouds of Popish ignorance, yea wholly overspread with darkness
more then Egyptian or Chymerian, so gross and palpable that it might be felt*
Only herein further is the proportion: Moses a weak old man, armed only
with his Exodus 4.17.
rod and staff against all the repugnance and resistance of Pharaoh, the
juglings and Magical practices of Iannes and Exodus 7.11.
Iambres, the might and malignitie, power and policy of Egypt, brings the
thousands of Israel out of the house of bondage; Luther armed only with power
from above, with his tongue and pen, brings as many by degrees though not all
at once, by preaching, writing and disputing, out of the tyranizing slavish
subjection of that man of sin, that Antichristian Pharaoh, that Babylonian
See the Sermon called, Nabuchadnezzar of Rome.

As once the D^i^i^^ and Rebeca, with the Idols of Michay and Laban Judge.
18.24. and Genes. 31.34.


Nabuchadnezzer the Pope, notwithstanding all the ragings of that Romish Lion,
the juglings and coloring, plots and traynes of his foxes the Friars, and
Jesuits, the props of his Hierarchy (as the Ianisaries to the Turks)
together with the disputes of Ecchius the invectives, Philipicks and libells of
Monckes (with whose bellies he too much intermedled, as Erasmus once scoft)
yea against all the powers and policies of Caesar, the Roman Emperor with the
confederate Princes, affected to the whore. yea against not only the might of
man, but the malice of devils, the very gates of hell, and the powers of
darkness, which did as much resist him, as these badd Angels, the Prince of
Dan. 10. verse. 13. verse. 20.
Persia, and Prince of Grecia, resisted that Angel which by the help of
Michaell the great Archangel, the Angel of the covenant, brought the children
of Israel out of their Chaldean, and Babylonian captivity.

Secondly, as when Moses was took away by death, and gathered to his fathers,
the Lord stirred up a Josh 1. ve. 1.2.
Ioshuah to succeed him, (in some manner to exceed him) in bringing the
Israelites into Josh. 4.19.20.
Canaan, which he did not: So when Luther concluded his holy life with a happy
and blessed death, (notwithstanding the calumnies of all Romish Cocleus,
Bolsecu^ de vita Luthert.
Simeis, and reviling Rabsakeis to the contrary) God multiplied his spirit, as
the spirit of 2. King. 2.15.
Elias upon Elisha, upon other successors; Melancthon, Iustus, Jonas, Capito,
Oecolampadius, Calvine, Bullinger, etc. and other worthy and renowned
instruments; according to his own prophecy, to finish and perfect that which
he had begun, even as he finished that in Saxony which according to another
prophecy, Jerome of Prage, and John Husse, had begun in Bohemia many years
Husse when he was burned told them they only burned a goose, (as husse
signifies in the Bohemian tongue) but out of his ashes God would raise up a
swan which was verified in Luther
before, and sealed with their blood at that unconstant, unconscionable
Council of Constance. Thirdly, So to proceed further, in respect of the
commonwealth, as when Deborah the prophetisse died, that nursing mother, or
nurse and mother in Israel, there was left yet a worthy Baruch. So when the
Lord deprived our English Israel of a virgin Queen Virgin mother, that Phoenixe
of her sex, for Arts and virtues the worlds wonder, the far famoused
Elizabeth, the Laureate Poets Spensers Eliza, or his fayrie Queen.
Eliza, Omnia nec secum ventus and undarapit, all was not lost and gone, as our
friends feared, our enemies gapingly expected, our sins deserved: out of the
dead ashes of that Phoenixe, the Lord stirred us up another such, a nursing
father, a wise Bonum nomen b^num omen co^veniunt rebus no mina sape suis.
Steward, to go in and out, (as once zealous) and judicious 1. Sam. 18.16
David before his people, to lead us on from the Tents of Moab, from the Gates
of Babylon, against which he has marched with the best pick of his In his
Majesty's printed Books extant.
pen, and blown a Trumpet to all Christian Princes to come out of Revel. 18.4.
Babylon, least they partake, as of her sins, so plagues: keeping us by this
means from all apostacy and backe-sliding. Chiefly total and final, that
those who have the least measure of grace, with a sound judgment and
discerning spirit, may never dream of the unions of the Romish Egypt any more.
or with Lots wife to look back with any affection toward spiritual Genesis
19.26.
Sodom. And herein is the mercy the more, that this Faithful, Regal, Royal
Stewart, as faithful over little, (as it was with the Tallents) being
entrusted with Math. 25. v. 21.22.23.
more, was not only, (as is evident by a special providence, in which there is
digitus Dei? Gods own finger) preserved amongst us in one treason, but
purposely in Gods storehouse, reserved for us in another From Gowries
conspiracy
treason, as a prologue to the powder Tragedy only, as the Queen of Shebah
said of 1. King. 10.^
Solomon, because the Lord loved this our English Sion.

Fourthly, yea and yet more, the mercy relisheth (as the Rose smells sweetest
that is gotten from the pricks, and the Lilly from the enclosing thorns, as
Sampsons and Ionathans honey tasted the sweetest, because hardest come by where
it was never expected out of the Lions Judge. 14.8.
belly, and the 1. Sam. 14.27.
wast desert) when in our expectance the times were probable to prove most
turbulent, when most men's hearts failed them for fear, when we were even at
our wits end, and knew not which way to turn us, when at the desired death of
our Deborah, the enemies of our Judah, cried up, Moab, and to the spoil,
victoria, the day is ours, there goes the game, even so would we have it,
hoping to fish in a troubled water: and to build on our ruins, I say when
factious spirits and malcontents looked for stirring times, yea when we our
selves being such clouds, might justly fear storms (yea some expecting no
other, but that Ovid. Metam
Phaeton-like, all would have been in a confusion and combustion, that stearne
Mars, and bloody Bellona would have raged in our streets, that there would
have been as much bickering about the English Crown, as about Ajax his
Armor, Paris his Apud Virgil. and Homerum.
Ball, or the Grecian Helena, when thus we thought the Sun of all our peace
and prosperity, had set in the night of her bewailed death, whom living we
accounted as the breath of our nosthrils, and dying lamented, as the Jews did
2. Chro. 35.25.
Josias and Ioshuah, her name with her Princely virtues, yet perpetuated in the
minds and mouths of Vivit post funera virtus.
men, more then in all the monuments of Brass or Marble: In these fears, in
these exigents, divisions and distructions of ours, when we looked for a
Histeron proteron, a disioynting of all in the Church and Commonwealth; so
Gods mercy exuperant above man's misery, man's demerits, see Gods greatness,
what he can, his goodness what he will do, turning, yea bringing (as at the
(n) first creation, still) light out of darkness: on a sudden in a trice a
Northern star arising in this our Albion, prognosticating good, as Pollux
appears at the setting of Castor, the Lords high Stewart, by the Lords free
donation, his own Lineall and Legal succession, the Peers election, the
Popular approbation with united hearts and heads, votes and voices, being
reduced or produced, as David once from 2. Sam. 5.1.
Hebron to Jerusalem, with the consent and to the content of all our English
Israel, from one part of great Britain to the other, from the lesser to the
greater Island, from the North to the South, to be the ruler and governor over
Gods Heritage. As this dashed all the hopes of every Iesuited Tobiah and
Sanballat, as a squib that brusts and ends in smoke, yea eclypsed all their
joys, and made them, (as some even now) hang down their working heads like
bulrushes, with quanta de spe decidi: So all our fears, upon the rising of
this new Sun of comfort, vanished as a Northern mist, or the Southern dew:
our sighs were turned into Tempora mutantur and nos mutantur in illis.
songs, our tears into Trumpets, our swords into Sythes, our spears into
Mattockes, our Tragedies imaginary into real Comedies, our sorrows into
Jubilees, as the sound of so many Trumpets, all the Land with united minds and
mouths, as one man upon the Proclamation of his Majesty, as Israel at the
investing of Solomon, cried till the air ecchoed and resounded Vive de la Roy,
God save the King: the very field and wood quyristers, in the spring, ringing
out and rejoicing for our then springing, and since our more then twenty
years budding peace and blossoming prosperity, conjoyning their well tuned
Trebles to our excellent Tenor, to the mending of our Music. This is the
Lords doing, and it is wondrous in our eyes.

Fifthly (and to set a fuller, and a freer edge yet upon our affections,) as our
peace I say begun a fresh to spring, with all other concomitant blessings upon
his Majesty's investing, and marrying as it were with this eldest and fairest
sister, our beauteous Albion, so (if our sins be not those Davusses to
interrupt it,) it is probable to continue in him and his seed, those royal
blossoms, which so abundantly to the joy of all Christendom that are not
Romanized) have proceeded, from his Regal In the royal issue of Lady Elizabeth
Princess of the Palatinate.
stem even so long, as the Sun and Moon shall continue, since all pleas
and pretenses of any Idumean, any forreiner, or usurper is by this blessing of
bounteous hymn cut off, notwithstanding the plots and projects of that Dolman,
that Devil man, that vir Parsons vir multorum nominum vi^^bom nominis.
dolosus, or any other Spiders webs that are spunne, or Cocatrices eggs that
are hatched by any such like Iesuited Ignatian, fiery spirits whatsoever.

Sixthly herein still the torrent of mercy runs toward us; more clearly,
more delightfully, more cheerfully, compared with the bloody and sanguinolent
streams that run in other countries, our neighbor Regions round about us;
for as a mercy of mercies, never to be forgotten, as it is calm in one City
when it raines in another, as lightsome in Goshen when dark in Egypt, as Manna
in the Tents of Israel but none in Moab, so do not we enjoy, and joy, in the
serenitie of peace in these our Halcyon days, when both in former times, and
at this instant (or within these few Months) there is and has been wars,
and rumors of wars (according to our Saviors Math. 23.6.
prophecy prognosticating the end,) round about us bloody Bellona invironing
us round, as the circumference and we still at peace in our resting center?
How has fair France the most fruitful ample and fertile country in Vide
Bartholomeum Cassaneu^, Catalogo gloriae mundi, de laudibus Franciae, par. 5.
consider. 30 and par. 16. consi. 17 p. 297. 298. 299. 300. ad page 306 and
Textur. in Epithesis in verbo Galli. Et Mant. lib. 7. Ionea meus Gallis, etc.
Et La Ziardum in Epitome: historia cap. 17. in fine.
Christendom, as a Kingdom divided in it self, been rent and torn in the
late Civil wars, by these vipers bred within her own bowels, chiefly, by
that hellish league of the Guizian faction, by the Duke de See the book called
the History of France in quarto, as in a Diary expressing the daily events
betwixt the Duke de Maine, and the Prince of Navarre, after Henry the fourth of
France.
Maine, and his confederate Catilinarians? How has she long wallowed (like a
Boar that is stickt) in her own conglomerate blood her men bleeding as
freshly, as her Vines, by the prunning knife of unnatural wars? How has
fruitful Italy been over-runne by the Goths and Vandales, those truculent
The Goths and Vandals, under Gensericus, Attalus Ton^as, subdued by
Bellisarius at last and Narses
forreiners, by the faction of the Guelphs and Gibelines, the ambition of the
houses of the Medices, the Matchavillian stratagems of Casar, Borgias, the
Luciferian pride of some contesting Popes, (the very firebrandes of Europe)
who like that Julius the N^nclerus, and Bergomensis de Iulio secundo.
second, having more affection to Peter's sword, then to Peter's keys or Paul's
parchme^t, which they have made floate in Tyber, having unlawfully used the
sword, and made millions perish by the sword, the ambition of some few Popes,
as Chronicles testify, shedding more Christian, then ever the ambition of
Alexander, Caesar, or Rome Pagan shed heathenish blood? So for Bohemia how has
she like a virgin been ravished and then slaughtered? And the like, I may say
too of the Palatinate, How have her young men perished with the edge of the
sword? Her old men and wise Senators been massacred? Her fields and vines
rooted by war, that wild Boar? Her Cities and fortified Towns like
Jerusalem, low levelled with the ground, and left desolate? the wars there in
many places leaving such monuments of her Tropheis as in this our Ireland, in
which (as the greatest object of passion or compassion my eyes ever beheld) iam
seges ubi Troia, etc. where many goodly Towns, if not Cities have stood, as
appears by their ruinated relickes; there is either corn or grass, or (as
they say now in Jerusalem, some few Tents for pilgrims) some smoakie Irish
cabbins, standing as little urchins with their bristles up betwixt great old
outwalles, or Reliquiat Graium, atque immitis Achillis
relickes of Castles, or as Pigmyes that sleep in the midst of the guard of
great Giants: whilst we Britanians, all this while (yea even we Britanicall
Hybernians,) in our long continued peace, hang up our Targets as at Hercules
his pillars, set open the gates of Ianus, as in the days of Augustus, nay make
Bee-hives, as once the Romans of our helmits, let our guns rust, our spears
rot, and our swords canker for want of employment, hurt by no enemy as yet
unless by our own lethargicall sensual and supine security (which, if ever
any thing will be our ruin, as it was to Luke 19.42. when Titus besieged it,
they were so secure in the strength of their walls (as once Babylon and Thebes
in the like case,) that they said if the Romans had wings, they could not fly
over them Joseph
Jerusalem, to the men of Judge. 18.7.
Laish, to the In ^adunt urbem somno vinoque sepultum, Virgil.
Trojans, the In their pride and security they contemned the Romans and the
valor of Scipio.
Carthaginians, When the Turks surprised a Castle at the mouth of Hellespont,
(the prologue to their Tragedy,) they made light account of it and said it was
but the loss of a hogs stye, as it signified in the Turkish tongue Knels his
Turkish history.
Constantinople, Judge. 16.19.
Sampson, and diverse others:) yea we fit as Israel under our own Vines
quietly and peaceably, as in the days of Solomon, as Bees in their Hives,
Aunts in their caverns, feeding on the honey and oil, and wheat of plenty,
the daughter of peace, under the shelter and shadow of his Majesty's wings,
our sovereign Solomon who deserves (as desires) the title of Rex pacificus the
peaceable King, as well as the title of the defender of the faith, more justly
clayming both, then the French King the name of the most Christian, the
Spanish, the name of the most Catholic King: yea better then Augustus or
Polycrates the name of fortunate, then Adrian the name of good, then Titus the
name of generous, then Alexander the name of great, munificent and magnificent.
Thus, though we may justly fear the sparks to fly over Sea, having by our
sins inkindled the fire of that wrath, which may kindle the fire of our
war, both with God and man: (our own houses being in danger of fire or
plague, when our neighbors is Iam tua res agitur paries cum proximus ardet.
burning with the flame, or with the fever,) yet, as yet we do but look on,
(though with more pity and piety then Suetonius in vita Neronis.
Nero when Rome was on fire, and he singing his tragic verses in
representation of Troy, or then Apud Plutarchum in vita Scipionis.
Scipio beheld the universal conflagration of the perverse, as well as
resolute Numantines) as commiserating spectators, rather then actors of (or in)
their tragedy: which, how ever it be to them justice (or trials for good
ends) I am sure this long bearing, forbearing us in mercy, the instrument and
organ of this Dulce bellum inexpertis: a^t pacem te poscimus omnes.
mercy is his Majesty, who by his admired prudence and providence as truly
effects, as lawfully and laudably affects the appellation, and deserved
cognomination of the peaceable See the book extant called the Peace maker,
printed Anno Dom. 1619 not only of the blessed peace we have by means of his
Majesty, not only with Spain Scotland, France and Ireland, our once opposite
neighbors: but of the peace concluded by his Majesty betwixt Denmark and
Suevia, Suevia and Polland, Cleve, and Brandemburg.
Prince.

Seaventhly, as a mercy equalizing the former, as much to be marvailed at, and
I admired, as magnified though our sins have exasperated the Lord as much, if
not more, then ever Isreal's, as sinning against a greater light, a greater
measure of Grace, a greater knowledge and illumination, a brighter Gospel then
ever they received, in our sins Evangelicall, as well as Legal, against the
Messiah, as much as against Moses, in sins omissive by impenitencie, as well
as by sins co^missive of impiety: yet nevertheless, the Lord has not been
so strict with us, as with them; in giving us over as the greatest judgment,
and the severest punishment of former sins, (as he did the unbeleeving Psalm
81.12
Jews, and Romans 1.28.29.
Gentiles,) to the vanities of our own minds, and to the lusts of our own
hearts; for how ever there be many rot members in our Church, such as with 1.
King 21.20
Ahab, and Job. 20.12.13
Iezabell, even sell themselves to work wickedness, commit sin with
greediness, drink up iniquity as water, make their members weapons of Romans
6.13.
unrighteousness, turn the grace of God into wantonness; how ever many an
Athist which says in his heart there is no Psalm. 14.1.
God, many an open professed, many a secret concealed Church Papist, that with
the Have runs one way, (as the Mariner rows) and looks another, his tongue
with the times, but in his belly he has a Pope, though there be many (yea more
then a good many) roots of gall and bitterness amongst us, unpurged by our
States Physicians, many stringes untuned as the discord in our Church-musicke,
the spots in our Jude, verse. 12
feasts, the Gangreenes, and plague sores in our body Political and
Ecclesiastical, the Judge. 1. per totum.
Cananites in our borders unremoved, the cankers in our roses, the Droanes in
our Hives, the unsavorie salt that offends, and scandalize the little ones,
uncast Math 5.13.
out by the severest censure of excommunication; yet for the generality and
universality, we are still a Church, as Rebecha was still a holy and a chaste
spouse, though she had an Esau in her Ge. 25.24.25.
womb, as Noah's Arc was Gods The Church was sometimes confined to Abraham's
family Noah's Arc, the chamber in which the Disciples were Act. 2.
Church, notwithstanding there was Genesis 7.13.
a Cham in it: we have not made a total defection and apostacy as Israel,
from our first husband, to follow after Idolatrous and adulterous Ierem. 3.8.
lovers, we serve not yet Bell, nor Baall, nor Baalim, nor Ashtaroth, nor 1.
King. 11.5.7.
Chemosh, nor Milchom, nor Dagon, the abominations of the Sidonians, Moabites,
and Cananites, for the body of our Church we yet bow not down to Shrines and
Idols, Crosses and Crucifixes, our kneeling communicating gesture, (though
scandalous perhaps to the weak) is far from Idolatry or Bread worshipped,
see the satisfactorie Resolutions of Master Hooker his Ecclesiastical
Policy: Master Hutton explayning our Lithurgie, Bishop Morton his learned
defense of the Ceremonies with others.
Artolatrie, adoring or imploring the breaden God. Let our Amsterdammians then
prove that we retain either the head or tail of the Dragon, that we have so
far played the Harlot, that the Lord has given us a bill of divorce to be
cut off totally (though not finally) from being a Church, as he has done with
the Jews: giving them over (till the fullness of the Gentiles be Romans 11.25.
come) for a time to the hardness of their own hearts, and blindness of
their own verse 9.10.
minds. For though there be amongst us (as many open professed profane ones,)
so many clancular and secret Papists (as in France, Italy and Spain, there
be many secret Protestants, and would be more, if it were not for the severitie
of laws, and the strictness of the Inquisition) yet as in the corruptest
times, there have been always some that have discovered and detested the
abominations of the scarlet whore, and with Elias have not bowed their knees
to Baall: (as John Husse and Jerome of Prage in Bohemia with their Hussites;
Waldo with his Waldenses, and Hugenotes in France: Ioachim Abbas, Bertram,
Berengarius, Jerome Savanoriola in Italy and elsewhere: Wickeliffe with other
learned lights in Oxford, Luther in Saxony, as they are expressed and
nominated by our modern See D Abbot, that late Bishop of Exeter, in his
preface before his defense of M. Perkins, D. Usher the Bishop of Mead de statu
Ecclesiae, M. Gabriell Powell, in his preface before his learned book, de
Antichristo.
writers,) so for the generality of our Kingdoms of great Britain at this
day, the mark of the beast, of the most, and the best, is not received: and
though there be blemishes and infirmities, and corruptions in our Church, as
in the best that ever were, yea erros in judgment and life in the best members
(as the Sun is subject to her eclypse, the Moon to her overshaddowing, the
best and healthfullest body to some anguish fittes, or other distempers:) Yet
the Church may be said to be sound, and so may her members be said to be
living, as a man may be said to be sound at the heart, though he have some
ploukes in his face, or biles and carbuncles on his body, as the fruit of
worm-eaten, as a Lawyer, a Physician, a Musician, a Logician, a Rhetorician,
may be said to be exquisite Artists in their professions, though the first
miss it in some cases, in judging or pleading; the second in some cures: the
third in some strains; the fourth, in some disputation: the last in some
declamation: And how ever there be some differences about some Ceremonies, and
See Master Powels little book de a ^^aphoris.
a Diaphorists, as there have been differences and disputes amongst the best,
as appears in our As there were differences betwixt Chrysostom. Theophilus, and
Epiphanius: betwixt Cyrill and Theodores, Gregory the great and Eutichius,
Bernard and Peter of Clunes, yea amongst the chief Bishops of Asia, about the
celebration of Easter: as appears in Ecclesiastical histor. Yea how ever it is
excused by Chrysostom. hom. 6. de laudibus Pauli, and by other fathers, Paul and
Barnabas disse^ted. Act. 16.37.
Margin: Yet since we all hold the foundation against Papist, and Pelagian,
and Armenian, and who ever else, which is justification freely by faith in
Christ, without the works of the law, according to the Scriptures, thus
building on the rock: though there may be amongst us doctrinall or personal
errors, we are still a Church, we have not totally and apostatically revolted
as the Jews.

Eighthly, and yet see still a further mercy to us then to these Jews, though
Gods own peculiar people, (as indeed, as when by a stone thrown in the
waters one circle begets another; and as in a golden chain, one lincke
succeedes (exceeds) another; so in the cords of a man, in the cords of Osee
11.4.
love, one mercy draws another) though our provocations and rebellions have
every way equalized theirs, and though in paternall love, by fatherly
castigations and corrections, the Lord has visited our sins with rods, and
our offenses with scourges, as he threatened 2. Sam. 7.14
Solomon, and as he has dealt with 2. Sa. 12.10.11.
David, 2. Chr. 32 25 26.
Ezekiah, Jonas. 1.3.4
Jonas, and all his transgressing children; yet he has not been so strict and
severe with us, as with them for many ages and generations, to scourge us,
with any Ashur, or Assirian, any rod of his Esaias 10.5.
wrath, any foreign power. For how ever in our first planting in this Island,
we have been subjugated and subdued very See Lanquets Chronicle, lib. 2 per
totum, and de Gestis Romanorum in Anglia, libr. 3. per totum, ^t testatur page
136.
often by the Pictes, by the Danes, by the Romans, and since the time of
William the Conqueror, as appears in the reigns of several Kings we have
had bloody bickerings with neighboring Kingdoms, chiefly the Normans, the
French and the Scotts (now our brethren our nearest and dearest Allies, they
and we meeting in his Royal Majesty, as in the Royal center of love (as the
Tyrians and the Syrians in one Aeneas,) and how ever in the Reigns of every
King, our Edwards, Richards, John's, Henry's and the rest, since (as before) the
Conquest, our land has been shaken, as with a fever, rent and divided as
with the teeth and fangs of madd dogs, in Civil wars, more or less by the
factions and rebellions, of turbulent, malignant, humerous, proud, ambitious
and discontented spirits: Yet within our memory, or the memory of our
forefathers, our great grandfathers, (which is a singular mercy, both to us
their successors and our predecessors) we have not been brought under any
foreign power, no external yoke has been laid on our necks, (excepting the
Roman yoke on the souls of our forefathers) as the Exodus 1.13.
Egyptian, Chaldean, Esaias 10.6. Ierem. 50.33.
Assirian, Ierem. 51.34.
Babylonian yoke was laid upon the Jews, for many years together in grievous
pressures; we have not been subdued in our times by any foreign enemy, as
the Israelites were kept under, sometimes Judge. 3.8.14.
twenty, sometimes thirty, forty years, by the Midianites, Moabites,
Ammonites, Philistines and other enemies, which the Lord stirred up against
them: Our land in our time, as was once said of Venice, is a Virgin
unconquered, unsubdued: We have obtained 2. Sam. 24.14.
David's desire, to fall into the hands of God by plague and famine, and other
afflictions, but not into the hands of man, as Sampson did, to be mocked of the
Judge. 16.21.25 1. Sam. 31.4.
uncircumcised, which was Saul's fear, as Abimelech was ashamed to die by the
hand of a Judge. 9.54
woman, quod omen avertat Deus.

Lastly, which is the sum and substance, and shutting up of all the rest,
comparing our selves still with them, not only in positive mercies, but in
privative, in respect of our evils of Malum culpa malum poena.
sins, and evils of sufferings, we shall find though, as has been said
and proved, that our provocations are as many, as monstrous, our demerits as
great as theirs: all circumstances considered, we having walked as unworthie
of Gods mercies as ever they, that the Lord has been to us, in respect of
them, a merciful and indulgent father, and to them in respect of us, a just, a
severe and unplacable judge; to us a father of mercies, to them a Jealous and
zealous God, visiting the sins of their fathers upon the Children unto the
third and fourth Exodus 20.5.
Generation. When I consider not only the judgments of God upon their souls,
even to this day, in giving them over according to his Deuteronomy. 28.28
threate, to madness, blindness of mind, astonishment of heart, to grope as
at noone day, their hearts being made fatt, their ears heavy, their eyes Esaias
6.10.
shut, least they should see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and
understand with their hearts, and convert and be healed, God giving them over
to the spirit of slumber, their eyes being darkened, the veil 2. Cor. 3.15.
unremoved, blindness in part happening to Romans 11.8. ve. 25. v. 9. v 32.
them, until the fullness of the Gentiles be come in: their Table being made a
snare and a trap, and a stumbling block, and recompense unto them: God
shutting them up so far in unbelife, that when their Messiah came amongst
them, as his own, his own received him John 1.12
not, but crucified the Lord of Act. 2.36.
glory, rejecting him that came in his fathers name, their promised Shiloh,
but receiving to their inevitable ruin and destruction both of body and
soul, imposters and deceivers for their Messiah, as Herod entertained of his
Some think the Herodians were so called, in that they thought Herod that
Idumean the Messiah.
Herodians two Bens or Barcosbas, the sons of lying, as their own writers
Sanhedrim. li. c. Helech. Rabb. Moses Ben. Maimon. That place of Haggai c. 2
7.8. being applied to the one, by Rab Akiba, tract Meghala, and Jacobs scarre,
Number 23. unto the other Talmud Ieros. L. Taanith
testify, being received even of their great Rabbyns, and the prophetical
Scriptures applied unto them, the one immediately after the Passion of Christ,
the other in the days of Adrian, besides that Egyptian Moses, that Devil in
the shape of a Socrat. eccles. hist. libr 7. c. 37.
man, who drowned so many of them in the Sea, in the Isle of Anno 434.
Creete, with other birds of that black feather, as that Pseudo-Moses in
Nicephorus
Arabia with others more. Thus (as our Papists and other heretics at this day)
not believing the truth, the Lord giving them over to strong delusions, to
believe 2. These. 2.9.
lies persecuting after the death of Christ, the Act. 5.18. chap. 7.58.
Apostles, chiefly Saint Act. 9 23. cha. 14.2.
Paul throughout the Acts, that preached the true Christ unto them with such
virulencie, that putting away the Gospel from them, and judging themselves
unworthy of eternal life, Act. 13.46. their golden Candlestick was removed,
their vineyard let out to other husbandmen, The halt, and blind, and lame, we
sinners of the Gentiles were called in to that marriage feast of mercy, by
that Gospel which they Math. 22.8.9.10.
refused.

But when I consider again, (as consequent upon the former) Gods judgments
upon their very bodies and outward man, upon them and their seed and
posterity, in all ages since the death of Christ, and in all places where they
are as the dust dispersed, that curse and fearful execration, his blood be
upon us and our children, so fully Math. 27.25.
verified, that he that reads their Tragedies by Iosep. de bell. Iudaico and
antiq.
Josephus, and Iosippus Heb.
Iosippus, (both Englished in our tongue) writ as it seems not with ink, but
blood, and prosecuted since, by Eusebius, Nicephorus, Dion Nicetus, Caesar
Baronius, Joseph Scalliger, Peter Galatinus, Damianus a Goes, John Renclin, our
Master Fox in his Martyrologie, and many more Authenticke Authors that in all
times since, have observed Gods heavy hand upon them, and his strict
proceedings with them in all countries where they are scattered: (if he have
not a heart of flint, or marble, hewn out of Caucasus) he cannot but relent.
But more particularly, when I ponder and seriously consider, those infinite
slaughters and massacres, that were made of them by Titus Vespasian, (after
that by divine Oracle the Christians were warned to fly to Eusebius. hist.
eccles. lib. 3. cap. 5.
Pella, as Lot out of Sodom, the Magi and Joseph out of Judea) as first eleven
hundred thousand of them perishing in the sacking of their City. Secondly, the
rest either killing themselves, or being sold for Joseph. de bello Iud. reckons
of slaves 97000. l. 7. cap. 17. Petrus Gal. de arcanis l. 4. ca. 21. recensit
200000. accounting all as slaves, under 17 years.
slaves, or, after the Roman custom reserved for triumph. Thirdly, besides
the murder of their Priests, the ruination of their Temple, (like the walls of
Josh. 6.26.
Jericho, never to be reedified, though attempted by cursed Hist. Tripart. and
Greg. Nazia. orat. 4 in Julio.
Julian, in despite of Christ's prophecy) for which they had a Sect and Order
of Joseph. Scalig. Elench. trihar. ser. cap. 13.
Mourners, Heraclitus his offspring, which solemnly did nothing else but weep
and lament it. Fourthly, and besides, the spoiling of their sacred vessels, or
profanely (as once before Dan. 5.2 3 etc
Balthazar) employing them to the adorning of the heathenish Temple of peace.
Fifthly, besides, the slaughters that at several times Adrian the Emperor made
of Joseph. de bello Iud. lib. 7. cap. 24.
them, some eight and forty years after their first overture by Vespasian for
their rebellion, under their impostor Benchochab or Barcosba, cutting off by
Severus his Lieutenant 580000. by the Dion. Nicei. Adrianus.
sword, besides those that perished by famine, sickness and fire, or (as
others number them) killing at Alexandria in Egypt 700000. of them, in such
multitudes that if we may believe their own Lib. Echa rabbethi.
writers, the blood reached to the horses mouths, and run down from the
place of effusion four miles to the Sea, it colored and made swell two Lib.
Massechith Ghittin.
Rivers, yea served the Heathens seven years after to fatten their ground with
it: as their bones stood Adrian in good stead to hedge in a Vineyard of many
miles compass, those that revived being prohibited from ever coming near
Jerusalem, or looking toward it, says Eusebius. Eccles. hist. libr. 4. cap. 6.
Eusebius, out of Ariston Pelleus, with many other Plurima vide apud Niceph.
lib. 3. cap. 24.
punishments and vexations together with the wondrous massacres the Emperor
Trajan made of the^, Adrians predecessor, who for their rebellions in (g) Egypt
and Cyrene under their Captain Luke, or Andrew as Dion calls (h) him by the
means of Martius Tubo cut off many thousands of them, but more by Lucius
Quietus, (that made them ever quiet) who destroyed them utterly in Mesopotamia.

And more, when I consider how every way miserable they are at this day in
their inward, and their outward man, their bodies and their souls: how they
are a mock and derision to all Nations as they mocked and derided Christ: how
they have been sold for slaves, yea thirty of them for one piece, (as they
bought Christ of the traitor Judas for thirty pieces:) how they are held under,
as slaves in every Nation, without Vrim, without Thummim, without Temple or
true Priesthood, Ministry, or Magistracy, Office, place, or Government, as
made the tail and not the head where ere they come, their names smelling as a
fowmart or Fox, the name of a Jew, being as odious as the name of a At zante
they are so hated that from Mo^day, Thursday, till Saturday noone, they come
not abroad least the people stone them. Purchase libr. 2. cap. 10.
Judas, every place in Europe, Affricke and Asia, being weary of them,
(excepting They have built them in Rome five Synagogues, See the Relation of
Religion in the West parts.
Rome that makes use of their tolerated usurie, (as of their Stews and
curtizans merely for gains:) how every country, after a time, has either
held their nose to the grindstone, miserably afflicting them, as they were used
here in England in the days King Richard the first, Edward the first, and King
John, as our Chronicles mention: or extremely pilling and polling them, by
taxes, John the second king of Portingall, made the^ pay 8. Crowns for a poll:
Emmanuel did the like Ann. Dom. 1497. with many more.
impositions and confiscations of goods, (as they pill and poll Christians by
their biting, yea bloody usurie:) fleeting them as the Turk uses to do with
his Bashawes, and phlebotomizing their full purses to prevent a plurisie, or
else banishing them and casting them out, as the Sea casts her froth to the
shore, as they were used by the three Phil^pps, but chiefly by Ferdinand and
Isabella in Anno Dom 1592. it is thought they were banished 120000. families of
them: or 420000 persons as are computed by Io^annes Re^clinus Cabal. lib. 1.
Spain, by some Popes also in As Paul the fourth, and Pius (or impious) the
fifth, though received again, as loath to forgo such good customers by Pius the
fourth and Si^ius the fifth.
Rome, by some of our Kings in England: or else massacring them with the sword,
or stoning them to death by the rage of the people, chiefly (as some histories
instance,) for their sanguinolent, devilish and malignant disposition, in using
to crucify some children, as upon our good friday, still in derision of our
Messiah when I see how all nations are weary of the^, as a tender stomach of
unholsom meat, ready to disgorge the^, how as The Apostle speaks of the^ even
to this day, God they please not, and are contrary to all men, 1. These. 2 15.
How as is said of Genesis 16. v. 12.
Ismael, like Ismalits rather then Israelits, their hand is against every man,
and every man's against the^, how even the Turks detest the^ above any nation,
for killing their own Prophet Christ, the best Prophet they say that ever was,
excepting Mahomet, and will not admit any amongst them, except he first turn
Christian, and then a Turkish Renegado: In their reproach also using a kind of
imprecation, if this be not true, would God I might die a M. Purchase in his
pilgrimage.
Jew, (as our perverse Irish use a worse, when I do such, or such a thing I Will
turn Protestant, and go to Church,) I say laying to heart, and desiring all
and every of us, to lay to heart these premises, this strict and severe,
though just and legal proceeding of God, with these his own people, in these
specified particulars, together with his multiplied, accumulated, renewed
mercies to us, in giving us so many blessings, forgiving or forbearing us
still, after all our rebellions and provocations by which even we rack and
stretch his patience, as cloth on the tentor hooks, not cutting us off as he
might do, (and has done them) root, and bough and branch, but giving us a
large space of repentance as he did to All the time that ^o^ lived amongst
them.
Sodom, to the old All the time the Arc was in building.
world, to Revel. 2.19.
Iezabell, not forty days as to Jonas. 3.
Ninive, but forty years in the pure and powerful preaching of the Gospel
under a gracious Deborah, and more then twenty years added since, under so
wise and worthy a King, all this while manuring and managing and pruning us,
as once his Israelitish Esaias 5. verse. 1.2 3.4.5.
Vineyard, hedging us in, and invironing us with so many mercies of adornation
and preservation as would stretch Arithmeticke to number them, and Geometry to
measure them, making us as famous over the whole world, as they are infamous:
us as much feared, as was Ioshuah of the Cananites, Alexander of the Indians,
Taubut of the French, A Drum was made of his skin to terrify his enemies,
when he was dead, test ^ran^zio in Va^dalia, libr. 11. cap. 9. Maiol. colloq.
7. page 270 Et Akiat^ in Emblem. sic c^te detracta Ziseas, etc. Zoenus potuit
vincere Pontifices.
Zisca of the Popish; amongst the Bohemians, Constantine amongst the Pagans:
and Bellisarius and Narses amongst the Goths and Vandals, yea as much loved,
and admired of our friends and confederates, and awefully feared of our
enemies, as they all are of all hated and detested with an Anathema Maranatha,
till the veil be removed, that they love and receive: yea believe in the Lords
Christ, their expected Savior. Yea, when I consider how the Lord by the word
preached, by the inward motions and suggestions of his spirit (which sometimes
in some flashes, knockes at the door of the heart of a Numb. 23.10.
Balaam, a carnal Ioh. 6.34. John. 7.46.
Jew, a John. 4.15.
Samaritane, a Pilate. Math. 27.23.24. John. 18.38.
Heathen, an Act. 26.28.
Agrippa, by crosses, by afflictions which wrought on 2. Chron. 33.10.11.
Manasses, and the Gospels Luke 15.16.17.
prodigal, yea sometimes on these Jews Hos^^ 6. v. 1.2.
themselves by fatherly castigations and corrections, paternall admonitions and
expostulations, legal Cominations and redargutions, Evangelicall promises and
consolations: yea even by mercies and judgments, nay even by signs and
wonders, from the earth, from the heavens, from the air, by Comets, blazing
stars, visions and apparitions, (as often to these Jews before their See the
book extant called Doom, forewarning to judgment where at large is recited
the voice commanmanding some to go to Pella: the crying of one Jesus, woe, woe
to Jerusalem: with many visions and wonders.
destruction, as prodigious, and prognosticating as any recorded by Texter in
Officina de Miraculis.
Textor, or Lycosthenes has write a great book only de Prodigijs.
Lycosthenes: How I say by all these, the Lord has lured us unto him, labored
to weane us from our sins, as the child from the desired dugge, that
iniquity be not our Ezekiel. 18.30.
destruction as it was to these Jews: etc. when I see he has rolled every
stone, touched every string, used all means for our conversion to prevent our
confusion: chiefly drawn us with the cords of love, using to us the rod of
beauty, as our indulgent Shepherd, to them the rod of bands: making us above
any Nation in the World, patterns and presidents of his mercy, as they of his
justice to present times, and to all posterity: making them exemplarie marks
of justice to us, not us to them, as our sins deserved, I say thus comparing
mercies and judgments together, (as white with black, as the Heathens Venus
with Vulcan) our mercies this day balanced and poy^ed with their miseries,
have such a luster, that if we see them not we are blind, if with David and
his people we bless not the Lord for them, we are as much past grace, as past
gratitude.

CHAP. XIIII. Special deliverances of our Princes, Peers and people from
Romish Treasons.
THus have we opened the Box, and seen the pearls, the blessings of great
Britain, comparing Nation with Nation, our English with the Jewish Sion; but
to come nearer still to my scope and aim, and to instance in more specialties,
the privileges and prerogatives, that we have had, even in our own memories
(to omit former times) equal with the Jews, in the happy and prosperous
Regiments of our Kings and Governors, may notably serve as a further prick
and goade to true gratitude, so pressed and prescribed: for in some particulars
we shall have the ballancing, if not the casting scales. I cannot enumerate
all (as he that comes into a garden pluckes not every flower, but some choice
ones:) compare our late Deborah, our mother in Israel, Queen Elizabeth of
famous memory, with their David, our present Liege Sovereign with their
Solomon, not only in the propagation and continuation of true Religion,
together with the two goodly Daughters of so gracious a Mother, Peace and
Religio peperit divitias, ast filia devoravit matre^
Plenty, in which we sympathize with them, nay far exceed them: (for as
our times have not been so turbulent, so truculent, so bloody and boisterous
as David's, that was a man of war and shed much blood, as he was to far
occasioned and provoked, both by foreign wars a broad with the Iebusites,
Ammonites, Philistines: and domesticke broils at home, we having not heard
Bellonas Drum, (except in a prudent provident Martial trayning in our Cities
as Genes. 14.14
Abraham once in his family) but for these many years, chiefly since his
Majesty's Reign, seen Noah's Genes. 7.11.
Dove flying amongst us, with the Olive branch of peace: so for that greater
and better blessing, the Sun of Religion in our Hemispheare, has shined more
comfortably, more constantly then in the days of Solomon, neither has it
been, nor I hope ever shall be clouded, and eclypsed by Idolatry, as it was
in his days, till it did reshine again upon his certain and assured (though
needlessely questioned) He that questions Salomons repentance, let him read
S^to Mayor his preface before his Comment on the Canticles, and Lorinus his
Comment on chapter 1. of Eccles. as also a book in quarto, called Salomons solace
in medi^ libri.
repentance: But in one particular (purposely to avoyde feared prolixitie) to
instance, how we do agree and (s) meet as in one Center of blessing: as their
Princes have been mervailously preserved in immediate and immanent perils; so
the preservation of ours, (and of us in them, since the body Political and
Ecclesiastical is safe, in the safety of the head) has even in our memories,
and the memories of our fathers, been marveilous if not miraculous. For, as
David's life (as before has been fully specified, and now shall be but
epitomized) was hunted after by Saul, and such as he set a work; the 1. Sam
23.19.
Ziphins, 1. Sam. 22.9
Doeg, and such bloody dogs, emulating courtiers, yea Wolves and Foxes in
sheep clothing, his pretended friends as he complains, making Nets and
Gunnes to intrapp him by fraud, when they could not prevail by force, (using
with it, polliticke Apud Brusonium titul. de Astutia.
Lysimachus the Foxes craft, when the Lions courage failed.)

So to reflect a little upon Queen Elizabeth of famous memory, and as I
promised and purposed, to parallel that Deborah with their David, besides what
we have in Chronicles in Master Fox his Martyrologie: Are there not some yet
living, that can relate, how the life of that famous virgin Queen, was
persecuted and prosecuted, by the bloody Romish Saulites, from the first hour
of her Crowning to the last of her death? For besides the plots and projects,
laid against her innocent life by sanguinolent Wolves in the Reign of her
unsisterly Sister, Queen Mary, her unjust taxations about the business of Sir
Peter Carew, in the West, but chiefly about her confederacy with Courtney, in
Wiatts conspiracy. The second, her inhumane apprehension, when she was She
was taken sick out of her bed at her house at Ashredge, by the Lord Ta^ne, Sir
John Williams, and other two Lords.
sick in her bed. The third, her transportation in that case from place to
place. The fourth, her uncivil usage, by her churlish Tailor Beinfield. The
fifth, her guarding as a Traitor by a The retinue of these Lords were two
hundred and fifty, of which there was a troop of horsemen: after a hundred
northern soldiers added in white Coats yet, as her black guarde: After at
Woodstocke threescore soldiers marched everyday with in the walls and without.
band of Soldiers. The sixth, her hurrying to the Tower without permission
either to speak or write to the Queen. The seventh, her landing at the very
traitors stayres. The eight, her strict usage in the Tower, worse then some
ordinary prisoners. The ninth, The restraint of her men, the imprisoning of
her Ladies, her tossing from poast to pillar, as from Scilla to Caribdis, from
danger to danger, when in her own apprehension and preparation, as her Motto
was, she was tanquam Ovis, as a sheep to the slaughter. The tenth, the
examinations of Sir James Acroft, and the rackings of many poor men, to find
out the knife to cut her throat, The eleventh, the gapings of the Lords of the
Clergy, chiefly Steven Gardner, Bishop of Winchester, and Lord Chancellor,
after the day, in which they might wash their white Rochets in her innocent
blood as much as ever Saul gaped after the blood of David. After all, which
storms, and tempests, lightnings and thunders, her Sun from under all these
clouds, gloriously reshined, in her triumphall Crowning, with such celebritie,
prayers, wishes, welcommings, cries, acclamations, shoutes, verses, pageants,
enterludes, as symptoms of affections, together with such gratulations from
foreign As from Zuricke, Geneva, Basil Berne, Wertenbridge, Argentine,
Franckford.
places, as the like has not been seen: Her enemies by As Poole, Hopton
Bishop of Norwich, Christopher of Chester, Weston^ the chief disputer against
Cranmer, Latimer, and Ridley, as also Bonner and Gardener.
death together with their plots, as mistes being suddenly dispersed: leaving
these dangerous accidents and occurrents, these complotments with many more, To
cut off that head, which after as gloriously as ever any of her sex wore a
Crown: How has she sympathized with David, in these her marveilous and
miraculous preservations after she came to the Crown, from both public
rebellions and private treasons that were comploted against her, (and so
consequently against us and our safety) both by ambitious and factious
spirits, as in the Norfolk and Kentish See Anglorum praelia extant in octavo.
rebellions, insurrection of the Commons, under the conductes of their
turbulent leaders, which had not Gods providence, and man's prudence (and
prowess prevented,) might have proved as fatal (as that rusticke De quo bello
rusticano more dialogi, multa habes erudite explicata per Simonem Maie^lum, de
diebus Canicul. volum. 2. in fine colloq. 3. page 466.
war to our neighbor Germany) both to this land in general and to her
Royal person in particular: But especially, by spirits that were Iesuited, and
leavened from Rome, from whence as armed Greeks out of the Troyan horse, and
as diseases out of Pandoras box, have issued all these treasons and rebellions
public and private, that as Cocatrice eggs, have by man's malice been
hatched, and by Gods mercy crushed amongst us: To reflexe upon some of them
(as a man may look upon a dangerous Serpent or vast monster, or his malignant
enemy when he is flaine, as the Israelites upon Goliath, and the Greeks upon
Hector) with gratulation and admiration: How dangerous was that conspiracy in
the North by the Earls of Northumberland and In the conspiracy were Dacred,
Digby, Hulthorp; Penyman, Bishop, and many more, great Esquiers and gentlemen
Westmerland, kindled by the Bull of Pope Pius, (or rather impius) the Fifth, in
the year 1569. and blown by Doctor Nicholas Morton, Story Felton, the
Nortons, Plumtree, (hanged justly at Durham on a crosse-tree) and other
dangerous spirits justified by that boisterous In his sixth motive fol. 31. and
in his forty motive.
Bristow, and De visibili Monarcha lib. 7. page 730. he prayseth the attempts
of these Noblemen: page 744. He prayseth Felton for an honorable Martyr.
Sanders, yea applauded and approved by many Seminary Priests, chiefly by
Campian (their chief As appears by his ten Reasons in his Oxford Oration,
confuted learnedly by Doctor Humfrey.
champion) who for all his cunning The Deane of Paul's and Windsor disputing
with him, found him very subtle.
sophistry, was found to have a hand and a heart for treason: and suppressed
by these wise and Martial worthies which her Majesty employed in that
behalf; as also to survey again that other conspiracy, intended Norfolk,
but discovered, and crushed in the shell, and the the chief agents executed: as
also the treason of the Duke of Norfolk, and after of the Earl of
Northumberland, who (as he had a hand in the Northern rebellion as well as
his brother, which by the Queens mercy was remitted) entered into a new plot
of invading the land, as an agent in Throgmortons treason, a conspirator with
Charles Paget, an intended assistant to the Duke of Guize, to bring in a
foreign Catholic Prince, of which the Popes holiness had a principal care;
as also (si fas dicere) not to be so unmindefull of Gods former mercies, (no
more then David was of his preservation from a Lion and a 1. Sam. 17.34.35.
Bear, or Moses for the overture of Isreal's Egyptian enemies in the red Exodus
15.
Sea, or Deborah of Iabins drowning in the River Judge. 5.
Kishon, as to pretermit the discomfiture of that Catholic Anno 15^8.
fleet, which the pride of Popish Proselites called the invincible Armado, by
one only Sir Francis Drake.
Drake, with some principal As Charles, Lord Howard high Admiral, Lord Thomas
Howard, the Lord Sheffield. with other brave spirits.
besides, swiming amongst them with his wooden So are Ships called.
walls, with the help of the winds and waves of the Sea, which from the God
of the Sea, fought against them, as the Sun once fought against the Josh.
10.12.
Amorites, and the stars against Judge. 5.20.
Sisera, and for us, as once for that good Oh ^timium dilecte Deo ^ui militat
ether, and coniurati vaniun^ ad classica venti, etc.
Theodosius, with no less glory to our English then that valourous Greek
had, who with his handful of a few hundreds overthrew that numerous
river-drinking, cloude-threatning Army of the Persian Zerxes. I say to
pretermit these public dangers, (with our deliverances) managed by all the
might and malice, prowess, and policy of the arm of flesh: as also these
Priests and Romish Proselites, that were deservedly cut off at Tyburne, and
their treacherous hearts cut out, as denying the Queens supremacy, and so
consenting unto, (if not contriving the most horrible treasons; amongst the
which, were Johnson, Forde, Shert, Kirby, Filby, Cotton, Richardson, so to
leave others, as unworthie naming, pestilent vermin, or croaking frogs
crawling out of the Romish Tyber, or as Locusts from the bottomless pit, to
disturb our peace, or endanger our Princess: how odious the naming (as of a
Jew or Judas? how horrid the remembrance (as once of him that burned Dianas
Temple) of these men monsters, inhumane Canibals, yea generation of vipers,
that besides strangers and forreiners) attempted, (as by the Devil and Priests
first tempted) to gnaw the very bowels that bred them, yea to lay their bloody
hands on the Lords anointed, a Princess the most free from vices, the most
famous for Arts, parts, and virtues, that these modern admiring times, ever
looked upon: amongst the which, that smooth Parasiticall Parry, whose sparks
of treason, being kindled by the words and writings of the carnal, (Cardinal)
Como, and inflamed by a Book of one Doctor Collins, sent him out of France, in
which there were as many warrants for treasons as words: and discovered partly
by his own tongue to an Esquire, one Nevill, and partly by the wisdom of
some The Earl of Leycester, and Sir Christopher Hatton.
counselors, they were quenched, smothered, and strangled at Westminsters
Palace, where he was executed: and another bird of the same feather, Francis
Throgmorton, who by the encitement of one Ienny, at the Spaw, in the country
of Liege, and Sir Francis Englefield in the Low Countries, with the^
confederacy of one Charles Paget, (alias Mope, alias Spring,) was made an
agent and instrument of discovery of the most fit and convenient Havens for
the landing of such foreign forces, (as if the great Lord Protector of
England, had not prevented and restrained) had supplanted us and planted
themselves with all the tail and traish of their Idolatrous worship.

In the third rank (as rank Traitors as the rest,) were Anthony Babington,
the head of his confederates, as Act. 1.16.
Judas was of those that apprehended Christ, who with thirteen (ungentle)
young Gentlemen more, bound themselves by Oath, as those forty Jews that vowed
the death of Saint Act. 22.13.14.
Paul, that by murdering the Queens Majesty, they would either settle their
Pope again in his former estate in England, or else, (as deservedly they did,
reckoning without their host, even the God of hosts, and swimming against the
stream,) even die the death.

In the same predicament was our Borne in Tonlerton near York.
Yorke-shire Weldon, Sutton, Hartley, priests, like Simeon and Genesis 49.5.6
Levy brethren in blood, hearted like the rest for the invasion of the land,
the surprising of the Tower of London, the firing of the City, the killing of
some privy Chiefly the Earl of Leicester was assigned to the pot.
Counselors, and other such like Catholicall meritorious deeds: all drinking
of that bloody cup, (as freely as Apud Instin. Satiate sanguine quem sitists.
Tomiris caused Cyrus) which they had brewed for us. The same poisonous bloody
cup was attempted to be brewed, mixed, and administered by Doctor Lopez, the
Queens Physician, with his confederates Stephano de Ferrara de Gama, Manuell
Lewis Tivaco, Portingals, with his pension of fifty thousand Crown; promised
for poisoning the Queen, by Count Fuentes, and Secretario Ibarra, as Judas was
promised thirty pieces of silver, for betraying of Christ, and Ecchius
promised a Bishopric, or great Of which missing he raved and died.
benefice, for disputing (at least railing) against Luther. Neither was the
treason of York, and Williams, less dangerous, less monstrous, less
malicious: who by the Consultation holden at Bruxels to murder the Queen,
whereof the Devil that murderer from the beginning was president, (as these
holy Fathers, in the Council of Trent consulted how to poison souls, and
their forefathers the Pharisees, how to murder Christ, and their holy brethren
of the Inquisition, how to murder his Protestant professed Christians:) these,
with one Owens an English rebel, were thought the fittests agents; of which
bloody purpose failing with their hopes of the promised forty thousand
Crowns, they lost their treacherous blood, out of their veins. I might here
further exemplify great Britains dangers, and deliverances, as the mark that
I shoot at, by the foolish (and at his death truly repented,) attempt of
Heskith, a gentleman of Lancashire, who at the soliciting of Cardinal Allen,
Sir William Stanley, and Worthington, our unnatural countreyman, persuaded
Ferdinand, the Lord Who as a natural subject revealed the Counsel of this
Achitophell.
Strange, Son and Heir to the Earl of Derby, to claim to himself the
title to the Crown of England, that so these turbulent spirits might by this
means fish in a troubled water. As also of that viper Squire, who by the
soliciting of the same venomous brood beyond sea, to kill the Queen, did co^plot
the poisoning of the pu^mell of her saddle, that laying hand on it, the poison
might disperse over her whole body, which plot also came to light by the eye of
that vigilant Ce^tinell the Shepherd of Psalm. 23.1.
Israel, as also of that Irish kern, Patricke Cullen, who by the persuasion of
that ever factious Stanley, and one Iacques his Lieutenant, together with
Sherewood and Holt, to come into England about the same bloody errand, that
formerly his brethren, was surprised by the high way, and he and his plot
supplanted: So let thine enemies O Lord Judge. 5.31.
perish, be they English, Irish, Romish, hellish whosoever, whatsoever and
wheresoever: and let us and all that love thee rejoice in thy salvation. And
since we have entered into this our Ireland, it is worth our animadversion, how
the Lords hand, has been as just and heavy, even against Irish traitors, as
English, in cutting off them and their bloody hopes, and plots ever, by one
means or another: Such is his mercy to us, his justice to our enemies, as
appears (if I may without offense reflect upon them) in Iames-fitz Morice, one
of the first Traitors (as I am informed) in this our Ireland, who was cut off
shorter by the head by an Irish young Gentleman, as he went to burn his
fathers country.

Secondly, such a stearne bloody treacherous verlet as this, was one Morrogh
Ogue (or Rogue) who after his effusion of abundance of English blood in the
Province of Munster, being apprehended, and executed at Cork, and his bones
broke with a smiths sledge, his only repentance was, that he might not live to
murder more English. His bloody villainies would fill a Volume.

Thirdly, so for the Earl of 1. King 2.34.
Desmond, that was a prince, and principal agent in these rebelling stirring
times; Was not his end proportionable to his life? Did he not come to his grave
as 2. Sam. 18.17.
Ioab, Absalom, and other traitors, cum cede and sanguine, with blood and
slaughter, wandering as a beggar? Was he not taken by one of the Irish in his
Cabin, and his head dissevered from his body? So Desmond brother to this
Earl, a notable Traitor (as was said of Caesar Borgias, a faithless and
perfidious butcher, as well of his friends as enemies, who any way stood in his
way to hinder his ends: wandering as a hungry Wolf in the woods to seek some
prey, as he had beheaded others in a proportionable retaliating justice, was
taken and beheaded himself, notwithstanding all his Coate-armour of the Popes
Bulls, and Agnus Dei, and the Ring that the Pope sent him from his own finger,
(as a love token to a Traitor dearly beloved) hanging about his Of these and
other Irish kernes, and rebels, see at large the discovery of Ireland by Sir
John Davis.
neck. So Doctor Sanders, the great Goliath of rebels, by hand and head,
tongue and pen, animating and encouraging them as one of the best active
factors that ever the Pope had, by his agencie, and one of the best Proctours,
the Romish Hierarchy ever had, by his works and writings, this not only
firebrand, but trumpe of rebellion, the Popes Legate, the Commander and
Treasurer for the late wars, wandering in the Mountains without succor or
relief, died (as is credibly reported) ravingly and in a frenzy. Sic necis
artifices art perire sua. So let all perish which either themselves
unlawfully, or by animating and encouraging, cause others to attempt to strike
treacherously with the Math. 26.5.
sword against the Lords Vicegerents, who as deputies under God carry not the
sword in vain.

CHAP. XV. More special applications of our preservations, and other
blessings, of which we are eye, and ear witnesses.
THus have we compared our Deborah, (for to this term I still cleave) with
Isreal's David, his and in him their) deliverances, with ours, he was delivered
and preserved from a Lion, a Bear, Saul, the Zephims, the Iebusites, Goliath,
the Amalekites, the Courtiers of the King of Achish, Absalom his own
rebellious bowels, Achitophell, that Matchavillian Politician, and Shebae: Our
deliverances have been more for number, greater in respect of danger, by the
inventions, and intentions of our enemies domesticke and foreign: as has
appeared in the particulars, and therefore (which is still my aim and scope,)
our Gratulations should be answerable.

I could enlarge my self further, in paralelling the deliverances of our wise
and peaceable Solomon, our Sovereign Lord the king, with their Solomon, in
this one point of preservation in a double deliverance: For, as the Lord had
elected Solomon, not only to Grace, notwithstanding his fearful (but not
final) fall, but also to the place of a 2. Sam. 7.12.
Prince of God, so dearly beloved as his name 2. Sa. 12.24.25.
imports, that as he was his Father, and he his 2. Sam. 7.14.
Son, so he promised him the inheritance of a spiritual Son, as from
verse. 15.
God, of a natural Son, as from David, even the throne of his father: which
Nathan and his mother 1. Reg. 1.17.2
knew, and David himself both verse. 30.
promised, and performed when time served: so we know the^e were some ^ubbes
and blots and and blocks in the high way, to wipe him of the Kingdom; for
surely had the prevailing faction of Ioab and his brother Adoniah prevailed,
Solomon had been Office perde, his nose had been put of joint, he might have
fisht for a Crown: yea he might have pleaded for his Rethsheba urges this
ver. 21.
life, as the Lamb before the Fox in the fable, he should have had that
favor showed him which Abimelech showed to the Sons of Judge. 9.18.
Gideon, Athalia, to the Kings 2. King. 11.1.
seed, and the reigning Turk at this day to his All are put to the sword,
etc, Knol^ his Turkish history.
brethren, he had been sure to have gone to the pot or been restained:
neither had his case been better, had his second plot taken, and his project
prevayled, in asking the Shunamite to wife, a ground of a second vie, for the
Kingdom: as Solomon was so wife and nasuted, that he smelt out the danger of
his 1. King. 2.22.
drift, so that by Gods overruling providence, both those treasonable plots of
Adoniah were prevented, the one by the care and circumspection of David, the
other by the wisdom and prudencie of Solomon himself: So (if we do not
voluntarily shut our eyes) do we not sensibly, and at this day comfortably and
feelingly perceive, that our Solomon, our Sovereign, has been rescued out of
the jaws of a double danger, the one before he was invested with the Crown of
Albion, the other since the one in Scotland, the other in England; the one, as
under God (whose hand kept him ever as the apple of his eye) by his prowess,
the other by his prudencie, and policy: for as he was lured and trained, to
the house of Earl Gowry, by the false lapwing cries of Alexander Ruthwen, as
he was a hunting inviting him (in his intention) to a bloody breakefast, and
thereby a serpentine wile leading him from the rest of his Nobles, as a sheep
to the slaughter, the butchering executioner standing ready prepared for the
fatal stroke: the Lord cast such a punicke fear, into the heart of him that
was set to be a murderer, that, that dog stood trembling and quaking as an
Espin leaf, (as he that once intended the murder of Darius) as not being able
to look upon our His Majesty is said to have the impression of a Lion on his
breast, the prophecy 2. Es^ 11.27. is by some applied.
Lion and gave withal such a strength, and spirit to his Majesty, that
grapling hand to hand, even with that Alexander, (though naked and the other
armed) he held him play, (the other standing by as a cipher or dumb show) till
by a special providence, his Majesty was overhard, and so speedily relieved
by his valiant followers, who in an unequal Impar congressus, etc.
combat, four to seven, (as appears in the particular passages, thus
epitomized) with the loss of their own blood, and the death of some of their
enemies, brought of his Majesty with honor and safety. But this danger was
but as it were a Northern prologue to a Sotherne Tragedy, if it had been
acted and effected, as it was penned and projected, by these unfortunate
Gentlemen, as their friends call them, Piercie, Catsby, Grant, Faukes, Keys,
Bates, Rookwood, Digby, and the two Winters, for ever sigmatized and branded,
(as Cain with his Genesis 4.15.
mark, as Ieroboan with his 1. King. 16.23 Jeroboam the son of Nebat that
caused Israel to sin.
title, with the odious name of the Powder Traitors: which plot being so deep
and infernal to blow up the Parliament house with powder, and in that one
blast to turn Heaven as it were into Hell, Religion into superstition, peace
into war, liberty into bondage, safety and security, into bloodshed: to
eclypse our Sun, our Moon and our Stars, all at once, to turn the flowers
of Christendom, the worthiest King, the sweetest Prince, the most honorable
Nobility, the most reverent Judges, learned Clergy, loyal Commonaltie, wisest
Patriots there assembled, into mummiamized earth; even in a trice, as it was
thought to be first invented, (as powder and Gunnes by a conjuring Friar) even
by a parliament of wicked spirits, breathing and suggesting it into the heads
and hearts of these malcontents, drunk with blind and bl^u^^e zeal, as the
Crow with Nux vomica: So it was (if comparisons be not odious) as is well
known by all circumstances, as wisely and judiciously found out, and
discovered by his Majesty, by rightly expounding (past a humane reach, the
most intricate quiddities of a mystical letter, as ever Solomon found out the
true mother of a controverted 1. Reg. 3.27.28.
child, or discovered the ambitious and bloody plot of a false brother
Adoniah.

But to draw (at length) together my sails, and to cast ancker in this large
sea of mercies, the Lord has not only given his judgments to the King, but
enlarged his mercies to the Kings Son; we are to look upon the Sun rising,
or else already risen, chiefly to admire the luster of our Illustrious Prince,
after he has been so long hid from our Horizon, as it were shining in another
Climate, yea (in our fears only and jealousies of love) clouded and vayled
from our eyes, but not from our hearts; and now the fogges and mistes of our
fears being dispelled and dispersed, breaking again upon us with more
resplendent beauty to our eyes, more sweet influence of comfort to our
hearts, then ever: we now receiving him as Abraham did his Isaac, or Jacob his
Joseph, with a redundant joy, after we had a while left him, or rather he us
in his expedition from us, which our longings thought too long.

And now to set a stronger edge upon our affections, and to excite our hearts
to a higher strain of thankfulness, for the safe and prosperous return of
our Prince, which we, with the whole Realm of England Scotland, and that part
of Ireland that is not Romanized, yea Belgia, and all Christendom, (our
friends in the same faith) do entertain and welcome with joyful Jubilees:
As those that have past the waves and quicksands, and rocks, and shelves and
Pirates of the Sea, stand upon the shore, and as joyfully, as safely view and
recount with glad, and exhilerated hearts, their forepast perils: So let it be
with us, in this our Sunny calm, let us reflect upon the storms that might
have fallen upon us, (had not the hand of the Almighty withheld them,) in that
hazard which we run in the late absence of the Prince: and as generals which
may as fitly as the right Glove to the right hand be applied to our own
particular, let us consider but these specials: First how many great and famous
Princes, together with other famous personages for Arms and Arts, have died
out of their own country far absent from their friends and favorites,
except such as did accompany them, finding their own country the place of
their birth, another of their burial. Thus Alexander was borne in Q Cart. lib.
1
Macedonia, but died, and was buried in Eusebius. libr. 1.
Babylon, Cyrus borne in Persia, yet slain and dishonourably buried in Justin.
hist.
Scythia, Hanniball of Africa buried in Plutarch. in Pompeyo.
Bithinia, Cleomenes borne in Lacedemonia, intombed in Egypt. Crassus and
Pompey both borne in Rome, but fallen untimely, the one in Assiria, the other
betrayed and butchered in Egypt. So for learned men, Pythagoras borne in Samos,
dead in Metapontus, Virgill born in Mantua, buried in Brundusium, Terence borne
in Carthage, buried in Arcadia: so these worthy Athenians, Themistocles,
Thesius, Solon, were borne in Athens, yet ended their days in Syria, Cyprus,
Persia, and elsewhere: I might add many more, as King Igurthu, borne in
Numidia, buried in Rome: these famoused worthies, the Scipios, Curtij, Decij,
Cornelij, borne in Rome, but dissevered in their deaths over the superficies of
the earth, as Paulus Emilius that died in Cynna: Titus Gracchus in Lucania,
Augustus Caesar in Nola, Traian the good Emperor in the East part of the De
istis omnibus, vide apud Fulgosum, Brusonium, Lycosthenem, Textorem, Zwingerum
in Theatro.
world. Secondly, when I consider how many renowned young Princes, beauteous
blossoms of excellent luster have been in their verdant spring (as a trial or
punishment to their subjects) cut off from the Tree of life, cropped by that
blatrant beast death, their Sun setting on a sudden even in the first rising,
or in their height and solstitiu, going back again by degrees as the Sun in
Ahaz 2. King. 20.11
Dial, 1. Sometimes eclypsed, by the immediate hand of God, as that zealous
young Prince Edward the VI. and the staff of our hopes our so lamented Josiah,
that so fair promising Heroes, whom, (as one calls Julius Scaliger, and Picus
Mirandula) we may truly call worthy and wonderful spirit, now translated to the
God of spirits. 2. some made away by the malice of man, by treasonable plots
and conspiracies, as Britanicus the son of Claudius slain by Nero in the 14
year of his age the nephews of Richard the 3 the Duke of Clarence, and his mate
rooted out by the bloody Celidonian Bore, in their springing buddes, 3. yea
some exposed to death in their very infancy, as Romulus and Renus, that
Lamusius (that was cast into a ditch) young Cyrus, by his grandsire Astyages,
etc. Some by this means perishing, though some again as these nominated
marvailously preserved, 4. some cut off by the sword of the enemy, as Josiah
by Pharaoh 2. Chro. 35.23.24.
Necho that loving Jonathan by the sword of the 1. Sam. 31.2.
Philistines, Ladyslaus the young King of Bohemia, slain by the Turk in a
fatal battle, (together with Hippolitus and This Julius persuaded the young
king to break his league and sworn truce with the Turk, by which he perished.
Julius Cardinals, that held themselves in their pride, as good as Princes) in
the 21. year of his age, 5. others cut off by sicknesses, incurable diseases,
or other dismal accidents (from which the Diadems of Emperors, the Mors
sceptra ligonibus aequa^s.
Crowns of Kings, and the Myters of Popes are not exempted) as Hierome Vrsmus,
who died of a wound, which he received in Rome, Henry Rauzovius crushed to
death by a fall in the waters, Medices the father to the great Duke of Hetruria
slain by the breach of a Gun: as also Heraclas Constantine, with more that
might be named, all these yielding the dew to death, and their debts to nature,
in the 28. year of their age: some by one means some by another, together
with Lodowicke the young king of Hungary, that as he was eagerly pursuing the
Turks, was found dead in a quagmire, in the 20 year of his age. But in the
third place, when I seriously ponder, (paralelling histories with our present
times) not only the perils and pikes, that great Princes have past, in their
expeditions by land, as many Princes and noble Peers of Christendom cut off
in their several unwarrantable voyages, which in their blind zeal and
devious devotion, they unitedly undertook for the recoverie of Jerusalem, the
holy land, from the Turk: But horresco referens, when I deeply ponder, the
perils by Sea, so many, so dangerous, as the Psalmist Psalm. 65.7
reveals, as experience knows, as holy Saints: even Act 27.14 15
Paul himself, and the disciples of our Math. 28.^4.
Savior have tried: from which even Kings and Princes have not been exempted,
the piety of that Troyan Pius Aentas a pietate in Patrem, in patriam.
Aeneas, the greatness and power of Zerxes or Artaxerxes, the felicity and
fortunes of Caesarem veha^ and fortunas, etc.
Caesar, as he called them, being but mean Orators and unprevailing pleaders,
to stay the rage of angry Neptune, when blustering Aeolus has stird and
exasperated him that he roars and fomes, insomuch that the wise Byas held
Seamen to be neither amongst the Nec inter vivos, nec inter mortuos.
living, nor amongst the dead; and it is fathered of Cato, that he resolved
amongst other things, never to go by sea, when he might go by land: to which
perils, if we credit A little book newly extant, of the Prince his return.
Mendoza, which now speaks English, even his Highness was subjected in two or
three particulars, from which the divine providence mercifully preserved him:
Yea when I consider how many Princes Peers and great personages, have perished
in and by the Sea, in which they have bin intombed in their watery graves, as
the Egyptian Pharaoh, Aegeus of Athens, Ajax of Greece, Leander of Abaddon: yea
in our own Realms, a King and a Queen; that as that Icarus icarij^ nomina
feci^ aquis. Ovid.
Icarus before them, from being drowned in the waters, gave denomination to the
waters: and commenting these and many more examples, with that proverbiall adage
verified daily by experience, that quod cuiquam, id cuivis, what happens to any
one, may happen to every one: and notwithstanding, as I said before, all these
justly feared storms, which might have befalne us, in the leaving or losing of
our Prince, at home, or abroad, by sea or by land; laying to heart, the perils
that Kings, and As Humber deviding Yorkshire, and Lincolneshire, and Queen
Hive.
princes are subjected unto, even when they are at home, amongst their friends
and favorites (as they think) even in their Castles, their Courts, their
Palaces, secured by their guard, (as Eglon slain by Ehud, even in his own
parlour Judge. 3. verse. 22 23. Ishboseth murdered by Baanah and 2. Sam. 4. verse
5.6.
Rehab, even in his own bedchamber, as Plautinus in the like case thought to
have dispatched Alexander Severus, by the means of The history is at large in
Guevara, in the life of Severus.
Secundus, as Judith dealt with Hollosernes in the Judith. 13.7.8.
Apocrypha, as the two sons of Senacharib with their father whom they
slaughtered, as he was at his Idolatrous sacrifice) much more subjected to more
eminent, immanent, dangers abroad where they know not their friends from their
foes: and yet notwithstanding all these doubts and dangers, these perils,
occasioning our perplexity, that good Angel that went out with him, as with
Chap. 48 16.
Jacob to Padam Aram with Abraham's servant, to Genesis 24.7.
Mesopotamia, and with that Tobiah in the Apocrypha, being his fidus Achates,
by land, his Palinurus and best Pilot by Sea, his bonus Genius, (if every man,
as every province, much more every This question Iustine Martyr expounded q.
30. and later our Master Calvine lib. 1. Instit. cap. 14.7. The mayor part of
all the Fathers, and the schoolmen affirm it, as Clemens Alexandrinus lib. 6.
stromat. Orig hom. 8. in Genesis Basil. in Psalm. 33. Epiphan. Mer. 51. Chrysostom. ho.
3. ad c. 1. ad Coloss. Cyril. lib. 4. contra Iul. Procopius cum cateris
grounding on Genesis 48.16. on Math. 18. verse. 10. and on Act. 12.11.15.
Prince have his bonus Genius his protecting Angel) both by land and sea in
every coast and country where he came, having reduced and brought him back
again after this large circumference to the English Court, his own center, in
health and honor, prosperity and safety both in body and soul, not so much
as the least infected dust cleaving to his feet, much less any corrupted
Popish air infect his royal blood, such was the antydote and preservative of
grace, of which his highness has given more then Mathematical demonstration,
even since his coming home: Oh this is a mercy to his highness in
particular, to the land and realm, all us in general (interested in him) past
expression Chiefly when I consider how unworthy we have walked of former
mercies, how like these nine cleansed lepers, we have been Luke 17.16.17.
unthankefull, how there is at this day a controversy, whether God is more
merciful to us, or we more sinful against him: we wounding the Lord with his
own weapons, abusing our peace and plenty, and all other Tallents, as Bawdes
and Panders to uncleanesse, as fuel to the fire of our licentiousness, as if
a whorish woman should with these Jewels and love tokens she receives from her
husband, mantaines an adulterous lover or a favorite with these lands and
revenues he has received from his Prince assist and animate a professed
rebel, we employing still Gods favors in the service of sin and satan,
our sins like Ierusalems, yea like Ezeth. 16.49.
Sodoms, pride, idleness, fullness of bread (yea and fullness, foulness of
drink too) extortion, oppression, increasing and springing with our blessings,
the sins of every country, the German drunknesse, Asian luxury, Cretian
lying, Carthaginian perfidiousnesse, Italian wantonness, Jewish usurie,
Turkish cruelty, the French complementall formality, with the vices, and
vanities of every other Nation, meeting in our land, as in their Center,
entertained and retained (as Lawyers their Clients, Physicians their Patients,
Noblemen their jeasters and fools) because they bring sackes to our Milnes,
pleasures to our minds, or profits to our purse, etc. Yea withal, when I
ponder too, how little use we have made of the Lords judgments, plagues,
pestilence, dearths, inundations of waters, sicknesses, diseases, deaths of the
Honorable, of the Martial, of the Senator, and of the Esai. 3.1.2.3.
Counselor, that have been taken from us: but chiefly the eclypsing of that
bright sun, that once shined so gloriously in our hemispher, th'death of that
our Illustrious, and far famoused Prince Henry, as grievous to our hearts, as
the death of that worthy By the malice of Roxama, cut off by his bloody father
Solomon in any great thing that happens, the proverb is, Mustapha is dead.
Mustapha was once to his Martial Ienisaries, or the death of that noble Zisca
to his zealous and valerous Bohemians: of whose death (in not dying since to
any sin, as humbled by this judgment) we have made so little use, that by
our grievous provocations, and as a just punishment of our former ungratious
ingratitudes, in the absence of our Prince, the Lord having lately the Ball at
his foot (as he has ever) to goal it to our grief, whereas he might have
brought on us now stouping plague indeed, and have paid us home once for all,
by many means (which I leave to all Christian hearts to excogitate) yet when
we experimentally see, that as in the first creation, he has brought light
out of darkness, good out of our feared evil, glory to himself praises to
his Majesty, as before prayers, for the preservation of our thrice honored
Prince: Is not all this the Lords doings, and it is marvailous in our eyes? Oh
if David and his Nobles were thankful for the mercies toward their Solomon,
the isntrumental builder of their material, let us be thankful for our
Solomon, the builder of the spiritual Temple, the propagator and continuer of
true Religion, the planter of Gods true worship, the supplanter of Idolatry.
If Cain be avenged seven times, then Lamech seventie times, said that Genes.
4.24.
Polygamist. If the Jews have cause of gratulation seven times for Gods
mercies toward their Church and Commonwealth: Kings and people; we have
occasion seventie times seven times. If the undersong of David's Psalms; much
more of our spiritual Hymns may well run in this torrent to the God of
mercies, for his mercy endures for Psalm. 136. per totum.
ever.

Oh then let all of us this day, this hour, with our mother great Britain, by
all means express our thankfulness, by our rejoycings in the outward and
inward man. Blow with your Trumpets as in the new Moon, strike your Drums,
advance your pikes, (I wish I could say as in England, ring your Bells) make
your bonfires, sound your Cornets, display your Banners, charge and discharge
your Guns, apply your powder, make good use of Match, or as more certain, use
your fire locks, march like Martialists, dance your measures as David did
before the Arc: Let the day of our preservation from the powder treason, of
the Coronation of our King, the reduction of the Prince, be to us as the Jews
^^^h. 9.26
Purim, let them be writ in red Letters, inserted in our Calender, but for ever
these mercies with their memorials, let them be (as Moses commands Deuteronomy.
6.6.7.8.
Israel) be engraven (better then in Brass and Marble,) in the Tablets of our
grateful hearts, perpetuated traditionarily to our Children: children: Let our
Hearts, Lives, Loves, Votes, Voices, Tongues Souls, Spirits, join with all
the blessed Quyre of Angels in Heaven and Saints in Earth, for all his mercies,
to praise the father of mercies: the God of spirits. To whom be honor and
glory of us and in all Churches for ever, and ever. Amen.

FINIS.
ERRATA. Sic Correcta.
1. Iaunnus, for Janus, page 9. post literam f. 2. optative, for operative, p.
12. initio pagina. 3. God, for good ibid. 4. Denuntion, for denuntiation,
initio page 20.5. Farnestius for Far^^sius, initio page 24. 6. of, for often, page
43. Sect. 6. lit (c) page 46. in fine sect. 6. those words must headded, post
verbum Queen Mary with many more, do sympath^^e one with another and hang
together like burres, 7. Zinick, for Zurick. p. 51. post lit. (y) 8. wafted,
for wafted p. 53 post lit (b) 9. Menius, for Mevius, p. 59 post (q) 10 page ^6.
in fine, pawn they, for, they pawn, 11 p. 97. prolonging, for, prolonging
post (f) 12 p. 99 pri^^aces, for, privaces, linea prima 13. p. 104. post (u)
bewitching, for butchering 14. p. 106. Zapirus, for, Zopir^s post (f) 15. p.
110. mike, for milk post (w) page 111. in lit. (m) it is, for is it. 16 page
136. chippe, for chirpe post lit. (z) 17 p. 138. initiation, for, imitation
post lit. (p)

In the Margino also there be some maine defects which yet with your pen may be
cured. page 25. lit. (x) Bols^ecus, for Bolsecus, p. 33. lit. (q) Magnetis
nigra, for, Mira, page 120. lit. (f) add to intolerable pride, and deleatur
where Caesar: make it as Pelargus of the p. 9^. lit. (s) Hexapla in Lucadum,
for in Exodum. with sodoe other of less moment.


