A Spiritual Trumpet: EXCITING AND preparing to the Christian WARFARE.

Sounded first in the utmost parts of the Lords Camp, to one wing of the
Army, now in the midst for the benefit of all.

By WILLIAM IEMMAT, Master of Arts, and Preacher of Gods word at Lechlade in
Gloucester shire.

Cyp. epist. ad Cornel. Qui in pace militibus suis futuram praenunciat pugnam,
dabit militantibus in congressione victoriam.

LONDON, Printed by I. H. for John Bartlet at the gilt Cup in Cheape-side. 1624.

To all the LORDS Captains and Soldiers, W. I. wishes courage and victory.
GOod friends, my purpose in publishing these few leaves, is, to rub up the
memory of those many good Treatises, already extant, concerning Temptations and
the Christian Warfare, M. Tailor, M. Downam, etc.
and to bring them into use. Pity it is to see, how so many and so good helps
are generally neglected; and people for most part live, as if they had never
heard of spiritual enemies, neither in the Ministry, nor otherwise.
Certainly it is one maine stratageme of our adversary, the devil: persuading,
either that there are no such black fiends to be feared, or that they have no
power to tempt or corrupt them, through the goodness of their hearts, and the
strength of their faith: and working them to busy themselves about other
matters, worldly affairs, lusts, vanities, and the treachery of pretended
friends, true enemies. While they run at large in these things, they shall
neglect him, and his undermining. Whereto if we add the sensuality of carnal
men and women, who cannot look up to things above sense, and will not when
they are called on, we have (I think) the full cause of this universal
security.

One of these rocks is commonly run upon. The most think not on it, whether
there be any devil or no. Many epsy a devil, but rather in others than
themselves: And after the sin is committed, not before: And it must be a foul,
gross, open sin too, or else it goes without observation. The multitude is
of opinion, that bare spetting at the mention of the devil, and defying of
him, is sufficient: And so I have marked in the very treating of these things
publicly. This is an unreprovable resolution, and must not be called into
question. And in other places, where this is laughed at for great simplenes (as
indeed it is) yet through carelessness, or worldliness, or voluptuousnes, or
other profaneness, the devil keeps up his strong holds, and suffers in no
manner as he should. The story of these wars is all they affect and regard.
Yea Gods own people do not acqu^^ themselus so generously as they ought, in
this co^bat; but, by the former evils, take great foiles, and hinder their
progress in grace exceedingly. And some of them who resist the devil well and
carefully in respect of sanctification and the exercises thereof, yet in
respect of consolation and those blessed privileges which their heavenly Father
allows them in Christ, do not resist him, but pass their days
vnco^fortably. But these are more to be pitied, than blamed: Yet withal must
bead monished, to resist in this kind as well as the other: because the devils
malice is seen in this, as in that, and God has promised victory, as well as
enjoined resistance.

If I may (as a Trumpeter) stir up the Lords Camp to consider better of these
enemies, I have my desire. For me^ of the former sort is the former voice of
this Trumpet, in the Direction: For those of the latter sort, the latter voice,
in the Consolation. Take both together, and you shall acquit your selves like
men, like men of God.

Lately I endeavored by a small watchword to arm Gods people against the
malignity of the world, S. Matthewes contiersion.
which at the worst, can but put us to the loss of all worldly comforts, and
must still leave unto us God, and Christ, and our great Comforter, and our
graces, and integrity of our consciences, and the glory of heaven. And now I
attempt the like concerning this Arch-enemie, the god of the world, 2 Cor. 4.4.
the prince of darkness. He has many ways to assail us, and we have many
weapons to repel him, with promise thereof, and victory, and a crown of
triumph. There is no one thing that can discourage us, if we be not wanting to
our selves, in watchfulness, in conscionable use of the means, and holy
endeavors. Therefore let us up and be doing, and our God will go out with us,
to assist us, and foil our enemies.

But I will not pre^et my self in the ensuing exhortations Take the^ (good
Reader) as they are; and though they give not so strong and shrill a sound, as
in the hand of the Lords other Trumpeters, yet a distinct sound they give (I
trust) and such as may prepare good Christians to the battle.

The Lord of hosts who has ordained these conflicts, and has said to his
Prophets and their successors, Esa. 58.1
Cry aloud, lift up thy voice like a Trumpet, and Set the Trumpet to thy mouth,
Hos. 8.1.
vouchsafe a blessing to these my endeavors, and give his people a heart to
look about them, that, while we keep out carnal enemies, we admit not
spiritual, and lose not our souls by security while we preserve our bodies
and outward estates by magnanimity. What will it prosit a man to win the whole
world, and lose his own soul? So I rest, thirsting for a good issue of all
these trialls and skirmishes, to you and all the Lords Warriors, that I may
rejoice with you in the day of our full Triumph.

Lechlade. Nouemb. 27. 1624. W. IEMMAT.

A short view of the Contents of this Book.
THe text consists of a Direction, and Consolation.

In the Direction, six things are handled.

I.
The Doctrine proposed and proved. page 3.
II.
The Object, or in what the Devil must be resisted. 1. In his own proper
suggestions, moving Unto evil. p. 7. From good. p. 8.
2. In the temptations of his instruments: whereof 3. sorts. p. 10.

III.
The means whereby be must be resisted. 1. Rules of Preparation: which are
three Sound illumination, in the points. p. 19. Sound humiliation p. 26. Sound
reformation. p. 28.
2. Rules of Oppugnation. Some means are Principal: as 1. The Word. 2. Faith.
3. Hope. 4. Patience. 5. Prayer. p. 30.
Less Principal and auxiliary, as 1. Comfort of conscience. p. 42. 2.
Communion of Saints. p. 43.

IV.
The manner how the Devil must be resisted. Early: in respect of Our life:
three reasons. p. 46. Any one temptation to sin. p. 56. Gouragiously:
wherefoure grounds of courage. p. 60. Universally. p. 66. Wifely: where three
Rules of wisdom in resistance. p. 68. Constantly. p. 75.

V.
The reasons why he must be resisted. 1. The nature of the resisted: That
evil one: diverse ways. p. 77. Satan: an enemy.
To God. p. 81. To Christ. p. 84. To the Gospel. p. 86. To eminent men. p. 89.
To holy and wholesome orders. p. 90. To every particular Christia. p. 93.
The Devil: accusing
God to man. p. 95. Man to God p. 96. Man to man. p. 98. Man to himself. p.
100. Virtues for vices, and vices for virtues. p. 102. In his instruments. p.
103.

2. The nature of the resister. p. 106. 3. The mischiefs of being foiled,
Privative. p. 109. 3. The mischiefs of being foiled, Positive. p. 111.


VI.
The Uses of the point. 1. To bring out of request the easy life of many. p.
112. 2. A Caveat against security and lukewarmenesse in the godly. p. 119. 3.
An exbortation to examine our selves: where eight marks of right resistance.
p. 133. 4. A confutation of them who dislike such treatises. p. 162. 5.
Commendation and encouragement to them that so resist the Devil. p. 166.

In the Consolation, containing the Devils flight, are five things.

I. What it is not. p. 171. II. What is it. Partial and temporary. p. 174.
Total and final. p. 176.
III. What lesson we learn: Victory shill be to them that resist. IV. What
reasons here are for it. 1. The faithful promise of the mighty God. p. 181.
2. The valor of our Captain. 182. 3. The validity of our armor: showed in
the parts. p. 184. 4. We have a bruised enemy. 189. 5. We need some
refreshment after skirmishes. p. 192.
V. What Uses are made hereof. 1. Comfort to Gods Warriors: where four
Answers to the Objection concerning the tediousness of this combat. p. 196.
2. Fond are they that sear perpetual molestation in Christianity. p. 204. 3.
Go on in resisting. p. 208. 4. Use times of respite well. p. 211. 5. It is
folly to lay all slips on the Devil: for he flies, if he be resisted. p. 214.

In the Appendix (out of Genesis 3.15.) gather these things.

I. Seven notes of right enmity against the Devil. 1. If it be of and from
God. p. 220. 2. If it be for God and his glory. p. 223. 3. If we resist him
duly. p. 226. 4. If we avoid places where he haunteth. p. 232. 5. If we
earnestly beg of God strength against him. p. 236. 6. If we be careful to
give him no advantage. p. 239. 7. If we zealously endeavor to thrust down his
Kingdom in others. p. 343.
II. Areproofe to three sorts of men. 1. Of them that think not on this
enmity. p. 247. 2. Of them that embrace the contrary amity. p. 251. 3. Of
them that help the Devil in stead of hindering him. p. 255.
III. Motives unto enmity against the evil spirits. Consider, 1. What they
are in respect of God. p. 259. 2. What they are unto us. p. 261. 3. What they
are in themselves. p. 263. 4. God hates them vnreconcilablie. p. 265. 5. So
always have Gods faithful servants. p. 266. 6. This enmity is the ground, or
companion of true grace. p. 267. 7. There are certain Meditations to effect
this. p. 271.
IV. A testimony of Cyprian, with the Application and Conclusion. p. 275.
A SPIRITVALL TRVMPET.
JAMES 4.7. Resist the devil, and he will fly from you.


I Think it not needful to look after any coherence between these words and
the rest of the context. Our Apostles purpose is to give good counsel to these
scattered Jews as concerning the life and power of godliness. For the form
of it, none more forward than they: and therefore he prescribes them such
substantial duties, as might indeed commend them to God, as the other could
not. Among the rest this is one, Resist the devil, and he will fly from you.

The parts whereof are two, Parts 2.
a Direction, and a Consolation: or a Duty directed unto, and the blessed
Fruit promised to them that perform it.

Resistance to be made upon the devil.
From the former we learn, that it is the duty of Gods people to make
resistance upon Satan, till they have given him the foil. A devil there is,
most subtle and malicious, who seeks by all means possible, to rob us of the
inheritance of the Saints in light, and make us miserable like himself: and
our care must be, to oppose, to resist, to disappoint him. With S. James
accords S. Paul, Ephesians. 4.27 Give no place to the devil: yield not an inch. And
with them both agrees S. Peter, 1 epist. 5, 8, 9. Your adversary the devil.
Whom resist steadfast in the faith: (...), he stands against you, therefore do
you withstand him: he will be sure to give no ground, till he needs must,
therefore turn not your backs upon him, stand your ground.

Here four material questions come to be answered, Four questions proposed.
the solution whereof will give great light to the Christian Combatant.

Quest. 1. Wherein should we resist the devil?

I. Resist him in his own person.
Ans. In two things. First, in his own proper suggestions. He makes not
dainty of doing his work, yea in his own person, though the Defendant be
never so mean and base in the world. None so good, but he hopes to make him
bad: None so bad, but he hopes to make him worse, or at least to keep him as
bad as he is: therefore he refuses not to present himself to any, but in a
diverse manner; sometimes visibly, sometimes and more commonly, inuisibly;
sometimes pleasingly, sometimes terribly; sometimes by outward objects,
sometimes by inward motions, and that more ordinarily. Being a spiritual
nature, he easily applies himself to our spirits, our fancies and minds: and,
unless he be well watched and withstood, he makes great battery upon the
soul, darkens the judgment, benummes the conscience, persuades the will, and
distempers all the affections: and then does his best to con^inue this disorder.

Motions to evil. Vnde venis? ab homicidijs, a sanguinib. ab adulterijs, etc.
Orig. in Job 1.7
As for example: The devil put into Judas his heart to betray Christ, and
prevailed. He put into David's heart to number the people, and prevailed. He
put into Eues heart to swallow the forbidden fruit, and her own bane, and
prevailed likewise. So at this day, by the instinct of the devil it is, that
men are carried along to pride, to covetousness, to uncleanness, and the most
loathsome courses, Matthew. 8.32.
as the swine into the lake. In this resist him.

Disswasions from good: as 1. from zeal.
Resist him also in motions to lukewarmnesse, or apostasy. A chief part of his
imploiment is, to hinder good, that either it may not be strengthened, or not
continued. It is he that disswades men from care in the pursuit of religion;
What need they be so hot? and what encouragement does the world give them for
such peevish courses? Master, spare thy self, Matthew. 16.22.
it shall not be so unto thee, thou need not be at so much charges in the
matter of piety. Here is a dart of the devil, here resist him, and say as
Christ to Peter, Verse. 23.
Get thee behind me, Satan, for thou art an offense unto me.

Many a man he persuades, 2. From constancy.
not to hold out in his religious beginnings, shows him the course of the
world, the backe-slidings of some, the harshnesse of his courses, and the
pleasures or profits that he might have; and, Job 2.9.
Do thou still retain thine innocence? blaspheme God, and die; forswear
thy profession, and all; take thy swindge, and please thy self, thou will
never be younger. This is the black voice of a black spirit. Herein resist
him.

II. In his instruments.
Secondly, resist him in the temptations of his instruments. That he may leave
no stone unturned, to advantage himself, or disadvantage man, he furnishes
men with variety of evil arts, and makes them his factors, to deal for him
in all places. For what? Though simple people take the devil for their enemy,
yet can they think so of their brethren? will their own flesh and blood
deceive them? Yes: he has many Agents whom he sets on work to deceive the
world, Three sorts of factors for the devil.
and loses not his labor.



they nothing else but do that openly, which Satan does secretly: and
therefore they are called his Ministers, 2 Cor. 11.15.

frowns, and checks, and vile usage, to make them weary of holiness. Others
have fire and faggot to command, and any extremities they please; and these can
violently make away the godly, till the hour of darkness be ouerpast.

Al these receive their power from the dragon, Reu. 13.4. and come with his
commission, as Christ intimates, Ioh. 14.30. The Prince of this world comes:
that is, in Judas the traitor, in the Jews my accusers, in the soldiers my
executioners, in the people that wagged their heads, railed on me, mocked me,
bid me come down from the cross, and save my self.

Thus we see, how Satan lays about him both by himself, and by his
instruments, to put us to the worse. In both these, suggestions inward, and
temptations outward, we must make resistance upon him. And this of the first
question.

Quest. 2. With what should we resist him? for of our selves we are bare, and
naked, and unable to encounter him.

Insufficient weapons for this warfare, three kinds.
Answ.



you must sprinkle your selves with holy water, carry a Crucifix about you, and
cross your selves well at your mouth, forehead, eyes, ears, breast, and other
parts. These are the strawes which the devil has taught men to fight withal,
and in the mean time laughs at them in his sleeue: Exire se saepe dicit, and
fall. t. epist. ad Magnum.
often pretending (as Cyprian observed in Exorcists) to go forth, and leave
the servant of God, but deceiving, etc.

But ask counsel at the wisdom of God, and we shall find armor of proof
indeed. The word tells of spiritual scourges (as the same Father elsewhere
calls them) wherewith the devils are tortured; Torquentur spiritalibus
flagris, and potestate diuiua: lib. ad Demetrianum.
and of the power of God, whereby only they can be vanquished.

The weapons that are sufficient, in two heads.
The means then of resistance stand in two sorts of Rules: 1. Of Preparation,
2. Of Oppugnation. With some things the Christian must be furnished before
hand, and some other things he must use in the skirmish it self.

The first in three things: 1. Preparatiue.
1. Sound illumination, 3. In special.
or knowledge. 2. Sound humiliation, or repentance. 3. Sound reformation, or
holy life. Never go into the field without these: for these are necessary, and
they put metal into a man, as one that may be bold.

1. Knowledge. of 3. points.
First, the spiritual warrior must be careful to get sound illumination, that
he may know why, and in what he must resist. Therefore he must labor to see,
Ges. 3.15. I have put enmity between thy seed and her seed; he shall break
thine head, and thou shall bruise his heel. Consider, the battle is Gods, the
quarrel is Gods, the armor Gods, the strength Gods, and the valor and
victory are Gods alone. And say as David, 1 Samuel 17.45.
I come to thee in the name of the Lord: I come not unsent, without just cause,
commission, or authority: no, the God of heaven preast me into the field, he
gave me my pressemoney, and liuerie, and bade me fight, and so I will. Note.
God makes peace for us with himself, by the atonement of Jesus Christ; with
the creatures, by virtue of that covenant; with one another, by the operation
of the Holy Ghost: but no peace with Satan; his sin is unpardonable, therefore
himself altogether unpeaceable, unreconcilable. Know this.

Cor. 2.11. We are not ignorant of his devices. How shall a Captain be able to
enter combat with the enemy, if he know not his power, plots, stratagems,
ambushments? What King goes to war, Luke 14.31.
and sits not down first, and takes counsel, whether he be able with ten
thousand to meet him that comes against him with twenty thousand? Should he
go forth a little way, and then fly, or send for conditions of peace? Here
therefore know, that the devil is an old serpent, the wisest of all beasts, a
beast of seven heads, and every head has many turnings and windings* Do thy
best to take an anatomy of them. Read the works of those godly men, who have
expounded Christ's Temptations: Especially learn what it is wherein thy self
art most assaulted; and know these things more by practice, than by history.

Thirdly, as the sons of Sceua, Act. 19.14.
who would needs ferret the fox out of his own hole, to their own shame and
harm: But he will acknowledge his unskillfulness and faint-heartednesse, and
say to himself as Saul sometime said to David, Alas, thou art a child, thou
art not able to fight with this man of war, this Goliath of hell, 1 Samuel
17.33. He will fly out of himself for strength, betake him to the banner of
Christ, and look for the accomplishment of the vision showed to Constantine,
Pol. Virgil.
(...), that is (in the language of Scripture) to be a conqueror, and more
than a conqueror, through him that loved him, Romans 8.37.

This as concerning illumination.

Next, 2. Repentance.
the spiritual warrior must look carefully to sound humiliation. If he will
look his enemy in the face, and fight the field manfully, he must first make
all sure at home, and see, that there be no homebred enemies, and lurking
traitors within his own walls. See Josh. 7.10.11, 12. Every sin is an
adversary to thy soul, yea a tyrant, and must not be suffered to reign in
thy mortal body, lest it set God at ods with thee. If there were no devil in
hell, yet something in thy self is sufficient to foil thee. Sin is
absolutely evil, as Satan is not. Therefore vnroost this cursed brood, humble
thy self before God, put away the accursed thing: so shall thou be able to
stand, where otherwise thou must needs fall. It is our Apostles method in this
place; first, submit your selves to the Lord; then, resist the devil: and
verse 10. Humble your selves in the sight of the Lord, and he shall lift you
up; higher than Satan can reach you, or pull you down.

3. Holiness and integrity of life.
Further, the spiritual warrior must have a special care of sound
reformation, or holy conversation. For this is that which Satan most labors
against, either to prevent it, or interrupt it; and that which most confounds
him in his enterprises: therefore it is called the breast plate of
righteousness, Ephesians. 6.14. because it keeps off gunshot, darts, spears, and
all the devils munition. As Job, by sound holiness in his heart and life,
swome through a great stream of violent oppositions. Pro. 28.1. The righteous
is as bold as a Lion: and so every good man sindes, that uprightness is a
great prop to boldness and confidence.

II. Oppugnatiue.
Now to the Rules of Oppugnation: that is, such as whereby he may either set
upon Satan, or keep him off from giving him the stab. A Christian prepared,
and furnished as before, must see, that he take unto him the whole armor of
God, Ephesians. 6.13.
and use it, and still keep it about him.

In 5. several pieces.
The several pieces hereof are these:

First, the word of God is the sword of the Spirit, Ephesians. 6.17. able to cut
off Satan's temptations, and preserve our graces. Christ still resisted him with
this, It is written; Matt. 4. Luke 4.
which put him so to a Nonplus, that he was not able to reply upon him in the
same kind. This shows us the validity of the word: It is profitable to
exhort, to reprove, to convince, and instruct in righteousness, 2 Timothy 3.16. No
error in doctrine or manners, but may be suppressed by it: no truth, no holy
duty but is begun, and continued, and perfected by it: Therefore buckle this
sword of the Spirit upon thee; Psalm. 119.11.
Hide the word in thy heart, that thou may not sin against God. Oppose
Scripture to all temptations; as of earthlinesse, Col. 3.1, 2. Seek the things
which are above: set your affections on things above, and not on things upon
earth. Of pride and vainglory, Phil. 2.3. Let nothing be done through strife
or vainglory, but in lowliness of mind let each esteem other better than
themselves. Of looseness and timorousness in matter of religion, Reu. 3.19.
Repent, and be Zealous: and if any tell you this is peevish, or the like, tell
them again, No, it is good to be always Zealously affected in a good matter,
Gal. 4.18.

Secondly, faith in the Son of God is a special weapon for resisting the
devil: 1 Pet. 5.8, 9. Whom resist, steadfast in the faith; firmly assenting to
the whole truth, especially of the Gospel, with application of it to ones
self for justification, and direction, and salvation. Ephesians. 6.16. Above all,
take the shield of faith, wherewith ye shall be able to quench all the fiery
darts of the wicked. Faith, how it is so helpful in this warfare.
And thus faith can help us, partly for that it lateth hold upon Christ, who
has broken the Serpents head, and put away the enmity, and reconciled the
Father to us: (so it can well stand between us and Satan; for, Romans 8.33, 34.
how can he condemn, when God justifies?) and partly, in that it draws
virtue from Christ, both in the example of his life, and by the power of his
death and resurrection, to overcome as he has overcome: He is the Head, and
his influence quickneth the whole Christian, to bestirre himself as the member
of such a powerful Head.

hope, to wit, an assured expectation of the mercy of God, that he will surely
provide means for us to hold out in grace unto glory. This is called the
helmet of salvation, 1 Thessalonians. 5.8. And why a helmet? Because when Satan raineth
down his snares as thick as hail (from the high places where he has his
abode, Ephesians. 6.12.) and vexes the Christian with threats of hell and damnation,
then hope lifts the heart upward, to a power that is higher than he, who has
said, I will not leave thee, Heb. 13.5.
nor forsake thee. It looks to God above hope, and against hope; saying,
Surely he is faithful, though I be unfaithful: He has called me effectually,
and though I of my self be not able to do his will, yet he will do it: 1 Thessalonians. 5.24.
He has begun a good work in me, and will surely finish it: As for thee,
Satan, thou art a lier, I believe thee not; I will use the means of
perseverance conscionably, and then a button for thee; thou art a dog in a
chain, wounded with a deadly wound, and the God of peace will tread thee
shortly under my feet, Romans 16.20.

Fourthly, Patience is a special part of the Christians Armor: Hereby he shall
be able to possess his soul, which otherwise will be loft through
fretfulnesse and impatience, Luke 21.19. Satan is incessant in his malice, to
weary us out by importunity. He preuailes too often in his enterprises, to
the disturbing of our peace and confidence: and hangs diverse clogs at our
heels, to keep us from fighting; as namely, the frowns of acquaintance, the
unnaturalness of friends, the reuilings of neighbors, and the violence of
secular authority; that, if one cannot dishearten us, another may, or all put
together, may not fail. So that we have need of patience, Heb. 10.36.
that we may receive the promises. Therefore while we walk among these
snares, and thorns, and rubs in our way, we must get our feet shod with the
preparation of the Gospel of peace, Ephesians. 6.15.

Fifthly, Prayer is the bond that ties all the other pieces together: as there,
verse 18. Praying always with all prayer and supplication in the Spirit, and
watching thereunto with all perseverance. Prayer how it is helpful.
Pray, to epsy a temptation when it comes: pray, to be able to use the
armor which God has put upon us, to be resolute and courageous for the truth,
to be delivered from evil, that we may not enter into temptation, or be left
to our selves and Satan's courtesy: And when the battle goes sore against us,
cry aloud (as Iehosaphat in the army) for aid and succor from God, and say,
Lord rebuke Satan, magnify thy power in confounding him, and strengthening me,
and give me grace to resist unto blood.

These are the maine weapons for resisting Two subsidiarie aids.
the devil: For the better managing whereof, use these two helps.

good and a pure conscience. Dubbe it not with the filthiness of any sin:
let none be admitted willingly, or wittingly, nor continue unrepented of: for
this would choke thy conscience, when it should have a voice to check thee.
Yea labor on the contrary, to fortify and cheer it Hic murus aheneus esto,
Nil conscire sibi, nulla pallescere culpa.
up with the sweet testimony of uprightness and integrity: So shall it be
bold to speak for thee, and answer Satan. Mark also the motions, and checks,
and recoilings of it: and make a good use of them; because this tends to the
application of the former weapons.

Secondly, live indeed in the Communion of Saints. As thou beleeuest it, so
make use of it; which is, by joining thy forces with the rest of Gods people.
Pray for the brethren who endure the same skirmishes abroad in the world: help
them with thy counsel, and experiences: and be as ready also to take profit
from them: suffer the word of admonition, yea crave it, depend upon their lips
that they may feed thee: descrie what policies of Satan thou have met withal,
and wherein he is most happily repulsed: Compare trials, and conquests, and
counsels: Join all together, and you shall all speed the better: So did the
Apostles and Disciples against the rage of the devil in his instruments, the
chief Priests and their whole Council, Act. 4.23-31.

And this be spoken of the second question.

Quest. 3. In what manner should we resist the devil? or what are the
conditions of sound resistance?

1. Resist the devil betimes.
Answ. First, resist him early and timely; and that, both in respect of thy
life, and in respect of any one sin, whereby he would have evil done, or good
left undone.

1. In the beginning of thy life, 3. reas.
For the former: Begin thy life with this holy combat, and end it in the same.
Thy whole being on the face of the earth, from thy birthday to thy dying-day,
is a continual warfare. Thou art borne in a camp, among soldiers and armor:
Thy Parents by their profession are of the train band, fighting under the
conduct and colors of the Lord Jesus: And can thou expect immunitie? expect
it not: no part of thy life is free from hazzards; therefore let none be free
from watchfulnes, from resistance.

And the equity hereof stands upon three other reasons.

happy, and himself so miserable: laid about him, how to strip our fathers and
us of all those robes of blessedness, wherewith God had clothed us, and leave
us naked to his own condemnation: and he never ceased till he had effected
his purpose. And is not this a good argument, to resist him timely? What brave
or generous spirit can put up such an injury? What? no revenge for so great an
indignity? Ioh. 8.44.
Shall Satan be a man slayer from the beginning, and wilt not thou be a
deuill-slaier (at least a resister of the devil) from thy beginning? Did he
owe thee a spite, when thou had done him no wrong, and do thou owe him no
ill will, since he has done thee the greatest wrong that can be? Consider his
forwardness to undo thee, and be thou as forward to oppose him.

any notable instrument to repair his decayed Church, and defeat Satan of his
malicious purposes, but he has presently bestirred himself to suppress and
hinder it, and make it forcelesse. Abel was a most faithful and holy man, very
hopeful, and likely to establish the pure worship of God in his family and
posterity, if he had lived: therefore what should the devil but cut him off
quickly, and shed his blood by his own brother? Iehosua was willing and ready
to do much good for the Temple of the Lord at Jerusalem: therefore what should
Satan but stand at his right hand and resist him? Paul, Zech. 3.1.
immediately upon his conversion set himself to preach the Gospel, and plant
Churches among the nations: therefore what should Satan but set himself to
stir up tumults, and do his best every way to hinder him? The Church, 1 Thessalonians. 2.18.
the Spouse of Christ, is a woman, Revel. 12.1. clothed with the Sun, that is,
in the robes of Christ the Sun of righteousness: Mal. 4.2.
and the moon under her feet, that is, disesteeming and trampling upon all
these vain and transitory things in the world: and has upon her head a
crown of twelve stars, that is, professes the doctrine of the twelve
Apostles, which she accounts her crown and glory. This woman, being married
to Christ, is often with child by her husband, to the subversion of the
kingdom of darkness. Now mark the disposition of the Prince of darkness in
this case, verse. 4. He still plaieth rex in the Church, casts down a third
part of the stars from heaven to earth, that is, many Preachers and
Professors of the truth, partly by erroneous doctrine, and partly by a profane
course of life. But especially if there be a child to be ^orne, who shall rule
all nations with a rod of iron, that is, mightily subject them to the obedience
of the Gospel; if so, now he uses more than ordinary diligence to spoil the
birth, and devour the child: so says the Spirit, The dragon stood before the
woman which was ready to be delivered, to devour her child as soon as it was
borne.

Never does there peep a special beautiful plant in the garden of God, but
incontinently he does what he can to crop it away. Therefore see herein his
malice, and learn by himself to resist him early. Shall he be watchful for
evil, and we not watchful for good, or to prevent evil?

Thirdly, Therefore look to it. Where is the word of an honest man? where the
word of a Christian? If thou have not hitherto resisted the devil, begin now,
foreslow no more time.

2. In the first proposal of any temptation. Centere caput serpentis, i^caue
primam peccati insinuationem, Cornelia Lapide in Genes. 3.
Again, resist him early (as in respect of thy life, so) in respect of any
sinful motion put into thy mind, whether to call thee from good, or egg thee
on to evil. These are matters that need no deliberation, and to consult with
flesh and blood in these cases, is most dangerous. What should fire do near
to gunpowder, or flax? Yet such is our corrupt nature to the temptations of
Satan: easily conceiues mischief, and brings forth confusion. And what should
Satan, that subtle fox, be suffered to set foot within the doors of the house
of our soul? will he not soon wind in his whole body?

If Eve will vouchsafe to enter parley with the serpent, and make a demurre
concerning the commandment, will he not soon work her to pride,
infidelity, rebellion, and apostasy? Therefore it will be good for the sons
of Adam, Genes. 39.
to do as Joseph did toward his lascivious Mistress. Being solicited to
folly, he never fumbles for the matter, never says, I pray give me time and
leisure to consider of it, yet I cannot, but I may hereafter: no, but he gives
her a plain denial at first, Verse. 8, 9.
God forbid that I should do this thing and sin against God, against my
master, against thee his wife, my own self, and the holy covenant of the Lord.

Stultis vanisque promissionibus nullus a cord Christiano dari debet accessus,
sed primis utillation bus obuiare debet ambigens manu. Cyp. de ieiumo and
tentat.
He that means to foil spiritual wickednesses, must give the onset betimes.
He must not strain his wits, and try whether he can stretch his conscience
to swallow some iniquity or other, and then devise some shift or excuse to
cover the filthiness, but give it a clear repulse at the first proposal.

And this is the first condition of right resisting the devil.

II. Resist the devil courageously.
Secondly, resist him courageously. Here we say to Gods people, as Iahaziel the
Leuite sometimes said to Iehosaphat, and the men of Judah, going to fight
against a great multitude of Moabites and Ammonites, 2 Chronicles. 20.15. Fear you
not, neither be afraid for this great multitude; for the battle is not yours,
but Gods: Fear not the whole legions of hellish infernal spirits, nor faint
because of their forces; for if you knew all, you would see you have small
reason to be afraid. In the wars of men, there are many things that put
courage into a man; as for example, goodness of the cause, valor of the
Captain, trustiness of the fellow soldiers, and weakness of the enemy. All
this, and more than this, may be seen in this consideration.

4. grounds of courage in this fight.
whose is the battle? not ours, but Gods: therefore most just, most holy, most
equal and reasonable. It is only to preserve his glory to him alone, by the
killing of sin, and the maintaining of his own Ordinances: and consequently
to deliver poor captive souls from hell and damnation. And why should Satan
rob God of his honor, and his people of salvation? Who would not be manfull in
such a quarrel?

who is our Captain? is it not the Lion of the tribe of Judah? is it not he,
who overthrew the devil alone in a single combat? He, Reu. 12.7, 8.
who thrust down the dragon and his angels, that their place was no more in
heaven? He, who has him in chains, and confines him when he list, to the
bottomless pit? Who would not do his best service under such a victorious
leader?

Thirdly, who are our fellow soldiers? are they not the righteous, who are
bold as lions? are they* not such as will resist unto blood, Heb. 12.4.
and never give over till the field be won? Are not the holy Angels on our
side, Heb. 1.14.
who are the fiery chariots, and glorious armies of the Lord of hosts? and do
not all the godly, in all parts of the world, closely follow the same cause?
Who would not be courageous, when he stands with such champions?

who are our enemies? are they not the enemies of God and al godliness?
tortured with the torments of an accusing conscience, and partly with the
torments of hell? Are they not of a crauenly brood, which will she if they be
resisted? Who would not stand out the brunt of the battle, when he knows his
enemies shall run away?

Think on these things, and be not offended either with the multitude, or the
blackness, or the violence, or the importunity of Satan's temptations,
therefore to flinch back, and cease fighting. Remember it is his nature to do
his best against thee, by doing the worst, in the worst manner that may be; and
when he has spent his powder, he must be gone.

This is the second condition: Be courageous.

III. Resist him universally.
Thirdly, resist the devil universally, in all his feats and arts of deceiving.
Quench all the fiery darts of the wicked, Ephesians. 6.16. One poisoned dart is
enough to kill thee, one lust to condemn thee. Satan is like that Champion who
said, Let me smite him once, 1 Samuel 26.8.
I will not smite him the second time. Keep but one sin, which either the
Ministry, or thy conscience checketh, and Satan desires no more; that one is
too much. What auailes, whether a man die of the pestilence, or of the famine?
by a sword, or by a bullet? if he die, it is all one to him. Therefore give no
place to the devil: labor to be as Christ, who was good enough for him at
every turn; the Prince of the world came, and found nothing in him; he
outstood all Satan's malice, and frustrated all his policy, Luke 4.13. When he
had ended all the tentation, he departed from him for a season.

IV. Resist him wisely.
Fourthly, resist the devil wisely: March craft with subtlety, and oppose
serpentine wisdom to the wisdom of the serpent. A man that has a wily and
politic fellow to deal withal, had need summon his wits together, and do
his best to defeat his counsels: So in this case, the Christian who has to do
with Satan, may, and must use many points of heavenly policy. Let him
therefore consider oftentimes with himself, in his retired thoughts,

Three points of wisdom in resisting the devil.
First, that the devil is exceeding subtle to counterfeit a truce, and make as
though he were our friend, and meant us no harm; only to make us secure, and
heedlesse of what we have to do: for ease slaieth the foolish, Prou. 1.32.
See the straragem of the Danites against careless Laish, in Judge. 18.7.27.28.
then think upon the devil: and learn to suspect that estate, which is
without suspicion, without jealousy, without watchfulness.

those that seem to fawn, as well as those that make the hair stand on end,
they are so odious. For why? he knows well how to make a little sin a
shooing-horn to draw on a greater. He that will be brought by custom to swear
neatly, and dally with oaths, faith and troth, or the like, will also be
brought by a stronger occasion to swear bloudily and roaringly. He that in
ease and peace falls back from his care and diligence in good duties, may fear
he shall easily be induced by persecutions to fall quite away. A scorner now,
will be a Bonner hereafter. Thieves doubt not, if they can put in a little boy
at a window, but the house is their own. So here. For why? A small sin
entertained and cherished, stifleth the conscience, strengthens corruption,
deadeth the heart, and grieueth Gods Spirit. Know this, and with-stand Satan in
such, as well as in other sins. Here is wisdom.

Thirdly, maintain, and grace, and adorn it: for this is quite contrary to
the devils machinations. It was notable policy in Scipio, when no means would
serve to drive Hannibal out of Italy, then to set upon Carthage, and so draw
him homeward, to defend his own. So that Christian, who is continually
infested by the malicious temptations of the devil, may deal very wisely, if
he vex him again, by enlarging the kingdom of grace: not only saving himself
harmless, but disaduantaging this his desperate adversary by all means
possible.

V. Resist him constantly.
Lastly, resist the devil constantly: not for a day, or for a month, or for a
year, or two, or three, or more, but to thy lives end. Luke 22.28.
Abide with Christ in tentation. This is the right, and the blessed resisting.
What credit is it for the Lords soldier, to stand one day, and run away the
next? what good, or what comfort, to be free to day, and a bondslaue tomorrow?
Therefore be advised by the Apostle, Ephesians. 6.13. Having done all, stand: being
foiled, begin afresh: make another skirmish, and another, and another: and
never cease resisting, till the devil cease tempting and molesting thee, and
the crown of conquest be set upon thine head.

This is the solution of the third question.

Quest. 4. Why, and for what reasons should I resist the devil? and what are
the grounds of this opposition?

Answ. There cannot want abundance of arguments, to show this fit and
necessary: Specially in 3. heads. Reasons for resistance, 3.


that evil one, he is Satan, he is the devil. And either of these has weight
enough to urge this resistance.

that evil one, (...), 1 Ioh. 5.18. The devil, evil many ways.
exquisitely evil, evil (according to the deriuation of the word) with pains
and industry; so evil, that none goes beyond him, none comes near him in
wickedness. And he is evil, both by his wilful departure from God, the
chief good, and by a transcendent naughtiness which is now inherent, and
seems all one with his nature. Evil, by occasioning the fall of mankind,
from the top of goodness, to the gulf of extreme wickedness: as also by
stirring up and drawing forth the corruption of man's heart. Evil, by
disgracing and discountenancing all the ways he can, all that is good, both
good men, and good matters: And by aiming in all his proceedings at man's
greatest evil. Now who that has any spark of grace or goodness in him, will
not pick a quarrel against such a one, and stoutly maintain the quarrel
being once begun? Shall simple people be afraid of the devil, when they hear
him described to be a black grim fellow, with claws, and horns, and all
things terrible; and shall not we do our best to keep out of his clutches,
when we hear he is so evil, so incurably and desperately evil?

2. (...) osor, inimicus.
Secondly, he is Satan, an enemy, an adversary* Evil is always opposite to
good: Therefore he whom we have found so evil, must needs prove Satan, Satan,
to whom he is an enemy.
a rank adversary to all that good is.

unto God: He stretches his joints, and mainly bandeth his forces against the
Majesty of God primarily and principally, and against others for his sake. He
maligneth that inexhaust fountain of infinite grace that is in him, thwarteth
his most holy and righteous counsels; disgraceth, defaceth, and extenuateth his
most glorious works; and seeks to rob him of his glory, peculiar to himself
alone. Thus our Savior noted him for an adversary ( Matt. 4.10. Avoid. Satan;
for it is written, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou
serve:) whereas before, he was only called a tempter, and the devil.

So in the institutions which God has appointed for the good of his people,
whether spiritual ordinances, or temporal encouragements: Here he fully sets
him self to cross the Lord in all his intendments. He knows, that the more
means he gives us to set us forward in his service, the more he looks to
be worshipped, Luke 12.48.
and the more he will require at our hands: and, if great favors be abused,
the more is he dishonored, and his servants endangered. If he can get Adam to
sin, in innocence, in Paradise, then he has made a whole world of sinners,
and a hell full of firebrarnds. If he can work David to adultery, 2 Samuel
12.14.
and so to murder, he wounds all religion through his sides, and makes the Name
of God to be blasphemed greatly for his sake. Whence would he have had Christ
to fall, but from a place where were stairs to go down? Cast thy self down
from hence, Luke 4.9. And where does he more bestirre himself, than in places
where people have greatest means of knowledge and good conscience?

Secondly, to Christ, the promised seed, who came into the world to destroy
the works of the devil. 1 Ioh. 3.8.
If he cannot break his head, he will be still nibbling to bruise his heel.
Genesis 3.15.
If he must not meddle with his Deity, he will vex and torment his Humanity
to the uttermost. And when he cannot single with him in his own person, being
now in heaven, he will be sure to iustle at his members. In the days of his
flesh, he still set upon him either by himself, or by his Agents. After that
solemn constict at his Inauguration, he left him but for a season, Luke 4.13.
Continually he sent his messengers to tempt him, as namely the Scribes, and
Pharisees, and other petty tempters. So that his whole life was nothing else but
a continual warfare against the kingdom and power of darkness.

Vary diabolus amulatus est veritatem. Tert. aduers Prax. c. 1
Thirdly, he is an enemy to the Gospel; to the proceedings, and the
prevailing of it. Feign he would have suppressed it in the cradle and infancy
of it, that it should never have been preached. If that cannot be, the
Preachers of it shall be set upon on every side, to make them desist. If that
will not fadge, false Apostles and false brethren shall be raised up, to mingle
falsehood with truth, and jumble together the Law and the Gospel. If that
mischief be prevented, then he will turn himself to another corner, and give
letters of commendation to the Apostles, to make them suspicious and odious:
Act. 16.17. These men are the servants of the most high God, which show unto us
the way of salvation. One way or other he will hinder the pure and powerful
preaching of the word; as Paul says, 1 Thessalonians. 2.18.
We would have come unto you (even I Paul) once and again, but Satan hindered
us: If not, he will do his best to hinder the fruitful and faithful practice
of the word so preached. He makes the heart of man to frame many objections
against it, as, that it is either an enemy to Civil States, or needless, or
comfortless, or prejudicial to his thriuing in the world, to his credit, or
commodity.

Fourthly, to eminent men, who stand up in the gap, and set themselves to deal
between God and his people, either in Church or Commonwealth. Peter must be
winnowed, Luke 22.31.
2 Cor. 12.7.
and Paul must be buffeted by the messenger of Satan. Which of the Lords
Worthies has he not confronted, persecuted, and (if he could) taken out of
the Church, in any age or state thereof? It grieueth him much, that there is
any one found, who seeks the weal and peace of Jerusalem. One godly Minister
in a whole country shall be picked out, above all the rest, to be a butt of
contradiction, defamation, scoffs and reproaches. So in Magistracy.

Fifthly, to all good order among men, especially in the best things. He enuieth
the flourishing estate of a Christian Kingdom, and does what he can to
undermine and blow it up. He enuieth to people the settled course of a powerful
Ministry, and does what he can to interrupt and dissolueit. He enuieth to
Christians the liberties and benefits of the communion of Saints, and does what
he can to make them weary of their holy exercises, or otherwise disunite and
scatter them, by arts and tricks that he will devise: Whence the Apostle
wishes the Corinthians to be wise, and temper their just severity with due
mercy, 2 Cor. 2.11. lest Satan get an advantage of us, to wit, in making the
incestuous person despair through extremity of rigor, and consequently
hindering others from so severe a religion. He is ready to make his best of any
thing: Therefore look to him, spoil him of his purpose, preserve your
liberties by all means possible.

to thy self in particular, in thy body, and soul, and goods, and friends.
He enuieth thee every good day that thou passest, every benefit that thou
receiuest from God, and every bit of bread that does thee good. He grudgeth at
thy prosperity, as sometime at Jobs. He still goes about, seeking whom he
may devour, 1 Pet. 5.8. not what, as of the estate, but whom, as of the man.
He owes thee a spite as well as any. Then give him as good as he brings.
Who can put up so much injury, and be patient? How can thou choose but
resist him who is an enemy to all these?

The devil so called in six respects.
But see further into his nature: In the third place, he is the devil; that is,
he is a traducer, a calumniator, an accuser. And this depends upon the two
former properties. For, he that is so perfectly evil, and so strongly
malicious as we have seen, will never stick to traduce, and calumniate, and
falsely accuse all that he deals withal.

Diabolum se fecit, deferen do de Deo, and quidem falsum. Tert. aduers. Marc.
l. 2. c. 10.
And first, he accuses God to man, telling him he is a hard Master, reapes
where he sowed not, and gathers where he scattered not, as the grumbling
fellow in the Gospel had learned to speak; and as they in the Prophet, Mal.
3.14. What profit is it to serve the Lord, or to keep his ordinances, or to
walk mournfully before him? None at all, it is altogether vain. Or if not,
yet nothing to that which Satan bestows upon his servants: He will give a
world to Christ, if he will fall down and worship him: Did God ever give so
much to one man, for one outward reverence, at one time? Alas they are all
pidling matters that he gives, nothing comparable to the bravery and iollitie
which is in the world.

he accuses man to God, as the holy man Job, chap. 1.9. Does Job fear God
for naught? or is it not for his flocks of cattle, and great prosperity?
do thou think he loves thee for thy sake, and not his own rather? And
this is the nature of this cursed fiend, that he first provoke us unto sin,
(promising us pleasure, profit, impunitie, and safety enough,) and then goes
and puts up a bill of enditement against us: first he disswades us from care,
and conscience, and constancy in good duties, and then accuses us to God, of
heaviness, hypocrisy, and distractednesse. Thence he is called the accuser of
the brethren, which accused them before God day and night, Reu. 12.10.

he accuses man to man. One special piece of his imploiment is, to breed
discord and contention among brethren. It is he that stirs up jealousy,
suspicions, and uncharitable surmises, in one neighbor against another: that
he does in malice, what proceeds from charity: that he informs him of
somewhat out of curiosity, not out of conscience: that he affects a peevish
singularity in matter of religion, and not obedience to God. He says to one
man of another, as the Nobles said to Hanun concerning David, 2 Samuel 10.3.
Does David indeed respect Hanun? can thou think he loves thee in deed and
in truth? Still he casts such bones, and demurres, to separate between dear
friends.

he accuses man to himself. It he be an holy man, one that fears God, and
endeavors to perfection in the way of godliness, he will make him believe,
that he is but an hypocrite in all he does, not a jot of sincerity is in him;
therefore a castaway, a reprobate, a firebrand of hell. On the contrary: If a
man be careless* and dissolute, and looks not which end goes forward in
things of his soul, him he will make believe, that his estate is better than
it is; oh he is out of all hazard, cocke-sure of eternal life, and what need
he fear? Just like the flatterers of the tyrant Dionysius, who would lick up
his spettle, and protest it was as sweet as Nectar or Ambrosia, the food of
their gods. Thus all the sins of the godly are mortal, and cannot be
pardoned; all the sins of the wicked are venial, and cannot be punished.

accuses virtues for vices, and vices for virtues; and makes men fall into
that curse of the Prophet, Esa. 5.20. Woe unto them that call good evil, and
evil good, that put darkness for light, and light for darkness; that put
bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter. What now adays is forwardness in
religion accounted, but foolish giddiness? and what luke-warmenesse, but
discreet moderation? How often is extreme earthlinesse shrouded under the name
of good husbandry, and pride under the name of decency, and apishnesse in
complements under the name of good manners, and excessive prodigality under
the name of good nature? Who has taught this strange imposition of new names,
but that Grand Lier, the master of falsehood?

he accuses in his instruments. The devil makes men to be accusers,
sycophants, picke-thanks, devils, (as the word stands in the original, 2 Timothy 3.3. (...)) Such was Doeg against David, Ziba against Mephibosheth, the
false witnesses against Christ, and those wicked wretches who informed the
Heathen Roman Emperors, Eusebius. hist. eccles. l. 9. c. 3.
that the Christians of the Primitive Church affected a temporal kingdom, and
would dispossess them of their throne, unless they were the better looked unto.

Now does Satan thus say and unsay, alter and change, put in and put out, and
turn things vpside down, that we cannot see the truth of our estate as we
should? Who then would not resist this accuser, this traducer, this slanderer,
this broacher of lies, and master of misse-rule?

Add unto all this, that he is one who will not be overcome by fair means:
there is no winning of a devil with kindness: that will not serve the turn:
He will overthrow thee, if thou do not overthrow and chase him away.
Therefore resist him.

State precor vestri memores, memores quoque Christi: Quae sit vestra tribus,
quae gloria, quis Deus, and Rex, Quis Dominus, meminisse decet. Prudent. in
Psychom.
Next consider, who thy self art, that must make resistance upon Satan. Who art
thou? Thou art a man, a reasonable creature: therefore, as a man, provide as
well as thou can, for thine own safety. Thou art a sinner, taken in the
snare of the devil, and led captive by him to do his will, 2 Timothy 2.26.
therefore deliver thy self, as a bird out of the snare of the fowler. Thou art
a Christian; therefore must partake of Christ's powerful grace and anointing,
and be a King, to conquer his and thine enemies. Thou art a baptized person,
and vowedst enmity against the devil, when thou receiuedst the seal of
righteousness, and entredst into the Church: therefore perform the word of an
honest man. Thou art one of the Angels of Michael; therefore must fight with
him against the dragon and his Angels. And one of a band of Lions; for the
righteous are bold as Lions, Prou. 28.1. The same combat is performed by thy
brethren abroad in the world, 1 Pet. 5.9. therefore resist steadfastly (it is
the Apostles argument) and stand it out: sometimes one dies in the field by
cowardly undermining, and sometimes another, but the Lords Champions go still
away with the victory.

what mischief he would bring upon us, Mischiefs of being foiled.
if he could once foil us.

1. Privative.
First, all the liuelihoods of a Christian, all his graces, and all his
assurances, he would quite take away. His desire is, Luke 22.31, 32
to winnow the Saints, and make their faith fail: that by the failing thereof,
all the labors of a godly Ministry may be lost, as the Apostle infers, 1 Thessalonians. 3.5. Or if he cannot bring them unto flat infidelity, he will seek
to pull them from that integrity and simplicity which becomes the Gospel of
God our Savior, 2 Cor. 11.3. He will endeavor to make them vain, formal,
hypocritical, fantastical, or unfruitful; or to draw them from their
constancy in doing good, and resisting evil. And hereby he aims at their
spiritual beggerie, that is, to rob them of all their hopes, and comforts, and
assurances, all the joys of the holy Ghost and a good conscience, and all the
glory of the kingdom of heaven. Now, shall a man fight for his purse, or
goods, and not resist for so great a patrimony of Saints?

2. Positive.
Secondly, all evil follows immediately upon thy overthrow. For now thou art
the devils own child, an utter enemy to God and the things of God, furious
and outrageous by little and little, desperately evil, and heir of
condemnation, like thy father himself in sin and punishment, and thy
torments shall be endless, easlesse, remediless.

Resist therefore, and betimes prevent so great mischief.

And thus the four questions are fully answered, both for clearing the point,
and directing the Christian Warrior. Let us now descend to the uses hereof.

A reproof and disgrace to the easy life of many.
And first, this serves to bring out of request the secure and easy condition
of many people, who neither do, nor will, nor think they have need to suspect
themselves. We may well say of them with the Prophet, Psalm. 73.4, 5.
They have no bands upon them, either in their life or death, neither do they
come into trouble as other men; They are fat, and strong, and lively, and in
very good liking; They have the world at will, and more indeed than heart can
desire; All admire, and follow, and attend them, and speak well of them, Oh
the only men in town or country: and they can think, and speak of others,
and do to them what themselves please, yet all must be well.

Others of a meaner rank can spend their days iollily, and smoothly, and
contentedly; neighbourly men, and good Churchkeepers; not only give way to
religion, but some countenance; and so pop into their grave, as fruit gathered
when it is ripe.

And do you dislike or condemn this estate, Vide ne forte ideo non sit bellum,
quia pax peruersa est. Aug. de verbis Apost. sermon. 12.
will some man say? I answer, Yes, and I have just cause so to do: for it is as
dangerous a condition as those who are openly profane, if not more. But
howsoever, it cannot be good, it cannot be safe. For, has not the opening of
this text discovered, that the life of a Christian here is the life of a
soldier? Have we not heard of war, and fighting, and striving, and
resisting? And have we not seen, that this bustling is grounded upon reasons
very sufficient? Whence then is this general carelessness, and universal
vnfeelingnesse, which possesses the hearts of the sons of men? Is it indeed
a pleasant, or an easy thing to be a warrior? No trouble, no fear, no
distraction in a camp? No wounds, or bloodshed in an army? Were he not a
fool that would go into a battle array, and yet say, Ezekiel. 13.10.
Peace, Peace, where there can be no peace? Examine the matter by common
reason, and you shall find it evidently true. Then look back upon Satan, and
think if you can, that he is more idle or weak to follow his skirmish, than
men are to follow theirs. Nay, he is more malicious, more puissant, more
unweariable. No truce can be taken, no favor expected, no conditions of peace
accepted, unless we yield him all that he asks: and, what that is, let any
one judge.

Therefore (my brethren) let these things work upon our hearts, and persuade
us for time to come to fight, and fight valiantly. Let us know, that we have a
most pestilent, and terrible, and bloud-thirstie enemy. And knowing it, we
cannot in reason but do our best to prevent his purposes. Let us be sober, and
temperate in all things, not suffering our selves to be clogged with any
distract-full hindrances, within us, or without us; as they that run in a race,
and strive for the masterie. 1 Cor. 9.25.
And not only be sober, but watch, 1 Pet. 5.8. Be sober, be vigilant. And not
only so, but pray, Matt. 26.41. Watch and pray, that ye enter not into
tentation. And more than that, Endure hardness, as a good soldier of Jesus
Christ, 2 Timothy 2.3. Be not entangled with the affairs of this life, strive
lawfully.

A caveat to the godly against security and lukewarmnesse.
Secondly, this serves as an antidote, or preservative to the children of God,
to keep them holily constant in that rank wherein the Lord has placed them.
Oftentimes it comes to pass through the weakness of their flesh, and the
heaviness of their spirit, and the occasions they have in the world, and their
familiarity with good duties, that they do even stand at a stay, and know not
well which way to turn themselves. To join with profane ones, they dare not,
they cannot: it is against their profession, and conscience, and salvation. And
to exceed themselves in the work of holiness, they know not how. They are
sure, that more grace should and may be obtained, but wherein, or how? Thus in
a maze (as it were) and doubtful what to do, they easily incline to a
temperate mediocritie, and rest content with some of the power, 2 Timothy 3.5.
but more of the form of godliness: Grace they intend still to pursue, but
without due affection: Holy exercises they will still observe, both at home and
at Church, but coldly, sleepily, brokenly, vnfeelingly, unfruitfully.

This lukewarmnesse of theirs, carnal persons see, and laugh at it: themselves
see, and bewail it, and wish it were with them as sometimes it was at their
first conversion; to be forward, and zealous, and do the work of the Lord
diligently. But how may this be, or what should they do?

Here now I answer by virtue of this text, Resist the devil. Many means they
have to shake up their security: as for example, To consider deeply and
seriously the multitude and heinousness of their sins, both before their
regeneration, and since: To recount their extreme beggerie in themselves, and
unworthiness to receive the least favor from the Lord: To prize highly the
blood of the Covenant wherewith they are redeemed: and the like. But especially
let them be careful to remember, and carry in mind, this necessary doctrine
of the Christian Warfare. For, if the noise of drums and trumpets, if the
fourbishing of swords, and the glittering of armor, and the trailing of pikes,
will not stir up a man's spirits, what will? This therefore let the Christian
man consider, and thus let him say with himself:

What? have I no enemy, with whom to exercise my self? Are there no devils
abroad in the world or in hell? Has my purse enemies on the highway, and my
goods enemies about my house; and my body enemies, and my soul no enemies?
Much ado I find in getting and keeping a small worldly estate about me: and
does it ask no fear or pains, to get and keep possession of the kingdom of
heaven? What? no opposition? Did all the earth sit still, Zech. 1.11, 12.
and at rest, while Jerusalem was under an heavy indignation, threescore and
ten years; and shall I, who profess my self one of the citizens of the new
Jerusalem, sit still, and at rest, while the whole world of Believers is hot in
the battle? How does this hang together? Should I not weep with them that
weep, and be sorry with them that sorrow? Have I not too just cause so to do?

Why, what do I think of Satan? Is he so loving, that he will spare me, or so
weak, that he will fear me? Is he witless, that he cannot deceive me by
subtlety, or idle, that he will not? Was he too good for our first parents in
innocence, for Noah a Patriarch, for David a Prophet, for Peter an Apostle,
for Demas an Evangelist, for Ananias and Sapphira two famous Professors, and
many Worthies of the Lord? and is it not likely he will get ground of me? Me?
Alas silly creature that I am! who am I, to stand in the hands of so stout a
Champion, especially unarmed!

Therefore hearken, O my soul, and all that is within me, muster up your
forces, and come into the field. I have hitherto spotted, and slept, and
snorted in the cradle of security: I little dreamt of an enemy, at least to
be so near as indeed he is, like Saul and Abner in the camp when David might
have smote off their heads, 1 Sa. 26.8.15. An hundred to one, but I had been
destroyed ere this time. Oh blessed be God who has delivered me out of the
mouth of the Lion, and the paw of the Bear, and has given me time to see
mine error! By the grace of my Lord Jesus, I will hereafter keep more
constantly to my colors, and fight under the bannet of my own Lord.

Thus therefore I argue: Is he a fox, and not subtle? Is he a serpent, and not
wily? and, if he be subtle and wily, has he no feats or tricks to put upon
me? Because I in simplicity think him no harm, does he think me none? Is
he not now at this present time, about some stratageme to undermine me? Does
he not lay siege to the Castle of my soul, either to scale the walls of my
faith, or to batter the bulwark of my patience, or to pull down the turrets
of my zeal and fortitude? Has he not some fetch or other, to draw me from
my hold, and then some ambushment, to surprise me unawares? Yes: he has a
thousand ways to circumuent such a simple fresh water soldier as I am: as
many turnings and windings, as ansractuous Meandrus; as many heads as the
serpent Hydra, as many eyes as the neuer-sleeping Argus, Therefore seeing the
uncircumcised Philistims are still ready to come upon me, and bind me if I
sleep, I will surely look unto them, I will up and shake my self, and follow
my Christen course more warily, more watchfully.

The Lord grant that thou may.



Quest. How may I know that?

Marks of right resisting the devil.
Answ. First, if thou resistest thine own corrupt and rebellious flesh, by
mortification, humiliation, watchfulness, and the conscionable use of holy
means. For the devil and our own flesh are of the same kind in respect of
sin, and fight equally against the soul: as 1 Pet. 2.11. Abstain from
fleshly lusts, which war against the soul: and Iam. 4.1. Lusts war in the
members. This is an homebred enemy, lurking within our own walls. Of it
self it works many stratagems against us, by moving to the acts of pride,
malice, revenge, oppression, contempt of the Gospel, and the like. And the
devil is no readier to crave its assistance, than it is to afford it: working
slily as he does, and secretly: that the Christian almost needs not to ask
that question, How shall I discern the temptations of Satan from the evil
motions of mine own heart? Some difference there is, and a devil may be
espied by the suddenness, and horriblenesse, and vnnaturainesse, and
importanacie of his suggestions. The motions of nature are more slow, and more
suitable with nature, and not so violently pursued as those are. But for the
most part, we need not observe any such distinction; the flesh easily agreeing
with the devil, and the devil shaping his temptations to the desire of the
flesh.

This a good Christian knows, and therefore he looks homeward principally:
Especially seeing the devil cannot foil him without himself, but himself
can destroy himself without the devil. So that well was it said, Ier. 17.9.
The heart of man is deceitful and wicked above all things, even above that
foul spirit, as foul and as black as he is.

Some say of Mary Magdalen, Luke 8.2.
that seven devils were cast out of her, that is, seven deadly sins, pride,
adultery, and the rest. And we may almost say, So many sins as thou
cherishest and maintainest, Quot peecata, tot daemonia.
willingly and with delight of thy heart, so many devils thou lodgest under the
roof of the house of thy soul. Matt. 12.43.
They are unclean spirits, because they bear rule over men by the
uncleanness of their hearts and lives.

Now examine thy self by this mark. So truly and faithfully as thou watchest
against the corruptions of thy nature, so truly and faithfully thou resistest
the devil. And those are easily proved liers, who say they defy and scorn
the devil, yet obey their own lusts, use no discipline toward their unruly
hearts, but take their own swindge in any or all ungodliness: No, no, they
agree with him well enough: he desires no better weapons against us, than
those out of our own armourie.

Secondly, the devil, so long as thou desire to resist: and this desire is
ever accompanied with care and watchfulness. None in the Lords field is yet
overcome, who desires to overcome; yea they that fall by the sleights of
Satan, and are taken away by violence, yet falling in this quarrel, Heb. 12.4.
and resisting unto blood, they are still conquerours, and more than
conquerors. God, who accepts the will for the deed, accepts the faithful
purpose of resistance for resistance it self, even when the Tempter does
somewhat prevail, and make battery upon the soul. Christ takes notice of the
willingness of the spirit in his Apostles, Matt. 26.41.
when he sees great weakness in their flesh.

And this note serves principally for the comfort of afflicted souls, which
cry out of themselves as foiled, and such as have cast up the buckler to the
devil, in way of voluntary yielding; yet minding to go on in the skirmish as
trustily as ever, and keeping the same way as before. They must know, that
their case is good enough, and they shall be accepted according to what they
have, 2 Cor. 8.12.
and not according to what they have not; yea according to that which they
desire to have. A man in war that is half dead, does what he can against the
enemy, by spurning, by supplanting, or otherwise: And so do you against the
grand enemy of your souls, therefore shall not be accounted to have
revolted, but shall be crowned as well as the rest, and (it may be) among the
first. Only continue this desire, care still to maintain the Lords right, and
watch still to disappoint the adversary: This shall be reckoned to you for
perfection of valor.

The third mark of resistance is this: If thou grieuest when thou art foiled,
and seek to recover thy self, and make amends by better trustiness. Undo
the works of the devil, by morning for them, by repentance, by running to the
ensigns of Christ, and by doing the contrary works, of what kind soever: and
now know thou have resisted. For the devils purpose is, that thou should
continue under a foil; and he knows, that if he cannot get thee to lie still
in the sin committed, it will do him no good, nor thee harm. It is one
kind of resistance, to recover our selves after our falls. Otherwise, which of
the Lords Worthies did ever resist him? 1 Chronicles. 21.1. 2 Samuel 24.1.
Satan stirred up David to number the people, and he numbered them; which was
his great sin, so mortally punished: but David's heart smote him for this
fact, and he made his recantation, saying, I have sinned, Verse. 17.
I have done wickedly, let thine hand be against me, and my fathers house: and
so Satan was altogether disappointed of his malicious project against him.

The fourth mark is: If thou art troubled when thou see the works of
darkness go forward, and gladded to see any thing on foot that overthrows
the kingdom of the devil. For he that resists him aright, would have him
resisted and rejected every where, by others as well as by himself: he would
have none obey him, or submit to his government: he is a rebel, and an
usurper, and therefore why should he have any place, to rule in any parts of
the Lords territories? Solomon says, When the righteous are in authority, the
people rejoice: but when the wicked bears rule, the people mourn, Proverb.
29.2. We may apply it to this: A good man is sorrowful, when he sees any
sent into a place, either for Magistracy or Ministry, who is likely to
advance Popery or profaneness, to discourage and weaken the hands of the
godly, to hearten the wicked, and do mischief any way among simple people; or
when he sees the people themselves set upon wickedness. It is even a death
to him, and his zeal does almost consume him, Psalm. 69.9. Ioh. 2.17.
as is said of David and our Savior. And on the contrary, it is joy to his
heart, to hear or see a good man come into a place where he may do good, or
hinder evil; to see a faithful Minister set over a people, or good orders
taken for the curbing of sin. For now he hopes the power of the kingdom of
darkness must totter, and now it is likely the strong holds of the strong man
shall be cast down, and much good will be done in such a place. Therefore he
cannot but rejoice: why should he not? And while he does so rejoice, he has
further cause of joy in this also, that he is an enemy to the devil, and the
devil to him.

The sift mark is, Care in the use of the means, whereby the devil is
resisted. He that uses physic, resists the disease: and he that is
conscionable in sharpning the spiritual weapons before mentioned, does resist
the devil. So much diligence as a man uses in searching, and applying, and
laying up the word, in strengthening his faith, in confirming his hope, in
fortifying his patience; so much as he strives in prayer, to be conqueror;
so much as he endeavors to keep his conscience clear, and to keep with
the Lords armies, by whom the same skirmishes are fulfilled: so much sincerity
he has in following this combat with the devil. And they that say they resist
him, yet neglect these weapons, care not for the word read or preached, think
not of increasing their faith, or any of those graces, nor make conscience of
holy exercises, do lie in so saying: Though they should spet so long, that
they spet out their lungs, yet the devil would not fly from them; but keep
possession, and that quietly enough. For he is not expelled, but by divine
authority and power. He that means to foil him indeed, will so consider,
and be so diligent in using the approved means of resistance.

The sixth mark is, Fear lest thou resistest not in the due manner. This a
careless Christian never has: yea he is more confident in his strawes and
toies, than the godly is in weilding the armor set apart by God himself. For
most part, a carnal man thinks not of resisting the devil, till he is even
ready to fall headlong into his condemnation, and then he bestirreth himself,
after his fashion. Or he can see the devil in his own wicked practice, but it
is after the sin committed, rather than before: And not in small sins, but
in great and crying sins only, which the world takes notice of, or such as
bring present punishment, and shame among men. Or if he begin at any time to
resist the devil, he does it so faintly, and sillily, and by halues, that he
never gets out of his clutches. And when he is most in heart, together with
some watchfulness, and that against all sins as he thinks, yet then he is
unconstant, and leeseth the victory one day which he got the other. But
howsoever, in all his striving, even at the best, he is never fearful or
jealous over his deceitful heart, but thinks he does well enough, and he
doubts not at all. Whereas a true Christian fears he does not as he should,
and recompenceth his failing in the matter, by his care in the manner of
resisting the devil.

The seventh mark is, Unfeigned thankfulness to Christ; who gives strength to
resist, and to overcome. This is a sign, that we resist upon a good ground,
and by a right power; not by our own wittiness; or skilfulnesse. We
acknowledge we are of our selves silly, and insufficient for such a combat,
and therefore, after it is finished, we must not live to our selves, or
sacrifice to our own yarne, as if our own bow and sword had saved us; but as
the Psalmist speaks, Psalm. 44.3. Thy right hand, and thine arm, and the light
of thy countenance because thou badst a favor unto us: therefore to thee will
we live, for thee will we die. Thus the Saints cast all the honor of the
victory upon Christ, their head and commander, Reu. 5.10, 11, 12. Thou have
redeemed us to God by thy blood, and have made us Kings and Priests unto God,
and we shall reign on the earth, etc. They overcome the dragon by the bleud
of the Lamb. Reu. 12.11. and therefore the Lamb shall have the honor of
their conquest. And they will specially express their thankfulness in
holiness of life, observing the laws of their General, and keeping within
his camp, and under his banner, without mutiny, outrage, filthiness, or any
unbeseeming behavior. But where it is otherwise, the devil is not rightly
resisted. Where Christ gets no honor in an holy and refined conversation, he
never assisted such against Satan. For, wherefore are we redeemed out of the
hand of our enemies, Luke 1.74, 75.
but that we should serve our Redeemer in holiness and true righteousness
all the days of our life?

Lastly, If the devil resists thee, thou resistest him: yea, therefore he
resists thee, because thou resistest him. For he fights not with his own:
why should he? or to what end? While the strong man keeps possession, all is
in peace: as while the Iaylor has his prisoners sure enough, he lets them lie
together in quietness enough. But, as he bestirreth himself, if any of them
give him the slip, so if any man at any time begin to get out of the power of
Satan, by whom he was taken captive at his pleasure to do his will, presently
vproares and tumults are made, and the devil has officers every where (wicked
and ungodly men) who will use all expedition in sending Huy and cry after the
escaped Christian; and, if either violence, or subtlety, or promises, or
threats, or any thing will reduce him to his ancient bondage, he shall not
long continue a free man.

Take this therefore for a note of opposition against the devil, if he
maintain opposition against thee. Iam. 1.2.
Count it all joy, when thou fallest into diverse temptations. Though they be
troublesome and tedious to a holy heart, which hates and abhors them, and
would feign be rid of them, yet have they their use also for good, and assure
the Christian by strong consequence, that his estate is safe enough, and so
long as he continues making resistance, he need not fear. A happy man he is,
that sees the devil professing himself his enemy.

A censure of scorners, who dislike such discourses.
Fourthly, we see by all this, how wide they are from the right, who like not
such treatises, such practices, such care in examining ones self; but jest,
and scoff, and put off all this so necessary a duty with a scornful tush.
Tush (says one) what do you tell us of a devil? when did you see him? and
how do you know him so well? and why do you affright people with such words
of terror? And Tush (says another) what needs all this preaching about this
matter? a goodly Sermon! and, He names the devil almost at every word. So
some have said of the former discourses, simple and blindfolded creatures that
they are: The Lord open their eyes, that they may see how the god of this world
has blinded them, 2 Cor. 4.4.
and get out of his snare. But others have a tush too, and it is cast against
them that are so careful in resisting the devil, as we have proved allshould
be: Oh it is a fit of melancholy, a silliness, a childishness: and, What
man, take a good heart, put such thoughts out of your mind, Come, follow the
world as we do, make your self merry, and leave these uncouth cogitations to
them that are so peevish.

Note this.
But stay, O man: this is not to resist the devil, but to scorn him. If this
troubled person should take this counsel, he should not overcome this grand
enemy of his soul, but take truce with him, and so, by pleasing himself in a
fond and vain peace, should lose his own salvation; as thou in all likelihood
must lose thine. Therefore be advised what thou will do: these are no jesting
matters: Hear what the Apostle says, Resist the devil, and for time to come
yield it a duty both lawful and necessary, that the people of God should thus
care, and labor, and strive in resisting, and thou with them.

This heartneth the godly.
Finally, here is commendation and encouragement for them that so resist the
devil. And it shall be of worth, against all calumnies and scoffs of those
iesters, whatsoever they be. Know (O soldiers of the Lord) that you are in the
right way. You have rightly judged of your life, to be (as it is) a warfare.
You fight the good fight of faith, and are sure of victory; which, when it is
achieved, there is a crown of righteousness prepared of old, which shall
certainly be put upon your heads. You take Gods part against his and your
enemies, and therefore he will take your part, sustaining you, and ^^iling
them. You are the Angels of Michael, and shall see the time, when the great
dragon (the devil) shall be quite cast out, and utterly excluded from heaven,
no more to molest, and vex, and disquiet your righteous souls. And for the
present, during the time of this conflict, know for your comfort, that
notwithstanding all his wiles, and tricks, and close following of his
business, yet upon your resistance he must avoid and be gone. If you use the
armor described, and use it in the due manner before spoken of, he cannot
stand before you. So often as he gives onset, do you give him battle; and
then lean upon this faithful promise, full of consolation (which comes now to
be handled)

And he will fly from you. The second general part of this text.


The event of other battles is doubtful, victory altogether uncertain:
Though the cause be good, and the men valorous, and stand the field stoutly,
yet they may go away vanquished, as the Israelites a long time before the
Beniamites. But here the conquest is certain: before any stroke is given, we
know we shall overcome: every one that will resist, shall chase away his
enemy, though himself be never so weak, his enemy never so strong and
puissant.

of the devil? and how does he fly away, who is so incessant in temptations?

I answer: First, Homil. 7. in Iosue.
Origin thinks, that the Saints of God, resisting the hellish tempters when
they provoke unto evil, do diminish the army of the devils, and (as it were)
kill many of them: so that it is not lawful for that spirit, which is overcome
of an holy man, living chastely and graciously, again to set upon any other
man. But this is not so: for the same devil, which had been repelled by our
Savior in his first temptation, did try him with a second, and a third.

Therefore secondly, Lombard) think, Lib. 2. distinct. 5 H. lit.
that this of Origin must be understood only of that vice, wherein the foul
spirit was overcome: as for example, If he solicit any good man unto pride,
and be foiled, he may not again solicit unto pride, either the same man, or
any other. But this is wholly uncertain, and not material to the comfort of a
Christian; as our text does intend. For if one devil should leave such a
sinful motion, another would follow it, and disquiet him as much as the other
could possibly; especially there being so many legions of them, one to succeed
another in their mischievous intendments. And what cares the devil, by what
sin he gains a soul, if he may be sure to gain it? Either of the extremes
will serve his turn sufficiently: or an habitual neglect of good, as well as
the wilful perpetration of evil.

A twofold flight of the devil.
Therefore thirdly, the plain answer is this: There is a twofold flying away,
forced upon the devil by the power of God, and this his promise: One partial
and temporary, the other total and final.

Partial and temporary.
That, when the child of God is enabled by the wisdom and grace of God, to
reject any wicked suggestion, and so is rid of the Tempter for that time: and,
so often as the devil renews his temptation, so often the Christian renews
his courage, in resisting him, and therefore still remains conqueror. The
devil left Christ but for a season, Luke 4.13. and no longer does he leave
the members of Christ. He goes away, and returns, and then must go away
again, and so continues passing to and fro, beaten and overthrown so often
as he is resisted. Feign he would return and re-enter into his old house, to
take and keep more sure possession: but if a repulse be given him, he must
take the repulse, and fly away.

Total and final.
This, that is, the total and final flight of the devil is at the end of the
warfare, and of the Christians life, when he most bestirreth himself, because
his time is but short, Reu. 12.12.
and he would feign lay hold on the righteous soul which he long molested, to
carry it among his own fiends, in eternal torments. Here he is prevented of
his purpose perfectly. The Spirit of God assisteth the Christian heart, and
vpholdeth it with faith, with patience, with remembrance of the promises, with
the sense of Gods mercy, and all convenient supplies, according to the several
and particular occasions. Luke 16.22.
And at last the Angels take the soul (as the soul of Lazarus) and carry it
into Abraham's bosom, in endless blessedness. And now the whole skirmish is
finished, the field won, the good fight of faith fought to the uttermost, and
the devil fled away for ever and ever.

The point is this:

The devil, resisted, flees necessarily.
All the Lords Warriors, who resist the devil as they ought, shall overcome,
and be rid of him. They are as sure of victory, as of trouble. His presence is
not so tedious and tiresome, but his absence (which is most certain) shall be
as joyous and comfortable. We fight not at uncertainty, but know we shall
overcome. It was for want of resistance, that our first parents were deceived,
and are of the forbidden tree: that David lifted up his heart, and numbered the
people: that Judas betrayed his Master, and so fell into his own place: and,
that ever any was subdued by the devil, was for want of resistance. They that
would overcome, did overcome, and could not be foiled. Our Savior resisted,
and saw the devil flying from him. The Apostles and Disciples resisted, and
saw him fall like lightning from heaven. Saint Paul resisted, and found grace
sufficient against the messenger of Satan that buffeted him. In a word, all the
Angels of Michael that fought against the dragon, did so thrust him to the
walls, that he was cast out, and his place found no more. Where the Christian
finds a heart and hands, the devil must find wings and heels. And why?

he will fly from you; and elsewhere, The God of peace shall bruise Satan
under your feet shortly, Romans 16.20. where the Apostle speaks of them that are
wise unto good, and simple concerning evil; which is all one with resisting of
the devil. To such he is a God of peace, and will in a little time put an end
to all their conflicts. For, faithful is he that has promised, who also will
do it.

Vincatur necesse est, quia Christus quem confitemur, inuictus est. Cyp. de
exhort. Martyr.
Secondly, the valor of our Captain is such, that the enemy cannot stand
before him or us. He himself, by himself, did in single combat put him to the
worse, and made him avoid: by whose conduct and conquest we also shall go
away victors. We go not forth against these hellish wickednesses, in our own
name and strength, but in the name and strength of God, and by the power of
Christ, who was never overcome yet, but overcame in every skirmish. Reu. 12.11.
They overcame him by the blood of the Lamb. And hereof we may assure our
selves, before we set foot out of our tents and camp; as the Church of old,
Psalm. 44.5. Through thee will we push down our enemies: through thy Name will
we tread them under, that rise up against us. The same voice of Christ, that
sent away the devil from himself (Avoid Satan) will send him away from us
also, when our temptations (as his) are ended.

the armor of God: Ephesians. 6.13.
and for the compleatnesse of it, it is called whole armor of God. And because
of this, God will not have his workmanship so much disparaged, as to suffer him
that uses it, to take a repulse, or suffer the armor it self to be broken
and mangled.

The edge of the sword of the Spirit was never yet blunted by the hardiness of
the enemy: no, They overcame him by the word of their testimony, Reu. 12.11.
The Word of God is of an invincible nature: not one tittle of it can pass
away: it will uphold him that holds it forth, so that he cannot perish in his
afflictions.

The shield of faith was never yet bored or pierced through by any darts of the
devil, came they never so thick and violent. No: this is the victory which
overcomes the world, 1 Ioh. 5.4.
(both the Prince of it, and the malice, and the allurements, and the
affrightments of it) even our faith. Faith, as much as a grain of mustard
seed, can do wonders.

The helmet of salvation was never yet beat off the head of Gods Warrior, So
hope is called, 1 Thessalonians. 5.8.
by any snares of fiery temptations which the devil rained down upon him.
No: our hope is a sure anchor, so steadfast in apprehending his Object, that it
enters into that within the veil, Heb. 6.19.

By our patience we may possess our souls, Luke 21.19.
even when our enemies are most urgent upon us, and ready to tire us out. Even
then, when we love not our lives to the death, we shall overcome the dragon,
Revel. 12.11.

By effectual and fervent prayer we shall prevail much. Iam. 5.16.
The Lord never hears that voice which the Archangell spoke, The Lord rebuke
thee, Jude 9.
but presently he consents, and says, The Lord rebuke thee, O Satan, even
the Lord that has chosen Jerusalem, rebuke thee, Zech. 3.2.

So of all the parts of our Christian armor, they are all so cutting, and
wounding, and deadly in slaying, that the enemy (as Ahab) must die of the
blow, and be glad to retire.

Fourthly, Col. 2.15. so that all our resistance is (as it were) but the
kicking of a cursed beast, whose throat is already cut; to let out his
life-bloud, whereby he does yet spurn against us. There was no more for the
Captains of Israel to do, after the battle ended, but only to tread upon
the five heathen Kings whom Joshua had overcome, Ios. 10.24. Come near, put
your feet upon the necks of these Kings. The like is the voice of our
victorious Joshua: Come, here are enemies foiled to your hands, up and trample
upon them. Christ pulls out the sting of the old hellish serpent, and then says
in the words of the Psalmist, Ipsi Christo applicat Irenaeus, l. 3. c. 38.
Thou shall tread upon the lion and adder; the young lion and the dragon shall
thou trample under feet, Psalm. 91.13. Christ put the devil to his wings, when
himself had been violently tempted: And ever since he has been so crazie
and fearful, that the weakest member of Christ, using the same method and
means of resisting, has been able to chase him away. Also by virtue thereof,
the ancient Believers who were before Christ in time, (being the fore-ward in
this barrel) did nor fly before their enemy, but made him to fly, and that
every way as efficaciously as we can do.

Fifthly, and therefore it shall not be as the devil will, who would always
molest us, and get that by importunity, which by persuasion he could not get:
but, will he, nill he, he must sometimes vanish. The Lord knows our frame, and
how we are but dust, easily foiled with long vexation: therefore in compassion
to our infirmity, he stinteth our adversary, what he shall do, and how long
he shall stay, and when he shall avoid; and will not suffer us to be tempted
above that we are able: An issue there is of our trials, and he will, with
the temptation, make a way to escape, that we may be able to bear it, 1 Cor.
10.13. The Lord knows, 2 Pet. 2.9.
how to deliver the godly out of temptations: both when the fit time is, and
what are the means, and what is the measure of his servants strength.

Likewise, he will have them have time, to prepare themselves for other
skirmishes: To repair the breaches which Satan made, to fortify their holds
where they are weak, to try their weapons in better manner, to gather their
grounds of comfort together, for magnanimity and vnweariablenesse.

Finally, they shall have some space allotted, that they may enjoy comforts
from God, and the joy of their salvation. Temptations are uncouth, and black,
and terrible, and vex a good heart, and disquiet the mind with an holy
indignation: During which time, the Christian cannot take his portion of
rejoicing in the Lord, as the word does allow him. Therefore a time shall be,
when this harshnesse and bitterness shall be gone, and the contrary sweetness
succeed in the place.

Consolation to the godly.
Hear this, ye armies of the Lord, and be comforted. Rejoice ye heavens, and
ye that dwell in them; Now is come salvation, and strength, and the kingdom
of our God, and the power of his Christ: for the accuser of our brethren is
cast down, which accused them before our God day and night, Reu. 12.10.12. The
devil (as malicious and subtle as he is, yet) when he is resisted, must fly
away. He is of a crauenly brood, and cannot stand where he finds a valiant
opponent. Let this therefore stop all voices of unquietness, and especially
the voices of desperation, whereby the Christian does many times too much
trouble himself. O (says he) I find not this doctrine true: the devil does
not so fly from me, as you speak, but is ever assailing me with thoughts of
blasphemy, with idle, and filthy, and unlawful motions: A fourefold answer to
complaints of Satan's tediousness in tempting.
I find almost continual temptations. To whom I answer:

almost continual: for I know they are not continual altogether and wholly.
You find some refreshing betweene-whiles. And is not this some comfort? Does
it not fly away, though it be but for a while? And did he leave your Lord and
Savior otherwise? It is sufficient, that the servant be as his Master, and not
in better estate, Matt. 10.25.

therefore, if he should stay till death, yet then he must be gone. If he fly
not at noone, yet he must and will fly by night. Only resist, and his back
shall be turned upon you first or last. Stay the time, and wait when it will
be. And take heed you look not for more immunitie from trouble, than your
present condition will permit.

you shall find by examination, that he staieth the longer with you by your
own default. According to our resistance is his flight: and according to our
manfulnesse, his cowardlinesse. No wonder if he stand his ground where he is
faintly and heartlesly opposed. Our Savior tells us, that some devils are not
cast out but by fasting and prayer: Matt. 17.21.
So also, some temptations and molestations cannot be vanquished, but by
extraordinary care and striving.

James, chap. 1.2. My brethren, count it all joy, when ye fall into diverse
temptations. For this is a sign, that the devil has not yet won us. He is
not so silly and unwise, as to trouble his own. It is good to have him our
enemy, and we may well be joyous in this, even in the very midst of all the
throng. Woe unto us, when the devil begins to be our friend. If we be not
tried and judged, as other of Gods people are, we have the more cause to try
and judge our selves.

Fond to leave godliness for a supposed perpetuity of molestation.
Again, we see by this doctrine, how fond it is to fear perpetual
molestation, and so leave the power and sound practice of godliness. Many
think, and some are not ashamed to say, that if they set to such and such
exercises, they shall lead a melancholy life ever afterward: Oh this
profession of the Gospel, which Ministers urge so much, is a tedious and
uncomfortable profession; they shall be still troubled with the devil, and the
world will be upon their backs, and manifold vexations they must endure.
Amongst the many errors committed in this argumentation, the answer to the
chief is this: that there is no enemy they shall meet withal in these
distasted ways of holiness, No enemy in Christianity but must fly.
but if he be resisted, he must fly away. It is impossible he should stand,
if we our selves be willing to chase him away. most hideous enemy, whom we
must encounter. And as plain is the Scripture concerning the other enemies:
Ioh. 5.4. Every one that is borne of God, ouercammeth the world: even when it
comes against us with tribulation, and distress, and persecution, and
famine, and nakedness, and peril, and sword: In all these things we are more
than conquerors, through him that loved us, Romans 8.37. which war against our
souls, the Lord has given us his own Spirit, to take part with us against
them: that, as the flesh lusts against the spirit, Gal. 5.17.
so the spirit also shall lust against the flesh, and the body of sin shall
be at last destroyed.

As for them that will have peace without fighting, and hope to pass away
their lives comfortably, not troubling themselves with the devil and his
temptations, nor incurring the displeasure of the world, nor yet watching the
corruptions of their own evil hearts; we envy them not their peace, but
pity them; hoping, and wishing, and desiring God in our prayers, that he will
rowse them up out of their fondness, and set them forth to know, and meet, and
resist, and overcome their enemies.

Be hearty in resisting: the event will give leave.
Thirdly, let the people of God be encouraged hereby, to go on stoutly in
resisting the devil; and that in the full measure, and due manner, before
described. Let them buckle to them the whole armor of God, and still try it,
as David did Saul's, before he went against Galiah. Let them repair breaches,
and recover losses, and regaine time, and be ever watchful to save themselves
harmless; yea to disadvantage the enemy, and work him what displeasure they
can: which is, by furthering holiness to the uttermost, both in themselves and
others. Let them be bold as the righteous are affirmed to be, and go forth to
the fight confidently, assuring themselves of a comfortable return, and saying
as he to Goliath, This day will the Lord deliver thee into mine hand, and I will
smite thee, and take thine head from thee, 1 Samuel 17.46. I know the event will
be gladsome, and therefore (by Gods grace) I will resist unto blood, to the
last gasp.

Well, hold that resolution, and the victory is thine, with the spoils, and
crown of it.

Provide for Satan's return and re-entry.
The unclean spirit, when he is gone out of a man, finds no rest any where:
all places are dry, and uncomfortable unto him: and therefore he resolves
with himself, I will return unto my house, from whence I came out, Luke
11.24. Though he must have the full foil at last, yet he will come and do
mischief as long as he can. And some he has gained by importunity. Others,
whom he could not win, he endangered shrewdly; put them to much
disqoietnesse; got them to commit great errors, especially coming upon them
unawares, and soon after his departure from them. Wisdom would therefore,
that every breathing time be well improued, and rather preparation made for a
new encounter, than triumphs for the old. Wise seamen provide for a storm in
a calm: and wise Captains stand upon their guard as well after a battle, as
before; fearing, lest (as the Amalekites) they lose more by their security, 1 Samuel 30.20.
than they got by their prowess and magnanimity. Let the same mind and
wisdom be in Christians also: still to be in expectation of the devil and his
hostility, and provide for him accordingly. And let them think it enough,
that they be at last rid of him, never to be again molested. When they have
finished their course, and fought the good fight of faith, then the crown
shall be set upon their heads: out now is their probation.

Folly to excuse our selves by blaming the devil.
Last of all, note here, how false it is to say the devil is the cause of thy
sin, and he must bear the blame of it. No: he was not resifted: if he had,
he must have fled away: this promise of God is most faithsull, and he that
made it, is able to make it good; that (upon thy resistance, the only necessary
condition) it should have been performed. Yet this is the ordinary allegation
of carnal people, when they are taken in any gross sin: Oh the devil owed
them a spite, and now he has paid them: the devil tempted them, and they
could not choose, and they hope they shall not be blamed for it. Smaller sins
they see not, nor the devils malice in them: and greater sins they put off
wholly to him. So for no sins they betake them to serious repentance, never
see any need of Christ, never crave mercy at the hands of God as they ought,
nor entertain the due watchfulness, for preventing the like mischief another
time. Such must know, that their sin cannot be so posted off, but will come
home to them again. That the devil tempted them, is the devils sin, and he
shall be damned for it: but, that themselves consented, and yielded to his
temptation, is their sin, and let them take heed they be not damned for it
likewise. Eve said, Genesis 3.13.
the serpent beguiled her, and so he did: but that would not serve her turn.
Take heed of saying and pleading as she did, lest the like inevitable
necessity of undergoing the punishment befall thee also. Happy is he only,
that resists the devil: from such an one only, he shall fly away. The Lord
make us all wise, and watchful, and valorous, to epsy his assaults, and
oppose him in his stratagems, that so we may be for ever freed from that
misery and condemnation, which he and his angels are adjudged unto.

AN APPENDIX of certain Sermon-Notes upon
GENESIS 3.15. I will put enmity between thee and the woman.


Quest. HOw may I know, whether I have rightly conceived, and do rightly
manage my enmity against the devil?

Marks of right enmity against the devil.
Answer. By these marks:

I will put enmity between thee and the woman. Many hate the devil, but it
is only by the force of nature, conceiving him to be a grim black fellow, with
horns, and staring eyes, and cloven feet: or according to the common notions
they have received from others, from the talk of people, or the like vain
occasion: Not from the word, for they are strangers to it: nor from the
ministry of the word, for they despise it, at least neglect it, and will not
be ruled by it.

Whereas a true Christian conceiueth his hatred of the devil in the
ministry, or in a serious perusal of the holy Scriptures. While he
attends these means, appointed for dispossessing the strong man, he finds
a stronger than he joining himself to him, and with him; even the blessed
Spirit of God, 1 Ioh. 4.4.
who is stronger than he that is in the world. So Christ professed, Luke 10.18.
that he saw Satan fall from heaven like lightning, to wit, in the Ministry
of the Disciples, whom he sent, and heard relating their good success. Let
this be the touchstone of your enmity, and if it hold the trying, it is true:
otherwise counterfeit, and only pretended.

And this is a needful condition, because God only can maintain, that enmity
which is necessary for us, and only an enmity of Gods setting can prevail
against the devil.

therefore to hate this evil one, because we will revenge our Lords cause and
quarrel. The most hate the devil, after their fashion: but why? only because
he would draw them into hell with himself: and if it were not for those
endless torments, they would never stand upon hating the devil. For we see,
that when they can put those torments out of mind, by iollitie and security,
they will be as busy as Bees, in doing the devils work, and cast off all the
faithful service of God, it may be, scoff at it, it may be persecute it. So
do not they that hate him indeed: They consider him as one that has
dishonored God, and would still dishonor him, and does daily in many: and
they would have God honored by many, but especially by themselves: And
therefore he that hinders, shall be the object of their indignation and
derestation. A true natural subject indeed, goes to war for the safety of
the King and his kingdom, others for other respects: so here.

By unlawful things, conceive here what things are lawful.
according to the counsel, Resist the devil, and he will fly from you. Every
one will resist him whom he hates, will stand against him, use all possible
violence, and repel him to his uttermost power. So if thou hate the devil,
and take him for thine enemy, thou will resist him, and use him as an enemy:
And it is a slim barred, when the parties agree in the maine matter of the
contention. Yet so do carnal persons: They say they hate and defy the devil
with all their heart, and yet they yield him that, which he mainly strives
for, namely sin and disobedience against God.

The beginning of resistance upon the devil.
The beginning of this resistance is by unfeigned repentance: when a man mourns
for his sins, and grieueth that he has so long served the devil: he hates
and loathes himself in this respect, and sees he had perished for ever, if
he had gone on in the old trade of sin. And those who feel not this godly
remorse and sorrow, never yet knew indeed what the enmity in our Text means.
By nature a man is only what the devil made him, and of himself he will so
continue. Therefore he must feel a perfect change, and hate and deny
himself; and so doing, he begins to vex that hellish adversary, who is
troubled with nothing but the conversion of sinners, and the companions
thereof, with the means and effects.

The continuing and following of it.
Afterward he is resisted by a careful and watchful course of life: while a
man dissolueth his works by mortification, and endeavors after full
holiness, and labors to keep off his temptations by the armor of God. And
this we have limited by certain conditions and marks, in the treatise on
Iam. 4.7. whereby much labor is now saved, and this discourse becomes short
which otherwise should be large.

They therefore that ordinarily fall into the same sins, and make little
conscience of their ways: They also that know in their own hearts, that they
commit sin securely; without watchfulness to the contrary, it is not against
the purpose of their soul, they do it freely, they humble not themselves for
it as an heinous matter, but entertain it willingly, and hold it peaceably,
with ease and quietness of conscience: All these, and all that fail habitually
in any of the conditions of right resistance, do not hate the devil in truth,
but counterfeit an enmity, which at last they shall see was deceiptfull, and
shall rue the time, that they framed to themselves so childish an hatred
against so manfull an enemy.

dry places of the world, Luke 11.24.
as the Scripture speaks; that is, such as wherein is no moisture or
refreshment for the soul, but ignorance and profaneness reigns, and a man
shall rather be hindered than furthered in godliness: As for example, blind
parishes where is no vision, alehouses, play houses, smoke-houses, and all
ungodly meetings: Here the devil has a kind of right, and special power
over the sons of men; as in that instance of Tertullian, In meo eam inueni,
Lib. de spectac. c. 26. Eiusmodi daemoniis penetrabiles fiunt.
I took her upon my own ground; so answered the devil to the Exorcist, which
adjured and asked him, why he invaded a Christian woman, being at a Play.

It is true, he compasses the earth to and fro, comes even where the
immortal seed of the word is sown, to steal it away, and enters into the
holiest closets where the heartiest prayers are preferred unto God: And in none
of these may we be secure. But in places of lewd resort, and in the
companionship of evil men, he is specially present, as the King and chief
man, speaking, and scoffing, and working by his instruments, what himself
would if he had flesh to appear in. Enmity in the heart against this wicked
one will either keep the feet altogether out of such places, which is best and
safest; or soon carry the feet from them, which is the next point of wisdom.
So does the blessed man, Psalm. 1.1. Blessed is the man that walks not in the
counsel of the ungodly, nor stands in the way of sinners, nor sits in the
seat of the scornful.

Which makes strongly against them that mingle themselves with such society,
and securely frequent such places, or live contentedly in such parishes. This
is amity, not enmity. Howsoever, it is too much familiarity: and an ill sign,
that the heart is at too much league with the devil. A good heart would keep
further off him.

The fifth mark is, the devil, together with a faithful depending upon him
for such strength: as a man will make all the friends he can, to disappoint and
annoy one whom he hates: he will call in company, and not trust his own only
provision, and rather get too many on his side, than want help: so here: A
special piece of our Christian armor is prayer, as the Apostle reckons,
Ephesians. 6.18. Praying always with all prayer and supplication in the Spirit,
etc. We had need crave wisdom to epsy temptations when they come, and grace
to repel them, and power to reject the pleasures of sin, or other wages of
unrighteousness whatsoever: And that God would maintain in us this godly
enmity, and keep it for ever in the purpose of our heart, to hate that
enemy; whom otherwise, of our selves we are ready to love and join withal,
as a very friend.

They that are not so careful, are too too careless. He can do little, that
cannot call for help against an enemy. Yet natural men think themselves good
enough for the devil. Good hearts, and good faith, and a good deal of
spetting, shall chase him quite away. So they forsake the rock of their
health, and forget the strong God of their salvation.

Sixthly, another who bears him no good will, but watches all opportunities
against him, will be sure for his own part to let fall nothing (in word or
deed) which may disadvantage himself, or advantage that his adversary. So
will thou watch against this enemy. The devil does often get ground of us
through our own folly; as namely, by the passions of anger, fear, and the
like; by natural affections, as love to parents, children, kinsmen; by
refections of nature, as about meat, and drink, and sleep, and apparel; by
wordly businesses, and the distractions that attend them; by covetousness, by
earthlinesse, by too much closeness and niggardliness: So he got within
Judas: and within Peter, by fearfulness: and by choler and fury, he gets
within us not seldom, as the Apostle seems to argue, Ephe. 4.26, 27. Be
angry, and sin not: let not the Sun go down upon your wrath: Neither give
place to the devil.

Which bends mainly against them that are altogether open and loose in such
things; no watchfulness, no jealousy over their deceitful hearts; and so
give the devil as much advantage against them, as he desires. And this is of
all other the most killing mischief, when he works in our troubled
affections, and destroys ere we be aware.

The last mark of right enmity is, endeavor to thrust down the Kingdom of
the devil in others: as a man that hates another, will do him all the
mischief he can, hinder his profit, impeach his credit and good name, incense
his friends, and raise up enemies against him. Thus the Apostles went up and
down, shaking the strong holds of Satan, and casting down every high thing
that exalted it self against the knowledge of Christ. 2 Cor. 10.4, 5. Thus if
one who has authority, does use his authority for the suppressing of
disorders, the shaming and punishing of evil members, the preserving of the
holiness of the Lords Sabbaths: If one that is rich, will be at charges to set
up, and hold up the Ordinances of God, especially the preaching of the word,
which gives the devil the greatest blow he can receive: If Masters of
families do chase away riotous and wicked persons, and set good in the room,
and seek to make all an holy company to the Lord: If private Christians, and
one neighbor to another, shall use admonition in due season, call one another
from sinful courses, and to the house of God, or any other way further the
sanctification and salvation of their brethren: They shall do worthy offices
against the devil, and show themselves to be his right sworn enemies. Christ
our Captain, who struck at the head of the serpent, was for this purpose
manifested, that he might destroy the works of the devil, 1 John 3.8. So also
does every true Christian, who partakes of his anointing: He also will
manifest himself, what he is, and whose he is, by endeavoring every way he
can, to destroy the works of the devil. And they that are not thus affected,
have not yet the right enmity in their hearts: they profess to hate the
devil, but love him well enough.

Three sorts of men reproved.
A reproof it is to diverse.

If these be marks of right enmity, then how many are there, that must needs
say (if they will speak truth) that they never yet hated the devil as they
ought? But specially, three sorts of people come here to be reproved.

1. They that think not (...) this enmity.
First, some living ciuilly and vnblamably among men, are altogether secure of
this hellish enemy, and never imagine, that either the devil practices any
thing against them, or they ought to watch against him. They think not at all
on such matters. They cannot tell, whether there be any such enmity or no, or
should be. Yea many take it for their happiness, that they are never troubled
with thoughts about the devil: Oh they are in good case, and God has blessed
them fairly, that they feel not the afflictions of conscience which such and
such feel, and need not complain as they do. And they never epsy the devil
till afterward, that is, when he has got them to do what he would have them
do; it may be, never but in the great and gross sins of others, Oh the
devil was busy and great with him that committed murder, that hanged
himself, or did some notorious wickedness. But they never watch before hand,
to see or prevent him: And they are presumptuously confident, that they are
safe, and the devil shall never be so great with them, as he was with such
and such: That is all their preparation, that is all their care to keep him
out.

But as for the shaking and supplanting of his Kingdom in their brethren, here
they are deeply secure, and do nothing at all: never care to execute any of
those things, in the seventh: The never see the power of Satan in men's hearts
and lives: They know what it is, and how miserable, to be corporally possessed
of the devil, and wish means may be had to release them; but, what it is to
be spiritually possessed of him, they know not, therefore desire no means for
their good. Indeed how should they tender the welfare of others, and have
compassion on the souls of others, who never knew their own bondage, nor
rightly pitied their own souls?

2. They that embrace the contrary amity.
Secondly, some are so far from waging enmity against the devil, that they
have entered into most near amity with him, and give up themselves to be ruled
by him at his pleasure. There seems to be but one head, and one heart, and one
hand, and one aim between them. Their counsels, and affections, and actions,
and intentions are one and the same; only for rebellion against God. I mean
all profane persons, who go on in a constant and customary practice of any
sin, or many sins. If they should do the devil a spite by daily
frequenting of alehouses, by tippling, by gaming, by swearing, or any such
abominations, then they were bitter enemies to him, and they would spite him
cruelly: for, this they do day by day, nothing more. But every wise man sees,
that this pleases the devil exceedingly, and he is delighted in nothing so
much. Therefore his they are, and of them Saint John says, 1 John. 3.8.
He that commits sin, is of the devil. They agree with him, as the silly
Israelites with Absalom in his conspiracy, 2 Samuel 15.11. They went in their
simplicity, and knew not any thing. They are traitors to God ere they be
aware, and serve Gods greatest enemy, whom they pretend to hate. None of those
vile persons will yield he is the servant and child of the devil, but will
scorn the motion, and profess the quite contrary. But that is nothing, and
we must prove shortly, that wicked men are the seed of the hellish serpent.
Every one is borne a limb of the devil, and he whom grace alters not, does
so continue, resembling his father in the grossest wickedness; yet some more,
some less, as children are like their parents, some more than others.

3. They that help the devil, in stead of hindering him.
Thirdly, some there are, who, in stead of hating the devil, and hindering him
as they should, do rather gratify him, and help him what they can. I do not
say they purpose to do him a good turn, and mean absolutely to set him up
for the king and god of the world; but in effect they do as much: they do
that which does advance the devil and his kingdom among men: Let them be
tried by their works, as our Savior argued with the Jews, and then, though
they say never so often they are the children of Abraham, and of God, yet they
will be found to be the children of the devil, John 8.44.
for his works they do: More; they are indeed his friends, his loving and
dear friends, for his works they set forward, and procure as many as they can,
to join with them in the same wickedness. As for example: how many are there,
who set themselves to make their brother drunken, and lay him under the table?
How many, who force oaths upon their neighbor, and twit a man for a Puritan,
who will not rap out a fearful oath, as they would have him? How many, that
begin misse-rule and vile disorders in a place, and that with a strong hand,
and a stiff neck, purposely to draw others from the obedience of the
Ministry, and make them like to themselves in an vnreformable obstinacy? and
so in other instances. Woe unto them: for they lend the devil their helping
hand, and strive against true holiness, which he also strives against. This
is not enmity, but amity in the highest degree. Let them look before hand
what the end will be.

Motives unto enmity against the evil spirits.
And let us all labor for this enmity, so limited and described, as we have
seen: Using for spurs and motives, these ensuing considerations.

but through pride, or unbelief, or some other act of disobedience, they fell
away, and left their first habitation; choosing rather to leave God and his
blessedness, than their own opinion conceived of, and within themselves. And
they are still spightfull against his Majesty, oppose his honor, resist his
counsels and ordinances, obscure his glory, deface his image on man, and
trouble the order of the creatures. Now what good subject does not hate to the
death, one that is an arrant traitor, still practicing against his Prince? So
should we be affected in this case, toward this enemy.

possibly can. They accuse us, and raise up slanderers, persecutors, other
enemies; with storms, and tempests, and witches, and other mischiefs, to
disturb and fret us, and work us to impatience, blasphemy, atheism; as he
said of Job, Job 1.11.
Touch him now, and he will blaspheme thee to thy face; and so he intended in
his own wickedness against him, using also his wife to that purpose, chap.
2.9.
Do thou yet retain thine innocence? blaspheme God and die. And there is
no possibility he should be better affected to us: therefore hate him.

This they intend principally, fully, willingly, maliciously. Therefore also
all their sins are sins against the holy Ghost; therefore can never be
pardoned, neither in this life, nor the life to come. They are reprobates, held
in the chains of black darkness against the judgment of the great day.
Briefly, there cannot be the like object for our hatred, in all the world:
therefore hate them.

follow as dear children, Ephesians. 5.1.
does hate them vnreconcileably. He has appointed no Redeemer, nor Mediator
for them; has made no promise of life to them, nor covenant of mercy, nor
given them the least hold of him, whereby they might be reconciled: But
contrarily, he has written in the Scripture the sentence of their
condemnation, has nominated his children to be their Judges, 1 Cor. 6.3. and
has appointed them in the mean time to exercise all hostility against the
devil, both here; and Ephesians. 4.27. Give no place to the devil: and Iam. 4.7.
Resist the devil, and he will fly from you, and elsewhere. Then follow your
Captain. Do as ye see me do, said Gideon.

Michael, who fought with the dragon, and overcame him. Yea they rejoiced, that
the devils were subdued unto them, Luke 10.17. see Ephesians. 6.12. And though good
men have sometimes been sore shaken, and foiled, yet they have got ground
again, and recovered their losses, and done him the more hurt for his
mischief against them; shaking his kingdom the more manfully. Then join with
these armies of the Lord, and march on with them. And know, that none is on
their side, but such as are against God; none but carnal and worldly men, none
but the seed of the serpent, the children of the devil; none but they whose
example must be odious to us as hell it self. Count that fight good, which
good men maintain, and evil men traitorously let alone, or join with the
adversary.

feared, nor served, nor any way truly regarded, till this enmity against the
devil be wrought in the heart. Thus the terms of our conversion are
described, Act. 26.18. To turn them from darkness to light, and from the
power of Satan unto God. And therefore, as our Savior Christ says, Ye cannot
serve God and Mammon, Matt. 6.24.
and, The one must be hated, that the other may be embraced; so say I, that the
devil must be hated if God must be loved, we cannot love or serve both
together. Well a man may play on both sides, pretending love to God while he
does what the devil would have him do, and pretending an hatred of the devil
while he persecuteth the will and work of God: But indeed and in truth he
cannot love God, till the devil be truly and unfeignedly hated. And, where is
no true love of God, there is no true faith, nor hope, nor patience, nor
humility, nor any sound grace whatsoever.

for us, with the purchase of his own blood.



our selves, who would be so sillily deluded, and shall for ever curse both:
for he and his angels are cast out, and their place is found no more in heaven.

A Postscript.
CYPRIAN in his Exhortation to Martyrdom has these words:

PArum est, etc. It is a small matter, that we stir up the people of GOD
with the Trumpet of our voice, unless also, by lessons taken out of Gods Word,
we strengthen the faith of Believers, and their virtue which is dedicated and
devoted unto GOD. And what does more suit with our (Pastoral) care, than that,
by continual exhortations, we fence the Congregation committed to us of God,
and the Army gathered together in the heavenly camp, against the battery and
darts of the devil? For a soldier cannot be fit for war, if he be not
first trained in the field; And he that would get the garland by wrestling,
yet shall not be crowned, if he do not first practice, and try his skill,
and strength. It is an old Adversary, and an ancient Enemy, with whom we
must combat. Six thousand years are almost finished, This he wrote about the
year of the world 5457. Eusebius. August. Oros. Sulpit. Scuerus. But there seems
to be an error
since the devil did set upon mankind. So that now, by his long standing, and
great experience, he has learned perfectly all sorts of temptations, and all
the feats and snares of destroying. If he overtake the soldier of Christ
unprepared, or ignorant, or not careful, and watchful with his whole mind,
he circumuents him unawares, and deceiues him in his simpleness. But if a man
keep the Commandments of God, and stoutly cleave to the footsteps of Christ,
and then shall withstand and resist him, he must needs be overcome; because
Christ whom we profess, is invincible.

See here (Christian Reader) the consent of this ancient Father, and glorious
Martyr of Christ, to the former doctrine. If thou receiuest the testimony of
man; know the testimony of God is greater. But be sure by all these
admonitions, to buckle on thy harness, and look for this grand enemy, and
resist him. Leave this intermedling so much with matters of State, and petty
adversaries, and attend this principal principally. For, what will it avail
thee, to be free from men, and in bondage to the devil? what good, to Lord it
in earth, and be guilty of hell fire? to conspire with thine own deceitful
heart, abused by the devil (where the end will be death eternal) and
discover the treacheries of men, to their utter disappointment and disgrace?
Will this quit cost? Call therefore thy thoughts and affection^ homeward. Look
to thine own house, 2 Samuel 6.20.
and bless it. Mark the possessions and strong holds of the strong man, and
cast him out. If he deceive thee, how great is that deceit? Thrice unhappy is
that man, and more, who lives too well known to others, and dies unknown to
himself. It had been good for that man, if he had never been borne.

One alarm more, and so I lay aside my Trumpet. Resist the devil, resist,
resist: not scorn, but resist: and resist him in all wicked motions
whatsoever: resist him by the weapons appointed, the armor of God; resist him
early, stoutly, universally, wisely, constantly: Be careful herein, and
jealous, that thou resistest not aright: And remember that thou have not yet
resisted unto blood, striving against sin; and provide so to do. The Lord give
thee a heart and courage hereunto, and afterward set the crown of victory on
thy head. Amen.

FINIS.

