A BREIFE DISCOVERY OF THE IDLE ANIMAD-VERSIONS OF MARK RIDLEY Doctor in
PHYSIC upon a Treatise entitled, Magneticall Aduertisements.

-- moueat Cornicula risum
Furtiuis nudata coloribus --
LONDON, Printed by Edward Griffin for Timothy Barlow, at the sign of Time in
Paul's Churchyard. 1618.

TO THE RIGHT NOBLE AND WORthy minded industrious Gentlemen, and others who are
any way addicted unto MAGNETICALL Knowledge.
SO it is that for a long time I have bin greatly delighted in the
contemplation of the properties and virtues of this admirable creature of God
which we call the Magnet, or Loadstone. And as my leisure and occasions have
served by conference from time to time, with the skilfullest Nauigators of our
age, by reading all the Treatises (as came unto my knowledge) of such as had
written thereof, and therewithal trying by practice the truth of those things
which I doubted of, and lastly finding some things by my own experience of
good importance by others not at all mentioned. The chief of these which I
judged profitable for common use I did set forth in a small Treatise entitled
Magneticall Aduertisements. And although of mine own loving affection toward
such (as ye are) I have bin always ready to further you in these knowledges
the best I could, yet I do assure you faithfully, that diverse of good
judgment, learning, and eminent place, (unto whom I communicated my
experiments) very vehemently urged my publishing of them.

A copy of this Treatise being by stealth written out of my Manuscript, by one
that understood it not, and by that means committed diverse errors, this Doctor
Ridley devoured some of them, and by his endeavoring to square my propositions
according to his own conceits, and so superciliously to control (and censure
the things which he understood not) he has missed of the truth very far and
wide, and has herein wronged both himself, and me, and his readers, but most
of all his believers; and yet such is his kind disposition, that he has
purloyned out of the scambled copy of my Treatise, for to adorn his own
Treatise of Magneticall bodies and Motions all these that follow; as in his
Treatise, Fol. 7. The hilly knobbes, and angulous parts etc. for 17 lines. Fol.
8. The greater stones etc. 5 lines. Fol. 9. Steel and iron etc. 4 lines. Fol.
10. The 14. 17. 18. 19. figures are mine. Fol. 18. 19. The 1. 2. 3. 7.
(...)mine, the 4. Doctor Gilberts. Fol. 22. Every part and piece of a
Loadstone, etc. 7 lines. Fol. 27. If a wire be touched etc. 5 lines. Fol. 30.
and 31. It is to be observed in the fashion of a Magnet etc. 16 lines. Fol. 36.
For although that naturally etc. 9 lines. Fol. 51. and 52. Also if a Magnet be
fastened etc. 4 lines. This practice is profitable for Travelers etc. 14 lines
more. Fol. 63. 64. The best way to touch etc. 11 lines. And some have thought it
better etc. 14 lines. Fol. 66. Set two Loadstones etc. 3 lines. Fol. 71. An
Adamant does loose much of his virtue etc. 3 lines. Fol. 72. That 20. Chapter
(only a few words chopped and changed) is whole mine. Fol. 83. And for this
cause the Adamant etc. 3 lines. Fol. 89. A piece of Steel well tempered etc. 2
lines. The two next are his own, and very absurd. Fol. 90. Now it is to be
observed etc. 10 lines. Fol. 95. The needles and compasses etc. 14. lines.
So that it cannot but seem to any indifferent person very strange, that
Doctor Ridley would publicly so traduce me, and that by name, and so
contemptuously (...) frivolous Animaduersions, and could never (...) my name,
no not so much as once to acknowledge it in all these things which he has by
stealth learned of me, and inserted into his Magneticall Motions for his own,
the which with their consequents if you withdraw from his Treatise, you will
leave his motions very dull. For except this Ridley, had ploughed with my
Heifor, he had not known my Riddle. Sic vos non vobis.

In my aduertisements indeed, I made mention that some body had in this manner
dealt euilly with me, and I reproved certain faults that some body had
committed, especially in the fundamental Magneticall heare-sayes of misnaming
of the true North and South, in Magnets and Magneticall bodies, and in making
the Inclinatory needle with the one end heavier than the other, and some
others: But these two especially, for because they do draw on many others, as
they do both in his Book, and wheresoever they shall be admitted, they will
increase like a snow-ball, waxing still greater as they go, and all his
dawbing of them with his untempered mortar in his silly Animaduersions do amend
the matter nothing at all, but make it far worse than before. For the common
good, I might not let them pass unreproved, and yet I would not publicly name
him, but used this word some body. The like himself has, viz. Some say, some
labor to clear, some think etc. in his book meaning me, being not
contented only to usurp that which was properly mine for his own (as
aforesaid) but also he took upon him (although very ignorantly) to confute
some of mine under these terms, and this only out of a stolen Manu-script.
Whereas all men know that Manu-scripts ought to be uncontrolled until the
Author has published them, who may alter and change things in the mean space
as he thinks good.

He styles himself principal Physician unto the Emperor of Russia, the which
many men wonder at, being so young as he than was, and supposed that he went
over only as Physician unto our Merchants there, that he should in so short a
time become that Emperors principal Physician. If he were, he sped better then
Bomelius did, who is said to have died there in that cold climat of the
extremest hot kind of Calenture.

Out of all question, somewhat it is more then ordinary, that makes him of so
hauty a spirit, so to brave the world with such prodigious assertions of his
Magneticals, in, and above the Moon; the earths Magneticall circular Motions,
and his paltry abusing of the holy scriptures to support his lunaticke fictions
under the name of Magneticall Philosophy.

There are yet two texts of Scripture, which it is a wonder how they escaped
him; the one is in Iosuah 10. ver. 12. and the other is in Esaias 38. ver. 8. In
the one: That the Sun and the Moon stood still the space of a whole day: The
other, that the shadow in Achas dial went back 10 degrees, and the Sun in
the sky returned 10 degrees by the which he was descended.

For it is his guise to make contrary conclusions unto that which the
Scriptures affirm, and therefore blame him not, if he do so despise
Aristotle, who never taught any such Logic.

Now therefore that ye may in few words understand the untruth of the earths
Magneticall Motion, that is so mainely emblazoned by him, and the weakness of my
Animaduersors Magneticall skill, you must know, that the Magneticall Motion is
a natural inclination of two Magnets or Magneticall bodies, that may freely
move, respecting the one the other within the Orb of their forces with their
convenient ends, that is to say, the North end of the one always respecting
the South of the other.

If the two Magnets or Magneticall bodies be of like quantity, form, and
goodness, their Motions will be of like quicknes of the one toward the other;
but if they differ in any of these, their Motions will be so much the slower.

Now forasmuch as all Magneticall motions are always respective of the one
Magnet or Magneticall body toward another, it follows by necessary
consequent, that no Magnet or Magneticall body, can either move, or be moved of
it self, but is utterly void of all intrinsecall or selfe-Motion, the true
and only cause of his Motion being evermore without it self.

And therefore mine Animaduersors selfe-motion of the Globe of the earth
circularly, by Magneticall vigor, in the which he does so gallantly triumph;
is but an idle figment, and a mere Chimera: but his definition of Magneticall
bodies is very suitable unto it; viz. very monstrous; namely, That we define to
be a Magneticall body, which does remain and place it self in one place, or
kind of situation natural, not alterable, as all stars do, and the great
Regent globes of Saturn, Mars, Jupiter, the Sun and the Earth do: or such,
as with respect and attendance follow other globes, as the two stars which
support Saturn; the four attendants upon Jupiter, lately discovered by the
truncke-spectacle; the two trauersers about the Sun, called Venus and
Mercury; and the Moon, which does follow or go about the earth, and
respects the same always with one Pole, and therefore has a peculiar
Magneticall virtue, that guides her in this kind of situation.

Auditum admissi, risum teneatis amici, Any man that considers this goodly
definition, being the foundation and ground of his Magneticall discourse, and
the very first sentence of his book, and many the like fancies in his Motions
and and Animaduesions will easily discern what his Magneticall skill is, and
what a vanity it were for me, to spend any precious time to confute in
particular such unreasonable and senseless opinions, which have more need of
Helleborus to purge them out of his head, then Arguments to confute them in his
book. And in his frivolous animaduersions seeking to maintain his former
errors, and he being so snappish to have them amended, he makes them ten
times worse then they were before, and far more palpable: But my tetricall
Animaduersor must be ruled by reason, and afford all those his patience that
do believe the holy Scriptures, which flatly do deny the Earths motion, and
affirm the motion of the Sun, Moon and Stars, in the whole current thereof,
as Psalm. 19. 6. 104. 5. Joshua 10. 12. 13. 14. Esaias 38. 8. etc.

Also that he will give men leave to credit their senses, in matters subject
unto sense, and not repugnant unto reason; and that he will not be offended
with those who do pitifully laugh at his Magneticall Astronomy, with those
topsituruy motions, like Voluitur Ixion, and se sequitur que fugitque.

For although some great learned men in those Sciences, have used the supposed
motion of the earth, for an Hypothesis, serving their ready calculations; as
they have done also their supposed Epicycles, for the motions of the Planets
and their courses: yet that is no reason for to avouch them for to be in
themselves true and real things, according unto some men's vain fancies, who
do argue after this sort.

It is an easier matter, and more (as they say) agreeable unto nature, for so
small a body as the globe of the Earth is in comparison of the heavens, to
move circularly in the space of four and twenty hours, then it is for the
huge Universe so to do; and that which is done with less hazard, is to be
preferred before the like, which may not be performed without fear of a
greater danger, with diverse other reasons like unto these.

But although such as these are, may go current in a mechanciall Tradesman
shop, yet they are very insufficient to be allowed for good, by men of
learning, and Christians by profession, who know right well, that it is great
folly for to oppose that which we call difficult, unto an omnipotent power, Who
stretches out the heavens like a curtain, and spreads them out as a tent to
dwell in, Esaias 40. ve. 22. He stretches out the North over the empty, and
hangs the earth upon nothing, etc. Job 26. ver. 7.

And that which we call Nature, it being nothing else but Gods ordinance; there
can be nothing contrary, but all things agreeable unto nature, which God has
ordained. But God has ordained the motion of the Sun, Moon, and Stars (as
aforesaid) and the vnmooueablenesse of the earth; therefore this is more easy,
and more agreeable unto nature; which is preserved only by obeying Gods
ordinance, and herein only that consists, and has her being. And that the
earths magneticall virtue has no power at all to perform or help any such
motion, as is also before made manifest.

But that mine Animaduersors magneticall skill is ascended up into our Moon it
self; yea, and yet higher, far beyond the Moon, unto the other Planets and
Stars, and into every one of them, this is such a point of his Magneticall
Philosophy, that would make Stupidity it self astonished to hear of it.

There was (as the Poets feign) a certain King of Phrygia, that had a gift
given him of the Gods, at his own request, that whatsoever he touched with his
body should be gold, but by that means being ready to starve, because his
victuals were also turned to gold, he entreated earnestly that he might
surrender his gift.

It seems that mine Animaduersor endeavors for to make show, that he has
a stranger gift; namely, that by his very looks (for his looks, with his
Truncke-spectacle, are his means) he can turn all things to be Magneticall,
that he does earnestly behold; He has scowred the Heavens already, even from
the one end unto the other, that both Planets and Stars are become magneticall
in his head; what tumultuous stir may they breed there, no man can tell, it
is his safest way to confine his Magnetismes unto the earth, as their natural
seat, and not suffer them to clamber up into the skies, where they have nothing
to do, lest that infinite dispersion of his magneticall knowledge, do in the
end ouercharge his brain, and make him magnetically mad, or at the least to
incur the censure of him that said, Delphinum siluis appingit, fluctibus aprum.

As therefore whilst his wits are yet his own, it is his surest way (like the
King of Phrygia) to surrender that gift again, to leave his trifling with the
holy Scriptures, and to be no more a censuring Animaduersor in matters that he
has but small skill in: and that he will hereafter learn to be wise unto
sobriety, Metirise quemque suo modulo ac pede verum est. And forasmuch as his
animaduersions contain nothing at all, of any truth and importance against
mine Aduertisements, but only many ignorant, many wilful mistakings,
contradictions and cauillings, and maintainings of his former absurdities, the
which the more they are stirred by him, the more they stink. I will content my
self with this brief discovery of this Animaduersor, and his animaduersions,
and so to leave him for this time peeping in his truncke-spectacle at his
celestial magneticall regent globes, with his proud motto: Non sufficit orbis.
To try whether he can yet find us here hence any more new glorious dreams,
whereby he may either increase the number of the hundred of merry tales, or else
augment the noble history of Huyn of Burgis.

And whereas he charge me opprobriously for to have in my Treatise nothing of
mine own, but all of other men's, and some of his: mine answer is, that he
knows in his own conscience (if he have any) that he speaks a manifest
untruth, contrary unto his own knowledge in both. Yea, I am verily persuaded,
that if he would but give his own conscience, leave to speak out, it would
ring him a tale in his ear unto this effect: That he himself knows right
well, that where my knowledge (even such as it is) in these matters fails:
all the store of skill that he has, cannot advance it, no not so much as one
strawes breadth, notwithstanding all the great countenance he sets on it,
with his swelling titles of his Magneticall bodies and motions, and his
Aristarchicall censuring of my Aduertisements. Nil dignum tanto feret hic
promissor hiatu. And for my just defense, I will rehearse but these few things
(yet such as are of principal importance in this Art) whereas I could name
diverse other.

I was the first that made the inclinatory instrument transparant, and to be
used pendant, with a glass on both sides, and a ring on the top, whereas
Doctor Gilberts has but of one side, and to be set on a foot. And moreover, I
hanged him in a compass box, where with two ounces weight he will be fit for
use at sea.

Another is, that I was the first that found out and showed the difference
between iron and steel, and their tempers for magneticall uses, which has
given life and quickening, universally to all magneticall instruments whatsoever.

I was also the first that showed the right way of touching magneticall needles.

I was the first that found out and showed the peecing and cementing of
Loadstones.

I was the first that found out and showed the reasons why a Loadstone being
double capped, must take up so great weight.

These things (ye worthy Gentlemen) have I mentioned only to give you
content and satisfaction: For although my magneticall knowledge be no manner of
way gainefull unto me, as all that are acquainted with me, know how little I
do esteem of it in any such respect, yet forasmuch as I have published my
Magneticall Aduertisements of my very earnest affection toward such as ye
are, and dedicated them unto one right worthy Gentleman of your Society in
steed of all, even for your sakes I could not suffer my pains and good will
toward you, to be so scornfully trampled under foot (with out some gain
saying) and pratled out of conceit with cauilling only, and multiplicity of
vain words and peevish brauadoes, The Lord prosper you in all laudable
knowledge and vetuous practice.

Yours in all hearty affection, W. BARLOW.

