A REPLY UNTO M. HARDINGES ANSWER: By perusinge whereof the discrete, and
diligent Reader may easily see, the weak, and unstable grounds of the Roman
Religion, which of late has been accounted Catholic. By John Jewel
Bishop of Sarisburie.

3. Esdrae. 4. Magna est Veritas, and praeualet.
Great is the Truth, and prevails.
Ex Edicto Imperatorum Valent in* and Martiani* in Council. Chalcedon. Action.
3. Qui post semel inuentam veritatem aliud quaerit, Mend^^ cium quaerit, non
veritatem.
After the Truth is once found, who so ever seeks further, he seeks not
for the Truth, but for a Lie.
Imprinted at London in Fleetestreate, at the sign of the Black Oliphante, by
Henry VVykes. Anno. 1565. With special Privilege.

Unto the Christian Reader.
PErusinge a certain book lately set forth in the name of M. Hardinge, and
weighinge the substance, and parcelles of the same, good Christian Reader, I
called to mind these words spoken sometime by Socrates the Philosopher,
touching his Accusers, in his own defense before the Judges: Plato in
Apologia Socratis.
My Lords, in what sort your affections have been sturred with mine
Accusers eloquence, while ye heard them speak, I cannot tell. But well I
vvote, for mine own part, I me self, whom it touches most, was almost
persuaded to believe, that al, they said, was true: yea, although it were
against me self. So handesomely they can tell their tale: and so likely, and
so smoothely they conueigh their matters. Every word, they spoke, had
appearance of truth. And yet in good soothe they have scarcely uttered one
word of truth.

Thus then said Socrates of his Accusers. Even so may I say now of M. Harding.
For both in truth of matter, and also in probability of utterance, they are
much alike. Aristotle, touching the darckenesse, and doubtefulnesse of natural
worldly things, says thus, Quaedam falsa probabiliora sunt quibusda^ veris:
Certain falls heads (by mean of good utterance) have sometimes more
likelyhoode of Truth, then Truth it self. For Truth is many times brought
in simple, and naked, in poor array. But Falsheade must needs apparel, and
attiere her self with all her furnitures. Thus, many times we are deceived,
and embrace Falsheade in steed of Truth. And this is the misery of the
Simple. For neither are they hable to teach them selves: nor have they, where
with to discern their teachers. There was never, neither error so horrible,
but the Simple have received it: nor poison so deadly, but the Simple have
dronken it. In this sort S. Hierome says, Hieronym. contrae Luciferiaenos.
Infidelity was sometime published, emonge the Simple, under the name of
Faith: And Antichriste shall be adoured, and honored in steed of Christ.

Touching the state, and issue of the matter, where as I, upon just occasion
offered, and only in regard of the truth, sometime said in great audience,
that in any of these cases here moved, our Adversaries are not hable to
allege, either any one sufficient clause, or sentence out of the Scriptures,
Councels, or Ancient Fathers, or any certain usage, or example of the
primitive Church, M. Hardinge has here alleged, and published, not only one,
or other, but, as he him self says, and as it is thought of many, great
numbers of such Authorities of Scriptures, Councelles, and Doctors, both
Greek, and Latin, and many anciente, and evident examples to the contrary.
The places are noted: the words are clear: It cannot be denied: and, as it
is supposed, all the world is not hable to answer it. (...)
It seems now an undoubted truth, that as well these, as also al other the
Doctrines, and Orders of the Church of Rome, have been derived directly from
Christ him self, and his Apostles: and have continued the space of fifteen
hundred, and thertie years at the least. Therefore some have wisshed, my
words had been more warily qualified, and uttered with more circumspection.
Even this is it, that Aristotle said, The show of truth bears often more
likelyhoode, then truth it self. There is no way so easy, to beguile the
Simple, as the name, and countenance of Ancient Fathers. The Arian Heretics
alleged for them selves the Ancient Father Origin: The Nestorian heretics
alleged the Council of Nice: the Donatian Heretics alleged S. Cyprian: the
Pelagian Heretics alleged S. Ambrose, S. Hierome, and S. Augustine: Dioscorus
the Heretic alleged Gregorius, Cyrillus, and Athanasius: and complained
openly in the Council, even in like sort, and as justly, as M. Hardinge does
now: Ego defendo dogmata Santorum patrum. Ego illorum habeo testimonia, non
obiter, nec in transcursu, sed in ipsorum libris posita. In Council. Chalcedon*
Action. 1.
Ego cum Patribus eiicior. I maintain the Doctrine of the Holy Fathers. I have
their vvitnesses, not uttered by chance, or by the way, but written in
their books. I am excommunicate, and cast out, and bannisshed with the
Fathers. If the Devil can show him self, as the Angel of light: and if False
Prophets can come in the name of Christian much more may some others come in
the name, and under the color of certain Fathers.

But, good Christian Reader, for thy better understanding, least happily thou
be deceived, it may please thee to know, that these Authorities, alleged here
by M. Harding, are neither new, nor strange, nor unknown to any man of mean
learning but have been both often brought in, and alleged by others, and also
weighed, and examined, and thoroughly confuted long a go. In deed M. Harding
has added of him self some beauty of his eloquence, and majesty of words*
and yet not so much, nor such, but it may easily be answered, although not
with like eloquence, whereof in these cases there is no need, yet at least
with more truth. I trust, by indifferent conference hereof, thou shall soon
see the Ancient Fathers, Some that never were, by M. Hardinge surmised, and
countrefeited: Some untruly alleged: Some corruptely translated: Some
peruersly expounded: Some unaptly, and gui^efully applied: Their words
sometimes abbridged* sometimes enlarged: sometimes altered* sometimes
dissembled: Fabulous, and unknown Authorities newly founded: Childish
Arguments fondly concluded: To be short, infinite Untruths, and known
Untruths boldly auouched^ In consideration hereof S. Augustine cries out, O
rerum Naturae obscuritas: August* de Morib^ Ma^^chae. (...). ^. ca. 16.
quantum ^egmen est Falsitatis? O the Darkness of Natural things. What a
coouer^e have lies to lu^ke in? Therefore Socrates says, We may not believe
every Argument, that is shevved us, upon the sight. But must open it, and
search it, and look it through. For oftentimes it seems otherwise, then it
is. It seems strong without, and is weak within. King Agesilaus, when he
understood his Enemies of policy, to coouer the smalnesse, and weakness of
their bodies, had bomebasted, and embossed out their coats with great
quarters, that they might seem big, and mighty men, and that his soldiers
therewith were much dismaide, after he had overthrown, and slain them in the
field, pulled of their coats, and stripped them, and left them naked: and, when
he had caused his Soldiers to behold the poor, lither, sclender, wearishe
bodies, nothing like that, they seemed before, then said he unto them: Lo,
these be they, of whom ye stood so much afraid: these be their great
bodies: these be their mighty boanes. Even so, good Reader, if thou stand in
fear of these M. Hardinges Authorities, and Arguments, and think them
terrible, and invincible, for that they are embossed, and wrought out by art:
take them, rippe them, open them, search them, weighe them, strippe them
naked, shake them out, confer them with the places, from whence they were
taken: consider the Causes, and the Circumstances, what goes before, what
comes after: mark the Story of the time: examine the Judgment of other
Fathers: and thou shall marvel, wherefore thou stoodest so much afraid, or
ever thoughtest them to be invincible.

It were above al things to be desired of God, that his Heavenly Truth might
pass forth without these contrarieties, and quarrels of judgments: and many
godly wise men are much offended, to see it otherwise. But thus it has been
ever from the beginning. Cain was against Abel: Esau against Jacob: The
Kingedome of Darkness was ever against the Kingedome of Light: The Scribes,
and Phariseis were grieved with Christ: Celsus, Prophyrius, Iulianus,
Symmachus were grieved with the Glory of the Gospel. Christ him self is the
stoane of offense, laid to the Resurrection, and ruin of many. But through
these offenses, and contentions the Truth of God breaks out, and shines
more glorious.

Blissed therefore be the name of God, that has offered this occasion. For I
have no doubt in God, but of this necessary conflicte, through his mercy,
there shall issue some sparkle, to the glory of his holy name. For as Moses
Rod devoured the Rods of the Sorcerers, even so will the Truth of God
devour Error. Darkness cannot stand before the light. Tertullian says,
Scriptura diuina Haereticorum frauds, and furta conuincit, and detegit: The
Holy Scripture discloaseth* and confounds the suttle^ies, and robberies of
Heretics. And Nehemias says, 3. Esdr. 4.
Great is Verity, and prevails.

But M. Hardinge threatened before hand, that mine Answer (be it true, be it
false) shall soon be answered. How be it, if he will not dissemble, but deal
plainly, and lay out the whole, and answer the whole, as, he sees, I have
dealte with him, perhaps it may require him some longer time. But if he
dismembre my sayings, and ^ulle out my words, and take choice of my
sentences, without regard, what goes before, or what comes after: or, if he
send us over such pretty Pamflettes, as he lately printed together, and
joined with the Turkish News of Malta, I warn him before hand, I may not
vouchesaue, to make him answer.

Notwithstanding, before he address him self to his second Book, I would
counsel him, first, to consider better the ouersightes, and scapes of his
former Book: and further, to think, that, what so ever he shall write, it will
be examined, and come to trial. And let him remember, it is not sufficient, to
call us Sacramentaries, and Heretics: or to condemn our Books for pelf, and
trasshe, and fardles of lies, before he see them. For these things will now no
longer go for Arguments. But before al things, let him write no more
Untruths: For thereof he has sent us yenough already: Let him no more
wreast, and rack the Scriptures: Let him no more neither misallege, nor
mysconstrue, nor corrupt, nor alter the holy Fathers: Let him no more imagine
Councels, and Canons, that he never saw: Let him no more bring us, neither his
Amphilochius, nor his Abdias, nor his Hippolytus, nor his Clemens, nor his
Leontius, nor any other like childishe forgeries: nor his Gheasses, nor his
Visions, nor his Dreams, nor his Fables: Let him no more bring one thing for
an other: And, to be short, let him bring no more Contradictions in his own
tales, nor be found contrary to him self. Otherwise, the more he strives,
the more he bewraieth his own cause.

Now, good Christian Reader, that thou maiste be the better hable, both to
satisfy thine own Conscience in these cases, and also to understand, as well,
what is said, as also, what is answered of either party, I have laid forth
before thee M. Hardinges Book without any diminution, fully, and wholly, as he
him self gave it out. And to every parcel thereof, according to my poor
skill, I have laid mine Answer: whether sufficient, or insufficient, thou
maiste be Judge. To thee it is dedicate: and for thy sake it is written. Here
must I say unto thee, even as S. Hierome says to his Reader in the like
case: Quaeso, Lector, vt memor Tribunalis Domini, Aduersus error. Ioha^.
Hierosolymitani.
and de iudicio tuo te intelligens iudicandum, nec mihi, nec Aduersario meo
faueas: neue personas loquentium, sed causam consideres: I beseech thee, good
Reader, that, remembringe the Iudgemen^seate of the Lord, and understanding,
that as thou do judge, so thou shall be judged, thou fauer neither me, nor
mine Adversary, that vvriteth against me: and that thou regard not the
persons, but only the cause.

God give thee the Sprite of Understanding, that thou maiste be hable to judge
uprightly: God give thee eyes to see, that thou may behold the comfortable,
and glorious face of Gods Truth: that thou may know thee good, and merciful,
and perfect will of God: that thou maiste grow into a full perfect man in Christ,
and no longer be blown away with every blast of vain Doctrine: but maiste be
hable to know the Only, the True, and the Living God, and his only begotten
Son Jesus Christ: To whom both with the Holy Ghost be al Honor, and Glory
for ever, and ever: Amen.

From London, the.vi. of Auguste. 1565. John Ievvel Sarisburien.

AN ANSWER TO M. Hardinges Preface.
IT misliketh you much, M. Hardinge, that in so many, and sundry cases by me
moved, wherein stands the greattest force of your Religion, I should say,
You, and others of that part are utterly void, not only of the Scriptures,
but also of the Old Councelles, and Ancient Fathers, and that in such an
Audience, I should so precisely, and so openly discoouer the wantes, and
weakness of your side. And therefore, The greatter my heap rises, the
less, say you, is mine advantage.

Whereunto I may easily reply, The larger is mine Offer, the more will your
discrete Reader mislike the insufficiency of your Answer: and the more
enlarged is your liberty, the less cause have you to complain.

Wise men, ye say, would more have liked greatter Modesty. Uerily, the men,
that you call Wise, would have thought it greattest Modesty, to have
dissembled, and said nothing. But what may the same Wise men think of your
Modesty, that having so often made so large, and so liberal offers of so many
Doctors, are not hable in the end to show us one?

Neither look we so fiercely, nor shake we the swearde so terribly, as you
report us. This was evermore your, and your fellows special, and peculiar
commendation: Who bisides your fierce, and cruel looks, and bisides the
shakinge, and terroure of your swearde, have also hewn, and cut, and slain,
and filled your hands with the blood of your Brethren.

Wherefore, ye should not take it in such grief, that, only for
distinctions sake, by so Civil, and courteous a name we call you our
Adversaries. For, findinge you armed with Swearde, and Fiere, and embrewed with
our Blood, we might well have spared you some other name. That I said, Ye
have no such assurance of the Ancient Fathers, as ye have borne us in hand,
and as your friends upon your credit have believed, I said it not, neither of
Ambition, as you expound it, nor of Malice: but forced thereto by your
importunity, and with great grief of mind.

Therefore ye did me the greatter wrong, to say, I came vaunting, as
Goliath, and throwinge forth my glooue, like a chalenger, and proclaiminge
defiance to all the world.

In these words, M. Hardinge, Wise men may find some want of your
Modesty. For, who so avouches the manifest, and known Truth, and says,
that you both have been deceived your selves, and also have deceived others,
ought not therefore to be called Goliath. And, notwithstanding you have
adventured your self, to be the Noble David, to conquer this Giante, yet for
as much as ye have neither David's slinge in your hand, Extra. De Constitu.
Licet.
nor David's stoanes in your scripp^, and therefore not likely to work great
maisteries, ye may not look, that the Ladies of Israel with their Lutes, De
Electio. and Elect. potestate. Significasti. 9. quae. 3. Nemo.
and Timbrelles will receive you in triumph, or singe before you, David has
conquered his ten thousands. He rather is Goliath, that sets his face
against the Heavens, and his foot in Emperors necks: and opens his mouth
a wide, to utter blasphemies: That sounds out these words into all the
world, De Maioritate, and Obedientia: Vnam Sanctam.
I cannot err: I have al laws, both Spiritual, and Temporal in my breaste: I
am above as General Councelles: I may Judge al men: but all the world may not
Judge me, be I never so wicked: I am King of Kings, and Lord of Lords: I
can do, what so ever Christ him self can do: In glosa.
I am al, and above al: Al power is given to me, as well in Heaven, as in
Earth. In Council. Lateran. Sub Iulio.
Ye know, whose words these be, by whom they are spoken, by whom they are
defended, and to whom they are applied. This seems to be the very express,
and lively Image of Goliath: That Goliath, I say, whom now you see knockte in
the foreheade, and fallinge down, not with force of worldly power, but only
with that little roughe despiced stoane of Gods everlasting, and heavenly
Word. Touching that most worthy, and learned Father, sometime your
Master, D. Peter Martyr, whom ye would seem somewhat to commend, not for his
Doctrine, from which you have so suddenly fallen away, but only for his
modesty: it cannot be doubted, but he, being at Poissy in that worthy
assembly, in the presence of the King, and of other the Princes, and Nobles
of that Realm, both did, and spoke, that might stand with the truth of the
cause, and also might well become his own person. But being demanded his
judgment in these cases, he would have answered, even as we do, and would
much have marueiled, that any learned man would say the contrary. Not long
sithence ye made the Pulpites ringe, that your Mass, and^ al other your whole
Doctrine, was assured unto you by Christ, and his Apostles, and that for the
same ye had the undoubted continuance, and succession of fifteen hundred
years, the consent of all the old Councels, Doctors, and Fathers, and al
Antiquity, and the Uniuersal allowance of all the world. Thus ye doubted not
then to say, without fear of controlment of God, or man. Many thousands
thought ye dealte simply, and would not deceive them: and therefore were
easily leadde to believe you.

In this case Christian dewtie, and Charity required, that the truth, and
certainty of your tales should be opened, that the simple might understand,
ye had deceived them, and that of all that your so large talk, and countenance
of Antiquity you were, as you well know, utterly hable to auouche nothing.
Where as it so much offends you, that I should so precisely auouche the
Negative, and require you to prove your Affirmative, whereof ye would seem
so well assured, it may please you to consider, that S. Gregory writing
against John the Bishop of Constantinople, that had entitled him self the
Uniuersal Bishop of the whole world, reasteth him self likewise upon the
Negative. His words be these: Nemo de^essorum meorum hoc superbo vocabulo vti
consensit: Lib. 4. epist. 32.
Nemo Romanorum Po^tificum hoc Singularitatis nomen assumpsit. None of my
Predecessors ever consented to use this arrogante name: No Bishop of Rome ever
took upon him this name of Singularity. S. Augustine, when he had reckened up
all the Bishops of Rome, before his time, August. epis. 165.
added thereto by a Negative, In hoc ordine successionis nullus Donatista
Episcopus inuenitur: In this order of Succession there is found no Bishop,
that was a Donatiste. Yet neither S. Augustine, nor S. Gregory was ever
condemned for Goliath. By the like Negative, you, M. Hardinge, your self say,
although untruly, as ye do many other things bisides, That neither M. Iuel,
nor any one of his side is hable to show, In the 3. Article, and in the 15.
Division.
that the public Service of the Church in any nation, was ever for the space
of six hundred years after Christ, in any other tongue, then in Greek, or
Latin. And yet we may not therefore call you, either Goliath, or Thersites, or
by any other like discourteous name. You say, I take presumptuously upon me,
to have readde al things, and to be ignorant of nothing: only because I
say, you in these cases can allege nothing. And why so? Can no man discrie
your wantes, and disclose your Untruethes, without presumption? You say, ye
have the consent of al Doctors, of al ages, and of al times, of your side,
shall we therefore say, that you vaunte your self of your knowledge? or, that
you know al things, and are ignorante of nothing? You say, Ye have all the
Doctors. I say, and true it is, Ye have not one Doctoure. The difference of
these saieinges stands only in this, that the one is true, the other untrue:
That your Affirmative cannot be proved: My Negative cannot be reproved. But,
touching vaunte of readinge, and knowledge, there is no difference.

How be it, for as much as, this Negative so much offends you of our side,
let us hardly turn it of your side: And let us say so, as it may bes^e like
you, to have us say: That it cannot appear, by any sufficient clause, or
sentence, either of the Scriptures, or of the Old Doctors, or of the Ancient
Councelles, or by any Example of the Primitive Church, either, that the
Priest then received the Holy Communion together with the people: or, that
the Sacrament was then ministered unto the people under both kinds: or, that
the public Prayers were ever said in the Uulgare, or Known tongue: or, that
the whole people thereto said, Amen, within the space of six hundred years
after Christ. Let us say further, that Christ him self, and al his Apostles
said Private Mass, and received the Holy Sacrament severally alone: That all the Ancient Fathers ministered the half Communion only under One Kind: That
all the Common Prayers were euerywhere said in a strange Learned Tongue,
utterly unknown unto the People. This offer is free, and liberal. And what can
you desire more? But perhaps it shameth you to say so much. For, al be it
some of you have often said it, yet the untruth thereof is manifest, and
shows it self.

Only ye wish, I had used some greatter Modesty. And would you, that I
should have said, Ye have one Ancient Doctoure directly, and plainly of your
side, and so in that place, and in that presence, for Modesties sake, to have
avouched open Untruethe, as you, and others had done before? O, M. Hardinge,
in these cases a mean way is no way. Accursed is that Modesty, that
drowneth the Truethe of God. Chrysostom says, 11. quaest. 3. Nolite.
Veritarem negat, qui came non liber^ praedicat. He is a renouncer of the
Truethe, that dares not freely to say the Truethe.

Ye say, I have sought up certain small quaestions of light importance,
wherein the Ancient Doctors have not traueiled, as not daringe to enter into
matters of greatter weight. How be it, it seems over much for you, to
limite, and appointe each man, what he should preach at Paul's Cross.
Neither is it much material, whether these matters be Great, or Small: but,
whether you, by color of the same, have deceived the people.

But would ye have us now at last believe, that your Mass, your
Transubstantiation, your Real Pres^nce, your Adoration, your Sacrificinge of
the Son of God, and your Supremacy of Rome be so small matters? Ye told us
not long sithence, there were no other matters so great, as these. And may we
think, that your Religion is now greatter, now smaller: and increases, and
vadeth: and waxes, and waneth, as doothe the Moon? Uerily Pope Nicolas would
have joined your Transubstantiation to the Creed, and would have made it the
Thirteenthe Article of our Faith. And Pope Boniface the eight says, Extra.
de Maiorita and Obedi. Vnam Sanctam. Did. 22. Omnes.
that to be subject to the Church of Rome, is of the necessity of Salvation.
And Pope Nicolas says, Who so ever deuieth the Authority, and preeminence of
that See, is an Heretic.

Notwithstanding, how Great, or Small these matters be, it forces not. In
deed, you had learned them in very small time: and, as now, ye auouche them
with very small proufes. And, how small, and light so ^uer you would now have
them to appear, yet for the same, ye have made no small adoo. Nothing ought to
be taken for small, wherewith so great multitudes of Gods people may be
deceived.

The matters, wherewith Christ charged the Phariseis, were not so Great. Yet
Christ says unto them, Matthae. 23. 1. Corin. ^.
Ye strain a g^at, and swalowe a Camel. S. Paul says, A little leaven
loureth a whole ^umpe of doughe. A hear is small, yet we read, it has chokte
a big man. The Canon.
Plato says, Robbery is no less in a Small matter, then in a Great. The
Ciniphes were but small: yet are they reckened emonge the great plagues of God.
They that first began to maineteine that arrogante presumptuous title, of
Uniuersal Bishop, which now the Bishop of Rome chalengeth wholly to him self,
said, it was but a Small matter. But Gregory says, Gregor. lib. 6. epist. 30.
Alia sunt friuola, and innoxia: alia sunt friuola, and noxia: Some things are
Small, and do no hurt: some things are Small, and do great hurt. And
comparinge the same with the pride of Antichriste, who should call him self,
Deus, (that is to say, Ibidem.
God) He says thus, Si spectes quantitatem vocis, duae sunt Syllabae: Si
pondus iniquitaris, est vniuersa pernicies. If ye weigh the quantity of the
word, it stands in two syllables: If the weight of the wickedness, it is an
universal destruction.

Though these matters were Small, yet the Untruethes, and Errors, that thereof
have risen, are not Small. Remove the same, and your greattest Religion will fall
to nothing. To conclude, if these matters be Great, they are the more worthy
to be considered: if they be Small, there is the less hurt in leauinge of
them, and the more wilfulness in defendinge of them: Uerily the whole world
is weary of them. Luke. 16.
Christ says, Qui in modico iniquus est, and in maiori iniquus est. He that
is wicked in the Small, is also wicked in the Great.

You say, We flee, and forbear the Judgment of the Learned, and shake out
these things with great admiration only amongst the simple. As Alexander
the King of Macedonia made him self a God, and had much talk of his Father
Iuppiter emonge the Barbariens: but amongst the Greeks, that were wise, and
hable to judge, and knew him well yenough, he was content to talk of other
matters. This comparison, M. Hardinge, is odious, and sauoureth over much of
your choler. We hunte not for any Admiration, or opinion of Godheade emonge
the people. We preach not our selves, but Christ Jesus.

But thus the Pharise^s said of Christ him self: These rascalles are
accursed, they have no learning, they know not the Law. Amongst them will he
be. There be reigns like a Prince: There he seeks to be made a God. Here
might I eftesones put you in remembrance of him, that has so long abused,
and mocked the whole world, both Princes, and Subjects: as well learned, as
unlearned: accomptinge them al, as wild, and barbarous: and has suffered him
self openly to be Proclaimed, and published by the name of God. Extra. 10. 22.
Cum inter. In Glosa. Did. 96. Satis euidenter.
The words be known, Dominus Deus noster Papa: Our Lord God the Pope. And
again, Constat, Papam a pio Principe Constantino Deum appellatum: Et Deum ab
hominibus iudicari non posse, manifestum est.

Alexander stood in some awe, and reverence of the Wise: but this man
despises both Wise, and Unwise: Learned, and Unlearned, and all the world.

It was somewhat out of season for you, in this place to entreat of the
Ualiditie of your Canon, and so earnestly to labor, to prove it faultelesse,
before any man had begone to touch it, or to prove it faulty. It is
supposed, that some parts thereof was divised by Leo: and afterward augmented
by Gelasius: and after that by one, Gregor. lib. 7. epist. 63.
whom S. Gregory calls Scholastieus: and after again by Gregorius him
self: and that at last, about eighte hundred, and fifty years after
Christ, it was brought to some perfection, and made up by Pope Sergius. As
now, it is more closely pronounced, and more reverently used, then either the
Epistle, or the Gospel.

But, whether there be any fault therein, or none, I leave that to you, M.
Hardinge, to be better considered by your self. Your Doctor Durande says
thus, Durand. libro 4. part 2.
Cum Sacerdos orauerit pro Hostia Transubstantianda, eamque Transubstantiatam
Patri obtulerit, orat pro ipsius acceptatione: When the Priest has prayed for
the Transubstantiation of the Host, and has offered the same being
Transubstantiate unto God the Father, afterward he prays, that God will
favorably accept it.

S. Paul says, 1. Timoth. 2.
Christ is the Mediator bitweene God, and Man. But here by your Canon
contrariwise, the Priest is made a Mediator bitweene God, The Priest a
Mediator bytweene God, and Christ.
and Christ.

And you your self, M. Hardinge, at your Mass, and in the highest Secrets
of your Canon, desire God the Father, to look favorably upon Jesus Christ
his own Son, at your request. Your words be plain, and evident: No
interpretation, or shifte is hable to salve them. Now if it be meet, you
should entreat God the Father to be merciful unto Christ his Son, and to
behold him favorably for your sake, then may you say, there is no fault
in all your Canon.

You seem to complain, that I leave out prayer for the Dead, and Invocation
of Saints: And that thing you amplify largely with many words. And yet I
think, you would not have us believe, that these points of your Religion be
greater, then your Sacrifice, or then your Mass.

Uerily, touching the first, I heard once, when you your self blewe down
the Paper Walls, In a Sermon preached in S. Mary's Church in Oxforde.
as ye then called them, and utterly quenched all the Painted Fires of
Purgatory. For the other, S. Chrysostom says, Homines vtuntur Atriensibus.
In Deo nihil est tale. Sine mediatore exorabilis est: Men use Porters, and
Ushers. But in God there is no such thing. He is easy to be entreated, yea
without a Mediator. Chrysostom. De Poeniten. hom. 4.
Again he says, Nihil tibi opus est Patronis apud Deum. Neque enim tam
facile Deus audit, si alij pro nobis orent, quam si ipsi oremus, etsi pleni
simus omnibus malis: Chrysostom. De profectu Euangelij.
Thowe need no Attorney to speak to God. For God does not so soon hear
us, when others pray for us, as when we pray for our selves: Yea although
we be full of al sin. S. Ambrose likewise says, Isti se non putant reos,
qui honorem nominis Dei deferunt Creaturae, and, relicto Domino, Ambros. in. 1.
cap. ad Roman.
conseruos adorant. Nam and ideo ad Reges per Tribunos, and Comites itur: quia
homo vtique est Rex, and nescit, quibus debeat Rempublicam credere. Ad Deum
autem, quem nihil later, omnium enim merita nouit, ad promerendum suffragatore
non est opus, sed mente deuota. Vbicunque enim talis ^oquutus fuerit ei,
respondebit illi: These men think, they do no il, geuinge the honor of
God unto a Creature, and leauinge the Lord, adoure their fellow servants. For
therefore we have access to Kings by Knights, and Marshalles, for that the
King is a mortal man, and knows not, to whom he may commit his Kingedome.
But God knows al men's merits, and there is nothing privy from him.
Therefore to obtain his favor, we need no Spokesman, but a devout mind.
Where so ever such a one shall speak, God will answer him.

Where as ye untruly say, we lay on load of sclaunders, to deface the
Church, you may remember, that there were sometime that charged S. Steven,
S. Paul, and Christ him self in like sort, for that they seemed, likewise to
speak irreverently against the Church. And against the Prophet Hieremie,
they cried out, even as you do now, Hieremi. 7.
The Temple of God: the Temple of God.

But he defaceth not the Church, that defaceth the defacers fo the Church:
and wipeth of the soil of your Errors, that her face may shine, and appear
more glorious. When Christ moourned over the City, and Temple of Jerusalem:
or when he said, Ye have made my Fathers house a den of thieves: And, when
Esai said, O how is this bewtieful City (that then was the Church of God)
become an harlot? Or, Esai. 1.
when the Prophet Hieremie said, Hieremi. 9.
Who will give abundance of Water unto mine eyes, that I may moourne day, and
night for the sins of my people, We may not think, that Christ, Esai, and
Hieremie were defacers of the Church. He hinders not health, that shows
the disease. He despises not the Church, that sets Christ before the
Church. The Church is our Mother: But Christ says, Matthew. 10.
Who so loves his Father, or Mother more then me, is not meet to be my
Disciple. He despises not his Mother, that lamenteth the Captivity of his
Mother, and delivers her from the hands of thieves.

But we have set up Altar against Altar: Or rather, as you say, We have
ouerthowen Aultars, and al together: And so have erected a New Church, a
New Gospel, and a New Religion of our own. Uerily, M. Hardinge, we have
overthrown nothing, but that Gods good will was, should be overthrown.
Christ says, Matthae. 15.
Every Plant, that my Heavenly Father has not planted, shall be rooted up. An
Altar we have, such as Christ, and his Apostles, and other Holy Fathers
had, which of the Greeks was called (...), The holy Table: And of the
Latins, Mensa Dominica, The Table of the Lord: And was made, not of stoane,
but of Timber: and stood, not at the end of the queer, but in the midst of
the People, as many ways it may appear: And other, or better Altar, then
Christ, and these holy Fathers had, we desire to have none: and specially any
such Altar, as has benne purposely set, up against the Altar of Christ.

But you of your side, Matthew. 26.
have said, Here is Christ, and there is Christ: And so have erected up, not
only Altar against Altar: and Church against Church: but also Christ
against Christ. Leo in Epist. ad Palaestinos. Naziaenzenus In Apologetico.
So Leo seems to say of you, Ecclesiae nomine armamini: sed contra
Ecclesiam dimicatis: Ye arm your selves with the name of the Church: And yet
ye fight against the Church. So says Nazianzene, Ye strive for Christ,
against Christ him self.

But you seem* to set light of mine age, and to dishable my knowledge in
Divinity: as though it were much: pertinente unto these matters, either to
calculate mine age, or else to examine the order of my study. I may say with
Origin, Gratias ago Deo, quod ignorantiam meam non ignoro: I thank God, that I
am not ignorante of mine ignorance. But, what so ever want either is, or is
surmised to be in me, it ought not to prejudice the Truth of God.

And yet I see no great cause, why any man should seek so greatly to
disadvantage me in respect of mine age, or study. For it is well known, that
I, although unworthy of that degree, Anno Domini 1551. anno Eduardi. 6. quinto.
proceeded Bachelare in Divinity in the University of Oxforde one whole year,
and more before M. Hardinge. In deed, I grant, I could not read all the
Councelles, and Old Fathers of the Church, both Greeks, and Latins; in
seven days, as M. Hardinge could. And yet, so much had I readde, that I
marueiled, M. Hardinge would ever enterprise, so much to abuse the names of
the holy Fathers.

But knowledge oftentimes is vain, and puffs up the mind. God make us
learned to the Kingedome of God, that we may humble al our knowledge to the
obedience of Faith.

It reioiceth me mutche, that ye say, ye love me, and in respect of our
old friendship, and love have thus written to me. How be it, our old private
frenship needid not so many public witnesses. Ye say, Ye will follow the
later part of Chiloes Counsel, Oderis, tanquam amaturus: Hate so, as
afterward thowe maiste love.

Bytweene which your two saieinges, of hatinge, and louinge, I know not how,
you include a plain contradiction: Unless ye will say, Ye can hate, and love
in one respect both together. But I take it in the best sense, wherein, I
doubt not, but ye meante it.

How be it, touching your friendly advise, I may answer you likewise, with
an other piece of Chiloes Counsel: Obsequendum est amico^ vsque ad aras: A man
may follow his friends Counsel, so it be not, either against God, or against
his Conscience. Liberatus. cap. 16.
The people of Alexandria said unto Timotheus, E^si non communicamus tecum,
tamen amamus t^: Although we Communicate not with you, yet we love you
notwithstanding. Ye promise to deal herein, without either gal, or
bitterness: For that, as you say, Glikes, Nippes, and Scoffs, Bittes,
Cuttes, and Gyrdes (these be your words) becomme not your stage. And
doubtelesse, such kind of dealinge, as it is most commendable in it self,
so it seems most sitting for them, that traueile in Gods causes. Matthae.
11.
Christ says, Learn of me, for I am meek, and gentle.

But whoes words then be these, M. Hardinge? From what Sprite have they
proceeded? Upon what stage were they spoken? These words, I say, wherewith
ye seem so mutche, and so often to solace your self, and to refreasshe your
Sprites: Terms used commonly by M. Hardinge through his whole Book.
Goliath, Thersites, Rasshe, Presumptuous, Wicked, Unlearned, Ignorant,
Peeuishe, Lucians, Scoffers, Coggers, Foisters, Pear^e, Insolente, Vaunters,
Braggers, Sectaries, Schismatiques, Heretics, Sacramentaries, New masters,
New Fanglers, False reporters, Sclaunderers of the Church, Terrible seducers,
The Enemies of the Sacrifice, The Enemies of the Church, The Ministers of the
Devil, Sitters in the Chair of Pestilence, Monsters, Heathens, Publicanes,
Turks, Infidelles, Antichrists, and Forerenners of Antichriste?

These words be yours, M. Hardinge, not only, for that they be uttered by
you, but also, for that they perteine directely, and properly unto your self.
With these, and other like pearls ye have thoroughly besette your whole Book,
that it might the more glitter in the eye of your Reader. Herewith your stage
is fully freight. Some man would think it were Vetus Comoedia. So faitheful
ye seem to be in keepinge your promise. If ye utter such words of pure
love, and friendship, what then may we look for, if ye once begin to hate?
They say, the Scorpion embraces louingely with his feet: but smites his
poison with his tail. Thus ye suffer the te^pestes of your affections
sometimes to blow you out, and to toss you of from the shore. In a man of
professed gravity reasons had benne more conueniente, then reproaches. Such
eloquence might better becomme some of your younger Iannizers: who, as their
friends say here, have not yet learned, to speak otherwise.

As for these words, and these stages, they may not well chas^ us away from
the Gospel of Christ. Yt is not needeful for us, to hear your good reports:
but it is most needeful for us, to speak the Truth.

The advertisement, that you allege out of Solomon (There is a way, that unto
a man seems right: but the end thereof leads to damnation) is common, and
touches us both, as well you, as me: or rather, somewhat more you, then me.
Ye were once deceived before, by your own confession. But they, that have
indifferently weighed the causes, and suddenness of your change, have thought,
ye are as mutche, or rather mutche more deceived now.

Mark, I beseech you, M. Hardinge, what ye were lately, and what ye would
now seem to be: what way ye trodde then: and what way ye ^reade now. The
difference is no less, then is bitweene Light, and Darkness: Life, and
Death: Heaven, and Hell* So great a change would require some good time of
deliberation.

But if ye be thoroughly changed, as you say, and if ye be touched in deed,
either with the^ zele of God, or with the love of your brethren, be not then
ashamed to tell us, what things God has done for you. Let your Reader
understand, that you your self sometime were that man, of whom Solomon
speaks: That you sometime were in a way, that seemed right, and yet the end
thereof leadde to damnation: That you sometime bent your whole heart, and
study to deface the Church of God: That you preached so many years together
directly contrary to your conscience: That you sometime witingly, and
willingly, and of purpose, and malice, deceived Gods people: That you
sometime were the Minister of the Devil* a Turk, an Heathen, an Infidel, a
Forerenner of Antichriste: and, that from this rueful state ye were suddenly
changed, not by readinge, or conference of the Scriptures, or Anciente Fathers,
but only for that ye saw, the Prince was changed.

Thus must ye deal, M. Hardinge, if ye deal truly. So will your friends
think, ye dissemble not now, as you did before: but are moved only of true
zele, and pure conscience. Certainly either, as we say, ye are now
deceived: or, at the least, as your self must needs grant, not long
sithence, ye were deceived. And S. Augustine says, Hoc est erroris proprium,
vt, quod cuique displicet, id aliis quoque oportere existimet displicere:
Augustine. De Gene. contra Manichae.
This is the very nature of Error, that, what so ever misliketh any man, he
thinks al others should likewise mislike the same.

Such is the misery of Adams children: their heart is evermore inclined unto
il, and error. Hereof false prophets oftentimes take occasion to say, Good
is Il, and Il is Good: Light is Darkness, and Darkness is Light. And
oftentimes the people is wilfully leadde away, and cannot abide to hear
sound Doctrine: but turns their ears to hear Fables.

Therefore, Salomons counsel is wise, and good. And for that cause we trust
not our own eyes, to choose our way: but we call unto God with the Prophet
David, Psalm. 142.
O Lord, show us the way, that we may walk in: We seek unto him, that
says, Johan. 14.
I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life: I am the Light of the World: who so
follows me, Johan. 8.
walks not in darkness, but has the Light of Life. And we thank God, that
with his Daiespringe from above has visited us, and directed our feet into
the way of peace: into the same way, that Christ has showed us, and the
holy Apostles, and anciente Catholic Fathers have trodden before us.

Touching your exhortation to humility, and the denieal of my learning,
which, I trust, of your part proceeds from a meek, and humble sprite, I
may safely deny that thing, that I never avouched. It cannot shame me to
say, that S. Hierome said, Dicam illud Socraticum, Hoc tantum scio, quod
nihil scio: Hierony. in praefa. in Abdiam.
I will say, as Socrates sometime said, This thing only I know, that I
know nothing. In these cases, as I seek no praise, so I fear no reproach.
What so ever want is in me, there be others, that can supply it. How be it,
I never understood, but Ueritie, and Humility might well stand together.

Where you say, what so ever skill, or knowledge I have, or had, I have
evermore bente it only to the reproach, and sclaunder of the Church, it is no
great maisterie, M. Hardinge, to speak il. But I trust, God him self, that
judges justly, judges otherwise. If there be in me, I say not, any talente,
but only any mite of a talente, my prayer unto God is, and ever was, it may
be bestowed wholly to the honor, and comfort of his Church.

And yet may not you, M. Hardinge, neither set such stoare by your self,
nor so mutche abase, and discredit others, as though bisides you, and your
fellows, there were noman meet to be counted learned. When the Jews, in
contempt of al others, boasted them selves to be the only stock, and Blood
of Abraham, S. Paul by an humble kind of presumption doubted not in all
respects to compare with them in this wise: 2. Corin. 11.
Hebrews they be: and so am I. Israelites they be: and so am I. The seed of
Abraham they be: and so am I. Again he says, Thus do I, and thus will I do,
that in the things, whereof they glory, they may be found to be, as we are.

I will force this comparison no further. Such contention is but vain. O M.
Hardinge, this saieinge is common unto us both: By the Grace of God we are,
that we are. O that his grace be not in us in vain. 1. Corin. 15.


For my part, both at your request, and also without your request, I
utterly deny my learning. And touching my Bishoprike, if that in any part
happen to grieve you, I deny it too: I deny mine estimation: I deny my name:
I deny me self. Only the Faith of Christ, and the Truethe of God I cannot
deny. Or with this Faith, or for this Faith, I trust, I shall end. I cannot
withstand the Sprite of God. I cannot say, the consent of all the Ancient
Catholic Fathers was an heap of errors, and a link of Heresies. Although
you, M. Hardinge, could deny al together at an instante, and upon the
sudden, yet bear with others, that cannot so easily do the same.

Touching D. Fisher, I scoffed neither at him, nor at any others. Only I
laid out the imperfection of certain their Arguments: which if they were
weak, and many ways faulty, the fault was not mine: I made them not. D.
Fishers Argument was this: Polydor. de Invent. rer. li. 8. c. 1.
We are sure, there is Purgatory: Ergo, the Popes pardonnes be good, and
available. I shall be forced in perusinge your Book, to disclose many like
infirmities, and folies in your Arguments, M. Hardinge. Yet notwithstanding I
will not scoff. But happy are you, that may call us Gospellers, New Masters,
Patriarchs, and, I know not what, and to write, what you list, without
scoffinge. In the end of your foretalke, which is before the shewinge of your
Book, ye think all the world sings Sanctus, Sanctus, and receives you with
Ozanna. And therefore ye will every body to come, and subscribe. How be it, it
seems, this request is very sudden and out of season. You should first have
showed us, both whereunto we should subscribe, and also your Authorities,
and Reasons, wherewith ye would force us to subscribe. But ye old learned
Father Tertullian says thus of the Ualentinian Heretics: Tertull. aduersus
Vale^tinian. lib. 1.
Habent artificium, quo prius persuadent, quam doceant. Veritas aute^ docendo
suadet, non suadendo docet. These Heretics have a kind of cunninge, and a
policy, whereby they persuade us first, and teach us afterward. But the
Truth persuadeth us by teachinge: and not teaches us by persuadinge.

King Agesilaus, the better to embolden his Soldiers to the fight, with a
certain juice wrote this word, Victory, in the palm of his hand: and
afterward being at his Service, as the manner then of the Heathens was, he
laid his hand so written closely, and secretly upon the heart of the
Sacrifice, and so printed it with the said word, Victory: and immediately
showed the same unto his Captains, and Soldiers, as if it had been written
by the Gods. The simple Soldiers, not understanding this policy, and
thinkinge, the whole matter had in deed been wrought by miracle, grew full of
courage, not doubtinge, but their Gods, that had written, Victory, would
also give them Victory.

By like policy, and to like purpose, it seems, you, M. Hardinge, would
beguile your Reader: and, that you lack in strength, would win by policy:
and, that you want in Reasons, would gain in words: that the simple may
think, you have the Victory, because you have written, Victory, with your
pen.

But you are not yet equal with the credit of Pythagoras. It is not sufficient
for your scholars to say, Ipse dixit: M. Hardinge has said it. Every man will
not think it is so, because you can write it, or Printe it, or say, it is so.
As for me self, I will say with S. Hierome, Cupio discere, and Discipulum me
profiteor, dummod^ doceant. I would feign learn, and make a vow to be their
Scholar, so they would teach me. First ye should have given us leave, to
have perused your whole Book. And when we had well weighed your untrue
Allegations, your vain Constructions, your New petite Doctors, your
Corruptions, your Forgeries, your Dreams, your Fables, and the huge multitude
of your untruths, then hardly ye should have called us, to subscribe.

How be it, M. Hardinge, this is no force sufficient to subdewe the world. It
was not thought, ye had benne so weakly appointed. It is not yenough for you,
thus odiously to vpbraide us in your anger, and to call us New Masters, and
Heretics. That lesson might have served you long ago, before ye were
espied. It behooves you now, to have some stronger arguments, specially
fightinge against God.

For my part, notwithstanding I were thoroughly persuaded long before, yet am
I now some deal the more satisfied by these your traueiles. For, touching
your want of Scriptures, Councelles, Doctors, and Examples of the Primitive
Church, I am well, and fully confirmed by the sclendernes of your proufes.

And I doubt not, but some of these, that now be about you, being, I trust,
not frowardly carried away with wilful malice, but having the fear of God,
and a reuerente zele to do the best, although perhaps not knowledge
sufficient, to judge, what is best, after they shall understand some part of
your dealinge herein, will by Gods Grace begin, somewhat to forethinke them
selves of their journey, Augustine. in Johan. tract. 7.
and to cast some doubts of your credit. S. Augustine says, Iuris forensis
est, vt qui in precibus mentitus sit, illi ne profit, quod impetrauit: The Law
is this, that, who so has made a false suggestion, shall lose, what so ever he
have gotten by the same.

O M. Hardinge, Credit without truth, is no credit. Your work is over
weak: It has no fundation: It cannot stand. Chrysostom tells you, Such
is the Nature of Error: Chrysostom. de Laudibus Pauli hom* 5.
It vadeth of it self, and will comme to ground without resistance. Remember
the place, ye sometime stood in: Remember, from whence ye are fallen: Remember
the causes of your fall. It is no shame to rise again. Ecclesi 4.
God is able to restoare you. The wise man says, There is confusion, that
brings grace, and glory. God has endewed you largely with great gifts.

Turn the same to the obedience of the Faith of Christ. As there is wisdom
in seekinge the Victory, so there is wisdom in geuinge place. Follow the
same Counsel, ye give others. Deny your own learning: deny your own
estimation: deny your self. Johan. 9.
Give the glory unto God.

FINIS.
THE TABLE.
A.
ABdias. pagina. 8. Accidents are broken, and give a crack. 454. Accidents
corrupted. 621. Accidents are Christ's Body it self. 459. Accidents by M.
Hardinges doctrine are the Sacrament. 634. 637. Accidents perform the
Sacrament. 427. Holy outward Accidents. 455. 464. Adoration. 379. Christ
very God. 379. We Adore Baptism, the word of God etc. 379. 408. 409.
Adoration of Oil, Cross, Gibbe^, Water, our Ladies Girdle. 398. Adoration of
the Sacrament lately invented. 381. 410. Origens words, O Lord, I am not
worthy, expounded. 399. Adoration implies no Real presence. 402. 404. We
Adoure Christ sittinge in Heaven. 403. Who so eats Christ's Fleashe,
adoureth the same. 404. Dangers in Adoration. 410. 411. Noman ought precisely
to adoure the Sacrament, but with a condition. 41^. We ought to honor
Christ as he would be honored. 417. 418. Amphilochius: A vain Fable. 82.
The true Amphilochius. 85. Angelle^ present at the mysteries, and at our
Prayers. 586. Aphricae spoke Latin. 181. 182. 183. The Apostles, and other
holy Bys hoppes, and Fathers were married. 573. Asia the less. 160. 161.
Athanas. countrefeite. 233. 502. Augustine of England. 185. Aultars in the
midst of the people. 195. Aultares of timber. 195. One only Altar in the
Church. 196. 488.
B.
Bacchus, and Ceres were thought to be honored of the Christians. 406.
Barbarous tongue. 155. Latin tongue Barbarous. 155. We be Incorporate into
Christ in Baptism. 392. Christ's Body is a Creature. 350. Christ's Body
equal in nature with our Bodies. 350. Christ's Body a mean bitvveene God and
man. after M. Hardinges fantasy. 348. 350. Christ's Body entered, the doors
being shut. 351* No Body without place. 351. Christ's Body in one place.
152. 361. 362. 371. Christ's Body not in the Earth. 357. Christ's Body
present by Faith, by Baptism. 358. Christ's Body in the Sacrament: in what
sense. 359. 360. 458. 471. Christ's Body present in a Mystery. 37^. Christ's
Body received spiritually. 36. Christ's Body not eaten Fleashly with the
mouth. 404. Christ's Body by M. Hardinges doctrine, enters not into our
Bodies. 627. The Sacram* not properly the Body of Christ. 369 Secundum
Literam. 369. 370. Errors touching Christ's Body. 349. Christ's Body not
equal to the Godhead. 350. 363. Christ's Body without any dimension, or
proportion of parts. 620. 639. Christ's Body without place. 362. Christ's
Body without quantity. 350. Christ's Body crucified in a thousand places.
362. Christ's Body spiritually present, spiritually seen^ spiritually
touched. 365. 366. Christ borne in his own hands, expounded. 368. Christ's
Body not in many places. 348. No miracle in the Sacrament. 349. 355. Abel,
Esaias, John Baptiste held Christ in their hands. 355. Christ's Body full
here, and full there. 360. Christ's Body not superior to the word of God.
45. 613. Christ's Body is not in the holy vessels. 45. 401. The irreverence
Opinions. and speeches of M. Hard. side, touching the Body of Christ. 625.
Bread remains in the Sacrament. 44. 382. 40^. The form, and quantity of
the Commu^ion Bread. 443.
C.
Canopie. 413. Canopie reproved by Linvvoode. 416. The stealinge away of
God. 418. Catholic, that follows the Faith of Peter. 244. Chrysostomes
Liturgy, or Communion. ^^. Reformation of the Church. 106 144. 150. 204. The
Church the expounder of Gods vvil. 121. Church reformed without
Councelles. 206. The Corruption of the Church. 414. 494. The Church inferior
unto Christ. 490. The Church not to be believed without Scriptures. 537.
Clemens. 7. Concomitantia. 396. Confession. 16. Consecration. 18. 19. 21.
Consecration under silence. 545. Use breeds contempt. 551. The Mysteries
kept secret from Infidelles. 553. Doubts touching Consecration. 411. A Holy
Cosse. 153. Constantines Donation. 2^8. Constancy. 387. Contention breeds
impudency. 461. Communion ministered unto all the people. 11. 12. 15. 42. 65.
Communion one only in a day. 16. Communion not daily ministered, but only
upon certain days. 24. 62. 63. 91. 136. Communion, so called of
Communicatinge together. 27. 37. Communion after Supper. 31. Communion of the
people at Rome every day. 51. Communion better then the Mass, by M. Hardinges
own Confession. 60. Proufes, and considerations for the holy Communion. 83.
123. 135. 149. The Half Communion proved by vveemen, children, Sickfolkes,
Infantes, and Mad men. 96. The whole Communion granted by the Counsel of
Basile, and the Council of Trident. 97. In the Commu. great difference
bitweene the Priest, and the people. 97. Whole Christ in either part. 98.
Proufes for the half Communion. 99. Drink ye al of this, expounded. 102. 120.
Proufes for the whole Communion. 103. 149. The words of S. John perteine not
to the Sacrament directly. 104. The Priest drinks for the people. 105. The
whole com. is Christ's institution. 103. 106. The half Communion a thing
indifferent. 108. The Rus^ians consecrate in Metheglen. 113. The Cup is of
Christ's institution. 118. 120. Infantes received both kinds. 139. 141. The
half Communion came first from Heretics. 147. The whole Communion
continued a long while. 150. Gods Word takes no authority of any
Council. 108. Council of Constance. 121. 124. Council of Constance concluded
against nature, against the Scriptures, and against the Faith. 143. The
Church reformed without General Council. 206. Custom. 49. 97. 143. Custom
the best expounder of the Law. 120.
D.
Decretalle Epistles. 67. 68. 22^. Deacons allowed to consecrate the
Mysteries. 130. Dionysius. 10. A Disjunctive for a Copulative. 127. Dissension
of Godly men. 39. 536. Dissension of M. Hard. side. 317. 395. The Division,
or breakinge of the Sacram. 440. The Division of the Sacrame^te condemns
Private Mass. 440. 444. The Mystical Significations thereof. 442. The
Division, or breakinge of Accidents. 453. 454. Dooues of Silver, and Gold.
41^.
E.
The Godheade cannot be ea^^n. 392. Elevation. 373. Diverse contrary meaninges
of Elevation. 374. Sancta Sanctis. 376. Elevation condemns private Mass.
378. ^. Paul came into England. 167. England not subject to the B. of Rome.
167. The Faith first preached in England. 190. The Common prayers of the
Church of England agreeable to the Old Fathers. 217. Ep^^rem ministered in
the Church in the Vulgate tongue. 157. Excommunication. 32. 38. 39.
Reconciliation. 134. Exuperius. 129.
F.
This word, Figure, misliked of M. Hardinges side. 445. Heretics press
the letter, and leave the meaning. 447. The Sacrament is a Figure. 446. 448.
451. 462. 475. The Sacrament is a Figure, and not the Truth. 465. M. Hardinge
says, Christ's Body it self is a Figure. 447. Christ's Body a Figure of
the life to come. 455. The number, and strangeness of M. Hardinges Figures.
448. 476. By M. Hardinges fantasy, the outvvarde fou^^^^es are Christ's Body.
408. Forma, ^ignifieth the Substance. 427. 435. 449.
G.
Gelasius. 144. 145. All the East speaks Greek. 162. The Greek tongue
reached far. 165.
H.
Receiuinge the Sacrament with hand. 48. Hearing without understanding is
no Hearing. 69. 70. 175. M. Hardinges vvitnesses against him self. 10. 11. 42.
139. M. Hard. iesteth at Christ's Institution. 20. M. Hard. allegeth one thing
for an other. 20. 33. 41. 56. 59. 135. 375. M. Hard. dissembleth the Doctors
words. 21. M. Hard. a^gumentes not well framed. 21. 25. 58. 92. 101. 158.
160. M. Hard. refuses the example of Christ. 22. 23. M. Hard. corrupts the
old Doctors. 43. 45. 49. 77. 84. M. Hard. allegeth authorities without
sense. 54. M. Hard. allegeth Decrees of Councelles, that he never savve. 69.
295. 390. 484. M. Hard. is feign to leave the old Doctors, and to forge
nevve. 7. 78. M. Hard. contrary to him self. 85. 139. 175. 201. 418. 459. 538.
550. M. Hard. concludes, that the Apostles of Christ committed Sacrilege.
126. M. Hard. deceiteful dealinge^vvherein (as Tertullian says) he follows
the very cast of al Heretics. 127. M. Hard. vvitingly avouches untruth.
167. 168. M. Hard. reasons against him self. 167. M. Hard. forgeateth him
self. 173. 209. M. Har. vvilfully peruerteth the way of God. 174. M. Hard.
comes after the date, as his wont is to do. 192. M. Hard. says, the
ignorant, and unlearned people understands the Latin tongue, although not
perfitly. 197. M. Hard. allegeth authorities, that he knovveth to be forged.
235. M. Hard. holds by burnte evidence. 235. M. Hard. condemns S. Augustine
for a Se^^matique. 290. 291. M. Hard. uses the arguments of the Heretics
called the Manichees. 150. M. Hardin. uses the Eurychian Heretics
arguments. 3^^. M. Hard. imagines two great errors. 391. M. Hard. ^aithe,
Accidents perform the Sacrament. 427. M. Hard. fights with old
Heretics weapons. 439. M. Hard. contrary to his own fellows. 445. M.
Hard. shunneth his own Doctors. 457. M. Hard. is driven to say, that the
very Body of Christ is not verily, and in deed, but unaptly, and unfitly the
Body of Christ. 474. M. Hard. understands not his own book. 495. M. H.
allegeth his authorities without his compass. 495. M. H. judgment of the
people. 527. M. Hard. suddenly turned from the Gospel. 534. M* Hard. seems,
not to understand his own words. 555. 557. M. Hard. says, Christ
sheadde his Blood at his Supper. 560. M. Hard. not certain of his own
Doctrine. 626. M. Hard. nevve Doctors cannot agree. 630. M. Hard. compares
the Pope with Balaam, and Caiphas. 274. M. Hard. misreporteth the Councelle of
Ephesus. 111 112. M. Hard. falsifieth the words of S. Luke. 115. M. Hardin.
unadvisedly allegeth the authority of S. Augustine. 123. M. Hard. abuses S.
Augustines words. 124. M. Hard. falsifieth S. Paul's words. 126. M. Hard.
corrupts the holy Fathers. 131. 144. M. Hard. misreporteth Strabo. 159. 161.
M. Hard. misreporteth the words of Pli^ie. 159. M. Hard. foully abuses S.
Chrysostomes words. 203. M. Hard. vvreasteth Origin from his purpose. 210.
M. Hardin. misreporteth the words of Chrysostom. 212. M H. cutteth of the
words of S. Gregory. 225. M. Hard. manifestly corrupts, and falsifieth S.
Cyprian. 228. M. H. twice falsifieth S. Cyprian in one place. 231. M. Hard.
falsifieth S. Hilarie. 527. 246. M. Hard. falsifieth S. Chrysostom. 264. 269.
M. Hard. falsifieth Cassiodorus, and Socrates. 284. M. Hardin. misreporteth the
Council of Chalcedon. 297. M. Hard. falsifieth the words of S. Augustine.
248. 250. 309. 405. M. Hard. vvilfully corrupts the (...) M. Har.
misreporteth S. Basiles words. 438. 439. M Hard. falsifieth Dionysi^s. 440.
44^. M. Har. vvilfully depraueth the holy Fathers. 453. M. Hard. says,
Tertullian understood not the very Literal sense of Christ's words. 45^. M.
Hard. vvilfully corrupts Tertullian 464. M. Hard. misconstrueth the words
of (...)485. M. Hard. mistaketh Prudentius. 500. 502. M. Hard. allegeth a Fable
under the name of Athanasius. 502. M. Hardin. misreporteth Gods Divine
providence. 527. M. Hard. untruly reports the Emperor Justinian. 171. 54^.
M. Hard. misreporteth his own Glemens. 561. M. Har. misreporteth S.
Augustines vvoorder. 598. M. Hard. untruly translateth the words of Origin.
602. 604. M. Hard. misconstrueth the words of Irenaeus. 602. M Hard.
guifully expounds S. Cyril. 622. M. Hard. utters a heap of untruths
altogether. 217. M. Hard. utters two untruths together in one sentence.
172. M. Hard. utters five untruths together, in the report of four
words. 382. M. Hardin. utters four vntruethe together with one breath.
454. M. Hard. utters three untruths together. 497 M. Hardinges untruths,
or ouersigthes upon better advise to be redressed, two hundred, fifty, and
five. Hippolytus Martyr. ^^.
I.
S. James Liturgy, or Communion. 10. James never drank wine, but only at
Christ's last Supper. 128. Ignorance the mother of Religion. 640. The faction
of Rome ouerruleth the World by Ignorance. 641. Ignorance dangerous. ^07.
641. Ignorance excuses not. 208. Images in the Church contrary to Gods
word. 496. 505. The Heathens, and Infidelles the first Fathers of Images.
497. 498. 503. The Cherubines. 498. 499. The Brazen Serpente. 499. The Cross.
499. 500. 501. 502. Irene the Empress, the Kings daughter of Tartarie, the
chief defender of Images. 504. An Image better, then Prayer. 504. The
Invention of Images came of if. 507. Peeuis he reasons for proof of Images.
508. In the Primitive Church there were no Images. 508. Images condemned by
the holy Fathers. 509. 517. Imagerie like unto Poetry. 510. An Image is a
Lesson of lies. 510. Holy Images. 512. Images vvoorshipped with godly honor.
514. 515. 516. Images dangerous in the Church. 514. We be incorporate into
Christ by Baptism. 36. 345. Indiuiduum Vagum. 629. 630. Institution of
Christ. 18. 19. 20. 22. Institution of Christ broken. 23. Gods Institution
lawfully broken. 113. Institution of the Cup. 118. In^ention of the Priest.
34. Invisible. 472. John the Aulmonare. 74.
L.
Latin tongue in Aphrica. 180. 181. The Learned Latin tongue. 200. Latin
Church. 211. Leontius. 74. Liberty of the Gospel. 33. 34. Lidforde Law.
432. D. Luther sclaundered. 3. 107.
M.
Malacl^ias. 6. Martialis. 9. 10. Missa signifies the Communion. 72. 94. 491.
Missa signifies any assembly. 6. 72. Missa never taken for Private Mass. 73.
492. Mass private, and peculiar. 3. Private Mass proved by Boys, Laiemenne,
and women. 41. 56. Difference bitvveene the Nevve private Mass and the Old
Communion. 50. No Private Mass at Rome. 51. 53. The Communion is better then
the Mass, by M. Hardinges own confession. 60. No Private Mass in good
towns, and Cities. 71. Private Mass is an Abomination, and not an Oblation:
Lorichius. 378. No Private Mass in the Primitive Church. 14. Private Mass
never ordained in any Council. 22. Private Mass gr^vve of lack of devotion.
14. Mass abused to vvitchecrafte and poisoninges. 2. To hear Mass, to see
Mass. 70. One man may say three Masses in one day. 479. The sale of Masses.
481. Errors in the Mass. 3. 532. The Priest receives the Sacrament for
others, as the mouth of the people. 588. The Priest presumes to apply the
merits of Christ by his Mass. 591. M. Hardinges proufes for Private Mass.
93. Matrimony honorable. 52. Matrimony misliked of certain learned Fathers.
52. Miracle in Baptism. 355. Fained miracles. 515. The first Fathers of idle
Monks. 85. Monasteries dens of Thieves. 85.
N.
In the name of Christ only. 115. Nature is, that God vvil. 367. Nestorius.
^^^^. Nobody taken for a ^evve. 88.
O.
Opus Operatum. 594. Against Opus Operatum. 600. Oath. 119.
P.
Paulinus historicus. 133. The people not so il as the Priest. 16. The people
compared to swine and dogs. 518. M. Hardinges Judgment of the people. 527.
534. 550. M. Harding calls the people, Curious bu^ie bodies of the Vulgar
sort. 531. The people better instructed in Religion, then the Priests. 619.
Poison ministered in the Sacrament. 2. Prayers Common, and Private. 215. Common
Prayers more effectual then Private. 215. M. Harding likes well the Prayers in
the knovve^ Vulgar tongue. 152. 206. Examples of prayers in the Common tongue.
156. 158. 168. 169. 175. 176. 196. 219. The people singinge Psalms together.
153. 168. Birds speak, they know not, what. 170. A Popiniaie taught to
say the Creed. 170. The Emperor Justinians Constitution for the Common
Prayers to be pronounced alovvde. 171. Prayers conceived with the mind. 171.
Prayers uttered with the voice. 171. Prayers in an unknown tongue utterly
unprofitable. 212. 215. The Priest, and the people in the Common Prayers
speak together. 178. The people ought to answer, Amen. 172. The Common
Prayers in England in the English tongue. 188. 190. 191. The Common Prayers in
France in the French tongue. 184. The Words of S. Paul. 1. Corin. 14.
make for Prayers in the Common tongue. 198. 199. M. Hardinge says, that
understanding of the words vvithdravveth the mind. 214. Preparation to the
Communion. 15. Priests, wicked, treen, vvoorse then the people, VVoulues,
Devils. 16. Number of Priests. 17. 89. Priests, and Ecclesiastical Judges
often deceived. 118. Real Presence. 316. Christ's Body not Corporally present.
406. Spiritual presence. 357. 358. 404. 430. 449. 471. 585. 607. Christ
present in Baptism. 352. 353. Christ present by Grace. 347. Spiritual
Eatinge. 320. 322. 324. 335. 389. 391. 392. 401. 430. 601. 627. Carnal
understanding. 322. The Fathers of the old Testamente received the Body of
Christ. 321. The cause of the Capernaites offense. 323. 324. The Omnipotente
power of God. 324. 35^. Berengarius Recantation. 327. 328. Christ's Body
Deified. 331. Christ's Fleas he two ways taken. 330. Iouisible, and
Inuifibly. 335. Christ our Spiritual Bread. 389. Very, and verily. 337.
Christ laid on the table, In what sense. 336. We are made one with
Christ. 339. Christ is i^ us Corporally, Carnally, Naturally. 339. Christ
mingled with us. 340. Christ Corporally in us by Faith. 344. We are
Naturally in Christ. 344. Christ Corporally, and Naturally in us by Faith,
by Raptisme etc. 345. 346. We are incorporate into Christ. 345. Pope. The
Pope holds his authority not by the Scriptures, but by custom. 221. 235.
Childis he Allegatio^s of the Scriptures, to prove the Popes Supremacy. 221.
Upon this Rock I vvil build my Church. 221. 233. The Church builte equally
upon all the Apostles. 309. The keys given to the rest, as unto Peter. 229.
Christ Head of the Church. 256. Christ's Vicare. 256. 257. Peter was not
Universal Bishop. 227. Peter was not Head of the Church. 261. 262. 311. The
places of S. Cyprian fully ansvveared. Vnus Episcopus: Vniuersa ^raternitas:
Hinc Schismata oriuntur. 228. 229. 230. 231. Anacletus countr^^^^ited. 223.
Anacletus corrupts the Scriptures. 224. The B. of Rome first of Bishops,
expounded. 241. The principality of the City of Rome: The principal Church.
243. 244. 247. The Nobleness of the City of Rome. 304. The Chieferie: the
Head. 249. 306. 307. 309. 310. The Highest Priest. 251. Paul went up to
Jerusalem to visit Peter. 253. The Supremacy proved by Aristotle, and
Homere, and by drifte of reason. 254. To seek to Rome for Counsel. 259. 294.
To take up, and compounde matters. 259. Appeals to Rome condemned. 265. 266.
Appeals from equal, to equal. 272. Appeals in Ecclesiastical causes to the
Prince. 272. The Prince calls Bishops in Ecclesiastical causes before him
self. 268. The Pope had no Jurisdiction over the East. 278. 279. The Pope
excommunicated others, and was excommunicate by others. 280. The Pope d^posed
by the Bishops of the East. 281. The Pope Confirms Bishops within his
own Province. 282. The Pope had neither power, nor authority, to call
Councelles. 284. 285. 259. The Pope confirms Councelles, as also do others.
286. Councelles allowed against the Pope. 287. The Emperors confirmed
Councelles. 286. The Pope could not restoare Bishops. 289. Reconciliation to
the Church of Rome. 290. 291. Damasus ruler of the house of God. 305. The Pope
saluted by the name of Brother. 228. 263. No Bishop, but Ambrose. 241. The
Primacie Common to many Bishops. 245. Paul equal unto Peter. 252. 253. 303.
Al Bishops rule the Church together. 260. Paul Head of al nations. 303.
John greatter then Peter. 309. The meaning of this name, Universal Bishop. 220.
The Bishop of Rome is not the Universal Bishop. 298. The Bishop of the
Universal Church. 299. The Bishop of Constantinople the Universal Bishop. 242.
300. The Pride of the sea of Rome. 224. 234. 235. 247. 251. 252. The Authority
of the Pope more then the Authority of the Scriptures. 107. The visitinge of
the Pope. 254. The Pope equal with Christ. 258. Flateringe of the Pope. 262.
Seruus seruorum Dei. 297. The intolerable tyranny, and pride of the Sea of
Rome. 314. The Pope cannot err. 274. Many Popes have erred. 275. The Pope
Doctor of both Laws by Authority, not by knowledge. 259. M. Hardinge
compares the Pope with Balaam, and Caiphas. 274. The Pope sometimes no member
of the Church. 220. The Pope has his holiness of his Chair. 276. The Pope a
forger. 221. The Pope a Cogger, a Foister, taken in manifest forgerie. 236.
The Supremacy of Rome condemned by Councelles. 235. 238. 240. 263. The
universal Bishop is the forer^nner of Antichriste. 2^0. S. Gregory's full
judgment of the name of Universal Bishop. 225. S. Gregory refused to be
called Universal. 227. The Supremacy of Rome the destruction of the Church.
255. The Bishop of Constantinople enioi^th the P^erogatiue of old Rome. 241.
Phocas a Traitor* and a Murderer. 243. Psalms hable to chase away Diuelles.
211. Psalms songue by Lay people and artificers. 213. Psalms hard, or
easy. 213.
R.
Relics. 52. Reservation in both Kinds. 131. 132. Against Reservation.
413. 416. 622. Reservation. 414. The Sacrament reserved to be received of the
people. 415. The Faith of the vveast Church came not first from Rome. 56. 166.
167. 233. The Church of Rome corrupted. 56. 260. Al Churches must agree to the
Church of Rome, In what sense. 244. Rome six times sackte within the space
of. 140. years. 292. The nobleness of the City of Rome. 294. 304. Rome had
the Faith from Jerusalem, and from the East. 295.
S.
Sacrament. The Sacrament is a Sign. 110. 380. 446. Sacrament generally
taken. 116. The Sacrament is material Bread. 381. Sacramental Changinge. 407.
427. The Sacrament^ is a Creature. 408. Sacraments be Visible words. 409.
The Sacram. is not bare Bread. 433. Difference bitweene the Sacraments of the
Old Testament, and of the Nevve. 464. 468. 470. The Sacrament consists of
two parts. 603. The Sacrament is a Creature, and no God. 614. A Resemblance
bitvveene the Sacrament, and the thing signified by the Sacrament. 634. The
Sacrament is one thing, and Christ's Body is an other thing. 380. 383. 430.
584. 610. The Sacrament passes into the nourishemente of our bodies. 380.
383. The word of God is more truly Christ's Body then the Sacrament. 883.
Vehemente speeches of the Sacrament. 385. 400. 409. 428. 434. 448. 462. 471.
608. Sancta Sanctorum. 385. The Anciente Fathers judgment touching the
Sacrament. 617. 618. The end; and use of Sacraments. 446. 462 Abuses of the
Sacrament. 141. The Sacrament thrust into dead men's mouths. 32. The
Sacrament sent^ unto strangers. 39. 40. The Sacrament delivered to men, and
vvemenne to carry home. 43. 46. 47. The same forebidden. 132. 140. The
Sacrament sent home to the nevve married man, and wife. 51. The Sacrament
sent abroad into sundry parishes. 54. 55. The Sacrament buried. 80. 84.
134. The Sacrament turned into a stoane. 136. To take the Sign in steed of
the thing that is Signified, a miserable servitude of the soul. 380.
Sacrifice. 555. To Sacrifice the Gospel, the People, etc. 556. M. Hard. says,
Christ offered his Body, al be it not in respect of offeringe. 555. 557. The
Sacrifice of thankesgeuinge, is the Sacrifice of the New Testament. 358. 556.
562. The daily Sacrifice, what it means. 24. The Sacrifice of the holy
Communion not daily offered. 24. 50. 62. 91. In what sense Christ is daily
Sacrificed. 61. 578. To Sacrifice the token of Christ's Body. 386. The
Sacrifice of Bread, and Wine. 386. 567. The pure Sacrifice prophesied by
Malachie. 559. 569. The Sacrifice of Remembrance. 556. 557. 562. 563. 565. 568.
569. 570. 575. The Sacrifice of the Nevve Testamente. 558. M. Hard. says,
Christ sheadde his Blood at his last Supper. 560. 570. Dreadful Sacrifice,
and why dreadful. 563. 568. M. Hard. says, Christ offered him self in
Heaven. 565. Christ's Sacrifice lasts for ever. 566. Christ him self is the
Sacrifice. 571. 572. The Sacrifice of Melchisedek. 576. 577. Christ is both
the Priest, and the Oblation. 578. The Vnblouddy Sacrifice. 579. 580. The
Priest in his Canon prays for Christ. 582. 583. Scriptures. Readinge of the
Scriptures necessary for the people. 520. 529. 534. 537. 544. The Scriptures
hard, or easy. 532. 533. The Scriptures hidden from the wise. 526. 527. 529.
The ignorante may read the Scriptures. 205. 523. 526. 527. The people
commanded to read the Scriptures. 518. 519. 521. 544. Not readinge the
Scriptures is dangerous. 530. 531. Knowledge of the Scriptures breeds
humility. 530. Knowledge blovveth up the mind. 530. Discourraginge from
readinge the Scriptures comes from the study, and Closet of the Diuel^
Chrysostom. 521. 522. The readinge of the Scriptures is profitable, although
we can not fully understand them. 210. 211. The Scriptures translated into
the Sclanon tongue by S. Hierome. 157. The Scriptures readde openly by Chapters
in the Church. 158. Dangerous to contend of Divine matters. 523. Ignorance of
the Scriptures is dangerous. 531. 538. 543. The Scriptures superstitiously
hanged about men's necks. 211. Writing, and readinge in the Hebrevve
tongue. 528. The Scriptures translated into the Sclauo^ tongue by S. Hierome.
540. The Scriptures translated into the Gotthian tongue by Vlphilas. 540. The
Scriptures translated into the Syrian, the Palestine, the Thebane, the
Phe^^ike, the Arabike, the Lybike, and the French tongue. 540. The Scriptures
translated into al Christian tongues. 540. The Scriptures translated into the
English tongue. 54^. 542. Heretics shut up the Scriptures. 544. Serapion.
134. Simplicity pardonable. 111. Vain, and fond simplicity. 208.
T.
Theodoretus condemned of Heresy. 252. Tertullian a married Priest. 44.
Diversity of tongues. 160. 163. Traditions used for the Scriptures. 522.
Transubstantiation. 396. 397. Transubstantiation, a late Fantasy. 410. 421 The
Greek Church never allowed Transubstantiation. 422. The Bread in the
Sacrament remains still. 44. 382. 408. 423. 429. 437. 460. 635. The
Omnipote^cie of God vvoorketh in Baptism, and in all Sacraments. 424. 426. The
place of Cyprian ansvveared, The Bread Changed, not in form, but in nature.
424. Sacramental Change. 427. In what sense the Bread is the Body of Christ.
428. 436. The Bread nothing in comparison of Christ's Body. 433. 434.
V.
Valdo. 538. VVasshinge of feet. 114. 116. The Water of Baptism, and
Christ's Blood are one thing. 382. Minglinge of water, and wine not
necessary. 34. Communion ministered in Norvvey without wine. 32. Communion in
Motheglen. 113. Wine continevvinge long. 138.
FINIS.
Errata.
Page. Line. Fault. Correction. 103. 43. Leo, Read, Julius. 113. 23. Ruscia,
Read, Russia. 135. 36 Aransican. Arausican. Ibidem. in margi. Aransican.
Read, Arausican. Ibidem. in margi. lib. 1. strike it out. 281. in margi. (...)
Read, (...) 284. 20. Curche, Read, Church. 415. 8. Chrystome, Read,
Chrysostom. 429. 4. Fealt, eas, Read, Fealte, as.

OF PRIVATE MASS. THE FIRST ARTICLE.
The Bishop of Sarisburie.
IF any learned man of our adversaries, or if all the learned men that be alive,
be hable to bring any one sufficient sentence out of any old catholic Doctor
or Father, or out of any old general Council, or out of the holy Scriptures of
God, or any one example of the Primitive Church, whereby it may clearly and
plainly be proved, that there was any private Mass in the whole world at
that time for the space of six hundred years after Christ. etc. The conclusion
is this: As I said before, so say I now again, I am content to yield and to
subscribe.

M. Hardinge. The first Division.
Every Mass is public, concerning both the oblation, and also the
Communion, and none pryuate. For no man offers that dreadful sacrifice
privately for him self alone, but for the whole Church of Christ in common.
The Communion likewise of the Sacrament, is a public feast by Christ through
the ministry of the priest in the same The first untruth: for there is no
such preparation.
prepared for every faithful person: from partakinge whereof none is excluded,
that with due examination having before made him self ready, demands the
same. And so being common by order of the first institution, and by The second
untruth: there appears no such vvil in the Minister.
will of the ministers, it ought to be reputed for common, not private.

That others do so commonly forbear to communicate with the priest, it is
through their own defaute and negligence, not regardinge their own salvation.
Whereof the godly and careful rulers of faithful people, have fithens the
time of the primitive Church, always much complained.

The B. of Sarisburie.
THERE appears small hope that M. Hardinge will deal plainly in the rest, that
thus makes his first entry with a cavil.

For where as the matter is known, and agreed upon, it is great folly to pyke
quarrel upon the word. Every Mass (says he) is common, and none private. If
it be so, then has he already concluded fully on our side. For if there be no
private Mass at all, the^ was there no private Mass in the primitive Church,
which was my first assertion.

But M. Hardinge, as may be gathered by his manner of proofs, is not yet well
resolved, neither what is private, nor what is Mass. For in the.22. article of
his book, intreatynge of the accidents of bread and wine, to the intent to
avoid the gross absurdities that follow Transubstantiation, Page 182. b.
he says, These mattiers were never taught in open audience, but privately
disputed in the schools, and set abroad by learned men in their private
wrytinges. There he calls y^ thing private, that is disputed in open
audience, in the hearing of five hundred, or more, and is set abroad to the
knowledge of the world: And here the thing that is done by the priest and his
boy alone in a corner, he calls common. Thus he makes words to sound
what him lists, M. Hardinge makes common, private: and private, common.
sometime common to be private, sometime private to be common at his pleasure.

And as touching Mass, sometime he makes it the Sacrifice: sometime the
Communion: sometime the prayers: and so seems not yet well to know, upon what
ground to stand.

His first reason is this: The Sacrifice of the priest is common, therefore the
Mass is common. These reasons be answered afterward more at large.
Here might be demanded, who gave the priest authority, to make this
Sacrifice? and without authority how can he make it? But if his Sacrifice be
common, why does he give it these private tytles, This for the lyuinge: This
for the dead: This for a friend: This for him self?

His second reason is this: It is a feast, and therefore it is common: and thus
he salu^th one error with an other. For if it be a feast, how is it received
by one alone? If it be received by one alone, how can it seem to be a feast?
But he says, it is prepared for all. Uerely it is but small provision to serve
so many. The priest him self knows this is untrue. He prepares for him
self, and not for others: He speaks to him self, and not unto the
congregation: He receives him self alone, and not with his brethren.
Therefore in this respect we must needs say, the Mass is private, and not
common.

The third reason touching the will of the Minister, is very uncertain. For
neither can the priest by his willinge alter natures, or make that thing
common, which is private: nor can any man certeinely know, what thing the
priest wills. For what if his will be to work Necromancie, or Sorcerie, as
it is reported of Pope Hildebrande? Or what if his will be to poison some body,
as Henry the Emperor was poisoned in the communion bread: Hermannus
Contractus. Nicolaus Lyra in. 14. cap. Danielis.
Pope Uictor in the chalice? Or what if his will be to work feigned miracles,
as Lyra says, many are wrought in the open Church by the priest to mock the
people. Doubtless if the priests will may be known, either by his words, or
by his doings, or by his gesture, or by his provision, or by the quantity of
his bread and wine, or by his whole usage and practice, it may soon be seen,
his will is to make a private banquet, and not a common.

These be very weak foundations to build upon. Of the same M. Hardinge might
rather, and far better have geathered the contrary. For if it be the common
sacrifice of the whole Church, it should be offered by the whole Church, as
S. Ambrose says: Ambro. 1. Cor. 11
Vt multorum oblatio simul celebretur: That the oblation of many may be made
together.

If it be a common feast of the whole Church, it should be received commonly
of the whole church. Hieron. 1. Cor. 11
And therefore S. Hierome says. Dominica ccena omnibus debet esse communis.
The lords supper must be common to al, and that not for these simple shifts
that M. Hardinge and his fellows have divised. S. Hieromes reason is this:
Quia dominus omnibus Discipulis, qui aderant, aequaliter tradidit Sacrame^ta.
Because the lord gave the Sacraments equally to all the Disciples that were
present. These words be plain, Equally, and To all the Disciples. And
therefore says S. Hierome, according to this example the Lords supper must
be common.

M. Hardinge. The second Division.
Therefore in this respect we do not acknowledge any private Mass, but leave
that term to Luthers school where it was first divised, 3. Untruth.
and so termed by Satan himself, seekinge how to withdraw his Nouice Luther
from the love and estimation of that most blessed sacrifice, by reasoninge with
him against the same in a night vision, as him self records in a little book
which he made De Missa angulari and unction Sacerdotali.

The B. of Sarisburie.
This tale against that godly man Doctor Luther, is scorneful, and
sclaunderous, blased abroad by Pigghius, Hosius, Staphylus the renegate, and
such others, only of wilful malice and hatred of the truth, and therefore
not worthy to be answered. Doctor Luther shows what terrible tentations
the Devil lays to trappe man withal, taking occasion sometime of well
dooinge, sometime of evil: sometime of truth, sometime of falseheade. And for
example he shows that the Devil on a time assaulted him, not in visible
form, but by dreadful suggestions in his conscience, as it were thus calling
him to remembrance: These many years thou have said Mass, thou have showed up
bread and wine to be woorshipped as God, and yet now thou know it was a
creature, and not God. Thereof followed Idolatry, and thou wear the cause
thereof. Al these things he saw to be true by the testimony and light of his
own conscience, and therefore confessed he had offended, and yielded him self
unto God. The Devils purpose was to lead him to despair: but God mercifully
delivered him. And this is Doctor Luthers whole and only meaning in that
place, that no man of him self is hable to withstand such assaults, and
tentations of the ennemie, but only by the power and mercy of God: This (good
reader) is that School of Satan: this is that woonderful Tragedy whereat M.
Hardinge makes such horrible exclamations. If he think it so heinous a matter
for a godly man to be vexed by the devil, Matthaei. 4. 2. Corinthians. 12.
perhaps he will also find some fault with Christ, that was carried by the
Devil into the mount: or with S. Paul that had the Angel of Satan to buffet
him: or with a great number of his portuise Saints, whose legendes are full of
visions of Devils, with other like childishe fables. As for Luther, y^ doctrine
that he taught in his school touching this point, is the very Gospel of
Christ, and therefore it increases, and enters into the hearts of men, and
the lies and sclaunders of the enemies shall never be hable to prevail against
it.

M. Hardinge. The.3. Division.
Yet we deny not but that the fathers of some ancient Councels, 2. Council.
Vase^. Cap. 4. Council. Triburien. Decretal. lib. 3. tit. 41. C. 2. De
consecrat. did. 1. ex August^. quod quida^ Gregor. tribuu^t. Grego. ex Regist.
lib. 2. ad Casteriu^. c. 9. b. 3. Part Summae. q. 83.
and since likewise S. Thomas, and certain other School Doctors have
called it sometimes a Private Mass, but not after the sense of Luther, and his
scholars, but only as it is contrary to Public, and solemn, in consideration
of place, time, audience, purpose, rites, and other circumstances. The variety
and change of which, being things accident arie, cannot vary or change the
substance or essential nature of the Mass. M. Iuel an earnest professor of
the new doctrine of Luther, and of the Sacrament aries, calls, as they do,
that a Private Mass whereat the priest having no company to communicate with
him, receives the Sacrament alone.

The B. of Sarisburie.
M. Hardinge by a Rhetorical Correction, upon better advise, puts him self
in remembrance, that there is mention made of Peculiar and Private Masses, as
he says, in certain ancient Councelles, and in the school Doctors. In the
Bishops book.
He might have named Steven Gardener, and Albertus Pigghius, that wrote the
defense of Private Mass, and he him self acknowledges abuses, and errors in
the same. Alber. Pigghius in locis Communib. De Priuata Missa.
Yet will he not, I trow, confess, that either of them both was the Disciple
of Satan.

Here M. Hardinge stands upon terms, and says, the Mass is called Private
in respect of place, time, audience, and other circumstances. And even such
be their Private Masses for the most part, said in side Isles, alone, without
company of people, only with one boy to make answer, so private, that the
people of God is thereby deprived, and robbed of al comfort. And thus it
seems Thomas understands the private Mass. ^ar 3. q. 83* ar. 5.
For thus he says, In Missis priuatis sufficit, si vnus sit praesens,
scilicet, Minister, qui populi totius personam gerit. In private Masses it is
sufficient, if there be one present, I mean, the Clerk, that stands in
steed of the whole people.

Touching the allegations in the margent, the School Doctors are al of very
late years: The place of S. Augustine is forged, and not S. Augustines: the
place of S. Gregory nothing to purpose, not once naminge private Mass: the
Councelles that are called so ancient, were al at the least seven hundred
years after Christ, and so without the reatche of my compass.

But to agree upon terms, and not to fly the name of Mass, although it be
very seldom, and for the most part never found in the old Catholic
writers: that we call the Common or Public Mass, Public Mass.
whereas the priest and people receive the holy Communion together, which was
the ancient order of the Apostles and holy Fathers in the primitive Church.
But whereas the priest receives the Sacrament him self alone, without
distribution made unto others, that we call the Private Mass, Private Mass.
yea although the whole parish be present and look upon him. For a thing may
be private although it be done by the public Minister, and for the people,
and in the mids of all the people. And thus Thomas of Aquine seems to take
these words Private, and Common. First (says he) the people is prepared to
receive by the Common prayer of all the people, which is the Lords prayer: and
also by the Private prayer, which the priest offers specially for the people.
3. Par. q. 183. ar. 4. In explanatione Missae Romanae.
Here the prayer is called private, notwithstanding it be made by the priest,
for the people, and in the mids of the Congregation.

M. Hardinge. The.4. Division.
Against this private Mass, as he terms it, he inue^gheth sore in his
printed sermon which he preached at Poules cross the second Sunday before
Easter in the year of our Lord. 1560. as he intituleth it, shunninge the
accustomed name of Passion Sunday, least (as it seems) by vsinge the term of
the Catholic Church he should seem to favor any thing that is Catholic.
In which sermon he has geathered together as it wear into one heap, all that
ever he could find written in derogation of it, in their books, by whom it
has been impugned.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Mark (gentle reader) how small occasions this man takes hold at, contrary to
his promise, to serve his intemperate humor of speakinge evil. What, thinks
he, that al folk are Heretics that name the days otherwise, then they be
named in his Portuise? So may he soon condemn the Greeks, and (the Church
of Rome only excepted) al other Christians throughout the world: who, as I
reckon, never had the name of Passion Sunday in their Calender, or use of
speaking. So may he condemn al such as call Parasceue Good friday, or the
Italians, that contrary to the Portuise call the first week in Lent the
Carneuale. In deed the Portuise calls that day not only Passion Sunday, but
also the Sunday, Iudica, Dominica Iudica.
and takes the one name to be as Catholic, as the other. God be thanked we
are not ashamed of Christ's Passion, as having nothing to glory in but only
the Cross of Christ, Galat. 6.
and his Passion: neither do we refuse your fantasies because they be
Catholic, as you surmise, but because they be your own, divised by your self
of late days, many of them contrary to Gods holy word, and are not Catholic.

Inuectiues I made none, neither do we use the Pulp^^e to that purpose, but
soberly, and far otherwise, then M. Hardinge seems to use his pen. I
spoke of the abuses of Christ's last Supper, having thereto occasion of these
words of S. Paul: 1. Corint. 11.
The thing that I received of the Lord, the same have I delivered unto you,
who in his time seems to find fault with the Corinthians for the same.
Neither is the Supper of Christ so priuileged, Albertus Pigghius de priuata
Missa.
but it may be abused, as appears by the very confession of our adversaries,
who deny not, but that there be abuses and errors cropen into the private
Mass.

M. Hardinge. The.5. Division.
Although he pretend enemitie against private Mass in word, yet in deed
who so ever reads his sermon, and discerns his sprite, shall easily
perceive, that he extends his whole wit and cunninge utterly to abolishe
the unbloody and daily Sacrifice of the Church, 4 The 4. Untruth. The old^
Fathers never commonly called it so.
commonly called the Mass. Pro sacrificio cruento, rationale and incruentum ac
mysticum sacrificium instituit, quod in mortem domini per Symbola corporis and
sanguinis ipsi^^ celebratur. Clemens constitutionu^ Apostolicarum lib. 6. cap.
23.
Which as the Apostles them selves affirm in Clement their scholar and
fellow, being unbloody, has succeeded in place of the bloody Sacrifices of
the old law, and is by Christ's commandment frequented, and offered in
remembrance of his passion and death, and to be used al times, until his
coming. But what so ever he, or al other the forerunners of Antichrist,
speak, or work against it, all that ought not to overthrow the faith of good
and true Christian men, having for proof thereof beside many other places of
holy scripture, the figure of Melchisedech, that was before the law, the
prophecy of Malachie, in the law, and lastly, and most plainly, the 5
institution of Christ in the new testament. The.5. Untruth, Christ speaks
not one word of any Sacrifice.
Which he left to the Apostles, the Apostles to the Church, and the Church
has continually kept and used through the whole world until this day.

Touching Doctors, they have with one consent in all ages, in all parts of the
world, from the Apostles time forewarde, both with their example, and also
testimony of writing, confirmed the same faith. They that have been brought
up in learning, and yet through corruption of the time stand doubtful in this
point, let them take pains to travel in study, and they shall find by good
ancient witness of the priests and Deacons of Achaia, that 6 The.6. untruth,
S. Andrew said the Communion and not the Mass.
S. Andrewe the Apostle, touching the substance of the Mass, woorshipped god
every day with the same service as priests now do, in celebrating the
externals Sacrifice of the Church. Abdiae li. 7. Historiae Apostol.
They shall find by witness of Abdias first Bishop of Babylon, who was the
Apostles scholar, 7 The.7. untruth, This Abdias never savve Christ in the
flesh: It is a very Legende of lies.
and saw Christour savior infleshe, and was present at the passion and
martyrdom of S. Andrewe, that S. Matthew the Apostle celebrated Mass in
Ethiopia a little before his Martyrdom. Concilium Co^stantinopol. in Trullo,
Cap. 32. Epistol. ad Burdega. li. Constir. Apostolicarum 8. Cap. ^lt.
They shall find by report of an ancient Council general, that S. James wrote
a Liturgy, or a form of the Mass. They shall find that Martialis one of the
LXXII. Disciples of Christ, and Bishop of Burdeaulx in France, sent thither
by S. Peter, served god in like sort. 8 The.8. Untruth, There is no manner
token or show of private Mass.
They shall find in Clement the whole order and form of the Mass, set forth
by the Apostles them selves, and the same celebrated by them after our lord
was assumpted, before they went to the orderinge of Bishops, priests, and
the.vii. Deacons, according to his institution, and the same right so declared
by Cyrillus Bishop of Jerusalem In mystagogicis orationibus. They shall find
the same most plainly treated of, 9 The.9. untruth, It is the very form of
the Communinion, and nothing like the private Mass.
and a form of the Mass, much agreeable to that is used in these days in
writing set forth by S. Dionyse, In Eccles. hi^rach. Cap. 3. Act. 17.
whom S. Paul converted to the faith, of whom it is mentioned in the acts of
the Apostles, who had conference with S. Peter, Paul, and John, the
Evangelist, and much acquaintance with Timothe.

Faith confirmed with out words. S. Paul says, Faith comes by hearing.
Thus do I give the good Christen reader but a taste as it were of proofs
without allegation of the words, for confirmation of thy faith concerning the
blessed Mass out of the Scriptures, Apostles, Lib. 4. Contra haeres. Cap. 32.
and Apostolic men. 10 A burden of untruths.
I do further refer the to Justinius the Martyr and Philosopher, To Irenaeus
the Martyr and Bishop of Lions, who lived with the Apostles scholars. To the
old Bishop and Martyr Hippolytus, that lived in Origens time, who in his
oration De consummatione mundi, extant in Greek, makes Christ thus to say
at the general judgment unto Bishops. Venite Pontifices, qui pure mihi
Sacrificium die nocteque obtulistis, ac pretiosum corpus and sanguinem meum
immolastis quotidie. Comeye Bishops that have purely offered Sacrifice to me
day and night, and have Sacrificed my precious body and blood daily. 11
The.11. untruth, They contain the very order of the Communion.
Finally I refer them in steed of many, to the two worthy fathers Basile,
and Chrysostom, whose Masses be left to the posterity at this time extant.
12 The.12. untruth, It is the very express order of the communion. It is no
private Mass.
Amongst al Cyrillus Hierosolymitanus is not to be passed over lightly, who at
large expounds the whole Mass used in Jerusalem in his time, In
mystagogicis orationibus.
the same which now we find in Clement, much like to that of Basile, and
Chrysostom, and for the Canon and other principal parts, to that is now also
used in the Latin Church.

As for the other Doctors of the Church that followed the Apostles, and those
Apostolic men, many in number, excellent in learning holy of life, to show
what may be brought out of their works for proof of this matter, that
th^oblation of the body and blood of Christ in the Mass is the Sacrifice of
the Church, and proper to the new testament, it would require a whole volume:
and therefore not being moved by M. Iuelles challenge to speak specially
thereof, but as it is private after their meanige, and many good treatises in
defense of this Sacrifice being set forth already in printe: at this present
I will say nothing, thinkinge hereof as Salust did of Carthago that great city,
that it were better to keep silence, then to speak few.

The B. of Sarisburie.
God grant unto al his people the spirit of wisdom and understanding,
Esai. 11.
that they may be hable to discern the Spirits, 1. Johan. 4.
whether they be of God or no, that they may take heed of false Prophets,
Matthe. 7.
and give ear to the voice of the Prince of Pastors, and fly the voice of
strangers, and beware of blind guides, Johan. 10.
that so often have deceived them. Matthe. 23.


Here M. Hardinge a little overmuch inflameth his choler, Forerunners of
Antichriste.
and whom he lists he calls the enemies of the Sacrifice, and the
forerunners of Antichriste, and what not? even with the same spirit that the
Pharisees sometime said: Actor. 7.
Steven had spoken against the holy Temple: Matthae. 26.
or Christ had uttered blasphemy against God. I will not answer heat with
heat, but in such kind of eloquence will rather give place.

As touching the matter, Ad Constantia^ August. epist 78. li. 4.
M. Harding knows that S. Gregory calls him the forerenner of Antichrist,
not ye says, Christ has made a full sacrifice for sin once for all upon the
Cross, but that vaunteth him self above his brethren, as did Lucifer, and
names him self an universal Bishop over the whole Church of Christ. Ad
Mauritium
Such a one S. Gregory calls the forerenner of Antichrist.

And where as he calls us at his pleasure the enemies of the holy Sacrifice,
Imperat. lib. 7. epist. 197.
woe were unto us, Johan. 1.
if we had not that Sacrifice. We know, that Christ is that lamb of God, that
has taken away the sins of the world, and that there is no name or
Sacrifice under heaven, Actorium. 4.
whereby we can be saved, but only the name, and Sacrifice of Jesus Christ.
And because we know that this Sacrifice is sufficient, therefore we fly to no
Sacrifice made by man.

The Sacrifice, says M. Hardinge, Commonly called the Mass.
commonly called the Mass. But why shows he not, of whom it is so called?
Uerely neither the Hebrews in their tongue, nor the Greeks in their tongue,
nor Christ, nor his Apostles, nor Tertullian, nor S. Cyprian, nor Origin, nor
Lactantius, nor S. Hierome, nor S. Augustine in any books undoubtedly known
for theirs, nor his own doctors, Clement, Abdias, Hippolytus, ever used the
name of Mass. Therefore it is marvel, yt he would say the Sacrifice is so
commonly called the Mass. If it might have pleased him to say, that he him
self and his fellows so call it, he had done right.

But here is brought in a whole troop of doctors in a rank: M^lchisedech:
Malachias: Clemens the Apostles fellow: the Deacons of Asia: Abdias the
Apostles Disciple, and Bishop of Babylon, that saw Christ in the fleash: S.
Andrew: S. James: Martialis: Dionysius, who had conference with Peter, Paul,
and John: Irenaeus, Justinius Martyr, Hippolytus Martyr, Basile, Chrysostom,
Cyril of Jerusalem, and all the rest of the Doctors in all ages, and in all
parts of the world. And who would not be affraide to see such an army come
against him? How be it (gentle reader) be of good cheer. All this is but a
camisado: These be but visardes: they be no faces. They are brought in like
Mummers for a show, and say nothing. That M. Harding lacked in weight, he
would needs make up in tale: and so uses this only as a floorishe before the
fight: and as a stream bl^wen up with wind and weather carries with it much
frothe and filth by the very rage and drifte of the water: even so M. Hardinge
in this place flowinge, and wanderinge over the banks with Copia verborum by
the violence and force of his talk carries a great deal of error, and
untruth alonge before him. For confirmation of faith.
Notwithstanding, thus has he given thee, good Christian reader, as he says,
a taste of his pro^fes without allegation of any words for confirmation of
thy faith concerning the Mass. Miserable is that faith, that in so weighty
matters can be confirmed with bare names by hearing nothing. I marvel that M.
Harding ever durst either to allege such authorities, as he knows the most
hereof be, or thus openly to mock the world.

For briefly to touch Melchisedech, Malachias, and the institution of Christ,
what weight can there appear in these reasons, Genes. 14.
Melchisedech brought forth bread and wine to banquet Abraham and his army
being weary of the chase: Or, Malachias Prophesied that all the nations of the
world should be turned unto God, Malachiae. 1.
and should offer unto him a pure Sacrifice: Matthae. 26.
Or, Christ ordained his last Supper amongst his Disciples, and badde them do
the same in his remembrance: ergo, there was private Mass in the Church. Who
ever made any such arguments in any school? what, will M. Harding make folk
believe, yt Melchisedech, Malachias, or Christ, said private Mass? Or does he
think yt these reasons must be taken, because he speaks the word?

But he will say, Clemens.
and Malachias, signified the Sacrifice of the new testament. We deny it not.
But did they signify a Sacrifice done by one man alone, in a strange language,
the people lookinge on him, and no man knowing what he means? Why may we not
think rather, they signified the Sacrifice of the holy Communion, whereas the
whole people does lift up their hands and hearts unto heaven, and pray and
sacrifice together, reioisinge in the cross of Christ, and so celebratinge
the lords death until he comme? for the Sacrifice that is prophesied by
Malachie, as it is expounded by Tertullian, S. Hierome, and other holy Fathers,
is the Sacrifice of prayer, and contrite heart, as hereafter in the seuentienth
article it shall further appear.

Touching the witnesses here alleged, first I marvel that M. Hardinge would
ever bring them forth, but much more that he would thus set them out,
with such circumstances of commendation, as that they saw Christ in the
flesh, or that they were the Apostles fellows. For he knows well, that many
of them are little worthy of such credit, as partly being ever doubted of,
and suspected to be written, not by them, whose names they bear, but by
Heretics, to whom M. Hardinge seems now to fly for aid: partly also
obscure, unknown, unacquainted, not readde, not seen, not hard of in the
world before this time.

But most of al I marvel that he would ever hasarde his cause on these
witnesses, who, as he him self very well knows, will speak against him. And
therefore he has here cunningly suppressed their words, and has only made
a mustre of their names, but would suffer them to say nothing.

And that thou (good reader) may have a taste hereof, Clemente.
and see the faithfulness of these men's dealinge, let us first consider
Clemens, who, as it is reported here, was the Apostles fellow. The title of
the book seems to be De Apostolicis traditionibus: that is, Of orders taken
and divised by the Apostles of Christ, for the better government of the
Church. A worthy book no doubt, and in all ages to be had in great price, if
men had been persuaded, it had been written in deed by Clement. Hierony. de
ecclesiast. scriptoribus.
But S. Hierome by the report of Eusebius, makes mention only of one epistle
of Clementes, that he thought worthy to be received, which epistle
notwithstanding is not now to be found. One other epistle of Clementes he
speaks of: Books counterfeited in S. Clementes name.
but he says it was never allowed by the Church. And further S. Hierome
says: Certain other books there are reported to be abroad in the name of
Clement, as the disputation of Peter and Appion, which books were never in
use amongst our fathers, neither contain they pure, and Apostolical doctrine.
Thus much S. Hierome.

Now whence then comes M. Hardinges Clement? Petrus Crabbe in. 1. tomo
Council.
It was found very lately in the I Will of Candie, by one Carolus Capellius a
Uenetian, written in Greek, and in these countries, never heard of, nor seen
before.

Here the reader, be he never so simple, yet must he think thus much with him
self. Clemens was Bishop of Rome, as it is thought, next after S. Peter. And
were the Bishop of Romes books, and such books, so strange, so holy, and of
such weight, kept in Candie, so far of from Italy, in an Island in the sea,
and not in Rome? written in Greek, and not in Latin? And could such a
worthy work divised by all the Apostles, and set forth by the Apostles
fellow, be laid up in secrecy for the space of a thousand, five hundred
years and more, and no man miss it? Thus much the reader may soon consider
with him self, be he never so simple.

But what if this book were never written by S. Clement? what if it were
written by no honest man? what if it were written by an Heretic? Uerely it
was a common practice in old times, to set wicked books abroad under the
names and titles of the Apostles, and other godly Fathers. Leo sometime Bishop
of Rome writes thus: Apocriphae Scripturae, quae sub nominibus Apostolorum
multarum habent seminarium falsitatum, Abdias.
non solum interdicendae, Decretal.
sed etiam penitus auferendae, Leon. 1.
atque ignibus tradendae sunt. Secret Scriptures, which bearyng the names of
th^apostles, Can. 15.
conteyne a ^^rcerie, and occasion of much falsheade, are not only to be
forbidden, but also utterly to be taken away, and to be committed to the fire.
By this we see that thapostles names were borrowed sometimes to auoutche
Heresies, and wicked doctrine.

As touching Clemens, Gelasius writes thus, and for that he was Bishop of the
same see, Did. 15. Sancta Romana.
it is the more likely he should know the truth. Pauca quae ad memoriam
venerunt, and Catholicis vitanda sunt, decreuimus esse subdenda. In primis
Ariminensem synodum a Constantino Caesare Constantini filio congrega^am
mediante Tauro praefecto, ex tunc, and in aeternum, confitemur esse damnatam.
Item Itinerarium nomine Petri Apostoli, quod appellatur sancti Clementis, libri
Octo Apocryphi. We have thought good (says Gelasius) to note certain books
which are come to knowledge, and ought to be avoided of Catholic people.
First the Council holden at Ariminum, geathered by Constanti^us the Emperor,
the son of Constantinus by mean of Taurus the lieutenante, from thenceforth
and for ever we judge worthy to be condemned: likewise the Iournal of Peter
the Apostle bearinge the name of Clement, eight books, are secret (unlawful)
writings. Thus we see diverse books of Clement condemned by name, and but one
epistle only allowed for good, and this volume here alleged by M. Hardinge
conteininge eight books, Petrus Crabbe.
as it is noted by Peter Crabbe, fully agreeyng in number of books with the
other condemned by Gelasius. 1. tomo Council.
To be short, Cardinal Bessarion allegynge parcel of the same book of
Clement, that has been hidden so long, writes thus of it. Bessarion de
Sacramen. eucharistiae.
Licet haec Clementis verba inter Apocryphas scripturas commemorari sol^ant,
placet tamen eis inpraesentiarum tanquam veris assentiamus. Albeit the words
of Clement be accounted amongst secret (unlawful) writings, yet for once we
are content to receive them as if they were true. Thus M. Hardinges Clement is
disallowed by Eusebius, and by S. Hierome, mistrusted by Bessarion, condemned
by Gelasius, kept forth coming in close prison for the space of a thousand
and five hundred years, yet must we now without refusal stoop unto him, and
take him as the Apostles fellow.

One other of these witness is Abdias, Abdias.
and he is brought in with all his titles: the Bishop of Babylon, planted there
by the Apostles: one that was conversant with Christ, and heard him preach,
and saw him in the fleashe: and was present all the martyrdom of S. Andrew:
with all other circumstances that may geather credit among the simple. Of this
Abdias somewhat must be spoken, and so much the more, for that his name is so
glorious. He was sought out, and found, and set abroad of very late years,
under the name of Abdias, by one Wolphgangus Zazius, a man that takes great
pains to force men to believe it is the very self same Abdias that he makes
him self to be: and therefore he says, he was one of the.lxxij. Disciples,
ordered Bishop by the Apostles, and that S. Luke the Evangelist writing the
Acts of the Apostles borrowed many whole stories word by word out of him.
Then was S. Luke very unthankful, that never once made mention of his author.

But who so ever, or what so ever this Abdias were, his own words do so
bewraye him, that a blind man may see it was not he. He makes many
shameless lies, that he was present with Christ, and at the most part of
the Apostles doings, and yet were the Apostles then according to Christ's
commandment gone into the whole world, Marci. 16.
some into Italy, some into Asia minor, some into Scythia, some into India,
some into Ethiopia, and were many thousand miles a sundre. Abdias in vita
Matthaei.
In his fable of Iphigenia he says, that the people took her brother B^or
being then Christened by S. Matthew, and made him King, and that he reigned
afterward in Ethiopia the space of.lxiij. years, and further makes mention of
Egesippus, Abdias. Martialis.
that lived above one hundred and three score years after Christ. If Abdias
were alive all this while, he might be likened to Johannes de temporibus,
Caguinus.
who, as the French story records, lived in France above three hundred
years. A lier must be circumspecte, and mindeful what he say. Paulus Aemylius.
If he saw Christ in the fleashe, it is not likely he ever saw Egesippus,
that was so long after Christ: If he saw Egesippus, it is not likely he ever
saw Christ. Thus if he report truth in the one, he lies in the other: and
so, whether he lie, or say truth, he cannot be Abdias.

Touching the substance of his book, it is nothing else, for the more part
of it, but a vain peeuishe tale, laid out with falsheade, wicked doctrine,
and curious conference, and talk with Devils: things far unmeet for that
gravity, and Majesty of the Apostles of Christ, as it may soon appear
unto the reader.

It may be geathered by S. Augustine in sundry places, August. contra^
Faustum, lib. 11. Et lib. 22. ca. 80.
that some part of this book was written by certain Heretics named ye
Manichees, and auoutched by them as the very true story of the Apostles. For
he reports the fables of S. Thomas: of S. Matthew: of S. Andrew: of the Lion
that slew the man, that had stricken S. Thomas: of the Dog that brought the
same man's hand unto the table: of Maximilla wife unto Egis: and other like
tales even in such order, as they be set forth by this Abdias.

Against one Adimantus he writes thus, August. contra Adimantum. cap. 16.
They (that is the Manichees) read Secret Scriptures, which they them self
say are pure and perfect: in which Scriptures it is written that S. Thomas
cursed a man, and that afterward a Lion slew him etc. And in an other place
he says, Attendite, qualia sint, quae scribuntur de Maximilla vxore Egetis:
August. de fide contra Manichaeos, cap. 30.
illam noluisse viro debitum reddere: donasse, and supposuisse Eucliam
ancillam, and alias similes fabulas. Behold what things they be, that be
written of Maximilla wife unto Egis: that she (being once Christened) would no
more yield duty unto her husband, but set Euclia her maid in her own
place, and other like fables. Al these and such like tales thus disallowed by
S. Augustine, are reported by M. Hardinges Abdias in great soothe. I thought it
not amiss to speak hereof the more at large, for that I saw a book so full
of tales, so lately found out, without any good show of credit, to be
fathered upon the Apostles disciple, and sent into the world with such a
countenance. S. Augustine seems in diverse places to have given his
judgment of the same. Augustine. co^tra Aduersarium
Writing against the adversary of the law, and Prophets he has these
words, He has brought forth witnesses out of Secret Scriptures, under the
names of the Apostles, John and Andrew, which writings if they had been
theirs, Legis and Prophetaru^. ca. 20.
they had been received of the Church. Did. 15. Sancta Romana.
The like judgment hereof seems to be given by Gelasius, who also says
that such writings according to an ancient custom, and by a singular
provision, were not read in the Church of Rome, for that they were thought to
be written by Heretics.

Thus is this Abdias a book as it is apparent, full of manifest lies, and as it
may be supposed by S. Augustine and Gelasius, written and favored by
Heretics, and refused of the Church: upon such a one, good reader, M.
Hardinge will have thee to stay thy faith.

As for the rest of these new witnesses, although I mind to take no great
exception against them: yet M. Hardinge knows there is scarsly one of them,
but may be doubted of.

Martialis Martialis.
was lately found in France in the City of Lemouica, in an arche of stone
under the ground, so corrupt and defaced, that in many places it could not
be read, and was never seen in the world at any time before.

Dionysius Dionysius.
although he be an ancient writer as it may many ways well appear, yet it is
judged by Erasmus, Erasmus contra Parisienses.
John Colet, and others many grave and learned men, that it cannot be
Ariopagita S. Paul's disciple, that is mentioned in the Acts.

S. James Liturgy Liturgia Iacobi.
has a special prayer for them that live in Monasteries: and yet it was very
rathe to have Monasteries builte in all S. James time.

Chrysostomes Liturgy prays for Pope Nicloas by these words, Liturgia
Chrysostomi, Edita a Claudio du Sanctes.
Nicolai Sanctissimi, and vniuersalis Papae longa sint tempora. We pray God
send Nicolas that most holy, and universal Pope a long time to live. But Pope
Nicloas the first of that name, was the second Pope after Pope Iohane the
woman, in the year of our Lord eight hundred, fifty, and seven, almost five
hundred years after Chrysostom was dead: Pope Iohane.
and likewise in the same Liturgy there is a prayer for the empier and
victory of the Emperor Alexius. And the first Emperor of that name was in
the year of our Lord a thousand and four scoare, after the decease of
Chrysostom seven hundred years. Now it were very much for M. Hardinge to
say, Chrysostom prayed for men by name seven hundred years before they were
borne. I trow that were Prophesieing, and not prayeinge.

Thou see, Christian reader, what Doctors here be brought, as M. Hardinge
says, to ground thy faith, and salvation upon. If he could have brought
any better, I trow, he would have spared these. But such doctrine, such
doctors. These doubtful authorities, I trust, will set men's consciences
out of doubt.

Now, not withstandinge it be something troublesome, yet shall it not be from
the purpose, for trial of these men's faithful dealinge, to examine some of M.
Hardinges own witnesses, and to hear what they will depose. Al these, as it is
said, auoutche the Sacrifice, otherwise called the Mass: and not only these,
but also al others of al ages, and times, and that in a manner in the self
same order and form, Folio. 11. a. linea. 1.
that now is used.

Here M. Hardinge much abuses both his own learning, and also the trust
and credit, that many have in him. For he knows well, that the Apostles had
neither the form, nor the order, nor the name of Mass.

How be it, if al these bear witness to the Mass, why speak they not? Why
come they forth so dumb? Dumb witnesses.
What? have they naught to say in this behalf? or is their word not worth
the hearing? Or are they so old, that they cannot speak? Or must we needs
believe M. Hardinge without evidence?

But what if neither Clement the Apostles fellow, nor Abdias, nor S. James, nor
Basile, nor Chrysostom, nor any other of al these here alleged, speak one
word of Private Mass? What if they have not so much as the name of Mass?
What if they testify plainly against M. Hardinges Mass? M. Hardinge allegeth
witnesses against him self.
What if they testify fully and roundely with the holy Communion? It were
great shame for M. Hardinge to fly from his own witnesses: and very much for
me to stand to be tried by them, that are brought in such a thronge to depose
against me.

And to begin first with S. James, the order of his Liturgy, which Master
Hardinge calls Mass, stands thus: Liturgia Iacobi.
Sacerdos ait: Nullus eorum, qui orare non possunt, nobiscum i^grediatur.
Diaconus ait, Cum timore, and fide, and dilectione accedite: Populus responde^,
Benedictus, qui venit in nomine Domini. Deinde impertit Clero: Cum autem
attollunt Diaconi discos, and calices, ad impertiendum populo, Diaconus ait,
Domine benedic. Which words may be turned thus: The Priest says: Let
not one of them, that may not pray, enter in with us. The Deacon says, With
reverence, and faith, and love approach ye near. The people answeareth, M.
Hard. vvitnesses against him self.
Blessed is he, that comes in the name of the Lord. After this he ministers
unto the Clergy. But when the Deacons take up the Dishes, and Cups to
minister unto the people, the Deacon says, Lord Bliss. Here by the order of
S. James Mass the people answeareth the Priest in their own tongue: provision
is made for the whole congregation in Dishes, and Cups: Dishes and Cups.
they be called to receive the Communion: and they do receive al together.
Now let M. Hardinge be judge whether S. James bear record to the Private
Mass, or to the Communion.

Abdias although he report many untrue tales, yet he reports not one word
of Private Mass, but much to the contrary. Abdias in vita S. Thomae Apost.
Writing the life of S. Thomas, and showing in what sort he ministered the
holy Communion, he says thus. Eucharistiam diuisit his quos supra
memorauimus, id est populo. He divided the Sacrament Unto the people, of whom
we spoke before. Abdias in vita S. Matthaei Apost.
And again in the life of S. Matthew, who as M. Hardinge bears us in hand,
without al question said Mass in Ethiopia, he writes thus, Cumque
respondissent, Amen, and mysteria Domini celebrata essent, and Missam
suscepisset omnis Ecclesia, When they had answered, Amen, and the mysteries of
the Lord had benne celebrate, and the whole Church had received the
Communion. Where the whole Church answeareth the Priest, and receives the
Communion together, I reckon M. Hardinge will hardly call that a Private Mass.

Justinius Martyr an other of M. Hardinges witnesses, Justinius Martyr in 2.
Apologia.
in his second Apology unto the Emperor Antoninus, declaring the Innocence
of the Christian people, that then lived under great persecution, and shewinge
the manner of their assemblies, writes thus. Before the end of our prayers we
kiss each of us one an other, Then is there brought unto him that is the
chief of the Brethren, Bread, and a Cup of Wine and water mingled
together: which having received, he praises God, and gives thanks a good
space: and that done, the whole people confirms his prayer saying, Amen.
(...).
After that, they that among us be called Deacons, give unto every of them,
that be present, part of the Bread, and likewise of the Wine and Water that
are consecrate with thanks geuinge, and carry the same home unto them, that
happen to be absent. Here is a full Communion, and no Private Mass.

Dionysius an other of the witnesses, and, as M. Hardinge says, the Apostles
scholar, opens the whole order of the Ministration in his time writing
namely, and purposely of that matter. The Priest, Dionysius, Eccles.
Hierar^hiae cap. 3.
says he, begins the holy Psalmodie, and the whole body of the Church
sings with him. Then follows in order the readinge of the holy Scriptures,
which is done by the Ministers: After that the Ca^echumeni, that is, they that
are newly come unto the Religion of Christ, and are not yet baptized, and
Energumeni, that is, such as are molested with evil Sprites, and such
others, as are enjoined to penance, are commanded forth. And so there
remain such, as are meet to have the sight and Communion of the holy
things. (...).
It follows: And showing forth the gifts of the holy Sacraments, he goes
to the Communion him self, and likewise exhorts others. And a little after
that, The Priest, vncoueringe the Bread, that came covered, and in one cake,
or loaf, and diuidinge the same into many portions, and likewise diuidinge the
unity of the Cup unto al, Mystically, and by way of a Sacrament, he
fulfilleth, and divides unity.

It follows again, Then the Minister receiuinge him self, and distributinge
the holy Communion unto others, (...).
in the end concludes with holy thanks geuinge together with all the whole
holy company of the Church. I believe M. Hardinge him self will say, M. Hard.
vvitnesses against him self.
here is yet but bare witness for his Private Mass.

In the Liturgy of S. Basile, which is also brought for a witness in this
matter, The Priest prays thus, Al we receiuinge of one Br^ade, and of one
Cup etc. It follows. Liturgia Basilij. Et sic communicant omnes.
The Priest divides the holy Bread into four parts: the queer^ sings the
Communion, and so they communicate al.

Another witness is Chrysostom: His Liturgy, or as M. Hardinge deliteth to
speak, Liturgia Chrysostomi.
his Mass is thus ordered: After that the Priest has communicate with the
Ministers, then the great door is set open: The Priest shows forth the
Cup unto the people, saying, With the fear of God, and faith, and love,
approach ye near. The Deacon says, Come ye near in peace: The people
answeareth: In the name of the Lord. Again, The Deacons receive the
Communion. Afterward the Mysteries be carried unto a place, where the people
must communicate.

Ignatius an other witness, Ignatius ad Philadelphien.
writing unto the people of Philadelphia, has these words, Vnus panis pro
omnibus fractus est, and unus calix omnibus diuidebatur. One bread was broken
for all, and one cup was divided unto al.

What needs it me to discourse further of the rest? By these few I doubt
not it may soon appear, how faithfully these men allege the Catholic
Fathers, only amasinge the reader with naked names. Here we see, such as can
not communicate, are commands forth: The whole Church prays, sings,
and receives the holy Sacraments al together. Such Masses they be, that the
old Catholic Fathers can witness of. And of other Mass they know none.
M. Hardinge him self confesses that in the Primitive Church the people
received the Communion every day.

Yet not withstandinge, for his Private Mass he allegeth the names of Doctors
of the Primitive Church. And so like a crafty Apothecarie, in his marks or
papers he has the Mass: but in his boxes he has the Communion.

But he will say, he alleged al these Doctors by way of digression, to an other
purpose, to prove the Sacrifice. First there is very small proof in such
witnesses as say nothing: and besides that it is a simple kind of Rhetorike
to use so large digressions from the matter, before ye once enter into the
matter. And as touching the Sacrifice, if you have any at al, you have it only
of the institution of Christ: otherwise you have none. But we are sure, we
have Christ's institution. Wherefore it follows, we have the Sacrifice that
Christ appointed.

Touching Hippolytus, Hippolytus Martyr.
the Bishop and Martyr, that, as M. Hardinge says, lived in Origens time,
and is now extant in Greek, it is a very little book, of small price, and as
small credit, lately set abroad in printe, about seven years paste: before
never acquainted in the world. Such be M. Hardinges ancient authorities for
his Mass. It appears it was some simple man that wrote the book, both for
the Phrases of speech in the Greek tongue, which commonly are very
childishe, (...).
and also for the truth and weight of the matter. He begins the first
sentence of his book with, enim, which a very child would scarsely do. He
has many vain gheasses of the birthe, and life of Antichrist: He says, and
soothely auoutcheth, that Antichriste shall be the Devil, and no man, and shall
only bear the shape of a man: Yet S. Paul calls Antichrist the Man of
sin. 2. Thessaloni. 2.
Besides this, he has a further fantasy, that Antichriste shall subdewe the
kings of Egypt, Aphrica, and Ethiopia, and that he shall build up again the
Temple of Jerusalem: Reuelabitur homo peccati.
And that S. John that wrote the books of Apocalypse, or Revelations, shall come
again with Elias, and Enoch to reprove Antichriste. And all this says he
without either warrant of the Scriptures, Hippolyt. Martyr.
or authority of the Church. And writing that book namely upon the Prophet
Daniel, he allegeth the Apocalypse of S. John, in the steed of Daniel, which
is a token either of great ignorance, or of marvelous oblivion. Moreover he
says, that the souls of men were from the beginning: which is an
Heresy, with other dreams and fantasies many more. This is M. Hardinges
Catholic doctor. Concerning the place of him here alleged, Venite
pontifices, qui pure mihi sacrificium, die nocteque obtulistis, ac pretiosum
Corpus, and Sanguinem meum immolastis quot idie, If he will precisely build
upon the words, then must al other Priests stand back and have no place
in Heaven, but Bishops only. For although they offer up, as M. Hardinge
says, the daily Sacrifice, yet it is well known, according to the nature and
use of the word, they are Priests only, and not Bisshoppes. If he will make
reckeninge of this word, Quotidie, Daily, then where shall the Bishop of Rome
and his Cardinals stand, that scarsely have leisure to Sacrifice once
through the whole year? And if it be Christ him self that they offer up unto
the Father, as they say, How is the same Christ offered up unto Christ him
self? How is Christ both the thing that is offered, and also the party
unto whom it is offered? But there is no inconvenience to a man in his dream.
And if it be the Mass that Hippolytus here speaks of, how is it offered
both day and night? For Hostiensis says, Hostien. in summa De celebratione
missarum.
It is not lawful by the Canons to say Mass in the night season, sauinge
only the night of Christ's Nativity.

But the meaning of Hippolytus seems to be this, that al faithful people in
this respect be Priests, and Bishops, like as S. Peter also calls them,
1. Petri. 2.
and that every of them by faith makes unto God a pure Sacrifice, and both
day and night, as it were, renews, and applies unto him self, that one and
everlasting Sacrifice of Christ's precious Body once offered for all upon the
Cross. Thus are the words of Hippolytus plain, and without ^auil, and thus
shall Christ's calling be very comfortable.

M. Hardinge. The.6. Division.
Now this presupposed, that the Mass stands upon good and sufficient
grounds for the stay of al true Christen men's belief: let us come to our
special purpose, and say somewhat of Private Mass as our adversaries call it.

The B. of Sarisburie.
The grounds, he here speaks of, be his Doctors, such as he has already
brought forth, laid up in great secrecy, and hidden from all the world by
the space of one thousand years and more, and now of late found out by
chance: some in Islands in the Sea: some in Arches under the ground: some so
defaced with moulde and canker, that it was hard to geasse their meaning:
some full of impudent lies and fables, one parcel not agreeinge with another:
some divised and written by heretics, and ever mistrusted and condemned of the
Church, yet every of these, as M. Hardinge well knows, fully reportinge the
holy Communion, and manifestly testifieinge against Private Mass. These be M.
Hardinges greatest grounds. Now judge thou, gentle reader, what worthy
buildinge may stand upon the same. Doubtless this beginning is very simple.

M. Hardinge. The.7. Division.
The chief cause, why they storm so much at private Mass, is for that the
Priest receives the Sacrament alone: which thing they express with great
villainy of words. Private Mass proceeded first of the negligence, and
misdoinge of the people.
Now in case the people might be stirred to such devotion, as to dispose them
selves woorthely to receive their housel every day with the Priest, as they did
in the Primitive Church, when they looked hourly to be caught and done to
death in he persecution of Paynimes, that they departed not hence sine viatico
without their viage provision: what should these men have to say? In this
case perhaps they would find other defaultes in the Mass, but against it in
this respect only that it is private, they should have nothing to say at al.
So the right of their cause depends of the missedoinge of the people, which
if they would amend, these folk should be driven either to recante, or to
hold their peace. To other defaultes of the Mass by them untruly surmised,
answer shall be made hereafter. Now touching this. Where no fault is
committed, There no blame is to be imputed.

That oftentimes the Priest at Mass has no comparteners to receive the
Sacrament with him, Lack of devotion cause of Private Mass.
it proceeds of lack of devotion of the peoples part, not of envy or
malice of his part.

The feast is common, 13 The 13. Untruth, They inuit^ no man.
al be invited, they may come that list, they shall be received that be
disposed and proved: None is thrust away that thus comes: it may be obtruded
to none violently, ne offered to none rashely: well, none comes. This is not a
sufficient cause, why the faithful and godly Priest, enflamed with the love of
God, feelinge him self hungry and thirsty after that heavenly food and
drink, should be kept from it, and imbarred from celebratinge the memory of
our Lords death according to his commandment, from his duty of geuinge of
thanks for that great benefit, from taking the cup of Salvation, and
calling upon the name of God: for these things be done in the Mass.

The B. of Sarisburie.
God be thanked, both our life and manner of teachinge, notwithstanding these
sclaunderous reports, is void of villainy. Or if there had been any defecte in
us, this man of his courtesy should not have supplied it with an other
villainy.

Here M. Hardinge grants, M. Hardinge confesses that in the Primitive
Church there was no Private Mass.
that the people in the Primitive Church received the holy Communion every
day, and so consequently unawares, he confesses that in the Primitive Church
was no Private Mass, which, as he says, came in afterward by the negligence
and vndeuotion of the people. It is great pity, that so good a thing, as it
is supposed, should have no better beginning. One special principle of these
men's doctrine is, to embarre the people from readinge and understanding of
the Scriptures, M. Hardinge articulo 15. diui. 7. folio 155. b.
and to suffer them to know nothing: for that as some of them have said, they
be Dogs, and Swine, and therefore should not precious stones be laid before
them. Yet now must their negligence be the rule of Christ's Religion. This is
laid as the ground and foundation of the whole cause, and therefore it ought
the better to be considered.

Eckius, Pigghius, Hosius, and others have often cried out amayne in their
books and Pulpites, where was your Religion before Luther first began to
Preach? So may we likewise say, And where was your Private Mass, which is
the crown of your kingedome, before your people first began to grow
negligent, and to want devotion? Some have said, the Church is governed by
the Pope: some by the general Councels: some by the holy Ghost. M. Hardinge
says better, it is not amiss, yt the Church be governed by the negligence,
and vndeuotion of the people.

Charity, say they, is cold, and the people is careless. But therefore has
God appointed Pastors and Ministers to ouersee and control the people, and not
to suffer them to perish in their negligence. Were it a matter of tiethes or
other paimentes, the people should be called upon, and not suffered in any wise
to be negligent: neither should their negligence stand for excuse. How much
less should it be suffered, when the case touches God? Council. Bracar. 2 Cap.
84.
The Bishops and Fathers in the second Council holden at Bracara in Spain
decreed thus: If any man resort unto the Church and hear the Scriptures, Pro
luxuria sua.
and for negligence or wantonness withdraw him self from the Communion of the
Sacrament, and in the reverend mysteries do break the rule of discipline,
we decree that such one be put out of the Catholic Church, Until he have
done penance, and showed the fruits of his repentance, that having obtained
pardon, he may be received again to the holy Communion.

Thus the godly Fathers in old time did not flatter, and favor the peoples
negligence in this case, as M. Harding and his felows do: but exhorted,
warned, reproved, rebuked them, called them mal^pert, and impudent,
Chrysostom in Epistolam ad Ephesios homil. 3.
that would be present, and not receive: and excommunicated them for their
negligence. But these men contrariwise turn away their faces from their
brethren: and suppress their voice, and will not be heard: and speak nothing
but in an unknown tongue: and find no fault with the people, but rather make
them believe that they receive for them, and apply Christ's death unto them by
their Mass, and that the very hearing thereof is sufficient for them, and
meritorious: and thus, as much as in them lies, they increase the negligence
of the people, and discourage them from the holy Communion.

The people is tought nothing, The cause of the peoples negligence.
they understand nothing, they hear nothing, and saving only a few childish,
and unseemly gestures, they see nothing, neither comfort, nor memory of
Christ, nor benefit of his passion. And this is the cause of their
negligence: therefore they stand thus back, and withdraw them self.

How be it, The Pope and his Cardinals as negligent as the people.
what needs M. Harding thus to charge the people with negligence and
vndeuotion? The Pope him self and his Cardinals, do scarsely communicate
once in the year, but are as negligent and as undevout therein, as the most
part of the people.

The feast (says M. Hardinge) is common: al are invited: they shall be
received that be disposed and proved. If this feast be common, it must needs
be common to very few: for the provision is very little to serve many. That al
be called in the Latin Mass, it is a great and manifest untruth. For
neither the Priest, nor the Deacon, either by word or by gesture calls
them: nor have they any preparation for them, if they were called. Yet are
these men not ashamed to say, they shall be received, that be disposed, and
proved.

Every man ought humbly to prepare and dispose his heart, Preparation of the
mind before the Communion.
before he presume to hear or receive any thing, that touches God. For God is
Spirit, and we are fleash: God in heaven, and we in earth. Pythagoras being
but an Heathen was wont to say, Non Ioquendum de Deo sine Iumine: we ought
not to speak of God without light, that is, without premeditation, and good
aduisement, who it is, of whom we speak. And the Paganes in their Sacrifices
were wont to remember their priest with these words, Hoc age, the meaning
whereof was, dispose thy mind, it is God, unto whom thou speak. Ecclesi. 18.
The wise man says, before thou pray, prepare thine heart, and be not as a
man, that tempts God. Likewise in old times they, that were called
Catechumeni, were warned before hand to prepare their hearts, that they might
worthily receive Baptism, Clemens Epist. 3.
as it is decreed under ye name of Clement, whose words be these, Let him
prepare him self in all things, that after three months ended upon the holy
day he may be Baptized. Augustine. tract. 10. and. 11. in Johan.
S. Augustine also exhorts the Catechumeni, likewise to dispose their minds
against the time of their Baptism. Thus ought every man to examine and
prepare him self, before he hear Gods word: before he presume to open his
mouth to pray unto God: before he receive the Sacrament of Baptism: and
namely before he come to the holy Communion. And therefore the Priest gives
warnyng unto the people, with these words, Lift up your hearts: Augusti. de
bono perseuerantiae. lib 2 ca. 13.
which words, as S. Augustine says, were commonly used in the holy
Mysteries.

But I think M. Hardinge here by these words prepare, and dispose, means
Priu^e Confession, which many have used as a rack of men's consciences to the
maintenance of their tyranny. Sent. li. 4. dis. 17
Peter Lombarde says, without it there is no way to Heaven. Innoc. 3. in
Con. Laterane^. ca. 21.
Innocentius the third commands, that whosoever is not confessed, neither
be suffered to come into the church being alive, nor to be buried when he is
dead. Hugo writes thus, Hugo de potestate Ecclesiae.
I am bold to say, who so ever comes to the Communion unconfessed, be he
never so repentant and sorry for his sins, certainly he receives unto his
judgment. So violent the late writers have been in exacting things of their
own diuises. Otherwise the old Fathers, notwithstanding sometime they speak
of Confession, yet they require it with more modesty, and many of them
require no such thing at al.

Chrysostom says, Chrysostom. De poenitentia. (...).
Let the Court (where thou yeldest thy self guilty) be without witness: Let
God alone see thee. And again, If thou be ashamed to show thy sins to any
man, then utter them every day in thy heart. I say not, go, confess thy
sins unto thy fellow seruante, that may vpbrayde thee with them. But confess
them unto God, that is hable to cure them. And again, thus he imagines God to
speak unto a sinner, Mihi soli dic peccatum tuum priuatim, vt sanem vlcus.
Chrysostom. in Psalm. 50. ho 2.
Open thy sin privately to me alone, that I may heal thy wound. And
Theodorus sometime Archbishop of Canterbury says, Graeci, and totus Oriens
confitetur soli Deo. Chrysostom. De Lazaro. hom. 4.
The Greeks, and al they of the East, confess them self only to God. Thus
much I thought good to touch hereof, De poeniten. did. 1.
lest it should be thought there is none other way for a man to prove and
dispose him self, but only by Auricular Confession. The meaning of these
words of S. Paul, Quidam deo.
Let a man examine him self, stands in two points, in Faith, and
Repentance. Faith contains the truth of our belief: Repentance concerns
the amendment of our life. Which kind of examinyng endures al our life
long. But to say, or think, we are al examined and disposed one only day in
the year, and that of custom, not of Holiness, and not one day before, nor
one day after, it is childishe, it is superstitious, it is Iewishe, it is no
persuasion meet for the people of God. Chrysostom. ad po. Antiochen. ho. 61.
If Chrysostom were alive, he would cry out, O praesumptionem: O
consuetudinem. O what presumption: O what a custom is this? And S. Ambrose
would say, If thou be not worthy every day to receive, then art thou not
worthy once in the year. Ambrosi. de sacramentis li. 6. cap. 4.


But grant it, that charity and devotion is fainted in the people: May we
yet think, that the same rests whole and sound in the Clergy? Or that the
devotion of the priests abundeth more now, then it did in the primitive
Church? For then the priest ministered the holy Communion but once in a day,
Leo Epist. 81.
unless the multitude of the Communicantes had been so great, that it
required double Ministration. But now the Priest may say two, three, or more
Masses in one day, ye although he have no man to receive with him. I would it
were not as the Prophet says, Esaias. 24.
Qualis populus, talis Sacerdos, As the people is, such is the Priest. Uerely
Bonifacius talkyng of the change of the holy Cups, ^onifacius De Con. dis.
1. vasa.
which in the old times had been Tr^en, and in his time were made of Gold:
then, said he, we had Treen Cups, and Golden Priests: but now we have
golden Cups, and Treen Priests. S. Bernarde complayneth thus of the state of
the Clergy in his time, Bernardus de conuersione Pauli.
O Lord wickedness has proceeded from the elder Judges thy vicares, which
seem to rule thy people.

We cannot now say, As the people is, so is the priest: for the very people is
not so (wicked) as is the Priest. Bernardus in Concilio Remensi.
And the same S. Barnarde in the Synod holden at Reimes in France, in the
presence of the Pope, spoke these words, Nunc non habemus mercenarios pro
pastoribus: nec lupos pro mercenarijs: sed pro lupis habemus Diabolos. Now have
we not Hierelinges (to rule the flock) in steed of Shepheardes: The neglig.
of the people.
nor Wolves in steed of Hierelinges: but in steed of Wolves we have Devils.

Johannes Vitalis a Cardinal of Rome likewise complains: Johan. Vitalis
Cardinalis, in speculo.
And of the priests of this age (says he) The Prophet Esaie has written
thus: The Pastors them self are void of understanding, they have al followed
their own way, every one even from the highest to the lowest. Wherefore if
want of devotion, and looseness of life may breed negligence in the people,
why may not the like want, Esai. 50.
and as great looseness, breed the like negligence in the Priests? And if
negligence be excuse sufficient, to warrant the people to Communicate but once
in the year, why may not the same negligence cause the Priests to say Mass
but once in the year? For it is not the love of God, as you surmise, neither
the hunger or thirst of Heavenly food, that makes the Priest to say Mass,
but order of fundation, custom, hiere or wages for his labor.

Now let us view the weight of M. Hardinges reasons: The people is negligent
and undevout: ergo, The Priest may say Mass alone. This argument is very
weak.

But the next that is geathered of the same, is much weaker: The people is
negligent now: ergo there was Private Mass in the Primitive Church. For this
only was my denial: and this has M. Hardyng taken in hand to prove. It is
called Petitio principij, where as one weak thing is proved by an other, as
weak as it. So might M. Hardinge say: The people will not hear the word of
God: ergo, the Priest may go into the Pulpit and Preach alone. For Christ's
Supper (as S. Augustine says) is a Sermon, and the Priest therein Preaches,
Augustinus De Trinitate lib. 3. cap. 4.
and utters the death of the Lord.

Again if only the negligence of the people have enforced Private Mass, how
then came it into Colleges, Monasteries, Cathedral Churches, ye, Authen.
Collat. prima. Vt determinatus s^^ numerus Clericor.
even into the very holy Church of Rome, where as be such numbres of Clerks,
Uicars, Munkes Priests, and Prebendaries, that the Emperor Justinian was
fain^ to stay the increase of them, al idle, al in study and contemplation,
al void from worldly cares, al confessed, al in clean life, al prepared?
Wherefore have they Private Mass? Ye wherefore have they so many Masses
severally, at diverse Altars, and many of them at one time? Wherefore do not
they Communicate together, as it appears they did in the Primitive Church?
Doubtless this grows not of the negligence of the people.

As for the people, they are not so negligent, nor undevout, as M. Hardinge
here charge them. They are Gods people, glad to be instructed, and desirous
to follow, and where so ever the Gospel is received, ready to give testimony
thereof, and to increase the same by the holy Communion of Christ's Body and
Blood, in great companies, and whole congregations al together.

But what it luck is this, that they whom M. Hardinge so often condemns for
Heretics, can be so devout: and he, and his Catholics thus remain without
devotion. Let the people be taught: let them hear the holy Ministration in
their own tongue, that they may understand the holy Mysteries, and feel
comfort and sweetness in the same: let them see examples of diligence in the
Clergy: then will they be no longer negligent. Then should M. Hardinge perforce
give over his private Mass, as seeing that the whole right of his cause
hangs only of the negligence and misdooing of the people.

M. Hardinge. The.8. Division.
But the enemies of this holy Sacrifice say, that this is against the
institution of Christ. God forbid, the institution of Christ should not be
kept.

But it is a world to see, how they cry out for the institution of Christ,
by whom it is most wickedly broken. For where as in Christ's institution
concerning this Sacrament, three things are contained, whi^he he him self
did, and by his commandment gave authority to the Church to do the same,
the consecration, the oblation, and the participation, wherein consists the
substance of the Mass: they having quite abrogated the other two, 14 The.14.
untruth. The Sacrifice is specialy named in the Communion book. And in the
Mass it self Consecration is not named.
and not so much as once naming them in their books of service, now have
left to the people nothing but a bare Communion, and that after their own
sort: with what face can they so busely cry for Christ's institution, by whom
in the chief points the same is violated?

Of Consecration and oblation although much might be said here against them,
I will at this time say nothing. Concerning participation the number of
Communicantes together in one place that they iangle so much of, as a thing
so necessary, that without it the Mass is to be reputed unlawful, 15 The.15
untruth. For S. Basil thinks the number is part of Christ's Institution.
Exercitationis ad pi^^ate^ Sermon. 4.
is no part of Christ's institution. For Christ ordained the Sacrament, after
Consecration and Oblation done, to be received, and eaten. And for that end he
said: Accipite, manducate, bibite, Take, eat, drink, herein consists his
Institution.

Now as for the number of Communicantes, how many should receive together in
one place, and in what place, what time, sitting at table (as some would have
it) standing, or kneeling, fasting, or after other meats: and whether they
should receive it in their hands, or with their mouths, and other the like
orders, manners, and circumstances: al these things perteine to the ceremony
of eatinge, the Observation whereof depends of the Churches ordinance, and
not of Christ's institution. And therefore S. Augustine writing to Ianuarius
says: Saluator non praecepit, quo deinceps ordine sumeretur, Epist. 118.
vt Apostolis, per quos dispositurus erat Ecclesiam, seruaret hu^c locum. Our
Savior gave not commandment in what order it should be received, meaning to
reserve that matter The Apostles used and ordained the Communion of a number,
and never any private receiuinge of the priest alone.
unto the Apostles, by whom he would direct, and dispose his Church.

Wherefore the receiving of the Sacrament being the Institution of Christ, and
the manner, number, and other rightes of Receiuinge, 16 The.16. untruth.
Christ appointed a number, although no certain fixed number
not fixed nor determined by the same, but ordered by the Churches disposition:
whether many, or few, or but one in one place receive: for that respect, the
Ministration of the Priest is not made unlawful.

The B. of Sarisburie.
It likes M. Harding to call us wicked, and the enemies of the Sacrifice: and
to say, we ^angle of the Institution of Christ, and yet our selves break
Christ's Institution. I must here protest in the name of many: We are not
enemies of the Sacrifice and Cross of Christ, but of the errors, abuses, and
sacrilege of the Mass, which now are maintained to the open derogation of
the Sacrifice and Cross of Christ.

As touching Christ's Institution, forgeat not, good Christian Reader, that M.
Harding confesses, there are three things therein contained, which as he
says, Christ him self did, and by his commandment gave authority to his
Church to do: 1. Cor. 11. Ye shall show forth the Lords death.
the Consecration: the Oblation: and the Participation. Here he leaves quite
out the Annunciation of Christ's Death, thinking perhaps, it is no matter
essential of Christ's Institution. Of these three (he says) we have broken
two: the Consecration, and Oblation: and so have only a bare Communion.

But whereby may it appear to M. Hardynge, that we have thus broken Christ's
Institution? Is it because we Communicate together with the people? or
because we Minister the Sacrament under both kinds? or because we show
forth the Death of Christ? or because we do, that Christ did, and
commanded us to do?

Concerning Consecration, he does great wrong to charge us with ye breach
thereof, Consecration.
before he him self and others of his side be better resolved wherein stands
Consecration. For Scotus, and Innocentius tertius, And certain others say,
that this word Benedixit, He blessed, woorketh Consecration. The common
opinion is that it is wrought by these words, This is my Body: Some think
that Christ spoke these words twice, first secretly to him self, and
afterward openly, that the Apostles might understand him. Consecr.
Cardinal Bessarion Bishop of Tusculum, Thom. and Bonauen. in. 4. Sent.
writes thus, The Latin Church following Ambrose, Augustine, and Gregory,
Bessarion de Sacrame^to Eucharistiae.
thinks that Consecration stands in these words, This is my Body: But the
Greek Church thinks the Consecration is not wrought by these words, but
by the Prayer of the Priest, which follows afterward: and that according to
S. James, S. Chrysostom, and S. Basil. But these it appears, that they them
self of that side, are not yet fully agreed upon their own Consecration.

How be it, by what so ever words Consecration is made, it stands not in
the abolishinge of natures, In the tenth^ Article.
as M. Hardinge teaches: nor in precise, and cloase pronouncing of certain
appointed words: but in the converting of the natural Elements into a godly
use: as we see in the water of Baptism. For Christ said not, Say ye this:
or by these words go and Transubstantiate, or change natures: But thus he
said, Do this in my remembrance. 1. Corinthians. 10.
And so, the Bread that we break, is the Communication of Christ's Body: and
as often as we eat of that Bread, 1. Corinthians. 11.
we do declare and publishe the Lords death. This is well noted and opened by
S. Augustine. Augustinus in Johan. tracta^u 80.
Put the words of God (says he) unto the Element, and it is made a
Sacrament. For what power is there so great of the water (in Baptism) that it
touches the Body and wassheth the heart, sauinge by the workinge of the
word? Not because it is spoken, Accedat Verbu^ ad Elementum, and sit
Sacrame^tum.
but because it is believed: and this is the word of Faith, which we
preach. The word of faith, which we Preach, says S. Augustine, not the
word which we whisper in secret, is the word of Consecration.

With what honest countenance then can M. Harding say, yt we have no
Consecration? we pronounce the same words of Consecration yt Christ
pronounced: we do the same yt Christ bad us do: we proclayme the death of
the Lord: we speak openly in a known tongue, and the people understands
us: we Consecrate for the Congregation, and not only for our self: we have
the Element: we ioygne Gods word unto it: and so it is made a Sacrament: Yet
says M. Harding we have no Consecration. And can he think, yt a Priest of
his side does Consecrate, yt whispereth his words cloasely, and that in a
strange tongue, in such sort as no man hears, or understands him: yt
oftentimes him self knows not neither the words of Christ, nor the sense
of the words: nor ye use, nor the end of the Sacrament: that exhorts
noman: that speaks to no man: that, if he do Consecrate, does Consecrate
only for him self, and not for others: that does neither that Christ did,
nor that Christ commanded to be done? If we Consecrate not, can he think
that such a one does Consecrate?

And where as he says further, that we have no manner Oblation in our
Communion, he should not him self speak manifest untruth, having taken
upon him, as he says, to reform falsehead. Tertulli. contra Marcionem, li. 4
and aduersus Iudaeos.
For he knows we offer up unto God in the holy Communion our selfs, our
souls, our bodies, and alms for the poor: praises and thanks giving unto
God the Father for our Redemption: and prayer from a contrite heart, which, as
the old Catholic Fathers say, is the Sacrifice of the New Testamente.
Eusebius de Demonstratione, lib. 1.
To conclude, we offer up as much as Christ commanded us to offer. In deed
we offer not up Christ's Body to be a propitiatory Sacrifice for us unto his
Father. For that Sacrifice is once wrought for all upon the Cross, and there is
none other Sacrifice leafte to be offered for sin. Hebraeos. 10.


But says M. Hardinge, we make no mention of any Sacrifice in all our
Ministration: Therefore we break Christ's Institution. This reason impeacheth
Christ him self as well as us: for Christ him self in his whole Ministration
spoke not one word of any Sacrifice, no more then we do. Therefore by M.
Hardinges Logike, Christ him self brake his own Institution.

Hereof he concludes, that we have nothing but a bare Communion: which
Conclusion is as true, as the Premises. Gods name be blessed, we have a
holy Communion, to the great comfort of the godly. But in M. Hardinges Mass
there is neither Communion, nor any other consolation at all: but only a
number of light and bare gestures, and Ceremonies, far unmeet for so grave a
purpose. But what should move this man, thus scornefully to jest at the holy
Ministration, M. Hardinge ieas^eth at the ordinance of Christ.
and to call Christ's ordinance A bare Communion? Others call it the Mystical
Supper: others the holy Distribution: bare, or naked, no man I trow, durst
ever to call it, but M. Hardinge. One of his own Doctors comparinge
Consecration, Alexander De Hales. 4. q. 35. mem 2.
and Communion together, says thus: Communio sacra mayor est in effectu
sanctitatis, quam Consecratio. The holy Communion in effect of Holiness, is
more then Consecration. And again, Consecratio est propter Communionem. Ergo,
Ibid. solu. 2.
Communio maius est Consecratione: Consecration is for Communion: Therefore is
Communion greater then Consecration.

A little before M. Hardinge said, in Christ's Institution three things are
contained, Consecration, Oblation, Participation. Immediately after, as a man
that had suddenly forgotten him self, he says, The number of the
Communicantes together in one place, M. Hardinge has forgotten himself.
that they iangle so much of as a thing so necessary, is no part of
Christ's institution. It is no marvel though he can so il agree with ye old
Catholic Doctors, that falls thus out so suddenly with him self. For if
Participation be not necessary, how is it a part of Christ's Institution? If
it be a part of Christ's Institution, how is it not necessary? He would
feign convey Christ's Institution, and his Mass both under one color. But
they are Contraries, the one of them bewraieth the other. As for the Priest, he
takes no part of the Sacrament with others, which is the nature, and
meaning of this word Participation, but receives al alone. Thus it
appears by M. Hardinges own confession, that Private Mass having no
Participation of the Priest with others, and therefore no Participation at al,
is no part of Christ's Institution.

I grant, certain circumstances, as fasting, sitting, standing, kneeling,
and other like Ceremonies about the holy Ministration, are left to the
discretion of the Church. But this is a very simple argument, Certain
Circumstances may be altered: Ergo, the Priest may receive alone. Christ him
self has already determined the case. For all be it he have appointed no
certain number of Communicantes, yet has he by special words appointed a
number. For these very words, Take ye: Matthae. 26.
Eat ye: Drink ye al: Divide ye emonge your selves: Do ye this in my
remembrance: ye shall set forth the Lords death: Luke. 22.
These very words I say, can not be taken of one singular man, 1. Corinthians. 11.
but necessarily importe a number.

Yet says M. Hardinge, S. Augustines words be plain, Saluator non
praecepit, quo deinceps ordine sumeretur: August. epist. 118 ad Ianuarium.
vt Apostolis, per quos dispositurus erat Ecclesiam, seruaret hunc locum.
Christ gave no commandment, in what order it should be received: to the
intent he might leave that matter to his Apostles, by whom he would dispose
his Church. Therefore says M. Hardinge, The number of Communicantes is at
liberty, and the Priest may receive alone.

S. Augustine in that place speaks not one word of any number, but only of
the time of receiving, whether it might seem convenient to Minister the
Communion after supper, as Christ did to his Disciples, and some used then to
do, as appears by ye words that follow, Nam si hoc ille monuisset, vt post
cibos alios se^per acciperetur, credo quod eum morem nemo variasset: For if
Christ had commanded that the Sacrament should ever be received after other
meats, August. in eade^ epist. ad Ianuarium. 118.
I believe no man would have changed that order. It is wrong dealyng to
bring one thing for another: to allege number in steed of time: and of S.
Augustines words to conclude that S. Augustine never meante. For that S.
Augustine requires a number of Communicantes, it appears by that immediately
in the same place, he allegeth the words of S. Paul, 1. Corin. 11. Inuicem
expect* August de ^ermone Dom. in monte li. 2. In Johan tract. 26. Hierony. ad
^ucinium Idem in Apolog aduersus Iouintanum. 1. Corint 11.
Quapropter fratres, cum conuenitis ad manducandum, inuicem expectate:
Wherefore brethren, when ye meet together to eat (the Communion) w^ite one
for another: Which words M. Hardinge thought best cunningly to dissemble. In
other places S. Augustine, like as also S. Hierome and others, witnesses that
the whole people daily received together, and generally intreatinge of the
holy Communion, he speaks evermore of a number, and never of one alone.

Now whereas M. Hardinge says, Christ leafte such matters to the
determination of the Church, and to that purpose seems to allege, as others
do, these words of S. Paul, Coetera cum venero disponam: Touching the
rest, I will take order, when I come, This kind of Doctrine unto the old
Fathers seemed very dangerous. For S. Augustine says, Omnes insipientissimi
Haeretici, qui se Christianos vocari volunt, audacias figmentorum suorum hac
occasion Euangelicae sententiae colorare cona^tur, vbi Dominus ai^, August in
Ioha^. tractatu. 97.
A dhut multa habeo vobis dicere, sed ea non potestis portare modo:

The most peeuishe Heretics that be, that would feign be called Christians,
do color the bold enterprises of their fantasies, by occasion of this saying
of the Gospel, whereas the Lord says: Yet have I many things to say unto
you, but ye are not hable now to bear them.

But if the Church have determined this matter for private Mass, as M.
Hardinge says, in what Council, at what time within six hundred years after
Christ, and in what place was it determined? Who was witness of the dooinge?
Who was president? Who was Present? This is it that the Reader would feign
learn. And M. Hardinge thinks it best to prove it by silence. How be it, it
is already confessed, that Private Mass came in, not by Christ, or by any of
his Apostles, or by the Authority of the Church, but only by the vndeuotion,
and negligence of the people.

It is wonderful to see, how handsome constructions these men make of these
words of S. Paul, Touching the rest, I will take order when I come. For upon
these words they build their Private Mass, even in such form as it is now
used in. As if S. Paul should say thus, At my coming I will take order,
that ye shall have Mass in a strange tongue: that ye shall receive alone: that
ye shall not look, and wait one for an other, notwithstanding any my former
commandment: that ye shall not need to meet together: that one shall receive
for all the rest: and so at my coming I will undo, what so ever hitherto I have
ordained.

I may not now dissemble the value of M. Hardinges argument: M. Hardinges
Argument.
Christ (says he) ordained the Sacrament, after Consecration and Oblation
done, to be received, and eaten: Ergo, the number of Communicantes together is
no part of Christ's institution.

What, thought M. Hardinge that none but children, and fools should read his
book? For how loosely hang these parts together? The Sacrament must be
received after Consecration: Ergo, The number of Communicantes is not
necessary. There is not one piece hereof that either is true in it self, or
agrees with other.

For touching Consecration, if he will precisely follow the words of the
Evangelists, Matthae. 20. Luc 22.
which wrote the story, Christ first took the Bread: and blessed it: and
brake it: and gave it, and said, take ye: eat ye: and afterward, this being
said, and done, he added the words of Consecration, This is my Body. Thus
the Evangelists witness, 1. Corin. 11.
contrary to M. Hardinge, that the receiuinge was first, and the Consecration
afterward.

Concerning the force of M. Hardinges argument, M. Harding concludes against
him self.
it concludes directly against him self. For if Christ Instituted the
Sacrament to the intent it should be first Consecrate, and then received of a
company, it must needs follow, yt receiuinge with company is part of Christ's
Institution: as it is also auoutched by Cardinal Bessarion the Bishop of
Tusculum. His words be these, Bessarion de Sacramen. ^ucharistiae.
Hoc ipse ordo rerum poscebat: primum Consecrare, de^^de Frangere, postea
Distribuere: quod nos in praesentia facimus: This the very natural course of
things required: first to Consecrate, then to Break, and after to Distribute:
which thing we also do at this day. And Gabriel Biel, Consecratio ad vsum,
Biel lect. 26.
qui est manduca^io, tanquam ad finem quodammodo proximum ordinatur, Quia
Christus accepit panem, benedixit, and dedit discipulis, vt manducarent:
Consecration is ordained for a use, which is the Eating, as it were for a
end. For Christ, after he had taken the Bread, Blessed it, and gave it to
his Disciples to eat.

And again, Consecratio non est semper finis Consecrationis, ^iel lectione. 38.
sed potius vsus fidelium. Ad hoc enim consecratur Corpus, and Sanguis Christi,
vt fideles illis vrantur manducando: Consecration is not the end of
Consecration, but rather the Use of the faithful. For to that end is the Body,
and Blood of Christ Consecrate, that the faithful may use them in eatinge.
Thus M. Hardinge frames arguments against him self.

M. Hardinge. The.9. Division.
But if they allege against us the example of Christ, saying that he received
not it alone, but did Communicate with his twelve Apostles, and that we ought
to follow the same: I answer that we are bound to follow this example, M.
Hard. refuses Christ's example.
Quoad substantiam, non quoad externam ceremoniam:

For the Substance, not for the outward ceremony, to the which pertains
the number, and other rites, as is aforesaid. Christ's example imports
necessi^^e of receiving only, (17) The.17* Untruth. For number i^ not only
of congruence, but also of institution.
the other rites, as number, place, time, etc. be of congruence and order. (18)
The.18* Untruth. The Church of Rome has taken no such order
In which things the Church has taken order, willinge, and chargeinge, that
al shall Communicate that be worthy and disposed.

And so it were to be wished, as oftentimes as the Priest does celebrate this
high Sacrifice, that there were some, who woorthely disposed, might receive
their rightes with him, and be partakers Sacramentally of the Body, and Blood
of Christ with him. But in case such do lack, as we have seen that lack
commonly in our time, yet therefore the continual, and Daily Sacrifice ought
not to be intermitted. For sith this is done in the remembrance of Christ's
oblation once mad^ on the Cross for the redemption of al m^kinde, A vveake
reason. This is only M. Hard. gloso
therefore it ought daily to be celebrated throughout the whole Church of
Christ, for the better keeping of that great benefit in remembrance: and
that though none receive with the Priest. And it is sufficient in that case, if
they that be present, be partakers of those holy Mysteries Spiritually, and
Communicate with him in Prater, and thankesgeuinge, in Faith, and Devotion,
having their mind, and will to Communicate with him also Sacramentally when
time shall serve.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Here is great pain taken, to prove that Christian men, in the Ministration
of Christ's Supper, are not bound to follow the example of Christ: al
learning also showed, to beguile the simple with a vain distinction of
Substantia, and Accidens. S. Hilarie writing of the lewd dealinge of the
Arians, used in rackinge of the Scriptures, Hilar. ad Constantium Augustum.
says thus of them, Aut ita sc^ibuntur fides, vt volunt: aut ita vt volunt,
intelliguntur: Their faithes must either be so written, as they will: or else
they must be co^strued, and taken as they will.

The question that lies between us, stands not in this point, whether we
ought to do every thing that Christ did: but whether we ought to do that
thing, that Christ both did him self, and also commanded us to do, and was
afterward practiced by the Apostles, and holy Fathers, yt had the Sprite of
understanding, and knew Christ's meaning, and was never broken, until the
negligence and vndeuotion of the people, as M. Hardinge confesses, brought in
the contrary.

Christ said not, Do this in Jerusalem: or in this parlar: or after supper:
or at this table: or being so many together: or standinge: or sitting: But he
said thus, Matthae. 26.
Do ye this, that is, take ye Bread, bless it: break it: give it, in my
remembrance. This is not a Ceremonial Accident: Luke. 22.
but the very end, purpose, and substance of Christ's Institution. 1. Corin.
10.
And therefore S. Paul says, The Bread that we break, is the
participation of the Lords Body: And al we are one Bread, and one Body, as
many as are partakers of one Bread.

Yet says M. Hardyng, We are bound to follow Christ's example in things
that be of the substance of the Sacrament, not in things that be of order and
congruence. Here unawares he seems to confess, that his Mass, what so ever
substance it bear, yet is void both of good order, and also of congruence.
But what wicked wilfulness may this be? To Minister the Sacraments of
Christ, as Christ him self did, and commanded to be done, is called an
Accident Ceremonial, that may well be changed: But for the Priest to speak in
a strange unknown tongue: to turn his face from the people: to Minister unto
him self alone: and to use an infinite sort of childish ceremonies, which
neither Christ, nor his Apostles ever either used, or thought of, al these are
holden for things substantial, and of importance, and be defended as
necessary, and may not be changed. Such power have these men, to change
Accidence into Substance, and Substance into Accidence, when they list.

The Church (says M. Harding) has charged and ordered, that no man that is
worthy and disposed, shall be refused. O miserable is that Church, where as no
man, no not so much as one, is well disposed. Here in few words he
condemns the whole Church of Rome, even ye whole College of Cardinals:
amongst whom, as he says, there is not one well disposed, and worthy: and
therefore they al withdraw them selves from the Communion. Chrysostom. ad
popul. Antiochenum. hom. 61
But Chrysostom says, If thou be not worthy to receive the Communion, then
art thou not worthy to be present at the Prayers. Therefore M. Hardinge
should drive his unworthy people from the Church, and not suffer them to
hear his Mass.

They imagine that any man, be he never so great a sinner, may pray to God,
and have free access to ye Throne of Majesty. Hebrae. 4. 2. Timoth. 2.
Only they think a sinner may not receive y^ holy Communion. But it is
written, Let him depart from his wickedness, who so ever calls upon the
name of the Lord. Whosoever is a member of Christ, and may boldly call God his
Father, may also be bold to receive the Communion.

If M. Harding wish in deed that the people would prepare them selves, and
Communicate with the Priest, as he pretends, why does he not exhort and
move the people? Why does he not provide for them? Why does he rather
defend his Sole Receiving contrary to his own wisshing, and contrary to the
example of Christ, as he him self confesses? Doubtless there are many godly
men emonge the people, and oftentimes more virtuously disposed a great deal,
then the Priest. Neither is it of their unworthiness, that they abstain so
often: nor of their woorthynesse, that they receive once in the year: but only
of custom.

But if the people beslacke, yet must the Priest do the Daily Sacrifice, says
M. Hardinge, that is, he must offer up Christ unto his Father for the sins
of the world. Herein appears the wanton folly of this people. That they may
do, and are commanded to do, they will not do: but that they can not do,
that they will needs do. The matter being so weighty, and not yet thoroughly
believed, it had been good for M. Harding to have made proof thereof by the
authority of S. Augustine, S. Hierome, or some other old Catholic Doctor,
within ye compass of ^^re hundred years: but he brings forth only an
Article or Decree of his own making. Sith this is done (says he) in the
remembrance of Christ's oblation once made on the Cross for the Redemption of
mankind, Therefore it ought daily to he celebrated throughout the whole
Church.

Least any error grow hereof, Daily Sacrifice.
it is to be noted, that these words, Daily Sacrifice, and Daily Bread Daily
Sacrifice. Daily bread.
are sometimes used in the holy Fathers, and both applied unto the Body of
Christ: but far otherwise, and to other purpose, then M. Hardinge means,
as it shall soon appear. The old Fathers call that the Daily Sacrifice, that
Christ made once for all upon the Cross: for that as Christ is a Priest for
ever, so does the same his Sacrifice last for ever: not that it is daily, and
really renewed by any mortal creature, but that the power and virtue thereof is
infinite in it self, and shall never be consumed. So says S. Augustine, Tibi
hodie Christus est, Deverb. Dom. in Euang. secundum Lucam. Sermon. 28.
tibi quotidie resurgit. To thee this day is Christ: and to thee daily he
rises again. So likewise says S. Hierome: Quotidie nobis Agnus occiditur,
and Pascha quotidie celebratur: Unto us every day the Lamb is slain: to us
every day the Easter Feast^s kept. And in like sort writes Germanus a later
writer, Panis quotidianus est Christus, Hieron in. 1. ad Corin. cap. 6.
Germanus in Ecclesi. rerum Theori^.
qui est, and ante fuit, and manet in saecula: Our daily Bread is Christ,
which is now, and was before, and endures for ever. Thus in Christ's behalf
is that most precious Sacrifice everlasting.

Likewise the same one Sacrifice is everlasting not only in it self, for
that the virtue thereof is daily effectual in us, and endures for ever, but
also of our behalf, in that we do daily offer up unto God our Sacrifices of
praises and thanks giving for that so merciful, and wonderful work of our
Redemption. And this kind of Daily Sacrifice, biside a great number of other
old Doctors, the godly Father Irenaeus has taught us to make: His words be
these, Sic and nos quotidie offerre vult munus ad altar frequenter sine
intermissione. Irenaeus, li. 4. Cap. 34.
Est ergo altar in Coelis. Illuc enim preces and oblationes nostrae
diriguntur. Even so has God willed us daily to offer up our Sacrifice at the
Altar without ceassinge. Therefore our Altar is in heaven: for thither our
prayers and oblations are directed. Thus is that Sacrifice once offered upon the
Cross rightly called our Daily Sacrifice, in like phrase of speech, as is this
of Tertullian: Tertullian ad. uersus Iud^^os.
Nos Sabbatum non septeno quoque die celebramus, Sed omni die, We keep the
Sabbothe not every seventh day, but every day. But M. Hardinges fantasy, that
is, that the Ministration of the Sacraments is the Daily Sacrifice, includes
a manifest vntruethe. Arti^ulo. 2. diuisi. 23. fol. 44. b.
For afterward he grants him self, that upon Good Friday there is no such
oblation made, and that (as he says) by the order of the Apostles. And again
he knows, that the Grecians in the Lent time never used to Consecrate, Sexta
Synod. cap. 52.
but only upon Saturdaies, and Sundaies: as it appears by the sixthe Council
holden at Constantinople, Council. Lacdic^^. can. 49.
and by the Council of Laodicea. And of the use of the Latin Church therein
in his time, S. Ambrose writes thus, Omni hebdomada offerendum est, e^iam si
non quotidie peregrinis: Ambro. in. 1. ad Timo. ca. 2.
incolis tamen vel bis in hebdomada, Every week we must celebrate the
oblation, although not every day unto strangers, yet for the inhabitants* ye
some times twice in the week. Non quotidie.
I trow M. Hardinge will not say, that the thing that is one day left
undone, or that is only done upon ye Saturdaies and Sundaies, or, as S.
Ambrose says, twice in the week, is not withstanding done every day.

Yet it is well to be thought, that both S. Ambrose and other learned Bishops
in the Latin Church, and the Fathers in the Council of Constantinople and
Laodicea for the Greek Church, understood what was the Daily Sacrifice.

Uerely that Sacrifice, that Christ once made upon his Cross, endures for
Good Friday, and al days in the Lent, and every day in the year, and for ever:
and therefore is justly called our Daily Sacrifice.

M. Hardinges reasons.
Christ's Death must be kept in remembrance, Ergo, The Priest is bound to say
daily Mass, y^ although there be no man to receive with him. Alas, how holds
this poor argument? Or how may we make it good? Is there none other mean to
remember Christ's death, but only by saying Private Mass? Or is not every one
of ye people bound to remember the same, as deeply, and as often as the
Priest? It is a very simple sequel, only upon remembrance of Christ's Death
to found the Mass. Doubtless the Mass, as it is now used, utterly drowneth
and defaceth al manner remembrance of the Death of Christ.

But to put a little more weight to this seely reason, where as M. Hardinge
says: The Priest ought daily to Sacrifice, ye although there be no man to
receive with him, I will say further in his behalf: If this Sacrifice be so
necessary, as it is supposed, then is the Priest bound to Sacrifice every
day, ye although he him self receive not. For the Sacrifice, and the Receiving
are sundry things, as it is also noted in a late Council holden at Toledo in
Spain. Quidam sacerdotes vno die plurima offerunt Sacrificia, De Con. did. 2.
Relatum est.
and in omnibus se oblationibus a Communione suspendunt. Certain Priests
there be, that every day offer many Sacrifices: and yet in every Sacrifice
withholde them selves from the Communion. Thus has M. Hardinge found his
daily Sacrifice, and lost his Private Mass.

An other reason.
The receiuyng with company is no substantial part of Christ's Institution,
Ergo, we are not bound therein to follow Christ's example. First this
Antecedent is false, as it is already proved. And if it were no part of the
substance of Christ's Institution, Yet are we nevertheless bound to his
example, because he has commanded us so to do.

If Christ's example have no more weight of our side, let us turn the same to
M. Hardinges side, and see how handsomely it will conclude: Christ ministered
the Communion to his Disciples altogether, Ergo, the Priest may receive alone.

Consider, good Reader, what credit these men deserve to have, that are thus
feign to shun and fly the example of Christ. 1. Corinthians. 11.
S. Paul to rectify the Corinthians thought no way better then to call them
back to Christ's example. For thus he says, That I received of the Lord, the
same have I delivered unto you. Likewise says S. Hierome, Dominica Coena
omnibus debet esse Communis: Hieron. in 1. Corin. 11.
quia ille omnibus discipulis suis qui aderant, aequaliter tradidit Sacramenta.
The Lords Supper must be Common to al. And that he proves by Christ's
example, Because Christ gave the Sacraments equally to al his Disciples that
were present.

But whose example follows M. Hardinge, when he says his Private Mass? When
did either Christ, or any of his Disciples, Or any one of the old Catholic
Doctors, Minister in that sort? If he follow none of these, let him not blame
others, if they refuse to follow him.

M. Hardinge. The.10. Division.
M. Iuel, and many other of that side, think to have an argument against
Private Mass of the word Communio, as though the Sacrament were called a
Communion in consideration of many receivers together. And therefore in his
Sermon oftentimes he makes an opposition between Private Mass and the
Communion, and alleging diverse places where mention is of a Communion,
infers of each of them an argument against Private Mass. But this agrument
is weak and utterly unlearned, as that which proceeds of ignorance. 19
The.19. untruth. For of Communicating to geather, it was called Co^munio.
For it is not so called, because many, or as M. Iuel teaches, the whole
Congregation Co^municateth together in one place: but because of the effect
of the Sacrament, for that by the same we are ioigned to God, and many that be
diverse, be united together, and made one Mystical Body of Christ, which is
the Church, of which Body, by virtue and effect of this holy Sacrament, all the faithful be members one of an other, and Christ is the head. Thus diverse
ancient Doctors do expound it: And specially Dionysius Ariopagita, where
speakinge of this Sacrament, he says: Ecclesiasti. Hie^arch. ca. ^.
Dignissimum hoc Sacramentum, sua praesantia reliquis Sacramentis long
antecellit, atque ea causa illud merito singularit^r Communio appellatur. Nam
quamuis vnumquodque Sacramentum id agat, vt nostras vitas in plura diuisas in
vnicum illum statum, quo Deo iungitur, colligat, attamen huic Sacramento
Communio^s vocabulum praecipu^ ac peculiariter congru^t. This mosi woorthi^
Sacrament is of such excellency, that it passes far al other Sacraments.
And for that cause it is alonely called the Communion. For all be it every
Sacrament be such, as geathereth our lives that be divided a sunder many ways
into that one state, whereby we are ioigned to God, Yet the name of Communion
is fit and convenient for this Sacrament specially, and peculiarly, more then
for any other. By which words and by the whole place of that holy Father,
we understand that this Sacrament is specially called the Communion, for the
special effect it woorketh in us: which is to ioigne us nearely to God, so as
we be in him, and he in us: and al we that believe in him, one Body in
Christ. And for this in deed we do not Communicate alone. For in as much
as the whole Church of God is but one house, as S. Cyprian says, Vna est
domus Ecclesiae, in qua agnus editur: There is one house of the Church wherein
the Lamb is eaten: De eaena Dn^i. 1. Timoth. 3.
And S. Paul says to Timothe, that this house of God, is the Church of the
living God: who so ever does eat this Lamb woorthely, does Communicate with all Christian men of al places, and countries, that be in this house, and do
the like. And therefore S. Hierome a Priest, shewinge him self loathe to
contend in writing with S. Augustine a Bishop, calls him a Bishop of his
Communion. His words be these. Non enim conuenit, vt ab adolescentia vsque ad
hanc aetatem, in Monasteriolo cum sanctis ^ratribus labor desudans, aliquid
contra Episcopum Communionis meae scribere audeam, Inter Epistolas Augustini.
Epistol. 14.
and eum Episcopum, quem ante coepi amare, quam nosse. It is not meet (says
he) that I occupied in labor from my youth until this age, in a poor
Monastery with holy brethren, should be so bold as to write any thing
against a Bishop of my Communion, ye and that Bishop whom I began to love, er
that I knew him. Thus we see that S. Hierome, and S. Augustine were of one 20
The.20. Untruth, R^singe of the ambiguitie or doubtful taking of this word
Communion.
Communion, and did Communicate together, though they were far a sunder:
Th^one at Bethlehem in Palestina, th^other at Hippo in Aphrica. Thus there may
be a Communion, though the Communicantes be not together in one place.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Where as of the nature of this word Communio, which is most commonly used
in all the old Fathers, I took occasion to say that the Priest ought to
communicate with the people, for yt otherwise it cannot justly be called a
Communion, M. Hardinge makes answer, as a man well brooking his own learning,
That this reason is weak, and unlearned, as proceedinge al together of
ignorance. Here to leave al contention of learning, and only to have regard
unto the truth, If the very nature of this word Communio, Communio.
importe not a thing to be common, as it is supposed, much less may it, as I
judge, importe a thing to be private.

It is named Communio, says M. Harding, of the effect that it woorketh in us,
because by the same we are ioigned unto God: not because many Communicate
together in one place. And for proof hereof he allegeth the authority of
Dionysius: wherein he does great wrong to that good old Father, alleging his
authority for the Mass, that never spoke word of the Mass.

It is granted of al without contradiction, that one end of al Sacraments is
to ioigne us unto God: as Dionysius says here of the holy Communion, and Paul
likewise of the Sacrament of Baptism: Cala. 3. Chrysostom. in ^pistol. ad ^phe.
ye are ^l the children of God by faith in Christ Jesus: Homi. 20.
For as many of you as are Baptized in Christ, have put on Christ. And
Chrysostom says, That by Baptism we are made Bone of Christ's Bones, and
fleashe of Christ's fleash.

An other end is to ioigne us al together. And so likewise writes S. Paul
of Baptism. 1. Cor. 12.
Nos omnes in vnum corpus Baptizati sumus. Al we are Baptized into one ^ody.
Contra (...)Manichae. li. 19. cap. 11.
And therefore says S. Augustine, In nullum nomen Religionis seu verum, seu
falsum, coagulari homines possunt, nisi aliquo signaculorum, vel Sacramentorum
visibilium consortio colligentur: Communio.
Men can not be brought into any name of Religion be it true, or false, unless
they be ioigned together with the band of visible Signs, or Sacraments.

And not withstandinge Dionysius speaks plainly of both these ends, yet it
pleases M. Harding in his allegation only to name the one, and to concele the
other: and by the affirmation of the one, untruly to conclude the denial of
the other. And as touching the later of these two ends, the same Dionysius in
the same Chapter that M. Hardinge here allegeth, writes thus: Dionys.
Ecclesiast. Hierarch. cap. 3.
Sancta illa vnius, and eiusdem Panis, and poculi communis and pacifica
distributio, vnitatem illis diuinam, tanquam vna enutritis, praescribit. (...).
That holy, common, and peaceable distribution of one Bread, and one Cup,
preaches unto them a heavenly unity, as being men fed together. And
Pachymeres the Greek Paraphrast expoundinge the same place has these words:
(...). For that common diete, and consent farther brings us into the
remembrance of the Lords Supper. What so ever M. Hardinge have said, I reckon
it will hereby appear unto the indifferent reader, that these words do
sufficiently declare, both the common receiuinge of the Sacrament, and also the
knittinge and ioyninge of many together.

Now let us examine this reason: The Communion has his name of the effect, for
that it joins us unto God: Ergo, says M. Hardinge, it signifies not the
communicatinge of many together. Surely this argument is very weak: I will not
say, It is unlearned, or proceeds of ignorance. He should need a new
Logique, that would assay to make it good.

Nay, it may much better be replied: what effect can this Sacrament have, or
whom can it join to God, but only such as do receive it? Or what effect
can the Sacrament of Baptism work, but only in them that receive Baptism?
Without al question, theffecte that Dionysius meante, stands not in this,
that one man says a Private Mass, and receives the Sacrament alone: but in
this that the people prays, and receives the holy Communion together, and
thereby does openly testify, that they be al one in Christ Jesus, and al one
emongst them selves. Chrysostom, Ad popul. Antiochen. homil. 61.
And therefore Chrysostom says, Propterea in Mysterijs alter al^erum
amplectimur, vt vnum multi fiamus. For that cause in the time of the Mysteries
we embrace one an other, that being many, we may become one.

How be it, in plain speech it is not the receiuinge of the Sacrament, that
woorketh our ioyninge with God. For who so ever is not joined to God before he
receive the Sacraments, he eats and drinks his own judgment. The
Sacraments be Seals and witnesses, Roman. 4.
and not properly the causes of this conjunction. Otherwise our children that
depart this life before they receive the Communion, and all the godly Fathers
of the old Testament should have no co^^unction with God. August. In Sermon
ad Infantes. Beda. 1. Cor. 10.
Wherefore S. Augustine says, No man may any wise doubt, but every faithful
creature is then made partaker of Christ's Body and Blood, when in Baptism
he is made the membre of Christ: and that he is not put of from the fellowship
of that Bread and that Cup, although before either he eat that Bread, or
drink of that Cup, he depart this world being in the unity of Christ's
Body. For he is not deprived from the partakinge and benefit of the
Sacrament, so long as he finds in him self that thing, that the Sacrament
signifies. Cyprian. de Coena Domini.
Likewise S. Cyprian, Nos ipsi Corpus Christi effecti, and Sacramento, and re
Sacramenti, Capiti nostro coniungimur, and vnimur: We our selves being made the
Body of Christ, both by the mean of the Sacrament, and also by the thing
it self of the Sacrament, or represented by the Sacrament, are joined and
united unto our Head.

But S. Cyprian says, Cyprianus de Coena Domini. Inter epistolas August.
epist. 14.
The whole Church is but one house, in which the Lamme is eaten. And S.
Hierome not withstandinge he dwelte in Bethlehem so many Miles of from S.
Augustine, being then at Hippo in Aphrica, yet he calls him a Bishop of his
Communion: Ergo, says M. Hardinge, the Priest that says Mass alone in
Rome, communicates together with an other Priest that says Mass alone in
India. Here S. Cyprian, and S. Hierome are violently drawn in, and forced to
witness the thing, that they never knew: and so M. Hardinge, as his manner
is, concludes a falseheade.

The holy Communion was so often, and so generally frequented amongst al
Christians in the Primitive Church in all their assemblies, and Congregations,
that at length the very company and fellowship of them was called Communio,
taking name of that action, that was most solemnly used emonge them at their
meetinges. And therefore to give somewhat more credit to M. Hardinges words,
S. Augustine says: August. in epist. ad Eusebium.
Mulier illa est Communionis nostrae: That Woman is of our Communion. Likewise
again, Donatus non nisi in sua Communione Baptismum esse credit. August.
Retractar. lib. 1. ca. 21. Hieronymus ad Damasum.
Donatus thinks there is no Baptism but only in his Communion. And S.
Hierome writing unto Damasus Bishop of Rome, has these words: Ego nullum
primum, nisi Christum sequens, beatitudini tuae, id est Cathedrae Petri
Communione consocior. I followyng no chief but only Christ, am joined by
Communion to thy holiness, that is to say to Peter's Chair: In these places
this word Communio, signifies not the Ministration of Sacraments, but a
side, a part, or a fellowship or consent in Articles of Religion. And in this
sense S. Hierome called S. Augustine a Bishop of his Communion: that is, of his
Faith: of his Mind: of his Doctrine: of his Religion.

Here may be noted by the way, that S. Hierome says not, S. Augustine is a
Bishop of my Mass, but of my Communion. For M. Hardinge knows, that neither
of them both ever said Private Mass, and therefore could not communicate the
one with the other in saieyng Mass.

But for clearer answer to the words of S. Hierome, the Communion or
fellowship of the Church stands in sundry respects: For we communicate
together, either in consent of mind, as it is written of the Apostles, They
had al one Heart, and one Mind: Actor. 4.
Or in knowledge of God, as Christ prays for his Apostles unto his Father,
Johan. 17.
that they may be one, as thou and I be one: And S. Paul to the Philippiens,
^hilippen. 2.
I thank my God always, that ye are come to the Communion of the Gospel: Or in
one Christ, ^alatas. 3.
as Paul says, there is now no bondeman, there is now no free man, but al are
one in Christ Jesus. To be short, we communicate in Spirit: in Prayers: in
Love: we are al washed with one Blood: we are al ^edde with one Body: we have
al one hope of our vocation: and altogether with one heart, and one voice, be
we never so far a sunder, Roman. 15.
do glorify God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.

And this is that only house wherein the Lamme is eaten, Cyprian. De Coena
Domini. Psalm. 54.
grounded upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets. In this house we
dwell, M. Hardinge: here we walk together with consent: here we eat that
Lamme of God, being al brothers, and members of one Body, and al one in
Christ Jesus. God restore you once again into the same house, Apocalyp. 2.
that you may open the eyes of your heart, and see from whence you are fallen.

Where you say, two diverse Priests sayeinge Mass may Communicate together,
not withstandinge they be in sundry countries, it may soon be granted. For
they Communicate together in wickedness: in breakinge of Gods
commandment: and in deceiuinge of the people: even in like sort as the
wicked Children Communicate in wickedness with their wicked Fathers. As
Christ seems to say to the Phariseis: Matthew. 23.
At your hands shall be sought for all the just Blood, that has benne spilte,
Luke. 11.
from the Blood of Abel the just unto the Blood of Zachary. Fill ye up the
measure of your Fathers.

Now these things noted, we may the better take the view of M. Hardinges
arguments,

The whole Church (says he) through the world is but one house: Ergo, the
Priest may

The faitheful that be far a sunder do Communicate together in consent of
mind: Ergo,

S. Augustine, and S. Hierome did Communicate in Faith and Doctrine, Ergo,
they did Communicate If S. Paul might have had some conference with M.
Hardinge, and have found out these reasons, he would never have found such
fault with the Corinthians, neither would he have written thus unto them,
Inuicem expectate, wait ye al, One for an other: Hugo Cardinalis.
Which words even Hugo Cardinalis expounds thus: vt vna sit mensa: non
habeat quilibet mensam suam: Let there be one table for all: and let not every
man have his sundry table.

But who can better expound S. Hieromes words, then S. Hierome him self?
Thus he writes unto Theophilus against John Bishop of Jerusalem, Quod
scribit, nos tecum pergere Romam, Hieron. Aduersus 10. Hierosolymitan.
and Ecclesiae communicare ei, a qua videmur co^munione separati, non necesse
est ire tam long: and hic in Palaestina eodem modo ei iungimur. Et ne hoc quod
procul sit: In viculo Bethlehem presbyteris eius, quantum in nobis est,
Communione sociamur. Where as he writes that I am goeinge with thee to Rome,
to Communicate with the Church there, from which we be divided by Communion,
it is nothing needeful to go so far. For being here in Palestine, we are
joined to the same Church in like manner. And let him not make matter, that it
is so far of. For being here in the little town of Bethleem, as much as in
us lies, we join in Communion with the Priests of Rome. He says, as much
as in us lies, As much, as (...)us lies.
whereby he excepteth only the use of the Sacraments together. For otherwise
they had Communicated thoroughly in all things, and these words, as much as
in us lies, should not have needed.

The error of these M. Hardinges reasons is called Fallacia aequiuocationis,
That is, a falseheade in reasoninge, risinge by the crafty handlinge of one
word, that has two, or more significations, whereby one thing is laid
forth in show, and an other is concluded. This word Communio, being one,
imports two things, Consent in Religion, and ye Ministration of the holy
Mysteries. The one is spiritual, the other corporal: The one requires
circumstance of place, the other requires no place. Therefore to say, S.
Hierome and S. Augustine, being so far a sunder, did Communicate in Religion:
ergo, they did Communicate in breakinge and receiuinge the Sacrament: has no
more order in sequel, then if M. Hardinge would reason thus: S. Hierome, and
S. Augustine did communicate in Spirit, ergo, they did also communicate in
Body: Or thus, Their Sprites were together, ergo, their Bodies were
together. So might he as well say, 4. Regum. 5. 1. Corinthians. 5.
The Sprite of Elizeus was with Giezi his man upon the way: ergo, the body of
Elizeus was with Giezi upon the way: Or, The Sprite of Paul was with the
Corinthians: ergo, his body was with the Corinthians.

By this argument M. Hardinge might very directly have concluded against him
self: The whole Church of God is but one house, and all the members of the
same do Communicate together in Faith and Sprite: Hereof we may found the
mayor. Every particular Church ought to be a resemblance of the whole Church:
and this particular Communion ought to be a resemblance of that general
Communion: That general Communion is common to al, and every member receives
his part: ergo, the particular Communion ought to be ministered commonly unto
al, and every member to receive his part.

Or thus, The Ministration of the holy Communion represents the conjunction,
and fellowship that we have in Faith: Cyprianus ad Magnum.
And as S. Cyprian says, that Christian men are joined together with
inseperable Charity, the Lords Sacraments do declare: But Christian people
being assembled in one Church do Communicate in Faith al together: ergo,
being so assembled they ought to Communicate in Sacraments al together.

But M. Hardinge of the nature of this word, Communio, seems to fashion out
far other arguments:

It is called Communio, says he: ergo, it may be Private.

It is called Communio: ergo, it may be received of one alone.

It is called Communio: ergo, the Priest may receive it without communicantes.
O M. Hardinge weighe your arguments better before you send them thus abroad.
You shall less offend God, and your own conscience: you shall less deceive
your brethren: and children shall take less occasion to wounder at you.

Now to add a little more hereunto toutchinge the nature of this word
Communio, wherein you so vncourteousely charge al others with ignorance, and
lack of learning, as it pleases you to do through out your whole book, I
think it not amiss to show you, what certain writers both old and new
have thought and written in that behalf. I need not here to allege the
words that S. Paul uses touching the holy Communion, 1. Corinthians. 10.
Hieron 1. Cor. 11. Chrysostom. 1. Corin. hom. 27.
We are al one Bread, al one Body, as many as do Communicate of one Bread:
Neither that S. Hierome says, The Lords Supper must be common: Neither that
Chrysostom* The thing that is the Lords, they make Private: But the Lords
things are not this servants, or that servants, but common to al: Neither
that S. Augustine says, August. in Johan. tracta. 26. Chrysostom. 1. Corin.
hom. 24.
Hunc cibum and potum, societatem vult intelligi Corporis, and membrorum
suorum, He would have us to understand, that this Meat, and Drink is the
fellowship of his Body, and of his members: Neither that Chrysostom says,
Quidnam appello Communicationem? Idem ipsum Corpus sumus. Quidnam significat
Panis? Corpus Christi. Quid fiunt qui accipiunt? Corpus Christi. What call I the
Communication, Significat.
or Communion? we are al one self same Body. What signifies the Bread? The
Body of Christ. And what are they made that receive it? The Body of Christ.
Although these Fathers by these words do manifestly declare, that the holy
Mysteries in their time were divided commonly to the whole people: yet will I
take no advantage thereof, for that M. Hardinge will reply, they come not
precisely to the nature of this word Communio.

Therefore I will note one or two others, and such as M. Hardinge can not
deny, but they speak directly to the matter. Pachymeres in Dionysiu^. cap. 3.
(...).
Pachymeres a Greek writer, the Paraphrast upon Dionysius, has these words:
(...). Therefore (says he) has this Father Dionysius called it the
Communion, Dicitur Communio, quia oe^s Communicant.
for that then al they that were worthy, did Communicate of the holy
Mysteries. Thus Pachymeres a man of late years wrote upon the same Book of
Dionysius: and we may safely think, he understood his authors mind as well as
M. Hardinge. He says, Communio is so called of that we do Communicate
together. But M. Hardinge thinks otherwise, and constantly says, it is not
so.

Haimo writing upon S. Paul's Epistles says thus: Haimo in. 1. ad Corin. 10.
Calix appellatur Communicatio, quasi participatio, quia omnes Communicant ex
illo. The Cup is called the Communication, which is as much as
participation, because al do Communicate of it.

Hugo Cardinalis says thus: Hugo Cardinalis in Speculo Ecclesiae.
Post hoc dicatur Communio, quae appellatur, vt omnes communicemus. Afterward
let the Communion be said, which is so called, that we should al
Communicate. And he says further: Vel dicitur Communio, quia in Primitiua
Ecclesia populus Communicabat quolibet die. Otherwise ( says he) it is called
the Communion, for that the people in the Primitive Church did Communicate
every day.

Gerardus Lorichius, De missa publica proroganda.
Dicitur Communio, quia concorditer de vno pane, and vno ^alice, multi
participamus: Et Communio participationem and co^municationem significat. It is
called Communio, because we do communicate together agreeably of one Bread,
and one Cup: And this word Communio, is as much as Participation, or
receiuinge of parts.

Micrologus says, Micrologus de Eccles. objeruationib. apud Cassand de
Liturgijs. cap. 22.
Non potest proprie dici Co^munio, nisi plures de eodem Sacrificio participent.
It cannot justly be called a Communion, unless many do receive together of
one Sacrifice. If M. Hardinge will not believe us, yet, I hope, he will believe
some of these. They be al his own. It were much for him to say, they be al
ignorant, and unlearned: and not one of them understood, what he wrote.
Certainly their age will give it them, they are no Lutheranes. S. Basile
reports an Ecclesiastical Decree, Basil. Exercit. ad pieta. Sermon. 4.
or Canon, that at the receiuinge of the holy Communion, which he calls
Mysticum Pascha, there ought to be twelve persons at the least, and never
under.

M. Hardinge. The.11. Division.
What if four or five of sundry houses in a sickness time, being at the point
of death in a parish, require to have their rightes ^r they depart? The
Priest after that he has received the Sacrament in the Church, takes his
natural sustenance, and dineth, and then being called upon, carries the rest a
mile or two to the sick, in each house none being disposed to receive with
the sick, he does that he is required. (21) The.21. untruth. M. Hardinge
says, The Priest does Communicate, and not Communicate both together:
Which is a Co^tradictio^ ^n nature.
Does he not in this case communicate with them, and do not they communicate
one with another, rather having a will to communicate together in one place
also, if opportunity served? Else, if this might not be accounted as a lawful
and good Communion, and therefore not to be used: the one of these great
inconveniences should wittingly be committed: (22) The.22. untruth. This order
was taken, not for every sickepartie, but for persons excommunicate.
that either they should be denied that necessary vitaile of life at their
departinge hence, which were a cruel injury, and a thing contrary to the
examples, and godly ordinances of the Primitive Church: Or the Priest rather
for companies sake then of devotion, should receive that holy meat after that
he had served his stomach with common meats: which likewise is against the
ancient decrees of the Church. Even so the Priest that receives alone at
Mass, does communicate with all them that do the like in other places and
countries.

The B. of Sarisburie.
He that seethe no mark, must shoot by aim. What, says M. Hardinge, if
four or five men of sundry houses within one Parish be at the point of
death, and require their rightes, and the Priest have di^^ed? Hereupon, he
thinks, may be grounded an argument invincible for his Mass. But what if the
Priest were fasting? should he then say four Masses to serve al four? And
what if noman happen to be sick? then has M. Hardinge lost a good argument.
Alas, must he leave all the old Doctors, and holy Fathers, and beg at
deaths door, to geate somewhat to healpe his Mass? In this case, says M.
Hardinge, either the Priest must communicate after he has dined, which is
against the Canons: or the sick man must receive alone, which is proof
sufficient for the Mass: or else he must pass without that necessary
vitaile, which were a cruel injury, and a thing contrary to the Primitive
Church. To answer these points, if the Priest not withstandinge his diner,
communicate with the sick, then has M. Hardinge yet found no Private Mass.
August. ad Ianuariu^ Epist. 118. Conci. Carthagin. 3. Can. 6.
And it appears by S. Augustine, and ^ertaine old Canons, that in the
Primitive Church both the Priest and people sometimes communicated together
after Supper.

And why is this provision thought so necessary? Or why is it counted so cruel
an injury, if the sick man pass without it? Shall noman be saved that so
departs? In deed that were a cruel injury. Infinite numbers of Children,
and others depart this life in Gods mercy, without that vitaile. In the
Primitive Church this order was thought expedient, not for the sick, for they
in their health received August. De Sermon. Domini in Monte. cap. 12.
daily, and in their sickness had the Sacrament ordinarily sent Ius^inus
Martyr Apologia. 2.
home unto them: but for persons excommunicate, and inioined to penaun^^: who
upon great and notorious crimes could not be suffered to communicate with the
rest of the faithful, sometimes duringe their whole life, but only when they
should depart the world. This extremity was used for terror of others, and
such reconciliation was thought necessary at the end for solace of the
party, that he should not utterly be swalowed up in despair, but might
perceive he was received again emongst the faithful, and so depart
comfortably, as the member of Christ. Council* Cartha. 6. ca. 13.
And therefore it was decreed by the Council of Carthage, That if any man after
such Reconciliation, had recovered his health again, he should never
thelesse not be received to the Communion of the Church, but only be admitted
to the common Prayers. Thus far forth, and in this case this provision was
counted necessary in the end.

How be it I confess, Council. Cartha. 3. can. 6.
sometimes it was otherwise used, and at last grew to such superstition,
that it was thrust into men's mouths after they were dead: as we may see by
the Council of Carthage forbiddinge the same. But if the people would now
Communicate every day, as they did then: or at least oftener, then they do
now, then should not this matter seem so necessary at the end, as it is here
pretended: and so had M. Hardinge lost an other argument.

But let us grant M. Hardinge his whole request: let his Priest come, and
minister to the sick. What makes all this for his Private Mass? the members
of these arguments hang together like a sick man's dream, not one piece
like an other. For if here be a Mass, which of the two is it, that says
this Mass? Is it the sick man, or the Priest? The Priest has dined, and
therefore may not: the sick man is no Priest, and therefore cannot. Here
would M. Hardinge feign find a Mass: but he can find no man to say his
Mass: and so has hitherto found no Mass at al. And thinks he to prove
his Mass by y^ thing that is no Mass?

Again, grant we this action of the Priest not only to be a Private Mass,
but also, the necessity of the sick considered, to be lawful. Yet could not
this President make it lawful to be done openly in the Churchs, where as is no
such case of necessity. The circumstances of place, of time, of cause, of
end, of manner of dooinge be not like. In case of necessity a dispensation
was granted to the Priests of Norwey to Consecrate the Mystical Cup without
Wine: ^olaterran. li. 7.
for that Wine being brought into that country by mean of the extreme cold
can not last. Yet was it never thought lawful for all other Priests, in all
Churches generally to do the same.

M. Hardinge. The.12. Division.
Now if either the Priest, or every other Christen man or woman, might at no
time receive this blessed Sacrament, but with more together in one place: then
for the inioyeinge of this great and necessary benefit, Even so S. Paul
calls them* (...).
we were bound to condition of a place. And so the Church delivered from al
bondage by Christ, and set at liberty, should yet for all that be in
servitude, and subjection under those out ward things, Galat. 4.
which S. Paul calls, Infirma and egena elementa, weak, and beggarly
ceremonies, after the English Bibles translation. Then when S. Paul blaminge
the Galathians says, ye observe days, and months, and times, for this
bondage he might likewise blame us, and say, ye observe places. But S. Paul
would not we should return again unto these which he calls Elements,
for that were ^ewis ^e. And to the Colossians he says, we be dead with
Christ from the elements of this world. Now if we except those things
which be necessarily required to this Sacrament by Christ's institution,
either declared by written Scriptures, or taught by the holy ghost (23) The
(23) untruth. The minglinge of wine and water together is neither Catholic,
nor necessary. Scotus.
as bread and wine mingled with water for the matter, the due words of
consecration for the form* and the Priest rightly ordered having intention
to do as the Church doothe, for the ministry: al these elements and al
outward things be subject unto us, and serve us being members of Christ's
Church. In consideration whereof S. Paul says to the Corinthians, Omnia
enim vestra sunt etc. Al things are yours, whether it be Paul, either Apollo,
either Cephas: whether it be the world, either life, either death, whether
they be present things, or things to come, al are yours, and ye Christ's, and
Christ is Gods.

The B. of Sarisburie.
If it be lawful neither for the Priest, nor for any other Christian man or
woman to receive alone, then says M. Hardinge, we must needs condition of a
place to receive together. Here these words, every other Christian man, or
woman, that he has taken in by the way, are an overplus, and quite from the
purpose. For the question is moved, not of any other man, or woman, but of the
Mass, and only of the Priest that says the Mass. Now, to condition of a
place, says M. Hardinge, were as badde, as to observe months and days,
Galat. 4.
which thing S. Paul utterly forbids: it were a very Jewish Ceremony: it
were an element of this world: and so a miserable servitude of the Church.
But from such bondage Christ has delivered us.

I know not well whether M. Hardinge scoff and dally herein for his pleasure,
or speak soothly as he thinks. If he dally, it becomes not the matter: if
he speak soothely and as he thinks, then he has not well advised him self,
neither from what servitude Christ by his Blood has delivered us, nor of
what liberty S. Paul speaks. Certain it is, Christ has not delivered us
from honest Civil Policies, without which no state, neither Ecclesiastical,
nor Civil can be maintained: but from the curse of the Law, Galat. 3.
wherein we reasted under sin: and from the Ceremonies and ordinances given
by Moses, which for that they were weak according to the imperfection of
that time, therefore S. Paul calls them the Elements of this world.

Here M. Hardinge seems by the way to touch the English Translation of the
Bible, which calls such Elements Beggarly Ceremonies, Beggarly Ceremonies.
him self being not hable to translate it better. And yet, if he were well
apposed, I think he would hardely yield any great difference between the
Greek word (...), (...).
and the Latin word Egena, Egen^^.
and this English word Beggarly. Which word if it seem to homely, yet S.
Hierome in his exposition, Hierony. ad Gala. ca. 4.
is as homely, calling it vilem intelligentiam Traditionum. And yet the
Prophets abase it further. Hieremie calls such Ceremonies so abused, and
others divised by men, Chafe, Swil, Dross, and Dreams: Esaie, Filthe:
Zachary, Curses: Ezechiel, Man's dounge, and other like.

From this servitude, Galat. 4.
says Paul, God has delivered you. Now are ye free, and no more bond: now
are ye the children and heirs of God. From this liberty the Galathians were
fallen away to the servile observation of Circumcisions, Washinges, and other
Ceremonies of the Law. Therefore of this liberty and of this bondage S. Paul
speaks, and of none other.

To condition of a place, says M. Hardinge, were mere Iewishe: for as S.
Paul says to the Galathians, ye observe months and days, so might he say
unto you, ye observe places. Thus he says, as though he him self had no
choice of place to say his Mass in. M. Hardinge shifteth number into place.
He moves talk of place, whereof we had no question: but the number of
Communicantes, whereof S. Paul so plainly speaks, he thought best to salve
with silence. If these men accoumpte al utter things to be worldly Elements,
then must they take away the Bread and Wine in the holy Ministration: the
water in Baptism: the words of the Gospel: the whole Ministry, and al
kind of Civil policy. Al these be utter creatures, given to us by God, to be
used freely, without servile observation, or subjection of Conscience. For God
has appointed these things for us, not us for them.

But will our adversaries now at last defend the Liberty of the Church, or
complain of Bondage? Minglinge of water and wine.
O good reader, they deal not simply: they dissemble: they mean it not. They
have d^filed the Lords Sacraments with a multitude of superstitious and
childishe Ceremonies, and have annexed unto the same a deep charge of Gods
high displeasure, and burden of conscience. They teach the people of God in
this sort: Colossen. 2.
O touch not this: O taste not this. They burden the peoples consciences with
choice of meats: They restrain^ lawful Matrimony, the restrainte whereof is a
Yoke intolerable, 1. Corin. 7.
and a snare of men's lives, and, as S. Paul calls it, 1. Timo. 4.
the doctrine of Devils. They hear S. Augustine August. ad Ianuarium epistola.
118.
complain, that by mean of such traditions, which he calls men's
presumptions, the Church of Christ was in worse case in his time, then ever
was the Synagoge of the Jews. Bernardus Clareuallen.
They hear others of late years likewise complain much of the same. Yet
would they never, nor yet will they yield, that any one of al their vain
Ceremonies be released, no not now, having had, as they call it, a general
Council for that purpose. Gerson Cancel^lari. Pa^isien.
And can these men stand forth to complain of bondage? Or will they
restore us the liberty of the Church?

How be it M. Hardinge has well disclosed him self herein, that this liberty
is nothing else, M. Hardinges Liberty.
but to do what him lists: and his Bondage nothing else, but to be subject
unto God. For he adds immediately, that the minglinge, and blindinge of Water
and Wine together, and the intention of the Priest, are things necessarily
required to the Consecration of this Sacrament. Of the first hereof, the
superstition only excepted, no man makes any great account. In deed S.
Cyprian, Cyprian. Contra Aquarios.
and certain old Fathers speak of it, and force it much: and Justinius
Justin. in Apolog. 2.
Martyr calls it (...). The Cup of Water, and mixture. But neither Christ,
nor any of his Disciples ever gave Commandment of it: neither was it at any
time in the Church universally received, Io. Scotus in 4.
or accounted necessary. For Scotus and Inn^ocentius witness, Senten. Dift.
11. quaest. 6.
that the Greek Church in their time used it not. Wherefore it cannot be
Judged Catholic. And touching the necessity thereof, Scotus saiethe in
plain words, Innocentius de officio Miss. par. 3. ca. 4.
Huic vino apponere aquam non est simpliciter necessarium de necessitate
Sacramenti. Here we see these Doctors agree not. M. Hardinge says, this
mixture is necessary to the Sacrament: Scotus says, it is not necessary.

Now to reuele the secrcates of M. Hardinges Mysteries touching the same: The
minglinge of wine and water is not necessary.
that one drop, or two must be powered on the ground: how much thereof
must be put to the Wine, that there may be made a convenient mixture: what
becomes afterward of the same Water: whether it be turned into a thin
flewme, or into Christ's blood by mean of mixture, or into a Sacrament of
Ablution, to wash the rest away, it would require longer talk, and not
necessary at this present. Neither would I now have moved one word hereof,
sauinge that this man thus vaunteth him self to be the restoarer of Christian
Liberty.

Where as he says: The Intention of the Priest.
The Priest must have Intention to do that the Church doothe: unless he be
well assured of the Churches dooinge herein, he cannot be sure of his own
Intention: and so must he say Mass with Intention to do, he knows not
what: Now it appears, that the Church is not yet resolved upon one
Intention. For the Intention of the Church of Rome is to work the
Transubstantiation of Bread and Wine: Council. Florentinum sessione Vltima.
The Greek Church had never that Intention, as it is plain by the Council of
Florence. The Intention of the Church of Rome is to Consecrate with Christ's
words: The Intention of the Greek Church is to Consecrate with Prayers.
Pessarion De Sacramento Eucharistiae.
And whether of these Churches shall the Priest follow with his Intention? This
is the very dungeon of uncertainty. The heart of man is unsearchable. If we
stay upon the Intention of a mortal man, we may stand in doubt of our own
Baptism. Intention.


Christ has delivered us from the elements of this world: M. Hardinges
arguments.
ergo, the Priest may say Private Mass. We are forbidden to observe months
and days: ergo, the Priest may receive alone.

Thus he reasons, as if S. Paul's words were written, that he might thereby
prove what him self lists. In deed, the Bread, the Wine, the Water, and
the Priest him self are worldly creatures, and therefore subject unto
Christian Liberty no less then place, or time. Yet may not M. Hardinge
therefore have y^ Communion ministered without either Priest, or Bread, or
Wine: neither Baptism ministered without water. Christ has delivered us from
the subjection, and superstitious using of the Creatures, but not from yt
Creatures them selves: Otherwise by the same form of reason M. Hardinge might
as well have concluded thus: Apollo, Paul, Peter, Life, and things to come are
worldly creatures: for so says S. Paul, even as M. Hardinge has alleged. Al
things are yours, whether it be Paul, or Apollo, or Peter, or the world, or
life, or things to come: 1. Corinthians. 3.
But Christ has delivered us from worldly creatures: ergo, Christ has
delivered us from Paul, Apollo, Peter, from the world, from life, and from
things to come. Such arguments M. Hardinge has brought to prove his Mass.

M. Hardinge. The.13. Division.
Again, whereas the ancient and great learned Bishop Cyrillus teaches
plainly and at large, the marvelous vnitinge and ioyninge together of us with
Christ, and of our selves into one body by this Sacrament: saying that al so
united and made one body, be not for all that brought together into one place,
for they be dispersed abroad in all the world: thereof we may welconclude,
that to this effect the being together of Co^municantes in one place is not
of necessity. His words be these much agreeable to Dionysius Ariopagita
before mentioned. Vt igitur inter nos and Deum singulos vniret, In Joan. lib.
11. ca. 26.
quamuis corpore simul and anima distemus, modum tamen adinuenit, consilio
patris and sapientiae suae conuenientem. Suo enim corpore credentes per
Communionem mysticam benedicens, and secum, and inter nos, vnum nos corpus
effici^. Quis enim eos qui vnius sancti corporis union in vno Christo unity
sunt, ab hac naturali union alienos putabit? Nam si omnes vnum panem
manducamus, vnum omnes corpus efficimur: diuidi enim atque seiungi Christus non
patitur. That Christ might unite every one of us within our selves, and with
God, although we be distant both in Body and also in Soul, yet he has
divised a mean couenable to the counsel of the Father and to his own wisdom.
For in that he blesses them that believe, with his own body through the
mystical Communion, he makes us one Body both with himself, and also
between our selves. For who will think them not to be of this natural union,
which with the union of that one holy Body, be united in one Christ. For if
we eat al of one Bread, then are we made al one body: for Christ may not be
divided nor done asunder.

Thus we see after this ancient Fathers learning grounded upon the
Scriptures, that all the faithful blissed with the body of Christ through the
mystical Communion be made one body with Christ, and one Body between them
selves. which good blissinge of Christ is of more virtue, and also of more
necessity, then that it may be made frustrate by condition of place, specially
where as is no wilful breach nor contempt of most seemly and couenable order.

The B. of Sarisburie.
As I can easily yield in part yt these two Fathers Cyrillus, and Dionysius
agree together, as it is here auoutched: So, if M. Hardinge can prove yt this
same Cyrillus ever said Private Mass, or in any of al his works once used
the name of Mass, I will as gladly yield unto y^ whole. But if Cyrillus never
spoke word of y^ Mass, how is he here brought in to prove y^ Mass? How be
it these men know, it is an easy matter to mock the ignorant with the glorious
name of Catholic Fathers.

Cyrillus says, that as many as believe in Christ, whether they be far or
near: Jews, or Gentiles: Free, or Bond, they are al one Body in Christ
Jesus. This thing neither is denied, nor in any point touches the Private
Mass. We confess, Chrysostom. in Epist. ad Ephesians. homil. 20.
that Christ by the Sacrament of Regeneration, as Chrysostom says, has
made us Fleash of his Fleash, and Boane of his Boanes: that we are the members,
and he is the head. We confess also yt all the faithful are one Body, al
indewed with one Sprite: And, be ye distance never so great, yet are we one an
others members.

This maru^lous Conjunction and Incorporation, is first begone, and wrought by
Faith, Paulinus and Therasia ad Augusti. epist. 31.
as says Paulinus unto S. Augustine: Per fidem nostram incorporamur in
Christo Jesus Domino nostro: By our Faith we are incorporate, or made one Body
with Jesus Christ our Lord. Afterward the same incorporation is assured unto
us, and increased in our Baptism: So says S. Augustine, Augusti. De Baptismo
paruulorum. De Con. Did. 4. Ad hoc.
Ad hoc Baptisma valet, vt Baptizati Christo incorporentur, and membra eius
efficiantur. To this avails Baptism, that men being Baptized, may be
incorporate into Christ, and made his members. And for that we are very
vnper^ite of our selves, and therefore must daily proceed forward, that we
may grow into a perfect man in Christ, therefore has God appointed, that the
same incorporation should be often renewed and confirmed in us by the use of
the holy Mysteries. Wherein must be considered, that the said holy Mysteries
do not begin, but rather continewe and confirm this incorporation. First
of al, we our selves must be the Body of Christ: and afterward we must
receive the Sacrament of Christ's Body: as it is well noted by S. Augustine:
Augusti. in Sermon ad Infantes. Citatur a Beda in 1. Cor. 10.
Corpus Christi si vis intelligere, Apostolum audi dicentem fidelibus: vos
estis corpus Christi, and membra: Mysterium vestrum in menia Domini positum
est: Mysterium Domini accipitis.

Ad id, quod estis, responde^is, Amen. Audis Corpus Christi, and respondes,
Amen. Esto membrum Corporis Christi, vt uerum sit Amen tuum. If thou will
understand the Body of Christ, hear what S. Paul says to the faithful.
Ye are the Body, and the members of Christ. Your Mystery is set on the
Lords Table. Ye receive the Mystery of the Lord. To that thing that ye are,
ye answer, Amen. Thou hear, The Body of Christ, and say, Amen. Be
thou a member of Christ's Body, that thy Amen may be true.

Neither may we think that Christ's Body must grossly and bodily be received
into our bodies. S. Cyprian. De Cana Domini.
Cyprian says, It is meat not for the belly, but for the mind. And S.
Augustine says, Creed, and manducasti. Believe in Christ, and thou haste
eaten. De Conse. did. 2.
And Cyrillus, that is here alleged, writes thus against the objections of
Theodoretus. Vt quid August. Cyrillus contra Obiectiones Theodoreti.
We do not maintain the eatinge of a man, irreverently, drawinge the minds
of the faithful unto gross, and profane imaginations: Neither do we submit
these things unto man's fantasy, that be received only by pure, and tried
faith. Therefore says Athanasius, It is spiritual meat, and spiritually is
digested in us.

Thus is Christ set forth unto us in that most holy Supper, Athanasius in
illa verba, Si quis dixerit verbum.
not to be received with the mouth: For that, as Cyrillus says, Were a
gross and profane imagination: but to be embraced with a pure, and a single
faith: And, as Athanasius says, to be eaten as spiritual food, and
spiritually to be digested into al his members. Thus are we al one Body, and
one Spirit in Christ, for that Christ is in all us, and al we in him. And
because the holy Ministration represents the same unto our eyes, Augustinus.
De Conse. Did. 2. Quia passus.
therefore S. Augustine calls it the Mystery of unity. Thus does the holy
Communion knitte and join us together, be we in number never so many: and in
distance never so far a sundre. For therein we profess yt we are al
servants in one house, and resort al to one table, and feed al of one
spiritual food, which is the fleash and blood of the Lamme of God. Paulinus.
Epistola ad Augustine. 33.
Which thing Paulinus seems very well, and in plain manner, to open unto S.
Augustine by these words. Non mirum, si and absentes adsumus nobis, and
ignotinosmet nouimus, cum vnius Corporis membra fimus, vnu^ habeamuscaput, vna
perfundamur gratia, vno pane viuamus, vna incedamus via, eadem habitemus in
domo. It is no marvel though we both being absent, are nevertheless present
togeathe^: and being unacquainted, yet know one an other: seeinge we be the
members of one Body, and have one head, and are powered over with one grace;
and live by one bread, and walk one way, and dwell in one house. I thought it
good to accompany Cyrillus with these other ancient Fathers, for the better
understanding of his meaning.

Hereof M. Hardinge seems to reason thus: By the Communion al faithful are
joined both unto God, and also between them selves: Ergo, the Priest may say
Private Mass. Little thought ye good Father, that his words should ever be
thus used, or so violently forced to such Conclusions. But let us drive this
argument a little further, that the inconvenience and the error may the better
appear.

Only the Priests in their Private Masses receive the Communion: Ergo, for
that action and time only the Priests are made one Body of Christ. And then
further, That body of Christ is the whole Church: Ergo, the Priests by
their Private Masses, are made the whole Church.

But that thou maiste plainly see, Christian reader, wherein M. Hardinge was
thus deceived: thou must understand, that Cyrillus takes his reason, as far
as it touches the Communion of the Sacrament, as we use to say in schools,
Ab effectis, and not A causis. But M. Hardinge turns it quite contrary: as if
it were taken A causis, and not Ab effectis. And that Cyrillus so reasons, it
is soon seen. For the receiuinge of the Sacrament is not the efficient cause,
that we are made one Body in Christ, Roman. 4. Signaculum.
but a token, and testimony, or as S. Paul says, the Seal and Confirmation
of that effect. For Judas received the Sacrament as well as Peter did: yet was
not Judas a member of Christ's Body, as Peter was. And many infantes and
others faithful, and godly be very members of that Body: and yet by occasion
of death, or otherwise, never receive the Sacrament of Christ's Body.

And not withstandinge M. Hardinge has thus altered his authors meaning, yet
shall he very hardly thereof in good order conclude his Mass. But he may of the
same very well and directly conclude the Communion. For if the Communion in that
it is received of many, be a testimony and a declaration that al faithful are
one Body in Christ, as Cyrillus means, then ought the same Communion to be
received together of many: otherwise it is no such testimony or declaration
as is supposed. The Antecedent or first proposition hereof, is proved by
sundry old Fathers. Cyprianus ad Magnion.
S. Cyprian says, With what love and concord al faithful Christians are
joined together, the Lords Sacrifice does declare. And Anselmus a man of
later years, Frangimus and diuidimus panem in multas parts, ad designandam
vnionem charitatis accipientium. Anselm. in. 1. Corin. 10.
We break and divide the Bread into many parts, to declare the unity of the
love of them, that receive it. Accipientium.
Here note: Anselmus says, this declaration of unity stands in receiuinge
of the Sacraments, and not only in lookinge on. Neither does Cyrillus say,
Cyrellus in Johan. li. 11. ca. 26.
they that hear Mass, but they yt receive the Mystical Benediction, are one
Body both with Christ, and also between them selves. Like as S. Paul also
says, 1. Corinthians. 10.
The Bread that we break, is the Communication of the Lords Body. And we
being many are al one Bread, and one Body, as many as be partakers of one
Bread. Whereunto agree these words of S. Hierome spoken in the behalf of
Christ. Hieron. in Ecclesiast. ca. 3.
Benedic haereditati tuae, quam per Corporis and sanguinis mei Mysterium in
ecclesia congregasti.

Bliss thine inheritance, which thou have geathered together in the Church,
by the Mystery of my Body and Blood: De Ecclesias. Hierar. Ca. 3. (...).
And Dionysius, The common and peaceable distribution of one, and the same
Bread and Cup, prescribes a godly concord unto them, as unto men fed
together with one food. And thus as M. Hardinge has truly said, Cyrillus
and Dionysius agree in one: but both together against him: both utterly
condemninge his Private Mass.

M. Hardinge. The.14. Division.
And therefore that one may communicate with an other, though they be not
together in one place, (which M. Iuel denies with as peeuis he an argument
of the use of excommunication, as any of al those is, that he scoffeth at some
Catholic writers for) 24 The 24. untruth. There appears no such thing in
any ancient Father.
and that it was thought lawful and godly by the Fathers of the ancient
Church, near to the Apostles time, it may be well proved by diverse good
authorities.

The B. of Sarisburie.
I used the Pulpite as a place of reverence, and not of scoffinge. Only I
thought good to lay out the weakness of sundry reasons alleged on your
side, that the people might see upon how sclender grounds your Religion
stands. And thus I did having just occasion thereunto of the unjust
reports moved in corners by you and others, whereby you bare the people in
hand, that al our doctrine was light, and childishe, and not woorthe the
hearing. Therefore that the people having taken some taste of the arguments
on both parts, might be the better hable to judge of both, I showed forth
this argument of Pope Inn^centius, The Sun is greater then the Moon, De
Maioritate and obedientia Ca. solitae.
Ergo the Pope is greater then the Emperor: and the Elose in the Margin upon
the same: The Sun is seven and fifty times greater then the Moon: Ergo, the
Pope is seven and fifty times greater then the Emperor. De Mayor. and
obedient. vnam Sanctam.
And likewise the argument of Pope Bonifacius the eight. In principio creauit
Deus Coelum and terram, non in principijs: In the beginning, and not in
sundry beginninges, God made Heaven and Earth: Ergo, the Pope has the
soueraintie over al Kings and Princes. He that shows the weakness of these
arguments and such other, deserves not therefore by and by to be called a
scoffer.

Further touching Excommunication, Excommunication.
I said thus, If the Priest that says Mass in Louaine, may communicate
with the Priest that says Mass in Calicute, which is M. Hardinges greatest
ground for his Private Mass, then has the Church so far forth as
touches the Priests, lost the whole use of Excommunication. For the party
excommunicate being a Priest, might say, he would say Mass, and so receive
the Communion, even with the Bishop of whom he were excommunicate, whether he
would or no. This saying M. Hardinge has condemned for peeuishe, by his
authority only, and not by reason.

In deed the Church of Rome, as it has lost the whole use of the holy
Communion, so has it also lost ye whole use of Excommunication. For these two
words be of contrary natures, and the one of them has his name of the
loosinge of the other. In the primitive Church as all the Godly were freely
received to the holy Mysteries, so by the authority of the Spirit of God, the
apparent wicked and ungodly were removed, and that with great discretion,
according to the enormitie and quality of the faults: as it is specially
noted by Gregorius Naeocaesariensis Gregorius Naeocaesariensis.
in a Canon touching the same. The greatest offenders were utterly excluded
from the Congregation, Lugentes.
as men not meet to be in the company of the godly. Others were suffered to
enter into the temple, Audientes.
and to hear the Sermon, but at the beginning of the prayers they were
removed, as men not meet to pray with their brethren. Others were suffered to
be present at the prayers, Precantes.
but at the beginning of the Communion were willed to depart. The rest were
the godly that remained still, and heard the Sermon, and continued in prayer,
and received the holy Mysteries altogether. Historia tripar. lib. 9. ca. 35.
The order hereof is declared by Cassiodorus out of Socrates. Stant rei, and
velut in lamentationibus constituti: and cum sacra celebratio fuerit adimpleta,
Communionem non percipiunt. They stand woefully, and as it were men in
lamentation, and in heaviness: and when the holy celebration is ended, they
receive not the Communion. It follows, Constituto vero tempore, velut quoddam
debitum exoluentes, cum populo Communionem participant, At the time appointed,
as if they had discharged a certain debte, they Communicate together with the
people. Thus the offenders were put from the Communion, and all the rest
received together. Excommunication.
And therefore it is decreed by ye Canons of ye Apostles, Canon. Apostol.
Canon. 9.
That al Faithful that enter into the Church, and hear the Scriptures, and
do not continue out the Prayers, nor receive the Communion, should be
excommunicate, as men woorkinge the trouble and disorder of the Church. And
the people said unto Timotheus being a Bishop of the Arrians, and
nevertheless a man of mild and gentle nature, and shunninge his company for
the one, and yet louinge him for the other: Although we Communicate not with
thee, yet we love thee notwithstanding.

Now, if M. Hardinges principle stand for good, that the Priest sayeinge his
Private Mass, may receive the Communion with all others in other places that
do the like, then can no Priest be excommunicate. For notwithstanding neither
any other Priest, nor any of the people will receive with him, yet may he say a
Private Mass, and by M. Hardinges new divise straight way communicate with
them al.

But for better declaration of this matter, it is commonly taught in Schools,
that Priuatio praesupponit habitum, that is, that the loosinge of a thing
first presupposes the having of the same: for no man can loose that thing,
that he has not. Therefore to say, there is Excommunication from the
Sacraments, where as is no Communion of the Sacraments: Or that he is put
from the Lords Table, that neither is at, nor coming to the Table: Or that he
is Excommunicate, that is only forbidden to hear Mass: Or that the people
does sufficiently receive the Sacraments by the mouth of the Priest: Uerely
this kind of learning in the Primitive Church would have seemed not only
peevish, but also fantastical and mere Frantike. Thus the Bishop of Rome (as
it is said, uses to Excommunicate Locustes, Snakes, Caterpillars, and other
like woormes: and Coniurers use to Excommunicate their Devils: as though these
creatures, saving the force of their authority, were otherwise meet enough to
receive the Communion.

M. Hardinge. The.15. Division.
Irenaeus writing to Victor Bishop of Rome concerning the keeping of Easter,
Ecclesiast. hist. lib. 5. ca. 24.
as Eusebius Caesariensis recites, to th'entente Victor should not refrain
from their Communion which kept Easter after the custom of the Churches in
Asia founded by S. John the Evangelist, shows that when Bishops came from
foreign parts to Rome, the Bishops of that see used to send to them, if they
had been of the Catholic faith, the Sacrament, to receive, whereby mutual
Communion between them was declared. Graeca sic habe^t aliter qua^ Ruffini
versio vulgata.
Irenaeus his words be these, Qui fuerunt ante te presbyteri, etia^ cum non
ita obseruarent, presbyteris Ecclesiarum, (cum Roman accederent) Eucharistia^
mittebant. The Priests (by which name in this place Bishops are understood)
that were before thy time, though they kept not Easter as they of Asia did, yet
when the Bishops of the Churches there came to Rome, did send them the
Sacrament. 25 The.25. untruth. Irenaeus says not, they did Communicate
together.
Thus those Bishops did Communicate together before their meeting in one place.

The B. of Sarisburie.
This story is common and known to many. The weast Church in keepinge of
Easter day followed S. Peter: the East Church followed S. John, and keapte it
otherwise. Hereof grew contention, and brake out into cruel heates. Uictor the
Bishop of Rome on the one side: and Polycarpus the Bishop of Smyrna on the
other side: both godly men, and both Martyrs. Each part would have the other
to yield. Uictor being a man of a fiery nature, was minded to Excommunicate
the whole Church of Asia, and al others what so ever, that in keepinge of
Easter day would not follow the Church of Rome. Irenaeus the Bishop of Lions
hearing thereof, wrote unto him a sharp letter out of France, willinge him in
anywise to proceed no further: for that it might tend to such a breach, as
would not afterward be recovered. Emonge other words he says thus, as it is
here alleged: The Priests, that were (in Rome) before thee, notwithstanding
they keopte not the Easter as they of Asia do, yet they sent the Sacrament
unto the Priests of those Churches, when they came to Rome. Hereof M. Hardinge
concludethe: Ergo, these Bishops did Communicate before they met together:
and notes also by the way in the Margin, that the Greek in Eusebius
differs from the common Translation of Rufinus. And yet is the same
Translation alleged and used in the book of Councels among the Decrees of
Uictor. Council. tomo. 1. inter decreta Victoris.
But if M. Hardinge had marked the matter well, he should have seen that his
own Translation in English varieth also somewhat from the Greek.

In this short story three things specially may be noted. First, that
Irenaeus a Bishop of France durst to write so roughly to the Bishop of Rome,
with out any style of Superiority, only calling him, and al others before him
Bishops of Rome, by the name of Priests.

Secondly, that so notable learned men and Martyrs of Christ, agreeing
otherwise in the substance of Religion, yet notwithstanding in certain small
matters of no great weight, contended and striued so extremely, and so long,
and could in no wise be reconciled. Which thing well considered, M. Harding
has less cause to triumph, if God have suffered any such sparkle of
dissension in ye special members of his Church in these days.

Thirdly, where was then that great superiority of the Bishop of Rome, when,
notwithstanding his threats and commandments, the Church of this Island of
Britain well near until seven hundred years after Christ, Beda Eccl. histo.
lib. 3. ca. 25.
in the keepinge of Easter day followed the manner of the Greek Church, without
any regard therein had to the Church of Rome?

But to the matter, these Bishops (says M. Hardinge) Communicated together
before they met. If he mean, in Faith, and Religion, it is not denied: if,
in the use of the Sacraments, it is not proved. In my judgment this word
Eucharistia, in this place of Irenaeus, signi^eth not the Sacrament already
consecrate, but rather other common Bread, wherewith one Bishop used then to
present an other, as with a special token of consent in Religion, and Christian
concord: which Bread the receiver afterward if he thought it good, might
use at ye holy Ministration. In that sense it seems Paulinus wrote unto S.
Augustine, Paulinus ad Augustine. Epist. 35.
Panem vnum sanctitati tuae charitatis gratia misimus, in quo etia^ Trinitatis
soliditas continetur. Hunc panem tu eulogiam esse facies dignatione sumendi. In
token of mutual love, I have sent unto thee one loaf of Bread, in which
also the soundenesse of the holy Trinity is contained. This loaf you shall
cause to be a louinge present of my behalf vouche-sauinge to receive it.
Paulin. ad August. epist. 36.
And in the next Epistle folowinge. Quinque Panes misimus tibi pariter and
filio nostro Licentio. Non enim potuimus in benedictione secernere, quem
cupimus eadem nobis gratia penitus annectere. Five loaves have I sent unto
thee, and unto my Son Licentius. For I could not sever him in blissing, whom
I desire thoroughly to ioigne with us in grace. Hereby it may appear that this
Bread was not the Sacrament: and namely by that Paulinus writes in an other
place: Paulin. ad August. epist. 31.
Panem vnum, quem vnanimitatis indicio misimus charita^i tuae, rogamus vt
accipiendo benedicas. I pray you to take and bless this one Loaf, which I
have se^te unto you in token of unity. If it had been already Consecrate, he
would not have desired S. Augustine to have blist it.

But Irenaeus uses this word Eucharistia, which is taken for the Sacrament.
I answer: it might so be called, for that it was prepared for the Sacrament.
How be it, De praescriptione aduersus haereticos.
herein I will not strive. Tertullian Tertullian.
names it Hospitalitatis Contesseratio, and seems to speak it of the
Sacrament. Which thing being also granted in this place of Irenaeus, let us
now see M. Hardinges reasons.

The Bishop of Rome says he, sent ye Sacrament unto them, that came out of
Asia: Ergo, there was Private Mass.

This Conclusion is far fette, and hangs loosely. For I might demand,
which then of the three said Mass? He that sent the Sacrament: or he that
received it: or else the Messenger that brought it? It were a strange matter to
see a Mass, and yet no man to say Mass. Uerely Irenaeus has not one word,
neither of the Communion, nor of the Mass: onelesse M. Hardinge will say, that
Mittere Mittere Eucharistiam.
is Latin to Communicate: or Mittere Eucharistiam, is Latin to say Mass.

If it were Common Bread, then was it but a present: If it were the Sacrament,
then was it to be received, not straight upon the way, or perhaps late in the
night, or in the Inn at the common table emonge other meats: but afterward
at his pleasure in his Congregation. Thus we see this place first is doubtful:
and being never so plain, yet it proves nothing for Private Mass. But
immediately after follows a manifest mention, in what order the Bishops used
then to Communicate together: which thing M. Hardinge thought better to
dissemble. (...).
Cum res ita haberent, Communicabant inter se mutuo, and in Ecclesia Anicetus
concessit Eucharistiam Polycarpo. The matters between them thus standinge, they
Communicated together: and Anicetus in the Church grannted the Sacrament, or
the Ministration of the Sacrament unto Polycarpus.

Here mark, good Christian Reader, then they Communicated, says Irenaeus,
when they met in the Church: and not before they met together, as M.
Hardinge says. Anicetus, as Irenaeus says, received the Sacrament with
Polycarpus in the Church: and not, as M. Hardinge seems to say, in his Inn
or Hosterie.

Now, the truth of the matter standinge thus, what has M. Hardinge here found
for his Private Mass?

M. Hardinge. The.16. Division.
Justinius the Martyr likewise describing the manner and order of Christian
Religion of his time touching the use of the Sacrament, says thus: Apolog. 2.
Finitis ab ^o, qui praefectus est, gratijs and orationibus, and ab vniuerso
populo facta acclamatione, Diaconi quos ita vocamus, vnicuique tunc temporis
praesenti, Panis and aquae, and vini consecrati dant participationem, and ad
eos, qui non adsunt, deferunt. When the Priest has made an end of thanks and
Prayers, and all the people thereto have said Amen: They which we call Deacons,
give to every one then present, Bread, and water, and wine Consecrated to take
part of it for their housel, and for those that be not present, they bear it
home to them. Thus in that time they that served God together in the common
place of Prayer, and some others that were absent, let from coming to their
company by sickness, business, or otherwise, 26 The.26. untruth. Justinius
speaks not one word of Communicating together.
Communicated together, though not in one place: and no man cried out of
breakinge the Institution of Christ.

And because M. Iuel is so vehement against Private Mass, for that the Priest
receives the Sacrament alone, and triumphs so much as though he had woonne
the field, making himself merry with these words in deed without cause:
where then was the Private Mass? where then was the Single Communion all this while? He means for the space of six hundred years after Christ, as
there he expresses: I will bring in good evidence and witness, that long
before S. Gregory's time that he speaks of, ye from the beginning of the
Church, faithful persons both M. Hard. brings one thing for another Sole
Receiuinge in steed of Private
men and women received the Sacrament alone, and were never therefore reproved
as breakers of Christ's Institution. And er I enter into the rehearsal of the
places which I am hable to show for this purpose, one question I demand of
M. Iuel. If they which remained at home, of whom Justinius Martyr writes,
received the Communion by them selves alone lawfully, why may not the Priest
do the same in the Church, seruinge God in most devout wise in the holy
Sacrifice of the Mass, lacking compartners without any his defaulte? Mass:
me^ and vvome^ in steed of the Priest.
Have the Sacramentar^es any Religion to condemn it in the Priest, and to
allow it in lay folk? what is in the Priest that should make it unlawful to
him, more then to the people? Or may a lay man or woman receive it kept a
long time, and may not a Priest receive it forthwith, so soon as he has
consecrated and offered? And if case of necessity be alleged for the lay, the
same may no less be alleged for the Priests also wanting compartners without
their defaulte. For otherwise the memory and recordinge of our Lords death
should not according to his commandment be celebrated and done. well, now to
these places.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Good reader, beh^lde not the names of these Fathers here alleged, but rather
weighe their sayings. M. Harding has brought them for his Mass: but they
witness clearly and fully against his Mass: and of al others none more
pregnant, or plain then Justinius Martyr: whereof thou have good occasion to
consider, how faithfully these men demean them selves in the allegation of the
Doctors.

Justinius Justinius Martyr in Apologia 2.
touching this matter writes thus: Toward the end of the Prayers, each of
us with a kiss saluteth other. Afterward unto him that is the chief emonge
the brethren, is delivered Bread, and a Cup mingled with wine, and water:
which he having received renders praise and glory unto the Father of al
things, in the name of the Son and the Holy Ghost, and yields thanks a
great space, for that he is thought worthy of these things.

Which being orderly done, the people blesses or confirms his Prayer, and
thankesgeuing saying, (...).
Amen etc. This ended, they that emonge us be called Deacons, deliver to every
of them that be present, the Bread, Wine, and Water, which are Consecrate
with thankesgeuinge, and carry of the same to them that be absent. Here is set
forth the whole and plain order of the holy Ministration used in the Church
at that time. The Priest prays and gives thanks in the Uulgare tongue:
Th^order of the Ho^y Ministration in Iustines time.
the whole Congregation hears his words, and confirms the same, saying
Amen. The holy Communion is Ministered to the people in both kinds: and all the
whole Church receiu^th together. I marvel much wherein M. Harding can liken
any part hereof to his Private Mass: Unless it be for that, as he said
before, every Private Mass is common, so ^e will now say, every Communion is
Private.

Let us a little compare Iustines Mass, Iustines Communion and M. Hardinges
Mass compared together.
and M. Hardinges Mass both together. And to pass by all other circumstances
of difference, in Iustines Mass all the people did receive: in M. Hardinges
Mass none of the people do receive. In Iustines Mass none absteined: in M.
Hardinges Mass al abstain. In Iustines Mass a portion was sent to the
absent: in M. Hardinges Mass there is no portion delivered, no not unto the
present. Withwhat countenance then can any man allege the authority of
Iustine to prove the antiquity of Private Mass?

M. Iuel triumphs, says M. Hardinge, and makes him self merry, as if he
had won the field. No, no, M. Iuel triumphs not, but gives al triumph,
victory, and glory unto God, Psalm. 110.
that will subdue al them that withstand his truth, and make his enemies his
foot stool.

I will bring good evidence and witness (says M. Hardinge) that from the
beginning of the Church faithful persons both men and women received the
Sacrament alone. I have no great cause to doubt these witnesses: for
excepting only the Fable of Amphilochius, and John the Almonare, which were
not woorthe the reckening, I alleged all the rest in mine own Sermon. I knew
them, and had weighed them, and therefore I alleged them. That certain godly
persons both men and women in time of persecution, or of sickness, or of
other necessity received ye Sacrament in their howses, it is not denied,
neither is it any parcel of this question.

But if M. Hardinge could have proved that any man, or woman in the Primitive
Church ever said Private Mass, then had he answered somewhat to the purpose.

He seems to reason thus: Some received the Sacrament alone: Ergo, there was
Private Mass.

The folly of this argument will the better appear by the like.

Women received the Sacrament alone: Ergo women said Private Mass.

But (sa^the M. Harding) it was lawful for lay men to receive alone: why then
was it not lawful for the Priest? If he could have proved his Mass by
Priests, he would never have sought help at lay men's hands. How be it, this
doubt is soon answ^ared. For he knows by his own learning, that it is
lawful for a Priest to say Mass: Yet is it not lawful for a lay man to do
the same. Of the other side, it is lawful (as he says) for the lay man to
receive in one kind: yet is not the same lawful for the Priest. But if he will
needs take a president of lay men for Priests to follow, let him rather reason
thus: This manner of Private receiving at home was not lawful for the lay men:
Council.
for it was abolished by godly Bishops in General Council: Caesaraugustan.
Cap. 3.
Ergo, it was not lawful for the Priest to say Private Mass.

M. Hardinge. The.17. Division.
Tertullian exhortinge his wife that if he died before her, Proufes for Private
Mass
she marry not again, specially to an Infidel* shewinge that if she did, it
would be hard for her to observe her religion without great inconvenience,
Lib. 2. ad vxor^.
says thus: Non sciet maritus, quid secreto ante omnem cibum gustes? Et si
sciuerit, Panem, non illum credet esse, qui dicitur. Will not thy husband know
what thou eatest secretly before al other meat? And if he do know, he will
believe it to be Bread, and not (27) The.27. untruth. The translation
vvilfully corrupted: It, violently turned into, Him.
him, who it is called. He has the like saying in his book De Corona
Militis. which place plainly declares unto us the belief of the Church then
in three great points by M. Iuel and the reast of our Gospellers utterly
denied. The one that the Communion may be kept: the second, that it may be
received by one alone without other company: the third, that the thing
reverently, and deuoutely before other meats received, is not Bread, as the
Infidels then, and the Sacramentaries now believe: but he who it is said to
be of Christian people, or who it is called, that is 28 The.28. untruth. The
Sacrament was never called our maker* or Redeemer by any of th^olde Fathers.
our Maker and Redeemer, or, which is the same, our Lords Body. And by this
place of Tertullian, as also by diverse other ancient Doctoures, we may
gather, that in the times of persecution the manner was, that the Priests
delivered to devout and godly men and women the Sacrament Consecrated in the
Church to carry home with them, to receive a part of it every morning
fasting, as their devotion served them, so secreatly as they might, that the
Infidels should not epsy them, nor get any knowledge of the holy Mysteries.
And this was done because they might not assemble them selves in solemn
congregation, for fear of the Infidels amongst whom they dwelt. Neither
should the case of necessity have excused them of the breach of Christ's
commandment, if the Sole Communion had been expressly forbidden, as we are
borne in hand by those that uphold the contrary doctrine. And Origin that
ancient Doctor, and likewise S. Augustine does write of the great reverence,
fear, and warenesse, that the men and women used in receiving the Sacrament in
a clean linen clothe to carry it home with them for the same purpose. S.
Cyprian writes of a woman that did the like, though unworthily after this
sort. Cum quaedam arcam suam, in qua domini sanctum fuit, In sermon de lapsis.
manibus indignis tentasset aperire, igne inde surgente, deterrita est ne
auderet attingere. When a certain woman went about to open her Chest, wherein
was the holy thing of our Lord, with unworthy hands, she was fraide with
fire that rose from thence, that she durst not touch it. This place of S.
Cyprian reports the manner of keepinge the Sacrament at home to be received of
a devout Christian person alone at convenient time. The example of Serapion of
whom Dionysius Alexandrinus writes, Ecclesiast. hist. lib. 6. cap. 44.
recited by Eusebius, confirms our purpose of the single Communion. This
Serapion one of Alexandria, had committed Idolatry, and liyng at the point of
death, that he might be reconciled to the Church before he departed, sent to
the Priest for the Sacrament. The Priest being himself sick and not hable to
come, gave to the ladde that came of that errant, Parum Eucharistiae, quod
infusum iussit seni praeberi, A little of the Sacrament, which he commanded to
be powered into the old man's mouth. And when this solemnity was doom (says
the Story) as though he had broken certain Chains and ^yues he gave up his
ghost chearefully.

The. B. of Sarisburie.
M. Hardinge sh^oteth fair, but far from the mark. To prove Private Mass in
the Primitive Church, for lack of Priests he allegeth Tertullians wife,
certain women out of Cyprian, and Serapions boy: not ye fittest people that
might have been found to say Mass. And yet that the folly might the more
appear, he has besides given a special note in the Margin of his book, by
these words, Proufes for Private Mass. Whereof I conceive some hope, that he
minds no more to slip away under the color of single Communion, as he has
done hitherto: but simply, and plainly, as he has here noted unto the
world, to stand upon the bare terms of Private Mass. For else his note was
not worth the noting.

As touching Tertullian, we must remember that the faithful in that time, for
fear of the Tyrannes under whom they lived, were often driven to pray a
sunder. Wherefore when they might priu^ly assemble together, besides that they
presently received there, they reserved certain portions of the Mysteries to
be received afterward in their houses at home, to put them daily the better in
remembrance, that they were the members of one Church.

This manner of the Church considered, Tertullian being a Priest, as S. Hierome
writes of him, Hieronymus: De Ecclesiast. Scrip. Tertullian a married Priest.
and having a wife, wrote unto her an exhortation, that if it should please
God, to take him first from the world, that she would remain still unmarried,
or at the least not match with any Heathen, showing her the dangers that
thereof might ensue: that she should be suffered neither to keep the solemn
feasts, nor to watch, nor to pray with the Congregation. Among other things
he says thus: Tertullian, li. 2. ad vxorem.
And will not thy husband know, what thou eatest before other meats? And if he
know it, he will believe it to be Bread, but not that Bread that it is called.

Here M. Harding, as if the Gospel of Christ were become odious unto him, in
scorn and disdain calls us Gospellers, Gospellers.
by the name of that Gospel, that he so wilfully has forsaken, returning to
his old vomit. And out of these words of Tertullian three things (he
says) he will teach us: of which three things notwithstanding his Private
Mass is none. Of the first we have to speak otherwhere. Of the second there
is no question. In the third M. Hardinge has manifestly corrupted both the
words, and meaning of Tertullian. He says, The thing, that we receive is
no Bread: but so Tertullian says not. His words be these, Thy husband will
think it (only) Bread, and not that Bread that it is called, That is to say
the Sacrament of Christ's Body: or the Mystery of any Holy thing, as
Christian men believe of it: like as Chrysostom also says of ye water of
Baptism, Ethnicus cum audit lauacrum Baptismi, Chrysostom. in 1. ad Cor. hom. 7
persuadet sibi simpliciter esse aquam. A Heathen when he hears of the bathe
of Baptism, believes it is nothing else but plain w^ter.

But that the thing, which our bodily mouth receives, is very Bread, both
the Scriptures and also the old Catholic Fathers have put it out of doubt.
S. Paul five times in one Chapter names it Bread.

1. Cor. 11.
Cyrillus says, Cyrill. in Johan. li. 4. ca 14.
Christ unto his faithful Disciples gave pieces of Bread. And S. Augustine
says, The thing that ye see is Bread, as your eyes bear you witness. I
pass by Gelasius, In sermon ad Infantes: citatur a Beda.
Theodoretus, Chrysostom, Origin, Justinius Martyr, Irenaeus, Clemens, and
others, who altogether with one consent have confessed, that in the Sacrament
there remains the nature and substance of Bread. Wherefore it is much
presumed of M. Hardinge to say, 1. Cor. 10.
there remains no Bread, specially having nothing to bear him in his
Author here alleged.

Yet for advantage he has also falsified Tertullian, Tertullian falsified by
M. Har. Ludoui. Viues.
Englishing these words, Illum panem, Him, as if it were the person of a man:
as Thomas Ualois writing upon S. Augustine, De ciuitate Dei, has turned this
word, Apex, which was the tufte or creaste of the Flamines hatte, De Ciui.
Dei li. 2. ca. 13.
into a certain Chronicler that wrote stories: Or as the Divines of late years
upon the Gospel of S. John, John. 19.
of this Greek word Lonche, which signifies a Spear, have made Longinus
the Blind knight. Petrus Crini. li. 13. ca. 6.
If Tertullian had not meante, Illum Panem, that Bread, he would not have
said, Illum, at al: but rather Illud, referringe the same unto Corpus. A small
difference between Him, and It. Codrus Vrceus sermon. 8.
So was there small difference between Sibboleth, and Shibboleth. Yet was it
sufficient to discrie the traitor. Iudicum. 12.


And where as M. Hardinge thus hardly and violently contrary to the phrase and
manner of speech, and as it may be doubted, contrary to his own knowledge and
conscience, has Translated, Illum Panem, Him, so as, to my remembrance never
did man before, meaning it was the very person of a man, that the woman had in
her hand, and did eat before other meats, Cyrillus Cyrillus contra
obiectiones
says, Non asseueramus anthropophagiam: We teach not our people to eat the
person of man.

But who can better expound Tertullians mind, Theodoreti.
then Tertullian him self? Tertull. De Corona Militis.
In his Book De Corona militis, speakinge of the same matter, he calls it
Sacramentum Eucharistiae, The Sacrament of thanks geuinge. And against Marcion
he writes thus, Tertull. contra Marcionem li. ^. August. contra Maximinum li.
3. ca. 22.
Christus non reprobauit panem, quo Corpus suum repraesentat. Christ refused
not the Bread, wherewith he represents his Body. And S. Augustine likewise
says, In sacramentis Videndum est, non quid sint, sed quid significent.
Touching Sacraments, we must consider, not what they be in deed, but what
they signify. So also says S. Chrysostom. Ego non aspectu iudico ea, quae
videntur, Chrysostom. in. 1.
sed mentis oculis Corpus Christi video. I judge not those things which are
seen, Cor. hom. 7.
after the outward appearance, but with the eyes of my mind I se the Body of
Christ.

This is the thing that the husband being a Heathen could not see. For
beleeuinge not in Christ, he could not understand that the Bread should be
the Sacrament or Mystery of Christ's Body.

And that this was the very meaning of Tertullian, it may well appear by the
words that immediately follow. Sine gemitu* sine suspicione panis, an ven^nl.
The husband ( says he) will doubt, whether it be poison or no: and
therefore will dissemble, and bear for a while, that at length he may accuse
his wife for poysoninge before a Judge, and do her to death, and have her
dower.

Touching S. Augustine and Origin, the portion so taken was to be used with
reverence, as being the Sacrament of Christ's Body: and so ought we also
reverently to have and to order the water of Baptism: the Book of the Gospel,
and al other things that be of God: as the Jews were also commanded to keep
their Manna reverently in a golden pot. 1. q. 1. Interrogo vos.
Tell me, says S. Augustine Whether of these two things, trow ye, to be the
greater, the Body of Christ (meaning thereby the Sacrament of Christ's Body)
or the word of Christ? Idem de te^pore.
If ye will answer truly, The word of Christ is no less, then the Body of
Christ.
ye must needs say, that the word of Christ is no less then the Body of
Christ. Therefore look, with what diligence ye take heed, when the Body of
Christ is ministered unto you, that no part thereof fall unto the ground: even
so with like ^^igence must ye take heed, that the word of God being once
received, be not lost from a pure heart. Chryso. in opere imperfe. hom. 11.
Likewise S. Chrysostom touching the same, Si haec vasa sanctificata ad
priuatos vsus transfer si^ periculosum est, in quibus non est veru^ Corpus
Christi, sed Mysterium Corporis Christi continetur: The very Body of Christ is
not contained in the holy vessels.
If the matter be so dangerous, to put these sanctified vessels unto private
uses, wherein is contained not the very Body of Christ, but the Mystery or
Sacrament of Christ's Body etc. Al these authorities do declare, that the
Sacraments of Christ ought discreetly and reverently to be used.

The story that S. Cyprian reports, Cyprian. De lapsis Sermo. 5.
as it shows the manner of keeping of the Sacrament, so it seems also to
show, that God was offended with the same* The like whereof has often been
seen in the water of Baptism, and in other Holy things, as appears by
Nicephorus Nicepho. li. 14. Ca. 17.
and others in sundry places. Therefore this authority serves M. Hardinge to
small purpose, unless it be to prove, that as God was then displeased with
Sole receiuinge in private houses, so he is now displeased with Sole receiving
in the Mass.

Concerning the story of Serapion, here are interlaced many fair words for
increase of credit, that it was written by Dionysius Alexandrinus, and recited
by Eusebius, as though the sick man had only desired his Housel before he
departed, and nothing else. But the special matter whereupon the story is
grounded, is passed by. Eusebius records in plain words, that the book,
wherein Dionysius wrote this story, was entitled De Poenitentia. Whereby he
gives to understand, that the Sacrament then was not generally sent home to
al men's houses, but only unto them that were excommunicate, and might not
receive in the Congregation emonge the faithful, and now lay in despair of
life.

The case stood thus: Eusebius li.6. ca. 44.
Serapion in the time of persecution for fear of death had offered Sacrifice
unto an Idol. The faithful being therewith fore offended, put him out of
their Congregation, and gave him over to Satan. He being thus least as an
Heathen and an Idolater, might neither resort to the common Church, nor
Pray, nor receive the holy Communion, or any other spiritual comfort among
his brethren. So hard the Church was then to be entreated for them, that had
fallen back into Idolatry. After he had made al means, and had with tears
besought his brethren, and was no way considered, through heaviness of mind
he began to droope, and fell sick, and for three days lay speachelesse,
and without sense. The fourth day being somewhat revived, he said to them
that were about him, O how long will ye keep me here? Send for one of the
Priests (that I may be restored before I depart.)

His mind was tormented with consideration of the state he stood in, for that
he had forsaken God. The Priest being sick him self, in token he was
restored, and might depart as a member of Christ, sent unto him the Sacrament
by his boy. The rest that M. Hardinge adds (And this solemnity being
done, says the story, as though he had broken certain chains and gives, he
gave up the spirit chearefully) All this is set to, either by Ruffinus,
Ruffinus. li. 6. ca. 34.
or by some other, I know not by whom, and is no part of the story. For
neither does Dionysius, nor Eusebius, in the Original make any mention either
of solemnity, or of Chains, or Gives, or of cheerfulness of Serapions
departinge: but only thus: And swallowinge down a little, straight ways he
yielded up the Ghost. (...).
As for his joyful departure, I doubt nothing. But any great solemnity
there could not be between a man in that case, and a boy alone, specially
having no such outward pomp, as has been used of late to make it solemn.

Now must I desire thee, gentle Reader, to have an eye a little backewarde to M.
Hardinges note, given thee for a remembrance in the Margin by these words,
Proufes for Private Mass: which note must needs be in the foot and
conclusion of al his arguments. Therefore of these stories here by him
reported we^ must conclude thus: Tertullians wife, and the woman of whom
Cyprian speaks, received the Sacrament alone, Ergo, Tertullians wife, and the
other woman said Private Mass. Or thus, Serapions boy ministered the Sacrament
to his Master, Ergo, Serapions boy said Private Mass. For if the conclusion
be otherwise, we conclude one thing for an other. And in deed M. Hardinge
may as certainly say, This action was a Mass, as he can say, Serapions boy was
a Priest.

M. Hardinge. The.18. Division.
Of keeping the Sacrament secretly at home, and how it might be received of
devout persons alone without other company, I ween none of the ancient.
Doctors wrote so plainly, as S. Basil in an Epistle that he wrote to a noble
woman called Caesaria, which is extant in Greek, where he says further* that
this manner began not in his time first, but long before: his words be
these, Illud aute^ in persecutionis temporibus necessitate cogi quempiam, non
praesente sacerdote aut ministro communionem propria manu sumere, nequaquam
esse grave, superuacaneum est demonstrate, propterea quod longa consuetudine,
and ipso rerum vsu confirmatum est. Omnes enim in Eremis solitariam vitam
agentes, vbi non est sacerdos, Communionem domi servants, a seipsis
Communicant. In Alexandria vero, and in Aegypto, vnusquisque eorum qui sunt de
populo, plurimum habet Communionem in domo sua. Semel enim sacrificium
sacerdote consecrante and distribuente, merito participare, and suscipere,
credere oporet. Etenim and in Ecclesia sacerdos dat partem, and accipit eam is
qui suscipit, cum omni liberate, and ipsam admouet ori propria manu. Idem
igitur est virtute, sieve vnam partem accipiat quisqua^ a sacerdote, sieve plures
parts simul. As concerning this, that it is no grievous offense, for one to
be driven by necessity in times of persecution to receive the Communion with
his own hand, no Priest nor Deacon being present, it is a thing
superfluous to declare, The.29. untruth, M. Hard. has corrupted the
translation. These words ( with them selves alone) are not in S. Basil.
for that by long custom and practice it has been confirmed and taken place.
For all they which live a solitary life in wilderness where no Priest is to
be had, keepinge the Communion at home, do Communicate with them selves alone.
And in Alexandria, and in Egypt, every one of the people for the most part,
has the Communion at home in his house. For when as the Priest has once
Consecrate and distribute the Host, it is reason we believe, that we ought
to be partakers of it, and he that takes it, receives it without al scruple
of conscience, and puts it to his mouth with his own hand. And so it is
of one virtue, whether anybody take one part of the Priest, or more parts
together. Thus far S. Basil. In this saieing of Basil, it is to be noted:
First that necessity here has respect to The.30. untruth. S. Basil says,
The Communicante received with his own hand even in the presence of the
Priest.
in that case the Sacrament might be received of a faithful person with his
own hand. And that for the ratifiyng of so dooinge he allegeth continuance of

Again, that holy Eremites living in wilderness aparte from company, and
also the devout

Finally, that whether a man take at the Priests hand the blessed Sacrament
in one piece or mo M. Iuels opinion that the Sacrament may not be received of
one without a certain number of Communicantes together, he would not so have
passed over that matter in silence, much less written so plainly of the
contrary. Now that the Communion thus kept in wilderness and in Egypt,
places of extreme heat, where wine in small quantity as is for that purpose
convenient, can not be long kept from sowringe, and chaungeing his nature,
was in the form of Bread only, and not also of wine: I differ to note it
here, because it pertains to the treatise of the next article.

The B. of Sarisburie.
This place of S. Basil we might have safely passed over without prejudice of
our cause, as touching other things impertinent, and not once making mention
of the Mass. Receiving with the hand.
Yet seeinge it has pleased M. Hardinge thus to color, and to embosse out
this aunciente Father, as if he alone of al others spoke most plainly of his
side, having notwithstanding both in this very self same place, and also in
other words immediately before, which M. Hardinge thought best of purpose to
dissemble, manifest record against Private Mass, I may not well utterly leave
him in silence.

First the case being supposed lawful for the people, both men and women to
take some portion of the Sacrament home with them, and to receive it alone
secretly, and at their pleasures: to make further doubt whether the party so
having it might touch it, and receive it, with his own hands, was a very
nice question, and meet for a Gentlewoman, as Caesaria was, to demand.

And so it seemed also to S. Basil, as may appear by his answer. For who so
ever has considered the old Fathers, shall find this matter fully debated by
the continual practice of the Church.

S. Cyprian shows that in his time the people received the holy Mysteries of
the Deacons with their hands: Cyprian. Sermo. 1. De Lapsis.
and that one that had committed Idolatry, and afterward came to receive the
Communion amongst the faithful, opened his hand, and found the Sacrament
turned into Ashes.

The like manner of receiuinge is recorded also by Tertullian. Tertullian. lib.
2. ad vxorem.
Dionysius Bishop of Alexandria has these words in an Epistle unto Sistus
the Bishop of Rome touching the same, speakinge of one that had received the
Communion in the Church: Eusebius li. 7. Ca. 9.
After he had heard the thanks geuinge, and had sounded Amen with the reast,
and had been at the Table, and had reached forth his hand to receive the
holy Food etc. Reached forth his hand.


Clemens of Alexandria thus utters the manner of the Church there: When
certain have divided the Sacrament, Clemens Alexandrin. Strom. li. 1.
as the order is, they suffer every of the people to take part of it.

Nouatus the Heretic, when he ministered the Communion to the people, used to
swear them by that they had in their hands, Eusebius lib. 6. Ca. 33.
that is to say, by the Sacrament, that they would no more return to
Cornelius.

S. Augustine writing against certain letters of Petilian, Augusti. contra.
literas Petiliani, li. 2. ca. 23. Theodoret. li. 5. ca. 18.
says thus, I speak of him whose Cosse of peace ye received at the
Ministration, and in whose hands ye laid the Sacrament. I leave the story
between S. Ambrose and the Emperor Theodosius, and other sundry like
authorities to the same purpose.

Yet because many have been superstitiously led, and simply seduced herein by
the doctrine of them, that say, O taste not this, O touch not this, which are
nothing else (as S. Paul says) but commandments and doctrines of men,
Ad Coloss. 2.
having a show of wisdom in superstition, and abasing of the mind, I think
it not amiss to note one special place out of the Council of Constantinople
concerning the same. Council. Constantinopol. 6. ca. 101.
The words of the Council be these, We do in no wise admit them, that in
steed of their hand make to them selves instruments of gold, or of any
other matter, for the receiuinge of the holy Communion, as men more regardinge a
dead metal, then the Image of God. And if any Priest receive such persons
with such instruments unto the Communion, sit him be Excommunicate, and him
likewise that brings them.

But if this gentlewomans doubt were not, whether a lay man might safely
touch the Sacrament, but only whether it were lawful for any such one to
minister the same unto his own mouth, Basilius ad Caesaria^ patritia^.
S. Basil says it is no question: custom already has made it good. For
says he, both the Eremites in the wilderness, and every of the people in
Egypt, and Alexandria, for the more part have the Sacrament at home, and each
of them doothe minister it unto him self.

Yea even in the Church, after that the Priest has distributed a portion of
the Sacrament, he that has received it, puts it to his mouth with his own
hand without any remorse or doubt of conscience: and whether he receive one
portion of the Priest or more, the effect and strength thereof is al one. This
is the very meaning of S. Basil: al be it for plainness sake reserving the
sense I have somewhat altered the words. But much I marvel, how M. Hardinge
can geather hereof his Private Mass.

Touching his five special notes, if we grant them thoroughly every one, yet
is he nothing the near his purpose. For his Mass is none of them.

The Eremites Sole receiuynge, as it nothing hinders us that deny not the
fact, so it nothing furthereth him, unless he will have lay men, and women to
do so still.

The reason that S. Basil makes of custom, and continuance being well
considered is very weak, both for many other good and just causes, and also
for that the same custom as it was never universally received, so upon better
advise by order of the Church it was clean abolished. For wise men in Gods
causes have evermore mistrusted the authority of Custom.

The Heretics in old time named Aquarij, that in the Holy Ministration used
water only, and no Wine, notwithstanding they manifestly brake Christ's
Iustitution as our Adversaries do now, yet they vphelde their doings therein
by long Custom. Ad Iubaian. De Haereticis Baptizan.
But S. Cyprian being then alive wrote thus against them: Victi ratione
opponunt consuetudinem, quasi consuetudo fit mayor veritate etc. Being
overcome with reason they defend them self by Custom, as though Custom were
better then the Truth. We may not prescribe of Custom, but we must
overcome with reason. Cyprian: ad Quirmum.
Custom without truth is the mother of error.

But be it that both the Reason were good, and the Custom that long sithence
has been abolished, Cyprian. ad Pompeium contra Epistol.
had remained still: Yet is not M. Hardinge hable out of this place precisely,
and undoubtedly to prove his Private Mass. For if a man should say, it may
possibly be, that these Eremites did not Minister severally each man to him
self alone, Stephani.
but one of them unto ye reast of the Eremites dwelling in the wilderness, as
it appears diuersely, they had times to meet, and to pray together: Or that
the householders in Egypt, and Alexandria, Ministered not only to them selves,
but also to their whole several families, as it is written of Hippolytus
Martyr, that being a lay man, he received the Communion of Justinius being a
Priest, and bare it home, and Ministered the same to his Wife, his Children,
and his Servants: If a man would thus say, perhaps M. Hardinge would
better bethink him self of his Conclusions. This sense may seem to stand
very well with S. Basiles words, notwithstanding M. Hardinge in his
Translation into English has openly falsified the same. For whereas it is
written in the Greek, and so likewise in the Latin, (...)
They receive of them selves, Which may well be understood, that one of them
received of an other for want of a Priest, he has otherwise wreasted it to
come to his tune, and has turned it thus: They do Communicate with themselves
alone: Wherein al be it I will not greatly strive, yet neither this word
Alone, nor these words with them selves, can be found either in the Greek,
or in the Latin.

This long allegation of S. Basiles words, with all the furniture thereof,
may shortly be geathered into this reason: These Eremites being no Priests
received alone: Ergo, These Eremites being no Priests said Private Mass.

Further M. Hardinge says, This Sole Receiving was allowed by custom, Ergo,
Private Mass likewise is lawful by custom.

This reason goes round against him self. For it may be well replied: This
Sole Receiuinge was an abuse, and therefore was abolished by the Church
notwithstanding custom: Ergo, Private Mass likewise is an abuse, and ought
to be abolished notwithstanding custom.

Now let us see, whether these very self words of S. Basil here alleged by
M. Hardinge, make any thing for the Holy Communion. And what authority can be
against us, if M. Hardinges own authorities, yea, as him self vaunteth, The
most manifest and plainest of al his authorities, be found with us? For trial
hereof we must resort, not into the wilderness, where as was neither
Priest, nor Deacon, as it is confessed, but unto the Churches that were in S.
Basiles time. So shall we soon see, whether the Ministration then used were a
Communion, or a Private Mass.

S. Basil in the same place says thus, We do Communicate four times in the
week: Basil. ad Caesariam patritia^.
upon the Sunday, Wensday, Friday, and Saturday. If we may found any thing
upon words, he says, We Communicate: he says not, we say Mass. And thus,
says S. Basil, we do four times in the week. Then had they not the Daily
Sacrifice, No Daily Sacrifice.
whereupon Private Mass is grounded. He much missereckeneth him self, that
says, that thing is daily done, which is done but four times in seven
days.

Moreover S. Basil says, After the Priest has once Consecrate, and divided
the Sacrifice, we must think that we ought to receive, (...) and to be
partakers of it (...)
accordingly. For in the Church the Priest gives port, and the Communicant
receives it with all freedom of conscience, and with his own hand puts it
to his mouth. Therefore is the virtue al one, whether it be one portion only
that he receives of the Priest, or more together.

Here mark well, good Reader, how many ways S. Basil overthrows M. Hardinges
Mass.

We do Communicate: M. Hardinge in his Mass does not Communicate.

Divides and Distributeth: M. Hardinge divides in deed, but distributeth
nothing.

The people receives: In M. Hardinges Mass the people receives not.

Each man receives with his own hand: In M. Hardinges Mass no man
Receives, no not with the Priests hand.

Had portions also delivered them to receive at home: In M. Hardinges Mass
there is no portion delivered unto the people, no not so much as presently to
be received in the Church.

Each man receives and eats for him self: In M. Hardinges Mass the whole
people eats by the mouth of the Priest. O what means M. Hardinge to bring
such witnesses for his Mass, as do, so openly witness against his Mass?
Who may trust him in the dark, that thus deals in the light?

M. Hardinge. The.19. Division.
It appears evidently by witness of S. Hierome also that this custom of
receiuinge the Communion Privately at home continued among Christian men at
Rome not only in time of persecution, but also afterward when the Church was
at reast and peace, so as the case of necessity can not here serve them for
mainteining of their strange negative in this point. These be his words:
Scio Romae hanc esse consuetudinem, In Apolog. aduersus Iouin. Romans 14.
vt fideles semper Christi Corpus accipiant, quod nec reprehendo, nec probo.
Vnusquisque enim in suo sensu abundat. Sed ipsorum conscientiam conuenio, qui
eodem die post coitum communicant, and iuxta Persium, noctem flumine purgant.
Quare ad Martyrs ire non audent? quare non ingrediuntur Ecclesias? An alius in
publico, alius in domo Christus est? Quod in ecclesia non licet, nec domi
licet. Nihil deo clausum est, and tenebrae quoque lucent apud Deum. Probet se
vnusquisque, and sic ad Corpus Christi accedat. I know this custom is at Rome
that Christian folk receive the body of Christ daily, which I do neither
reprove nor allow. For every man has enough in his own sense. But I appose
their conscience which do Communicate that same day as they have done
wedlock work, and as Persius says, do rince nightefilthe with runninge
water. Why dare not they go to Martyrs shrynes? why go not they into the
Churches? what, is there one Christ abroad, and an other Christ within the
house? what so ever is not lawful in the Church, neither at home is it lawful.
To God nothing is hidden: ye darkness also shines before God. Let every one
examine himself, and so come to the Body of Christ. S. Hierome reproves
this in the Romans, that where as S. Paul ordained, that for cause of Prayer
married folk should at times forbear their carnal imbracinges, they not
withstandinge that, though they had dooynge with their wives, yet received
their rightes nevertheless daily. And yet what day they had so done, they
durst not go to Churches, where Martyrs toumbes were, there to receive our
Lords Body.

For it is to be understood for better knowledge hereof, that such as knew
them selves to have done any uncleanness were afraid in the old time to come
to Martyrs Sepulchers. Hereof speaks S. Hierome, ad vigilantium, S. Aug.
Epistola 137. and Seuerus Sulpitius in vita. S. Martini dial. 3. cap. 7.
For there commonly by miracle such things were be wraied, and many times by
open confession of the parties, whether they would or no. Erasmus in his
scholies upon this place of S. Hierome says thus. Of this place we gather
that in the old time every one was wont to receive the body of Christ at
home in his house, that would. He says further, Idem videtur innuere Paulus,
cum ait: an domos non habetis ad manducandum? S. Paul (says he) seems to
mean the same thing where he says, Erasmus speaks of private receiving:
but not one word of Private Mass.
have ye not houses to eat in? Thus Erasmus gathers proof of Private, or as
M. Iuel gesteth, single Communion, out of the Scriptures, and he was as well
learned in them as M. Iuel is. Yet herein I leave Erasmus to his own defense.
By this we may understand that in the ancient times of the Church, the
receiving of the Communion of one by him self alone. S. Hierom reproves this
custom.
was well allowed. And though it was done but by one faithful person at once
in one place, yet was it called a Communion both of S. Basile, and also of S.
Hierome, clean contrary to M. Iuelles sense. It is to be judged that they
kn^we the institution of Christ, so well as he, or any other of these new
Masters, and that their conscience was such, as if Christ's ordenance therein
had been broken, they would not have winked at it, ne with their ungodly
silence confirmed such an ungodly custom. Verily for excuse of this sole
receiuinge, Thus he says, That is not lawful in the Church, is not lawful at
home.
necessity cannot justly be alleged.

The B. of Sarisburie.
How often will M. Hardinge allege the old Doctors against him self? Here he
brings in S. Hierome: and the first words that he could find for his
purpose, were these: I know the custom at Rome is this, Hieronym. in Apologia
aduersus Iouinianum.
that the Christian people there receive the Body of Christ every day. It
seems this custom grew first from Peter, and was planted in Rome. A man may
here well demand, when the custom was that the whole people should
communicate daily together, Where was then the Private Mass?
where then was the custom of Private Mass?

Bisides this, M. Hardinge to prove the custom of the peoples receiuinge at
home, has alleged S. Hierome, that earnestly reproves that custom, and would
not have them receive at home. S. Hieromes words be these: Why dare they not
go to the temples builte in the remembrance of Martyrs? Why go they not to
the Church? What, is there one Christ abroad, and an other Christ at home?
If the people did well, why does S. Hierome thus reprove them? If they did it,
why doothe M. Hardinge thus allow them?

Here M. Hardinge interlaceth other matter of the office of wedlock, the words
of Persius the Pagane Poet, and the superstitious Ceremony of the Heathens,
as I take it, little perteininge unto his Mass. Where as the whole people
received the holy Mysteries every day, the man and wife remembringe sometimes
what they had done between them selves, and thinkinge them selves for the same
not to be in so clean state of life, as the rest were, for y^ cause forbear
the Church for the time: and having the Sacrament sent unto them, received it
Privately at home. Unto this superstition S. Hierome him self gave great
occasion, many times both writing and speakinge unseemly of the state of
Marriage: in defense whereof S. Augustine wrote a Book against Iouinian
entitled De bono Coniugij: and S. Hierome afterward was driven to make his
answer by way of purgation unto Pammachius for the same. In this error were
diverse of the old learned Fathers. Tertullian says, I allow not Marriage:
for fornication and that stand both in one thing. Tertullian. in
exhortatione ad Castitatem. Origin. in Numeros Homil. 23.
Origin says, No man can offer the continual Sacrifice, that is to say, the
Sacrifice of Prayer, unless he be a Virgin. S. Hierome says, It is good not
to touch a woman: Therefore it is il to touch a woman. Upon occasion of
which error the people sometimes forbear the Churches where Martyrs were
buried.

Wherein M. Hardinges translation swarueth much from the Original. Hi^rony.
aduersus Ioum. lib. 1.
For in steed of Churches he has translated, Martyrs Shrines: as though the
bones of holy men had then been shrined, M. Hardinge corrupts S. Hierome.
and offeringes made unto them, as of late years has been used.

True it is, Almighty God for the testimony of his Doctrine and Truth, has
oftentimes wrought great Miracles, even by the dead Carcasses of his Sain^^es,
in witness that they had been his Messengers, and the Instruments of his will.
But as these were good inducementes at the first to lead the people to the
truth, so afterward they became snares, to lead the same people into error:
and that even in the time of the old Fathers, above eleven hundred years
ago. S. Augustine says, August. de moribus Eccle. and Manich. Ca. 34.
I know many woorshippers of Craves and Images, that drink and quaffe
disorderly over the dead, and offer meat unto their Carcasses, and bury them
self over the buried, and make account, Idem Confession. lib. 6. ca. 2.
that even their very dronkennes, and glottony is a Religion that pleases God.
Gelasius says, It is reported that with procession they furnishe up their
Churches, builte in the name of dead men, Celasius Can. 2.
and the same, for ought that I can learn, while they were alive, not
altogether good faithful men. De Conse. did. 1. placuit.
S. Martin on a time came to a Chapel builte in the name of a holy Martyr. But
afterward he learned by revelation, that the same Martyr had been sometime a
common thief, Sulpitius in vita Martini.
and for a robbery had been put to death, and by error of the people was
honored for a Saint. Likewise S. Augustine says, De opere Monachorum. Ca.
28.
Some there be, that carry about Martyrs bones to sale: and yet it may well be
doubted, whether ever they were Martyrs or no.

Thus much briefly and by the way of the Relics, and Miracles of Martyrs
boanes: for that M. Hardinge upon so small occasion seems to touch them in
such forte, as if he would have them shrined, and set up again.

As for the Matrimony of the Godly, Ad Hebraeos. 3. Chrysostom ad Hebraeos
Homil. 7.
as S. Paul says, it is clean and honorable in all estates. And therefore S.
Chrysostom says, Use thy Marriage with sobriety, and thou shall be the
chief in the kingedome of Heaven. And the same Chrysostom expoundinge these
words of S. Paul, Marriage is honorable, writes thus: Here he touches the
Jews, Chrysostom. ad Hebraeos homil. 8.
that reckon the Marriage bed to be unclean, and that a man risinge from the
same, can not be in clean life. But o you most unkind, and most insensible
Jews. The thing is not filthy, that God has granted of nature unto man etc.

Touching Erasmus M. Hardinge has already refused his authority, and turned
him over to his own defense. Where he says, every man was wont in old
times to receive the Sacrament severally at home: it would much better have
sounded of M. Hardinges side, if Erasmus had said, every man was wont then to
say Mass severally at home. And al be it in that short not upon S. Hierome he
seem to understand these words of S. Paul, (have ye not houses to eat and
drink in) of the private receiuinge of the Sacrament: yet otherwhere writing
of purpose, and good deliberation upon the same, he says S. Paul meante it
only of common meats, and not of the Sacrament. Paraphrasis Erasmi in. 1. Corinthians. 11.
In his Paraphrase he expounds it thus: Hie vnanimitatis Christianae
mysterium agitur etc. Here is practiced the Mystery of Christian unity, and
not provision made for the belly. For that ought ye to do in your private
houses, and not in the public Congregation. If ye would fille your bellies,
have ye not houses, where ye may do it by your selves alone? And again, if
any man be so greedy of meat, that he can not tarry, let him eat at home.
Thus says M. Hardinge, Erasmus gathers the Private Mass out of the
Scriptures. M. Hardinge is over quick in his Conclusions. He makes him self
sure of the Consequent, before he see the Antecedent. For Erasmus has not one
word there neither of Private Mass, nor of single Communion. How then can he
geate that of Erasmus, that Erasmus him self has not? Neither is this any
necessary form of reason, Men received the Sacrament in their houses: Ergo,
they received the Sacrament alone. For they might receive in their several
houses with their wives and families altogether, as it is already proved by
the example of Hippolytus Martyr. Hieronym in Apologia aduersus Iouinianu^.
And S. Hierome says, The Sacrament was sent home to the man and wife.
Otherwise it might be said, God commanded that every man should eat the
Easter Lamme in his house, Ergo, God commanded that every man should eat
that Lamme alone. How be it I make small accoumpte of this matter, as nothing
touching the Private Mass: but only show the feebleness of these
Conclusions.

Yet says M. Hardinge, both S. Hierome and S. Basile call it the Communion,
not withstandinge it were privately received: which is clean contrary to M.
Iuelles sense. The Communion.
But neither S. Hierome, nor S. Basile ever called it the Mass, and that little
furthereth M. Hardinge sense. They call it a Communion, not for that he that
received it, communicated with others in other places as M. Hardinge gheasseth:
but for that it was a portion of the holy Communion ministered, and divided
openly in the Congregation to be received of the faithful.

The reason that M. Hardinge hereof geathereth must needs be this: The
husband and his wife received the Sacrament at home: Ergo, the Priest said
Private Mass. He must needs be very simple, that will be led by such
single proufes. S. Hieromes plain words necessarily importe the contrary.
For if this were the custom in Rome for the space of four hundred years,
that the people should communicate every day, Then must it needs follow, that
duringe that time, there was no custom there of private Mass. No private
Mass in Rome


M. Hardinge. The.20. Division.
Damasus Bishop of Rome in S. Hieromes times writes in libro pontificali,
that Milciades Pope and Martyr, A heap of simple gheasses without sense or
favor.
ordained that the Sacrament in sundry portions consecrated by a Bishop, should
be sent abroad among the Churches for cause of Heretics, that the Catholic
people of the Churches, (which word here signifies as the Greek word
(...) does, so as it is not necessary to understand, that the Sacrament was
directed only to the material A Church by M. Hardinges judgment signifies a
private house.
Churches, but to the people of the Parishes) might receive the Catholic
Communion, and not communicate with Heretics. Which doubtless must be
understood of this private and single Communion in each Catholic man's
house, and that where Heretics bare the sway, and Priests might not be
suffered to consecrate after the Catholic usage. Else if the Priests might
without let or disturbance have so done, then what need had it been for
Milciades to have made such a provision, for sendinge abroad hosts sanctified
for that purpose, by the Consecration of a Bishop? The place of Damasus has
thus. Milciades fecit, M. Harding otherwise reports these words, the^ he
finds them.
vt oblationes consecratae per Ecclesias ex consecratu Episcopi, (propter
Haereticos) dirigerentur, Milciades ordained that consecrated hosts should be
sent abroad amongst the Churches, prepared by the consecration of a Bishop.
The two words, propter haereticos, for Heretics, added by Ado, the writer of
Martyrs lives opens the meaning and purporte of that Decree.

The B. of Sarisburie.
This gheasse is one of the weakest of all the rest, and therefore M. Hardinge
has stayed it up on every side with other gheasses, that one gheasse might
healpe propter Haereticos.



Ecclesia, must needs signify the people of the parishes, and not the
material Church.







First in this place of Damasus neither is there mention of any Mass, nor any
perfect sense, or reason in the words. For thus it is written. In libro
Council. impresso Colon. An 1551.
Milciades fecit, vt oblationes consecratae per Ecclesias ex consecratu
Episcopi dirigerentur, quod declaratur fermentum. Milciades caused that
th'oblations consecrate, by the Churches by the Consecration of the Bishop
should be directed, which is declared leaven. Neither is there any kind of
thing either goinge before, or followinge after, whereby we may gheasse the
meaning. M. Hardinge allegeth authorities without sense or reason.
It is much to see so learned a man as M. Hardinge is, so scanted of
authorities, that he is thus driven to prove his Mass by such places, as be
utterly void of sense and reason. But a man must use such weapons as may be
gotten.

The two words, propter Haereticos, that are patched in by Ado a man of late
years, as they do nothing healpe the sense, so have they no healpe of the
story of that time. For a man may well demand of Ado this new Doctor, what
were these strange unknown Heretics without name, that you at the last for
a shifte have espied out? where began they? where dwelte they? what taught
they? how long continued they? who maintained them? who confuted them? what
Council condemned them? For it seems somewhat strange, that there should be
companies, and routes of Heretics in the world, that noman ever knew but
Doctor Ado.

And where as M. Hardinge puts in of his own bisides his book (for Damasus
has no such thing, M. Hardinge adds of him self biside his Author.
nor any other thing like) that these new found Heretics, in the
Ministration keapte not the Catholic usage, he should have showed for his
credites sake, what other usage they keapte, that was not Catholic: for his
word is not yet Canonized. The world will believe neither him nor Ado without
some proof.

Further to increase absurdities, he says, by these words, per Ecclesias,
is meante, not the material Church, but the people of the Church: that is to
say in plainer terms, Ecclesia, Ecclesia, a private house.
is not a Church, but a private house. I grant the Greek word (...), out
of which our English word, Parish, (...) seems to have been taken,
signifies a Congregation, or meetinge of neighbors, or a company dwellinge
within some space together, whether it be in compass more or less. So says
Eusebius: Eusebius. ll. 7. ca. 26. (...)
Dionysius writes unto Basilides the Bishop of the divisions of Pentapolis.
Athanasius in Epist. de sententia Dionysii aduersus Arrian.
Athanasius says, that Demetrius took upon him the Bishoprike of Alexandria,
and, (...), of the divisions in Egypt. In these places and certain others,
that might be alleged out of Basile, Nazianzene, and other Greek fathers, this
word, (...) seems to signify a Bishoprike, or a Diocese, and not a several
parish. Eusebius Hist li. 5. ca. 26.
And therefore Irenaeus thus writes unto Uictor Bishop of Rome, The Priests
of Rome, meaning thereby the Bishops there, sent the Sacrament (...), to
them that came out of other dioceses or divisions. And Eusebius thus writes of
Hippolytus: (...). He being Bishop of an other division. Thus much touching
this word (...), being moved thereto by the strange interpretation of M.
Hardinge. Certainly, I think, he him self will say, that sithence the
Church was once in peace, neither this word Ecclesia, nor this word
Parochia ever signified a private house, in any kind of writer, or in any time.

But, says M. Hardinge, Adoes Heretics (for Damasus speaks of none) bare
all the swaie, and would not suffer the Catholic people to communicate in the
Church. Therefore we must needs understand here private houses. Alas, when
did Heretics ever bear such swaie in the Church of Rome? Or if they did at
any time, Sovereign Heretics.
as it is untrue, unless he mean the Sovereign Heretics, the Pope and his
Cardinals, yet may we think, that the Catholics were so weak in the
common Church being altogether, and so strong in their own houses being
alone? Or were these Heretics hable to withstand a whole Congregation: and
not hable to withstand one single man by him self?

Mark well, good reader, how handesomely M. Hardinges arguments hang
together. He must needs think thee to be very insensible, that hops thou will yield to such gheasses.

To leave a great number of other like absurdities, M. Hardinges arguments are
framed thus: The Sacrament was received in Private houses (albeit there
appears no such thing by Damasus) Ergo, one man received alone. Surely then
had that man a very empty house: he might well singe, Tanquam passer solitarius
in tecto. It is more likely, that being a godly man, he would desire his wife,
and family to receive with him, as I have said before.

Again, the Sacrament was sent emonge the Parishes: Ergo, there was private
Mass. The force of this reason may soon be seen. But who said this Mass:
whether it were the Messenger, or the receiver, I leave it to M. Hardinge to
consider. He might better have concluded thus, The Bishop sent the Mysteries
abroad for the people to Communicate: ergo, he meante a Communion, and no
Private Mass.

Further he says, this was done in time of necessity, because of Heretics:
and yet by the same he defends the Mass used now without any such
necessity: and that in the Church of Rome, where, he says, can be no
Heretics.

To conclude, this manner of sendinge abroad the Sacrament, was afterward
abolished by the Council holden at Laodicea. Council. Laodicen. Ca. 14


Thus is M. Hardinge driven to go by Gheasse: to imagine strange Heretics:
for show of some antiquity, to allege vain Decrees without sense: to
auoutche such orders, as he knows were long sithence condemned: and to
comment the same with his own Gloses.

M. Hardinge. The.21. Division.
Here have I brought much for private and single Communion, and that it has
not only been suffered in time of persecution, but also allowed in quiet and
peaceable times, even in the Church of Rome it self, 31 The.31. untruth.
Rome is now become the Mother of fornication. Apocal. 17.
where true Religion has ever been most exactely observed, above al other
places of the world, and 32 The.32. untruth. The faith of the west Church
came not first from Rome.
from whence all the Churches of the VVeste have taken their light. As the
Bishops of al Gallia that now is called France, do acknowledge in an
Epistle sent to Leo the Pope with these words, Epist. proxima post. 51. inter
Epist. Leonis.
vnde religionis nostrae propitio Christo, fons and origo manauit. From the
Apostolic see by the Mercy of Christ the fountain and spring of our
Religion has come.

The B. of Sarisburie.
M. Hardinge uses a strange kind of Logique: M. Hardinge pretends private
Mass, and concludes Single Communion.
He pretends private Mass, and concludes single Communion. And why might
he not as well plainly and without color conclude his private Mass? Doubtless
the wise reader may soon geather thus, if he could find it, he would not
concele it.

This talk of the Church of Rome in this place, was needless, as nothing
seruinge to private Mass. Yet is it generally confessed by all men, that Rome
is the eldest Church that we know founded in this Weast part of the world,
and that the Churches of France and other countries at the beginning, had
both the confirmation of Doctrine, and also other great conference and conforte
from thence: like as also the Church of Rome had from Jerusalem, and
Antioche, and other great Churches in the East. But that the first that ever
preached the Ghospel in France, were sent from Rome, I reckon it not so easy
to be proved. For some say, Nathanael. Lazarus. Saturninus.
that Nathanael, whom Christ commends to be the true Israelite, preached at
Trire, and Bituriges: Lazarus whom Christ raised, at Marsiles: Saturninus at
Tolouse, long before Peter came to Rome. S. Paul as it is thought after his
delivery under Nero, 2. ad Timoth. 4. Epiphanius Contra Alogos.
went into Spain, sent Titus into Dalmatia, and Crescens into Galatia, or as
Epiphanius reads it, into Gallia: Joseph of Arimathaea came into England.
And yet it appears not that any of these were sent by Commission from Rome.
But why does M. Hardinge thus out of season rushe into the commendation of the
Church of Rome that was so long ago? It had been more to purpose to have
vewed the state of the same Church, as it stands now. But as one once
said, ye shall not now find Samnium in Samnio, because the City of Samnium
was sackte, and rased up, and utterly overthrown: even so I heard M. Harding
sometime say, He had sought for the Church of Rome in Rome it self, and yet
could not find the Church of Rome. The Bishops, Cardinals, and Priests,
do neither teach, nor exhort, nor conforte, nor any other part of their
duties: The people, as it is already confessed, is careless, and void of
devotion. S. Bernarde says, O Domine, sacerdotes tui facti sunt ^onsores:
Praelati, Pilati: Doctores, Seductores: O Lord, thy Priests are become
shearers: thy Prelates, Pilates: thy Doctors, Deceivers. If such a Church
cannot err, then may we say of it, as Eurypides sometime said of the City of
Athens, (...). O City, City, thy luck is far better then thy wit.

M. Hardinge. The.22. Division.
More could I yet bring for confirmation of the same, as the example of S.
Hilariae the virgin in the time of Numerianus: of S. Lucia in Diocletians time
done to Martyrdom: of S. Maria Aegyptiaca, and S. Ambrose: of which every
one, as ancient testimonies of Ecclesiastical histories, and of Paulinus do
declare, at the hour of their departure hence to God, received the holy
Sacrament of the Altar for their viage provision, alone. But I judge this is
enough: and if any man will not be persuaded with this, I doubt whether with
such a one a more number of authorities shall any thing prevail.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Now M. Hardinge higheth him self unto the end of his authorities: and for
speed is content to pass by the stories of Hilaria, Lucia, Maria Aegyptiaca,
and others written, I suppose, in Legenda Aurea, of whom as it appears, he
is certain that they said Mass a little before their departure hence. The
like is also auoutched for certain, of S. Ambrose lieinge in his death bed.
But this thing seems marucilous in my judgment, Paulinus in vita Ambros^^
that, not withstandinge S. Ambrose were Bishop in Millaine two and twenty
years and more, being also so holy a man, as few the like in those days, yet
M. Hardinge can not learn, that ever he said private Mass, but only when he
lay breathless in his death bed.

M. Hardinge. The.23. Division.
Now that I have thus proved the single Communion, I use their own term, I
desire M. Iuel to reason with me soberly a word or two. How say you sir?
Do you reprove the Mass, or do you reprove the Private Mass? I think, what
so ever your opinion is herein, your answer shall be, you allow not the
Private Mass. For as touching that the oblation of the Body and Blood of
Christ done in the Mass, is the Sacrifice of the Church, and proper to the
new Testament, 33 The.33. untruth. Christ never commanded, or named any
such Sacrifice.
commanded by Christ to be frequented according to his institution: if you
deny this, make it so light as you list: al those authorities which you
deny us to have for proof of your great number of articles, will be found
against you: I mean Doctors, general Councels the most ancient, the examples
of the primitive Church, the Scriptures: I add further reason, consent
universal and uncontrolled, and tradition. Great words without ground.
If you deny this, you must deny al our religion from the Apostles time to
this day, and now in the end of the world when iniquity abounds, and
charity waxes cold, when the Son of man cominge shall scarsely find faith
in the earth, begin a new. And therefore you M Iuel knowinge this well
yenough, what so ever you do in deed, in word, as it appears by the little
book you have set forth in printe, you pretend to disallowe, yea most
vehemently to improve the Private Mass.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Hitherto M. Hardinge has brought Doctors without Reason: now he brings
Reason without Doctors. And how say you sir? says he, Do you reprove the
Mass? Or do you reprove Private Mass? I trust, he has not so soon
forgotten, whereof he has discoursed all this while. Neither does the matter
reast upon that point, what I list to allow, or disallowe: but what he can
prove, or not prove, by the Scriptures, and by the ancient Councels, and
Fathers.

But mark well, good Christian Reader, and thou shall see, how handesomely M.
Harding conueieth and shifteth his hands to deceive thy sight. First he has
hitherto foreborne both the name, and also the proof of Private Mass: and
only has used the words of Sole Receiuinge, and Single Communion: and so
has taken pains to prove that thing, that was never denied: and that thing
that we deny, and wherein the whole question stands, he has leafte utterly
untouched. Now he demands whether I reprove the Mass, or the Private Mass?
what means this, that Private Mass, and Sole Receiving, be so suddenly
grown in one? Surely M. Hardinge well knows, that the nature of these words
is not one. Neither who so ever receives alone, does therefore of necessity
say Private Mass. This so sudden alteringe of terms may breed suspicion.

That he further interlaceth of the Sacrifice of the New Testament, is an
other conueyance to blind thy sight, as utterly nothing making to this
purpose.

For neither does the Sacrifice importe Private Mass: nor does Sole
Receiuinge implie the Sacrifice. Yet for short aunsweare, we have that only
Sacrifice of the New Testament, that is, the Body of Jesus Christ upon the
Cross* that Lamb of God, that has taken away the sins of the world: The
virtue of which Sacrifice endures for ever. To this everlasting Sacrifice,
the Sacrifice that is imagined in the Mass is mere injurious.

And where as M. Hardinge says, If you deny this, you must deny al our
Religion from the Apostles time until this day, These be but empty words
without weigh, and prove nothing.

In my little Book (says he) I disallowe the Private Mass. If he find fault
with my Book for that it is little, he might consider, it is but a Sermon, and
therefore no reason it should be great. Yet is it a great deal longer then
either Hippolytus Martyr, or the fable of his Amphilochius, of whom,
notwithstanding their shortness, he makes no small account. And where he
says, I dissallowe Private Mass, I disallowe that thing, that infinite
numbers of Godly and learned men have disallowed, and that M. Hardinge him
self not long since openly, and earnestly disallowed both in Schools and
Pulpittes: until he was suddenly persuaded to the contrary, only by the
alteration of the state. Of these two words, Private Mass, I can no better
say, then S. Gregory sometime said, of that Antichriste should be called
Deus, Lib. 6. Epist. 30.
God: Si quantitatem vocis perpendimus, sunt duae syllabae: sin pondus
iniquitatis, vniuersa pernicies. If we weight the quantity of the word,
they are but two syllables: but if we wey the weight of the wickedness, it is
an universal destruction.

M. Hardinge. The.24. Division.
Upon this resolution, that the Mass, as it is taken in general, is to be
allowed: I enter further in reason with you, and make you this argument. If
Private Mass, in respect only of that it is Private after your meaning, be
reproueable, it is for the single Communion, that is to say, for that the
priest receives the Sacrament alone: But the single Communion is lawful, yea
good and godly: Ergo, the Private Mass in this respect that it is Private, is
not reproueable, but to be allowed, holden for good and holy, and to be
frequented. If you deny the first proposition or Mayor, then must you show
for what else you do reprove Private Mass in respect only that it is
Private, then for single Communion. If you show any thing else, then do you
digress from our purpose, and declare that you reprove the Mass. The Minor
you cannot deny, saying you see, how sufficiently I have proved it. And so
the Private Mass in that respect only it is private, is to be allowed for
good, as the Mass is.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Out of al these former authorities of Tertullians Wife, Monks in the
wilderness, Lay men, Women, and Boys, M. Hardinge geathereth this
conclusion, which as he would have folk think, stands so soundely on
every side, that it cannot possibly be avoided.

The Private Mass is single Communion: Ergo, Private Mass is lawful.

This Syllogism unto the unskillful may seem somewhat terrible, as a visard^
unto a child, that can not judge, what is within it. But M. Hardinge that made
it, knows it is vain and woorthe nothing. And that it may the better
appear, I will open the error by an other like.

The Ministration of Private Mass is a single Communion: Ergo, the
Ministration of Private Mass is lawful for a woman.

It is al one kind of argument, of like form, and like terms. And as this is
deceiteful, so is the other likewise deceiteful. The error is in the Second
Proposition, which is called the Minor: and that shall ye soon see, if you
turn the same Minor, and make it an universal, and say thus in M. Hardinges
argument.

Al manner Single Communions be lawful: Or in the other argument, Al manner
single Communions are lawful for a woman. So shall ye soon find out the folly.

Further Medius Terminus, that holds and knitteth the argument, must agree
with the Subiectum and Praedicatum in circumstance of time, of place, of
person, of subject, and part of subject. With which circumstances a thing
may be lawful: and without the same may be unlawful. For example, It is thought
lawful for a woman to Baptize at home: but it is not thought lawful for a woman
to baptize in the open Church: yet is the thing al one: but the circumstance
of place being changed, changes the whole. Again, it is lawful for a Priest
to minister the Sacrament in the forenoone, and in the Church: but it is not
lawful for a Priest to Minister the Sacrament after he has dined, or in his
bed: Yet was it lawful for S. Ambrose, and others so to receive the
Sacrament. We see therefore, there is great matter in alteration of the
circumstance.

These things perhaps may seem over curious, and therefore I pass them by,
dooinge thee nevertheless, Gentle Reader, to understand, that without
consideration hereof thou may be deceived. Set the head in his natural place
between the shoulders: and there is a man. Set the same head in the breast or
other where out of his place: and there is a Monster.

Now touching M. Hardinges Syllogism, thou may see, that the Minor, or
Second Proposition is not true, as they term it, Simpliciter, and without
exception. For the Single Communion was never so taken for lawful, but only in
consideration of circumstances, and cases of necessity. Which cases being
either removed, or better examined, the same kind of Single Communion is no
longer thought lawful. Therefore thou may thus say to M. Hardinge: How say
you sir? Do you allow the examples that you have brought to prove your Mass
by? or do you not allow them? If you allow them, why then suffer ye not
Women to carry home the Sacrament, and to keep it in Cheastes, and Napkins, as
they did of old? If you allow them not, because they were abuses, why then
seek you to prove your Mass by the same, and so to establishe one abuse by an
other? Now let us look a little back to the note, that M. Harding set out in
the Margin for our remembrance, by these words (Proufes for Private Mass).
That it might seem lawful for a Priest to say Private Mass, he has brought
in examples of Lay men, Women, Sick folk, and Boys. Alas does M. Hardinge
think, it was the manner in old times, yt Lay people should say Mass? Or
was there no Priest all this while in the world for the space of.600. years,
that Women and Children must come forth to prove these matters? Or was there
no difference then between Sole Receiuinge, and Private Mass? Or shall we
think that Women and Boys did then Consecrate the holy Mysteries, or offer up
Christ's Body: or make Sacrifice for quick and dead: or apply Christ's
death unto others? Where is M. Hardinges Logique becomme? where is the
sharpness of his wit?

But mark, How aptely M. Hardinge answeareth to the question.
good Christian Reader, how far he swarueth from that he has taken in
hand. I demand of the open Church: he answeareth me of Private Houses. I
demand of Priests: He answeareth me of Women, Boys, and Lay men. I
demand of the Mass: He answeareth me of that thing, that him self
grants, is no Mass. I demand of the right Use of the Holy Supper, that
ought to stand: he answeareth me of Abuses, that be abolished. I demand of
the usage that then was Ordinary: He answeareth of necessity, and cases
Extraordinary. Judge thou therefore how well, and substantially he has
hitherto performed his promise.

M. Hardinge. The.25. Division.
Marie I deny not, but that it were more commendable, and more godly on the
Churches part, if many well disposed and examined, would be partakers of the
blessed Sacrament with the Priest. But though the Clergy be woorthely blamed
for negligence herein, The vndeuotion of the people grows of the negligence
of the Clergy.
through which the people may be thought to have grown to this slackenesse
and indeuotion: yet that not withstandinge, this part of the Catholic
Religion remains sound and fautles. For as touching the substance of the
Mass it self, by the single Communion of the Priest in case of the peoples
coldenesse and negligence, it is nothing impaired. Else if the public
sacrifice of the Church might not be offered without a number of communicantes
receiuinge with the Priest in one place: then would the ancient Fathers in all their writings some wheare have complained of the ceasinge of that, which
every where they call Quotidianum and judge sacrificium, the daily and continual
sacrifice: of which their opinion is, that it ought 34 daily to be sacrificed,
The. 34. untruth. The Fathers say not so, but plainly the contrary*
that the death of our Lord, and the work of our redemption might always be
celebrated, and had in memory, and we thereby show our selves according to
our bounden duty mindeful and thankeful. But verily the Fathers no where
complain of intermittinge the daily Sacrifice, but very much of the
slackenesse of the people, for that they came not more often unto this holy and
wholesome banquet: and yet they never compelled them thereto, but exhortinge them
to frequent it woorthely, left them to their own conscience.

The B. of S^^isburie.
The painter yt pourtraid out in colors Medea killinge her own child,
Council. Nicen. 2. Actio. 4.
by the skill he had in paintinge, made to appear in her face two contrary
affections: for in the one side he expressed extreme Fury, that bad her kill:
and in the other side motherly Love and Pity, that bad her not kill. Such two
contrary affections we may here see in M. Hardinge, both painted and set out
in one face. For notwithstanding for his credites sake he auaunce his Mass,
and deface the holy Communion with all that he is hable: M. Hardinge confesses,
that the Communion is better then his Mass.
yet here again for conscience sake of the other side he confesses, that the
Communion is the better: and so rippeth up al, that he has sewed before, and
wills others to assent unto him, before he can assent unto him self. Gods
name be blessed, that is thus hable to force out his truth, even by the
mouths of them, that openly withstand his truth. But neither should he in
such disdain, and so often call us new Masters and Ghospellers, for
defendinge that him self knows, and confesses to be the better: nor after
the holy Communion was once restoared, should he have drawn the people again
to the Private Mass: that is, by his own confession, from the better to the
worse.

But says M. Hardinge, in case of negligence of the people, if the Priest
receive alone, the substance of the Mass is not impaired. This difference in
terms of Substance, and Accidents in Christ's Institution, is newly found
out, and has no warrant neither of the Scriptures, nor of the old Fathers.
How be it Christ's example in dooinge, and commandment to do the same, may
not be taken for a show or Accident, but for the effect and Substance of his
Supper. Do this says Christ, Matthew. 26.
the same that you have seen me do: Take, Bliss, Break, Divide, in my
remembrance. Ad populum An^iochen. Hom. 61.
Which words S. Chrysostom expounds thus: Hoc facite in memoriam
beneficij mei, salutis vestrae: Do this in remembrance of my benefit, and of
your Salvation. This is no Accident or light fantasy, that may be leafte at
our pleasure, but the very substantial point of that Sacrament, which we are
specially commanded to continue until he come: and for want whereof S. Paul
says, 1. Corinthians. 11.
that Supper is not the Lords Supper.

Certainly Alexander of Hales, Daily Sacrifice.
and Humbertus, two of M. Hardinges own Scholastical Doctors, Par. 4. q. 35.
m. 2. Solu. 2.
are full against him in this point. Alexander says, Consecration is for the
Communion: Humbertus contra libel. Nicetae Monachi: Ex Cassandro.
therefore of both the Communion is the greater.

Humbertus says, Hoc quoticscunque feceritis, id est, benedixeritis
fregeritis, distribueritis, in mei memoriam facietis. Quia quodliber horum
trium, si sine reliquis fiat, perfectam memoriam Christi non repraesentat: As
often as ye shall this do, that is to say, as often as ye shall Bliss, Break,
and Distribute, ye shall do it in my remembrance. For what so ever one thing
of these three things be done without the rest, it represents not the
perfect remembrance of Christ. And thinks M. Hardinge, that the Sacrifice,
whereof neither Christ, nor his Disciples ever spoke one word, is the
Substance of his Supper: and the Mystical Distribution in remembrance of his
death, whereof he gave us such a strait commandment in so manifest, and so
plain words, is no part of the Substance.

The allegation of which Sacrifice to this purpose is mere vain. The old
Fathers never complained of ceasinge thereof, because they knew it could
never cease. For, the strength and virtue of Christ's Sacrifice rests in if
self, and not in any diligence, Hebrae. 7. and 10.
or dooinge of ours. Christ being a Priest after the order of Melchisedech,
has offered up one Sacrifice for all upon his Cross: Full, and p^rf^t; therefore
we need none other: One, and everlasting: therefore it needs no renewinge:
By privilege given to him self Only: therefore it can not be wrought by any
other.

This Sacrifice notwithstanding is revived, and freashly laid out before our
eyes in the Ministration of ye holy Mysteries, as it is well recorded by sundry
of the old godly Fathers. August. Epist. ^^. ad Bonifaciu^
S. Augustine says, Was not Christ once offered in him self? Yet that
notwithstanding, by way of a Sacrament he is offered every day unto the people,
not at Easter only, but also every day: And he says no untruth, that being
demanded the question, says, Christ is offered. For if Sacraments had not a
certain likeness of the things, whereof they be Sacraments, then should
they in deed be no Sacraments. And of this likeness many times they bear
the names of the things them selves: as the Sacrament of Christ's Body by a
certain manner of speech is the Body of Christ. Likewise again he says,
Augustine. (...)Psalmum. 75.
Cum non obliuiscimur munus Saluatoris, nonne Christus quotidie nobis
immolatur? Ex ipsis reliquijs cogitationis, and ex ipsa memoria quotidie nobis
sic immolatur, quasi quotidie nos innouet: When we forgeat not the gift of our
Savior, is not Christ daily offered unto us? Through the remnantes of our
cogitation, and by way of our very memory, Christ is so offered unto us every
day, as if he daily ren^wed us. And again likewise he says, Augustine. in
Epist. ad Romans sub finem.
Holocaustum Dominicae Passionis eo tempore offert quisque pro peccatis suis,
quo eiusdem Passionis fide dedicatur, and Christianorum fidelium nomine
baptizarus imbu^tur: At that time does every man offer up the Sacrifice of
Christ's Passion for his sins, when he is indewed with the Faith of Christ's
Passion, and being Baptized, receives the name of faithful Christians.

Thus is the Sacrifice of Christ's Passion expressed in the holy Ministration:
and yet not as M. Hardinge imagines, by any action there done by the Priest
alone, but by the Communion and Participation of the people, as S. Augustine
also otherwhere witnesses: De Con Did. 2. ex sentent.
Dum frangitur Hostia, and Sanguis in or a fideliu^ funditur, quid aliud, quam
Dominici Corporis in Cruce immolatio designatur? Prosperi.
While the oblation is broken* and the blood (that is, Designatur.
the Sacrament of the Blood) is powered into the mouths of the faithful, what
other thing is there expressed, or signified, but the sacrificinge of the
Lords Body upon the Cross?

This Sacrifice of Christ on his Cross, is called the Daily Sacrifice, not
for that it must be renewed every day, but for that being once done, it
stands good for all days, and for ever. What force then is there in this
reason: The Fathers never complained of ceasinge of the Daily Sacrifice: Ergo,
they had private Mass? For it may be answered in one word, they had the
Holy Communion every Day, and therefore they complained not. How be it neither
is the holy Communion that Daily Sacrifice it self, but a memory of the same:
neither was the Communion then ministered every Day. For proof whereof, I
would with M. Harding, to mark this Epistle sent from the Council of
Alexandria, in the defense of one Maca^ius, who was charged by his enemies,
that he had forcibly entered i^to the Chur^he, and broken the Cup of the holy
Ministration. They make his defense in this manner: Epistola Synodalis Council.
The place where they say the Cup was broken, was no Church, nor any Priest
at that time near there about: Alexandrin^.
and touching the day, it was no Sonnedaie. Saying then there was no Church
in that place, Communion only upon the ^^nneday.
nor Ministration of the Sacraments, nor the day required the same, what
manner Cup was it then, or when, or where was it broken?

It appears plainly by these words of the Council, that they had no
Ministration of the Sacraments at that time in Alexandria, but only upon the
Sonnedaies. And yet noman ever complained of the ceasinge of the Daily
Sacrifice notwithstanding. For they knew, that the Sacrifice of Christ's
Death is Daily, and for ever, and can never cease.

M. Hardinge. The.26. Division.
S. Ambrose witnesses that the people of the East had a custom in his time,
to be houseled but once in the year. Lib. 6. De Sacra. cap. 4.
And he rebukes harpely such as follow them, after this sort: Si quotidianus
est cibus, cur post annum illum sumis* quemadmodum Grae^^ in orient facere
consueuerunt? If it be our daily meat (says he) why take thou it but
once in the year, as the Greeks are wont to do in the East? De verbis
Do^^^^ ^ecundum Lucam. ho. 28.
S. Augustine utters the same thing, almost with the same words. And in
the second book De sermon Domini in monte, the twelfthe Chapter, expoundinge
the fourth pe^^tion of our Lords Prayer, Give us this day our daily Bread,
shewinge that this may be taken either for material Bread, either for the
Sacrament of our Lords Body, or for Spiritual meat, which he allows
best: would that concerning the Sacrament of our Lords Bo^ie, they of the
East should not move question, how it might be understood to be their daily
Bread, which were not daily par^akers of our Lords Supper, (35) The. 35.
v^trueth. For S. Augustine says* In illis partibus non intelligi^ur
quotidianus Pani^.
where as for all that, this Bread is called Daily Bread: There he says
thus: Vt ergo ill^ taceant, neque de hac resententiam suam defendant, vel ipsa
authoritate Ecclesiae sint contenti, quod sine scandalo ista faciunt, neque ab
eis qui Ecclesiis praesunt, facere prohibentur, neque non obtemperantes
condemnantur: Wherefore that they hold their peace, and stand not in defense
of their opinion, let them be content at least way with the authority of
the Church, that they do these things without offense thereof taken, neither
be forbidden of those that be over the Churches, neither be condemned when they
disobeye. Here we see by S. Augustine, that they of the Orient, who so seldom
received the Sacrament, were holden for all that Christen People by t^authoritie
of the Church, none offense thereof was taken, neither were they inhibited of
their custom: and though they obeyed not their Spiritual governors, mouinge
them to receive more often, yet were they not condemned, nor excommunicated.

The B. of Sarisburie.
M. Hardinge finds small force herein, Ambrosius li 6. de Sacram. ca. 4.
to prove that he seeks for. S. Ambrose rebukes the slackenesse of some of
his people that received so seldom, and wishes them to communicate daily
altogether. Wherein he quite overthrows the private Mass.

As for S. Augustine, I must needs say, he has taken wrong, and is il used
at M. Hardinges hand, as being by violence, and perforce made both to
suppress that he would say, and also to say that he would not say: and yet
in the end says not one word for private Mass, but plainly to the
contrary. First he would have S. Augustine say, August. De Sermon Domini in
mon^e lib. 2. M. Hard falsifieth S. Augustines mind. The Sa^rament is not the
Daily Bread.
that the Sa^rament of Christ's Body to them of the East was their daily
Bread, yea although they daily received it not. This matter of it self is not
weighty. Yet S. Augustine says far otherwise, not in any other of his
Books, but even in the self same sentence, where hence M. Hardinge had these
words. For he adds immediately, Vnde probatur, non hunc in illis partibus
intelligi quotidianum Panem. Nam magni peccati crimine arguerentur, qui ex illo
non accipiunt quotidie. Whereby it appears, that they of the East understand
not the Sacrament to be their daily Bread. For then were they guilty of great
sin, that do not daily receive it. But touching Private Mass, he says
thus, even in the same place, Panis quotidianus po^est accipi pro Sacramento
Corporis Christi, quod quotidie accipimus. The daily Bread may be taken for
the Sacrament of Christ's Body, which we receive every day. The Sacrament
received every day.
S. Augustine says, The people then received the Sacrament every day: whereof
it follows necessarily, that ye Private Mass was then said never a day.

But the Grecians custom was, to receive once only in the yete: Ergo, the
Priest at other times received alone. No, says S. Augustine, this custom,
or negligence, was not universal emonge all the people of Grecia, but emonge a
certain of them only. Plurimi.
For thus he says: Plurimi in orientalibus partibus non quotidie Communicant.
Augustinus. In the Greek Church some received the Communion every day.
Many in the E^st parts do not daily Communicate. Wherein may be well implied,
that some daily did Communicate: Otherwise the exception of many had been in
vain. And that the rest did daily Communicate, it may plainly appear by
these words of S. Augustine in the same place, Vel authoritate Ecclesiae sint
contenti, quod sine scandalo ista faciant. Let them hold them selves content
with the authority of the Church, that they may thus do without offense.
These words do necessarily importe, that the rest received the Communion,
and yet that notwithstanding were not offended with the negligence of their
brethren, that received not. For if the negligence had been general, and the
whole people had absteined altogether, as they do now in the Church of Rome,
there had been no cause at al, why one of them in that respect should be
offended with an other.

Now touching the matter it self, Jesus Christ the Son of God, is our daily
and everlasting food, German* in rer^
not to be removed, and renewed after certain days, as the show Bread of
the Jews, Eccl. Theoria.
but to stand before the Mercy Seat of God for ever. Our daily Bread
(says Germanus) is Christ, August. De ver^^^^ Domini sec.
that is, Lucam sermon 28.
and was before, Ambros. De Sacramen. li 5. c. 4.
and continues for ever. The Sacrament called the Daily Bread.
Likewise S. Augustine says, Not the Bread that passes into our body, but
the Bread of everlasting life, which susteineth the substance of the Soul.

A Sacrament of this food is the Bread, that Christ commanded to be
blessed, broken, and delivered in his remembrance: which also may be called
the daily Bread: not for that it is daily received, but for that there is no
day excepted, but it may be received every day. And that in such places, where
as the Sacrament was not daily received of the people, it was not received
privately and daily of the Priest, for continuance of the daily Sacrifice, as
M. Hardinge surmiseth, it appears well by sundry good records. And to leave
S. Basil. ad Caesariam.
Basil ad Caesariam Patritiam: the Council. Laodicen. ca. 49.
Council of Laodicea: the Con. Constantinopol. ca. 52.
Council of Constantinople holden in Trullo: and the Synodal Council. Alexandri.
epistola Sy^odalis.
Epistle sent from the Bishops of the East part in, the defense of Macarius:
Augusti. in Ioh. tracta. 26.
S. Augustine says, Huius rei Sacramentum alicubi quotidie, alicubi certis
internallis dierum, Ambros. in epi. ad Timo. 1. Ca. 4. Council. Toletan. 4. ca.
9.
in Dominico praeparatur, and de Mensa Dominica sumitur. The Sacrament of this
thing is prepared, or consecrate in the Church, and received of the Lords
Table, in some places every day, in some places upon certain days. Likewise
also says S. Ambrose, Every week we must celebrate the oblation, although
not every day unto strang^rs, yet unto the inhabitants at least twice in the
week. S. Augustine says, the Sacrament was ministered at certain days: S.
Ambrose says, sometimes twice in the week: and not every day. But what
record hereof can be plainer, then the Council of Toledo: The words in
English be these: There be sundry Priests in Spain, that, touching the
prayer that the Lord taught, and commanded daily to be said, The Communion
ministered only upon the Sunday.
say the same only upon the Sonneday, and upon no day else. Hereof we may
very well geather, that if the Priests in Spain said the Lords prayer only
upon the Sonneday, for so much as the Communion is never ministered without the
Lords prayer, therefore the Priests in Spain ministered not the Communion,
but only upon the Sonneday.

These things well considered, the weakness of M. Hardinges gheasses may the
better appear. For where he says, Some of the people withdrew themself,
Ergo, no man did receive: Or, Many absteined, Ergo, the Priest received alone,
these reasons be of no value, neither are worthy of any answer. For of the
same premises the contrary will rather follow. S. Augustine says, Many in the
East part absteined. Hereof we may well geather: Ergo, Some absteined not.
Otherwise he should have said, Al absteined, and not some. Then further, Some
absteined not: Ergo, some received with the Priest: So did not the Priest
receive alone: and so has not M. Hardinge yet found his Private Mass.

M. Hardinge. The.27. Division.
S. Chrysostom^ ^n. 10. cap. ad Heb. Hom. 17.
many times exhortinge his people to prepare themselves to receive their
rightes, at least at Easter, in one place says thus: what means this? The
most part of you be partakers of this Sacrifice but once in the year, some
twice, some oftener. Therefore this that I speak, is to al, not to them only
that be here present, but to those also that live in wilderness. For they
receive the Sacrament but once in the year, and peradventure but once in two
years. Well, what then? whom shall we receive? those that come but once, or
that come often, or that come seldom? Soothely, we receive them that come
with a pure and a clean conscience, with a clean heart, and to be short,
with a blameless life. They that be su^he, let them come always: and they
that be not such, let them not come, not so much as once. Why so? because
they receive to them selves judgment, damnation, and punishment. The ancient
doctoures, specially Chrysostom and Augustine, be full of such sentences.

The B. of Sarisburie.
It is needelesse to answer such places, as make no show of proof.
Chrysostom, as M. Hardinge well knows, has neither here, nor else where,
either the name, or the sense of Private Mass. Only he exhorts the people
to examine and prepare themselves, and so to come woorthily to the Lords
Supper. Now if M. Hardinge think he may found his Mass upon this place, he
may also presume the like of S. Paul, that, where he said, Probe^ se ipsum
homo* Let a man examine him self, he meante to erecte Private Mass.

M. Hardinge. The.28. Division.
Now to this end I drive these allegations, leauinge out a great number of
the same sense. Although many times the people forbear to come to the
Communion, so as many times (36) The.36. untruth. M. Hardinge is hable to
shevve no such case.
none at al were found disposed to receive, yet the holy Fathers, Bishops
and Priests, thought not that a cause why they should not daily offer the
blessed Sacrifice, and celebrate Mass. Which thing may sufficiently be
proved, whether M. Iuel that makes himself so sure of the contrary, will
yield, and subscribe, according to his promise, or no. Of the daily
Sacrifice, these words of Chrysostom be plain: Quid ergo nos? Nonne per
singulos dies offerimus? offerimus quidem, sed ad recordationem facientes
mor^^s eius: and vna est hostia, non multae etc. Then what do we? do we not
offer every day? Yes verily we do so. But we do it for recordinge of his
death. And it is one host, not many. Here I hear M. Iuel say, though against
his will, I grant the daily Sacrifice, but I stand still in my negative, that
it can not be showed, there was ever any such Sacrifice celebrated, without a
Communion, that is, as they wilhaue it, without some convenient number to
receive the Sacrament in the same place with the Priest. For proof of this,
these be such places as I am persuaded withal. The better learned men, that be
of more readinge then I am, have other, I doubt not.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Here M. Hardinge notably betrayeth him self, laiynge forth for a
countenance a few of Chrysostomes words, and the same nothing to the matter,
hewinge and manglinge them as him lists best, requiringe also subscription,
as upon sufficient proof: and yet in the same place, and with one breath, him
self secretly confessinge the insufficiency and weakness of his proof.

These words of S. Chrysostom, Chrysostom. ad Hebrae. Hom. 17.
as they make nothing for Private Mass, so do they very well declare, what
the Old Fat^^^s meante by these words, Oblation, and Sacrifice in the Holy
Ministration. Chrysostom compares the Sacrifices of the Jews in the Law,
with the Sacrifice of Christ in the Gospel.

He says, the Sacrifices of the Law were many, and imperfect, and therefore
daily renewed: This of the Gospel, is one, and perfect, and therefore
everlasting. And resembles the same unto a sovereign salve, which being
once laid on the wound, heals it up thoroughly, and needs no more laieynge
on. He says further that we of the Gospel have a Sa^rifice also, and that
daily, but in remembrance of that Sacrifice once made upon the Cross. And
although we Sacrifice in sundry places, yet, says he, the Sacrifice is but
one, because it has relation unto that one Sacrifice of Christ. And therefore
he adds: Quomodo vna est hostia, Chrysostom ad Hebrae. Hom. 17.
and non multae? Quia semel oblata est, oblata est in sancta sanctorum. Hoc
autem Sacrificium exemplar illius est. How is it one oblation, and not many?
Because it was once offered, it was offered into the holy place: but this
Sacrifice (meaning the Ministration of the Sacrament) is an example of that.
And what he means by this word Exemplar, Exemplar.
he shows a few lines before: Quae formam tantum alicuius habent, Exemplar
ostendunt, non autem virtu^em. S^cut in Imaginibus exemplar hominis habet
imago, non etiam virtutem. The things that bear only a likeness, show the
samplar of some other thing, but not the power of the same: as an Image
shows the pattern of a man, but not the power of a man. Hereof S.
Chrysostom concludes thus: The thing that we do, is done in remembr^unce
of that thing that was done before. For Christ said, do this in my
remembrance. Hereby it appears in what sense the old Fathers used these
words, Oblation and Sacrifice.

But what does all this f^rther M. Hardinges Private Mass? Or if it further it
not, what does it here? It is but a faynte Conclusion to say,

Chrysostom had the daily Sacrifice, Ergo Chrysostom had Private Mass.

Soothely (good reader) if it had lyked M. Hardinge to have given thee leave to
read the n^^te lines folowinge in Chrysostom, M. Hardinge nippeth
Chrysostomes words.
thou might easily have seen the whole order of the holy Ministration in
his time. For thus he says unto the people, Per singulos dies intras in
Ecclesiam, Thou come daily to the Church.

Whereby we see, the Priest was not in the Church alone. Then touching the
receiuinge, he says, Vocat sanctos.
The Deacon at that hour calls the holy, and by that voice, as it were
beholds the peoples spots. For like as in a flock, where as be many sound
sheep, and many infected, the one must needs be sundred from ye other: even
so f^reth^t in the Church. For some are sound, Sancta sanctis.
and some are sick. And by that voice the Deacon d^uideth these from them. For
that voice of his fallinge into our ears, as it were a hand, remoueth and
shuts forth some, and other some it takes in, and presents them to the
Congregation. I send thee not unto other places of Chrysostom, which be both
many more, and far plainer then this, but only unto this same place, out of
which M. Hardinge has piked as much as he thought good.

Chrysostom says, The people resorted daily to the Church: The Deacon
sundred them with his voice, the sound from the sick: the one port to
receive, the other to abstain: the one part he shut out at the time of the
Holy Communion: the other he brough^ in, Epistles Decretal.
and presented to the Congregation. This was the ordinary practice of the
Church in Chrysostomes time: where we see plainly by his own report, that
he received not alone.

Yet says M. Hardinge, For proof of this, these folowinge, be such places as
I am persuaded with all. By this cold conclusion, he cutteth of credit from all that he has hitherto said, as not making show sufficient to win his
purpose, and so condemns his note made in the Margin, which was Proufes for
Private Mass: and lays all the burden of his grounds, upon these other
gheasses that hereafter follow. Uerely hitherto, for any thing that may
appear by his Book, notwithstanding his long time, his much readinge, and
great conference with all his fellows, he has not yet found either the name
of Private Mass, in any old Catholic writer, or the Sole Receiving of the
Priest. If he will have the world to believe him and subscribe, he must leave
his gheasses, and bring some sound and substantial proufes.

M. Hardinge. The.29. Division.
Soter Bishop of Rome about the year of our Lord. 170. who suffered
Martyrdom under Antoninus Verus the Emperor, for order of celebratinge the
Mass, made this statute or decree: Vt nullus Presbyterorum solennia celebrare
praesumat, De Conse. did. 1 ^an. Hoc quoque statutum.
nisi duobus praesentibus, sibique respondentibus, and ipse tertius habeatur,
quia cum pluraliter ab eo dicitur, Dominus Vobiscum, and illud in secretis,
Orate prome: apertissime conuenit, vt ipsius respondeatur saluta^ioni. This
has been ordained that no Priest presume to celebrate the solemnity of the
Mass, except there be two present, and answer him, so as he him self be
the third. For where as he says, (as by way of speakinge to many) Our Lord
be with you, and likewise in the Secrets Pray you for me: It seems
evidently convenient, that aunsweare be made to his salutation accordingly.
which ancient decree requires not that al people of necessity be present,
37 The.37. v^^truthe. For all, that (...)present, were vvill^^ either to
Communicate, or to depart. A bare collection.
much less, that al so often times should Communicate Sacramentally, which
thing it requires neither of those two that ought to be present. If of the
bare words of this Decree a sufficient argument may not be made for our
purpose, inducinge of the affirmation of that one thing there specified, the
denial of that other thing we speak of, which manner of argument is
commonly used of our adversaries: then more weight may be put unto it in this
case: for that where as the receiuinge of Christ's Body is a far greater
matter, then to answer the Priest at Mass, if that holy Bishop and Martyr,
had thought it so necessary as that the Mass might not be done without it:
Doubtless of very reason and conuenience, he would, and should have
specially spoken of that, rather then of the other. But for that he thought
otherwise, he required only of necessity, the presence of two for the
purpose above mentioned.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Some say, this Decree was made by Pope Anacletus: some others say, by Soter:
and so they seem not to be yet thoroughly resolved upon the Author. Polydorus
de inue^toribus reru^.
But if we had not good cause to doubt of the authority of these Decrees,
and Epistles Decretal, we would the less doubt of their doctrine. It was
evermore the Common practice of deceivers, to blase their dooinges by the names
of such, as they knew to be in estimation in the world. For to pass by Homer,
Hefiod, Cicero, Plautus, and such others counted learned and famous among the
Heathens, in whose names many counterseite books were set abroad, S. Paul
him self wills the Thessaloniens not to suffer them selves to be drawn from
their faith, 2. Thessalon. 2.
Neither by spirit, nor by talk, nor by letter as sent from him. By which
last words he signifies, that letters sometime were falsified, and set
abroad in his name. So were there given out Gospels in the name of Peter,
Thomas, and other the Apostles: and other matters of small weight in the names of
Augustine, Hierome, Ambrose, Cyprian, and other like. This was unto some a
common pastime: and many godly Fathers complain much of it.

Wherefore we ought the less to marvel if the like have happened unto
Anacletus, Euaristus, Soter, and such others, as followed immediately in Rome
after the Apostles time.

Gratian shows that the Decretal Epistles have been doubted of among the
learned: Distin. 19.
And Doctor Smithe, although his authority be not great, declared openly at
Paul's Cross, De Epistolis.
that they can not possibly be theirs, whose names they bear. Anno secundo
Edwardi Sexti.
And to utter some reasons shortly for proof thereof, These Decretal Epistles
manifestly deprave, and abuse the Scriptures, as it may soon appear unto the
godly Reader upon the sight: They maintain nothing so much, as the state and
kingedome of the Pope: and yet was there no such state erected in many hundred
years after the Apostles time: they publishe a multitude of vain and
superstitious Ceremonies, and other like fantasies, far unlike the Apostles
doctrine: They proclaim such things, as M. Hardinge knows to be open, and
known lies.

Anacletus that was next after Peter, Distin. 97.
wills and straightly commands, that al Bishops once in the year, Iuxta
sanctoru^.
do visit the entry of S. Peter's Church in Rome, which they call Limina
Petri. Yet was there then no Church yet builte there in ye name of Peter. In
Decretal.
For Pope Cornelius says (as he is alleged) that he first took up S. Cornelij.
Peter's body, and buried the same in Appolloes Church in Rome, at the least
one hundred and forty years after that Anacletus was dead. Pope Antherus
makes mention of Eusebius Alexandrinus, and Felix, which lived a long time
after him, and therefore was it not possible for him to know them. Fabianus
writes of the cominge of Nouatus into Italy: Cypria. li. 1. cp. 3.
And yet it is clear by S. Cyprian, and by Eusebius, Eusebius, lib. 6. ca. 43.
that Nouatus came first into Italy in the time of Cornelius which was next
after him. And to leave a number of other conjectures, which may be hereafter
more aptly touched some otherwhere, neither S. Hierome, nor Gennadius,
intreatinge of the Ecclesiastical writers, nor Damasus writing purposely of
the lives of the Bishops of Rome before him, ever made any mention, either of
such Epistles, or of any such Decrees: which they would not have
dissembled, if there had been any such extant or known in their time. Thus
have I briefly given a taste of these Decretal authorities, that the reader may
the better understand, of what credit they ought to be.

Now touching the matter, that by this Decree of Soter Bishop of Rome, it
should then be lawful for the Priest there to say Mass, having only two
others in his company, the state, and story of the time considered, it
seems very unlikely. Augustine epist. 118. and Ianuarium.
and S. Hierome, who lived two hundred and fifty years after Soter, have
recorded, that the people of Rome even in their time, used to receive the
Communion together every day: which practice can hardly stand with Augustine.
in Ioha^. tracta. 26. Hieronym. in Apologia aduersus Iouinianum.
The words also them self, implie a manifest contrariety. For this word
Solennia, which here is used, seems to importe a solemn company, or
resort of the people. And yet this Soter requiring to this action only the
company of three persons, nevertheless calls it Missarum Solennia.

The Lord be with you, and, Brethren pray you for me, It may well be doubted,
whether Dominus vobiscu^, or Orate pro me Fratres, were any part of the
Liturgy of Rome in Soters time. For Damasus, Damasus in Epist. ad Hieronymum.
which was Bishop of Rome two hundred and fifty years after that, writes
unto S. Hierome, that things were done with such simplicity in the Church
of Rome in his time, that upon the Sonneday there was nothing else but some
Epistle of the Apostle, or some Chapter of the Gospel, read openly unto the
people: which whether he meante of the holy Ministration or no, I leave further
to be considered.

Further this same Soter requires, that both these two, and as many others

Moreover touching these two, De Conse. did. 1.
whose presence is required, question is moved Hoc quoque. In glosa.
whether they ought to be two Clerks, or two lay men: or one Clerk, and one
lay man: or one man, and one woman. The Resolution whereof is, that they must
be two Clerks.

How be it, Summa Ang^li Missa. 38.
the matter is otherwise determined: that if the Mass be public,

Gerson likewise says, Gerson contra^ Floretum li. 4.
that the Priest may well say, Dominus vobiscum, although

Pope Innocentius has yet an other featche to healpe the matter. Innocen. li.
2. ca 20. De offi. Miss.
He says, Dominus vobiscum: because it may be thought, there be Angels there
to supply men's rooms.

Again, that there were any such secres^es in the Mass in the time of Soter,
Amen. And in deed to say unto the people, Pray for me Brethren and Sisters,
as it is now used in the Mass, unless the people may hear and understand
the same, it is a mockery. And yet Durandus says, Durandus li. 4.
Sacerdos ante secre^ellam voluens se ad populum dicturus, Orate fra^res etc.
debet dicere, Dominus vobiscum sub silentio. The Priest before the little
secreate turninge him self to the people to say, Brethren pray for me, must
say, The Lord be with you, under silence.

Now says M. Hardinge, Soters decree is not that these two should
Communicate with the Priest, but only requires their presence: Ergo, It is
likely the Priest received alone: which is an argument much used among our
adversaries. But what if these two will not come, neither to Communicate, nor
to be present at al? Uerely by M. Harding^s mind the Priest^ devotion ought
not to stay for want of company. For these be his very words a little before:
well, none comes: This is not a sufficient cause, why the faithful and godly
Priest enflamed with the love of God, Pagin. 12.
feelinge him self hungry and thirsty after the heavenly food and drink,
should be kept from it, etc. This is a cause sufficient, says Soter: it is no
sufficient cause says M. Hardinge. The judgment hereof I refer unto the
Reader.

Touching the force of the argument, wherewith he charge us by the name of
his adversaries, I trust there doothe already appear, some difference between
our proufes, and his gheasses. But the argument that he means, and not very
plainly utters, is called in the Schools, Argumentum ab authoritate
negatiu^: which is thought to be good, when so ever proof is taken of Gods
word: and is used not only by us, but also by S. Paul, and by many of the
Catholic Fathers.

S. Paul says, Ad ^alatas. 3.
God said not unto Abraham, in thy seeds al nations shall be blessed, but in
thy seed, which is Christ. And thereof he thought he made a good argument.

Likewise says Origin, Orig. in Leuit. Homi. 5.
The Bread which the Lord g^ue unto his Disciples, saieinge unto them, Take
and Eat, he differred not, nor commanded to be reserved until the next day.
Such arguments Origin, and other learned Fathers thought to stand for good,
what so ever misselykinge M. Hardinge has found i^ them. This kind of proof
is thought to hold in Gods Commandments, for that they be full and
perfect, and God has specially charged us, that we should neither put to
them, nor take fro them: and therefore it seems good unto them, that have
learned of Christ, Matthae. 23.
Vnus est magister vester Christus, Christ only is your Master: and have
heard the voice of God the Father from heaven, Matthae. 17.
Ipsum audite, Give ear unto him. But unto them that add to the word of
God, what them lists, and make Gods will subject unto their will, Matthae.
15.
and break Gods Commandments for their own traditions sake, unto them it
seems not good. To conclude, if this manner of reasoninge be good, why does
M. Hardinge reprove it? If it be naught, why does he use it, and that even in
the same place, where he doothe reprove it?

But (says M. Hardinge) Soter requires only the praesence of two, and these
two were not commanded to Communicate: Ergo, the priest did receive alone: and
so there was undoubtedly Private Mass. But mark well a little (good Reader.) If
these two were bound to Communicate with ye priest, then notwithstanding this
Decree, M. Hardinge has not yet found his private Mass. Then consider this
Decree written in the name of Pope Calixtus: Peracta Consecratione, De Con.
did. 2. Peracta.
omnes Communicent, qui noluerint Ecclesiasticis carere liminibus. Sic enim and
Apostoli statueru^t, and Sancta Romana tenet Ecclesia. The Consecration being
done, De Con. did. 1.
set al Communicate, unless they will be removed from the Church. Episcopus
Deo.
For so the Apostles appointed, and so holds the holy Church of Rome. By
this Decree these two were bound, either to Communicate with ye priest, or to
depart forth of the Church. If they did Communicate, then has M. Hardinge
here no Private Mass: If they departed forth, then could the priest say
no Mass at al: for Soter at least requires the presence of two.

Again, the argument that M. Hardinge geathereth out of this Decree, Three
persons were present, Ergo Two of them did not receive,

is utterly insensible, and void of reason. Rather he might have concluded
thus: Soter wills that two be present, Ergo, much more he wills that the
same two do Communicate.



It may also stand with reason, and with the common practice of the Church at
that time, that these two, whose presence Soter requires, were Priests, or
Deacons, De Con. did 1. Hoc quoque. I^ Glosa.
or otherwise of the Clergy, and that over and beside the company of the
people, as in deed it is determined by the Gloss. And so this Decree of Soter
agrees with an other Decree of Anacletus made to the like purpose, that is,
That the Bishop at the ministration have about him a certain number of
Deacons, De Con. did. 1. ^piscopus Deo.
Subdeacons, and other Ministers, bisides the common multitude of the lay
people. And likewise with an other Decree of the same Soter, De Con. did. 1.
Vt illud.
that is, That every Priest making the Sacrifice, have by him an other Priest
to assist him, and to make an end of the Ministration, if any quame or
sickness happen to fall upon him. And this assistance of the priest is required
notwithstanding the presence of others, either of the Clerks, or of the
Laity.

Now being Priests, or Clerks, and being present at the Ministration, the
law specially constrained them to receive the holy Communion with the
Minister, as it appears by this Decree written in the Canons of the Apostles:
Canon. Apost.
If any Bishop or Priest, Can. 9.
or Deacon, or any other of the Clerks, after the Oblation is made, do not
Communicate, either let him show cause thereof, that if it be found
reasonable he may be excused: or if he show no cause, let him be
excommunicate.

Thus who so ever these two were, whose presence Soter required, whether they
were of the Laity, or of the Clergy, the law constrained them to receive
together with the Priest: And therefore M. Hardinge has hitherto found a
Communion, and no manner ^oken or inklinge of the Private Mass.

M. Hardinge. The.30. Division.
In a Council holden at Agatha a City of france then called Gallia, Ex Con.
Agath. can. 31. M^^sas di^ Dominico saecularibus totas audire, special^ ordine
praecipimus: ita vt ante benedictionem sacerdotis egredi populu^ non praesumat:
quod si fecerint, ab Episcopo public co^fundantur.
about the time of Chrysostom, an old Decree of Fabianus Bishop of Rome and
Martyr, De Con. did. 1. cum ad celebra^das Missas.
and also of the Council Elibertine, in the time of S. Syluester, Anno
Domini.314. was renewed, that al secular Christen folk should be houseled
three times every year, at Easter, Witsontide, and Christmas. It was there also
Decreed, that they should hear the whole Mass every Sonneday, and not
depart before the Priest had given blessinge. So they were bound to hear
Mass every Sonneday, and to receive the Communion but thrice in the year. The
self same order was decreed in the Council of Orleance. Then of like,
specially in small Towns and Villages, they had Mass without the Communion of
many together sometimes. Private Mass proved by like lyhoode.


The B. of Sarisburie.
M. Hardinge knows well, that these Decrees which he here allegeth, could
never be found written, neither in the Council holden at Agatha in France, nor
at the other Council holden at Eliberis, M. Harding allegeth Councels that
cannot be found.
now called Granado in Spain: but were set forth many hundred years after in
the name of those Councels, by one Gratian, a man of great diligence, as may
appear by his geathering: but of no great judgment, as we may see by his
choice. Yet here M. Hardinge shuffleth a great many of them together, that
the one may the better countenance the other.

But let us receive the authority of these Decrees, and grant there was no
error committed by Gratian in his geathering: Yet will they stand M. Harding
in small steed^. For as in many other matters they utterly cast him, so they
nothing relieve him for his Mass. For thus it is concluded by both these
Councels, Qui in na^ali Domini, Paschate, and Pen^ecoste non Communicant,
Catholici non credantur, ne^ inter Catholicos habeantur. De Con. did. 2.
Sa^cularis.
They that receive not the Communion at Christmas, Easter, and Witsonnetide,
let them not be taken, nor reckened for Catholic people. It appears by these
general Councels, that in the whole Church of Rome, sauinge only a few
Massinge Priests, there is not one man worthy to be accounted Catholic.

And to draw near to the purpose, who so will narrowly vewe the poinctes of
these Decrees, shall soon see they cannot stand with the very form and order
of the Church of those days. For bisides that I have already proved by the
authority of S. Hierome, and S. Augustine, that the holy Communion was then
ministered unto the people in Rome every day: Fabianus also Bishop of Rome,
which is likewise brought forth here for a witness, has plain^ly Decreed,
not that the people should hear Mass every Sonneday, as it is soothely
warranted by M. Harding, but that they should receive the Communion every
Sonneday. His words be plain: Inter Decret^ Fab^ani, ca. 7.
Dercernimus vt in omnibus Dominicis diebus altaris oblatio ab omnibus viris,
and mulieribus fiat, tam Panis, quam Vini. We Decree, that every Sonneday the
oblation of the Aultare be made of al men and women, both of Bread and of
wine. Here besides that in these words is included the receiuinge of the
Communion every Sonneday, may be noted also by the way, that by this authority
of Fabian, men and women made the Sacrifice of the Aultare, and that of Bread
and Wine, and therefore after the order of Melchisedech. Bernard. in Sermon in
Die purific^.
Therefore S. Bernarde says, Non solus Sacerdo^ sacrificat, sed totus
conuentus fidelium: Not only the Priest sacrifices, but also the whole
company of the faithful. These things well considered, the sense, that M.
Harding would so feign wringe out of these Decrees, will seem unlikely.

Moreover, when did S. Augustine, S. Hierome, S. Chrysostom, or any other
learned Father, or Doctor of that age ever use this manner of speech, Audire
Missas, To hear Mass. Certainly this phrase was so far unacquainted, and
unknown in that world, that the very Originals of these Decrees have it not:
but only have these words, Tenere Missas, To hold Mass: as may be seen in
the book of Councels, Con. Agathen.
noted purposely in the Margin. The Italians this day seem to speak far
better. Can. 31.
For of them that hear Mass, and understand not, what they hear, they say,
Videre Missas, To hear Mass.
That is, not to hear, but to see Mass.

And for so much as M. Hardinge seems to delight him self with this kind of
speech, To hear Mass.
To hear Mass, To the entente he may make some simple body believe, that the
people hearing that they understand not, are nevertheless well and devoutly
occupied, and therein follow the order of the Primitive Church, I will also
demand of him, Hearing.
what learned Doctor or Ancient Father ever took, Hearing, in that sense.
Surely Christ in the godly, joins hearing and understanding both
together. Thus he says, Matthew. 15.
Audite, and intelligite: Hear ye, and understand ye. And the wise man
says, Ecclesi. 6.
If thou give thine ear, thou shall receive knowledge. And God himself in the
Deuteronomie says, Deuterono. 31.
Thou shall read the words of this Law, in the presence of all the people of
Israel etc. That they hearing may learn, and fear the Lord your God, and
may keep and fulfill all the words of this law. And in the book of Kings it
is written thus, 4 Reg. ca. 18.
Loquere nobis Syriac^: nam audimus. Speak to us in the Syrian tongue: For we
hear it. That is to say, For we understand it. And to that use has God
endewed us with the sense of hearing, that thereby we might learn, and
atteine knowledge. And therefore Aristotle calls hearing, the sense of
understanding.

For hearing void of al manner understanding is no hearing. Cicero in
Tusculanis quaest.
Cicero says, In illis linguis quas non intelligimus, quae sunt
innumerab^les, surdi profecto sumus: In the tongues that we understand not,
which are innumerable, we are doubtless deaf, and hear nothing. By this it
appears, yt the simple people hearing Mass in a strange language, De
authoritate and consen. tuto. and Cur. Non multum.
is deaf, Deverbor. and rer. significat.
and hears no Mass at al. The Emperor Justinian says, No^ multu^ interest,
vt^um abfuerit tutor, cum negotiu^ contraheretur an praesens ignorauerit, quale
esset quod contrahebatur. There is no great difference, whether the Tutour
were absente, when the bargain was made (in the behoufe of his Pupil) or being
present understood not ye manner of the bargain. Likewise also in an other
place he says, Coram Titio aliquid facere iussus, non videtur praesente eo
fecisse, nisi is intelligat. He that is commanded to do a thing in the
presence of Titius, seems not to do it in his presence, unless he
understand it. Upon the which words Alciat writes thus, Andr. Al^iatus^
Quid opus erat eius praesentiam adhibere, qui quod agatur, non intelligat?
Siquidem aiebat Epicharmus philosophus, Mente^ esse, quae videt, non oculos.
Qui igitur animo non adest, abesse videtur. what n^edeth his presence, that
understands not, what is done? For the Philosopher Epicharmus says, It is
the mind that sees, and not the eyes. Therefore he that is not present with
his mind (to understand what is done) may be taken for absent.

I have alleged these authorities rather then other, for yt in them we may see
the very light and sense of Nature. How then can M. Harding think, he may
steal away invisible under the cloak of these words, of hearing Mass?
Uerely in the savor and judgment of common reason, it is as strange, and as
fond a speech to say, I will hear Mass, As it is to say, I will see the
Sermon. To hear Mass.
For what is there in the Mass, that the unlearned can hear? To see the
Sermon.
The oblation, that they imagine, is an outward action, or dooinge, and
therefore is to be seen, and not to be heard: The Consecration, as they use it,
is spoken in silence, and may not in any wise be heard: Their Communion is
none at al, and therefore cannot be heard. These be the three substantial
parts, Folio. 12. b.
whereof as M. Harding says, the whole Mass consists. How then can he say,
The unlearned man hears Mass, that hears not one part of the Mass?

If by this word, Mass, he understand the prayers that be said in the
Mass, the unlearned understands them not, Chrysostom. in. 1.
and therefore hears them not. Chrysostom speakinge of him, Corin. Hom. 3^.
that hears the prayers in a strange unknown tongue, says thus: T^ recte
oras: Spiri^u, scilicet, concitatus sonas: sed ille nec audiens, nec
intelligens ea, quae dicis, paruam ex ea re vtilitatem capit. Thou praiest well:
for thou soundest out words being moved ^y the Spirit: but the unlearned,
neither hearing nor understanding, what thou sayste, has thereby but small
profit.

Likewise says S. Paule^ Qui loquitur lingua, non hominibus loquitur, sed Deo:
Nullus enim audit. 1. Cor. 14.
He that speaks with tongue, speaks not unto men, but unto God: For no man
hears him. M. Hardinge says, The unlearned hears the Mass, and other
prayers, ye although he understand not one word, that is spoken: But S.
Paul, and S. Chrysostom say, The unlearned hears not, because he
understands not. ^sai. 9.
God says unto the wicked, and not unto the Godly: Ye shall hear with your
ears, Matthae. 13.
and shall not understand.

Now let us see what M. Hardinge geathereth out of these two Councels. Then of
like (says he) specially in small towns, and villages, they had Mass without
the Communion of many together. Of like, Of like.
was never good argument in any Schools.

Thou see (Good Reader) the best that here can be had, is but a gheasse,
and as it shall afterward appear, a very simple, and a blind gheasse. It is a
wonder to see so great a matter, Innoce. 3. in prologode officio Missae.
and so single proufes. You have taught the people, that in your Mass Christ
him self is Presently, Durandus li. 4.
and Really Sacrificed for the sins of the world: Rupertus de Missa.
that all that ever he did, or suffered for our sakes, is lively expressed in the
same: and that al Kings, Princes, and other estates must needs stoop unto
it. And yet was the same for the space of six hundred years, to be found
only in poor Towns and Uillages, and that only by gheasse, and blind
conjecture, and none otherwise? Or could it never all that while once enter
into any City, or good Town? And being so good a thing, can no man tell us,
who published it, and said it first?

But what if the very words of these Councels, whereupon M. Hardinge has
founded his Mass, make manifest proof against his Mass? The words be
these: Al Secular Christian folk, be bound to receive the Communion at the
least thrice in the year. This Relaxation or Privilege is granted only unto
the Secular Christians. Whereof it follows necessarily, yt al Ecclesiastical
persons, as Priests, Deacons, Clerks, and others what so ever of ye sort
were not excepted, but stood still bound to receive orderly, as they had done
before: and yt was at al times when so ever there was any Ministration. And so
by the plain words of these Councels the priest received not alone: neither
has M. Hardinge yet found out his Private Mass.

But that the whole matter may the better appear, not by gheasse, or aim, but
by the very Ecclesiastical order of that age, we must understand, that these
and such other like Decrees were made, not for the greattest part of the
people, that in those days used to Communicate in all their assemblies, but for
a few, that were negligent, and haled back. For otherwise the general order
does well appear, by all the Ecclesiastical records of that time.

And whereas M. Harding has taken exception of small towns and villages, which
he gheasseth had then the Private Mass, it was decreed and straitely ordered in
a Council holden at Gerunda in Spain, Con. ^erunden. Ca. 1.
that al little Churches in the Country should confourme them selves unto the
great Cathedral Churches that were in Cities, and Towns, as well for order of
the communion, as also for Singinge, and other Ministration. De Conse. did. 2.
Institutio Missarum.
But by M. Hardinges own grant there was no Private Mass then in Cathedral
Churches: It follows therefore necessarily (this Council of Gerunda standing
in force) that there was no Private Mass then in Towns or Uillages.

And that the people did then commonly receive the Sacrament every Sonneday,
Council.
it appearet^ by most certain, and undoubted proufes. The Council holden at
Matiscona in Italy has this Canon: Matisconen. 2. ca. 4.
Decre^imus vt omnibus Dominicis diebus al^aris oblatio ab omnibus viris, and
mulieribus offeratur. We have decreed, that every Sunday the Oblation of the
Altar be offered of al both men and women. Likewise the Council holden at
Antisiodorum. Council. Antisiodoren. Can. 42.
Decernimus, vt vnaquaeque mulier quando Communicate, Dominicalem suum habeat.
Quod si non habuerit, vsque in alium die^ Dominicu^, non Communicet. We decree
that every woman, Missa signifies the ^ommunion.
when she does Communicate, have her Dominical: if she have it not, let her
not Communicate until the next Sonneday. Likewise Carolus Magnus a long while
after, Emonge other his ^cclesiastical laws writes thus: Vt populi oblationes
sacerdotibus in Ecclesia offerant, and in die Dominico Communicent. Ex
Cassandro.
That the people offer their Oblations unto the Priests in the Church, and
receive the Communion upon the Sonneday. Libr. 6. Cap. 162
By these Councels and Decrees, it appears plainly without Gheasse or Gloss,
that the people used commonly in all that time, and long after, to Communicate
the holy Mysteries every Sonneday. Therefore M. Hardinge must yet seek further
for his Private Mass.

M. Hardinge. The.31. Division.
In that Council of Agatha we find a Decree, made by the Fathers assembled
there, whereof 38 The ^38. untruth. There appears no such thing: but rather
the contrary.
it appears, that Priests oftentimes said Mass without others receiving
with them. Ca. 21.
And this much it is in English. If any man will have an Oratorie or Chapel
abroad in the country, biside the parish Churches, in which lawful and
ordinary assembly is: for the rest of the Holy days, that he have Masses
there, in consideration of weariness of the householde, with just ordinance
we do permit. But at Easter, Christ's birthe, Epiphanie, the Ascension of our
Lord, Witsonneday, and the Nativity of S. John Baptist, and if there be any
other special feasts: let them not keep their Masses, but in the Cities and
Parishes. And as for the Clerks if any will do, or have their Masses, at the
aforesaid feasts in Chapels, unless the Bishop so command or permit, let
them be thrust out from Communion. By this Decree we learn, that then Masses
were commonly said in Private Chapels at home, at such times, as the people
were not accustomed to be houseled. For when by commandment and common order
they received their rightes, as in the before named feasts: then were the
Priests prohibited to say Masses in Private Oratories or Chapels without the
Parish Churches. And hereof we may plainly understand, that in such places
Priests customably said Masses of their own and of the householders
devotion, when none of the householde were disposed to receive with them. The
like Decree is to be found, Concilij Aruernensis. cap. 14. Council.
Constantinopol. generalis in Trullo. ca. 31.

The B. of Sarisburie.
This objection being al one with the former, may the sooner be discharged by
the former answer.

Notwithstanding here we may learn by the way, that the old Fathers when
they use this word* Missa, mean not thereby a Private Mass, as M. Hardinge
would feign have it taken, but a Communion. These be the words: Missa used
for the Communion.
At Easter, Christemas, Epiphanie, the Ascension of our Lord, Witsonneday, and
at the Nativity of S. John the Baptist, let them hold their Masses, Teneant
Missas, in Cities or Parishes. Now it is known and confessed by M. Hardinge,
that in great Parishes, and Cities, at their Solemn Feasts they used to have
general Communions for all the whole people, and no Private Mass.

Notwithstanding for auoidinge of error, it is also further to be marked, that
this same word, Missa, Missa used for any assembly of the people.
in the old writers, sometime signifies no Mass at al, neither Private nor
Common: but only a resort and meeting of the people together in place and
time of Prayer, as it may sundry ways appear, and namely by old
Translations out of the Greek into Latin touching the same. For that the
Greek Writer utters by the word that signifies an assembly, or meetinge
of the people, the same doothe the Latin Interpreter oftentimes Translate by
this word, Missa. For example, Sozomenus in Greek writes thus: Sozome, li.
7. Ca. 5.
(...), that is when the people came together: that does Epiphanius Translate
into Latin thus: Epiphan. in tr^par. histor. li. 9. ca. 9.
Cum populus congregaretur ad Missas, When the people came to Mass. Socra. li.
5. ca. 15.
Likewise Socrates writes thus in the Greek, (...), That is to say, To have
a Congregation, or assembly by them selves: That doothe Epiphanius translate
into Latin thus: Epiph. in Tripar. li. 7. cap. 31.
Apud se ipsos Missarum celebrare solennia, that is, Emonge them selves to
celebrate the solemn^ties of the Mass. In these and many other like places,
which I purposely pass by, it must needs be confessed, that, Missa, can not
any way be taken for the Mass, but only for an assembly of ye people. For
which cause al manner of common prayers many times are called, Cassia. li. 3.
ca. 12^
Missa, as may be seen in Cassianus an ancient writer, and sometime Scholar
to S. Chrysostom, In Canone diuinarum orationum, and in Honorius and others,
sufficient only to be touched. But emongst al other significations, it can not
be found that this word Missa, Missa in th^old writers never taken for
Private Mass.
in any old writer was ever taken for the Private Mass, notwithstanding any
thing by M. Hardinge yet alleged.

Now if a man would say, that this Council of Agatha, that is here brought in,
by this word Missa, meante nothing else but ordinary prayers, in which
signification the old writers, as I have proved, have often taken it, and so
dispensed with them, that dwelt far from the Church, only to have such
ordinary Prayers at home, and for the holy Communion to resort to the parish
Churches, perhaps M. Harding should not find much to reply against it. If
he will say, I force and rack this exposition only of me self, without
president, it may please him to remember, that the same practice is yet
continued until this day, in many parishes within this Realm: 16. qu^^st. 1.
and that the law it self determines a difference between Ecclesia
parochialis, Quida^ Abbas.
and Ecclessia Baptismalis.

But let this word, Missa, in these Decre^s be taken for the Mass, that is
to say, for the Ministration of the Sacraments. Yet is not M. Harding much
therefore the near to prove his purpose. For, alas, what a simple reason is
this, upon principal Holy Days the Priest received the Sacrament solemnly in
the Common Church with all the whole pari^he: Ergo, at other times he received
alone? Or how hangs this argument, At certain times all the people received
together, Ergo, at other times the Priest received alone? Or this, The Priest
ministered the Sacraments in a Chapel, Ergo, he said Private Mass? What
leads M. Harding thus to say? What, was there no company at al in the Chapel
to Communicate with the Priest? Uerely it is provided by the Decree it self,
Can 21. In quibus est legitimus ordinariusque conu^ntus. In Pra^fatione Conci
^angren.
that there should be a lawful, and an ordinary company. And that in such
companies, yea, and in men's several houses, they had the Communion ministered,
it is evident by the Preface of the Council of Gangra against the Heretic
Eustac^ius. These be the words, In domibus coniugatorum ne orationes quidem
debere celeb^ari persuaserun^, in tantum, vt easdem fieri ve^ent: and
oblationibus quae in domibus factae fuerint, minime communicandum esse
decernant. They have persuaded the people, that prayers may not be made in
married men's houses: and that so far forth, that they forbid any such
pra^ers to be made, and determine, that no man may Communicate of the oblations
made in houses. Here we have not only the Communion, but also the ordinary
use of the Communion in Private houses.

Now let M. Hardinge show us as much for the ordinary use of Private Mass, or
for any Private Mass at al, and that without his surmises, and Gheasses: And
then let him hardly require Subscription.

Thou may see good Reader, these be but very poor healpes. In his former
allegation he sought his Mass in little Towns and Uillages: now he hunteth for
it in Private men's houses: and yet cannot find it. They say, they have had
the use and possession of their Private Mass these fifteen hundred and
threscore years, and more. Wherefore it is much to be marueiled, that of so
long continuance of time, of so many Doctors, and Councels, they have so
s^lender proufe^ to bring for it.

Yet for clearer aunsweare unto M. Hardinges blind gheasses, it appears by
the plain words of the same Council of Agatha, that in those days the
people received the holy Communion together with the Priest, and not the
Priest by him self alone: The words are these, Council. Agathe^. Can. 60.
Lapsi in haeresim agentes paenitentiam, cum Catechumeni egredi commonentur,
discedant. They that have fallen into some Heresy, and do penance for the
same, when the Nouicies (that be not yet Christened) be commanded to depart
out of the Church, let them depart also. They were commanded forth, not to
the intent they should not hear Mass, but that they should not Communicate
with the rest. For it is well known both to M. Hardinge, and also to others,
that al such as were newly entered into the Faith of Christ, but were not yet
Baptized, and were called Catechumeni, after the Sermon was ended, were
commanded out of the Church before the Distribution of the holy Mysteries:
and so likewise were the Penitentes, that they should not Communicate with the
rest of their brethren. Which is a manifest and undoubted proof, that the
rest of the brethren that remained still, did communicate altogether. And so
it follows in the same Canon, Hoc si obseruare voluerint, constituto tempore
admittendis ad altar obseruatio relaxe^ur. If they will do thus, after a time
appointed their penance shall be released, and they shall be admitted again unto
the altar (which was the Communion table) there to receive together with the
congregation, and no more to be commanded forth. Epistola D^cretal. Sirici^^
Hereunto agrees an other Canon set forth in the name of Siricius toutchinge
the same case by these words: Certain, that after their penance have gonne
back again like dogs unto their vomit, we decree that they shall join in
prayer only, with the faithful within the Church: and that they may be
present at the celebration of the Mysteries, although they be not worthy: but
that they be keapte of from the banquet of the Lords Table, Offe^ders keapte
from the Lords Table.
to the intent that by this advertisement being corrected, they may both
amend them self, and also show example unto others. Here we may plainly
see, that the rest received, and these that had offended sat by, and received
not, for Example unto others. But what Example could that have been, if they
had absteyned altogether?

M. Hardinge. The.32. Division.
Now let us see what examples of the old Fathers we have for the Private
Mass. M. Hard. proves his Mass by a childishe fable.
Leontius a Greek Bishop of a City in the East Church called Neapolis,
writes the life of S. John the holy Patriarch of Alexandria, who for his great
charity was commonly called John the Al^onar began to be in estimation in the
year of our Lord. (...).
Eleemosynarius, that is the almose geuer, tells this story, whereby it
appears, that at that time Private Mass was used. Though the transla^our
through ignorance of the time he lived in, turned this life into Latin of
mean eloquence, yet for trueths sake, I will not let to recite that which I
take for my purpose, as I find it. Malitiam reseruantem quendam industrium
contra alium principem, audiens hic magnus Ioannes, monuit eum saepe, and
suasit ad concordiam, and non potuit eum conuertere ad pacem. Semel ergo ad eum
mi^^it, and adducit eum sanctus, quasi pro republica, and facit Missas in
oratorio suo, nullum habens secum nisi ministrum suum. Cum ergo sancta
benedixisset Patriarcha, and orationem dominicam inchoasset, coepe^unt dicere
tantu^ tres illi, Pater noster. Et cum peruenissent ad sermonem quo dicitur,
dimitte nobis debita nostra, sicut and nos dimittimus debitoribus nostris:
Innuit domestico Patriarcha, vt taceret. Siluit ergo and Patriarcha, and
remansit princeps solus dicens versum, dimitte nobis sicut and nos dimittimus.
Et statim conuersus sanctus, dicit ei mansueta voce, vide in quam terribili
voce dicas Deo, quoniam sicut ego dimitto, ita and tu dimitte mihi. Et tanquam
ab igne sta^im cruciatum ferens praedictus princeps, cecidit in faciem ad pedes
sancti, dicens: Quaecunque iusseris domine faciet seruus tuus. Et reconciliatus
est inimico suo cum omni veritate. This story sounds thus in English: This
great Patriarch John, hearing that a noble man bare malice to an other noble
man, warned him oftentimes of it, and treated with him to be at accord: but he
could not bring him to be at peace. Wherefore on a day this holy Father sent
for the noble man, and causes him to come to him, as though it were about some
matter of the common weal. At that time 39 The.39. untruth. There was never
Private Mass said in Alexandria, neither before this time, nor at any time
sythence.
he says Mass in his Chapel, having none other body with him but his
servant. When the Patriarch had consecrated the Sacrament, and had b^gunne to
say our Lords Prayer, they three only begun to say our Father, and so
forth. When they were come to these words, Forgive us our trespasses, as
we forgive the^ that trespass against us, the Patriarch made a beeke to his
seruante, to hold his peace. Then the Patriarch held his peace also, and the
noble man remained alone, sayeinge forth the verse, forgive us as we
forgive. Then the holy ^ather turninge him self toward him, by and by says
with a mild voice, Consider with how terrible words thou say to God, that
as I forgive, so forgive thou me also. Where at the said noble man, as though
he had felt the torment of ^ier, forth with fell down on his face at the
holy Fathers feet, sayeinge: My Lord what so ever thou biddest me thy
seruante to do, I will do it. And so he was reconciled unto his enemy without
al dissemblinge.

Here M. Iuel will grant, Private Mass. Private F^ble.
I ^rowe, that this was a Private Mass. The place was private: The audience
not public nor common: the purpose touching the noble man was private: The
Communion also Private, I mean for the Patriarchs part alone, for biside that
the story makes no mention of any other co^municantes, he could not be
assured of that noble man to communicate with him. For where as he could by no
means before bring him to forgive his enemy, he had but a small conjecture,
he should bring it to pass now. And again, though he had conceived no
distrust of his reconciliation upon this holy policy, yet we may doubt,
whether the Patriarch forthwith without further and more mature probation, and
examination, which S. Paul in this case requires, would have admitted him
to receive our Lords Body so upon the sudden. Now for the seruante, it is a
straight case that so holy and so great a Patriarch, and Bishop of so populous
a City, as Alexandria was, understanding that Mass could not be celebrated
without breach of Christ's institution (as M. Iuel holds opinion) except he
have a number to communicate with him in the same place: should have none of
his spiritual flock with him at so weighty a matter of conscience, but one
only, and him his own householde servant. He was no^ so simple as not to
think, that the servant might be let from receiuinge by some sudden
pange cominge upon him, or with some cogitation and conscience of his own
unworthiness suddenly coming to his mind. If either this, or any other
let had chanced, in what case had the Patriarch been then? He had been like by
M. Iuels doctrine, to have broken Christ's institution, and so Gods
commandment, through an others defecte, which were strange. But I judge
that M. Iuel, who harpeth so many iarringe arguments against Private Mass
upon the very word Communion, will not allow that for a good and lawful Order
was taken, that at the receiuinge of the Communion, there should b^ twelve
persons at the least, and never under. S. Basil, Exercitationis ad pieta^e^,
Sermon. 4^
Communion, where there is but one only to receive with the Priest. Verily it
appears by his Sermon, that all the people ought to re^eiue, or to be This
Decree as it is supposed was made by Anacletus, and Cal^^ immediately after the
Apostles time. De Con. did. ^. Episcopu^.
driven out of the Church. Now therefore to an other example of the Private
Mass.

The B. of Sarisburie.
This is the best proof of al others. A short answer may well serve it. For
being but a little vewed, it is hable to answer it self. There is neither
authority in the tale, nor weight in the matter: The translation is peeuishe:
and all without the compass of six hundred years.

S. Augustine says, ^ugust. epist. 1^2.
that certain Heretics in his time named the Donatistes, that they might the
rather prevail in disputacion against S. Augustine, and other Christians, and
that the world might understand they had some company of their side,
therefore for a show subscribed their articles with the names of certain that
were dead, and oftentimes such, as never were Donatistes. Such a policy me
thinks M. Hardinge has here begun to practice. For what is this Leontius
that wrote this story? or who ever heard of his name before? I trow he has
raised up one of the seven Sleapers to help him to Mass. He should have
showed us, as his manner is, what this strange Doctor was: what books he
wrote: M. Hardinge rangeth without the compass of.600. years.
where, when, in what age, and in what credit he lived. If he had said, This
John the Almonar lived above six hundred years after Christ, and this
Leontius, that wrote his life, a great while after that, this one circumstance
would have answered the matter wholly. For notwithstanding the rest of this
tale were true, John the Almonar.
yet my assertion stands still good, that within the space of six hundred
years after Christ, M. Hardinge is not hable to find his Private Mass.

Vincentius in his book that he calls Speculum writes thus: Vincentius in
specul. lib. 23. ca. 17.
After Gregory was dead, Bonifacius ruled the Church of Rome. This Bonifacius
obtained of the Emperor Phocas, that the Church of Rome should be the head of
al Churches, and that because the Church of Constantinople wrote it self by
that title. The next year after that Augustine that was called the English
men's Bishop, Anno domini. 610.
died. The year folowinge John the Almonar was in great fame, at which time
also Mahomet first spread his Religion in Arabia. The same computation of
years appears in Freculphus, Sabellicus, Palmerius, and others. Wherefore M.
Hardinge might well have spared this tale, as nothing else but bewrayeing his
want of better matter, and prouinge that his Mass is of the very age of
Mahomet.

But to leave both thaduantage of the time, and also the exception against the
Author, let us consider the likelihood of the dooynge: and if John the Almonar
said this Private Mass in his Chapel, how safely he might so do by the
order of the holy Canons, 25. quaest. 1. violatores.
which to break Damasus says, is blasphemy against the holy Ghost. M.
Hardinges Leontius says, John the Almonar said Mass in his Oratorie at home,
being sure of no more company but of one of his own householde servants
alone. De Con. did 1. Hoc quoque.
But Pope Soter, as it is before alleged by M. Hardinge, straitely commands
that no priest presume to celebrate the Sacrament without the company of two
together. De Con. did. 1. vt illud.
And again that no priest dare to Minister, without the company of some
other priest. And in the De Cons. did. 1. vnicuique.
Council holden at Orleance it is decreed thus: It is lauful for every
Christian man to have a Chapel in his house: but to have Mass said there it
is not lawful. And in the Council. Laodicen. Ca. 58.
Council holden at Laodicea, It is not lawful for Bishops or priests to
minister the Oblations at home. Likewise Inter Decreta Felicis Papae, Decre. 4.
Pope Felix, It is not lawful to minister the Communion at home, but upon
exceedinge great necessity. The same order was taken in the Council of Acon,
and in sundry other Councels. Which Decrees being so many, and so strait,
it is not likely that John the Almonar being so holy a man, would wilfully
break them al without cause.

Neither in deed if M. Hardinge will thoroughly behold the matter, shall he find
here any Mass spoken of at al, neither bread, nor wine, nor Consecration, nor
Oblation, nor Elevation, nor Altar, nor Uestiment, nor any other thing to the
Mass belonging.

And if we agree there was Mass said there, yet may there grow an other
doubt, which of these three said that Mass: I mean, the Bishop, or the
Gentleman, or the Servant. For here is no more noted, but that they said the
Lords prayer al three together: which verily is not ye manner of Private
Mass. For there the priest as he receives alone, so he says the Pater
Noster him self alone. But in the Communion as the people said the Lords
prayer al together, as it is noted by S. Gregory, Gregori. lib. 7. epist 63.
so they received al together. Thus M. Hardinge brings a witness for the
Mass, that says nothing for the Mass. The law says, De verboru^ and
rer. significa. Apud Labeone^.
Qui mutum exhibet, nihil exhiber. He that presents a dome body, presents
no body.

But he will reply, here is the very name of ye Mass: and facit Missas. And to
make the more appearance, M. hardinge helps it forth with a preatie false
translation of his own. M Hardinge corrupts, and falsifieth his translation.
For, whereas it is written in the Latin, Cu^ benedixisset sancta, he
translateth it thus, When he had Consecrate the Sacrament: And likewise these
words, Post finem orationum, he translateth thus, After he had done the
prayer of Consecration: notwithstanding he knew right well, that in these
words there is no mention at al, neither of any Sacrament, nor of any
Consecration. And thus Vocat ea quae non sunt, Roman. 4^
tanquam sint. He calls things that be not, as though they were: and yet is
not afraid of Lex Cornelia de falsis. But this I trow he him self will
confess, is no sincere, nor plain dealinge. Yet will he say, here is the very
word Missa. It is well known, that Missa, is no Greek word, and therefore
Leontius, what so ever he were, in his Greek tongue could not use it. As for
the Translatour, seeing he was not hable to write true Latin, we may well
think he had simple skill in the Greek.

But grant we there be no error in the word: yet will it not necessarily
follow, that Missa in this place imports the Mass. For as I have already
proved by sundry authorities, Missa is oftentimes used for any kind of
prayer. As it may further appear by an Epistle of Chromatius, Chromatius.
and Heliodorus, sent unto S. Hierome touching Gregory the Bishop of
Corduba: and by the words of the council of Cabilon. De con. did. 1.
Which thing also very well agreethe with the custom and order of the Church
of Alexandria at that time, Solent plures.
whereof Nicephorus writes thus: Nicephorus. li. 12. ca. 34.
Quarta hebdomadis die, and ea, que Parasceue dicitur, Alexandrini Scrip^uras
legebant, Doctoribus eas interpretantibus: omniaque, quae ad Synaxin pertinent,
peragebant, praeter Diuinorum Mysteriorum perceptionem. Atque eam illi
antiquitus habuere consuetudinem: At Alexandria they read the Scriptures upon
Wenesdaies, and Fridaies, and the Doctors, or preachers expound the same. And
they do al things, that apperteine unto the Communion, sauinge only the
receiuinge of the Holy Mysteries. And this custom there they have had of old.

Touching these words, Benedicere Sancta, Benedicere Sancta.
they do no more signify the Consecration of the Sacrament, as M. Hardinge
has translated it, then these words Extollite manus vestras in Sancta, do
signify the liftinge up of hands to the Sacrament. Chrysostom in his
Liturgy uses the same manner of speech to a far other purpose. Chrysostom. in
Liturgiae ad fine^.
For after the Communion is ended, and the people ready to depart forth, he
writes thus, Sacerdos Benedicit Sancta, and exuit. Here if M. Hardinge will
take Benedicere Sancta, for Consecration, there must needs follow a great
inconvenience, that there were two Consecrations in one Communion: yea, and one
Consecration after al was ended. It may appear that Chrysostom by these
words meante a solemn prayer to conclude the whole. For it follows
immediately, O thou that art the fulfillinge of the law and Prophets,
Christ our God, thou that haste fulfilled all the dispensation of the Father,
fill our hearts with joy, and gladness now and for ever. This Chrysostom
calls Benedicere Sancta: and the same seems to be the meaning of this
Leontius, what so ever he were. And notwithstanding al these things were
granted, yet is not M. Hardinge hable thereof necessarily to importe his
Private Mass.

But says he, The place was Private, the audience was Private, the purpose was
Private: only one noble man, only one servant, al was Private. And further
he says, It was a very strait case, that so Holy a Bishop, in so populous a
town, could find no man to Communicate with him but his own servant only.
Yea doubtless it was a very strait case, that a noble man should be driven
to help the priest to Mass: A strait case for M. Hardinge to run to
Alexandria, a thousand miles beyond al Christendom, to seek his Mass, and
that not in open Church neither, but only in a Private Oratorie: A strait
case, that for the space of six hundred years after Christ and more, there
was not one Private Mass to be found in the whole Church of Rome: A very
strait case, that M. Hardinge is thus forced to leave S. Augustine, S.
Hierome, S. Chrysostom, and al other the godly learned Fathers, and to rake up
of the dust Hippolytus, Abdias, Leontius, and other like new Doctors without
name or credit, such as never were thought worthy to be alleged or named
before.

Yet he forces his gheasses further: The noble man came unlooked for: The
servant might have had some sudden pange, or some conscience of his
unworthiness, and so the priest perforce must have received alone. Here to
aunsweare gheasse with gheasse, even so might the priest also him self have
had some suddayne pange or quame: De Con. did. 1. vt illud.
as in deed it is specially presumed by the law, that it may so happen: or
else some sudden conscience of his own unworthiness: and so had there been
no Mass at al. Alas these gheasses be to light in so great a matter.

Here further for his pleasure he says, M. Iuel harpeth many iarringe
arguments. Of my arguments I make no vaunte: If they sound well in Gods
ears, they are well in tuene: God be thanked we lead not the people by aims,
and gheasses: we rear up no new Doctors: We combre not the peoples ears
with lies and fables, as M. Hardinge does: We bring forth neither women, nor
boys to prove the Communion, as these men are driven to do to prove their
Mass.

Moreover he says in scorn, as his manner is, that we would have all the
people, that will not receive, to be driven out of the Church. O M. Hardinge,
How long will you thus wilfully peruerte the ways of the Lord? You know,
this is neither the Doctrine, nor the practice of our Church. How be it the
ancient Doctors have both taught so, and also practiced the same. Anaclerus
says, De Conse. did. 1. Episcopus.
Alter the Consecration is ended, De Con. did. 2. Peracta.
let al receive, unless they will be thrust from the Church. And Calixtus
says further, For so is it appointed by the Apostles, and so is it observed
in the Church of Rome.

Now says M. Hardinge, the place was private, Ergo, there was a Private
Mass. A Child may soon see, that this reason has no hold. For touching
that the place was private, Gregor. hom. 37. in euang.
S. Gregory says thus of one Cassius the Bishop of Narnium, He said Mass
(which is, he ministered the Communion) in an Oratorie within his Palace, and
with his own hand he gave the Body of the Lord, In praefatione in Council.
Gangren.
and peace unto them al. The like hereof we may see in the preface before the
Council of Gangra. And in the Tripartite Story it is written thus: Gregory
Nazianzene at Constantinople in a little Ora^orie, Histor. tripart. lib. 9. ca.
8.
(...), made assemblies of the people. Here we see, The action was common, and
a full Communion ministered, notwithstanding the place were private.

Again he says, There were but three, Ergo, but one did receive.

This reason holds as the former.

Consider now gentle Reader, how aptely M. Hardinge answeareth to the purpose.
I demand the authority of S. Augustine, S. Hierome, or some other Catholic
ancient Father: he answeareth me with a childishe Fable. I demand of the
usage of the open Church: he answeareth me with a private Oratorie, as though
at that time there had been no Churches builte. I demand, what was done in
the face and sight of the people: He answeareth me, what, he supposes, was
done in a Corner. I demand of him undoubted truth, and certainty: he
answeareth me by conjecture and blind gheasse.

I believe he would not willingly have hindered his own cause. If he could
have found better matter, doubtless he would have brought it forth. Is this
the Antiquity, is this the Uniuersalitie, that they so much talk and glory
of? Is this the common consent of all the world?

Thus then, gentle Reader, stands my answer to this tale. First that

Secondly, that this word, Missa, used here by the rude and utterly unlearned

Thirdly that M. Hardinge the better to furnishe out the matter, has violently,





Alexandria, was ever any one private Mass said, either before that time, or
ever sithence.

M. Hardinge. The.33. Division.
Amphilochius Bishop of Iconium the head City of Ly^aonia^ A fabul^^ tale
under the name of Amph^^ lochiu^.
to whom S. Basile dedicated his book De spiritu sancto, and another book
entitled Ascetica, writing the life of S. Basile, or rather the miracles
through gods power by him wrought, which he calls, worthy of record,
true, and great miracles: specially such as were not by the three most
worthy men Gregory Nazianzene, Gregory Nyssene, and Holy Effrem, in their
Epitaphical or funeral treatises before mentioned: amongst other things
reports a notable story wherein we have a clear testimony of a Private
Mass. And for the thing that the story shows, as much as for any other,
of the same Amphilochius, he is called Co^lestium virtutum collocutor, and
angelicorum ordinum comminister, A talker together with the heavenly powers,
and a fellow servant with orders of Angels. The story is this. This holy
Bishop Basile besought God in his prayers, he would give him grace, wisdom,
and understanding, so as he might offer the sacrifice of Christ's blood
shedinge proprijs sermonibus, with prayers and service of his own making: and
that the better to atchieue that purpose, the holy ghost might come upon him.
After sixth days he was in a trance for cause of the holy ghostes coming.
When the seventh day was come, he began to minister unto God, that is to
wit he said Mass every day. After a certain time thus spent, through
faith and prayer, he began to write with his own hand, Mysteria
ministrationis, the Mass, or the service of the Mass. On a night our lord
came unto him in a vision with the Apostles, and laid bread to be consecrated
on the holy altar, and stirringe up Basile said unto him. Secundum
postulationem tuam repleatur os tuum loud etc. According to thy request, let
thy mouth be filled with praise: that with thine own words thou maiste
offer up to me sacrifice. He not hable to abide the vision with his eyes, rose
up with tremblinge, and goeinge to the holy Altar, began to say* that he had
written in paper thus: Repleatur os meum laud, and hymnum dicat gloriae tuae
domine Deus, qui creasti nos, and adduxisti in vitam hanc, and caeteras
orationes sancti ministerij. Let my mouth be filled with praise, to utter an
hymn to thy glory Lord God, which have created us, and brought us into this
life, and so forth the other prayers of the Mass. It follows in the
story. Et post finem orationum, exaltauit panem, sine intermissione orans, and
dicens: Respice Domine Jesus Christ etc. After that he had done the prayers of
Consecration, he lifted up the bread, prayeinge continually and sayeinge,
Look upon us Lord Jesus Christ out of thy holy tabernacle, and come to
sanctify us, that sittes^e above with thy Father, and art here present
inuisibly with us, vouchesafe with thy mighty hand to deliver to us, and by
us to al thy people, The people ansvveared: yet was there no people there.
Sancta sanctis, thy holy things to the holy. The people answered, one
holy, one our Lord Jesus Christ, with the holy Ghost, in glory of God the
Father, Amen.

Now let us consider what follows perteininge most to our purpose, Et
diuidens panem in tres parts, vnam quidem communicauit timore multo, alteram
autem reseruauit consepelire secu^, tertiam vero imposuit Columbae aureae, quae
pependit super altar. He divided the bread into three parts, of which he
received one at his Communion, The bu^^inge of the Sacrament^ Seven yeer^^
after he ha^ seen this vision.
with great fear and reverence, the other he reserved, that it might be
buried with him, and the third part he caused to be put in a golden pixe,
that was hanged up over the Altar, made in the form and shape of a Dooue.
After this a little before the end of this treatise, it follows, how that S.
Basile at the hour that he departed out of this life, received that part of
the host himself, which he had purposed to have enterred with him in his
grave, and immediately as he lay in his bed, gave thanks to God, and rendered
up the ghost.

That this was a Private Mass no man can deny. Basile received the Sacrament
alone, for there was no earthly creature in that Church with him. The people
that answered him were such as Christ brought with him. And that all this was
no dream, but a thing by the w^l of God done in deed, though in a vision as
it pleased Christ to exhibit, Amphilochius plainly witnesses, declaringe
(...)that one Eubulus, and other the chief of that Clergy standinge before
the gates of the Church, whiles this was in dooinge, saw lights within the
Church, and men clothed in white, and heard a voice of people glorifieinge
God, and beheld Basile standinge at the Altar, and for this cause at his
coming forth fell down prostrate at his feet. The forcinge of this fable.
Christ and his Apostles bring bread from heaven.
Here M. Iuel and his consacramen^ar^es doostagger, I doubt not: for grant
to a Private Mass they will not, what so ever be brought for proof of it. And
therefore some doubt to avoid this authority must be devised. But whereof
they should doubt, verily I see not. If they doubt any thing of the
bringinge of the bread and other necessaries to serve for consecration of the
host: let them also doubt of the Bread and fleash, that Elias had in the
ponde of Carithe. 3. Keg. 17.
Let them doubt of the bread and pot of water he had under the Juniper tree
in Bersabee. 3. Reg. 19.
Let them doubt of the pot of potage brought to Daniel for his dinner,
Daniel. 14.
from Iewrie into the Cave of Lions at Babylon, by Abacuk the Prophet. But
perhaps they doubt of the ^uthoritie of Amphilochius that wrote this story.
It may well be that they would be glad to discredit that worthy Bishop. For
he was that vigilant Pastor, and good governor of the Church, who first with
Letoius Bishop of Melite, Theod. in hist. eccle. li. 4. ca. 11.
and with Flauimus Bishop of Antioche overthrew and utterly vanquished the
Heretics called Messaliani, otherwise Euchitae, Rather the first pare^tes of
hypocritical* and idle Monks.
the first parents of the Sacrament arie heresy: whose opinion was that the
holy Eucharistie, that is the blessed Sacrament of the Altar, doothe neither
good nor evil, neither profits ought, nor hurts: Even as our Sacramentaries
do ascribe al to faith only, and 40 The.40. Untruth. We never called it
so. The glorious paintinge of a shadovve.
call the most woorthiest Sacrament none other but tokeninge bread, which of
it selfehath no divine efficacy of operation. Therefore I wondre the less I
say, if they would Amphilochius his authority to be dimished. But for this I
will match them with great Basile, who esteemed him so much, who loved him so
intierly, who honored him so highly with the dedicatio^ of so excellent
works. I will join them also with the learned Bishop Theodoretus, Theodor.
lib. 5. eccles. hist. ca. 16.
who seems to give him so sovereign praise as to any other Bishop he writes
his stories of, never naminge him without preface of great honor, now
calling him admirandum, the wonderful, at an other time Sap^^en^^ssimum, the
most wise, and most commonly Laudatissimum mostprayse worthy. If they
(...)Basile him self, whether he were a man worthy to obtain by his prayer
of God such a vision, it may please them to peruse what Gregorius Nyssenus,
what holy Ephrem of Syria, and specially what Gregory Nazianzene wrote of him,
which two Gregory's be not affraide to compare him with Elias, with Moses,
with S. Paul, In Monodi^.
and with who so ever was greatest, and for virtue of most renoume. VVherby
without al envy he has obtained of all the posterity to be called, Magnus,
Basile the great, much more for deserte of virtue and learning, then those
other for merit of Chivalry, the Great Charles, the Great Pompey, the Great
Alexander. If they deny the whole treatise, and say that it was never of
Amphilochius dooinge, that were a shifte in deed, but yet the woorst of al,
and furthest from reason and custom of the best learned, and much like the
fact of king Alexander, who being desirous to undo the fatal knotte at
Gordium a town in Phrygia, hearing that the Empier of the world was boded by
an old prophecy to him that could vnknitte it, not findinge out the ends of
the strenges, nor perceiuinge by what means he could do it, drew forth his
swoorde, and hewed it in pieces, supplyinge want of skill, with wilful
violence. For thautoritic of this treatise, this much I can say. Byside that
it is set forth in a Book of certain holy men's lives printed in Colen,
Set abroad lately with other fables.
and biside very great likelihoode appearinge in the treatise it self: it is
to be seen in the Library of S. Nazarius in the City of Verona in Italy,
written in veleme for three hundred years past, bearinge the name of
Amphilochius Bishop of Iconium.

The B. of Sarisburie.
If this serve not the turn, nothing I trow, will ever serve. The authority
of S. Basile and Amphilochius is so great: the matter so clear: the wonder so
strange: The fable of Amphilochius.
the antiquity so ancient: the fable so likely: the dream so plain: The
original hereof at Verona in Italy in the Library of Nazarius, keapte as a
Relic, fair written in veleme above three hundred years ago: Basile a
worthy Bishop: Ephrem a holy Father: Amphilochius a man that had conference
with the heavenly powers: Not one show or circumstance leafte out, that may
serve to win credit. And what should need so much a do, if there were
not some suspicion in the matter? He that never saw this Book, nor knows the
contents thereof, happily by such circumstances and colors may be deceived.

But I me self have had this unknown Doctor in my poor Library these
twenty years and more, written likewise in veleme, as true, as fair, and of
as good record in all respects, as that other of Verona: in deed not under
the name of Amphilochius: but no doubts very ancient, as it may soon
appear. For the same Author in the same book has written also the life of
Thomas Becket, who lived at the least seven hundred years after that
Amphilochius this writer was dead. Therefore that story written by him of one
that was to come so many hundred years after him, must needs be a Prophecy,
and not a story.

The very names of old godly Fathers are worthy of much honor. But as it
is well known, many vain tales have been covered under the name of old
Fathers. The life of S. Basile has been set forth fully, and faithefully by
sundry old worthy writers, as by his own Brother Gregorius Nyssenus, by
his dear friend Gregory Nazianzene, by Gregorius Presbyter, by Socrates, by
Theodoretus, by Sozomenus, by Nicephorus, touched also in diverse places by
Chrysostom. And not withstandinge of late years he that wrote Vitas patrum,
and Iacobus de voragine, and Vincentius in speculo, who seem to entitle this
Book by the name of Amphilochius, have furnished the same with many unsavory
vain tales, yet was there none of them so impudent, once to make any mention
of this peeuishe fable of M. Hardinges Mass.

But, for so much as the glorious name of this holy Father is here brought in
to bear witness to these matters, and that in the night season in a dream,
and a vision, with the visible appearance of Christ and his Apostles, and the
greatest stay of M. Hardinges cause rests hereupon, and many are amassed with
the strangeness hereof, and many are led away as though it were matter of
good truth: and specially for that the Book is not commonly to be had: and it
would be chargeable to send to Verona into Italy for a copy: suffer me
therefore, good Christian Reader, to give thee some taste of the same, that
thou maiste be hable of thee self to judge further, and to see, by what
Doctors M. Hardinge proves his Private Mass.

To pass over the idle talk and confer^nce with Devils, The contents of M.
Hardinges Amphilochius. Tertul. lib. 5. co^tra Marcionem.
the Uisions, the Dreams, the Fables, and other fantastical vanities, which
are the whole contents and substance of this new Book, Tertullian has a
good discreet saieing, Furibus aliqua semper excidere solent in indicium. The
thief evermore leaves somewhat behind him that he may be known by. Let us
therefore compare M. Hardinges Amphilochius with Socrates, Sozomenus, Gregory
Nazianzene, Gregory Nyssene, and other old writers of approved credit, that
have of purpose written S. Basiles life.

Socrates and Sozomenus say, Socr. li. 4. ca. 26 Sozom. lib. 6. ca. 17.
that Basile in his youth was Libanius Scholar: M. Hardinges Amphilochius
says, Nazian. invita Basilij.
Basil was Libanius school fellow.

Nazianzene and Gregorius Presbyter say, that Basile continuinge at Caesaria,
was well acquainted with Eusebius the Bishop there, before he went into Pontus:
Gregor. Presbyter invita Nazianzeni.
M. Hardinges Amphilochius says, that at his return from Pontus, which was
soon after, Eusebius knew him not, neither had ever spoken with him, or seen
him before.

M. Hardinges Amphilochius says, Basile was Bishop of Caesarea, in the time
of The Emperor Iulianus: whereupon also are founded a great many fond fables:
Nazianzene his nearest friend says, Nazian. invita Basilij.
he was chosen Bishop there a long while after, in the time of The Emperor
Valens, and was not Bishop there at al duringe the whole time of Iulianus.

M. Hardinges Amphilochius tells a long tale, Nazian. in oratione. 2. contra
Julian.
how that S. Mercury being then dead, and a Saint in Heaven, at the
commandment of our Lady, took his own Spear out of his Chapel, where it
was keapte, and went out with the same into the field, Socrates lib. 3. cap.
25.
and slew Themperoure Julian, and that the same Spear was found bloody
afterward: Nazianzene, Socrates, Theodoretus, and Sozomenus say, Theodor. lib.
3. cap. 21.
it could never be known, by whom he was slain.

M. Hardinges Amphilochius says, Basile foretold the death of Julian:
Theodoretus says, Sozom. li. 6. ca. 2.
it was one Iulianus Sabba, that foretold it, and not S. Basile.

M. Hardinges Amphilochius says, The Emperor Valens yielded and gave place unto
Basile: Sozomenus says, The Emperor continued still his purpose, Theodor. li.
3. ca. 23.
and would not yield. M. Hardinges Amphilochius says, Nazianzenus was
present at S. Basiles burial: Sozom. li. 6. ca. 16 Nazian. in Monodia.
Nazianzene him self, that ought to know it best, says he came afterward,
and was not present.

Gregorius Presbyter says, Nazianzene came a great while after that Basile
was buried: Gregor. Presbyter in vita Nazianzen.
M. Hardinges Amphilochius is so impudent, that he says, Nazianzenus came in all haste, and saw the blissed body, and fell upon it when it was buried.
Whereby it seems, that this Amphilochius was not very wise nor circumspecte
in his talk. For if Nazianzene saw S. Basiles body, how was it buried? If it
were buried, how could he see it?

Again. M. Hardinges Amphilochius says, Gregory Nazianzene ruled the
Apostolic see for the space of twelve years: By thapostolike see he must
needs mean either Rome, or Constantinople. If he mean Rome, Nazianzene was
never Bishop there: If he mean Constantinople, where in deed he was Bishop,
yet was that never called thapostolike see: and so, what so ever he meante, he
made a lie.

Now judge thou indifferently, good Christian Reader, whether Amphilochius the
Bishop of Iconium, S. Basiles special and nearest friend, writing of him that
he knew so well, could possibly so many ways be deceived. If M. Hardinge had
known him better, I think, he would have spared this authority. De verbor.
and rer. significat. Quaeret aliquis*
How be it Vlpian says, Etiam monstra, and po^tentosi partus prosunt: Even
Monsters, and il shapen children may go for children.

To come to the matter, M. Hardinges Amphilochius thus tells on his tale:
Basile, says he, being once made Bishop, besought God that he might offer up
ye unbloody Sacrifice with his own words: he fell in a trance: came again
to him self: and so ministered every day. On a certain night Christ with his
Apostles came down to him from heaven: brought bread with him: awooke Basile,
and bade him up, and offer the Sacrifice. Up he arose: was straight at the
Aultare: said his prayers, as he had written them in his paper: lifted up the
bread: laid it down again: brake it in three parts: received one: reserved
an other to be buried with him: honge up the third in a golden Dooue. And all this was done, Christ and his Apostles being still present: who came
purposely from Heaven to healpe Basile to Mass.

We may now the better believe Homer, that Iuppiter with his Gods went down
sometime for his pleasure to banquet in Ethiopia: Or that an Sozomenus li. 6.
ca. 29.
Angel evermore ministered the Sacrament unto Marcus that holy Mounke: Or that
Nic^phor. li^ 11. ca. 26.
Angels came from heaven to consecrate Amphilochius Bishop of Iconium: Paulus
Aemili^s.
Or that Paulus Aemili^s.
the holy Ghost was sent from heaven to Remigius with a box of Holy Oil:
Henricus Herfordien. Ca. 49. M. Hardinge falsifieth his own fable.
Or that, when holy Arnulphus began Matins at Midnight, and said Domine labia
etc. and al his Monks were a sleep, a number of Angels supplied the lack,
and answered him, Et os meum annuntiabit Iaudem tuam.

But M. Harding lays on more weight, and forces this fable to his purpose:
and al be it in the whole tale there is not once the name of Mass, yet is he
content to take pains conningly to falsify the text, and seven times
together to translate it only by the name of Mass. For with him offerre
sacrificium, is to say Mass: likewise Ministrare Deo, is to say Mass: and
ministerium ministrationis, is the service of the Mass. For as Midas what so
ever he touched had power to turn the same into gold: so M. Hardinge what so
ever he touches has a special power to turn the same into his Mass.

But let us a little vewe the Circumstances, and weighe the likelihoodes of this
matter. Basile besought God, that he might make the Sacrifice with his own
words. And shall we think, he had more fancy to his own words, then he
had to the words of Christ? He awooke: stood up: and suddenly was at the
Aultare at midnight. What, shall we think he was the Sextine there, or lay al
night, like Eli or Samuel, in the Church: and yet being so famous a Bishop
had no man to attend upon him?

He divided the Bread, The Golden Dooue.
and laid up the third part of it in a Golden Dooue, that honge over the
Aultare: and yet by his own tale, his golden Dooue then was not yet ready
made. For it follows immmediatly in the next lines, After Basil had done
these things, and had communed with Eubulus, and others, the next day he sent
for a Gold smithe, and made a Dooue of pure Gold. It behooves a liar to be
mindeful what he says. If this Dooue were made before, how was it made
afterward? If it were not made before, how could it then hang over the
Aultare? Or how could Basile put his bread in it before it was made? And to
what end was that bread so keapte in the Dooue? And wherein, or where, was
the other third part keapte, that Basile thus reserved purposely to be
buried, or as M. Hardinge terms it, to be interred with him? Wherein M.
Hardinges Amphilochius both utters words of manifest blasphemy, and also
shamefully belieth that holy Father, and doothe him great and open injury. It
was but fondly done by S. Benet, Dialogorum, li. 2. ca. 24.
as Gregory reports of him, to cause the Sacrament to be laid upon a dead
man's breaste: and likewise it was as fondly done of others that ministered
the Sacrament unto the dead, and gave it into their mouths: which things is
namely forbidden by the Council of Carthage. Council. Carthagin. 3. can. 6.


But the Sacrament being, as M. Hardinge would have the world believe, no Bre
ade, The buryinge of the Sa^rament.
nor Wine, and so no Sacrament at al, but only the Natural and real Body of
Christ, it were horrible blasphemy to bury it, and, as a dead thing, to
lay it in the grave.

Further as this Doctor says, S. Basile had this Dream or Uision, and
reserved this portion of the Sacrament, The Sacrament reserved seven years.
immediately after he was made Bishop of Caesarea: and after that, as it is
clear by other stories, continued Bishop there seven years at the least. Now
judge thou (Gentle Reader) what kind of bread that would have been after
seven years kepinge, to be given to a sick man in his death bed. So many
absurdities, and contrarieties, may easily be found in the very show, and
sight of this childishe fable.

Yet says M. Hardinge, Here does M. Iuel with his Consacramentaries stagger,
and knows not what to say. Yea verily, M. Hardinge, we are astonished to
consider the wonderful, and just judgments of God, that any man should so
wilfully renounce Gods known truth, and be thus utterly given over to
follow lies: or so much to presume of his own wit and eloquence, that he
thi^keth himself hable to over rule and lead all the world with a fable. As
for a^es or ^^struments to hew up this knotte, we need none. Every child
may see (...): It opens, and loses it self. Christ comes with his
Apo^^^^ (...) from heaven to hear Mass: The Apostles singe Mass by note:
Christ (...) the Clerks part, and attends the priest: Amphilochius
writes Thomas Beckettes Life seven hundred years before he was borne: S.
Basile li^th al night in the Uesterie: He hangs up a golden Dooue first, and
makes it afterward: He keeps a portion of the Sacrament seven years
together: He receives the same in his death bed, and is buried, or, as M.
Hardinge deliteth rather to say, is interred with it: besides a multitude of
other like folies, and fables. This is that woonderful Gordius fatale knotte,
that can never be opened without an are.

And although M. Hardinges Amphilochius were a manifest, The true Amphilochius.
and an impudent liar, yet I confess, and it is well known, that the true
Amphilochius of Iconium, was a godly and a worthy Bishop, stout and
courageous in suppressinge the Messalians, the first parents, as M. Hardinge
here says, of the Sacramentarie Heresy. How be it the rest of his
brethren, and he him self else where says, Berengarius was the first father
of that Heresy. For afterward in the Fifth Article he writes thus: M.
Hardinge much for g^atteth himself.
Berengarius first began openly to sow the wicked seed of the Sacramentarie
Heresy. So it appears that M. Hardinge neither is resolved in the Heresy,
nor can tell when it first began. Notwithstanding the seed that he calls
wicked, was first sown, neither by the Messalians, nor by Berengarius, but by
Christ him self, and by his Apostles.

In deed the Messalians, The first Fa^h^^s of (...)Monks. Augustine. ad
Quod^ult Deu^.
whom Amphilochius suppressed, were Heretics, the Fathers of many idle
swarms, yet remaininge in the world. They were named in Greek (...), or
(...), of their long counterfeite prayeinge. S. Augustine says, They prayed
so much, or so fast, that a man, that knew it not, would not think it
possible. They thought it unlawful for a Monk, to labor for his living, and
therefore became Monks, that they might be free from labor. Thus far S.
Augustine.

Theodoretus says, Theodoret. H^^ret. Fabular li. 4. De opere Monachorum. Ca.
22. Theodor. li. 4. ca. 11.
Orationi vacantes, maximam diei partem dormiunt, They give them selves to
Contemplation, and sleep the most part of the day. S. Augustine says,
Tanquam conseruatricem Euangelij praedicant pigritiam, They highly commend
slewthe, as if it were the maintenance of the Gospel. For these causes
Amphilochius being the Archbishop of Lycaonia, and Flauianus the Bishop of
Antioche withstoode them, and drove them from their Dioceses: and Letoius
being an earnest and a zealous man utterly consumed, (...).
and burnt their Monasteries, or rather, as Theodoretus terms it, their
Dens of Thieves.

These were the Messalians, not the open mainteiners of any error touching the
Mystical Supper: neither does either S. Augustine, or Epiphanius report any
such matter of them.

In deed Theodoretus says, they had certain secret instructions emonge
them selves, that Sacraments did at al neither further, nor hinder: meaning
thereby as well the Sacrament of Baptism, as the Sacrament of Christ's Body:
into which error they were led, for that they gave al perfection and
holiness to their prayers, and in respect thereof refused the Communion of
their brethren.

But where as M. Hardinge says, This is also our doctrine, and that we teach
the people, the Sacrament of Christ's Body to be nothing else but tokeninge
Bread, his own conscience knows it is a sclaunder, and will be required of
him in ye day of the Lord. Our doctrine is, that the Sacraments of Christ
unto the Godly are the instruments of the Holy Ghost: and unto the wicked
are increase of further judgment: Like as S. Augustine also says,
Sacramentum sumitur quibusdam ad vitam, quibusdam ad exitium. Res vero ipsa
cuius est Sacramentum, omni homini ad vitam, nulli ad mortem: August. in
Ioha^nem tractat. 26.
quicunque eius particeps fuerit. The Sacrament is received of some unto life,
of some unto destruction. But the thing it self, (that is the Body of
Christ) whereof it is a Sacrament, is received of al men to life, and of no
man to destruction, who so ever be partaker of it. Here S. Augustine makes
great and manifest difference between the Body of Christ, and the Sacrament
of the same. And this is not the Messalian Monks heresy, but S. Augustines,
and the Catholic faith.

Now to deny, that ever this was Amphilochius dooinge, that (says M.
Hardinge) were a shifte in deed. Thus he is bold to say, I believe, for that
he never considered the whole Book. For otherwise he might soon have seen it
is but a rude geatheringe out of the Tripartite story in many places word by
word, without discretion, with interlacinge of lies, and fables of his own
without shame. Neither can M. Hardinge justly prove, Amphilochius never wrote
S. Basiles life.
that ever Amphilochius wrote S. Basiles life. For notwithstanding a clause in
Nazianzenes Monodia touching the same, as it is now extant in Latin, yet must
he understand, that the said clause was thrust in by Volaterane the
Translatour, a man that has perverted, and altered a great part of that
Book, as by conference to any learned man may appear: and is not to be found
in the Greek. But false translation makes no proof.

But, This Book is found at Verona in Italy: he might as well have said, at
Falsona. It is written in Veleme: this is but a simple allegation. A Calves
skin is no sufficient warrant of truth: lies have been written in letters
of gold.

The allegation of the Book called (...), which M. Hardinge says, S. Basile
dedicated to Amphilochius, Nazianzen. in M^nodia.
rather hinders, then furthereth his matter. For Nazianzenus reckening up al S.
Basiles Books, passes that Book by, as none of his. And Sozomenus says, it
was ever doubted of, and thought of many never to be written by S. Basile,
Sozomen. lib. 3. cap. 13.
but rather by an Heretic named Eustathius, a book full of superstition, and
wicked doctrine, and namely condemned by the Council of Gangra. Praefatio in
Council. Gangrense. ^ubulus.


But, Eubulus is witness of these things. He peered in at the creauie, and
espied what was done. Certainly a meet witness for such a matter. I have
heard sometime a man without a name: but here we have found a name without a
man. M. Hardinges Amphilochius ever makes this Eubulus the chiefest man about
S. Basile in all his affairs: Yet neither doothe Basile in any of al his
Epistles, or other works, nor Nazianzene, nor Socrates, nor Sozomenus, nor
Gregorius Nyssenus, nor Gregorius Presbyter, once make mention of any such.
Thus much for the credit of M. Hardinges Amphilochius.

But if all this were good record, and matter of truth, yet were it but a
miracle, but a vision, and perhaps but a dream, but one man's fac^e, but once
done, not in the day time, but at midnight, and that without company, and
without witness. If this Eubulus, which doubtelesse was No Body, had not
espied it, No Body should ever have heard of it.

Now as touching the very Mass, that S. Basile said in deed, we may soon
learn thorder of it without any dream or vision. S. Basile him self in the
Liturgy, that bears his name, Liturgia Basil^^.
plainly declares the whole order in this sort. The Priest speaks thus
alowde unto the people: The whole people makes answer, One is holy, One is
the Lord, One Jesus Christ in the glory of the Father. Then (says S.
Basile) the queere ^ingeth the Communion: and so they communicate altogether.

Here may we clearly see the very order and usage of S. Basiles Mass. Here
was no Sole Receiuinge: no Single Communion: no Private Mass: the whole people
prayed a loud together with the Priest, and received the Communion al
together.

And what if M. Hardinges own Amphilochius, notwithstanding al his fables,
say the same? Can any man desire more substantial witness? Uerely his words
be plain, S. Basiles Mass is a Communion, and no Mass
that there was people in the Church with S. Basile, and received the
Communion at his hand. For thus says S. Basile, even as it is here written by
this Amphilochius, Voutchesaue O Lord to give unto us, and by us unto all the
people, holy things unto the holy: The people answers, One is holy, etc. I
shuffle not these words: but leave them even as this Amphilochius has
written them, and M. Hardinge him self has here alleged them.

Now Mark (good Reader) what healpe M. Hardinge has here found for his
Private Mass. M. Hardinge and his Ampholochius can not agree.
M. Hardinges own Amphilochius says, The holy things were given unto all the
people: M. Hardinge says, S. Basile received alone. M. Hardinges own
Amphilochius says, there was people in the Church: M. Hardinge says, there
was no people there.

But this people (says M. Hardinge) was Christ and his Apostles. No doubt a
strange kind of people: And Basile being so notable a man for his eloquence,
was not hable to utter his mind in his own mother tongue: but said, All the
people: and yet saw no people there at al: and, Give this to al: and yet knew
there was no body there to give unto. Thus may we conclude according to M.
Hardinges own construction, that, that People was no People: that Christ, no
Christ: that Eubulus, no Eubulus: that Amphilochius, no Amphilochius: that
Basile, no Basile: that Dooue, no Dooue: and that Mass, no Mass at al. Such
be the proufes of Private Mass.

M. Hardinge. The.34. Division.
Now one place more for proof of Private Mass, at the windinge up of this
matter, and then an end of this article. 41 The.41. Untruth. Private Mass is
never found in Chrysostom.
This place is twice found in Chrysostom, in an Homily upon the Epis^le to
the Ephesians, Homil. 61. ad popul. Antioch*
and more plainly in an Homely Ad populum Antiochenum, where he has these
very words: Multam video rerum inaequalitate^. In alijs quidem temporibus,
cum puri frequenter sitis, non acceditis: In Pascha vero licet sit aliquid a
vobis patratum, acceditis. O consuetudinem, o praesumptionem. Sacrificium
frustra quotidianum. In cassum assistimus altari. Nullus qui Communicetur. I
see great inequality of things among you. At other times, when as for the
most part ye are in clean life, ye come not to receive your rightes. But at
Easter though ye have done some things amiss, yet ye come. O what a custom
is this: O what a presumption is this? The daily Sacrifice is offered in vain.
We stand at the Aultare for naught. There is not one that will be houseled.

Here is to be noted, where as Chrysostom says, the daily Sacrifice was
celebrated in vain, and the priests stood at the Aultare in vain: it is not
to be understood of the Sacrifice in it self, as though it were in vain,
and frustrate: but this is to be referred to the people: it was in vain for
their part, that should have received their Communion with the priests, who
waited daily for them, and cried out as the manner was, Sancta Sanctis, Holy
things for the Holy: and after that they had received the bread them selves,
shewinge the Chalice to the people, said: Cum timore dei, and fide, and
dilectione accedite. Come ye up to receive with the fear of God, with faith,
and charity. But al was invaine. 42 The.42. Untruth. There came many, both of
the people, and also of the Cleregie.
For none came: so cold was their devotion in that behalf. Now if
Chrysostom had cause to complain of the peoples slackenesse in coming to
the Communion, in that great and populous City of Antioche, where the
Scriptures were daily expounded and 43 The.43. Untruth. There was no such
daily preachinge: As shall appear. M. Hard. seeks up his Mass in little
towns and Villages.
preached, where discipline and good order was more straitely exacted, where in
so great number some of likelihoode were of more devotion then others: what is
to be thought of many little towns and villages, through the world, where
little preachinge was heard, where discipline slaked, where the number of the
faithfuls being small, and they occupied altogether in worldly affairs, few
gave good example of devotion to others? Doubtless in such places was much
less resort of the people at the Mass time, to receive the Sacrament with
their priests. And where as least this place might seem plainly to auouche
the having of Mass without a number Communicatinge with the Bishop, or
Priest, for auoidinge of this authority, the Gospellers answer by way of
conjecture, that in Chrysostomes time the Priests and Deacons Communicated
together daily with the party that offered the Sacrifice though none of the
people did: we tell them that this poor shifte will not serve their purpose. For
though they say, some sufficient number ever Communicated with him, that
celebrated the Daily Sacrifice, in that great and famous Church of Antioche,
where many Priests and Deacons were, Private Mass proved by a simple
Collection.
which neither being denied, they shall never be hable to prove: What may be
said or thought of many thousand other lesser Churches through the world,
where the Priest that said Mass had not in readiness a sufficient number of
other Priests and Deacons to receive with him, so to make up a Communion? Of
such Churches it must be said, that either the Sacrifice ceased, and that was
not done which 44 The.44. untruth. Christ commanded no such daily
Sacrifice.
Christ commanded to be done in his remembrance, which is not to be
granted: or that the memory of our Lords death was oftentimes celebrated of
the Priests in the daily oblation without tarieinge for others to Communicate
with them, and so had these Churches Private Masses, as the Churches now a
days have. Now to conclude of this most evident place of Chrysostom, every
child is hable to make an invincible argument against M. Iuel for the Private
Mass, as they call it, in this sort. By report of Chrysostom the Sacrifice
in his time was daily offered, that is to say, the Mass was celebrated: but
many times no body came to Communicate Sacramentally with the Priests, 45
The.45. untruth. This is not yet proved.
as it is before proved: Ergo, There were Masses done without other receiuinge
the Sacrament with the Priests. And then further: Ergo, Private Masses in
Chrysostomes days were not strange: and then yet one step further, there to
stay: Ergo, M. Iuel according to his own promise and offer, must yield,
subscribe, and recant unto a gheasse.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Now is M. Hardinge come (as he says) to the windinge up of his Clew: meaning
thereby, as may be thought, that the substance of all that he has alleged
hitherto, hangs only by a twined threade.

This Conjecture is taken out of certain words of Chrysostom: and the whole
force thereof stands only upon this word Nemo, which is in English, No
body. Chrysostom. Ad populum Antiochen. hom. 61.
Chrysostomes words be these, We do daily offer the Sacrifice, or (as M.
Harding deliteth rather to say) we do daily say Mass, and there is No Body
to Communicate. Ergo, says he, Chrysostom received alone: And so have we
without question a plain Private Mass.

Here would I first know, whether M. Harding will rest upon the bare words of
Chrysostom, or rather qualify them somewhat, and take his meaning. If he
press the words so precisely, as he seems to do, then did not Chrysostom
him self Communicate. For he was Some Body: and the plain words be, No Body
does Communicate: By which words doubtless Chrysostom him self is
excluded, as well as others. And so there was no Sole receiuinge, nor any
receiuinge at al: and therefore no Prinate Mass.

If he will rather take Chrysostomes meaning, it apppeareth, his purpose was, to
rebuke the negligence of ye people, for that of so populous a City, they came
to the holy Communion in so small companies: which companies, he in a vehemency
of speech by an e^aggeration in respect of the whole, calls No body. The
like manner of speech is used also sometimes in the Scriptures. Johan. 3.
S. John says of Christ, Testimonium eius nemo accipit. Not for that no body
at al received his witness: For his Disciples, and many others received it:
but for that of a great multitude very few received it. In like phrase
Chrysostom him self says otherwhere, Nemo diuina sapit, Chrysostom ad Hebr^os.
hom. 1^.
nemo co^temnit ea quae in terra sunt, nemo attendit ad Coelu^: No body
sauoureth godly things: No body despises the things of this world: No body
has regard to Heaven. In these words M. Hardinge must needs confess, that
Chrysostom in steed of few, by heat of speech, and by way of comparison,
said No body.

And al be it, this only answer compared with the manner of Chrysostomes
eloquence, which commonly is hoate and fervent, and with the common practice
of the Church then, may suffice a man more desirous of truth, then of
contention, yet I have good hope, it may be proved, notwithstanding M.
Hardinges, Nemo, that Chrysostom neither was alone, nor could be alone at the
holy Ministration, and therefore could say no Private Mass. For if the whole
company of the Lay People would have forsaken him, yet had he company
sufficient of the Priests and Deacons, and others of the Quiere. And if the
whole Quiere would have forsaken him, yet had he company sufficient of the
Lay People: as it may be clearly proved.

That there was then a great number to serve in the Mynistery, it may
diuersely well appear.

Ignatius, calls Presbyterium, The sacred College, The Council, Ignatius ad
Trallianos (...).
and company of the Bishop.

Chrysostom him self in his Liturgy, says thus: The Deacons bring the
disshes with the holy Bread unto the holy Aultare: the reast carry the holy
Cups. Chrysostom. in Liturgia.
By which words appears both a number of the Ministry, and also
provision for them that would receive.

Cornelius writes, Epistola Cornelij ad fabium Antiochenum ex Eusebio. li. 6.
ca. 43.
that in the Church of Rome, there were forty and six Priests: seven
Deacons: seven Subdeacons: forty and two Accolutes: Exorcistes, Readers and
other Officers of the Church, fifty and two: Wydowes and other afflicted
people that there were relieved, a thousand five hundred.

Nazianzene complains of the number of the Clergy in his time, that they
seemed to be more, Nazian. in Apologetico, (...).
then the rest of the people. And therefore The Emperor Justinian afterward
thought it needeful to abridge the number, and to make a law, that in the
great Church at Constantinople, where Chrysostom was Bishop, there should
not be above the number of threescore Priests: one hundred Deacons: forty
women: four score and ten Subdeacons: one hundred and ten Readers, and
five and twenty Singers. Hereby we may see, that Chrysostom being at
Antioche in so Populous a City, although he had none of the Lay people with
him, yet could not be utterly left alone.

Now if we say, In Authen. Collatione prima Titul. vt determinatus sit numerus
Clericor^
that some of these Priests, Deacons, or other Communicated with the Bishop, I
tell them (says M. Hardinge) boldly, and with a solemn countenance, which
must needs make good proof, This is but a poor shifte, and will not serve
their purpose. But if it be true, it is ritche yenough: if it agree with
Chrysostomes own meaning, it is no shifte: and therefore sufficiently serves
our purpose.

And because he sits so fast upon the bare words, and reposeth al his hope
in Nemo, if we list to cauil in like sort, we might soon find warrant
sufficient to answer this matter, even in ye very plain words of
Chrysostom. For thus they lie. Frustra assistimus Altari, In vain we stand
at the Aultare. We stand (says he) and not, I stand: and therefore
includes a number, and not one alone. How be it our shifts are not so poor:
we need not to take hold of so small advantages.

It is provided by the Canons of the Apostles, Canon. Apost. Ca. 9.
That if any Bishop, or Priest, or Deacon, or any other of the Quiere, after
the Oblation is made, do not receive, unless he show some reasonable cause of
his so dooinge, that he stand Excommunicate. (...).
There was then neither such number of Aultares, nor such cheuisance of
Masses, as has been sithence. De Con. dis. 1. Episcopus. Con. Nic. Can. 14*
All the Priests received together at one Communion. The like law in the
Church of Rome was afterward renewed by Pope Anacletus.

The Council of Nice decrees thus: Accipiant Diaconi secundum ordinem post
Presbyteros ab Episcopis, vel a Presbytero Communionem. Let the Deacons in
order after the Priests receive of the Bishops, or of the Priest the holy
Communion.

Likewise the Council of Carthage, Council. Carthaginen. 6. ca. 18.
Accipiant Diaconi ex ordine Eucharistiam post Presbyteros, eis dante Episcopo,
vel Presbytero. Let the Deacons receive the Communion in order after the
Priests, either the Bishop, or the Priest ministering it.

So the Council of Laodicea: Council Laodic. ca. 59.
It is lawful only for the Priests of the Church, to enter into the place,
where the Aultare stands, and there to Communicate.

So the Council of Toledo: Council. Toletan. 4. ca. 17.
Let the Priests, and Deacons Communicate before the Aultare: the Clerks in
the Quiere: and the people without the Quiere.

Nicolaus Cusanus writing unto the Clergy and Learned of Bohemia, Nicolaus
Cusanus ad Clerum and literatos Bohemiae.
has these words: Hoc est singulariter attende^dum, quod Sacerdotes nunqua^
sine Diacono celebrabant: and in omni Missa Diaconus de manu Sacerdotis accepit
Eucharistiam sub specie Panis, and Sacerdos de manu Diaconi Calicem. This
thing is specially to be noted, that the Priest did never Celebrate without a
Deacon: and that in every Mass the Deacon received the Sacrament in the kind
of Bread, at the Priests hand: and the Priest the Cup at the Deacons hand.

But what needs much proof in a case that is so plain? Chrysostom him
self in the Liturgy, Chrysostom. in Liturgia.
that commonly bears his name, follows the same order.

After that the Priests have received (says he) the Archedeacon commands
the Deacons to come forth: and they so coming receive as the Priests did
before. This was the very order of Chrysostomes Mass, touching the Clergy,
and that by the witness of Chrysostom him self.

Now let M. Hardinge judge uprightly, whether these shifts be so poor, as he
would make them.

But if the whole Clergy had been so negligent, that not one of them al,
being so many, and so straitely charged, would have Communicated with the
Priest, as M. Hardinge seems to condemn them al, only upon his own word
without any evidence, Yet let us see whether M. Harding^s Nemo, were hable of
necessity to shut out all the rest of the people.

Chrysostom in diverse places seems to divide the whole multitude into three
sorts, whereof some were Penitent, some Negligent, and some Devout. The
Penitent were commanded away, and might not Communicate: The Negligent
sometime departed of them selves, and would not Communicate: The Devout
remained, and received together. Now, that the Devout remained still with
Chrysostom the whole time of the holy Mysteries, it is plain by the very fame
place, Chrysostom. ad populum Antioch. Hom. 61.
that M. Hardinge here allegeth for his purpose. For thus Chrysostom says
unto the people, Thou art come into the Church, and have song praises unto
God with the rest, and have confessed thee self to be one of the worthy, in
that thou departedste not forth with the unworthy. By these words he
shows that some were worthy, and some unworthy: that the unworthy
departed, and the worthy remained.

And again in the same Homily he says, The Deacon standinge on high, calls
some to the Communion, and puts of some: thrusts out some, and brings in
some. Chrysostom says, Some are called, and some are brought in to Receive
with the Priest.

Where then is now M. Hardinges Nemo? Uerely if there were some people with the
Priest, then was there no place for No body: If No body received, then is it
not true that Chrysostom says, that Some Received.

Here of a false Principle, M. Hardinge, as his wont is, gheasseth out the
like Conclusion: If there were so few Communicantes in that populous City of
Antioche, where the Scriptures were daily expounded and preached, then it is
likely in Country Churches there were none at al. This argument hangs only
by likelyhoode, as do the reast of his making: and being set in order, it
stands thus: There was no Private Mass in the great City of Antioche:
Ergo, there was Private Mass in the Country. Surely* (Good Reader) this is a
very Country Argument, what so ever it seem to M. Hardinge.

And further, where as to advance the City, and to abase the Country, he
says, The people in Cities were duly taught by open Sermons, herein he must
n^^des be content, Chrysostom. in Act^^ Aposi. Hom. 45. Idem in Matthew. Hom. ^.
that his gheasse give place unto the truethe. For Chrysostom h^^ self says
far otherwise. Thus he speaks unto the people in the City. Dum per
Hebdomadam semel vocamus vos, and ignaui estis, and alij quidem non aduenitis,
al^ a^tem praesentes sine ^ucro disceditis, quid non faceretis, si nos hoc
continu^ ^^^^remus? Where as being called by us but once in the week, yet ye
be slothful, and some of you come not at al, and other some being present
depart without profit, what would ye not do, if we should call you every
day? I note not this for that I misselyke with daily preachinge, but for that
untruth so boldly presumed should not pass untouched.

Yet says M. Hardinge, In small Country Churches either the priest let cease
the daily Sacrifice, or else he received alone. But the daily Sacrifice ceased
not: for then that had been leafte undone, that Christ commanded to be
done. Ergo there was Private Mass. O M. Hardinge, is it not possible, your
doctrine may stand without lies? So many untruths, in so little room,
without shame of the world, without fear of God? Where did Christ ever
command you to make your Sacrifice? By what Commission? By what words?
Where did Christ will you to do it every day? Where did Christ ever call it
the daily Sacrifice? Or where ever learned you that the remembrance of Christ's
death perteyneth more to the priest, then to the people? And if your Mass be
that Sacrifice, who ever commanded your priest to say your daily Mass? What
Law, what Decree, what Decretal, what Legantine, what Prouincial? Or what
priest ever was there, that said if daily.

Peccham in his Prouincial was never so strait. De celebrat. Miss. Can.
Al^issimus.
He says no more but thus: Statuimus vt quilibet Sacerdos, quem Canonica
necessitas non excusat, conficiat omni ^ebdomada saltem semel. We ordeine that
every priest, unless he be excused by some Canonical necessity, do
Consecrate every week once at the least. There is odds between once a week,
and once a day. De Con. did 2. Quotidie. Extra de Celebratio. Miss. Dolentes.
And Linwoode writing upon the same, allegeth these words of S. Augustines,
Quotidiae Eucharistiae communicare, nee laudo, nec vitupero: As for receiuinge
the communion every day, In Summa Part vl^im. Q^^^. 82. arti^.
I neither praise it nor dispraise it. Innocentius the third notes, that
there were priests in his time, that would scarcely say mass at four times
in the year. And Thomas of Aquine thinks it sufficient for a priest that is
not charged with Cure, to say Mass only upon principal feasts. It is also
written in Vitis Patrum, that a certain holy man being made priest, would
notwithstanding never say Mass, while he lived. Yet was there none of these
ever charged with fores^owinge or ceassinge the daiely Sacrifice, or leauinge
undone that thing, that Christ had commanded to be done.

Concerning the priests Sole receiuinge, which is grounded only upon it
self, without further proof: Uerily I see no cause, but that Nicolaus de Cusa
being a Cardinal of Rome, ought to carry as good credit herein, as M.
Hardinge with all his gheasses. Nicolaus de Cusa Ad Cle^^^ and literatos
Bohaemiae.
He says, and wills his words to be specially noted, as it is before
touched, that in those days the priest did never receive without the Deacon.
Yet has M. Hardinge a certain surmise by him self, that the priests in the
Country received alone.

But what a woonderful case is this? The Mass, that we must needs believe is
so Ancient, so Uniuersal, so Catholic, so Holy, so Glorious, cannot be
found neither in Churches, nor in Chapels, nor in secret Oratories, nor in
Private houses in Town or City, but must be sought out in some Petie parish
in the Country, and that by conjecture only, and by gheasse, and by such
records as directely condemn the whole order of the Mass, and will suffer no
man to be present thereat, but only such as will receive.

For thus says Chrysostom: Chrysostom. ad Ephesios hom. 3.
If thou stand by, and do not Communicate, thou art maliperte, thou art
shameless, thou art impudent. Thine eyes be unworthy the ^ight hereof,
unworthy he thine ears. O thou will say, I am unworthy to be partaker of
the holy Mysteries. Then art thou unworthy to be partaker of the prayers: thou
may no more stand here, then a Heathen, that never was Christened. And
touching him self he says, In vain we come to offer the daily Sacrifice:
In vain we stand at the Aultare, Meaning thereby, as may appear, that if
he said Private Mass for lack of company, it was in vain. Here M. Hardinge
seeinge that his Mass, even by his own authority is shrewdly crac^te, and
leafte for vain, assayeth to salve it, as well as he may.

The Mass (says he) is not in vain in it self, but unto the people that
will not come.

This is a Gloss biside the text: yet let us take it, as it were true. But if
hearing of the Mass be a thing pleasant unto God, and meritorious unto the
people: if Christ be there offered in deed for the sins of the world: if
the Priest alone may receive for all the rest: if it be sufficient for the
people to Communicate spiritually, as M. Hardinge has avouched, then is not
the saieinge of the Mass in vain, no not unto the people: no although they
never would Communicate.

Chrysostom says, It is in vain: M. Harding says, It is not in vain. And
yet, to see a greater contradiction, M. Hardinge him self in this place
says, It is in vain unto the people: Division. 9. fol. 13. b.
And yet the same M. Hardinge has said before, It is commanded by Councels:
it is sufficient for the people to Communicate in spirit: it is not in vain
unto the people.

If M. Hardinge will stand unto the auth^ritie of Chrysostom, let him not
dissemble, but speak plainly unto the people* as Chrysostom spoke. Let him
say to them that come to hear his Mass, If ye receive not, ye are
shameless, ye are impudent: ye are not worthy to be partakers of the common
prayers: depart ye from the Church: ye have no more place here, then Turks
and Heathens: Your eyes ^e unworthy to see these things: unworthy be your
ears: our Masses can not profit you: they are not meritorious for you: they
please not God: they provoke his anger: they are al in vain.

This is Chrysostomes sense, and plain meaning: and this is a fair winding
up of M. Hardinges Clewe.

Now let us examine this invincible argument, wherewithal every Child, as M.
Hardinge vaunteth, is hable to prove the Private Mass.

The Mayor, is this, The Sacrifice in Chrysostomes time was daily offered.

The Minor, is this, But many times no man came to Communicate with the Priest:

The Conclusion, Ergo, There was Private Mass.

Here the Mayor is apparent false: The Minor proved at adventures only by
blind gheasse, and so not proved at al: Therefore the Conclusion must needs
follow after as it may. Unless M. Hardinge look better to it, I trow it will
prove but a childish argument.

As for the Mayor, Council. Constantinop. 6. Can. 52. Aug. tractat. 26 Basil. ad
Caesar. Council. Laodic. Ca. 49.
it is plain by the sixte Council of Constantinople: by S. Augustine upon S.
John: by S. Basil Ad Caesariam patritiam. By the Epistle of the Council of
Alexandria in the defense of Macarius, and by the Council holden at Laodicea,
and by sundry other authorities to that purpose before alleged, that the
Sacrifice was not daily offered, as M. Hardinge imagines.

Touching the Minor, it is not proved, but hangs, as I have said, only by
gheasse. M. Hardinge him self saw, that this is but a sclender proof,
Chrysostom Ministered every day, Ergo, he received alone: And therefore he
sought further to find his Single Communion in ye Country. But Chrysostom
says, There is No body to Communicate. By this it may appear, as I have
already said, that Chrysostom him self did not Communicate: unless we will
say, Chrysostom was No body: and so No body received alone: and No body him
self said M. Hardinges Private Mass. And therefore No body may come forth,
and justly require me to subscribe. Thus the Mayor being false, the Minor not
proved, the Conclusion not following, thou see, good Christian Reader, what
invincible force M. Hardinge has brought to prove his Mass.

But because he seems to set somewhat by the windinge up of his Clewe, it shall
not be from the purpose, to unwind it again, and to lay it abroad, and to
consider the stuffinge of it, and to see how closely and handesomely it is
wound together.

First there is not one threade of the holy Scriptures in all this Clew, but the

Secondly the Private Mass is founded upon the negligence, and, as M. Hardinge

Thirdely, there is a way divised, how two Priests saieinge their Masses in

Fourthly, Lay people, women, sick folks, and boys, that received or
ministered

Fifthly, because S. Ambrose, S. Augustine, S. Hierome, S. Chrysostom, S.

Sixthly, the matter is made good by Uisions, Dreams, and Fables.

Seventhly there are alleged Canons of Councels not extant in any Council,

Eighthly, because M. Harding could not find his Mass in the whole Church
Caesaria in Cappadocia, a thousand Miles beyond the Limits of al
Christendom, where as was never Private Mass said, neither then, nor before
yt time, nor never sithence.

Nienthly, for that he stood in despair of Cathedral and other like great
Churches,

Tenthly, notwithstanding all this inquiry, he has not yet found neither

To be short, the whole substance of his proufes hangs only upon his

These be the contents of M. Hardinges Clew, and thus substantially has he
proved the antiquity, and universality of his Mass.

Now, good Reader, to give thee only a taste of some part, that may be said
of our side, first it is apparent, that Christ our Savior at his last
Supper Ministered the holy Communion, and no Private Mass, and bade his
Disciples to do the same in his remembrance.

Likewise S. Paul willed the Corinthians one to wait, and tarry for an other,
in the holy Ministration, Communion.
and to conform them selves to Christ's example.

Whereupon S. Hierome says, Hieronym. in. 1. Cor. 11.
as it is before alleged, The Lords Supper must be Common unto al: for the
Lord delivered the Sacraments equally unto all the Disciples that were
present. Ambros. 1. Cor. 11.
And S. Ambrose likewise expoundinge these words, Inuicem expectate, wait
one for an other, says thus, That the Oblation of many may be celebrate
together, and may be ministered unto al.

In the Canons of the Apostles it is Decreed, that if any man resort unto the
Church, Can. Apost. Canon. 9.
and hear the Scriptures, and abstain from the Communion, he stand
excommunicate, as one that troubles the Congregation.

The like Decrees are found under the names of Calixtus, De Con. dis. 2.
peracta.
Anacletus, Martinus, Hilarious, and others: by which it is certain, that the
whole Church then received together. De Con. dis. 1. Episcopus.


Cleme^. Epist. 2.
Clemens, as M. Hardinge calls him, the Apostles fellow, writes thus: Let so
many Hosts be offered upon the Aultare, De Con. dis. 2. Si non.
as may be sufficient for the people.

August. de Sermon dom. in Monte. lib. 2.
S. Augustine says of the Congregation in his time: Every day we receive the
Sacrament of Christ's Body. Augustine. in Psalm. 10.
And openinge the same more particularly, he says thus, De Con. dis. 2. Si
quis.
Vnde confido in eis, quibus heri Communicasti, and hodi^ Communicas, and cras
Communicabis? What trust can I have in them, with whom thou did Communicate
yesterday, and do Communicate to day, and wilt Communicate again to morrow?

Augustine. in Psalm. 10.
Clemens Alexandrinus says, After that certain, as the manner is, have
divided the Sacrament, they give every of the people leave to take part of it.

S. Chrysostom plainly describes the very order of the Communion that was
used in his time, by these words: The spiritual and reverend Sacraments,
are set forth equally to rich and poor: Cleme^. stroma. lib. 1.
neither doothe the rich man enjoy them more, and the poor man less: they
have al like honor, and like coming to them. The Sacraments being once
laid forth ( as then the manner was for the people to receive) are not taken
in again, Chrysostom. in. 1. Cor. Hom. 27.
until all the people have Communicate, and taken part of that spiritual meat:
but the Priests stand still and wait for all, even for the poorest of them al.

Again he says, There are things wherein the Priest differs nothing from
the people: Chrysostom. 2. Cor. hom. 18.
as when we must use the fearful Mysteries. For we are al of one
worthiness to receive the same.

S. Gregory says, Gregorius Dialogor. li. 2. ca. 23.
that even in his time the order was, that in the time of the holy Communion,
the Deacon should stand up, and say alowde unto the people, Si quis non
Communicate, det locum, If there be any body, that is not disposed to
Communicate, let him give place.

This Latin word, Missa, Missa.
in the time of Tertullian, and S. Cyprian, signified a dimissing, or a license
to depart: and was specially applied unto the Communion, upon this occasion
that I must here declare. Isido^us in Lexico.
They that were then named Catechumeni, that is to say, Nouices of the faith,
and not yet Christened, were suffered to be present at the Communion, until the
Gospel was ended. Then the Deacon commanded them forth, pronouncing these
words alowde, Catechumeni exeunto: Or thus, Ite, Missa est. Go ye forth,
ye have license to depart. Of this dimissing or departinge forth of the
Catechumeni and others, the service it self was then called Missa. The reast
remained still in the Church, and received the Communion together with the
Priest. Further, the breakinge of the Bread, The breakinge of the Bread.
August. ad Paulinum. ^pist. 59.
which even now is used in the Mass it self, signifies a distribution of
the Sacrament unto the people, as S. Augustine says unto Paulinus, Ad
distribuendum comminuitur, It is broken to the end it may be divided.
Moreover, the Priest him self in his Mass says thus. This holy Mixture and
Consecration etc. be unto me, and to all that shall receive it, unto Salvation.
Thus the very name of the Mass, the very Breaking of the Bread, the very
Gestures and Words that ye Priest uses at his Mass, bear manifest witness
against Private Mass.

Here I leave out a great number of Councels, and Canons, and old Fathers, as
Justinius Martyr, Dionysius, Tertullian, Epiphanius, and Eusebius, with sundry
other ancient writers, both Greeks and Latins: thinkinge it sufficient by
these few to have given a taste of the rest.

Our proufes hang not upon conjecture, or uncertain Gheasses: we pray not
aid of Sick folk, Women, Boys, and Children, for the Proof of the holy
Communion, as M. Hardinge is driven to do for proof of his Mass: we seek
not out secret Oratories, or privy Chapels: we forge no new Doctors, such
as the world never knew before, as these men do for lack of others: we
allege neither Dreams, nor Uisions, nor fantastical Fables.

We rest upon the Scriptures of God: upon the authority of the aunciente
Doctors, and Councels: and upon the Uniuersal practice of the most famous
Cities and Churches of the world.

These things well compared and weighed together, judge thou now (gentle
Reader) whether M. Hardinge have hitherto just cause, either to blow up the
Triumph with such courage, or to require any man to Subscribe.

THE SECOND ARTICLE OF COMMUNION UNDER BOTH KINDS.
The B. of Sarisburie.
Or that there was then any Communion ministered unto the People under one kind.

M. Hardinge. The first Division.
This being a Sacrament of Unity, every true Christian man ought in receiuinge
of it to consider, how unity may be atchiued and keapte, rather then to show a
straightness of conscience about the out ward forms of Bread and wine, to
be used in the administration of it: and that so much the more, how much the
end of every thing is to be esteemed more, then that, which serves to the
end. Otherwise herein the breach of unity is so little recompensed by the
exact keepinge of the outward Ceremony, that according to the saieinge of
S. Augustine, who so ever takes the Mystery of unity, and keeps not the
bond of peace, he takes not a Mystery for him self, but a testimony
against him self. Therefore they have great cause to weigh with them selves,
what they receive in this Sacrament, who moved by sclender reasons made for
both kinds, do rashely and daungerously condemn the Church, for geeuinge
of it under one kind, to al, that do not in their own persons Consecrate
and offer the same in remembrance of the Sacrifice once offered on the Cross.
And that they may think the Church to stand upon good grounds herein, may
it please them to understand, that the fruit of this Sacrament, which they
enjoy that woorthely receive it, depends not of the ou^warde forms of Bread
and Wine, but redoundeth of the virtue of the Fleashe and Blood of Christ.
And where as under either kind, 46 The.46. (...)truth, proceeding only of the
gross error of Transubstantiati^^
whole Christ is verily present (for now that he is risen again from the
dead, his Fleashe and Blood can be sundred no more, because he dies no more)
this healthful Sacrament is of true Christian people with no less fruit
received under one kind, then under both. The Sacramentaries that believe not
the truth of Christ's Body and blood in this holy Sacrament, I remit to
sundry godly treatises made in defense of the right faith in that point. I
think it not necessary here to treat thereof, or of any other matter* which
M. Iuel has not as yet manifestly touched in his sermon.

The B. of Sarisburie.
The former article of Private Mass, by M. Hardinges own confession
proceeds not from God, but from the negligence of the people: but the abuse
of the Communion under one kind, from whence so ever it first proceeded,
stands now only upon the wilfulness of the Priests: who seeinge, and
knowinge the Institution, and Commandment of Christ, yet notwithstanding
have divised ways against their own knowledge, violently to repel the same.
And that the whole case may the better appear, the Question, that stands
between us, is moved thus: Whether the holy Communion at any time within the
space of six hundred years after Christ, were ever Ministered openly in the
Church unto the People under one Kind.

For proof whereof M. Hardinge has here brought in Women, Children, Sick
folks, Infantes, and Mad men: that these have sometimes received the one
kind: some in their Private houses: some in their death beds: some
otherwise, as he did before, for proof of his Private Mass. If in all this
long treaty, he have brought any one example, or proof sufficient, of the
Ministration in one kind openly used in any Church, it is good reason he be
believed.

But if he after al these vauntes, having published such a book, as all the
world, as it is supposed, Difference betvveene Priest and Lay.
is not hable to answer, have hither to brought no such, neither example,
nor proof, then may we justly think, there is nothing to be brought at al:
but that by his eloquence and fair speech, he seeks to abuse the
simplicity and ignorance of his Reader.

The Council of Basile above one hundred and thirty years paste, Council.
Basil.
made no conscience to grant the use of both kinds unto the kingedome of
Bohemia: and this Council now presently holden at Trident, Council. Trident.
upon certain conditions has granted the same to other Kingedomes, and
Countries: and were it not, they should seem to confess, the Church of Rome
has erred, they would not doubt to grant the same freely to the whole
world. None of them al can tell, neither when, nor where, nor how this error
first began. St. G. in the D^uels Sophistry. Tertullian. de virginibus
velandis.
Some think it sprange only of a certain superstition and simplicity of the
people. But whence so ever it first began, as Tertullian writes of the
frowardnes, that he saw in certain of his time, it must now needs be
maintained, and made good against the truth. His words be these: Consuetudo
initium ab aliqua ignorantia, vel simplicitate sortita in vsum per successionem
corroboratur, and it a aduersus veritatem vendicatur. Sed Dominus noster
Christ^s Veritatem se, non Con^uetudinem, cognominauit. Viderint ergo, quibus
nouum est, quod sibi vetus est. Haereses non tam nouitas, quam veritas
reuincit. Quodcunque aduersus veritatem sapit, hoc erit Haeresis, etiam vetus
consuetudo. Custom, either of simplicity, or of ignorance, geatinge once an
entry, is inured, and hardened by succession: and then is defended against the
truth. But Christ our Lord called him self the Truth, and not Custom. Let
them take heed therefore, unto whom the thing seems new, that in it self
is old. It is not so much the novelty of the matter, as the truth that
reproves an Heresy. What so ever sauoureth against the truth, it is an
heresy, be the Custom thereof never so old.

To come near the matter, Unity, says M. Hardinge, is the substance of this
Sacrament, and who so receives not the same in Unity, receives a testimony
against him self. As this is true, and auoutched by S. Augustine, and of our
parts not denied, so is it also true that S. Ambrose writes, Ambros. 1. Corinthians. 11.
Indignus est Domino, qui aliter Mysterium celebrat, quam ab eo traditum est.
Non enim potest deuotus esse, qui aliter praesumit, quam darum est ab authore.
He is unworthy of the Lord, that does otherwise celebrate the Mystery, then
it was delivered of the Lord. For he cannot be devout, that takes it
otherwise, then it was given of the author. But this excuse under the pretense
and color of unity, seems to importe some defaulte. For what, think these
folk, that unity cannot stand without the breach of Christ's Institution?
Or that the Apostles, and holy Fathers, that ministered the Communion under
both kinds, were not in unity? Or that there was never unity in the Church
for the space of a thousand, four hundred and more years after Christ, until
the Council of Constance, where this matter was first concluded? Herein
stands that Mystical Unity, that one Bread is broaken unto al, and one
Cup is delivered unto al, equally without difference: Chrysosto. in. 2*
and that, as Chrysostom says, in the reverend Sacrifice, Corint. hom. 18.
there is no difference between the Priest and the people, but al is equal.
But our adversaries have herein forced a difference between the Priest, and
the people, without cause: and say, There must needs be such a difference.

And when ye French King, Johan. Sleidanus. li. 9.
who until this day receives still in Both Kinds, had moved his Clergy,
wherefore he might so do more then others, they made him answer, Gerson in
Tractatu contra haeeresim communicandi Laico^ sub vtraque specie. Gabriel Biel*
for that kings are anointed, as well as Priests. Gerson says, that if Lay
men should Communicate under both kinds as well as Priests, Dignitas
sacerdotis, non esse^ supra dignitatem Laicorum, The dignity of the Priest
should not be above the dignity of Lay men. And Gabriel Biel extolleth the
Priest above our Lady, and al Hallowes, because he may Communicate under
both kinds, and they cannot. And so have they altered the Sacrament of
equality, Whole Christ in either part.
and unity: and made it a Sacrament of difference and dissension.

The fruit of the Sacrament (says M. Hardinge) hangs not of the forms of
Bread and Wine. This is a strange form of speech unto the ignorant, that
knows not what these forms mean. Beware, good Reader: for under this word
there lies a snare. 1. Corin. 11.
S. ^^ule five times in one place calls it Br^ade: but this man says, it is
the Form, the Appearance, and show of Bread: but he would have thee believe,
that in deed it is no Bread.

We know well, The fruit of the Sacrament stands not, neither in the Forms,
nor in the Bread, or Wine, which are outwardely received with the bodily
mouth: but in the Fleashe and Blood of Christ, which only are received
spiritually into the soul.

He adds further, Whole Christ is under either kind: therefore he that
receives in one kind only, has no wrong. If any ancient Doctor had said
the same, it might the rather have been believed. But M. Hardinge of false
Principles of his own, thinks he may boldly geather the like Conclusions.
These toys are sufficient to please vain fantasy: but they are not
sufficient to content a godly conscience. But does M. Harding so surely know,
that whole Christ is in either kind, and did Christ him self not know it?
Or if Christ did know it, was not he hable to break his own ordinance, and
to provide for this inconvenience, as well as others? We know, and it is our
belief, that Christ's whole Humanity both Fleashe and Blood is in Heaven. But
that the same humanity of Christ is in the Sacrament, in such gross sort,
as is supposed by our adversaries, notwithstanding many bold vauntes thereof
made, yet was it hitherto never proved. And although this matter be moved by M.
Harding out of season, as being no part of this Question, yet I think it not
amiss briefly to signify by the way, what the old Catholic Fathers have
thought of it.

Consentius demands this question of S. Augustine, Lib. Epist.
whether the Body of Christ being now in Heaven, Epist. 146.
have in it blood or no. Here to leave S. Augustines answer, it is easy for
any man to consider, if Consentius had been persuaded, as M. Hardinge would
seem to be, that Christ's Body has Blood in it in the Sacrament, he would
never have moved this question of the Body of Christ, yt is in Heaven. To
leave these new fantasies, whereof it does not appear, that ever the old
Catholic Doctors made any report, we must understand, that the Bread is
the Sacrament of Christ's Body, and the Wine is the Sacrament of his Blood. So
says Beda, Beda in Lucam ca. 22. li. 6.
Panis ad Corpus Christi Mystic^, Vinu^ refer^ur ad Sanguinem. The Bread in
Mystical manner has relation to the Body of Christ: the Wine has relation
unto his Blood. So likewise says S. Paul, The Bread that we break, is it
not the Communication of the Body of Christ? And the Cup of the blessinge,
which we bliss, is it not the Communication of the Blood of Christ? S.
Paul says not, each part is in other: but each has a peculiar
signification by it self.

But if it were so as M. Harding, and certain others of late days have grossly
imagined, yet notwithstanding the people taking but one kind only, receives
injury, as M. Hardinge may see by Alexander of Hales, and Durandus, and other
of his own Doctors. Alexanders words be these, Licet illa sumptio, quae est
in accipiendo sub vna specie, Alexander. 4. q. 53. M. 1.
sufficiat, tamen illa quae est sub duabus, est maioris meriti. Although that
order of receiuinge the Sacrament, which is under one kind, be sufficient, yet
the other which is under both kinds, is of greater merit. And immediately
after: Sumptio sub vtraque specie, quem modu^ sumendi tradidit Dominus, est
ma^oris efficaciae, and maioris complementi. The receiving under both kinds,
which order the Lord delivered, is of greater strength, Alexander. 4. q. 40.
M. 3. art. 2.
and of greater fullness. And the same Alexander again says, Totus Christus
non continetur sub vtraque specie Sacramentaliter: sed Caro tant^m sub specie
Panis, and sanguis sub specie Vini. Whole Christ is not contained under each
kind by way of Sacrament, but the fleashe only under the form of Bread, and
the Blood under the form of Wine. The like might be reported out of Durandus,
and others. Here M. Hardinges own Doctors confess, that the people
receiuinge under one kind, receives, not the full Sacrament, nor the Blood of
Christ by way of Sacrament: and that their dooinge therein is of less
strength and merit, then the dooinge of the Priest. Wherefore M. Hardinge in
sayeinge The people receiuinge only under one kind takes no injury, doothe
the people double injury.

But to pass over these Scholastical subtle points, it behooves us to know,
that Christ the Son of God, appointed the Sacrament of his Body to be given
in Bread, and the Sacrament of his Blood to be given in Wine. These be the
holy Mysteries of Christ's Body and Blood. We may not here account what may
be in either of them by the drifte of vain fantasy: but rather we ought to
consider, what Christ in the first Institution hereof did, and what he
commanded to be done. Neither do we here condemn the Church, as it
pleases M. Harding unjustly to charge us: but we wish, and pray to God, that
his whole Church may once be reformed after the example and Institution of
Christ: without whom the Church is no Church: neither has any right, or
claim without his promise: nor any promise without his word.

Now, whereas M. Hardinge says, The reasons that we make for the
maintenance of Christ's Institution, are so sclender, If he had first weighed
his own, perhaps he would the more favorably have reported ours. I mean not
the reasons, that others of that side have taken of men's Beardes, of fear of
the Palsy and shakinge, or other diseases, or inconveniences that may happen:
but even of the same, that he has here planted in the first rank, and entry
of his cause. The first is this:

It is a Sacrament of unity: Therefore if it be abused, we may seek no
redress.

The second is this: The fruit of the Sacrament depends not of the fourmes
of Bread

The third is this: Whole Christ ( as M. Hardinge says) is in either part
of Certainly these reasons seem very sclender, and specially to countermaunde
the plain Word of God. The sentence that S. Basile uses in this case, is
very terrible. Basil. Moral. Su^ma. Ca. 14.
Who so forbids the thing that God commands: and who so commands the
thing, that God forbids, is to be holden accursed of al them that love the
Lord.

M. Hardinge. The second Division.
Now concerning th^outwarde forms of Bread and Wine, 47 The.47. Untruth.
For the Bread and Wine signify the body and blood of Christ: the
vvhitenes, the roundnes, and other outward forms signify nothing
their use is employed in signification only, and be not of necessity, so as
grace may not be obtained by worthy receiuinge of the Sacrament, unless both
kinds be ministered. Therefore in Consecratinge of the Sa^rament, according to
Christ's Institution, both kinds be necessary: for as much as it is not
prepared for the receiving only, but also for renewinge and stirringe up of
the remembrance of our Lords death. So in as much as the Sacrament serves
the Sacrifice, by which the Death and Oblation of Christ is represented,
both the kinds be requisite: that by diverse and sundry forms, the bloudde
of Christ shed for our sins, and separated from his body, may evidently
be signified. But in as much as the faithful people do receive the
Sacrament, thereby to attain spiritual grace and salua^ion of their souls,
diversity of the forms or kinds, that be used for the signification only,
has no further use ne profit. But by one kind, because in it whole Christ
is exhibited, abundance of al grace is once given: so as by the other kind
thereto over added (which gives the same and not an other Christ) no further
augmentation of spiritual grace may be atteined. In consideration of this, the
Catholic Church taught by the Holy Ghost al truethe, Whiles in the daily
Sacrifice the memory of our Lords Death and Passion is celebrated, for that
it is necessary therein, to express most plainly the sheddinge and
separatinge of the Blood from the Body, that was Crucified: has always to
that purpose diligently used both kinds of Bread and Wine. But in
distributinge of the blessed Sacrament to Christian people, has used liberty
(which Christ never imbarred by any commandment to the contrary) so as it
has 48 The.48. Vntruethe. The church never thus ministered the Sacrament unto
the people in any open Congregation within the space of six hundred years.
ever been most for the behoufe and commodity of the receivers: and has
ministered sometimes both kinds, sometimes one kind only, as it has been
thought most expedient, in regard of time, place, and persons.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Here is much talk, and no proof. I grant, the Priest if he minister the
Communion orderly, and as he should, does renew the memory of Christ's
Passion, according to his own commandment, Do this in my remembrance. Yet
all this concludes not directly, That therefore Christ's ordinance may be
broken. Neither is it yet so clearly proved, that the priest in his Mass
represents the separation of Christ's Blood from his Body. For, beside that
there is no ancient Doctor here alleged for proof hereof, I might well
demand, by what words, by what gesture, or to whom does he represent this
Separation? His words be strange: his gesture secret: the people neither
hears, nor sees ought, nor knows what he means. And being granted,
that the Separation of Christ's Body and Blood, is represented in the holy
Mysteries, yet how knows M. Hardinge, that the priest ought more to
represent the same, then the people? Doubtless Christ's Blood was shed
indifferently for all the faithful, as well for the People, as for the Priest:
between whom and the people, as I have before showed out of S. Chrysostom,
Chrysostom in. 2. ad Corin. Hom. 18.
in this case there is no difference. For whereas M. Hardinge takes the name
of Sacrifice for some show of proof in this matter, it behooves him to know,
that not only the portion received by the priest, but also the portion that is
distributed unto the people, is of the old Fathers called a Sacrifice. S.
Augustine has these words, In Carthage the manner was, that Hymns should
be said at the Aultare out of the Book of Psalms, Retracta. lib. 2.
either when the Oblation was made, or when the thing that was offered, was
divided unto the people.

By these plain words we may see, that both the priest and people received
one Sacrifice. And Clemens (as M. Hardinge calls him, the Apostles fellow)
says thus, Clemens Epist. 2.
Tanta in Altario Holocausta offerantur, quanta populo sufficere debeant: Let
there be so many Sacrifices offered at the Altar, as may suffice for the people.

And whereas it is further said, that the priest by receiuinge both parts
in several, expresses, as it were, unto the eye, how Christ's Body and
Blood were done asunder, the Scriptures, and ancient Fathers, have taught us
otherwise, that not any gesture of the priest, but the very Ministration of the
holy Communion, and the whole action of the people, expresses unto us the
manner and order of Christ's death. S. Paul says, As often as ye shall eat
this Bread and drink this Cup, 1 Cor. 11.
ye shall declare the Lords death until he come. And this, S. Paul writes,
not only to the priests, but also to the whole Congregation of the
Corinthians. And in like sort writes S. Augustine touching the same, Cum
frangitur hostia, and Sanguis de Calice in ora fidelium funditur, quid aliud
quam dominici Corporis in Cruce immolatio, De Con. Did. 2. Cum frangitur.
eiusque Sanguinis de latere effusio designatur? When the Oblation is broken,
and the Blood from the cup is powered into the mouths of the faithful, what
thing else is there signified, but the offringe of the Lords Body upon the
Cross, and the flowinge of his Blood from his side? Thus it is clear, that
the separation of Christ's Body and Blood, is represented as well by the
People, as by the Priest. Wherefore to divise a difference without cause, and
of the same to conclude an error, it is double folly.

The diversity of forms and kinds (says M. Hardinge) serves for
signification only, and has no further use ne profit. Notwithstanding this
saieynge were otherwise true, yet the issue thereof seems dangerous. It is
our part to be obedient, and not to discuss, or rectify Gods
Commandments: and to say, any thing that Christ the Son of God has
appointed us to do, is utterly void of use and profit. As for the liberty
of the Church, that is here claimed, if we shou^de demand where, and when it
was granted, perhaps the Chartar would not be found. The liberty of the
Church, is not to be against God, nor to controlle any his ordinance. Neither
has M. Hardinge yet proved, that the Church within six hundred years after
Christ, in open Congregation and assembly of people (which is the state of
this question) ever used any such kind of liberty.

In these words M. Hardinge has privily cowched sundry arguments, which of
what value or force they be, I pray thee (Gentle Reader) to understand.

The first is this, The priest Consecrateth the Sacrament: Therefore the

The second is this, The priest offers the Sacrifice, and represents the
Ergo, it is sufficient for the people to receive in one kind.

The third is this, The Church has her liberty, Ergo, she is not bound

Alas how sclenderly hang these things together? Yet these are the
arguments, that, as it is supposed, are never hable to be answered.

M. Hardinge. The.3. Division.
As touching the words of Christ, Bibite ex hoc omnes: Drink ye al of
this: They perteine to the Apostles only, and to their successors. For to
them 49 The.49. Untruth. For these words perteined as well to the people,
as to the priests, as shall appear.
only he gave commandment to do that, which he did in his supper, Ante
passionem nobis solis praecepit hoc facere, inquiunt Apostoli apud Clementem.
li. 8. Constitu. Apostolicarum Cap. vltim.
as Clement says: to them only saiynge, do this in my remembrance, he gave
Commission to consecrate, offer, and to receive the Sacrament in remembrance of
his death and passion, by the same words ordeininge them priests of the
new Testamente. Wherefore this belongs not to the lay people, neither
can it justly be geathered by this place, that they are bound of
necessity, and Here M. Hardinge alters the case.
under pain of deadly sin to receive the Sacrament under both kinds.

The B. of Sarisburie.
When I read these words of M. Hardinges, I am stricken with horror, to
consider the terrible judgment of God. It is much to be feared, that he, that
is led away of this sort, offends not of ignorance, for so were the
fault the more pardonable, but against the manifest known truth, and
against the spirit of God. For whereas Christ says, Drink ye al of this,
if he will follow the letter, the words be plain, that al should drink. If
he will leave the letter, and take the meaning, S. Paul has opened it. For
writing unto the whole Congregation at Corinthe, 1. Cor. 11.
he says thus, As often as ye shall eat this Bread, and drink of this
Cup, ye shall declare the Lords death until he come. If he doubt S. Paul,
yet the very practice, and continual order of the Primitive Church, fully
declares what Christ meante. And they say, Consuetudo est optima interpres
Legis. Custom is the best Interpreters of the law. If he will take neither the
words of Christ, nor Christ's meaning, then I know ^ot how to deal with
him.

Once again he brings forth Clement the Apostles fellow. And what
Clement? Uerily even the same, that ministered and delivered the holy Communion
to the faithful, that then were in Rome, under both kinds, as appears by
the long usage of that Church, even as Christ delivered it to his Disciples:
and M. Hardinge is not hable to show, that the same Clemente ever ministered
otherwise. He sees, and knows, that the word Omnes, is against him: the
meaning against him: The practice of the Church against him: his own Clement
against him. Yet he bears his countenance so, as if al were with him. To be
short, if Christ, when he said, Drink ye al, meant not that al should
drink, why did S. Paul and all the Apostles, and the whole primitive Church
expound it, and practice it, as though he had meante so: And if he meante so,
why does M. Hardinge deceive the world, and say, he meante not so?

But Clement says, Christ spoke these words, do this in my remembrance,
only unto the Apostles. Therefore (says M. Hardinge) These words, drink
ye al, pertain to the Apostles only, and to their successors. Understande,
good Reader, that Clement in the place here alleged, speaks not one word,
either of one kind, or of both: but only says thus, That Christ appointed
his Apostles to the office of the holy Ministration, which he calls the
spiritual oblation. Therefore thou maiste see, Spiritualis hostia.
that M. Hardinge shewinge the one thing for an other, and of the same
concludinge what him likes, cannot seem to deal plainly.

The argument that hereof is geathered, stands thus: Clement says, that
Christ gave only unto his Apostles, the office of the Ministry, and
authority to offer the spiritual Sacrifice, Ergo, these words, drink ye al
of this, perteine nothing to the people. Here is a very fainte conclusion. For
by force of this reason, he may take from the people both parts of the
Sacrament, as well as one, and so leave them no Sacrament at al.

M. Hardinge. The.4. Division.
And this understood they which above one hundred years past, 50 The.50.
Untruth. They changed not, but restoared the old custom.
chaunginge the old custom of the Church of receiuinge the Communion under
one kind by their private authority, would needs usurp the Cup also. For
seeinge them selves not to have sufficient proof, and warrant for their
dooinge, Joan. 6.
of these words, drink ye al of this, the better to bolster up their new
fangled attempt, they thought it better to aliege the words of Christ in S.
John. Except ye eat the fleashe of the Son of man, and drink his blood,
ye shall not have life in you: which words, for all that our new Masters of
forty years paste, will to be understood of the spiritual, and not of the
Sacramental eatinge, as it may be, and is taken for both, of the Doctors,
vewed a part: Yet in all that Chapter, there is no mention of the Cup, nor of
Wine at al. Wherefore they that cry so much on the institution and
commandment of Christ, cannot find in all the Scriptures neither
commandment, where he gave charge, the Sarcament so to be given, neither so
much as any example, where Christ gave it under both kinds to any other
then to thapostles. Where as contrariwise it may be showed of our part, that
the Sacrament was given under one kind only to the two Disciples, that went
to Emaus. Luc. 24.
For that the Bre^de, which Christ there took, Blissed, Brake, and gave to
them, was not simple and common Bread, but the Sacrament of the Body and
Blood of Christ. For so In Matthaeu^ hom. 17.
Chrysostom, De co^sensu Euang. li. 3. ca. 25.
Augustine, In Lucam.
Bid, and In Lucam. Act. 2.
Theophylacte, with one accord do witness. It appears also, that the
Communion under one kind was used at Jerusalem among Christ's Disciples, by
that S. Luke writes in thactes of the Apos^les of the breakinge of the Bread.
If M. Iuel here think to avoid these places by their accustomed figure,
Synechdoche, among his own sect happily it may be accepted: but among men
of right and learned judgment, that shifte will seem over weak and vain. Now
to conclude touching the sixth Chapter of S. John, as thereof they can bring
no one word mentioninge the Cup, or Wine, for proof of their both
kinds: so it shows, and not in very obscure wise, that the form of Bread
alone is sufficient, whereas Christ says, Qui manducat panem hunc, viuet in
aeternum, he that eats this Bread, shall live for ever.

The B. of Sarisburie.
In these words M. Hardinge charge not only us, but also the Apostles of
Christ, and all the Fathers of the Primitive Church, with great oversight: who
in their times ministered the holy Sacrament unto the Uulgare people, as it is
now supposed by these men, without any example of Christ, and without
Commission.

Touching the Institution of Christ, I have already said so much, as unto
a quiet mind may seem sufficient. Yet for further declaration, I would
demand of M. Hardinge, what thing he requires to Christ's Institution. If
Words, Christ's words be plain: If Example, Christ him self ministered
in both kinds: If Authority, Christ commanded his Disciples, and in them
al other Ministers of his Church, to do the like: If Certdi^etie of his
meaning, The Apostles endued with the Holy Ghost, so practiced the same, and
understood, he meante so: If Continuance of time, he badde the same to be
continued until he come again. If neither the Words, nor Example, nor
Commandment of Christ, nor the understanding and practice of the Apostles,
can warrant us Christ's Institution, alas what warrant then have they, that
being utterly void of al these things, only stay them selves, St. Guard. in
the Devils sophistry
as it is confessed by the best of that side, by the simple devotion of the
people? When Christ had delivered both kinds unto his Disciples, he said
unto them, This do ye, the same, that ye see, I have done. But where did
Christ ever say, Minister unto your selves one way, and an other way unto
the people: or, Receive ye in both kinds, and let all the rest receive in one?

Although these things be plain, and evident of them self, yet that the
folly of these men may the better appear, it shall be good to hear the report
of one of their own Doctors touching these matters. One Gerardus Lorichius,
Garardus Lorichius in.7. part Canonis.
in a book that he wrote De Missa publica proroganda, has these words:

Sunt Pleudocatholici, qui reformationem Ecclesiae quoquo modo remorari non
verentur. Hi ne Laicis altera species restituatur, nullis parcunt blasphemijs.
Dicunt enim, Christum solis Apostolis dixisse, Bibite ex eo omnes. Atqui verba
Canonis habent, Accipite and manducate ex hoc omnes. Hic dicant, oro, number and
hoc ad solos dictum sit Apostolos. Ergo Laicis and a specie panis est
abstinendum: Quod dicer^^st haeresis, and blasphemia pestilens, and
execrabilis: Consequitur ergo, vtrunque verbum dictum esse ad omnem Ecclesiam.

They be false Catholics (says this man) that are not ashamed by all means
to hinder the Reformation of the Church. They, to the intent the other kind of
the Sacrament may not be restored unto the Lay people, spare no kind of
blasphemies. For they say, that Christ said only unto his Apostles, Drink
ye al of this. But the words of the Canon (of the Mass) be these, Take and
eat ye al of this. Here I beseech them, let them tell me, whether they will have
these words also, only to perteine unto the Apostles. Then must the lay
people absteyne from the other kind of the Bread also. Which thing to say,
is an Heresy, and a pestilent, and a detestable blasphemy. Wherefore it
follows, that each of these words was spoken unto the whole Church. Thus
far Lorichius, an earnest defender of Transubstantiation, of the Popes
Supremacy, and of Private Mass: lest M. Hardinge should say, he were one of
Luthers Scholars, and so except against him, as being a party. And Leo
sometime Bishop of Rome, hearing of certain that used to dippe the Bread in
the Wine, and so to deliver it to the people, had no way to reform them, but
only by Christ's Institution. For thus he says. De con. did. 2 Cum omne.
Quod pro complemento Communionis* intinctam tradunt Eucharistiam populis, nec
hoc prolatum ex Euangelio testimonium receperunt. Whereas for accomplishment of
the Communion, they dippe the Sacrament, and deluer it unto the people, they
have not received this witness of the Gospel. He adds further: Seorsum enim
Panis, and seorsum Calicis, commendatio memoratur. For the delivery of the
Bread, and the delivery of the Cup, are mentioned asunder. And thus he
speaks of the ministration of the Sacrament, that is due not only to the
priests, but also to the people.

The learned men of Bohemia s^we they could have no hold of Christ's
Institution, and therefore to maintain their new fangled attempt, as it
pleases M. Hardinge to ter^e it, they were (...)to take the words of Christ
out of the sixthe Chapter of John, unless (...)fleashe of the Son of man,
and drink his blood, ye shall have no life in you. But these words in the
sixte Chapter of S. John, says M. Hardinge, our new Masters will have
expounded of the spiritual, not of the Sacramental eatinge. Of the Bohemians, I
cannot see why they should be called new fangled. Their request was none
other, but that they might continue the order of the Primitive Church, Par. 3.
q. 80. art. 12*
which Thomas of Aquine says, had continued in diverse Churches from the
Apostles until his time, for the space of a thousand and three hundred years
without controlement. And it may il become a Christian man, and a scholar of
thaposto^^que See, to call the dooinge of Christ, and of his Disciples, new
fangled. Touching their reasons made in this behalf, I need not to speak.
Gods name be blissed, they have prevailed with the best learned of the
world. What so ever their premises seem to M. Hardinge, their Conclusion was
this, that no mortal creature should presume, to disallowe the ordinance of
the Immortal God.

But our new Masters, says M. Hardinge, must needs have these words of
S. John expounded of the spiritual eatinge. If it be either the violence of
nature, or the manner of his Catholic doctrine, that drives M. Hardinge thus
to taunte, he must be borne with all: notwithstanding it agrees not with his
promise. As touching the understanding of the words of Christ, in the
sixthe of S. John, they are not al new Masters, that have so taken them. For,
to leave S. Augustine, Origin, and others of that age, Nicolas Lyra, Nicol.
Lyra in Psalm. 111.
a man of later years, says, The said words of Christ must needs be
taken spiritually, and none otherwise. Thus he says, Ista intelligi debent de
manducatione, and potatione spirituali. Quia sequitur, qui manducat meam
Carnem, and bibit meum sanguinem, in me manet, and ego in eo. Quod B.
Augustinus exponens ait* Hoc est manducare illam escam, and bibere illum potum,
in Christo manner, and Christum manentem in se habere: quod nihil aliud est,
quam esse in charitate Christi. These words must be taken of the spiritual
eatinge and drinkinge. For it follows, he that eats my Fleashe, and
drinks my Blood, dwells in me, and I in him: Which thing S. Augustine
expoundinge, says thus, This is the eatinge of that food, and the drinkinge
of that drink, for a man to dwell in Christ, and to have Christ in him
dwellinge: which thing is nothing else, but to be in the love of Christ.
Here we see, that Nicolas Lyra a man that lived two hundred years ago, and
therefore no very new Master, expounds these words of the spiritual
eatinge.

Yet M. Hardinge says, The same place may be taken also of the sacramental
eatinge. But Lyra thinks no, Nicol. Lyra in Psalm. 111.
and therefore adds further: Hoc verbum nihil direct pertinet ad
Sacramentalem, vel corporalem manducationem. Nam hoc verbum fuit dictum diu,
antequam Sacramentum Eucharistiae esset institutum. Ex illa igitur litera, de
sacramentali Communione, non potest fieri argumentum efficax: These words
pertain not directly unto the Sacramental or Corporal eatinge. For it was
spoken long before the Sacrament was ordained. Therefore out of this letter,
there cannot be made any good argument for the Sacramental Communion.

Likewise one Michael Uaehe one of late years, Michael Vaehe tractatu. 5.
contra Lutherum.
a man of M. Hardinges own side, toutchinge the same matter, writes thus:
Infirmum est argumentum: Quae enim de spirituali manducatione dicta sunt, ille
ad sacramentalem torquet. This (says he) is but a weak reason: For the
words that be spoken of spiritual eatinge, he applies to the Sacramental
eatinge. Here may M. Hardinge see, bisides S. Augustine, Origin, and other old
Catholic Fathers, whose words I have not alleged, what men he has called
new Masters. Nicolas Lyra was an English man, and lived two hundred years
before Luther: Michael Uaehe was of late years, and wrote namely against
Luther. Uerely if Christ and his Apostles were now conuersante in the world,
unless they would forsake their own doctrine, they should be called New
Masters to, as well as others.

And not withstandinge these words in the sixth Chapter of S. John be spoken,
and taken, of the spiritual eatinge, as it is already proved, yet are they
oftentimes by the old Fathers applied unto the Sacrament: but indirectly, as
it is above noted by Lyra. To allege the places, specially being so many, and
not unknown unto the learned, it would be tedious. Christ's being at Emaus,
and the Disciples breakinge of Bread at Jerusalem, because it has pleased M.
Hardinge to bring them twice, shall be afterward answered in their places.

The reasons, that M. Harding has here geathered, be these: In the sixth
Chapter of S. John there is no mention made of the Cup or Wine: Ergo, the
people may receive under one kind. This reason is very weak: for he may as
well conclude of the same words: Ergo, the Priest may receive under one kind:
which he him self says is against Christ's Institution. He might far
better have concluded the contrary. The lay people being faithful and godly,
by Faith, and in their hearts do in deed and verily drink the Blood of
Christ: Therefore they may drink the Sacrament of the ^ame. And as Eckius a
Doctor of that side says, Eckius, In locis communibus.
The people drinks in the person of the Priest, Therefore, they may drink
in their own person, as well, and without danger.

An other reason is this: It doothe not appear, that Christ ever ministered in
Both Kinds, but only to his Disciples: Ergo, y^ people may receive in one
kind. I marvel, what luck M. Hardinge has to such Conclusions. For what
necessary sequel can there be, either from thapostles to the people: or from
both kinds to one kind: or from an Affirmative to a Negative? The sum of
the reason stands thus: Thapostles are commanded to receive Both Kinds:
Ergo, the people is not commanded to receive Both Kinds. The weakness
whereof is evident, and shows it self. It will much rather and better follow
thus: The people is commanded to receive, as Thapostles received, for there is
expressed no difference: The Apostles received in both kinds: Ergo, the
people is commanded to receive in both kinds. And thus, notwithstanding it be
here stoutely auoutched, that we have neither example, nor Institution, yet I
trust it doothe well appear, that we have both the example of Christ, that
ministered the Sacrament in both kinds: and also Christ's Institution, that
bade his Disciples to do the same.

M. Hardinge. The.5. Division.
Thus our adversaries have nothing to bring out of the Scriptures against the
use of the Catholic Church, in ministringe the Communion under one kind. And
yet they cease not crieinge out upon the breach of Christ's express
commandment. And M. Iuel for his part in his first answer to D. Cole,
says, that the Council of Constance pronounced openly against Christ him
self. But for as much as they are so hot in this point, I will send them to
Martin Luther him self their Patriarch, that either by his sobriety in this
matter they may be somewhat colded, or by his, and his Scholars inconstancy
herein, be brought to be asshamed of themselves. Though the places be well
known, as oftentimes cited of the Catholic writers of our time against the
Gospellers, yet here I think good to rehearse them, that the unlearned may
see, how them selves make not so great a matter of this article, as some seem
to bear the people in hand it is. Luther writes to them of Bohemiae these
very words. Quoniam pulchrum quidem esset, vtraque specie Eucharistiae vti,
and Christus hac in re nihil tanquam necessarium praecepit: praestaret pacem
and vnitatem, quam Christus vbique praecepit, sectari, quam de speciebus
Sacramenti contendere. Where as it were a fair thing (says he) to use both
kinds of the Sacrament, yet for that Christ herein has commanded nothing,
as necessary, it were better to keep peace and unity, which Christ has
every where charged us with all, the^ to strive for the outward kinds of the
Sacrament. Again his words be these in a declaration that he wrote of the
Sacrament. Non dixi, neque consului, neque est intentio mea, vt vnus aut
aliquot Episcopi, propria authoritate alicui incipiant vtramque speciem
porrigere, nisi ita constitueretur and mandaretur in Concilio generali. Neither
have I said, nor counseled, nor my mind is, that any one, or more Bishops,
begin by their own authority, to give both kinds (of the Sacrament) to
any person, unless it were so ordained, and commanded in a general Council.

The B. of Sarisburie.
It greeueth M. Hardinge that we should say, the Council of Constance decreed
against Christ him self, and therefore he sends us to Luther him self,
that, saying his inconstancy, we may be ashamed of our self. And thus with
one poor syllable, he thought it good merrily to refreashe him self: and yet
touching inconstancy, wherein he so triumphs against D. Luther, he seems
utterly to have forgotten him self. For it is known to the world, that D.
Luther in all his life, never changed but once; and that from manifest error to
the open confessed truth. But M. Hardinge, upon how good occasions I will not
say, has changed his doctrine, and whole faith, twice within the space of two
years. And so much would I not now have toutched, sauinge only to put him
in remembrance of him self.

That the determination of ye Council of Constance was against Christ, De
Missa publica proroganda. 1. Corinthians. 11.
bisides Gerardus Lorichius, a Doctor of M. Hardinges own School, who
affirms it in vehement words, what can there be so plain, as that S.
Paul writes unto the Corinthians? That I received of the Lord, the same have
I delivered unto you. After he mentions each kind aparte, and shows, that
as Christ took the bread, so he also took the Cup: and that the Apostles
received both at Christ's hands, not only for them selves, but also to the
use, and behoufe of the people. Therefore, where as M. Hardinge cries so often
against us, that the delivery of the Cup unto the people, is no part of
Christ's Institution, if he had considered these things well, or had conferred
herein with the old Catholic Fathers, he would have better advised him
self. Cyprian. lib. 2. Epist. 3.
For in steed of many, for shortness sake, to allege but one, S. Cyprians
words in this matter be very plain. Quidam vel ignora^ter, vel simpliciter,
in Calice Dominico sanctificando, and plebi ministrando, non hoc faciunt, quod
Jesus Christus Dominus and Deus noster huius Sacrificij Author, and Doctor
fecit, and docuit. Some there be, that in sanctifieyng the Cup, and
delivering it unto the people, do not that thing, that Jesus Christ our Lord
and God, the author and teacher of this Sacrifice, both did, and taught. Ad
originem Traditionis Dominicae. Quod mandatum est.
And adds further, If any man be in this error, seeinge the light of the
truth, let him return again unto the root, and unto the original of the
Lords Tradition. And after in the same Epistle, we keep not the thing that is
commanded us, unless we do the same, that the Lord did. In these few
words S. Cyprian says, The Lord both did it, and taught it to be done: He
calls it The Lords Tradition: he calls it The Lords commandment. And
here cannot M. Hardinge steal away in the miste, and say, S. Cyprian meante all this of the Cup, that the Priest consecrateth for him self: for his very
words be plain to the contrary. In Calice Dominico sanctificando, and plebi
ministrando, that is, in sanctifieinge the Lords Cup, and ministringe it
unto the people. And if S. Cyprian might well write thus against the Heretics
called Aquarij, which in the holy Ministration would use no wine, but in steed
thereof did Consecrate water, and ministered it unto the people, much more may
we say ye same against our adversaries, which Consecrate and Minister unto the
people, no Cup at al. Wherefore at the end of the same Epistle he concludes
with these words: Not to do that thing, that the Lord did, what is it else,
then to cast of his Word, and to despise his Discipline, and to commit not
worldly, but spiritual robbery, and adultery, while as a man from the truth
of the Gospel, steals away both the sayings, and dooinges of the Lord, and
corrupts and defiles Gods commandments? So it is written in the prophet
Hieremie, what is Chafe in comparison of Corn? Hierem. 23.
Therefore vvil I upon these prophets, says the Lord, that steal my
words each one of them from his neighbor, and deceive my people in their
lies, and in their errors.

The words that Luther wrote to them of Bohemia, and the others here
reported, were written by him before God had appointed him to publishe the
Gospel^ and therefore are no more to be alleged against him for that he wrote
afterward, as note of inconstancy, then M. Hardinges Sermons preached openly
in the (...)of king Edward, are to be alleged against that he writes now.

M. Hardinge. The.6. Division.
Thus he wrot^ before he had conceived perfect hatred against the Church. But
after that he had been better acquainted with the Devil, and of him,
appearinge unto him sensibly, had been instructed with arguments against the
Sacrifice of the Mass, 51 The 51. untruth, joined with a sclaunder. Never
man sp^ke more reverently of the Oblation of Christ upon the Cross.
that the memory of our Redemption by Christ wrought on the Cross, might
utterly be abolished* (...)wr^te hereof far otherwise. Si quo ca^u Concilium
statueret, minime omnium nos vellemus vtraque specie potiri^imo tunc primum in
despectum Concilij, vellemus aut vna, aut neutra, and nequaquam vtraque poti^^,
and eos plaue anathema habere, quicunque talis Concilij authoritate potirentur
viraque. ^f in any case the Council would so ordeine, we would in no wise
have both the kinds: but even then in despite of the Council, we would have
one kind, or neither of them, and in no wise both: and hold them for
accursed, who so ever by authority of such a Council would have both. These
words declare, what spirit Luther was of. They show him like him self.
Who so ever reads his books with indifferent judgment, shall find that
since the Apostles time, never wrote man so arrogantly, ne so dispitefully
against the Church, nor so contrarily to him self. Which marks be so
evident, that who so ever will not see them, but suffers him self to be
carried away into error* hatred of the Church, and contempt of al godliness,
either by him, or by his scholars: except he repent and return, he is
guilty of his own damnation, utterly overthrown, and sins inexcusably, as
one condemned by his own judgment. But for excuse hereof, in his book of the
Captivity of Babylon, he confesses, that he wrote thus, not for that he
thought so, nor for that he judged the use of one kind unlawful, but because
he was stirred by hatred and anger so to do. His words do sound so much
plainly. Prouocatus, imo per vim raptus. I wrote this, says he, otherwise
then I thought in my heart, provoked, and by violence pulled to it, whether I
would or no. Here I doubt not, but wise men will regard more, that Luther
wrote when his mind was quiet and calm, then when it was enraged with
blusteringe storms of naughty affections.

The B. of Sarisburie.
There is nothing so easy as to speak il. There was nothing further of from
Luthers mind, then upon any determination of any Council, to minister the
Sacrament under one kind, and so to break Christ's Institution into halfes.
But he thought it not meet, that Gods truethe immortal, should hang of
thautoritie of a mortal man, and stand for true no further, ^hen it should
please a man to allow of it. Notwithstanding such interest and authority
the Pope has claimed to him self, Extra de Consti. Licet Romanus. Syluester
Prierias, Magister Palatij.
^orcinge the world to believe, as he him self writes, That he has al right
and law in the closet of his breaste. And one Syluester Prierias gouer^our of
Pope Leos Palaice, was not ashamed nor afraid, to write these words, A
Doctrina Romanae Ecclesiae, and Romani Pontificis, sacra Scriptura robur, and
authoritatem trahit. The holy Scripture takes strength, and authority of the
Church, and Bishop of Rome. This was the thing, that D. Luther misselyked;
and thought intolerable. And therefore he said, he would have Gods word
received, only because it is Gods word, and spoken by him, not because it
is authorized by a Council: and if the Council would allow the Ministration
in one kind, then, he said, he would use Both, because Christ in his
Institution appointed Both. But if the Bishops in the Council would agree
upon Both kinds, as a matter standinge wholly in their pleasures, as though
they had full power to controlle, or to ratify the will of God, then, he said,
he would have no regard unto the authority of such a Council, that sets
it self above God, but rather would use one kind only, or none at al. For
this cause M. Hardinge reproves Doctor Luther so bitterly, and calls him
arrogante: because he would not have Gods will subject to the will of man.

Yet it appears that S. Paul in the like case did the like. Actor. 16.
For not withstandinge he had Circumcised Timothee, yet when he saw certain
come in, that would needs force the same upon Titus also, and so make it
necessary, he withstoode them stoutely, Galat. 2.
and would not yield. Thus he writes: Neither was Titus that then was with me,
compelled to be Circumcised, for the cominge in of certain false Brethren,
which came upon us to try out our liberty, that we have in Christ Jesus, to
the intent to bring us into bondage. Unto whom we gave no place by yeldinge,
no not for any time, that the truth of the Gospel might remain among you.

Eusebius in his story says, Eusebius, lib. 2. ca. 2.
there was an old law in Rome, that no Emperor should consecrate a God,
unless the same God had been first allowed by the Council. Tiberius being
Emperor, when he heard of the wonderful works, that were wrought by Christ
in Iewrie, thought therefore he was a God, and promoted a bil unto the Council,
that Christ might be proclaimed, and taken for a God. But the Council was
otherwise bente, and would allow him for no God. Tertullian laugheth at their
folly. Tertul. in Apologetico.
His words be these: Apud vos de humano arbitrio diuinitas pensitatur. Nisi
homini Deus placuerit, non erit Deus. Homo iam Deo propitius esse debet.
Emongst you the divinity and state of God, is weighed by man's judgment.
Unless God please man, God (Emongst you) shall be no God. Now therefore, man
must be good and favorable unto his God. The like folly seems to be in them,
that think Gods truth is no truth, unless the Consent of a Council allow
it to be truethe. Ad nobiles Ordinis Teutonici.
To this same purpose Luther wrote a book unto the Knights of the order of
Russia, after they had obtained from the Pope a dispensation to marie
notwithstanding their vow. He charge them, that in any wise they marie not
by warrant of that dispensation: otherwise (he says) they offend God, and be
worse then adulterers, as having more regard unto man, then unto God: and
having Gods own dispensation, as if it were not sufficient, would seek
further for the dispensation of a man.

Luther wrote not this in the despite of any godly Council, no more then the
prophet Esaie, Esai. 8.
when he said Inite Concilium, and dissipabitur. Go, geather your Counsel,
and it shall be broken. But he could not suffer to see Gods glory so defaced,
that a company of men should presume to allow or disallowe his truth, as if
it were not true in it self, but must fall, or stand only at their pleasure.

The rest that follows, is nothing else, but unseemly slander. But God be
blissed, that has delivered that godly man from liynge tongues.

But Luther (says M. Hardinge) was contrary unto him self. Even so Marci^n
the Heretic charged S. Paul, that he spoke against the Ceremonies, and yet
him self shaued his head at Cenchreae, Actor. 21.
and observed the Ceremonies: that he would not circumcise Titus, and yet had
circumcised Timotheus: that he would sometime defend the law, and sometime
reprove the law: and so was evermore contrary to him self. And he that had M.
Hardinges sprite, perhaps would no more doubt to find fault with S. Paul
for inconstancy, then with Luther. If Luther were ever contrary to him self,
yet might no man worse charge him in that behalf, then M. Hardinge. But Luther
evermore followed Gods calling, and never returned back unto his vomit,
neither fought against his own conscience, nor against the manifest known
truth. And therefore although he were contrary unto him self, as passinge
from error unto truth, yet was he not contrary unto God.

M. Hardinge. The.7. Division.
Now to put this matter that Luther judged it a thing indifferent, whither one
receive the Sacrament under one kind or both, more out of doubt, Philip
Melanch^on, his scholar, and nearest of his Counsel, In locis communibus.
writes: Sicut edere suillam, aut abstinere a suilla, sic alterutra signi
part vti medium esse. That as it is a thing indifferent to eat Swines
fleashe, or to forbear Swines fleashe, so it is also to use, which part of
the sign a man lists. By the word, Sign, he means the Sacrament,
likinge better that strange word, then the accustomed word of the Church:
least he might perhaps be thought of the brethren of his sect, in some what
to join with the Catholics.

Bucer also is of the same opinion, who in the conference that was had between
the Catholics and protestants for agreement in controversies of religion at
Ratisbone, confirmed, and allowed this article by his full consent with these
words: Ad controuersiam quae est de vna aut vtraque specie, tollendam, cum
primis conducturum, vt sancta Ecclesia liberam faceret potestatem, Sacramentu^
hoc in vna, vel in vtraque specie sumendi. Ea tamen lege, vt nulli per hoc
detur occasio, quem vsum tantopere retinuit Ecclesia, temere conde^nandi, aut
inuicem iudica^di. That the controversy for the one, or both kinds, may be
taken away, it shall be very well done, that holy Church made it free, to
receive this Sacrament in one or both kinds: yet under such condition, as
hereby no occasion be given to any body, rashely to condemn the use, which
the Church has so long time keapte, nor to judge one an other. Soothly he
which would have it free and at liberty, to receive the Sacrament under one
or both kinds, and holds opinion, that the old custom of the one kind
only is not to be condemned, seems plainly yenough to confess, that
nothing has been instituted or commanded of Christ toutchinge this matter,
as necessary to salvation.

Thus we may see plainly, that they which have divided them selves from the
Mystical body of Christ, that is, his Church, who were of greatest learning
and judgment, make it a matter indifferent (as it is in deed of it self left
to the liberty of the Church) whether the Sacrament be ministered under one
kind, or both. And thus much has been confessed against M. Iuel, and his
sect, not only by the learned adversaries of the Church in our time, but
also by a learned man of Bohemia above six score years past. His name is John
Przyxsam, of whose writings, some are set forth in printe. This learned man,
where as he endeavored to prove the use of both kinds of the words of
Christ written by S. John. Except ye eat the fleashe of the son of man and
drink his blood, ye shall not have life in you, at length utters these
words according to the eloquence of his time. In li. de professione fidei
catholicae. Ca. 19.
Veruntamen hic Deum timens, and mores impios aliorum praecauens, fateor, quod
quaslibet personas de Ecclesia Communioni fidelium sub utraque specie
repugnantes, damnare aut haerericare non intendo. But here having the fear of
God before mine eyes, and being well ware, I follow not the wicked conditions
of others, I grant, that what persons so ever of the Church repine against
the Communion of the faithful people under both kinds, I intend not to
condemn them, nor to hold them for Heretics. But if it be the commandment
of God, that the Sacrament be received of al under both kinds, why should he
be forbidden by the fear of God, to condemn those that withstand that order
of Communion? Seeinge that, who so ever gooeth against Gods commandment, is
worthy to be condemned? Therefore by his testimony the use of one, or both
kinds is indifferent.

Thus we are hable to allege Luther, Melancthon, Bucer, and that learned
Bohemian, for the indifferency of the Communion to be ministered either under
one kind or both. Whereby I mean nor, that the use of the Sacrament is so
left to every man's liberty, as he that lists may require both kinds, and
an other may content him self with one kind. Not so: every man is bound to
follow the ord^r of the Church: but the Church is not bound of necessity by
^oddes commandment, to minister it under both kinds to the Laity.

The B. of Sarisburie.
To prove that the half Communion is a thing indifferent, he brings forth
thauthoritie of Melancthon, Bucer, and a certain learned man of Bohemia: some
of them falsely alleged, and some without any allegation at al. Neither does he
bring them to the intent to take them for his authors, and to follow them: for
they neither in their books, nor in the order of their Churches, ever
consented to the breach of Christ's Institution. But herein he bewrays his
want of old Doctors: for having thauthoritie of them, he would never have
alleged any of these.

In Melancthon he misseliketh much the manner of his speech, in that he
calls the Sacrament a Sign: which word (as he says) is strange, and
not the accustomed word of the Church. Sauinge that he seeks occasions,
and quarrels without cause, as his woonte is, otherwise he knows, that a
Sacrament has been called a Sign in all times, A Sign.
and ages of the Church.

Petrus Lumbardus thus defines a Sacrament, Lib 4. did. 1.
Sacramentum est Signum rei Sacrae. A Sacrament is the Sign of a holy thing.
And as it is thought, the very substance and nature of a thing cannot be
better known, August. De Doctrina Christia. lib. 3. ca. 15.
th^n by the Definition. S. Augustine says, Signa cum ad res diuinas
adhibentur, sacramenta vocantur. Signs, when they be applied to godly things,
be called Sacraments. And again, writing of the difference that is between
the Sacraments of the Old Law, In Johan. Tractatu 45.
and of the New, he says thus, In Signis diuersis, eadem fides. The Signs
being diverse, the faith is one. And writing against one Adimantus (he
says) Non dubitauit Dominus dicere, Augustine. contra Adimantum. ca 12.
Hoc est corpus meum, cum daret Signum Corporis sui, The Lord doubted not to
say this is my Body, when he gave the Sign of his Body. Likewise says
Chrysostom, Si mortuus Jesus non est, cuius symbolum, Chrysostom. in Matthae.
hom. 83.
ac Signum hoc Sacrificium est? If Jesus died not, whose token, and whose Sign
is this Sacrifice? And lest any man should be deceived in the meaning of this
word Sign, Augustine. de Doctrina Christ. lib. 2.
S. Augustine him self has expounded it thus: Signum est res praeter speciem,
quam ingerit sensibus, aliud quiddam faciens ex se in cognitionem venire. A
Sign is a thing, that bi^ides the sight it self, which it offreth unto the
senses, De Con. Did. 2. Signum est.
causes of it self some other certain thing to come into knowledge.

Hereby it may appear, that this word Sign, is not so strange, as M.
Hardinge would have it seem, nor so unaccustomed unto the Church. Although it
misselike him, that we should do, as the old Fathers did, yet he might give
us leave, to use such words, and phrases, as the old Fathers used.

But (he says) Melancthon, and Bucer accounted it as a thing indifferent. In
deed these godly learned men, when they saw, that through the malice of their
adversaries, they could not obtain, that Christ's Institution might
universally be received, yet they desired at the least, it might be leafte free
without restrainte, for every Church to do therein, as they should think
good, and that without murmr, or offense of others. And thus far forth
their desire was, it might be judged free: not that they thought, Christ had
not ordained the Sacrament to be ministered unto the people in both kinds, or
that in it self it is indifferent: but that the faithful of God might
indifferently, and freely use it without controlement, and that it should not
be judged Heresy, to do as Christ had commanded.

So the godly Fathers at the beginning, when they could not persuade the
Princes of the world, with their people, to receive the Gospel, yet they
thought they were gainers, and gave God thanks, when they might have place,
and liberty for them selves, freely, and with quiet conscience, to meet
together, and to preach the Gospel.

This liberty M. Hardinge cannot like with all. He would have it free for the
whole Church to determine of it: but not for every Church particular. This is
a shifte to deceive the ignorant. For he knows well, that al other Churches
throughout the world, from the first plantinge of the Gospel until this day,
do still minister the Holy Communion in Both Kinds, as Christ commanded:
and that Christ's Institution was never openly, and by consent broaken, but
only in the Church of Rome: which Church also is not universal, but mere
particular: and that the same breach in the same Church of Rome, sprange not
of any consent of Bishops, or other learned men, but, as it is proved
before, only of the simple devotion of the people. And doothe M. Hardinge
think, the people may safely break Christ's Institution without any General
Council: and may not safely return again to the same, without a general
Council? Uerely there needs no Council, where as nothing is done by Council.

Touching the indifferency of this matter, whereupon M. Hardinge has bu^lte
this whole treaty, and in what sort the breach of Christ's Institution may
seem a thing indifferent, I know no better answer, then that is already
made by S. Cyprian, who in the like case makes answer thus: Cyprian. li. ^.
Epist. 3.
Si quis de antecessoribus meis non hoc obseruauit, and tenuit, quod nos
Dominus exemplo, and magisterio suo docuit, potest simplicitati eius de
indulgentia Domini venia concedi: nobis vero non poterit ignosci, qui nu^c a
Domino admoniti, and instructi sumus etc. If any of my predecessors have not
followed, and keapte that thing, which the Lord by his example, and
commandment, has taught us, he for his simplicity may be pardoned: but (if
we wilfully offend) there is no pardon for us, that are already warned, and
instructed of the Lord. We give God thanks, that whiles he instructs us,
what we shall do for the time to come, he forgeueth us that is past, because
we have e^^ed of simplicity. Thus far forth the breach of Gods ordinance
may be borne with all by the judgment of S. Cyprian. Cyprian. Ad Iubaianum de
Haereticis Baptizandis.
But he adds further, Post inspirationem vero, and reuelationem factam, qui
in eo, quod errauerat, perseuerat, prudens and sciens, sine venia ignorantiae
peccat, praesumptione a^que obstinatione superatus: After that God has once
opened and reveled (his truth) who so continues still in his error, willingly
and wittingly offends without hope of pardon, as being overcome with
Presumption, and Wilfulness.

M. Hardinge. The.8. Division.
And where as it was ministered in both kinds at Corinth, as it appears by
S. Paul, and in sundry other places, as we find most evidently in the
writings of diverse ancient Fathers: Yet the Church has been moved by
diverse and weighty causes, to take order, that the people should receive their
Communion under one kind, not only in the Council of Basil, but also in that
of Constance, and long before them above a thousand years, in 52 The.52.
untruth. There was no such Cano^ touched, or once moved in that Council.
the first Council of Ephesus, as many do probably geather, and namely Vrbanus
Regius a Doctor of Luthers school, confesses in his Book De locis
Communibus. One cause, and not the least, was, that thereby the heresy of
Nestorius might the rather be extinguished, who amongst other errors held
opinion 53 The.53. untruth. Nestorius never dreamed of any such folly. Weighty
consideratio^s, wherefore Christ's Institution should be broken.
that under the form of Bread in the Sacrament is contained the Body of
Christ without his Blood: and under the form of the Wine, his Blood only
without his Body. Many other causes moved those Fathers to take that order,
for the avoiding of many inconveniences, dangers and offenses, which might
happen in the use of the Cup: as irreverence of so high a Sacrament, whereof
Christen people at the beginning had a marvelous care and regard: the
lothesomenesse of many, that can not brook the taste of wine: the difficulty
of gettinge, and impossibility of keepinge wine from corruption, in countries
situated near to the North Pole, in that Clyme, where is known to be great
extremity of cold, biside a number of the like. So that it had been bisides
reason, to have bound al to the necessity of both kinds.

The B. of Sarisburie.
He grants that S. Paul at Corinthe, and sundry other holy Fathers, in
their several Churches ministered the Sacrament in Both Kinds. He might as well
have said, all the Apostles, and all the holy Fathers, sauinge for hindering of
his cause. But the Church afterward upon good causes, as it is here alleged,
took order to the contrary, and namely to confute the Heretic Nestorius.

Here must thou mark, good Christian Reader, The Question is, whether M.
Hardinges half Communion, were ever ministered openly to the people in the
Church within the space of six hundred years after Christ. For prooufe
hereof he allegeth, that this order was allowed in the Councels of Constance,
and Basil, the former whereof, was begun and holden, in the year of our Lord
a thousand, Anno. 1414.
four hundred and fouretenth: and the same, neither general, nor ever
generally received. And what force can he find herein to prove his purpose?
It is also probably geathered (says M. Hardinge) that the same order was
taken a thousand years before, in the first Council of Ephesus. Here he is
driven utterly to leave his learning, and as he commonly does, only to hold
by bare gheasse. But if this new divise were brought in to confute the
Heretic Nestorius, Nestorius
why then took it place first in the Councels of Constance, and Basil, a
thousand years after that Nestorius was dead, and his Heresy quite forgotten?
If it were so ordered in the Council of Ephesus, why is there no Act, or
mention thereof extant in that Council, nor any learned man within a thousand
years after to record the same?

But Vrbanus Regius a Doctor of Luthers School confesses it. First Urbanus
Regius departed this life not above tweentie years ago: and therefore is a
very young witness, to testify a thing done so long before. Bysides this,
the Book of Common Places, that is abroad in his name, is nothing else but a
heap of things geathered together by long readinge, as the manner of
students is, out of diverse and sundry books, and that as well of the one
side, as of the other, only for healpe of memory, and increase of knowledge.
Neither was that Book ever corrected or publisshed by him, but only delivered
to the Printer, as it was, by his widow after his death, as appears by
Pomeranus, that dedicated that book to the Prince of Mensburg. And therefore
these collections do witness his diligence, but not his judgment. As
touching that note concerning the Council of Ephesus, it may be thought, he
had it out of Alardus, or Michael Vaehe, or some other like writer of this age.

Nestorius emongst other errors (says M. Hardinge) held opinion, that under
the form of Bread in the Sacrament is contained the Body of Christ without
his Blood, and under the form of wine, the Blood only, without his Body. Why
should this man thus delight him self, to uphold one falsehead with an other?
First he says, The Council of Ephesus decreed against Both Kinds. This is
untrue, and was never yet proved. Next, some cause must be divised, that
should lead the Fathers to that Decree. Which, as it is here surmised, was
this error of Nestorius. A cause that never was, is good yenough to prove the
effect, that never was. Thus is M. Hardinge driven not only to forge New
Doctors, and New Decrees of Councels, but also to imagine New Heresies, such
as were never heard of before: even in like sort, and to like purpose, as by
some it is supposed, that Aristotle sometime imagined strange, and monstrous
opinions to be taught by Democritus, Parmenides, Melyssus, and other old
Philosophers: not because they had ever taught, or written so in deed, but to
the end to find occasion of talk, and the better to set abroad his own
learning. If it be true, that is surmised by Nestorius, then M. Hardinges
whole defense stands but upon an Heresy: if it be untrue, as in deed it is,
then it stands upon an open falsehead: and so, whether it be true, or false,
it has a very weak fundation.

As for Nestorius, it is known, he was a wicked, and a blasphemous Heretic,
and was woorthely condemned by sundry holy Fathers and Councelles.
Philastrius, Epiphanius, and S. Augustine, have written namely of his errors:

The Council of Ephesus, the Council of Chalcedon, Coelestinus, Gelasius, Leo,
Bishops of Rome, Cyrillus Bishop of Alexandria, have ripte up, and condemned all the branches of his Heresies. Yet none of them al ever charged Nestorius with
this new Heresy of M. Hardinges making. If there had been in it any show
of truethe, M. Hardinge, as he is eloquente, would have laid out all the
Circumstances, When this strange error first began, Where, and How long it
continued, Who wrote against it, and by Whom, and in What Council it was
condemned. Uerely this great silence declares some want. It must needs be a
very strange Heresy, that never had neither beginning, nor endinge: nor
defender, nor reprouer: nor mouth to utter it: nor ear to hear it: nor pen
to write it: nor time to last in: nor place to reast in. And if all this had
been true of Nestorius, yet had it been no reason, that for any one man's
private error, Christ's Institution should be broken.

But that the vain folly and manifest falshead of these men may appear,
understand (Good Reader) that where as Nestorius dwelte, and his Heresy took
place, in those countries they have evermore kept Christ's Institution in
both kinds: but in these countries, where as neither the name of Nestorius
was ever heard of, but only unto a few, nor his Heresy ever received, there
have they made great Prouisoes against Nestorius, yea a thousand years after
Nestorius was dead. The reast of the causes which he calls so weighty, are
scarcely woorthe any answer. Some men do loathe wine: some people can
hard^ly geate, some can hardely keep wine: Ergo, there must be made a law
general, that the whole world shall Communicate in one kind. If the Conclusion
had been, that such as have these impedimentes, or wantes, might so
Communicate, it had been more tolerable. For, as it is well noted by Pomponius,
De legib. and Senatuscon. and lo^ga consuetud. (...).
Laws must touch things that happen commonly, and for the most part, not
things that happen to few, or seldom. Otherwise, the like reason may be made
for the Priests: some Priests by mean of disease can taste no wine: some in
certain countries can hardely geate, some can hardely keep wine: therefore it
were well provided, that al priests should minister under one kind.
Certainly where as wine may be provided for the priest, there may also wine be
provided for the people. For it were strange to hear, that a carte, or a
whole ship, should come laden only with one bottle of wine into a country.

Some say, that the Priests in Ruscia for lack of wine, Cornel. Agrippa de
vani. scientia. Volateranus.
used to Consecrate in Metheglen: Some other say, that Innocentius the eighth,
for the like want, dispensed with the Priests of Norweye to Consecrate
without wine. It were no reason to bind the whole Church to the necessity,
or imbecillitie of a few. For otherwise the same want, and impossibility,
that M. Hardinge has here found for the one part of the Sacrament, may be
found also for the other. Arrianus. lib. 8. Strabo.
For Arrianus de rebus Indicis, and Strabo in his Geographie, have written,
that there be whole Nations and Countries, that have no bread. Therefore it
should seem necessary by this Conclusion, that in consideration of them, the
whole Church should absteyne from the other portion of the Sacrament also,
and so have no Sacrament at al.

M. Hardinge. The.9. Division.
Now in very deed, if we would grant to our adversaries, which in no wise
we do not grant, that it has been commanded of Christ, the lay people
should Communicate under both kinds, by these words: Drink ye al of this,
yet this notwithstanding, the exact straightness of Gods ordinance may
without sin in cases be omitted, in such things which be not necessarily
to be observed of them selves, or of the prescripte of the law of nature: so
that great and weighty causes (the rule of charity exactely observed) require
the same. For evident proof of this, we have examples both of the Old, and
also of the New Testament. Did not ^od command, Leuit. 24.
that none should eat of the Show bread, but the Priests only? David eat
thereof, 1. Regum. 21.
and yet Christ clears him of al blame. The law of Circumcision so
straitely commanded, Mar. 2.
was for the space of forty years, by the people of Israel quite omitted,
whiles they passed from Aegypte, Genes. 17. and 34.
to the land of Promise, and God found no fault with them for it. Exodus 20.
God gave the law of keepinge holy the Sabothe day without exception. The
Machabees notwithstanding, 1. Match 1.
stickte not to arm them selves against Antiochus, and to spend that day in
the field in their defense, having no scruple of conscience for breach of
that law. Many the like examples we find in the old Testament. But let us
come to the New testament, and to the Sacraments of the time of Grace. In due
consideration of which, we may find, that Christ has scarcely commanded
any outward thing, the moderation, quali^^^ing, and orderinge whereof, he
has not left to his church, as according to the condition of the time, it
has been seen most expedient for the common preferment, and edifieinge of the
same. So that, notwithstanding there be no swaruinge from the scope, and
principal intent, and no creature defrauded of that good, which by the
outward things is to be attein^d.

To^chinge the Sacrament of Baptism, though nothing be said of the reaching
of them that should be Baptized, neither of the dippinge of them into the
water, (...).
which Christ's charge in this behalf given seems plainly to require, go
you (says he to his Apostles) and teach al nations, baptizinge them etc. And
yet the Church h^^h not feared to baptize Infantes, that be without capacity
of teachinge, and for the due administration of this Sacrament, to many, ^ath
thought pouring, or sprinklinge of water upon them sufficient: though this be
not spoaken of, I say, it is much to be considered to this purpose, that the
Apostles ^^ickte not for a time to alter, and change the very essential form
of words, with which Christ would this Sacrament to be ministered. For
whereas he commanded them to baptize in the name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the Holy ^host, they Baptized in the name of Jesus Chiste 54
The.54. untruth. ^ foul dep^uation of the Scriptures.
Only, intendinge thereby to make that to be of more fame and celebritie. So
to return to the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ, whereof we
treat, no man can deny, but many things were at th'ins^itution of it, done,
by the example of Christ, and by him commanded, which now be not observed:
and yet in that respect no fault is found.

Christ washed the Apostles feet, and gave them an express commandment to
do the same, Joan. 13.
with these most plain words, If I that am your Master and Lord have
vvashed your feet, you also ought to wash one an others feet. For I have
given you an example, that as I have done, you do so likewise. Which
commandment of Christ according to the outward letter, verily binds no
less, then these words: Drink ye al of this: yet this commandment is not
keapt, but clean grown out of use. Though it appear by S. Bernarde who
calls it Magnum Sacramentum, In Sermon. de Caena Domini.
A great Sacrament, and long before, by report of S. Cyprian, that Christ
did not only wasshe his Apostles feet, but commanded also by solemn
request, and ordained that the Apostles afterward should do the same. In
Sermon. de unction Chrismatis.
Whether this ordinance of Christ has been abolisshed, for that it should
not be thought a rebaptization, as it may be geathered of S. Augustine, Ad
Ianuarium ca. 18.
or for any other cause, it forces not greatly. But this is much to be
marueled at, that this so earnes^ly commanded, is so quietly, and with such
silence suffered undone, and in the ministration of the Sacrament, the use of
the cup so factiously, and with so much crieing out required. Neither in
many other rites and ceremonies, we do not as Christ did. Christ celebrated
this Sacrament after that he had supped: we do it in the morning, and
fasting. Christ sat at the table with his xij. Apostles: neither sit we
at a table, neither think we it necessary to observe such number. Christ
brake the bread: we think it not necessary to break the host, that is to
be delivered to the faithful participantes. Here is to be noted, that S.
Cyprian rebukinge them, which thought sprinklinge or pouring of water not to be
sufficient for Baptism, declares, that the Sacraments be not to be esteemed
according to their extreme and rigorous observation, or administration of all the externe elements: but rather according to the integrity and soundenesse
of faith of the geuer, and of the receiver: and that divine things used in a
compendious sort, confer, and give nevertheless to the right beleuers their
whole virtue. lib. 4. Epist. 7. Many other commandments of God concerning
outward things might here be rehearsed: which notwithstanding by little and
little in the Church have been omitted: as the forebearinge of strangled things
and blood: which was commanded by God in the Old Testament, and according to
the pleasure and advise of the Holy Ghost, decreed by the Apostles in the New
Testament: Yet for as much as concerns outward things, both this, and many
other the like, have in process of time grown out of observation, and have
without any scruple of conscience been abrogated.

The B. of Sarisburie.
The best stay, that these men can lay hold upon, is to deny Christ's
Institution. And therefore M. Hardinge says here, In no wise we do not
grant it, which is an argument of good courage, but of small proof. But he
adds further, If it were Christ's Institution, yet notwithstanding by the
authority of the Church, In the name of Christ only.
and upon good consideration, it might be broken. His reasons be these, In the
old Testament, David did eat the Shewbreade, notwithstanding it were
forbidden: the people in the wilderness ceased from Circumcision,
notwithstanding it were commanded* the Machabees fought and defended them
selves upon the Sabbath day, 1. Samuel. 2^
notwithstanding God had appointed that day to reast. Iosue. 5.
In the New Testament, we Baptize Infantes that can receive no teachinge: 1.
Machabae. 1.
and sometime we think it sufficient to sprinkle them, or to power them over:
and the Apostles contrary to Christ's Institution, Baptized in the name of
Jesus Only. If M. Harding could have brought any such example, or
authority, as was required, such poor healpes should not have needed. For
these allegations are partly true, partly false, partly not agreeinge to that
we have in hand, neither in place, nor in time, nor in ye end, nor in ye
manner of doing, nor in other circumstances: and therefore make little to this
purpose.

David took of the Shewbreade: 1. Samuel. 21.
but he was forced thereto by extremity of famine: Neither did he ever decree,
yt it should be lawful for all others to do ye like.

The people ceased from Circumcision in the wilderness: Joshua. 5.
but they had Gods special dispensation so to do, as it is noted by Lyra, for
that they were in continual travel from place to place: and people being newly
Circumcised could abide no labor: yet made they no law, that Circumcision
should quite be abolished.

The Machabees might lawfully defend them selves upon the Sabbath day. 1.
Macha. 2. Matthew. 12.
For, as Christ expounds the law, Man is not made for the Sabbothe, but the
Sabbath is made for man. And therefore the Jews did il, that being beseeged
upon the Sabbath day, Dion.
as Dion says, stood still, and yielded them selves unto their enemies. Yet
did not the Machabees proclaim, that it should be lawful upon the Sabbath to
go to the field.

Touching Baptism, first we teach the Fathers, and afterward we Baptize
them, and their children: and this is no breach of Christ's commandment. For
after we be once become Gods people, God has promised, That he will be our
God, and the God of our children: And by the Prophet Ezechiel he says,
Ezechiel. 16.
your children be my children. They that sprinkled them that they Baptized,
used both the word, and also the element or kind of water, that was
commanded: neither does it appear, that Christ gave any commandment of
dippinge the party into the water. But these men take quite away from the
people, both the element and kind of wine, and also the words of
Consecration.

Last of al, in that he says, M. Harding falsifieth the words of S. Luke.
The Apostles contrary to the Institution, Baptized in the name of Christ
Only, Bisides the mere sophistication of the matter, he also falsifieth the
words, putting that behind, that S. Luke set before.

And that thou may the better perceive the fraud, I must do thee, Christian
Reader, to understand, that in the time of the Apostles, some that were
Baptized, received the Holy Ghost in sensible signs, and were hable
immediately, some to speak sundry tongues, some to work other miracles: Some
others received no such miracle, but Baptism only: as they of Samaria that
were Baptized by Philip. Therefore, says S. Luke, Peter and John prayed for
them, Actor.8.
that they also might receive the Holy Ghost in visible signs, as well as
others. For the Holy Ghost until that time, was come upon none of them, Only.
but only they were Baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus, by this word,
Only, excluding nothing else, but the outward miraculous gifts of the Holy
Ghost.

But M. Harding transposeth and shifteth S. Lukes words at his pleasure, and
places this word Only, in the end, and thereby excludes the essential
form of Baptism, as if they had been Baptized in the name of Christ Only,
and so not in the name of the Father, and of the Holy Ghost. This error must
needs hold by the can^asinge of the Scriptures. vvashinge of feet.


To Baptize In the name of Christ, is to Baptize according to the Order,
Institution, and Commandment of Christ. Neither do these words, In the
name of Christ, importe that Baptism was ministered in the name of Christ
only, and in none other name biside: no more then these words, Paul the
servant of Jesus Christ, do importe, that Paul was the Servant of Christ
only, and so not the Servant of God the Father, Act. 16.
nor of the Holy Ghost: Or these words, that Paul spoke unto the keeper,
Believe in the Lord Jesus, do discharge him from believing in ye other two
persons of the holy Trinity. Doubtless he must be very bold with the
Scriptures of God, that will presume hereby to prove, either that the Apostles
altered ye essential form of Baptism, or that they proclaimed them
Heretics, that in Baptizinge would follow Christ's Institution.

The objection of wasshing of feet is common, and has been often answered.
S. Bernarde calls it a Sacrament. In sermon de Coena Domini.
I grant. But S. Bernarde is a Doctor but of late years, and therefore his
authority herein must weigh the lighter. Neither does he so call it according
to the nature, and common Definition of a Sacrament. For neither was there any
certain element namely chosen, nor any special words appointed to make it a
Sacrament, nor any promise of Grace thereto annexed. Only he calls it a
Sacrament by a general kind of taking. And in that meaning S. Hilarie says,
Hilar. in Matt. canon. 5. 11. 12. 23.
The Sacrament of Praie^: the Sacrament of Fasting: the Sacrament of Fullness:
the Sacrament of Thirste: the Sacrament of Weeping. And S. Bernarde in an other
place in like sort says, Hilar. De Trinita. li. 10.
The Sacrament of a painted Cross: and in this place he says, that the
washinge of feet betokens the washing, and purging of venial sins,
Bernard. De bonis defende^dis.
which signification he calls a Sacrament.

But Christ says, I have given you an example, that as ye have seen me do,
ye also do the like. Therefore (says M. Hardinge) this commandment byndeth
as well as the other, Drink ye al of this. How may a man trust M. Hardinge in
the dark, that will thus deceive him in the light? For he knows that the
washinge of feet was neither Institution of Christ, nor any part of the
Sacrament, nor specially appointed to be done by the Apostles, nor the breach
thereof ever deemed Sacrilege, De Con. did. 2. Comperimus.
as Gelasius writes of this disorder of the half Communion. Whether the
Apostles for any time after Christ's Resurrection observed it or no, it
appears not. Neither is there any thing, to my remembrance, written of it. 1.
Timoth 5.
As we may perceive by S. Paul, it was an office more belonging unto women,
then unto men. And it seems by S. Augustine, that this Ceremony in the
Church had relation unto some other cause, and not unto the Institution of
Christ, neither to the example or practice of the Apostles. For thus he
writes unto his freende Ianuarius touching the same: Augustine. ad Ianuar.
Epist. 118
If thou demand, upon what consideration this Ceremony of washinge feet
began first, notwithstanding I have well thought of it, yet can I find
nothing, that seems more likely, then this: for that the bodies of them that
had appointed to be Baptized (at Easter) being il chearished by reason of the
Le^ten fast, would have had some lothsomnesse in the touching, unless they
had been washte at some time before: And that therefore they chose this day
chiefly to that purpose, upon which day the Lords Supper is yearly
celebrate. Here S. Augustine says, it was the fulsomnesse of the bodies, and
lothsomnesse of the senses, that first began this Ceremony, and not the
Institution or commandment of Christ. But as touching the Ministration of
the Communion in Both Kinds, it is most certain, that ye Apostles used it,
and that Christ commanded it to be used still until his coming.

With what indifferent judgment then can M. Hardinge thus compare these
things together: a Sacrament, with no Sacrament: an Institution, with no
institution: a thing, that in the Primitive Church was every where used, with
that thing, whereof no proof can be made, that upon Christ's commandment it
was ever used. Neither did Christ therefore so abase him self, to wash his
Disciples feet, to the intent they according to the letter should do the
same: but in him self to show them a perfect example of humility* For they
were yet in a deep dream, that Christ should come like a King with all
worldly Majesty, and that they should be Princes, Matthae. 20.
and sit with him to rule the world. Therefore to break them out of this
sleep, he took upon him this vile and servile office, that they might see,
that his coming was to serve them, and therefore might learn humility, by
his example one of them to serve an other. Matthew. 18.
In like manner Christ set a child before his Disciples, Math. 10.
and willed them al to be as children. He bad them to shake of the dust from
their shoes, Matthew. 8.
and to carry neither rod nor scrippe about them, and to salute no man upon
the way: not that they should practice these things according to ye rigor of
ye words, but to the intent yt by the same, they might be induced to a deeper
understanding. Such, was the Sacrament, and meaning of the Washing of feet.

The reasons that follow, are of like value. For Christ said not, Do this
after supper, or sittinge, or at a table, or being so many together: Neither
did the Apostles ever so understand his words. But when he had Ministered the
Sacrament unto his Apostles in Both Kinds, he bade them do the same, that he
had done: and so they understood his words, and Ministered the Sacrament
unto the people in Both kinds accordingly.

The words of S. Cyprian here alleged, are spoken of sprinkeling, or pouring
on water over them, that were Baptized: which is but a Ceremony, and therefore
ought to be at liberty, and is not of the substance of Baptism. Neither does
it follow, We may break a Ceremony, Ergo, we may break the substance of
Christ's Institution. This reason rather makes against M. Harding and his
fellows. For if Ceremonies should be used freely, and without rigor, as S.
Cyprian says, why then be they so precise in their Oil, their Balm, their
Lights, and other things of like value, yt be the abuse thereof never so
great, yet they will remitte nothing? And if they be so precise, and so
earnest in Ceremonies, and diuises of their own, how much more ought we to
be earnest, in matters touching the essential form of the Institution of
Christ?

M. Hardinge. The.10. Division.
I trust no man will geather of that I have said here, that it is none offense
to do against Gods commandment. My meaning is far otherwise. Neither say
I, that this sayeinge of Christ in Matthew, Drink ye al of this, or that in
John, Except ye eat the fleashe of the son of man, and drink his Blood, ye
shall not have life in you: Or other commandments of Christ, be not to be
keapte: but this is that I say, and that every Catholic man says: that the
universal Church does better understand, which are the commandments of
Christ, and how they ought to be keapte, then Berengarius, VViclefe, Hus,
Luther, Zuinglius, Calvin, Cranmere, Peter Martyr, or any their scholars, and
followers, which now be sundry sects. As for example: God has thus
commanded, Thou shall not swear: and, Thou shall not kill: Math. 5.
and if thine eye cause thee to offend, Exodus 20.
pull him out, and cast him away from thee. Whereas certain sects of
Heretics, as namely they which be called Waldensis, and Picardi, by their
construction hereof have maintained opinion, that no oath ought to be given or
made in no case or respect: likewise that in no case or respect, a man may
do an other to death: and also that after the outward letter of the Gospel,
sometime a man is bound to pull out his eye, and cast it from him: which
thing has been done by some of the Picardes, as it is reported, as though
else Gods commandment were not keapte: this has so been understood by the
Catholyke Church confessing nevertheless these to be Gods commandments, as
in time, in place, and in certain cases, a man might, and ought, without
breach of Commandment, both swear, and kill: and likewise keape his eye in
his head* and therein offend God nothing at al. So the Catholic Church
understands, Drink ye al of this, to be Christ's Commandment, and of
necessity to be observed: but of Priests only, I mean of necessity: and
that when in the Sacrifice of the Church is celebrated the memory of Christ's
death, which in that degree be the successors of the Apostles, to whom that
commandment was specially given, when they were consecrated priests of the
New Testament: who so did drink in deed, as S. Mark witnesses: Et biberunt
ex eo omnes, Mark. 14.
and they drank al of it. To these only, and to none other, the 55 The.55.
untruth. The Catholic, or universal Church never under stood it so: But
only the Church of Rome, which is both late, and mere Particular*
Catholic Church has ever referred the necessity of that commandment. Else
if the necessity of it should perteine to al, and because Christ said
Drink ye al of this, if al of every state, and condition ought to drink of
this Cup, of necessity, how is it come to pass, that our adversaries them
selves (who pretend so streighte a conscience herein) keep from it infantes,
and young children, until they come to good years of discretion: specially
where as the Custom of the Primitive Church was, that they also should be
partakers of this Sacrament, as it may plainly be seen in S. Dionyse,
Cyprian, Augustine, Innocentius, Zosimus, and other ancient Fathers? what
better reason have they to keep the infantes from the Cup, then the
Anabaptists have, to keep them from their Baptism? If they allege their
impotencie of remembringe the Lords death, the Anabaptists will likewise
allege their impotencie of receiuinge and understanding doctrine, that
Christ's Institution in this behalf seems to require.

Thus the adversaries of the Church them selves do agnise, that the use of
the Cup in the Sacrament, pertains not to al of necessity. So have they
neither godly charity to join with the Church, neither sufficient reason to
impugn the Church.

The B. of Sarisburie.
The best defense to color disobedience, is to improve Gods Commandment.
Therefore says M. Hardinge, The half Communion is no breach of Christ's
Institution. For Christ never commanded, that the whole Communion should be
ministered unto the people in both kinds. And that (says he) the Church
knows better, then Luther, or Cranmere, or such others. What so ever
ordinary light the Church has, she has it not of her self, Psalm. 118.
but of Gods holy Word, that is a lantern unto her feet. And it is no
Christian modesty, Johan. 3.
to make such boastes of the gifts of God. Gods holy Spirit blows where
it thinks good. Daniel. 13.
Daniel alone saw the innocence of Susanna: Sozomenus. li. 1. Cap. 23.
the Judges and Elders saw it not. Paphnutius alone was heard against all the
rest of the Nicene Council. S. Hierome alone is received against all the whole
Council of Chalcedon. 36. Quest 2.
And for as much as M. Hardinge deliteth him self with odious comparisons
without cause, Tria legitima.
why might not a man likewise say, The Primitive Church in the time of the
Apostles, and other Catholic Doctors, and old Councels, that ministered the
whole Sacrament unto the people in Both kinds, understood Christ's
Institution, as well as did afterward the Council of Constance, in which
Council holden fourteen hundred years after Christ and more, it was
determined, that the Laity should content them selves only with the half
Communion in One Kind. But therefore has God given his holy Scriptures, that
the Church should be directed, and never err. August. contra Cresconium
Grammaticum. lib. 2. cap. 21.
And S. Augustine says: Dominus semper veraciter iudicat: Ecclesiastici autem
Iudices, sicut homines, plaerunque falluntur. The Lord always judges truly:
but the Ecclesiastical Judges, for that they be men, are oftentimes deceived.

The examples of killinge, swearinge, pullinge out of eyes, eatinge of blood,
and strangled things, that are here brought in, stand more for a countenance,
then for proof of the matter. Touching the first, God says unto the private
man, Exodus 20.
Thou shall not kill: Leuit. 20.
but unto the Magistrate he says, Deuteron. 18.
Thine eye shall not spare: Thou shall not suffer the wicked sorcerer to live.
This case was never doubteful: or if it were, let M. Hardinge show, in what
Council it was determined. Touching Oaths, it is forbidden, that any shall
swear unadvisedly, or without just cause, and so to abuse the name of God: But
otherwise, to swear before a Judge in the way of Judgment, Hieremiae. 4.
Justice, Matthew. 5.
and Truth, God him self has commanded.

The pullinge out of the eye is an allegory, wherein by a figure, or manner of
speech, one thing is conceived of an other: and Christ's meaning is, that
who so will follow him, must pull out, and cast from him his affections, his
goods, and his friends for the Gospelles sake, ye though he love them as his
eyes. And if the Picarde took it otherwise, it was an error of simplicity,
much like the error of Origin, Eusebij lib. 6. cap. 8.
and certain others, who, as it is written of them, grossly, and according
to the letter, ghelded them selves for the kingedome of heaven: Or the error
of the Bishop of Rome, who upon small occasion of these words, De Maioritate
and obedient^a.
Ecce duo gladij h^c, Behold, here be two sweardes, claims unto him self
both the Spiritual, and also the Temporal swearde, Vnam Sanctam.
and so the whole jurisdiction of all the world.

The forbearing of blood, and strangled meats, Act. 15.
began emonge the faithful in the time of the Apostles, not as of Gods
commandment, or to continue for ever: but only of charity, to bear with
the weakness of the Jews, until they might grow to a perfect knowledge in
Christ: duringe which weakness, this charitable order among the rest of the
faithful Christians, continued still, as may appear by Tertullian, by Arnobius,
by Eusebius, by Oecumenius, and others. But after that the Jews were thoroughly
persuaded, that al creatures of God were clean, this forbearinge, which
began only for their sakes, had an end.

But how can M. Hardinge apply these things to his purpose? Or how can he
hereby, warrante the manifest breach of Christ's Institution? The Church in
every of these orders was directed, and guided by Gods word: Touching
killinge, God says unto the Magistrate, Thou shall not suffer the wicked to
live. Touching swearinge, Hieremi. 4*
God says, Ephe. 5.
Thou shall swear in truth, in Judgment, and in Justice. Touching pullinge
out of our eyes, S. Paul says: No man ever hated his own flesh, but does
nourishe, and chearishe it. And touching blood, and strangled meats, Christ
says, The thing that enters into the mouth, defiles not the man: And S.
Paul says: Every creature of God is good. Therefore the Church in these
cases divised no new thing of her self, nor brake any of Gods ordinances,
but only followed the word of God.

Now of the other part, let M. Hardinge show, what Word of God the Church
of Rome had to follow, in thordering of the half Communion. Where did
Christ, or his Apostles ever say, Let not the people receive the whole
Sacrament, as it was ordained at the first, but let it be sufficient for them
to receive one portion? If there be no such commandment to be showed, then
be not these cases like. And if the cases be not like, why does M. Hardinge
deceive the world, and compare them thus together, as though they were like?
What, troweth he, there is no difference between obeying Gods Commandment,
and breaking Gods commandment? ^enesis. 20.
Or thinks he, because it was lawful for Abraham, having Gods Commandment,
to have slain his Son Isaac, that therefore it was lawful for him to slaye
Ismael also, having no commandment? It is a dangerous doctrine, to say,
The Church is Omnipotent, and may allow, or disallowe Gods Commandments
without difference, In Edicto Imperat. Valentin. and Martia. in Chalced. Con.
Acti. 3.
at her pleasure. For as it is discretly noted by the Emperors Ualentinian,
and Martian, Who so ever, after the truth is once found, seeks further, he
seeks for a lie, and not for the truethe.

But to minister unto the vulgar lay people in Both kinds (says M.
Hardinge) was not Christ's institution. Thus he says, and says it often,
and only says it. Other authority then his own, he brings none. The
reason that moves him, I ween is this: for that there was no Lay people at
that Banquet with Christ, but the Apostles only: But this reason would spoil
the Lay people, not of one part only, but of al together. De Missa publica
proroganda.
Surely one Lorichius a Doctor of M. Hardings own side says thus: Ipsius
Sacramenti Institutio vult, vt omnes vna manducemus, and bibamus. The very
Institution of the Sacrament wills, that we al Eat, and Drink together. M.
Hardinges Doctor says, It is Christ's Institution: M. Hardinge him self
says, It is not Christ's Institution. Whether of them two a man may believe,
I leave it to others.

How be it in the mean time, while these Doctors can better agree, it cannot
be denied, but Christ ministered unto his Disciples the whole Sacrament in
Both Kinds, and gave them in charge, in plain express words, to do the
same. But of the half Communion in one kind, Christ neither gave them
charge, nor spoke any one word at al. If M. Hardinge will reply, that
Christ's words in this case be doubtful, and may be diversely taken, yet is
that objection already answered. For the law says: De Legibus and
Senatusconsult. and lo^ga consue. Si de.
Si de interpretatione Legis quaeratur, in primis inspiciendum est, quo iure
Ciuitas retro in huiusmodi casibus vsa fuerit. Optima enim est Legum
interpretatio Consuetudo. If question happen to be moved touching the meaning
of a law, first of al we must see, what order has been used in the like
cases in times past. For the Custom, and practice of the people, is the best
expounder of the Law. Now it appears plainly, that the Custom and practice
of the purest Church, in the time of the Apostles, and others old Catholic
Fathers was, to minister unto the people in Both Kinds: whereof we may
conclude, that the same was Christ's Institution, and very meaning. But if M.
Harding will apply thautoritie of Custom unto his purpose, for yt the common
practice of the Church of Rome for a few late years, has been to the
contrary, that therefore this was Christ's meaning, this objection is also
soon answered. For both Law, and common reason says: In ambiguo sermon
non vtrunque dic^^us, sed id duntaxat quod volumus. De rebus dubijs. In ambiguo.
In a doubtful speech we speak not both the things (that may be geathered)
but that thing only, that we mean. Now if Christ meante both the order,
that was practiced by Thapostles, and Old Fathers, and also the contrary
order, that of late has been practiced in the Church of Rome, then had
Christ at one time, and in the vtteringe of one sentence, not only two, but
also diverse and contrary meaninges: and so by M. Hardinges judgment, Christ
must needs construe his own words in this wise: Drink ye al of this, I
mean, set pristes only drink of this: Drink ye al, I mean, some may not
Drink: Drink ye al, I mean contrary, Drink ye not al. And when I say, Do
ye the same that I have done, my meaning is otherwise, Do not the same that
I have done. O M. Hardinge, It is an old saiynge, Maledicta glosa quae
corrumpit textum: Cursed be that gloa^inge construction, that destroieth the
text.

Ye say, The priests are bound of necessity to receive Both Kinds: but
the Lay people is not bound: and so ye conclude, that Christ ordained two
sundry Communions, the one not like the other: the one for the priests, the
other for the people. And therefore by your advise, Hieronym.
we must correct S. Hierome, 1. Corinthians. 11. Chrysostom.
that says: 2. Corinthians. 18.
The lords Supper must be common to al: And likewise Chrysostom, that says,
In the holy Mysteries, there is no difference between the Priest and the
People. For it is now otherwise agreeed, that the Lords Supper may not be
Common unto al: and that in the Mysteries there must be a difference between
the Priest and the People.

The objection that is made of keepinge children from the Communion, is but
childishe, and nothing to the matter. For in so dooinge we divide not the
Mysteries, nor break any part of Christ's Institution: no more then when by
order of Excommunication, we remove the wicked from the whole use of the
Sacrament.

For notwithstanding it appear by S. Augustine, S. Cyprian, and others, that
Infantes in the Primitive Church in sundry places were admitted to the holy
Communion, yet afterward upon good advise, they were justly removed from it:
because that being in that age, they were not thought hable to examine and
prove them selfs according to the doctrine of S. Paul, and so to eat of
that Bread, and to drink of that Cup. In like sort in the law of Moses,
notwithstanding al menchildren were commanded to be Circumcised, yet none
were admitted to eat the Passover, but only such as could demand, what it
meante.

The Church (says M. Hardinge) is the interpreter of Gods mind. The Church
knows, that this was not Christ's Insttrution. Uerily if the Church know it
now at last, she has been long in learning this lesson. For the old
Catholic Church, as it is well known, took it far otherwise, and that
folowinge the plain words of God, whereby Gods ordinary way is to reuele his
mind: and because Christ ministered unto his Disciples in Both kinds, and
commanded them to do the same, therefore that Church understood him, even
as his words sounded, and ministered unto the people the whole Communion in
Both Kinds.

Now, whereas M. Hardinge says, The Church of Rome of late years, has
more secret intelligence of Gods mind, then the elder Church had any time
before, me thinks he imagines Christ thus to say to his Apostles: Do the
same to others, that ye have seen me do to you. For a time it shall be lawful:
after it shall not be lawful. Now it is my Institution: the time shall come,
when it shall be no longer my Institution. After fourteen hundred years there
shall be a certain Council of five hundred Bishops, and eight hundred Monks
and Friars: there shall be terrible contention, whether the Pope be above the
Council, or the Council above the Pope. One Pope shall be deposed: an other
shall be erected against him: and so two Popes at one time. ^hone shall
excommunicate, and curse, and seek al means to depose the other. Kings and
Princes shall be in parts. The whole world shall be troubled. Th^^ shall these
meters be concluded. That I comm^unde, they shall break: that I bind, they
shall loose. O^lesse M. Hardinge give such exposition to Christ^s words, he
cannot be greatly relieved by them. Thus have we reason sufficient, to open the
error of M. Hardinges Church: and godly charity, to join with the old
Catholic Church of the Apostles, and holy Fathers, which we doubt not, was
the Church of God.

M. Hardinge. The.11. Division.
And although herein we could be content, Infantes not to be spoken of* yet it
may easily be proved, that the Communion under both kinds has not ever
been general. And as we do not condemn it, but confess, it might be
restored again by the authority of the Church lawfully assembled in a
general Council, upon mature deliberation before had, and a wholesome remedy
against the inconveniences thereof provided: even so are we hable to show
good authority for the defense of the one kind, no we used in the Church.

The B. of Sarisburie.
M. Hardinge would have us put Gods word to dayeinge, and none otherwise to
be obedient to Christ's commandment, then if a few Bishops geathered at
Trident shall allow it. But we may answer such a Council, as king Agesilaus
sometime answered ye Ma^edonians, through whose country he desired to have
passage against his enemies. For when they had sent him word, that the
matter was great, and that therefore they would well consider of it, Let them
consider, s^ide he, wh^le they list: but in the mean time I will pass through.
If the Council vp^n advise will restore again the whole Communion why then
does Pope Leo call it, In Bulla Leonis. 10
The Heresy of the ^reekes, Ce^son.
and of the Boh^mians? Or why does Gerson in title his book, Con^^a Ha^esim
Communicandi Laicos sub vtraque specie? against the Heresy of (...)the ^oye
people under Both Kinds? I trow Councelles be not called to restore the
world to Heresies. The great inconveniences, that M. Hardinge would have a
general Council to make prouisees for, are noted by Gerson the greatest
Promoter of the Council of Constance, and are these:

The liquoure might be sheadde:

It cannot be carried about without danger.

In winter it would soon sower, and turn to Uineger:

In Summer it would putrify, and breed woormes:

It would be lothesome for men to drink:

In some Countries it is hard to be gotten:

The lay people should touch the Cup:

Some of them have Beardes: some have Palsies:

The dignity of the priest, and lay man should be al one.

These, and other like inconveniences are such, as Christ and his Apostles
never knew: yet the Council that is now holden at Trident, upon mature and
solemn deliberation has pronounced and published, If any man will say, that
these be not just causes, why the people should stand content with the Half
Communion, accursed be he.

And notwithstanding the Bishops in that Council have already yielded, that
certain Countries and Kingedomes may use the whole Communion according to
Christ's Institution, yet have they added so fond conditions unto the same,
that al men may see, they sit there only for a countenance to mock the
world.

M. Hardinge. The.12. Division.
And because M. Iuel bears the world in hand, nothing can be brought for
it of our side: some places I well ^llege here, that seem to me very evidently
to prove, that the use of both kinds has no^ always been thought
necessary to al persons, and that the Communion under one kind, has been
practiced and holden for good within the six hundred years after Christ,
that he would so feign ^inde us unto.

Here may be alleged first th^example of our Lord him self out of the.xxiiij.
Chapter of S. Luke which is spoken of before: where it is declared that he
gave the Sacrament unto the two Disciples at Emaus under S. Luke n^meth neither
(...)nor ONLY.
the form of Bread only: which place ought to have the more weight of
authority in a Catholic man's judgment, because it is brought by the Council
of In the year of our Lord 1414*
Constance, and also by the Council of Basile, for proof of the Communion
under one kind. That it was the Sacrament, the ancient Doctors do affirm
it plainly, and the words conferred with the words of our Lords Supper,
do agree: and that it is not needeful of our own head to add thereto
th^^ministra^tion of the Cup, as our adversaries do by their figure
Synecdoche: it appears by that those ^wo Disciples, declared to the.xij.
Apostles assembled together in Jerusalem, how they knew our Lord in
fractione Panis, in breakinge of the Bread to them, which cannot be taken for
the wine. And as soon as they knew him in breakinge of the Bread, he
vanished away from their sight, er that he took the Cup into his hands, and
blissed it, and gave it unto them, 56 The.56. untruth. Neither S. Augustine,
nor B^da, nor any other ancient Father has any such word but rather the
contrary.
as it appears evidently enough to S. Augustine, to Bid, and to al other
that be not wilfully opinatiue.

Again, what need is it to use violence in this Scripture, and ioygne unto it
a patche of our own divise, by so simple a warrant of a figure, sith that
according to the mind of the learned Fathers, Christ gave here to the two
Disciples, not a piece of the Sacrament, but the whole Sacrament, as it is
proved by the effect of the same: and the effect presupposes the cause. For
S. Augustine confesses by that Sacrament of Bread (so he calls it) Vnitate
corporis participata, remoueri impedimentum inimici, vt Christus posset
agnosci, that thereby they were made partakers of the unity of Christ's body,
that is to say, made one Body with Christ, and that al impediment or let of
the enemy the Devil, was taken away, so as Christ might be acknowleged. What
more should they have gotten, if they had received the Cup also?

The B. of Sarisburie.
If I would speak only by authority, and prove nothing, as M. Hardinges
woonte is, I might answer all this matter in three words.

First, that the Bread that Christ brake at Emaus, Emaus.
was common table

Secondly, that, al be it some writers seem to call it the Sacrament, yet none

Thirdely, although he were hable to prove, that Christ so ministered at that

And because he makes him self so sure, and certain, that Christ at Emaus
ministered the Sacrament, it may please him to remember, that even the same
Doctors, that he has here alleged, and diverse others of late years, upon
good consideration have said, Augustine. in c^tena in. 24. Luc^.
it was not the Sacrament. S. Augustine says, the breakinge of Bread there
was hospitality, and intertaininge of strangers. His words be these: Quia
hospitalitatem sectati sunt, eum, quem in expositione Scripturarum non
agnouerunt, in panis fractione cognoscunt. Because they were given to
hospitality, they knew him in the breakinge of Bread, whom they knew not
in the expoundinge of the Scriptures. Which thing S. Gregory utters in
plainer manner. Gregor. in Eua^gel. Hom. 23.
Mensam igitur ponunt, Panes, cibosque offerunt, and Deum, quem in scripturarum
expositione non cognouerant, in panis fractione cognoscunt. They lay the
table, and set forth Bread and Meat, and God, whom they knew not in the
expoundinge of the Scriptures, they know in the breakinge of bread. It were
hard to say, the settinge forth of Bread and Meat upon a table in an
Hosterie, was the Ministration of the Sacrament. And to leave Beda, Dionys. in.
24. Lucae.
and others, that follow the same exposition, Dionysius one of late years, and
therefore led away with many errors, according to the weakness of that
time, says thus: Accepit panem, and Benedixit: non tamen in suum Corpus
conuertit, sicut in coena: sed vt moris est benedicere cibum. He took bread,
and Blissed it: but he turned it not into his Body, as he did at his Supper:
but only as the manner is to say grace, or to bliss the meat. Antonius
Iulianus in Postilla maiori.
So likewise says Antonius Iulianus: Nicolaus Lyra.
Accepit panem, benedixit, fregit, and porrigebat illis, sicut consueuerat ante
passionem. He took Bread, blist it, brake it, and gave it unto them, as his
manner was before his Passion.

Lyra says, they knew him, for that he brake the Bread so even, as if he
had cut it with a knife. By these writers it appears, it was Common Bread,
that Christ gave to his Disciples, and not the Sacrament.

And whereas M. Hardinge allegeth S. Augustine to the contrary, if he had
considered the words of one William Wideforde, VVil. VVideford. contra
VVi^leuum.
a Doctor of his own side, which he uses against Wicklife, I reckon, either
he would have better advised him self, or else would have refused his own
Doctor. Wildefordes words be these: Hic dico, quod non habetur ex textu, vel
ex Glosa Lucae. 24. vel per antiquos Doctores, quod ille Panis, quem Christus
fregit post Resurrectionem, fuit Consecratus, vel Sacramentalis. Ideo inepte,
and consequenter dico, quod falso allegat authoritate^ Augustini. This I say,
it cannot be geathered neither by the text of S. Luke, nor by the Gloss, nor
by the ancient Doctors, that the Bread that Christ brake after his
Resurrection, was the Consecrate, or Sacramental Bread. And therefore (I say)
that foolishely, and by consequence, that falsely he allegeth S. Augustine to
this purpose.

The two Councels of Constance, and Basil, thus understood the word; of S.
Luke: and that (says M. Hardinge) in a Catholic man's judgment ought to
weigh much. The former of these two Councels, was holden but of late days,
above fourteen hundred years after Christ, and the weight of them is already
determined by others. For all the Dominike Freers, L^doui. Viues in 2^^ De
Ci^^ta. Dei. Ca^ 26.
and al others that held with Thomas of Aquine, which thought them selves to
be the best learned, that were then alive, utterly refused the Council of
Basil, and said, it was never lawfully called together.

And Albertus Pigghius says, I^^^hius in Hierarchia.
that both these Councels, as well that of Basil as the other of Constance,
Decreed against the order of Nat^re, against the manifest Scriptures, against
thoutoritie of al Antiquity, and against the Catholic faith of the Church.

These be the two Councels that M. Hardinge would have to weigh so deeply in
a Catholic man's conscience. Neither can it justly be replied, that any of
these were Lutherans. For the Dominike Freers were a hundred years before
Luther ever preached: And Albertus Pigghius wrote namely and of purpose against
Luther. Uerily these Councels seem over light, to weigh down all the old
Councels of grave and Catholic Fathers, that were before them. Touching the
authority of Councels, because they seem oftentimes to vary, Gelasius thought
it best to take up the matter thus: Did. 50. Domino Sancto.
In gestis Conciliorum, quotiescunque discors sententia inuenitur, illius
Concilij sententia magis teneatur, cuius antiquior, and potior extat
authoritas. When so ever contrariety in sentence is found in the Acts of
Councels, let the sentence of that Council be taken, that has the elder, and
better authority. It this determination of Gelasius be good, there is no cause
why these two so late Councels should weigh down any Catholic man's
conscience, specially against so many contrary Councels as have been before.
Doubtless it is a marvelous case, that either of these two Councels, should
at last see that thing in the words of S. Luke, that the Council of the
Apostles could not see.

Yet to healpe M. Hardinge foorthwarde, let us grant, S. Augustine
understood these words of the Sacrament. In deed he calls it in the same
place, Sacramentum Panis, The Sacrament of Bread, meaning thereby, that the
substance of Bread in the same remains still: but he calls it not, The
Form or shadow of Bread, as M. Hardinge doothe. But let us grant, it was the
Sacrament.

Now have an eye (good Reader) to M. Hardinges fingers, and mark how he
iuggleth with S. Augustines words. Augustine. De Con^ensu Euangel^starum. li.
3. ca. 25.
S. Augustine says, Per Sacramentum Panis vnitate Corporis participata. These
plain words it likes M. Hardinge to English thus, Thereby they were made
partakers of the unity of Christ's Body, that is to say, made one Body with
Christ. Alas, this was no part of S. Augustines mind. Beware, good Reader:
this man seeks ways to deceive thee. Lyra him self confesses, that these
words of S. Augustine have Mysticam interpretationem, A mystical
understanding, and may not be taken, neither of the Sacrament, nor of Christ's
Natural Body, but of his Body Mystical, which is the Church: and that who so
ever is partaker, or member of the Church, knows Christ: who so ever is
without the Church, knows not Christ. But who can better report the same,
then S. Augustine him self? His words be these, plain and clear, and in
the same place: how be it M. Hardinge thought good to dissemble them. Nec
quisquam se Christum agnouisse arb^^retur, si eius Corporis particeps non est^
id est, Ecclesiae: cuius vnitatem in Sacramento Panis Apostolus commendat,
dicens, vnus Panis, vnum Corpus multi sumus. Let no man th^nke he knows
Christ, unless he be partaker of his Body (that is to say) of the Church:
the unity of which Church the Apostle commends in the Sacrament of Bread^
sayeinge, We being many, are one Bread, and one Body. The Church was that
body whereof the two Disciples were made partakers, and members, and so came
to the knowledge of Christ.

Now, notwithstanding we have granted that S. Augustine expounds this
place of the Sacrament, yet does not S^ Augustine say, that Christ ministered
the half Sacrament to his Disciples in One Kind only. But says M. Harding,
Luke speaks only of the Bread: Ergo, There was no wine.

This argument may be good in M. Hardinges Divinity, but it is of small force
in good Logique.

As for your Synecdoche, whereby of the part ye understand the whole (says
M. Hardinge) It is but a patche of your divise, and will not serve. Yet S.
Augustine, S. Gregory, Bid, Iulianus, Dionysius, Lyra, Wideforde, and others
that understand these words of S. Luke of hospitality, must needs crave
the warrant of a figure, and under the name of Bread must needs conceive
meat, and Wine also: otherwise there had been a very simple, and a dry
feast. Now if M. Hardinge can allow them the figure of Synecdoche, why may not
he as well allow us the same? It is a manner of speech commonly used in all the
Scriptures.

But Christ straight way vanished from their sight upon the breakinge of the
Bread: and therefore had no leisure to deliver the other portion: neither is
their any mention made of the Cup. O what miserable straites these men be
driven into? To make up their tale, they are glad to say, that Christ lackte
leisure. But there is nothing written of the Cup. I grant. Neither is
there any thing there written, that Christ did Consecrate the Bread. And
this place is priuileged above al others. We must conceive no more of it, then
is spoken. Then was there a Sacrament without Consecration. Neither is there
any thing there written, that either Christ him self, or the Disciples did
eat the Bread. Thus has M. Hardinge with much a do found out at last, not
a Communion of One Kind, yt he sought for, but a Communion of No Kind at al.
And so have we a Sacrament without Sacrament: and a Communion without Communion.

What shall I say further? If I grant M. Hardinge his whole demand, yet has
he won nothing against me: but very much against him self. For the
question is moved of Lay people: M. Hardinge brings examples of Christ and
two Disciples, who were of the number of the seventy and two, that were sent
abroad to preach the Gospel, and therefore it may well be thought, they were
Ministers, and not of the Lay ^^rte. Lyra Lyra in Lucam^ ca. 24.
and others think, the one of them was S. Luke him self. Epiphanius thinks,
it was Nathanael. Therefore M. Hardinge may well geather hereof, Epiphanius
contra Saturnilianos.
y^ Priests may receive in One Kind: which thing he will in no wise grant.
But he can conclude nothing against the people. Such luck has he to allege
matter against him self.

M. Hardinge. The.13. Division.
Here might b^ alleged the place of thactes in the.2. Chapter, where mention is
made of the Communion of breaki^^e of the Bread, the Cup not spoken of:
which the Heretics called Waldensis, did confess that it must be
understood of the Sacrament, In confessione ad vladi^^aum: and likewise the
place of the.20. Chapter, and specially that of the.27. Chapter of the Acts.
57 The.57. untruth. Chrysostom understands it of Common meat.
Where Chrysostom and other Fathers understand the Bread that S. Paul in
peril of shipwreck took, gave thanks over, Brake, and Eat, to be the holy
Sacrament.

The B. of Sarisburie.
He thought it not good to recite the words, as knowinge, they would not
greatly serve his purpose. That the two former places were meante of the
Sacrament, it appears (says he) not only by the Waldensis, but also by
thexposition of the old Fathers. Yet could none of them in either of these
places, ever find out the half Communion in One Kind. But here is no mention
of the Cup: Ergo, says M. Hardinge, the Communion was ministered in Bread
alone. A learned man, before he conclude so unadvisedly, should foresee, what
would follow. M. Hardinge grants, as shall hereafter appear, that if a
Priest do Communicate in One Kind alone, he commits sacrilege: for so it
is determined by Gelasius. Now let us lay these two verities of M. Hardinges
both together. The first is, If a Priest minister in One Kind, he
commits sacrilege. The second is, The Apostles were Priests, and ministered
only in One Kind: for here is no manner mention of the Cup. These both be
M. Hardinges premises. M. Hardinges Conclusion. That the Apostles of Christ
committed sacrilege.
Hereof it must necessarily follow, and can not be avoided, that the Apostles
of Christ committed sacrilege. But what will not these men grant, to win
their purpose?

The weight of M. Hardinges argument, is taken, as they name it in Schools, ab
Authoritate negative: and unless it be in consideration of some other
Circumstance, it is so simple, that a very child may soon answer it. For as
he says here, There is no mention made but of Breakinge of Bread: Ergo,
there was no Cup, So might he also say, There is no mention made, but of
Breakinge of Bread: Ergo, there was not Christ's Body. Genes. 46.
Or thus: Jacob went down into Egypt with three score and ten souls: Ergo,
in his company he had no bodies. Certainly, as the soul in that place
imports the whole man: even so in the other place, the breakinge of Bread
imports the whole Ministration.

As for the Breakinge of Bread in the.27. of the Acts, which place as it is
auoutched, Chrysostom understands of the Sacrament, verily M. Harding was
therein much ouerseene. For the text is clear: If S. Paul gave the
Sacrament* being at that time in the ship, he gave it only unto Infidels,
that knew not Christ. M. Hardinge misreporteth S. Chrysostom.
And Chrysostomes exposition even in the same place is plain to the contrary.
For thus he enlarges S. Paul's words, that he spoke to the Mariners. Obsecro
vos vt sumatis cibum: hoc enim ad salutem vestram fuerit: hoc est, ne forsan
fame pereatis, cibum sumite. I pray you take some sustenance, It is behooueful
for you that ye so do. That is to say, take some meat, least perhaps ye die
for hunger. Now let M. Harding either say, these words are spoken of ye
Sacrament: or confess, that he has made untrue report of his Doctor.

M. Hardinge. The.14. Division.
It is not to be marueled at, al be it S. Paul delivered to the Corinthians
thinstitutio^ of our Lords Supper under both kinds, that yet upon occasion
given, and when condition of time so required, 58 The.58. untruth. S. Paul
never ministered the Communion so.
he ministered the Communion under One Kind, sith that without doubt, he
took that holy mystery under One Kind, 1. Corinthians. 10.
for the whole Sacrament, as we perceive by his words, where he says, Vnus
panis, and vnum corpus, multi sumus, omnes qui de vno pane participamus. One
Bread, and one Body, we being many are, all that do participate of one
Bread. 59 The.59. untruth. For immediately before he says, The Cup of
Blissing, which we Bliss, is it not the Communion of Christ's Blood?
Where he speaks nothing of the Cup. And likewise by his words, where
he speaks disiunctiuely, as the Greek, and the true Latin text has.
Quicunque manducauerit Panem, vel biberit calice^ Domini indigne, reus erit
corporis and sanguinis Domini. Who so ever eats the Bread, or drinks of
the Cup of our Lord unworthily, he shall be guilty of the Body and Blood
of the Lord. Whereon depends an argument of the contrary, that who so ever
eats this Bread woorthely, or drinks this Cup woorthely, he eats and
drinks righteousness and life.

The B. of Sarisburie.
It is no marvel, says M. Hardinge, though S. Paul ministered sometimes in
One Kind. But it is much to be marueled, that any Christian man durst ever
thus boldly to publishe open error under the name of S. Paul. What would
not these men take in hand^ to prove, that dare thus to allege S. Paul him
self against him self, and that without any testimony, or word of S.
Paul? Yes Marie, saiethe M. Harding, S. Paul says, We being many are one
Bread, and one Body: and speaks nothing of the Cup. M. Hardinge charge
S. Paul with sacrilege.
Here by the way, M. Hardinge charge S. Paul with manifest sacrilege. For
it is already confessed by all them of that side, that it is sacrilege, if a
Priest, such as S. Paul was, do Minister and receive the Sacrament under
One Kind.

But (he says) there is nothing spoken of the Cup. What may we think
hereof? Whether is this man him self blind, or thinks he al others to be
blind? Is there nothing there spoken of the Cup? O good Christian Reader,
mark the dealinge of this man, and beware of him. Unless thou consider well
the places, that he allegeth, he may soon deceive thee. Thus lie S. Paul's
words. 1. Corinthians. 10. M. Hardinge misreporteth S. Paul's words.
The Cup of the Blissinge, which we Bliss, is it not the Communication of
the Blood of Christ? The Bread that we Break, is it not the Communication of
the Body of Christ? For we being many are one Bread, and one Body, all that
be partakers of one Bread. Here S. Paul distinctly names both parts
together, and the Cup before the Bread. Yet, says M. Harding, there is
nothing spoken here of the Cup. If he have dealte faithfully herein, thou
maiste trust him further for the rest. Uerely S. Hierome notes it thus:
Hieronymus, (...)1. Corinthians. 10.
Ideo de Calice primum dixit, vt posset postea de Pane latius disputare.
Therefore S. Paul spoke first of the Cup, that he might afterward entreat
more at large of the Bread.

Further, says M. Hardinge, S. Paul uses a Disjunctive, as appears both
by the Greek, and also by the true Latin text. Such diligence, and
circumspection in searchinge the Scriptures for defense of a truth is much to
be commended. For there may be oftetimes great weight in one letter, as
appears by sundry disputations between the Christians and the Arrians. But
this man seeks so narrowly, only to find some Covert for his error. S.
Hierome, Anselmus, Haimo, and many others, both in the text, and in
thexposition of the same place, use the Copulative. Not withstandinge, to
grant M. Hardinge his Dis^unctiue, yet if he be so skilful in the Digeste, as
in other places of his Book he would seem to be, he might soon remember,
that the very discretion of the law ^ath determined, that sometimes
Disiunctiues stand in steed of Copulatiues, sometimes Copulatiues in steed
of Dis^unctiues. De verbor. and rer. significatione.
Saepe ita comparatum est, vt and Coniuncta pro Dis^unctis accipiantur, and
Dis^uncta pro Coniunctis.

But if M. Hardinge have so good eye to one little Dis^unctiue, and mean
uprightly, why does he so blindely pass by so many Copulatiues in the self
same place altogether? 1. Corinthians. (...).
For S. Paul says, As often as ye shall eat of this Bread, And drink of
this Cup: And again, Let a man examine him self, and so eat of that
Bread, And drink of that Cup: And again, He that eats, And drinks
unworthily, eats, And drinks his own damnation. Here be four Copulatiues
together. And by these it were good reason, that M. Hardinge should expound
his Disjunctive: specially for that S. Paul, Likewise also the Cup.
recordinge thinstitution, uses a Copulative: and the order of the Primitive
Church, and thexposition of S. Hierome, and others, is agreeable to the same.
Tertul. aduers^^ Prax^am.
In such cases Tertullian has given a good rule. Opor^et secundum plura
intelligi pauciora. Sed proprium hoc est omnium Haereticorum: Nam quia pauca
sunt, quae in sylua inueniri possunt, pauca aduersus plura defendunt, and
posteriora aduersus priora suscipiunt. It is meet that we expound the fewer
places according to the more. But this is the very cast of al Heretics. For,
because there be few things to be found in the wood, or in the multitude,
therefore they defend a few things against many: and things lately
divised, against the first. Thus doothe M. Hardinge, as we plainly see: and
this, says Tertullian, is the very cast of al Heretics.

M. Hardinge. The.15. Division.
For this purpose we have a not able place in the Hebrew Gospel of S. Matthew,
which, S. Hierome says, he saw in the library of Caesarea, and translated
it. This place is cited by S. Hierome in his book De Ecclesiasticis
Scriptoribus, in Iacobo fratre domini. The words touching the Communion,
that S. Hierome rehearses, agree thoroughly with those of S. Luke. 24. Chapter.
Matthaeus sic refert. Dominus autem, etc. Matthew reports thus: when our
Lord had given his shrowde unto the Bishops servant, he went to James and
appeared to him: for James had made an oath, that he would not eat Bread,
from that hour he drank of the Cup of the Lord, until he saw him raised
from the dead. It follows a little after: A^^erte, ait dominus, mensam, and
panem. Statimque addit: Tulit Panem, and benedixit, and fregit, ac dedit Iacobo
iusto, and dixit ei: Frater comede Panem tuum, quia resurrexit filius hominis a
dormientibus. Bring the table and set on Bread, quoth our Lord: and by and
by it is added: he took Bread and blessed it, and brake it, and gave it to
James the Just, and said unto him: my brother, eat thy Bread: for the son
of man is risen again from the Dead. No man can doubt but this was the
Sacrament. And wine was there none given, for any thing that may be geathered.
For it is not likely, that S. James had wine in his house then, for as much as
Egesippus, who was not long after him, witnesses of him, that he never drank
wine, but at our Lords supper.

The B. of Sarisburie.
What shall need long answer to him that alleges nothing? Here is no
word spoken of the Sacrament, Luc. 24.
no more then when Christ did eat of the broiled Fish, and of the Honey
comb. And other proof thereof there is none brought, but words, and
boldness. For show and countenance of somewhat, there is brought forth the
Gospel of S. Matthew, and that written in Hebrew, as though S. Matthew had
written two Gospels, in two sundry tongues: and not only two, but also
diverse. I know, it is thought of some, that S. Matthew wrote his Gospel in
Hebrew, and by report of Theophylactus, S. John the Evangelist translated the
same into Greek. But that there should be any contrariety, or diversity of
story, or matter, as M. Hardinge seems to mean, I have not heard.

But S. Hierome in the place here alleged, Hieronymus. De Ecclesias^icis
scriptoribus
as he not once names the Sacrament, so he speaks not one word of S.
Matthew. Which thing adds some more distrust to M. Hardinges dealing. S.
Hierome only names the Gospel of the Hebrews, which (he says) he him self
translated both into Greek and Latin, and is often alleged by Origin. Eusebius.
lib. 3. ca. 25.
But Eusebius accompteth it for no Gospel, but only among the bastard
Scriptures.

How be it, what so ever the credit of the Book be, thus it is written:
Christ took Bread and blist it, and brake it. Here (says M. Harding) no man
can doubt, but it was the Sacrament. I see well he would feign have it so. Yet
is there here neither by the Hebrews Gospel, nor by S. Hierome, any one word
spoaken of the Sacrament. Neither had S. James vowed, that he would not
minister, or receive the Communion, but that he would eat no Common Bread,
before he had seen Christ risen again from the dead. As for the blessing of
the Bread, it was not a thing peculiar to the Sacrament, but a general manner
that Christ observed, when so ever be used Gods creatures, as it may appear
throughout the story of the Gospels. That Christ should then minister the
Sacrament, it is but M. Hardinges gheasse. No old writer ever saw so much
before, no not S. Hierome, that wrote the story. Yet M. Harding, as though he
had learned it in the third heaven, says, It is so plain, that no man may
doubt of it.

But be it the Sacrament: Ergo (says M. Hardinge) There was but one kind. And
how may that be proved? Now must one gheasse healpe an other. For it is likely
(says M. Harding) that there was no wine in the house. And why so? Because S.
James drank no wine. If gheasses go for arguments, this matter is done. How
be it, it seems a very seely gheasse, to say, S. James drank no wine, Ergo,
He had no wine in his house. Uerely the same Egesippus, Egesippus. Abdias
libro. 6.
that says, S. James never drank wine, says also, That he never was
anointed, never ware woollen clothe, never eat fleashe in all his life.

Hereof by M. Hardinges Logique we may conclude, that he had neither ointment,
nor woollen clothe, nor fleashe in his house. Yet is there here an other
greater inconvenience. Hieronymus de Ecclesia. Scriptoribus.
S. Hierome says that S. James continued Bishop in Jerusalem the space of
thirty years, until the seventh year of Nero: if it be true that is here
avouched, that in all his life he never drank Wine, but only at Christ's last
Supper, then must it follow, that being Bishop in Jerusalem the space of
thirty years he never said Mass: which thing M. Harding may not well grant:
Or else that he consecrated in one kind: which thing by Gelasius is adjudged
Sacrilege. Which way so ever M. Harding turn him self, into one of these
inconveniences he must needs fall.

Again, if here be mention in deed of the Sacrament, and no Wine to be had in
S. James house, then did Christ him self receive in one kind, to whose
example, as these men say, Bishops and Priests are bound to stand.
Therefore let them no longer defraude the people, but by Christ's example let
both Bishops, and Priests, content them selves with the half Communion, as
well as others.

M. Hardinge. The.16. Division.
But because perhaps our adversaries will cast some myste over these
allegations, to darken the truth with their cloudie gloses, which be clear
yenough to quiet, and sobre wits, that give ear to the holy ghost speaking
to us by the mouth of the Church: I will bring forth such witnesses and
proufes for this purpose out of ancient Fathers, as by no reason, or
Sophistical shifte, they shall be hable to avoid. Many of the places, that I
alleged in the article before this for Private Communion, may serve to this
purpose very well, and therefore I will not let to recite some of them here also.

The B. of Sarisburie.
God wot it were great wrong to cast a myste over darkness. But M.
Hardinge having alleged such matter for his half Communion, as he him self
sees may be easily answered, VVil. VVidefor^^dus contra wicleuum.
and William Wideford a Doctor of his own learning says, is foolishely, and
falsely brought in, to serve this turn, Yet he would not pass it over
without some bravery. But now will he bring in such authorities, so clear,
so forcible, and so invincible, as can not possibly be avoided. How be it, God
be thanked, these authorities be neither so weighty, nor so strange. I knew
them al, and had weighed them well, before I spoke any thing in that behalf.
Here he doubleth a great many things before by him alleged for his Private
Mass, in deed seruinge as well to the one purpose, as to the other.

M. Hardinge. The.17. Division.
Melciades that Constant Martyr of Christ, and Bishop of Rome, ordained, that
sundry hosts, prepared by the consecratinge of a Bishop, should be sent
abroad among the Churches, and Parishes, that Christian folk, who remained
in the Catholic faith, might not through heretics be defrauded of the holy
Sacrament. Which can none otherwise be taken, then for the form of Bread
only, because the wine cannot so conveniently be carried abroad from place to
place in small quantity, for such use, much less any long time be kept
without corruption.

The B. of Sarisburie.
This argument hangs only upon lack of carriage. For if it were possible to
divise a way, that the Sacrament might be carried about in both kinds, then
were this gheasse soon answered. For otherwise Melciades speaks not one
word of the Communion in One Kind. Now, that the carriage of both kinds is
not impossible, the examples of antiquity do well declare. S. Hierome writes
thus of Exuperius ye Bishop of Toulouse in France: Hieronym. ad Rusticum.
Nihil illo di^ius, qui Corpus Domini in canistro vimineo, sanguinem portabat
in vitro. There was no man richer th^n he, that carried the Lords Body in a
wicke^ Basket, and his Blood in a Glass. Justinius Martyr in Apologia. 2.
Likewise Justinius Martyr, declaring the order of the Church in his time,
says thus: Illis, quae cum gratiarum action consecrata sunt, vnusquisque
participat: Eadem, ad eos qui absunt, Diaconis dantur perferenda. Of the
things that be consecrate (that is, the Bread, Water, and Wine) every man
takes part, The same things are delivered to the Deacons to be carried unto
them that be away. Here have we found not only a possibility, but also a
common usage and practice of carrieyng the Sacrament in Both Kinds. This is
the first invincible argument, that all the world cannot answer.

M. Hardinge. The.18. Division.
The Council of Nice decreed, This Cano^ is neither sound in the Greek, nor
extant in the first editio^, no^ alleged by Gratia^.
that in Churches where neither Bishop, nor Priest were present, the Deacons
them selves bring forth and eat the holy Communion. Which likewise can
not be referred to the form of wine, for cause of sowringe, and corruption if
it be long keapte.

The B. of Sarisburie.
This later clause (Ipsi proferant, and edant) Let them bring it forth them
selves, and eat) neither is in the Greek, nor in the Decrees, nor in the
former edition of the Councels. Certain words somewhat like, are found in
Rufinus in this sort: Praesentibus Praesbyteris, Rufinus libro. 1. ca. 6.
Diaco^^ ne diuidant Eucharistiam, sed illis agentibus, Solum ministrent. Si
vero praesbiter nullus sit in praesenti, tunc demum etiam ipsis liceat
diuidere. In the presence of the Priests, let not the Deacons divide, or
minister the Sacrament, but only serve the Priests in their office. But if
there be no Priest present, then let it be lawful for the Deacons to minister.
Here is very small healpe for M. Hardinges purpose, unless perhaps he will
say, that, Proferre, or diuidere, Is to minister in One Kind. But if he think
this a very fond Translation, as it is in deed, then this authority might
have been spared.

M. Hardinge upon occasion of these words, would have men believe, that the
Deacon in the absence of the Priest, went to the Pyx, and took out the
Sacrament, and received it. But Rufinus speaks not one word neither of
takings forth of the Sacrament, nor of the receiving of the Deacon, but of
Diuidinge or Ministringe to the people. And his meaning seems to be this,
that in the absence of the Priest, the Deacon might Consecrate, and so serve
the people. Which thing notwithstanding it seem in some part contrary to an
other Canon of the same Council, Canon. 18.
namely in the presence of a Priest, yet that it was so used in the primitive
Church, it appears by most manifest, and certain prou^es. S. Ambrose
imagines S. Laurence being a Deacon, thus to say unto Sixtus the Bishop,
when he saw him led to his Martyrdom. Ambr. officior. lib. 1. ca^ 41.
Experire vtrum idoneum ministrum elegeris, cui commiseris Dominici sanguinis
Consecrationem. O ^ather, try whether thou have chosen a ^itte minister, unto
whom thou have committed the Consecration of the Lords Blood. By these words
we see, that Deacons then used to Consecrate. Therefore Eutropius was not well
advised, when he without cause corrupted, and altered S. Ambroses words, and
for Dominici sanguinis Consecrationem, Eutropius.
read, Dominici sanguinis dispensationem. For it follows immediately in S.
Ambrose, Et consummandorum consortium Sacramentorum, That is, The fellowship of
perfiting the Sacraments.

And the Emperor Justinian in his Authentiques, De ecclesiasticis diuersis
capitulis, Let the Bishop appoint unto the women, Folio. 356. Authen. De Eccle.
diuer. capitulus.
that be under his government, such Priest or Deacon as they shall choose to
make answears unto them, or to minister unto them the holy Oblation.

The same also may evidently be geathered by the second Canon of the Council
Ancyrane: Council. Ancyran. Can. 2.
the words be, Diaconi similiter, qui immolauerunt, honorem quidem habeant:
cessare vero debent ab omni Sacro ministerio, ^iue a Pane, ^iue a Calice
offerendo, vel praedica^do. Let the Deacons, yt have offered (unto Idols)
keep their estate still. But they must give over al holy Ministry, both of
offering the Bread and Wine, and also of preachinge.

This part of the Deacons office was afterward in sundry decrees abrogated.
First Bergomensis in the life of Honorius, Bergomen. in Honorio.
says, It was Decreed by Zosimus Bishop of Rome, that the Deacon should not
minister in the presence of the Bishop or Priest. And long before that time,
order was taken in ye Council holden at Arle in France, that Deacons should
not minister the Sacrament at al. The words be, Council. Arelaten. 1. ca. 15.
De Diaconis, quos cognouimus multis locis offerre, placuit id minime fieri
debere. Touching Deacons, of whom we hear say, that they make the oblation in
many places, we have thought it good that they do so no more.

M. Hardinge will not deny but these be proufes sufficient, that the Deacons in
those days used to minister the holy Communion. Therefore the meaning of the
Council of Nice, is not that the Deacon should go to the Pix, and take ye
Sacrament reserved, as M. Hardinge seems to geather upon a false text, being
neither in the Greek, nor in the former setting forth of the Councels, nor
alleged by Gratian: but that the Deacon in the absence of the Priest, might
Consecrate the holy Mysteries, and deliver the same unto the people, as may well
be geathered by the words of Rufine. But let us grant M. Hardinge, that the
Sacrament was reserved. Yet has he gotten very small advantage for his half
Communion. For if he would say thus: The Sacrament was reserved, Ergo, it was
reserved in one kind,

the Sequel of his argument would be to weak. No Logique could make it good.

I grant, the holy Mysteries were sometimes keapte in the primitive Church
upon sundry occasions: but they were keapte in Both kinds, as manifestly
appears by Nicephorus, Nicephor. li. 13. ca. 19.
and by the first Epistle of complaint sent by Chrysostom unto Innocentius.
This being true, Chrysostom. epist. 1. ad Innoce^tium.
as it can not be denied, that the Sacrament was reserved in both kinds, what
then has M. Harding gotten by this invincible argument, for his half
Communion in one kind?

M. Hardinge. The.19. Division.
Where oftentimes we find it recorded of the Fathers, that Christian people
in time of persecution received of the Priests at Church in fine linen
clothes the Sacrament in sundry portions, to bear with them, and to receive
it secretly in the morning before other meat, as their devotion served them:
for the same cause, and in respect of other circumstances, it must of
necessity be taken only, for the kind or form of Bread. The places of
Tertullian, and S. Cyprian be known. Tertullian writing to his wife, Lib. 2.
ad V^^rem.
exhorts her not to marie again, specially to an Infidel, if he die before
her, for that if she do, she shall not be hable at al times for her husband,
to do as a Christian woman ought to do. VVil not thy husband know (says
he) what thou eatest secretly before al other meat? The.60. Untruth,
Standing in the false translating of Tertullian.
And in case he do know it, he vvil believe it to be Bread, not him who it
is called. S. Cyprian writes in his Sermon De Lapsis, That when a woman had
gonne about with unworthy hands to open her Cofer, where the holy thing of
our Lord was laid up, she was made affraied with fire that rose up from
thence, as she durst not touch it, which doubtless must be taken for that one
kind of the Sacrament.

The B. of Sarisburie.
The matter, that hangs in question between us, is whether the people being
assembled together in the Church, at any time within the space limited,
received the Communion under one kind. M. Harding answeareth me, not of the
order of the Church, but of several men, and Private houses. Thus he flies
that thing, that should be proved: and the thing that needs no proof, as
nothing pertinent unto the matter, he proves only to conjecture. M. Hardinge
falsifieth Tertullian.
In the place of Tertullian he uses a manifest corruption, as I have already
showed.

His conjectures be these: Women received the Sacrament in a linen clothe:
Tertullians wife received it at home before meats: S Cyprian says, A woman
keapte it at home in a Cheaste: Ergo, The Sacrament was ministered in one Kind.
These be cold gheasses, and no prou^es. To say, They had the Bread, Ergo,
They had not the wine, is a very fainte reason, and hangs only of ignorance,
for that M. Hardinge knows not, in what order these things were keapte. But
that women and others keapte the Sacrament, and carried it about them, and that
in Both Kinds, it is evident, and cannot be denied.

Gregory Nazianzene thus writes of his sister Gorgonia, Nazian. in funere
Gorgoniae.
(...). etc. If her hand had laid up any portion of the tokens of the
precious Body, and of the Blood, minglinge it with her tears etc. Here
Nazianzene, contrary to M. Hardinges judgment, says, she had laid up both
parts. And what should I stand long, to heap examples? M. Hardinges own
Amphilochius, Amphilochius.
of whom he seems to make so great account, emonge other his fables,
whereof he has good stoare, says, That a certain Jew came and received
emonge the Faithful, and privily carried part of either Kind home with him.
How, or wherein, it is not written. Yet will it not follow: M. Hardinge cannot
tell wherein the Jew carried home the wine: therefore Amphilochius tale is not
true.

Now, if M. Harding had his own request, yet is he far of from his purpose.
For if he would reason thus, One woman received the half Sacrament in one
Kind at home, Ergo, The People received in like sort openly in the Church,
Which is the thing that should be proved, this argument would hardely hold.

To be short, these three examples here alleged are nothing else, but mere
abuses of the Sacrament. Cyprian. de Lapsis Sermon. 5. Conci^. Caesaraugust. ca.
3.
And therefore as it appears by S. Cyprian, God showed him self by miracle,
to be offended with it, frayeing ye woman, yt so had keapte it, with a ^lame of
fire. And it was decreed in ye Counsel holden at C^saraugusta in Spain, That
if any man received the Sacrament, and eat not the same presently in the
Church, he should be accursed for ever. Thus M. Hardinges reasons hold only
by gheasse: grounded upon abuse: and being granted, yet are not hable to
prove his purpose.

M. Hardinge. The.20. Division.
The examples of keepinge the holy Sacrament under the form of Bread only,
to be in a readiness for the sick, and for others in time of danger, that
they might have their necessary vitaile of life, or viage provision with them
at their departure hence, be in manner infinite. Here one, or two may serve in
steed of a number. For though M. Iuel makes his vaunte, that we have not one
sentence, or clause, for proof of these articles, which he so defaceth with
his negative: yet I will not accumulate this treatise with tedious allegation of
authorities. S. Ambrose at the hour of death, received the Communion under one
Kind, keapte for that purpose, as it appears by this testimony of Paulinus,
who wrote his life. And because it may be a good instruction to others to die
well, I will here recite his words. At the same time as he departed from us to
our Lord, from about the eleventh hour of the day, until the hour that he
gave up the ghost, streatchinge abroad his hands in manner of a Cross, he
prayed. We savve his lips move, but voice we heard none. Horatus a
Priest of the Church of Vercels, being gonne up to bed, heard a voice
three times of one calling him, and sayeing to him, arise, and haste thee, for
he vvil depart hence by and by. Who goinge down gave to the Saint our
Lords Body: which taken, and swallowed down, he gave up the ghost, having
with him a good viage provision, so as the soul being the better refresshed
by the virtue of that meat, may now rejoice with the company of Angels, whose
life he lead in the earth, and with the fellowship of Elias.

The B. of Sarisburie.
It is no vaunte to say the truth. Neither did I deny, that ever any one man
received the Communion in one Kind. For I knew al these examples, and the
weight of them. Neither is it so hard a matter for a man to know them. But this
is the only thing that I denied, That you are not hable to bring any one
sufficient authority, or example, that ever the whole people received the
Communion in the open Church under one Kind. Hereupon rests that strange
Negative, wherewithal ye are so grieved. This is it, that ye should prove, and
yet hitherto have not proved. Ye say, ye will not accumulate examples, as though
ye had yenough to spare. Paulinus.
Yet have ye gotten together Sickefolke, Women, Infantes, Mad men,
Conjectures, Gheasses, Miracles, and Fables: and have spared nothing that might
be found, although it made nothing to your purpose. Such is the stoare of
your examples.

Touching Paulinus, that, as it is supposed, wrote this life of S. Ambrose, I
will say nothing, as of me self, but only refer you to Erasmus, Erasm. in
praefatione in Ambrosium.
whose judgment ye would seem sometime not to misselike. Thus he says: Idem
est artifix, qui ta^ multa contaminauit in scriptis Hieronymi, and Augustini
etc* It is the same crafts man, that has corrupted so many things in the
writings of S. Hierome and S. Augustine, a man even made to such a purpose.
He had the story of S. Ambroses life written by some other. Unto the same he
set a ioyly preface of his own: he woaue in a great many talks between
parties, and thereunto framed a conclusion, and patched on a sort of Miracles.
Compare the very phrase, and manner of speech of the true Paulinus with this
fellows rags etc.

This is that Paulinus, whom M. Harding has chosen for his author.

Touching the matter, if it be granted, it neither reliueth M. Hardinges
purpose, nor hinders ours. For if S. Ambrose straight upon receiuyng of the
Bread, yielded up the sprite, and therefore did not receive the Cup, which
thing notwithstanding is not yet proved, yet will it not follow, that this was
the common order of the Church. What example of dieing well M. Hardinge has
here ^ounde, I cannot see: unless he mean yt the Sacrament, only because it
is received, has power to work Salvation, and to cause a man to die well:
which is a dangerous doctrine, Articulo. 20.
and by M. Harding already refused. For, as much as may appear by the story,
neither did S. Ambrose in that case call for the Sacrament, nor utter any kind
of word, nor understood, what he received: but only lay speechless, and as
soon as he had swallowed the Bread down, gave up the Ghost. But this
Paulinus in the same story, notes one special sentence of S. Ambrose, much
had in remembrance and commended by S. Augustine in his old age, and here
dissembled by M. Hardinge, whereof a man may take great comfort, and in deed
learn a good lesson to die well. For he said lieyng in his death bed, Non sic
vixi, vt pudeat inter vos vinere: nec mori timeo, quia bonum habemus Dominu^,
Neither have I so lived that I am ashamed longer to live amongst you: nor am I
affraied to die, for that we have a gracious Lord.

M. Hardinge. The.21. Division.
Dionysius Alexandrinus about the year of our Lord.200. as Eusebius
Caesariensis recites, manifestly declares, Ecclesias. hist. lib. 6. ca. 44.
how that an old man called Serapion, was houseled under one kind at his
end. This Serapion after that he had laien speechelesse three days, sent for
the Sacrament. The Priest for sickness not hable to come him self, gave to
the ladde that came of that errant, a little of the Sacrament, commanding him
to weate it, and so being moisted to power it into the old man's mouth. Thus
much is expressed by the words there, as the Greek is to be construed. (...).
The ladde being returned home, moisted with some liquor that divine meat, to
serve the old man withal, licinge now pantinge for desire to be dimissed
hence, and to have him away to Heaven, and powered it into his mouth. For that
this old man's mouth and throat, had long benne dry by force of his
sickness, the Priest, who had experience in that case, prouidently gave
warninge, to moiste the Sacrament with some liquour, and so together to power
it into his mouth. Which was so done by the ladde, as Dionysius expresses.
Now if the form of wine had then also been brought by the ladde to be
ministered, there had been no need of such Circumstance, to procure the old
man a moisture to swallow down that holy food. And that this was the manner
of ministering the Sacrament to old men at their departinge, it appears by
record of Theodoritus, who writes in his Ecclesiastical story, how one
Bassus an Archepriest ministered unto an old man called Simeones, of great
fame for his holiness. Bassus, says he, as he visited his Churches, chanced
upon holy Simeones that vvoonder of the world, lieinge sick, who through
feebleness was not hable to speak, nor move. When Bassus savve he should
dye, he gives him his rightes before. But after what sor^e, it is to be
marked. Spongia petita Simeoni o^ hum^ctat atque eluit, ac tum ei diuinum
obtulit Sacramentum. He calls for a sponge (says Theodoritus) and
therevvith moisteth and vvassheth Simeones mouth, and then gives him the holy
Sacrament. If at that time the receiuinge of the Sacred Cup had been in use,
such procuringe of moisture, for the better swalowinge down of the Sacrament
under one kind, had been needelesse.

Amphilochius that worthy Bishop of Iconium in Lycaonia, of whom mention is
made in the article before this, writes in the life of S. Basile, that a little
before he gave up his Ghost, he received a portion of the holy Sacrament, The
buriynge of the Sacrament.
which long before he had caused to be kept, to the intent it might be put in
his grave with him at his burial. Which no man can cauil to be any other then
the form of bread only.

The B. of Sarisburie.
M. Hardinge rather then he would seem to answer nothing, answeareth one
thing for an other. The question is of the usage and order of the Church: his
answer is of Serapions death bed, as though there had been no Churches
yet erected in those days.

This Serapion for open Idolatry by him committed, was excommunicate from the
Church, and utterly cut of from the company of the faithful, and that in
such extreme sort for the greatter terror of others, that duringe his life
he should never be admitted again. Notwithstanding which extremity, upon
good proufes, and tokens of repentance, lest the party should be utterly
swalowed up with despair, the Church oftentimes with charitable discretion,
remitted some part of that rigor: as may appear by S. Cyprian, S. Augustine,
and others, and by Dionysius that wrote this story.

S. Augustine speakinge of the times of persecution, Do not we consider
(says he) August. Epist. 180^
in what multitudes the people in such dangers resorteth to the Church, some
desiringe they may be Baptized, some that they may be reconciled from
excommunication, some that they may be admitted to show their repentance (for
their open crimes) every man desiringe consorte, every man desiringe the
participation of the Sacrament? In which case if there be no Minister to be
had, what misery then follows them, that depart this life either unbaptized,
or else bound (in their sins?) Likewise S. Cyprian says, In this extreme
case of death, the party excommunicate should not tarry to be reconciled by
the Bishop (in the presence of the Church, as the order was then) but
discharge him self before any Deacon, and so depart unto the Lord in peace.
Therefore the priest understanding the state, the old man Serapion being
excommunicate stood in, and being not hable for sickness to go him self,
least he should depart confortelesse in desperation, in token that he was
reconciled unto the Church, sent unto him the sacrament by the ladde, and
sent it not in one kind only, but in both. For such was the order of the
Church then, Hieronym. ad Rusticum.
as it appears well by the story of Exuperius, Justinius, Apologia. 2.
and by Justinius, and others. And the boy that carried the Sacrament, for more
ease of the old man in that case, was warned by the priest to moiste the
bread in the Sacramental wine that he brought with him, like as Bassus also
did unto Simeones: whom M. Hardinge highly commends for his holiness, not
withstandinge he were the founder of the Messalians, Theodoret. li. 4. Cap. 11.
and therefore, as he afterward says, the first parent of the Sacramentarie
Heresy. And what has M. Hardinge herein found for his half Communion? He
will say, The boy was commanded to dippe the Bread: and Bassus was feign to
wash Simeones mouth, Ergo, they received in one kind. Uerily, Serapions boy
were soon hable to answer this argument. For what sequel is this in reason,
The sick man's mouth was dry: Ergo, he could not receive the Cup? Who
would make such reasons but M. Hardinge? Of this ground he might better
reason thus: Good Frydaie.
The sick man's mouth was dry: Ergo, he could not receive the Bread. In my
judgment, the scowringe of the sick man's mouth, has small force to take from
him the Sacrament of Christ's Blood, and so to prove the Half Communion.

As for the fable of M. Hardinges Amphilochius, it were great wrong to
answer it otherwise then as a Fable. For thus it is: The Bread had been
keapte by the space of seven years, or more: S. Basile in his death bed
called for it, and received it, to thentent, as M. Hardinge says, it might be
buried with him. The former part hereof, to say, either that the Sacrament was
kept the space of seven years, or that at the end of so long time, it was
fit to be received of a sick manne in his death bed, is mere folly. But
to say as M. Hardinge here says, that the Body of Christ being now
immortal, and glorious, and at the right hand of God may be laid in the
grave, and buried, is manifest and wicked blasphemy. Abdias says, that S.
Mathie thapostle when he was stoaned to death, desired that two of the first
stoanes might be buried with him, for a witness against them, that so used
him: who, although he be full of like fables, yet has he some reason in his
fables: but M. Hardinges Amphilochius has none at al.

Now for view of M. Hardinges proufes, good Reader, consider this. I demand
of the Laity: he answeareth of S. Ambrose, and S. Basile, which were
Bishops. I demand of the whole people: he answeareth of several men. I
demand of the usage of the Church: he answeareth of persons excommunicate,
that were without the Church. I demand of sufficient and certain proufes:
he answeareth me by gheasses and fables. And these be his invincible
arguments, that no man can answer.

M. Hardinge. The.22. Division.
It has been a 16 custom in the Latin Church from thapostles time to our
days, The.61. untruth. Without any color, or show of truth.
that on Good Friday as well Priests, as other Christen people, receive the
Sacrament under the form of Bread Only, consecrated the day before, called
the day of our Lords Supper, commonly Maundie thursday, and that not without
signification of a singular Mystery, and this has ever been judged, a good
and sufficient Communion.

The B. of Sarisburie.
This may well be called a Good Fridaies argument, it comes in so naked
without witness. In deed M. Tonstal says, Tonstall. de Eucharist.
it has been used of old in the Latin Church, but he durst not say, from
the time of thapostles, as M. Hardinge here says. Yet, for augmentation of
matter of his side, I will say further: the first Council Aransicane holden
sometime in France, Council. Aransicanu^. 1. li. 1. ca. 4.
and Innocentius the first have added hereto the holy Satursday, which now
is called Easter Eaue, and say it is a tradition of the Church, that in those
two days the Sacrament in any wise be not ministered. The like whereof is
written by Socrates, Socr. li 5. ca. 22^
of Good Friday and the Wensday before. Innocent. 1. ca. 4.


The singular mystery hereof, M. Hardinge holds secret as a Mystery. Thom.
3. par. de Euch. q. 76. ar. 2^
Innocentius says, It is because thapostles ran their way that day, and
hid them selves. Gerson contra Floret. li. 4.
Thomas of Aquine, and Gerson say, Because if any had Consecrate that day,
while Christ say dead, the Body had been without Blood, and the Blood
without the Body. Others say, If the Sacrament that mean while had been
keapte, Tho. 3. par. q. 81. ar. 4*
it would have been dead in the Pix.

Hugo Cardinalis says, Innocent. 3.
Quinta feria duae hostiae consecrantur, Hugo Cardinal in Euang. secundu^
Luca^. ca. 24.
and altera in crastinum reseruatur, ^leganter.
quod eleganter fit, etc. Upon Shire Thursday two hosts be consecrate, and
the one of them is reserved until the next day, which thing is very trimly
done. For Christ's passion is the truth, and the Sacrament is a figure of the
same. Therefore when the truth is come, the figure gives place. These be the
greatest mysteries, that I could ever learn toutchinge this matter.

But this, says M. Hardinge, was ever coumpted a good Communion. I grant.
But ye have not yet proved, that this was your Half Communion. For if ye say,
they Consecrated the day before: Ergo, they received in One Kind only the day
after, this would be no formal argument. For the Greek Church all the Lent
long used to consecrate the Sacrament only upon Satursdaies, Sext^ Synodus
Constantinopol. Can. 52.
and Sonnedaies, as it is noted in the Council of Constantinople: and upon
other days they used the Communion of things Consecrate before, and yet had
they never until this day the Communion under On^ Kind. (...).
Yet notwithstanding unto this manner of the Greek Church, Tonstall. de
Eucharist.
M. Tonstal resembles the ^bseruation of Good Fridaie in the Latin Church.
So far is M. Hardinge of, from prouinge his purpose by Good Fridaie.

M. Hardinge. The.23. Division.
And that in the Greek Church also, even in the time of Chrysostom, the
Communion under the form of Bread only, was used, and allowed, it appears
by this notable story of Sozomenus a Greek writer: which because it is
long, Histor. Ecclesi. li. 8. ca. 5. in Graeco.
I will here rehearse it only in English, remittinge the learned to the
Greek. When John, otherwise named Chrysostom, governed the Church of
Constantinople very well, a certain man of the Macedonian Heresy had a wife of
the same opinion. When this man had heard John in his Sermon declare, how one
ought to think of God, he praised his doctrine, and exhorted his wife, to
conform her self to the same judgment also. But when as she was led by the
talk of noble women, rather then by her husbands good aduertisementes, after
that he saw counsel took no place, except (que he) thou will bear me
company in things toutching God, thou shall have no more to do with me, nor
live any longer with me. The woman hearing this, promisinge fainedly, that she
would agree unto it, conferreth the matter with a woman servant that she had,
whom she esteamed for trusty, and uses her help to deceive her husband.
About the time of the Mysteries, she holdinge fast that which she had
received, s^ouped down, making resemblance to pray. Her servant standinge by,
gives to her secretly, that which she had brought with her in her hand.
That, as she put her teeth to it, to bite it, hardens into a stone. With
that the woman sore astonished, fearinge leasie some evil should happen unto her
therefore, which came by the power of God, ran forthwith to the Bishop, and
bewrayinge her self, shows him the stone, having yet in it the printes of
her bitte, representinge a strange matter, and a wondrous color: and so with
tears of her eyes, besought forgiveness, promisinge her husband she would
consent and agree to him. If this seem to any incredible (says Sozomenus)
that stone is witness, which to this day is keapt among the Jewels of the
Church of Constantinople. (...).
By this story it is clear, the Sacrament was then ministered under One Kind
only. For by receiuinge that one form, this woman would have persuaded her
husband, that she had communicated with him, and with that holy Bishop. Else if
both kinds had then been ministered, she should have practiced some other
shifte for the avoiding of the Cup, which had not been so easy.

The B. of Sarisburie.
I may not disgrace the credit of this story: al be it in Sozomenus, and
Nicephorus, of both whom the same is recorded, there be sundry things, that
may well be filed. But I see no cause yet, wherefore M. Hardinge should blow
the triumph. For in all this long rehearsal there is not one word spoaken of
the Communion under One Kind. The Bread so changed into a stone, and keapte
for a memory emonge the Jewels there, was a witness of the woman's
dissimulation, and not of M. Hardinges half Communion. Yet (says he) by this
story it is clear, the Sacrament was then ministered under one Kind only.
For by receiuinge that one form, the woman would have persuaded her husband,
that she had Communicated with him. Else if both kinds had then been
ministered, she would have practiced some other shifte, for thauoidinge of the
Cup, which had not been so easy. Now truly here is but a cold
Conclusion, hanginge wholly (as it may appear) only upon the sleight of a
woman's wit. For as this woman had divised to deceive her husband in the
Bread, why might she not as well divise to deceive him in the Cup? Why might
she not take the Cup, and feign that she drank, and yet drink nothing?
Doubtless such dissimulation is sooner wrought in the Cup, then in the
Bread: and she that durst so to dissemble in the one part of Gods
Sacraments, would little fear to dissemble in the other.

Here we see the certainty of M. Hardinges gheasses. He reapeth the thing,
that was never sown: and geathereth of his authors the thing, that was never
spoaken.

But touching the truth of this whole matter, if a man list only to go by
gheasse, as M. Hardinge does, why may he not thus imagine with him self, If
this woman would thus dissemble in a case so dangerous, what needed her to take
the Bread at her maids hand, and specially at that time, in that place, and
in the sight of ye whole people? Or how could she so openly receive it without
suspicion? Or why might she not have brought it in a Naptkine secretly about
her self? The burden was not great: her fayninge and hypocrisy had been
the easier.

And thus much to answer one gheasse by an other.

But that there was no such dismembringe of the holy Communion at that time,
we may well understand both by S. Basile, Chrysostom. in. 2. Cor. hom 18.
Nazianzene, Gregory Nyssene, and others of that age, and also by these plain
words of Chrysostom, Est vbi nihil differat Sacerdos a subdito: vt quando
frue^dum est horrendis Mysterijs. In some cases there is no difference between
the Priest and the people: as when they must enjoy the reverend Mysteries.
Bysides yt, the Greek Church never had this half Communion, neither before
that time, nor never sithence. And therefore Pope Leo the tenthe, calls the
use of the whole Sacrament according to Christ's Institution, the Bohemians,
and the Grecians Heresy.

M. Hardinge. The.24. Division.
The place of S. Basiles Epistles ad Caesariam cannot be avoided by no shifte
nor Sophistry of the Gospellers. These be his words. Al they which live the
solitary life in wilderness, where is no ^rieste, keepinge the Communion at
home, communicate them selves. And in Alexandria and in Egypt, each of the
people for the most part, has the Communion in his house.

Here I might ask M. Iuel^ how they could keep wine consecrated in small
measures, as should serve for every man's housel a part, in those countries of
extreme heat, specially in wilderness, where they had neither Priest, nor
Deacon, as in that place S. Basile writes: For lack of whom they keapte it
in stoare a long time, that they might not be destitute of it at need.
Again, Bread and Wine shifted suddenly into forms.
here I might ask him, whether it was the form of Bread only, or of Wine
also, which Christen men, and specially women were wont deuoutely to
receive of the Priests, in their clean linen, or Napkins to bear home with
them, taking great heed, that no fragmentes of it fell down to the ground,
as both Origin, and also S. Augustine do witness. I think he will confess,
that linen clothe is not a very fit thing to keep liquour in.

The B. of Sarisburie.
The Gospellers, whom M. Hardinge so often vpbraideth with that name, as if he
him self had no part in Gods Gospel, have little need to avoid that thing,
whereby they see them selves nothing hindered. For the question is moved of the
whole Congregation: answer is made of several persons. We speak of the
order of Churches: M. Hardinge answeareth of forestes and wilderness. Uerely
if he could find any thing to purpose in the Church, he would not thus
hunte the Mountains: neither would he flee for aid into Egipte, if he could
find any near at home.

The ground of this argument is the impossibility of keepinge Wine: which M.
Hardinge has hitherto uttered by the name of Form: Now that it is come to
sowringe, he calls it wine. There is conninge in shiftinge of terms. But if
there be no Wine there remaininge, as these men would persuade the world,
what shall we call it then, that thus stands in danger of soweringe?
Certainly, Christ's blood will not sower: and Forms of Wine without substance
cannot sower: either of these both can as well abide the hot country, as the
cold. But Gelasius says, There remains in the Sacraments the Nature and
Substance of Bread and Wine.

Of preseruinge Wines in hoate countries, I will not reason. Not withstandinge,
Macrobius.
I remember, Macrobius says, that as the country of Egypt is extreme hoate,
so the Wines of the same be extreme cold, and therefore, as it may be
supposed, the more durable. And although the Country of Naples be very hoate,
yet the Wines thereof have been preserved, the space of forty or fifty
years, as it is mentioned by Plutarche, Plutarchus in Lu^ullo.
Athenaeus, Athenaeus, li. 1.
and others. How be it this is not much material. But as the Wine is in danger
of sowringe, so is the Bread in danger of mouldinge, as appears by sundry
cautels of the Mass therefore provided. Yet one question would well be here
demanded. If the Wine in the Mountains of Egypt could not be keapte in small
quantities a few days, how then could the wine that Christ changed out of
water in Cana of Galilie, Vinum Archi^riclini.
be keapte at Orleance in France as a Relic, for the space of fifteen
hundred and thirty years, ever sithence that time until this day, and that
still without soweringe? But let us yield, that wine in the Mountains could
not be keapte: yet might it well be had and keapte in Churches, at the least
duringe the time of the Communion: and that to this purpose is sufficient.

The keepinge of liquoure in a linen clothe, was M. Hardinges conceit, more
to solace him self with all, then much making to the matter. For otherwise as
the women received the Bread in a clothe, so might they receive the Wine in a
Uial, or some other like thing. And that they so did, it may well be geathered
by the story of Gorgonia Nanzianzenes sister: by Eruperius, Nazian. in Funere
Gorgoniae. Hieronym. ad Rus^^^cum Narbonen.
of whom S. Hierome writes: and by the fable of the Jew in M. Hardinges own
Amphilochius. And for that M. Hardinge makes such sport with keepinge
liquoure in a clothe, it was decreed in the Council holden at Altisiodorum,
that the Priest should put his oil in a Chrismatorie, and in linen, by
these words: vt Chrisma Chrismario, and lin^eo imponant. I doubt not, Council.
Altisiodoren. Can. 6.
but M. Hardinge thinks, a linen clothe will hold Wine, as well as Oil.

M. Hardinge. The.25. Division.
Though I might bring a great number of other places, for the use of one
kind, which after the most common rule of the Church, was the form of
Bread: yet here I will stay me self, puttinge the reader in mind, that the
Communion has been ministered to some persons under the form of Wine
only, and has been taken for the whole Sacrament, specially to such, as for
dryness of their throat, at their death, could not swallow it down under the
form of Bread. Where as it appears by S. Cyprian, and also by S.
Augustine, Sermon 5. de (...).
that the Sacrament was given to infantes in their time, we find in S.
Cyprian, that when a Deacon offered the Cup of our Lords Blood to a little
maid child, which through defaulte of the Nourse, had tasted of the
Sacrifices that had been offered to Devils: the child turned a way her face
by the instincte of the divine Majesty (says he) closed fast her lips, and
refused the Cup. But yet, when the Deacon had forced her to receive a little
of the Cup, the yea^^ and vomit followed, so as that sanctified drink in
the Blood of our Lord, gwoshed forth of the polluted bowels. If the
Sacrament had been given to this Infant under the form of Bread before, she
would have refused that no less, then she did the Cup, that the Deacon then
would not have given her the Cup. And that this may seem the less to be
wondered at, De consecrat. did. 4. Can. 4. Si qui apud illos Haereticos.
Ioannes Teutonicus that wrote scholies upon Gratian, witnesses, that even in
his time, the custom was in some places, to give the Sacrament to Infantes,
not by deliueringe to them the Body of Christ, but by powringe the Blood
into their mouths: which custom has been upon good consideration,
abrogated in the Church of Rome, and keapte in the Greek Church, as Lyra
writes upon S. John.

The B. of Sarisburie.
What so ever plenty of such examples M. Hardinge has, if he had any better,
he might well have spared these. Here he says, Some old m^nne for their age,
and dries, were suffered to Communicate of the Cup only, as being not hable
to swallow the Bread. M. Hardinge is against him self, and speaks
contraries.
A little before he said, That S. Ambrose lieinge in his death bed, received
the Bread only: And that S. Basile in the like case received the Sacrament,
being then stale and dry, of seven years keepinge, and that alone without
Wine. Seneca says, Proprium est ^^xuriae gaudere peruersis. It is the
property of wantonness, to delight in things out of order.

Infantes, says M. Hardinge, received in one Kind, and thereto he allegeth
the authority of S. Cyprian: which although it made with him to this purpose
toutchinge Children, yet to other great purposes it makes directly against
him. For first by that place of S. Cyprian, Cypria. Sermo. 5. De lapsis.
the holy Communion was thought so necessary to all the faithful, that Children
and Infantes were not excluded: which plainly overthrows the Private Mass:
Bisides that, the whole people received in Both Kinds, as it is manifest by
S. Cyprians words: M. Hardinge allegeth S. Cyprian against him self.
which thing is contrary to M. Hardinges half Communion.

All this he grants touching the people: wherein only I joined issue: and
makes his whole plea upon an Infant: and yet of Infantes, as he knows, I
spoke nothing. If all that he says, were proved true, yet has he gotten but
an Infant of his side. But what if^ this Infant received both kinds? Uerely,
there is nothing in Cyprian to the contrary. And it appears by S. Hierome,
S. Augustine and other old writers, August. De Eccl. Dogma. lib. 1. cap. 52.
that they that were Baptized, as well children, as others, immediately received
the holy Mysteries in Both Kinds. S. Hierome speakinge of one Hilarious says
thus: Hieronym. co^tra Luciferian.
Non potest Baptisma tradere sine Eucharistia. He cannot minister Baptism
without the Sacrament of thanks geuinge. S. Cyprians words toutchinge this
matter be these: Vbi solemnibus adimpletis calicem Diaconus offerre praesentibus
coepit, and accipientibus caeteris, locus eius aduenit, faciem suam paruula
instinctu diuinae Maiestatis auertere etc. After the solemnity (of the
Consecration) was done, and the Deacon began to minister the Cup unto them
that were present, and emonge others that received, her turn was come, the
child by the power of Gods divine. Majesty turned away her face etc.
Hereby we may well geather, that like as the Priest, the Deacons, and the people
received, even so the child received to, without any manner innovation, or
difference.

He will say, there is mention made but only of the Cup. Therefore the Child
received not the other kind. This gheasse is over s^lender: yet is it an
ordinary argument with M. Hardinge. But it seems, he does not well consider
the inconvenience, that thereof may follow. For so may he as well conclude,
that the Priest him self, and the Deacons, and the whole people, received
only of the Cup. For there is no mention at al made of the other portion.

If the Bread had been offered to the child, she would as well have refused
that, as she did the Cup. This is an other gheasse without any necessary
sequel. This effect followed when God would have it: of whose dooinges we
can give no reason.

Lyra, and Teutonicus, lived at the least thirteen hundred years after
Christ, wherefore their authority in this case must needs seem the less.
Yet, for ought that I can see, Lyra is untruly alleged, as writing to an
other purpose.

Teutonicus in his gloss in the same place, manifestly corrupts S. Augustines
text. For, where as S. Augustine speaks namely of Children, and calls
them, paruulos, Little ones, he says in his Gloss, Hoc intellige de adultis,
Understand this of men of ripe years. Then to confirm his error he
allegeth a custom, but he knows not where: and proves it also, but he
knows not by whom. For thus he auoutcheth it, Secundum quosdam, that is, as
some men say: Which was never good witness in any court. Wherefore M.
Hardinge might have spared these Doctors, without any prejudice of his cause.

M. Hardinge. The.26. Division.
The fourth Council of Carthago decreed, Can. 76.
if a man in sickness (who was enjoined public penance) do demand his
housel, and er he die fall in a Phrenesie, or become speechless: that the
Sacrament be powered into his mouth. To take this for the form of Wine, we
are moved by the decree of the Eleventh Council Toletane. Where it is said,
Can. 11.
that the weak nature of man is wont at the point of death to be so far
oppressed with drouthe, that it may be refreshed by no meats, uneath sustained
with conforte of drink. Then it follows. Which thing we see to be so, at
departinge of many, who being very desirous to receive their viage provision
of the holy Communion, when the Sacrament was given them, have cast it up
again: not that they did this through infidelity, but for that they were not
hable to swallow down the Sacrament delivered to them, but only a draught of
our Lords Cup. How so ever this be taken, it is plain by this Council, as
by many other ancient Councels and Doctors, that the manner of the Catholic
Church has been, to minister the Sacrament to the sick, under one Kind.

The B. of Sarisburie.
These authorities answer them self. Being every way granted, yet is M.
Hardinge never the near. The whole matter we stand upon, is the open order,
and usage in the Church. For proof hereof here are brought in Lunatiques, and
Mad men. It were a strange sight, to see a Church full of such people. The
substance of his argument reasteth only upon this gheasse, that the Bread
cannot be powered into the sick man's mouth: Council. Carthag. 3. Ca. 6.
and yet he may learn by the third Council of Carthage, and by the
Abridgement of the Council of Hippo, that the Sacrament was then put into De^de
Men's mouths. Neither can I see what necessity is in this reason: The man is
frenetique, or lies speechelesse, which was the suggestion of that Council:
Ergo, he cannot receive the Sacramental Bread. If there be danger in the
receiuinge, there is none more, then in the Cup.

The Canon of the Council of Toledo here alleged, is not an exposition of this
Council of Carthage, as M. Hardinge thinks: but a declaration of a Canon made
in the first Council of Toledo: Council. Toletan. 11. Ca. 11.
as it is plain by these words: In collatione nostri coetus relectus est
Canon Toletani Concilij primi, in quo praeceptum est, vt si quis acceptam a
Sacerdote Eucharistiam non sumpserit, velut Sacrilegus propellatur. In the
conference of our Council there was read a Canon of the Council of Toledo,
wherein it was ordered, that, if any man received not the Sacrament delivered to
him by the Priest, the same should be Excommunicate, as a wicked doer. This
Decree seemed very strait, specially for that a godly man by mean of
sickness, or other weakness of nature, might happen to refuse, or not to
receive down the Sacrament, but to cast it up, against his will. Therefore the
Council by way of declaration determines thus: that, if any man happen so to
do by force of sickness, he shall not stand in danger of the Law.

Hereupon M. Hardinge concludes thus: It is plain by this Council, and by
many other Councelles, and Doctors etc. Other Council, or Doctor here is none
named. This Council neither makes any law, toutchinge this matter: nor
declares any order, or manner of public Ministration: but only excuses the
invincible necessity, and weakness of nature.

But touching the manner and order of the Church, the same Council, Si quis
accept^ Eucharistia^ non sumpserit. Collatam a Sacerdote Eucharistiam reijciunt.
in the same self place says, that the whole Sacrament was offered even to
the sick: that the sick did sometime of infirmity cast it up again. Which
is a good argument, that they did receive it: And that Infantes did som^time
the like. Whereof we may geather, that Infantes then received the Sacrament,
and that in such sort, as others did.

Al these things considered accordingely* M. Harding might well conclude thus
against him self: It was granted of special favor unto Lunatiques, and
Mad Men, and other sick persons, that in consideration of their
weakness, they might Communicate under One Kind without danger of the Law:
Therefore the reast, that were not so excepted, Communicated under Both
Kinds, and that by the very force of the Law.

M. Hardinge. The.27. Division.
Now, where as some say, that the Sacrament to be given under the form of
Bread, was first dipte in the Blood of our Lord, and would have so used
now also, for the sick, and that it is so to be taken for the whole and entier
Sacrament, as though the Sacrament under the form of Bread were not of it
self sufficient: let them understand, that this was an old error, condemned
above twelve hundred years past, by Julius the first, that great defender of
Athanasius who hereof in an Epistle to the Bishops through Egypt, wrote
thus: De con. did. 2. Can. Cum omne crimen.
Illud vero quod pro comp^emento Communionis intinctam tradunt Eucharistiam
populis, nec hoc prolatum ex Euangelio testimonium receperunt, vbi Apostolis
Corpus suum Dominus commendau^t and sanguinem. Seorsum enim panis, and seorsum
Calicis commendatio memoratur. Where as some deliver to the people the
Sacrament dipte, for the full and whole Communion, they have not received this
testimony pronounced out of the Gospel, where our Lord gave his Body and his
Blood. For the giving of the Bre^d is recorded aparte by it self: and the
geuinge of the Cup, aparte likewise by it self. And where as some afterward
in the time of Vitellianus would have brought in again this abrogated
custom, it was in like manner condemned and abolished, In tertio Concilio
Braccarensi. Can. 1.

The B. of Sarisburie.
There have been many great abuses about the holy Mysteries, not only of
late years in the Church of Rome, whereof we justly complain: but also in
the primitive Church, even from the Apostles time. For some there were, that
ministered in water only: some that ministered milk in steed of Wine: De Con.
did. 2. Cum omne.
some bruised grapes into the Cup, and so ministered: Augustine. ad Quod vult
Deu^*
some ministered Bread and Cheese together: some dipte the Sacrament of
Christ's Body in the Sacrament of his Blood. But neither this folly, whereof
Julius speaks, nor any other like old folly, was ever renewed by any of us.
In deed M. Hardinge, and all the rest of that side, have used to break the
Bread, and to dippe the third part of it into the Wine, and for the same
have divised a solemn^ Mystery. For some of them say, it signifies Christ's
risinge from the dead: some, the faithful that be yet alive: some others, the
Blissed, that be in Heaven. And yet M. Hardinge knows, that Julius calls it
a Schismatical ambition, and a practice contrary to the Apostles Doctrine.

We both herein, and in all other cases like, follow only Christ's
Institution: who as the Evangelists have written, and as Julius also
records, first gave the Bread aparte, and afterward the Wine likewise
aparte: and said not only, Eat this, but also by express words, Drink
this. Yet I^o says, that for danger of sheddinge, Iuo de diuinis officijs.
Cassander.
sometimes the Bread, is dipte into the Cup, and so delivered to the people.

This Julius here alleged, stands fully of our side: and therefore I marvel,
that M. Hardinge would seek comfort at his hand. For where he says,
Por^igunt Eucharistiam populis, they deliver the Sacrament unto the people, he
imports a Communion: where he reproves the error of dippinge, and
recti^ieth the same by Christ's Institution, Julius commands Both Kinds,
contrary to M. Hardinges doctrine.
and commands Both Kinds to be given aparte, he signifies the whole
Communion expressly in Both Kinds: and so quite overthrows, what so ever M.
Hardinge has hitherto builte.

M. Hardinge. The.28. Division.
Now I refer me to the judgment of the Reader, of what opinion so ever he
be, The question is of the open ministratio^ in the Church.
whether for proof of the Communion under one Kind, we have any word,
sentence, or clause at al, or no: and whether these words of M. Iuel in his
Sermon be true, or no, where he says thus: It was used throughout the whole
Catholic Church six hundred years after Christ's ascension under Both
Kinds without exception. That it was so used, yea six hundred years, and
long after, we deny not: but that it was so always, and in every place used,
and without exception, that we deny: and upon what grounds we do it, let
M. Iuel him self be judge. If some of our allegations may be with violence
wrested from our purpose, verily a great number of them cannot, the authority
of the ancient Fathers, who wrote them, remaining inuiolated. Whereof it
follows, that after the judgment of these Fathers, where as Christ
instituted this Blessed Sacrament, and commanded it to be celebrated, and
received in remembrance of his Death, 62 The.62. untruth. Christ's Institution
pertains as well to the people, as to the Priest.
he gave no necessary commandment either for the one, or for both kinds
(biside, and without the celebration of the sacrifice) but left that to the
determination of the Church* Now that the Church for th^^^idinge of
irreverence, periles, offenses, and other weighty and important causes, has
decreed it These Councelles were holde^ fouretene hundred and fouretene years
aft^^ Christ.
in two general Councels, to be received of the lay people in one Kind
only, we think it good with all humbleness to submit our selves to the
Church herein: which Church, Christ commands to be heard and obeyed,
sayeinge: He that hears not the Church, Matthew. 18.
let him be to thee, as a Heathen, and as a Publican. In doeinge whereof, we
weigh advisedly with our selves, the horrible danger that remains for them,
who be authors of schism, and breakers of unity.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Good Christian Reader, now that M. Harding has said so much, as he is hable,
it behooves thee, as thou will judge indifferently between us both, so to
consider, and mark well the very state, and issue of the matter, wherein the
whole question lies. The negative of our side, which so much troubles him,
is this: That for the space of six hundred years after Christ, it can not be
found in any old Doctor, or Council, that ever the holy Communion was
ministered to the people in the Church, or any open assembly in One Kind
only, as it is now ministered in the Church of Rome. The issue therefore of
the whole matter between us, stands upon the order, and usage of the Church.

M. Hardinge for proof hereof, has brought certain particular examples of
Drouthe, Infirmities, Sickness, Age, Inevitable Necessities, and
Impossibilities, and Weakness of nature. Uerely, good Reader, I lookte for
other proufes at M. Hardinges hands. For all these, and other like things I
knew before. He has alleged Christ's Breakinge of Bread at Emaus: the
allegation whereof to this purpose, VVil. VVidefordus.
one of his own Doctors says, is mere folly. He has alleged two Women:
three Sick Folk in their death beds: Persons Excommunicate: Infantes:
Phrenetiques: and Mad Men.

He allegeth Naptkins, Cheastes, Chambers, Mountains, and Wilderness: and for
further proof has brought Conjectures, Gheasses, Lies, and Fables.

He allegeth abuses, that long sithence have been condemned. He allegeth
Scriptures, Doctors, and Councels, plainly, and directly against him self.

He is learned, and has read much: he is eloquent, and can utter much:
yea he is hable to make nothing to appear somewhat, and a little to seem
much.

He has had good conference with as many, as he thought meet, either within
this Realm, or without. He has seen, what so ever has been written by
Coclaeus, Eckius, Pigghius, Hofmeister, Michael Vaehe, Hosius, Staphylus, and
such other of that sort. He has had five whole years and more, to order,
and digeste his Book. It touches him very near, that any man should be so
bold to say, They have defrauded the people of half the Sacrament, and yet
can allege nothing for it. He shows him self much offended, and therefore
spares not his familiar terms, Heretics, Schismatiques, Adversaries of the
Church, Gods Enemies, and such like. Yet having so much learning, so
much eloquence, so much conference, so much study, so much leisure, being
so affected, and so offended, yet has he not hitherto brought one word,
either of ancient Council, or of old Doctor, to prove that thing that is
denied: that is, that the Sacrament was ever Ministered unto the people in one
Kind, Openly in any Congregation, or in the open order and usage of any
Church. Yet were there Churches then erected: yet were there Priests and
people then: yet was the holy Ministration then openly used in form, and
order: and learned men to record the same. All this not withstandinge, M.
Hardinge has hitherto found nothing in the open Ministration, in the
Congregation and assembly of the people, whereby to prove his Half
Communion. Wherefore, there is no cause yet showed to the contrary, but M. Iuel
may say now, as he truly before said in his Sermon, The whole Communion was
used throughout the whole Catholic Church under Both Kinds, six hundred
years after Christ's Ascension, in all Congregations, and Churches without
exception.

But Christ has lea^te these matters to the discretion, and determination of
the Church. By what record may that appear? M. Hardinges word is no
Charter. Or if it be true, where did the Church ever so determine of it,
within the compass of six hundred years? S. Augustine in this case is very
reasonable: Ad Casulanum.
his words be these, Vbi authoritas deficit, ibi consuetudo Maiorum pro lege
tenenda est, Where authority fails, there the Custom of our Elders must
hold for a Law. But having Gods Word, and Christ's Institution, we want
no authority.

The authority of the Church is great: I grant: but the causes, yt moved
the Church of Rome to break Christ's Institution, as the keapinge of the
Wine, Beardes, and Palsies, and such like, are not great: Not withstandinge
M. Hardinge enlarge them much, and call them Importante, and weighty causes.
The two Councels of Basile and Constance, where this matter was first
concluded, as they were at the least fourtene hundred years after Christ,
and therefore not to be alleged in this case against may assertion, so the
authority of them both ^angeth yet in question.

For the Thomistes say, the Council of Basile came unlawfully together, Ludo.
Viues in 20. lib. De Ciuit. Dei. ca. 26.
and that therefore al their determinations were in vain. And Pigghius says,
the other Council of Constance concluded against Nature, against the
Scriptures, against Antiquity, and against the Faith of the Church. These
be the two Councels that M. Hardinge would have us yield unto.

We are bound to hear the Church, Gelasius.
says M. Hardinge. But much more are we bound to hear God. This saieing of
S. Cyprian is worthy deeply to be noted, Non iungitur Ecclesiae, qui ab
Euangelio separatur. He has no fellowship with the Church, that is divided
from the Gospel. And likewise writing against certain, that abused the Cup
of Christ, Ministringe therein Water in steed of Wine, he gives this lesson
to al Bishops and others toutchinge the Reformation of the Church: Religioni
nostrae co^gruit, Cyprian. ad Caecil. lib. 2. epist. 3.
and timori, and ipsi loco, and officio Sacerdotij nostri, custodire
Traditionis Dominicae veritatem: and, quod prius apud quosdam videtur erratum,
Domino monente, corrigere: vt cum in claritate sua, and Maiestate Coelesti
venire coeperit, inueniat nos tenere, quod monuit: obseruare, quod docuit:
facere, quod fecit. It behooves the Religion that we profess, and our
reverence toward God, and the very place, and office of our Priesthood, to
keep the truth of the Lords Tradition, and by the Lords advertisement to
correct that thing, that by certain has been amiss: that when he shall
come in his glory, and Majesty, he may find us to hold, that he warned us:
to keep, that he taught us: to do, that he did.

M. Hardinge. The.29. Division.
Now for answer to M. Iuelles place alleged out of Gelasius, which is the
chief that he, and al other the adversaries of the Church have to bring for
their purpose in this point, this much may be said. First that he allegeth
Gelasius untruly, making him to sound in English, otherwise then he doothe
in Latin. M. Iuels words be the^e. Gelasius an old Father of the Church,
and a Bishop of Rome, says, that to Minister the Communion under one Kind,
is open Sacrilege. But where says Gelasius so? This is no sincere handlinge
of the matter. And because he knew, the words of that Father imported not so
much, guilefully he recites them in Latin, and does not English them:
which he would not have omitted, if they had so plainly made for his
purpose. The words of Gelasius be these: Diuisio vnius e^usdemque Mysterij,
sine grandi sacrilegio non potest peruenire, The Division of one and the same
Mystery, can not come without great sacrilege. Of these words he cannot
conclude, Gelasius to say, that to minister the Communion under one kind, is
open sacrilege. Gelasius rebukes, and abhors the division of that high
Mystery, which under one form, and under both, is vnum, idemque, One, and
the same: not one under the form of Bread, and another under the form of
Wine: not one in respect of the Body, and an other in respect of the
Blood: but vnum, idemque, one, and the self same. The words before recited,
be taken out of a fragment of a Canon of Gelasius, which is thus, as we find
in Gratian. Comperimus autem, De Con. did. 2. Can. Comperimus.
quod quidam sumpta tantum Corporis sacri portione, a calice sacrati cruoris
abstineant. Qui procul dubio (quoniam nescio qua superstitione docentur
adstringi) aut integra sacramenta percipiant, aut ab integris arceantur: quia
diuisio vnius eiusdemque Mysterij, sine grandi sacrilegio non potest peruenire.
Which may thus be Englished: But we have found, that some having received
only the portion, Gelasius untruly translated by M. Hardinge.
Wherein is the holy body, abs^eine from the Cup of the sacred Blood: who
without doubt (for as much as I know not with what supersitition they be
taught to be tied) either let them receive the whole Sacraments, or let them
be keapte from the whole: because the division of one and the same Mystery can
not come without great sacrilege.

Here might be said to M. Iuel* she we us the whole Epistle of Gelasius, from
whence this fragment is taken, that we may weigh the circumstance, and the
causes, why he wrote it, conferringe that goes before, and that follows: and
we will frame you a reasonable answer. But it is not extant, and therefore
your argument in that respect is of less force.

^he B. of Sarisburie.
Neither are we the adversaries of the Church, nor Gelasius the chiefest that
we bring for our purpose. We follow Christ, as he has commanded us, whom
it became Gelasius also to follow. But it is a world to see, into how many
faces, and fashions M. Harding is feign to turn him self, to avoid this
authority of Gelasius. He leaves the whole route of his own company, and is
glad to run alone. He expounds Gelasius by Leo, as though they wrote
both of one thing. And yet others of his own side say, that Leo wrote of
Heretics, and Gelasius of Catholics: Leo of the people, Gelasius of the
Priests. He complains, that the rest of Gelasius is not to be found, as
though it were suppreste by some of us: In Pontificali, v^ citatur in primo
tomo Council. in vita Gelasij.
and yet it is thought the Pope has it whole in his Library. He diuiseth new
causes of unity of the Mystery, such as Gelasius never knew. He concludes
at the last, that this breach of Christ's Institution, and Ministration under
One Kind, that is now universally used in the Church of Rome, was first
brought in, and practiced by the Manichees, which were in old time wicked,
and horrible Heretics.

He says, I have guilefully alleged Gelasius, and to the intent it might the
sooner appear, he has noted it specially in the Margin. But if M. Hardinge
himself had meante no guile, he would have showed plainly, wherein I have
been guileful: or what I might have gotten by this guile: or what advantage I
might have lost by plainer dealinge. For guile without cause is mere ^olie,
and no guile. But I recited the words in Latin, and had forgotten to
English them. Now surely, that is but a simple guile, and might well have
been spared out of the Margin.

But my words be these: Gelasius says, that to Minister the Sacrament in
one Kind, is open Sacrilege. And what guile can he find herein? This
word, Sacrilege, and the refusinge of the Cup, are both specially named by
Gelasius. There remain only these words, To minister the Sacrament: and
there, says M. Hardinge, lies the guile. How be it therein, as it shall well
appear, I say nothing, but that Gelasius says, and M. Hardinge him self
would have him say. For thus says Gelasius, The division of the Mystery,
whereby he means the Sacrament, is Sacrilege: The Priest ministringe in One
Kind commits Sacrilege.
But the Priest that Ministers in One Kind, divides the Mystery: Ergo, the
Priest that Ministers in One Kind, commits Sacrilege.

This argument is perfect and formal, and founded upon Gelasius words. I
trow this is no guileful dealinge.

The unity of the Mystery, that M. Hardinge has here fantasied, that either
part is in other, and therefore harpeth so often, as it were by reports upon
these words Vnum, and idem, Vnum, and idem.
is but his own voluntary. He is not hable to allege either Gelasius, or any
other old Father, that ever expounded Vnum, and Idem, in that sort. He
calls it one Mystery, as Hugo Cardinal^s says, Hugo Cardinal.
although otherwise a very gross writer, Propter vnitatem Institutionis, 1.
Cor. 11.
For the unity of the Institution: and for that the Bread and Wine being
sundry portions, have both relation unto one Christ: and for that cause by
S. Hieromes judgment S. Paul says, Hieronym. ad Ephesians. li. 2. Ca. 4.
vna fides, vnum Baptisma, one Faith, one Baptism. And for that also, that
being, as I said, two sundry portions, yet they make not two sundry
Sacraments, but one only Sacrament. Durand. li. 4. Ca. 24.
And therefore Durandus a late writer seems to say well. In multis locis
communicatur cum Pane and Vino, id est, cum toto Sacramento. In many places
they Communicate with Bread and Wine, that is, says he, with the whole
Sacrament. Of which words the Reader, be he never so simple, may easily
geather, that the Communion in One Kind, is but the Half Sacrament: and so
the division of one Mystery: and so further, the self same thing, that
Gelasius calls Sacrilege.

M. Hardinge. The.30. Division.
But for auoidinge that our adversaries would hereof conclude, it is to be
understood, that this Canon speaks against the Heretics named Manichaei:
who in the time of Leo the first abou^^ forty years before Gelasius, went
about to spread their Heresy in Rome, and in the parts of Italy. Their
Heretical opinion was, that Christ took not our fleashe and Blood, but that
he had a fantastical body, and died not, ne rose again truly, and in deed,
but by way of fantasy.

And therefore at the Communion, they absteined from the Cup: and the better
to cloak their Heresy, came to receive the Sacrament in the form of Bread
with other Catholic people. Against whom Leo says thus. Sermon. 4. De
quadragesima.
Abdicant enim se Sacramento salutis nostrae etc. They drive them selves away
from the Sacrament of our Salvation. And as they deny that Christ our Lord
was borne in truth of our fleashe, so they believe not that he died, and rose
again truly. And for this cause they condemn the day of our Salvation, and
gladness (that is the Sonneday) to be their sad fasting day. And where as, to
cloak their infidelity, they dare to be at our mysteries: they temper them
selves so in the Communion of the Sacraments, as in the mean time they may
the more safely keep them privy. With unworthy mouth they receive
Christ's Body: but to drink the Blood of our Redemption, utterly they will
none of it. Which thing we would advertise your holiness of, that both such
men may be manifested by these tokens unto you, and also that they whose
Diuilishe simulation and faininge is found, being brought to light, and
bewraied of the fellowship of Saints, may be thrust out of the Church, by
Priestly authority. Thus far be Leo his words.

Gelasius that succeeded forty years after Leo, employed no less diligence
then he did, utterly to vanquishe and abolishe, that horrible Heresy. Of whom
Platina writes, that he banished so many Manichees as were found at Rome, and
there openly burned their books. And because this heresy should none else
where take root, and spring, he wrote an Epistle to Maioricus, and Ioannes,
two Bishops, amongst other things warninge them of the same. Out of which
Epistle, this fragment only is taken: whereby he does both briefly show
what the Manichees did for clokinge of their infidelity, as Leo says: and
also in as much as their opinion was, that Christ's Body had not very Blood,
as being fantastical only, and therefore superstitiously absteined from the
Cup of that holy Blood: gives charge and commandment that either
forsakinge their Heresy they receive the whole Sacraments, to wit, under
Both Kinds, or that they be keapte from them wholly. Here the words of Leo
before mentioned, and this Canon of Gelasius conferred together, specially the
story of that time known: it may soon appear to any man of judgment,
against whom this fragment of Gelasius was written. Verily not against the
Church for ministringe the Communion under one Kind, but against the
detestable Manichees, who goeinge about to divide the Mystery of the Body
and Blood of Christ, denieynge him to have taken very fleashe and Blood, so
much as in them lay, loosed Christ, whereof S. John speaks: ^. Johan. 4.
and would have made frustrate the whole work of our Redemption.

The B. of Sarisburie.
To avoid the inconvenience growinge of this authority, M. Hardinge is driven
to avoid the company of Pigghius, Hosius, Tapper, D. Cole, and al others his
fellows of that side, and to say that Gelasius wrote this decree against the
Manichees: notwithstanding al they say, he wrote it against certain
superstitious Priests. D. Cole refers him self unto the construction of
the Gloss there written. De Con. did. 2. Comperim. In Closa.
The words thereof be these: There were certain Priests, that consecrated
the Body and Blood of Christ in due order: and received the Body, but
absteined from the Blood. Against them Gelasius writes. This gheasse of that
Gloser, for many good causes seems unlikely: for first it cannot be showed by
any story, neither where, nor when, any such Priests were, that so
absteined: and again, Gelasius seems to write of them that should be taught,
not of them that should teach: of them that should be removed from the
Sacraments, not of the Priests that should remove them: of the sacrilege and
wickedness of the fact, not of the difference of any persons.

But the Gloss says notwithstanding, These Priests Consecrated both the
Body and the Blood, and received the Body, and absteined from the Blood.
Here would I ^aine learn of D. Cole, what then became of the Cup. The
Priest drank it not: That is certain: for the Gloss says so. Again, the
people drank it not: for so says the Gloss also: and be it true, or false,
it must be defended.

Then must it needs follow, that Christ's Blood was Consecrate, to be cast
away. D. Cole might have foreseen, that this Gloss would soon be taken
against him self. Now let us see of this very self Gloss, what may be
concluded of our side. The Sacrament of Christ's Blood was not thrown away:
The Priest received it not. Ergo, It follows of very fine force, it was
received by the people. Thus D. Cole seeking to prove, that the people
received not in Both Kinds, him self unawares necessarily proves, that the
people received in Both Kinds.

Wherefore M. Hardinges conjecture carries more substance of truth. For the
very story, and conference of time, will soon give the advised Reader to
understand, that Gelasius wrote this decree against the Manichees.

Thus much therefore has M. Hardyng gotten hereby, Heretics the first
authors of the half Communion.
that now it appears, that the first authors of his half Communion were a
sort of Heretics. They held that Christ never received Flesh of the
Blessed Uirgin, neither was borne, nor suffered, nor died, nor arose again.
Which errors are manifestly convinced by the Sacraments. For they are
Sacraments of Christ's Body and Blood: therefore who so receives the same,
confesses thereby, yt Christ of the Uirgin received both Body and Blood. So
says S. Chrysostom, Chrysostom. in Matthae. hom. 83. Co^tra Marcion. li. 4.
Si mortuus Christus no^ est, ^uius Symbolum, and signum hoc Sacramentu^ est?
If Christ died not in deed, tell me then, whose token, or whose sign is this
Sacrament? Tertullian also by a like argument taken of the Sacrament reproves
Marcion, that held that Christ had no Body, but only a show, and a fantasy
of a Body. Christus acceptum Panem, and distributum Discipulis, Corpus suum
illum fecit, dicendo, Hoc est Corpus meum, hoc est, figura Corporis mei. Figura
autem non esset, nisi veritatis esset Corpus. Caeterum vacua res, quod est
phantasma, figuram capere non potest. Christ having received the Bread, and
geuinge the same to his Disciples, made it his Body, saieing: This is my Body,
that is to say, a figure of my Body. But it could not be a figure, unless
there were a Body of a truth. For a void thing, as is a fantasy, can receive
no figure at al. Thus the Sacraments do plainly testify, that Christ
received not a fantasy, or show of a Body, but a very Body in deed.
Therefore the Manichees absteined from the holy Cup, as it appears by Leo:
notwithstanding S. Augustine in one place, Contra Faustum Manich. li. 20. ca.
14.
writing namely against the Manichees, seems to signify the contrary. These
be his words. Sacramentum Panis, and Calicis ita laudatis, vt in ^o nobis
pares esse volueritis. Ye so commend the Sacrament of the Bread, and of the
Cup, that therein you would make your selves equal with us.

Neither were they in deed hable to show any simple cause, why they should
more shun the one portion, then the other. For the Sacrament of the Bread no
less consounded their error, then the Sacrament of the Cup. And as they
thought that Christ's Body was no Body, but only a fantasy, so they likewise
thought that Christ's Blood, was no natural Blood, but only a fantasy. But
if they would not believe Leo, or Augustine, that Christ had one Body, how
much less would they believe M. Hardinge, that Christ has two Bodies, the
one in the Br^ade, the other in the Cup, and each wholly in the other?

M. Hardinge. The.31. Division.
And therefore M. Iuel does us great wrong in wresting this Canon against
us, for as much as we do not divide this divine Mystery, but believe
steadfastly with heart, and confess openly with mouth, that under each kind,
the very fleashe and Blood of Christ, and whole Christ himself, is present
in the Sacrament, 63 The.63. Untruth, Gelasius never believed so.
even as Gelasius believed. Upon this occasion, in the parties of Italy, where
the Manichees uttered their poison, the Communion under Both Kinds was
restoared, and commanded to be used again: whereas before 64 The.64 untruth,
No
of some the Sacrament was received under one kind, and of some under Both
Kinds. Catholic Congregation ever received the Sacrament in One Kind
Else if the Communion under Both Kinds had been taken for a necessary
Institution, and commandment of Christ, and so generally, and inuiolably
observed every where, and always without exception: what needed Gelasius to
make such an ordinance of receiuinge the whole Sacraments, the cause whereof
by this Parenthesis (quoniam nescio qua superstitione docentur adstringi)
plainly expresses? Again, if it had been so inuiolably observed of al until
that time, then the Manichees could not have covered, and cloked their
inf^lclitie, as Leo says, by the receiuinge the Communion with other Catholic
people under One Kind. For whiles the Catholics went from Church, contented
with the only form of Bread, it was uncertain, whither he that came to
receive were a Manichee, or a Catholic. But after that for discrieinge of
them, it was Decreed, that the people should not forbear the Communion of the
Cup any more: the good Catholic folk so received, and the Manichees by
their refusal of the Cup, bewraied them selves. Whereby it appears that the
Communion under One Kind used before by the commandments of Leo, and
Gelasius, was forbidden, to th*intente thereby the Manichees heresy might the
better be espied, rooted out, and clean abolished.

Thus because we do not divide the Mystery of the Lords Body and Blood,
but acknowledge, confess, and teach, that Christ took of the Virgin Mary
very Fleashe, and very Blood in deed, and was a whole and perfect man, as also
God, and delivered the same whole Fleashe to death for our redemption, and
rose again in the same for our Justification, and gives the same to us, to be
partakers of it in the Blessed Sacrament, to life everlasting: that Decree of
Gelasius can not seem against us justly to be alleged: much less may he
seem to say, or mean, that to minister the Communion under One Kind, is open
Sacrilege.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Here M. Hardinge complains, we do him wrong, to allege this Canon against
him: for that he believes even as Gelasius did, that whole Christ is in each
part of the Sacrament. It is very much to allege Gelasius faith without his
words: or to found any new faith, as this is, without some kind of proof.
This is M. Hardinges gross error, and not Gelasius, or any other of the
Catholic Fathers faith. If the holy Fathers had so believed, they had
words, and were hable to utter it. If this had been the faith of the
Catholic Church, it had not been keapte so long in silence.

As for Gelasius, Gelasius contra Eutychem.
his own words are sufficient to declare his faith. Thus he writes
against Nestorius, and E^tyches: Sacramenta, quae sumimus, Corporis, and
Sanguinis Christi, diuinae res ^unt: propter quod and per eadem diuinae
efficimur consortes naturae. Et tamen esse non definit substantia vel natura
Panis and Vini. The Sacraments of Christ's Body and Blood that we receive,
are a godly thing, and therefore by the same we are made partakers of the
divine nature. yet there lets not to be the substance or nature of Bread
and Wine. This was Gelasius faith touching these portions of the Sacrament.

Now has M. Hardynge divised an other Mystery of the woonderful conjunction
of God and Man in Christ: whereof Gelasius spoke not one word in this place,
neither was it any thing to his purpose, to speak of it. Bisides this, he
imagines Gelasius to give a law, that no man should divide that Mystery,
whereas it never lay in the power of man to divide it. Neither had that been a
division, but an utter dissolution of the Mystery.

Thus so he may seem to say somewhat, he weighs not greatly what he say,
examininge each thing as S. Augustine says, August. contra Epist.
Parmeniani. li. 3. ca. 2.
Non in sta^era aequa diuinarum Scripturarum, sed in statera dolosa
Consuetudinum suarum, Not in the just balance of the holy Scriptures, but in
the deceitful and false beams of his own customs.

Of the Cup he makes the Bread: Of the Bread he makes the Cup: Of one
he makes both: Of both he makes one: Of one Mystery he makes an other:
and thus they deal, even as Irenaeus Irenaeus li. 1.
writes of the Heretic Ualentinus. Ordinem and textum scripturarum
supergredientes, and quantum in ipsis est, soluentes, me^bra veritatis
tranferunt, and transfingunt, and alterum ex altero facientes: seducunt multos,
ex his quae aptant ex Dominicis eloquijs male composito phantasmati.
Ouerrenninge the order and text of the Scriptures, and as much, as in them
lies, dismembring the lymmes of the truth, they alter and transpose matters,
and making one thing of an other, they deceive many, by that they geather out
of the Lords words, and join to their il favored fantasy.

The Mystery whereof Gelasius speaks, is the holy Sacrament, which al be it
it stand of two parts, yet is it one Sacrament, and not two. The Manichees
divided the same, taking one part, and leauinge the other: And this is it,
that Gelasius calls Sacrilege.

Here it is further surmised, that Leo, and Gelasius, by their Decrees,
restoared the Catholic people again to the use of Both Kinds. This is
utterly untrue. And may be gheassed by M. Hardinge, but cannot any way be
proved.

The Decrees of Leo, and Gelasius, be abroad, and may be known. But where are
these Decrees? In what Books are they written? Or who ever made mention of
them? Uerely these godly Fathers reproved the Manichees for their Sacrilege,
and not the Catholics: and commanded such as had offended, to correct their
faults, and not such as were faultlesse.

But how could the Manichees have been known (says M. Hardinge) Unless the
Catholic people among whom they received, had Communicate in One Kind? This
question is out of course. I might better say, Nay how could the Manichees
have been known, if they and the Catholics had received in One Kind both a
like? For this is the token that Leo would have them known by: Sanguine^
redemptionis nostrae haurire detrectant. They refuse to drink the Blood of our
Redemption. By these words it is clear, that the Cup was offered orderly
unto them, as unto others: but they refused it.

Thou see, good Christian Reader, that M. Harding notwithstanding he be
driven to leave his own fellows, to shifte one Mystery for an other, to
imagine new laws, and new Decrees, that were never heard of, to change him
self into sundry forms, and to seek al manner hoales to creep out at, yet
at last has found by the authority of Leo, whom he him self allegeth, that
the Catholic people received ye whole Communion under Both Kinds, according
to Christ's Institution: and that the patrones and founders of his half
Communion, were old wicked Heretics, named the Manichees: that the same is
the division of one whole intiere Mystery: and therefore by the authority of
Gelasius may well be called open Sacrilege.

Now to show, what might be said of our side, were labor infinite. For our
Doctrine takes no authority of Private Folk, of Women, of Forcelettes, of
Naptkins, of Sick Bodies, of Death Beds, of Miracles, of Fables, of
Children, and of Mad men: which be the only grounds of all that M. Hardinge
seems hitherto hable to say: But of Christ's Institution, of the Scriptures,
of ye Practice of the Apostles, of the usage of the Primitive Church, of old
Canons, of ancient Councels, of Catholic Fathers, Greeks, and Latins Old,
and New: even of Clemens, Abdias, and Amphilochius, Chrysostom. in. ^. Cor. ho.
18. Eccl. Hiera. Ca. 3 Ignatius ad* Philadelphien. De Con. did. 2. Quia passus.
which are M. Hardinges peculiar Doctors. S. Chrysostom says, In the
receiving of the holy Mysteries there is no difference between Priest and
people. Dionysius says, The unity of the Cup is divided unto al. Ignatius
says, One Cup is divided unto the whole Church. S. Augustine says, We
drink al together, because we live al together. But to reckon up the
authorities of antiquity, as I said, it would be infinite.

The Scholastical Doctors of very late years have seen and testified, that M.
Hardinges doctrine is but new. Thom. par. 3. q. 80. ar. 12.
Thomas of Aquine says, In quibusdam Ecclesiis provide obseruatur, vt populo
Sanguis non detur: In certain Churches it is prouidently observed, that the
Blood be not given to the people. In certain Churches, he says: Not in all
Churches.

Likewise Durandus: Durand. li. 4. cap. 42.
In multis locis Communicatur cum Pane, and Vino, id est, cum toto Sacramento.
In many places they Communicate with Bread and Wine, that is to say, with the
whole Sacrament. In many places, Alexan. par. 4. q. 55. m. 1.
he says: but not in all places. Likewise Alexander de Hales, a great Schole
Doctor: Ita fere vbique a laicis fit in Ecclesia. Thus the lay people in the
Church for the most part do. For the most part, he says: but not in all
parts. And Linwoode in his Prouincialles: Lynwoode de sum. trini. and Fide
Catholi.
Solis celebrantibus sanguinem sub specie vini consecrati sumere, in huiusmodi
minoribus Ecclesiis est concessum. It is granted only unto the Priests that
celebrate in such small Churches, to receive the Blood under the form of Wine.
He excepteth only the small Country Churches, not the greater Churches in
Cities and Towns. Al these Doctors lived within the space of three hundred
years paste. So long it was before M. Hardinges Doctrine could grow general.

Antoninus says, Antoninus.
that King William the Conqueror, that lived a thousand years after Christ,
caused his whole army to Communicate, and that as ye order was then, Haimo in.
1. Cor. 11.
under Both Kinds. Haimo that was not long before him, says, Appellatur
Calix Communicatio, propter participationem: quia omnes Communicant ex illo.
The Cup is called the Communication, because of the participation, for that
every man receives of it. Thus is our doctrine confirmed, not only by the
Old Doctors, but also by the New.

Wherefore M. Harding thus mainteining the open abuse of the holy Mysteries,
offends against Christ's Institution, against the Scriptures, against the
perfection of the Sacrament, against the Confirmation of the New Testament,
against the Tradition and practice of the Apostles, against the ancient
Councels, against the Canons, against the Doctors, both Old and New. The
Apostles of Christ being full of the holy Ghost, so took Christ's words, as
we take them now. Hi^rony. ad Galat. li. 3. ca. 5.
And S. Hierome says, Quicunque aliter Scripturam intelligit, quam sensus
spiritus sancti flagitat, quo conscripta est, licet de Ecclesia non recesserit,
tamen Haereticus appellari potest. Who so ever understands the Scriptures,
otherwise then the sense of the holy Ghost requires, by which holy Ghost the
Scriptures were written, although he be not yet departed from the Church, yet
he may well be called an Heretic. If M. Harding will say, Hilarious ad
Constantium August.
that was true then, and this is true now, then may we answer him, as S.
Hilarie did the Arrians, Veritas ergo temporum erit magis, quam Euangelioru^.
Then truth must be as pleases the time, not as pleases the Gospel. And
further, as S. Augustine answered the Donatistes, Augustine. de vnitate Eccle.
Ca. 11.
Si aliud declamas, aliud recitas, nos post vocem Pastoris nostri, per ora
Prophetarum, and os proprium, and per ora Euangelistarum, nobis apertissime
declaratam, voces vestras non admittimus, non credimus, non accipimus. If ye
Preach any otherwise, or tell us any other tale, after we have once heard the
voice of our Shephearde, most plainly declared unto us by the mouths of his
Prophets, by his own mouth, and by the mouths of his Evangelists, touching
your voices, we take them not, we believe them not, we receive them not.

But for as much, as this is a Mystery of unity, God grant unto us such
humility of mind, that we may al submit our selves unto his Holy Word,
that we may join together in holy and perfect unity, and as I alleged before
out of S. Cyprian, Cyprian. ad Caecilium, lib. 2. 1 p^^^ 3.
By his advertisement redress that thing, wherein certain have erred: That
when he shall come in his glory, and in his heavenly Majesty, he may find us
to hold that he warned us: to keep, that he taught us: to do, that he did.
Amen.

THE THIRD ARTICLE, OF PRAYERS IN A STRANGE TONGVE.
The B. of Sarisburie.
Or that the People had their Common Prayers then in a strange tongue, that
they understood not.

TO furnishe out this Article, M. Hardinge has laid together a great heap
of Stories, Antiquities, Observations of writers, Erections, Propagations,
Canons, and Orders of the Church, Cosmographie, Situation of Countries,
Corruptions and Chaunges of tongues: which things he might better have used
to some other purpose. Now they serve him more for show of learning, then for
substance of proof. He has bestowed upon this treaty, what so ever he could
either divise of him self, or find in others, adding bisides al manner of
beauty, and force unto the same, both with weight of sentence, and also with
color of words. How be it, great vessels be not always full: and the
emptier they be, the more they sound. The wise Reader will be weighed with
reason, and not with talk. As I said at the beginning, One good sentence were
proof sufficient. And if there be any one such in this whole book, I will
yield according to promise. If there be none, then must M. Hardinge consider
better of the matter, and begin again. How be it, he has done, that was the
part of a good Orator: that ye learned may say, he has showed learning, and
eloquence: the unlearned may think, he has said some truth.

M. Hardinge. The.1. Division.
If you mean M. Iuel, by the peoples Common Prayers, such as at that time
they commonly made to God in Private devotion, I think they uttered them in
that tongue, which they understood: 65 The.65. untruth, For under the
Subjection of the Bishop of Rome, the people for the most part prays in
Latin
and so do Christian people now for the most part: and it has never been
reproved by any Catholic Doctor. But if by the Common prayers, you mean the
Public service of the Church, whereof the most part has been pronounced by
the Bishops, Priests, Deacons, and other Ecclesiastical Ministers, the people
to sundry parts of it sayeing Amen, or otherwise geuinge their assent: I
grant, some understood the language thereof, and some understood it not: I
mean, for the time you refer us unto, even of six hundred years after
Christ's conversation here in earth.

For about niene hundred years paste, 66 The.66. untruth, This certainty
vvil never be proved.
it is certain, the people in some Countries had their service in an unknown
tongue, as it shall be proved of our own Country of England.

The B. of Sarisburie.
The disorder of Prayer, that M. Harding has here taken in hand to defend,
is not only repugnant to the Scriptures of God, but also contrary to the sense
of Nature. For if Birds, and Beasts could speak, as Democritus the
Philosopher sometime thought, and as Lactantius a Christian writer seems
partly to say, they do, yet being Birds, and Beasts, and void of reason,
Lactantius, Institution. li. 3. ca. 10.
they would not speak, they know not what. Wherefore seeinge this abuse
appears contrary to God, and Nature, and now also is misseliked and condemned
by the common judgment of al People, therefore it behooves M. Harding to leave
his gheasses, and soundely, and effectually to seek to prove it.

Two special things he has confessed in this treaty, which quite overthrow
his whole purpose: The one is, That the Prayers in the Primitive Church were
said in the common known tongue: The other is, That it were good even now,
that the people understood their own Prayers. This is the plain song, and
may well stand for the ground: the rest is altogether discant, and vain
voluntary, and the most part out of tuene.

This distinction of Common Prayers, whereof he imagines some to be made
openly by the Minister of the Church, some severally by every of the people in
Private devotion, is both imperfect, and also needelesse. For the secret
prayers, that the faithful make severally by them selves, have evermore been
called Private, and never Common. Par. 3. quest. 183. ^rti. 4.
And in this sense Thomas of Aquine thinks, that a Prayer made in such sort
by the Priest, and in the Church, may be called Private.

He thinks, That the people uttered their Secret Prayers in the tongue, that
they understood, and so he says, Christian people do now for the most
part. The former part hereof is undoubtedly true. But for the second, That
Christian people do so now, Gods name be blessed, that has brought it so to
pass, not by M. Hardinge, or his Catholic Doctors, but by such as they have
withstanded for the same, and called Heretics.

Touching the Public Service pronounced by the Priest, whereunto the people
said, Amen, some (says M. Hardinge) understood the language thereof, and
some understood it not.

Here unawares he implies a repugnance in reason, M. Harding implies a
contradiction.
and a manifest contradiction.

For if some of the people understood it not, how could all the people say
Amen? S. Paul's words be plain, How shall the vnl^arned say, Amen, to thy
thanks geuinge? For he knows not what thou say. This tenneth directly
against M. Harding: All the people gave their assent, and said Amen, to the
Common Prayers in the Church: Ergo, all the people understood the Common
Prayers. The allegation of the Church of England in the time of Augustine,
whereof M. Hardinge makes him self so sure, and says with such affiance, It
shall be proou^d, when it shall hereafter come to prou^e in deed, shall prove
nothing.

As concerning the distinction of Private, and Common Prayers, between which
M. Hardinge would also have a difference of speech, undoubtedly the tongue,
that is godly, and profitable, and will stir the mind in Private devotion, is
also godly, and profitable, and likewise hable to sturrey^ mind in the open
Church. And I marvel, what reason can lead any man, to think the contrary.

M. Hardinge. The.2. Division.
But to speak first of antiquity, and of the compass of your six hundred
years, it is evident by sundry ancient records, both of Doctors, and of
Councels, Here M. Harding^ vvandreth vainly from the purpose.
specially of the Council Laodicene in Phrygia Pacatiana, holden by the
Bishops of the lesser Asia, about the year of our Lord. 364. that the
Greek Churches had solemn service in due order and form, set forth with
exact distinction of Psalms, and Lessons, of Hours, Days, Feasts, and
times of the year, of Silence, and open pronouncinge, of geuinge the Kiss of
Peace to the Bishop, first by the Priests, then by the Lay people, of
offeringe the Sacrifice, of the only Ministers coming to the Altar to
receive the Communion, with diverse other seemly observations.

As for the Latin Churches they had their Prayers and Service also, but in
such fixed order, long after the Greeks. For Damasus the Pope first
ordained, that Psalms should be Song in the Church of Rome Alternatim,
enterchaungeably, or by course, so as now we singe them in the Quier, and that
in the ^nde of every Psalm, should be said Gloria patri, and filio, and
spiritui sancto, sicut erat* etc. In rescripto Hieronymiad. 2 Epist. Damasi
Papae ad Hieronymum Presbyterum.
Which he caused to be done by Council of S. Hierome, that the faith of the
318. Bishops of the Nicene Council, might with like fellowship be declared in
the mouths of the Latins. To whom Damasus wrote by Bonifacius the Priest, to
Jerusalem, that Hierome would send unto him Psallentiam Graecorum, The
manner of the singinge of the Greeks, so as he had learned the same, of
Alexander the Bishop in the East. In that Epistle complayninge of the
simplicity of the Roman Church, he says, that there was in the Sunday but
one Epistle of the Apostle, and one Chapter of the Gospel rehearsed, In. 2.
pro^emio commentarior^ Epist. ad Galat. Lib. Confessionum.
and that there was no Singinge with the voice heard, nor the comeliness of
Hymns known among them. --

About the same time, S. Ambrose also took order for the Service of his
Church of Millane, and made Holy Hymns him self. In whose time (as S.
Augustine writes) when Iustina the young Emperor Valent^^ians mother, for
cause of her Heresy, wherewith she was seduced by the Arrians, persecuted the
Catholic faith, and the people thereof occupied them selves in devout
watches, more then before time, ready to die with their Bishop in that quarrel:
it was ordained, that Hymns and Psalms should be song in the Church of
Millane, after the manner of the Eastparties: that the good folk thereby might
have some comfort, and spiritual relief, in that lamentable state, and
continual sorrows. Thereof the Churches of the West forth with took example,
and in every Country they followed the same. Cap. ^^.
In his second Book of Retractations he shows, that in his time such
manner of singinge began to be received in Aphrica. Before this time, had
Hi^^rius also the Bishop of Poyters in France, made Hymns for that purpose,
of which S. Hierome makes mention.

The B. of Sarisburie.
We may well suffer M. Hardinge to wander at large in matters that relieve him
nothing. If it were lawful for others so to do, it were no great Maisterie
to write Books. Many matters be here heapte together, touching order of
Service, distinction of Psalms, Lessons, Hours, Days, Feasts, the geuinge
of Peace, the form of Communion, Singinge in the Church, when it began in
Grecia, when in Rome, when in Millane, when in Aphrica, when in France, and
when in other places. These be none of the matters, that lie in Question.

And therefore, as they nothing further M. Hardinge to this purpose, so in
other respects they hinder him sundry ways. Council Laodie. Canon. 59.
For in the same Council of Laodicea it is decreed, like as also in the Council
of Carthage, That nothing be read in the Church unto the people, sauinge only
the Canonical Scriptures. Council. Cartha. 3. Can. 47.
Therefore the Lessons there mentioned, were not taken out of the Festiual, or
Legenda aurea, as has been used in the Church of Rome: but out of the
Chapters of the Holy Bible, as it is now used in the Church of England. The
Peace given to the Bishop, was not a little Table of Silver, or somewhat else, as
has been used in the Church of Rome: but a very Cosse in deed, in token of
perfect peace, and unity in Faith, and Religion. In Apologia. 2.
So Justinius Martyr says, speakinge of the time of the Holy Ministration, We
salute each one an other with a Cosse. (...)
So likewise Chrysostom and others.

Where he says, that the Church of Rome being as then plain and simple,
learned the Psalmodie, and other Ecclesiastical Music, and the singing of
Gloria patri at the end of every Psalm, of S. Hierome, and the Bishops of
the East, he does us well to understand, that then Rome is not the Mother of
al these things, neither is so to be taken.

But where he further says, Damasus ordained, that the Psalms should be
Song Interchangeably, and in sides, and even so, as they be now Song in the
Quiere, meaning as it seems, that only the Priests, and Clerks Songue,
and the people sat still, it is an open, and a manifest untruth. For it is
certain many ways, that the whole people then Songue the Psalms altogether.

S. Augustine says, Confessionum li. 9. Ca. 7.
That S. Ambrose took that order in Millane in time of persecution and great
danger, for the solace of the people. Nazianzen. in funebri Oratione De Basilia.
Nazianzenus expresses the terrible sound of the people so singinge together
in this wise: (...)
When the Emperor Valens was entered into the Church, where S. Basil Preached,
and was stricken with the Psalmodie, as if it had been with a Thunder etc. In
Psalm. 65.
The like has S. Hilarie writing upon the Psalms: Theodoret. li. 2. Cap. 24.
The like has Theodoretus of one Flauianus, and Theodorus, that first divised
this order of Singinge in the City of Antioche.

But none plainer then S. Basil: Singinge.
his words be these: Basil in Epist. ad Clericos Naeocaesarien.
The people rise before day, and high them to the house of Prayer, and there
after that in mourninge, and in heaviness, and cont^nual tears, they have
confessed them selves unto God, standinge up from their Prayers, they begin
the Psalmodie, and being divided into two parts, they Singe together, the
one part ^^swearinge to the other. And this order (he says) was agreeable to
all the other Churches of God. (...)
Certainly it se^meth that S. Gregory in his time thought Singinge in the
Church to be a thing fitter for the multitude of people, Did. 92. In Sancta
Roman. 1.
then for the P^^est. For he expressly forbids the Priest to Singe in the
Church: but I do not remember that ever he forbade the people.

Hereof we may geather, yt Damasus divided the whole people into two parts,
and willed them to Sing^ the Psalms in their own known tongue, the one part
making answer by course to the other: saving only the ^ides, nothing like
to that is now used in M. Hardinges Quiers.

M. Hardinge. The.3. Division.
Much might be alleged for proof of having service in the Greek and in the
Latin Churches, long before the first six hundred y^^^es were expired,
which is not denied. The thing that is denied by M. Iuel is this. That for
the space of six hundred years after Christ, any Christian people had their
Service or Common Prayers, in a tongue they understood not. Which they of his
side bear the world in hand, to be a heinous error of the Church, and a
wicked deceit of the Papists. And I say, as I said before, that 67 The. 67.
untruth, M. Hardinge is not hable to show one nation, that vnderstood^ not
their Common Service.
the Service was then in a tongue which some people understood, and some
understood not. I mean, the Greek tongue, and the Latin tongue. For that it
was within the six hundred years, in any other Barbarous, or Vulgar tongue,
I never read, neither I think M. Iuel, nor any the best learned of his side
is hable to prove. To be the better understood, I call al tongues Barbarous
and Vulgar, biside the Hebrew, Greek, and Latin.

The Gospel, and the faith of Christ was Preached, and set forth in Syria
and Arabia by Paul: in Egypt by Mark: in Ethiopia by Matthew: in
Mesopotamia, Persia, Media, Bactra, Hyrcania, Parthia and Carmania by Thomas:
in Armenia the greater by Bartholomew: in Scythia by Andrew: and likewise in
other Countries by Apostolic men, who were sent by the Apostles, and their
next successors, as in France, by Martialis sent by Peter: by Dionysius
sent by Clement: Constitu. Apost. li. 7. Cap. 46. Lib. de Scriptor.
Ecclesiasticis.
by Crescens, as Clement and Hierome writes: and by Trophimus S. Paul's
Scholar, and by Nathanael Christ's Disciple, of whom he at Arclate, and this
at Bourges and Treueres, preached the Gospel as some record. In our Countries
here of Britain by Fugatius, Damianus, and others sent by Eleutherius the Pope
and Martyr, at the request of King Lucius, as Damasus writes in Pontificali.
Temporib. Anronini Co^modi anno. Do. 181.
Other Countri^s where the Greek and Latin tongue was commonly known, I
pass over of purpose. Now, if M. Iuel, or any of our learned adversaries, or
any man living could show good evidence and proof, that the Public Service
of the Church was then in the Syriacal or Arabike, in the Egyptian, Ethiopian,
Persian, Armenian, Scythian, French or Britain tongue: then might they justly
claim prescription against us in this Article, then might they charge us with
example of antiquity, then might they requier us to yield to the manner, and
authority of the Primitive Church.68 The.68. untruth, For doubtless it vvil
soon^ be shevved.
But that doubtless can not appear* which if any could show, it would make
much for the Service to be had in the Vulgar tongue.

The B. of Sarisburie.
M. Hardinge being now out of his digression, foundeth him self upon this
Principle, that some people understood the common Prayers, and some
understood them not. But if it might have pleased him to show any one kind of
people, that understood them not, it had been sufficient. But he shows
none, neither here, nor else where. Therefore we may conjecture, his stoare of
such ^hinges is not great.

He grants, that the Service was commonly said in the Greek, Barbarous
Tongue.
and in the Latin tongue. Al other tongues he condemns for Barbarous: by
what authority I can not tell. Gala. 3.
For in respect of God, There is neither Jew, nor Gentile: nor Greek, nor
Barbarous: nor any other distinction of tongues: but al are one in Christ
Jesus. Otherwise any tongue unto him, that understands it not, appears
Barbarous. And in that sense S. Paul says, 1. Cor. 14.
Unless I understand the meaning of the speech, I shall be Barbarous unto him
that speaks: and he that speaks, shall be likewise Barbarous unto me. Like
as Anacharsis the Philosopher also said, The Scythian is Barbarous at Athens:
and the Athenien is Barbarous among the Scythians. And so the Priest, that
prays in an unknown tongue, whether it be Greek, or Latin, is Barbarous
unto the people: and, if he be ignorant, and him self understand not his own
Prayers, he is Barbarous also unto him self. As for the Latin tongue, which
M. Hardinge so favorably exceptethe, it has no such special Privilege above
others. S. Paul making a full division of the whole world, names some
Greeks, and some Barbarous: and so leaves out the Latins emonge the
Barbarous. The same Division Strabo Strabo Cosmograph. li. 1. and. 4
also follows in his Cosmographie. For thus he says, Barbarae sunt omnes
nationes praeter Graecos, Al nations be Barbarous biside the Greeks.
Afterward the Romans misseliking herewithal, as they increased the state of
their Empier, so first they excepted them selves, and in continuance, al other
Nations, that would become Provinces, and be subject unto them. And therefore
Pope Nicolas Epistola Nicolai. 1.
the first made a piteous exclamation against the Greek Emperor Michael,
that seemed to deface the Latin tongue with that odious name. Appellatis
Latinam linguam Barbaram, ad iniuriam eius, qui fecit eam. ye call the Latin
tongue Barbarous, in despite of him that made that tongue. Great Alexanders
modesty is much commended, who, as Strabo Strabo Cosmograph. li. 1.
says, would never sort his subjects by Greeks, and Barbarous, but rather
by the difference of Good, and Il. For many Greeks (said he) be il people:
and many Barbarous be good. The like modesty might well have served M. Hardinge
in this place. For many that know the Greek, and the Latin tongues, be
notwithstanding ungodly: and many be godly, that know them not. Therefore it is
very discretely said by Beda, Beda. 1. Cor. 14.
Barbara est lingua, quae Deum laudare non potest: That tongue is Barbarous,
that can not praise God.

M. Hardinge makes a long discourse of the Apostles, and other Apostolic
men's travails throughout the world. If he had showed to what end, we
might the better have known his purpose. If he will say, The Apostles Preach
in sundry Countries: Ergo, The people had their Common Prayers in an unknown
tongue: Act. 2.
This Argument will hardely hold. For to that end God gave unto them the gift
of Tongues, that they might deal with all nations in their own Languages.

Here are we required to show some evidence, that in the Primitive Church,
the Public Service was in the Syriacal, or Arabike, or Egyptian, or any other
Barbarous tongue: and it is stoutely presumed, that we are hable to show
none. What so ever we can show, this is no indifferent dealinge.

For M. Hardinge M. Harding requires others to show, being him self hable,
to show nothing.
being required of me, to show but one sentence of proof for his side, and
having as yet showed nothing, suddenly alters the whole state of the
cause, and shifteth his hands, and requires me to show. Which thing
although I be not bound to do by any order of Disputation, yet that it may
appear that we deal plainly, and seek nothing but the truth, I am
content only in one example or two, presently to follow his will, referringe
the reast to an other place more convenient for the same. In the.15. Division.


And, for as much as the first tongue that he names amongst others, is the
Syriacal, Ephrems Homilies
let him read S. Hierome, Hieronym. in Epi^aphio Paulae.
describinge the pomp of Paulaes funeral.

These be his words. Tota ad Funus eius Palaestinarum vrbium turba conuenit:
Hebraeo, Graeco, Latino, Syroque Sermon Psalmi in ordine personabant. At her
Funeral all the multitude of the Cities of Palestine met together. The
Psalms were song in order in the Hebrew, Greek, Latin, and Syrian tongue.
Here may he see, that in one City four several nations, in their Common
Service used four several tongues, among which tongues is the Syriacal:
which thing, M. Hardinge thinks, all the world cannot show. S. Augustine
willing ye Priests to apply their studies to correct the errors of their
Latin speech, adds thereto this reason, Vt populus ad id, quod plane
intelligit, dicat, Amen. That the people unto the thing, that they plainly
understand, may say, Amen. This of S. Augustine Augustine de Catechizandis
rudibus. Ca. 9.
seems to be spoaken generally of al tongues. M. Hardinge him self at the
end of his treaty confesses, that the Armenians, Russians, Ethiopians,
Sclauons, and Moscouites, have from the beginning of their faith, in their
public Service used evermore their own natural country tongues. Wherefore
by M. Hardinges own grant, we may justly claim prescription, and charge
him with Antiquity, and require him to yield to the authority of the
Primitive Church.

M. Hardinge. The.4. Division.
Wherefore M. Iuel in his Sermon, which he uttered in so solemn an audience,
and has set forth in Printe to the woorlde, says more then he is hable to
justify, where he speaks generally thus. Before the People grevv to
corruption, (whereby he means the first six hundred years after Christ) al
Christian men throughout the world, made their Common Prayers, and had the
holy Communion, in their own Common and known tongue. This is soon spoaken
sir: but it will not by you be so soon proved.

The B. of Sarisburie.
That M. Iuel there said, is proved sufficiently, unless M. Hardinge be
hable to bring some example, one, or other, to prove the contrary. Neither is
the matter so hard of our side to be proved. Thomas of Aquine, and Nicolas
Lyra, M. Hardinges own witnesses, for some good part, will prove it for me.

M. Hardinge. The.5. Division.
In deed we find, that where as holy Ephrem Deacon of the Church of Edessa,
wrote many things in the Syriacal tongue, Lib. De Scriptorib. Ecclesiast.
he was of so worthy fame and renome, that (as S. Hierome witnesses) his
writings were rehearsed in certain Churches openly, Post lectionem
Scripturaru^. after the Scriptures had been read: whereof it appears to
Erasmus, that nothing was wont then to be read in the Churches, biside the
writings of the Apostles, or at least of such men, as were of Apostolic
authority. But by this place of S. Hierome, it seems not, that Ephrems
works were used as a part of the Common Service: but rather as Homilies, or
exhortations to he read after the Service, which consisted in manner wholly of
the Scriptures. And whether they were turned into Greek, or no, so soon, it
is uncertain.

The B. of Sarisburie.
M. Hardinge, contrary to the order of Rhetorique, would confute our side,
before he confirm his own. But I marvel much, to what end he should thus
allege Ephrem, unless it be to heap matter against him self. For will he thus
frame his reason, Ephrem wrote sundry things in his own mother tongue: Ergo,
The people had their Service in a strange tongue?

Will he have this to be allowed, and go for an argument? If there were nothing
else* here to be geathered, yet has he touched two things expressly against
him self. The one is, that nothing was then read in the Church, sauinge
only the Scriptures, or other matters of Apostolic authority: which thing
is also straitely commanded by the Council of Carthage. Council. Cartha. 3.
Can. 47.
Yet M. Hardinge in his Church, even in the Public Service, reads Lessons,
and Legendes of childi she Fables.

The other is, that Ephrems Homili^s were pronounced unto the people in the
Uulgare tongue: yet M. Hardinge him self pronounces Gospels, Epistles, and
Homilies, and al what so ever, unto the people in a strange tongue.

But to avoid this inconvenience, he says* The Homilies were no part of the
Service. First how is he sure of that? Certainly, the Latin Homilies be read
in the Matins, and accounted part of the Romish Service. Again, what
necessary Sequel is this: The people understood Ephrems Homilies: Ergo, his
Homilies were no part of the Service?

Or what leads him to think, It was profitable for the people to hear and
understand Ephrem, and yet was not profitable for them, to hear and
understand Peter, Paul, or Christ? To be short, be confesses, that Ephrems
writings were exhortations to the Greek people: and yet doubts, whether
they were translated into the Greek, or no: and so he ends in uncertainty,
and concludes nothing.

Now let us see, whether the same Ephrem will conclude any thing of our side.
First, Theodoretus Theodoret. lib. 4. Ca. 29.
says, He was utterly ignorant of the Greek tongue. Which thing is also
confirmed by M. Hardinges own Amphilochius. Amphilochius. Hierom. D^
Ecclesiast. Scriptor.
For in the conference that was bitweene him and Basil, he says, He spoke by
an Interpreter, as being not hable to speak Greek himself. Yet was the same
Ephrem a Minister in the Church, being as S. Hierome says, a Deacon, and as
some others write, the Archedeacon of the Church of Edessa. Now let M.
Hardinge show us, in what other tongue he could minister the Ecclesiastical
ser^ice, but in his own.

If he think, this conjecture to be weak, let him understand further, that
as Theodoretus Theodoret. li. 4. Ca. 29.
reports, the same Ephrem made Hymns, and Psalms in the Syrian tongue: and
that the same were song at the solemn Feasts of Martyrs: and that, (...).
as Sozomenus says plainly, the same Hymns, and Psalms were song in the
Churches of Syria.

M. Hardinge. The.6. Division.
Neither S. Hieromes Translation of the Scriptures into the Dalmatical tongue
(if any such was by him made at al) proves that the Service was then in that
Vulgar tongue. That labor may be thought, to have served to an other purpose.
But of the Translation of the Scriptures into Vulgar tongues, I shall speak
hereafter, when I shall come to that peculiar Article. Verily the handelinge of
this present, and of that, has most things common to both. Thus that the
people of any Country, See the.15. Division of this Article
had the Church Service in their Vulgar and common tongue, biside the Greek,
and the Latin tongue, we leave as a matter stoutely affirmed by M. Iuel, but
fain^ly proved: yea nothing at al proved.

The B. of Sarisburie.
M. Hardinge seems to doubt, whether S. Hierome translated the Scriptures in
to the Sclauon tongue, or no. Yet Stanis^aus Hosius, Hosius de Sacr^ vernacule
legendo.
one of the greatest of that side, makes it very certain, and puts it
quite out of doubt. His words be plain, In Dalmaticam lingua^ Sacros Libros
Hieronymum vertisse, co^star. It is certainly known, that S. Hierome
translated the Scriptures into the Sclauon tongue.

And likewise Alphonsus Alphonsus De Haeresib. lib. 1. ca. 13.
de Castro, S. Hi^ro. translation.
Fatemur olim Sacros Libros in Linguam Vulgarem fuisse translatos, Bea^^mque
Hieronymum in Linguam Dalmaticam cos vertisse.

We confess, that in old times, the Scriptures were translated into the
Vulgar tongue, and that S. Hierome turned them into the Sclauon tongue.
Neither ever wist I any man, that made doubt hereof, but M. Hardinge. But
being granted (says he) that S. Hierome so translated the Scriptures, yet
that proves not, that the Service was then in the Vulgar Tongue. Good sir:
much less it proves, that the Service was then among the Sclauons in the
Latin Tongue. He says further, That labor may be thought, to have served to
an other purpose. But to what other purpose, he shows not. Surely what so
ever is thought hereof by M. Hardinge, M. Eckius Eckius de Missa Latin dicenda.
one of his own Doctors, confesses that the same S. Hierome, that Translated
the Scriptures into the Sclauon tongue, procured also that the Common Service
there should be said in the Sclauon tongue. And it may well be thought, his
Translation could serve to no better purpose. I grant, S. Chrysostom,
Chryso. in Matt. hom. 2. and in Genes. hom. 28. Origin in leuit. hom. 9.
and Origene, in their Sermons exhort the people to read the Scriptures in
their houses at home: which purpose also no doubts, was very godly. But such
Private readinge at home, excludes not the open readinge in the Church.
Chrysostom says, It was the readers dewtie openly in the Church to pronounce
the Scriptures. And S. Augustine says unto the people, The Apostle Chrysostom.
in Acta Apost. hom. 19.
S. Paul witnesses, that this Psalm which ye have heard, pertains to
that Grace of God, whereby we are made Christians: therefore I have caused the
same Lesson to be read unto you. I think, M. Hardinge will grant, that these
Lessons, that S. Chrysostom, and S. Augustine Augustine. in Psalm. 31.
speaks of, were vttred in such a tongue, as the people might understand.
For else Origene says, Origin. in Le^iti. ca. 7.
Alioqui non fuisset necessarium, legi haec in Ecclesia, nisi ex his
aedificatio aliqua audientibus praeberetur. Otherwise it had not been
necessary for these things to be read in the Church, unless some profit
might come thereof unto the hearers.

Yet not withstandinge (says M. Hardinge) these matters be stoutely affirmed
by M. Iuel. and faintely proved. My proufes were taken out of the manifest
words of S. Paul, S. Ambrose, S. Augustine, S. Chrysostom, Arnobius,
Gregory, and others like: notwithstanding it please M. Hardinge to call them
so fainte. Let us therefore see the weighty reasons, that he and others of his
side have made for the contrary. M. Harding seems to reason thus, Ephrem made
Homilies in the Syrian tongue: And, S. Hierome Translated the Bible into the
Sclauon tongue. Ergo, The Common Service was in the Latin or Greek tongue.

Cardinal Otho Otho Cardin. in statut^s Synodi Augusten.
says, There were three tongues written in the title of the Cross, the
Greek, the Hebrew, and the Latin: Ergo, In one of these three tongues, the
people must have their Common Service.

Eckius says, Eckius De Missae Latin dicenda.
Christ prayed secretly being in the Mount alone, Ergo, The Service must be
in an unknown tongue.



These, and such like arguments be brought by them: I leave it unto the
discreet reader, to judge their force.

M. Hardinge. The.7. Division.
Now concerning the two learned tongues, Greek, and Latin: and first the
Greek. That the Service was in the Greek tongue, and used in the Greek
Church, I grant. And to show what is meante by the Greek Church, the
learned do understand, all the Christian people of that Country which
properly is called Graecia, of Macedonia, Thracia, and of Asia the less, and
the Countrie^ adioyninge. The Provinces that were allotted to the Patriarch of
Alexandria in Egypt, and to the Patriarch of Antiochia in Syria, are of the
old writers called sometime by the name of the Oriental or East Church,
sometime of the Greek Church. Thus much by us both confessed, M. Iuel and
agreed upon: I say, that if I can show, that the people of some Countries of
the Greek Church, 69 The.69. Untruth. For it is certain, that sundry of
the East nations had not their Service in the Greek tongue: as shall appear.
which al had their Common prayers and Service in the Greek tongue, for the
more part understood not the Greek tongue, more then English men now
understand the Latin tongue: then I have proved that I promised to prove,
that some peoples, I mean whole nations, understood not their Service, for
that they had it in an unknown tongue.

The B. of Sarisburie.
M. Hardinge first having divided the whole world into two Churches, the
Greek and the Latin, afterward makes offer to prove his purpose. Whereof
it may be geathered, that he has hitherto proved nothing. This division of
the Church, The Division of the Church into Greek and Latin.
neither is greatly material, nor of our part much denied: albeit many ways
if seems imperfect. For the great Churches of Ethiopia, India, and Scythia,
planted by S. Matthew, by S. Thomas, and by S. Andrew: bisides Arabia, Syria,
Persia, Media, Armenia, and a great number of other Countries, which never
were neither of the Greek Church, nor of the Latin, are here quite leafte
out. Two propositions M. Hardinge has here chosen to prove. The one is, that
all the Greek Church had the Common Service wholly and thoroughly in the Greek
tongue. The other is, that some whole countries in the Greek Church,
understood not the Greek tongue.

If both these propositions be proved soundely, and substantially, without
surmise, or gheasse, then it behooves me to yield. But, good Reader, mark
them well both, and consider the proufes. For if he fail in either of these,
he proves nothing: as, I hoape, it will appear.

M. Hardinge. The.8. Division.
Now, how well I am hable to prove this, I refer it to your own
consideration. The less Asi^ being a principal part of the Greek Church,
had then the Service in the Greek tongue: A Fallax, or a deceiteful argument.
But the people of sundry Regions, and Countries of the less Asia, then
understood not the Greek tongue: Ergo, the people of sundry Regions, and
Countries, had then their Service in an unknown tongue. The first
proposition, or Mayor, is confessed as manifest: no learned man will deny it:
and if any would, it may easily be proved. The second proposition, or Minor,
may thus be proved. Strabo, who travailed over all the Countries of Asia, for
perfect knowledge of the same, nere about the time of S. Paul's peregrination
there, who also was borne in the same, in his 14. Book of Geographie writes,
that, where as within that Cherronesus, that is the straight between sea, and
sea, there were sixteen Nations by report of Ephorus: 70 The.70. Untruth.
Misreportinge Straboes words.
of them al only three were Greeks, all the rest Barbarous. Likewise Plinius
in the sixth Book Naturalis historiae Ca. 2. declares, that 71 The.71.
Untruth. Misreportinge the words of Pliny.
within the circuit of that Land were three Creek Nations only, Doors,
Jones, A^oles: and that the rest were Barbarous. Act. 14.
Amongst whom the people of Lycaonia was one, who in S. Paul's time spoke
before Paul and Barnabas in the Lycaonical tongue.

The Scripture it self reports a diversity of language there, and there
about, as it appears by the second Chapter of the Acts. Where the Jews
geathered together in Jerusalem, for keepinge of the feast of Pentecoste,
wonderinge at thApostles for their speakinge with so many sundry tongues,
among other provinces different in language, they recke^ Pontus, and Asia,
Cappadocia, Phrygia, and Pamphylia. Which two provinces are of al attributed
unto the less Asia. Which makes a good argument, that al Asia the Less had
not only the Greek tongue. And therefore so many of them as were of other
language having the Service in Greek, had it in a tongue they understood not.

They that will seem to search the cause, why that land had so great
diversity of languages, impute it to the often change of conquestes, for that
it was overcome, and possessed of diverse nations: of which every one coueted
with enlarginge their Empier, to bring into the Countries subdued, their
laws: Asia the Less.
their customs, and their language. Now this being proved by good and
sufficient authority, that in Asia of sixteen Nations three only were
Greeks, it follows that the other thirteen having their service in Greek,
had it not in their own, but in astraunge tongue. For else if they had al
naturally spoaken Greek, why should not they have been called Greeks? Thus
we see it is no new thing proceedinge of a general corruption in the Church,
some peoples to have the Service in an unknown tongue.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Take heed, good Reader, M. Hardinge has here thrown a great Miste of
learning, to da^^e thy sight. Unless thou eye him well, he will steal from
thee. Thus he frames his Syllogismus. The less Asia being a principal part
of ye Greek Church, had then the Service in the Greek tongue: But sundry
Countries of the same Asia understood not the Greek tongue: Ergo, they had
their Service in an unknown tongue.

Here is a fair gloss. But be not deceived: M. Harding The discloasinge of M.
Hardinges Fallax.
knows well yenough, it is but a fallace, that is to say, a deceiteful
argument, named in the Schools, Ex meris particularibus: or, A non distributo
ad distributum. Unless he amend the Mayor, and make it an universal, and say
thus, Al Asia the Less had the Service in the Greek tongue, it can in no wise
hold. That Asia the Less had the Service in Greek, it is doubted of no man,
nor learned, nor unlearned. But, that al Asia ye Less had throughout in all
parts the same Service, if it be denied, M. Hardinge with all his learning is
not hable to prove it: and therefore he did better to turn it over without
any proof at al.

The Minor is this, sundry Nations in Asia the Less understood not the
Greek. And to prove this, M. Hardinge has directed al his drifte, But to
what end? for neither is it denied by any of us, nor is it any part of our
question. And yet not withstandinge, is not M. Hardinge hable to prove it with all his gheasses.

He allegeth the Acts of the Apostles, Actor. 2.
where as mention is made of sundry languages, and among the same certain
provinces of this Asia specially named for their difference in speech. But
what if answer were made, That al there rehearsed were not diverse tongues,
but rather certain differences in one tongue? Certainly Beda Beda in Luc. Ca.
22. li. 6. Ex Hieronymo in Matthaeis Ca. 26.
seems plainly so to say. His words be these: Verily this man was with
him, for he is of Galilie: not for that the people of Galilie, and the people
of Jerusalem, used sundry tongues: but for that every province (of Jury)
having a peculiar manner of utterance in their speech, could not avoid the
same. And hereunto he applies this story of the Acts of the Apostles.

But says M. Hardinge, There must needs be greater difference between these
Countries of Asia, and that, because of often overthrows and conquestes, that
there had happened. The conjecture is good. But the greatest Conquerours that
came there, were the Macedonians, the Thebanes, and other Grecians, who no
doubt, planted there the Greek tongue, as it may soon appear to any man,
that can with judgment consider of it. Actor. 19.
S. Paul unto the Ephesians, the Galathians, and the Collossians, dwellinge al
in this same Asia the Less, wrote in Greek. And S. Luke writing of S. Paul's
being, and preachinge, at Ephesus says, It came so to pass, Vt omnes, qui
habitabant in Asia, audirent Sermonem Domini Jesus, Iudaei simul and Graeci:
that al they, that dwelte in Asia, heard the word of the Lord Jesus, both
Jews, and Greeks. Actor. 19.
S. Luke that had travailed over that whole Country with S. Paul, knew none
other Nation there but Jews, and Greeks: Master Hardinge has a gheasse,
there should be some other Barbarous people also: but what they were, or where
about they dwelte, or what tongue they spoke, he can not tell. Uerely
Polycarpus was Bishop of Smyrna: Gregorius was Bishop in Pontus: S. Basile was
Bishop of Caesaria in Cappadocia: Amphilochius Bishop of Iconium in Lycaonia:
Gregorius S. Basiles Brother Bishop of Nyssa in Caria, or Thracia. Al these in
sundry Countries within Asia the Less preached openly in the Greek tongue,
and the vulgar people understood them.

Yet, says M. Hardinge, Strabo being borne in the same Country, and living
under the Emperors Augustus and Tiberius, in the time of S. Paul, writes in
his Geographie, that, where as there were then sixteen sundry Nations in Asia
the Less, three only of them were Greeks, and the reast Barbarous. I know
not whether M. Hardinge be vnwittingely deceived him self, or wilfully goo
about to deceive others. But well I know, that this is no part of Straboes
meaning. For Strabo Strabo Geogra. lib. 14.
speaks not this of his own time, but of the time of Ephorus, that lived well
near five hundred years before him. This Ephorus reports, yt in his time
there were but three Greek nations as yet entered into Asia, but all the rest
then were Barbarous. And therefore Apollodorus says, yt before the Battle of
Troy, no people of ye Greeks at al ever came over, to dwell there. For if
Strabo had meante this of his own time, to what end should he allege the
record of Ephorus, yt lived so many hundred years before him, for proof of
ye thing, that he had so diligently vewed, and seen him self: and specially
seeing his purpose is not to follow, Strabo li. 14. eodem loco.
but to reprove Ephorus: as it well appears by his words. As for
Apollodorus, thus he says of him. He seems not discretely to deal herein:
(...).
for he disordereth, and falsely allegeth the words of Homer. And unto this
constructio^ of Strabo, very well agrees the place of Plinius here alleged, and
concludes manifestly against M. Harding, as it appears by the very words:
In omni ^o tractu proditur, tres tantum gentes Graecas iure dici, Doricam,
Ionica^, A^olicam: Caeteras barbaroru^ esse. Plin. hist. nature. li. 6. ca. 2.
In which whole circuit, it is written, that only three nations be rightly
called Greeks: and that the rest are of the Barbariens. In yt he says
proditur, it is written, he means by Ephorus, Apollodorus, or such others, as
had lived long before. In that he says: Caeteras barbarorum esse, the reaste
be of the Barbariens, he means, that they had arrived thither, not out of
Graecia, as had the other three, but out of other Countries that were
Barbarous. But in that he says, Tres tantum gentes Graecas iure dici, that
only three Nations be rightly, or naturally called Greeks, he must needs
mean that the rest were called Greeks also, although not so rightly, and
naturally, as the other. For else the exception of this word, iure, that is,
rightly, or naturally, had been in vain. And thus M. Hardinge seekinge to
prove, that the people of Asia were no Greeks, allegeth Plinius, by whose
words it appears necessarily, that they were Greeks.

But M. Hardinge will force the matter further. Strabo says, that these three
Nations excepted, the rest were Barbarous: Ergo, they understood no Greek.
And here upon reasteth his whole proof. But this is an other falsification of
Straboes mind. M. Hardinge falsifieth Straboes mind. Lib. 14. Geogra.
For Strabo calls them Barbarous, that understood, and spoke Greek. And
what better witness can we herein have, then Strabo him self? Thus he writes,
Barbarismum in his dicere consueuimus, qui male Ioquuntur Graece: non autem in
illis, qui Carice Ioquuntur. Sic etiam barbariloquos, and barbari sermonis
homines cos accipere debemus, qui mal^ Graeca pronuntiant. We take a
Barbarismus, or a Barbarous manner of speech to be in them, that speak the
Greek disorderly: and not in them that speak a strange tongue, as is the
tongue of the Carians. So we ought to take them to be barbarous, or men of
barbarous speech, that is fauoredly pronounce the Greek. Thou maiste see,
good Reader, with what ^aithe M. Hardinge allegeth the authority of old
writers. He would prove by Strabo, yt these people spoke no Greek, because
they were Barbarous: And Strabo him self says, not withstanding they were
Barbarous, yet they spoke Greek. Now therefore, seeinge the Syllogismus M.
Hardinges Syllogism.
it self, as I have said, is a Fallace, the Mayor false, the Minor false, and
neither of them any way proved, and Strabo, and Pliny falsely alleged: to
geather hereof, that these people had their Service in an unknown tongue, must
needs seem a strange Conclusion.

M. Hardinge. The.9. Division.
Here perhaps M. Iuel, or some other for him replieth, and says, that the
people of Asia commonly biside their own proper language, spoke the Greek
tongue also, and allegeth for the same purpose S. Hierome, In p^o^mio. 2. lib.
Comment. Epist. ad Gala^as.
who says, Galatas, excepto sermon Graeco, quo omnis Oriens loquitur,
propriam linguam ea^dem habere, quam Treuiros. That the Galathians byside the
Greek language, which all the Orient or the East speaks, have their own
peculiar tongue, the very same that they of Treuers have. Lo, says this
replier, S. Hierome affirms, all the Orient to speak the Greek tongue. Ergo,
the service in Greek to them was not strange, and unknown.

To this I answer, S. Hierome means that some of al Countries of the Orient
or East, spoke Greek, as the Learned men, Gentle men, Merchauntes, al of
liberal education, and such other, as had cause to travail those Countries.
To be short, it was without doubt very common, as being their only learned
tongue for all sciences, and the tongue that might best serve to travail
withal from Country to Country, within the East, right so as the Latin
tongue serves to the like intentes, for all Nations of the Weaste. And he
means not that al, and singular persons, of what degree, and condition so
ever they were, al vplandishe people, Tillers of the ground, Heardmen, and
Women, spoke Greek. For if it had been so, then had they not had peculiar,
and proper tongues. For it is not for their simple heads (for the most part)
to bear away two languages. In that S. Hierome calls the Galathians tongue
Propriam linguam, a proper, and a peculiar tongue to that Nation, he does us to
understand, the same to perteine to al in particular, that is, to every one of
that Province, and the Greek to al in general, in respect of other Nations
there, so as not of necessity, it be understood of every one.

The B. of Sarisburie.
M. Hardinge over much paineth him self to prove that thing, that no wise
man will deny him. For how can it seem likely, that the whole East, which
is in a manner the one half part of the world, conteininge so many, and so
sundry Nations, should speak al one tongue: seeinge we our selves in this
one little Kingdom of England, have the use of five tongues, and not one of
them understanding an other? I marvel that M. Hardinge alleged not the Fables
of Herodotus, Herodotus.
that Bek in the Phrygians tongue signifies Bread: Kiki in the Egyptians
tongue, an ointement: Achmach, one of the Guard: or Alila, or Vrotal, in the
Arabike tongue, and such like. For these might have stand him in steed of
good proufes, yt all the Nations of the whole East part of the world spoke not
Greek.

And although we agree with him in the principal, that in the East part were
used sundry languages, and likewise that the Greek tongue was commonly used
emonge the learned, yet his distinction of al in General, and al in Particular,
that he has here divised to shifte of S. Hierome, seems very homely, and
home made. For how ca^ it be a General, onles it include every Particular? By
M. Hardinges construction we must take, Al, for Some: or, Al, not for the tenth
part of Al: and by this Rhetorique, less then half is as much as Al: and
so, Al, is not Al. Thus M. Hardinges General is a mere Particular: and to
conclude, his General is no General. So weakly, and so loosely his answer
stands.

As touching the Galathians, of whom S. Hierome says, that biside their
own natural tongue, they had also the use of the Greek, because, as
Apollodorus says, Strabo Geographi. lib. 14.
they of al others arrived last into that Country, it is likely, they keapte
their own Barbarous speech longer then others. But, like as, whether they al
of al sorts spoke Greek or no, as M. Harding says, of necessity it cannot
be proved, so in deed it forces nothing. For he cannot prove thereby, that
they that understood not the Greek, had their Service in the Greek. Yet is
this the Mayor, and the ground of the whole, which M. Hardinge so closely
dissembleth, and passes by.

M. Hardinge. The.10. Division.
S. Augustine speakinge of the title written by Pilate on the Cross, Tracta.
in Ioan^ 117.
says thus: It was in Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, Rex Iud^eorum. For these
three tongues were there in preeminence before al other. Hebraea, propter
Iudaeos in Die lege gloriantes: Graeca, propter gentium sapientes: Latina,
propter Romanos multis ac pene omnibus iam tun^ gentibus imperantes. The
Hebrew, for the Jews, that gloried in the law of God: the Greek, for the
wise men of the ^entiles: the Latin, for the Romans bearinge rule at that
time over many, and almost over al nations. Now where he says here, that the
Greek tongue was in preeminence Propter gentium sapientes, for the wise men of
the Gentiles: he discusseth fully the doubt, that might seem to rise of S.
Hieromes sayeinge, and shows, that the Greek tongue was common not to all the
vulgar people of the whole Orient, but to the wise men only, and that for the
atteyninge of learning. And for this it is to be noted, that the Scripture
reports the vulgar tongue of the Lycaonians, to have been uttered in the
hearing of Paul, and Barnabas, not by the Magistrates, or other the chief,
but by the vulgar people. Turbae leuauerunt vocem sua^ Lycaonic^ dicentes etc.
Act. 14. And so S. Hierome is to be understood to speak in that place, not
of al men of the Nations of the East, but rather of a great number, and of
some persons of al nations. For else, if all the East had spoken Greek, the
Soldiers that buried Gordianus the younger Emperor, apud Circeium Castrum, at
Circey Castle, near to the land of Persie, would not have written his title
of honor upon his Sepulcher, in Greek, and Latin, in the Persians, Jews,
and the Egyptians tongues, vt ab omnibus legeretur, that it might be read of
al, In Gordian^s.
as Iulias Capi^o^inus writes. Which is an argument, that all the East spoke
not, ne understood not the Greek tongue. As likewise that Epiphantus writes,
where he says thus. Most of the Persians after the Persical letters, Li. 2.
Haeresi ^^.
use also the Syrians letters. As with us many Nations use the Greek letters,
yea where as in every nation in manner, they have letters of their own. And
others some much esteem the profounde tongue of the Syrians, and the tongue
that is about Palmyra, both the tongue it self, and also the letters of the
same. Books also have been written of Manes in the Syrians tongue. Again, if
all the East had spoken Greek, sundry the holy Fathers would not have been
so ^n^ious to the common weal of the Church, as to hide their singular works
from the readinge of al, which they wrote in Barbarous and vulgar tongues, to
the commodity only of their brethren that understood the same. Li. de
Ecclec^ia^t^ Script.
Antonius that wrote seven not able Epistles to diverse Monasteries of
Apostolic sense and speech, as S. Hierome witnesses, in the Egyptian tongue.
Likewise holy Ephrem of Edessa, Bardesanes of Mesopotamia, who wrote very
excellent works in the Syriacal tongue.

Even so did Isaac of Antioche, and Samuel of Edessa priests, write many
goodly works against the enemies of the Church, in the same tongue, as
Gennadius records. But what shall we speak of all the East? Neither all the
Less Asia, and the Countries there adioyninge, spoke not Greek, one
generation before the coming of Christ. For if al had spoken Greek,
Mithridates that renoumed King of ^ ontus, had not needed to have learned two
and twenty languages of so many Nations he was king over, to make answer to
suitors, to appointe them orders and laws, and in open audience to speak to
them in so many languages without an Interpreter, Natura. Histor. lib, 7. Cap
24.
as Pliny writes. Here if these.22. Nations of 2^ sundry tongues, had also
biside their own language spoken Greek, and understood the same:

Pliny would not have uttered that word sine Interpret, without an
Interpreter. And likewise that King had taken vain labor in learning those
tongues, where one might have served his turn.

Near to this Kings dominion, Li. 6. Natural, hist. Ca. 5.
in the shore of the sea Euxinus, in the land of Colchis, there stood a City
named Dioscurias, so much haunted of strangers, that, as Pliny writes by
record of Timost^enes, it was resorted unto of three hundred Nations of
distinct languages, and that the Romans for the better expedition of their
affairs there, had at length lieinge in the same.130. Interpreters. Now, if all the Orient had spoken Greek, as S. Hieromes words seem to importe, the
Romans should not have needed, to have mainteyned there to their great
charges, so great a number of Interpreters, to be their agentes there. But for
proof that all the Orient spoke not Greek, what need we allege Profane
writers? The known place of the Acts makes mention of sundry Nations there,
that had distinct languages, the Parthians, Medians, and Elamites etc. Act. 2.

To conclude, they that to maintain their strange opinion of the universal
understanding of the service used of old time in the East Church, say and
affirm, that all the Orient spoke ^reeke: seem much to diminishe the
Majesty, Utility, and necessity of the miraculous gift of tongues, which
the holy Ghost gave in the primitive Church, for the better furtherance of the
Gospel. For if al in those parties had spoken Greek, the gif^e of tongues had
been in that respect needeles. Hitherto of the Greek 72. The.72. untruth. For
he has not hitherto spoken one word of the Service.
and of the Service in that language.

The B. of Sarisburie.
This labor may well be called Vanitas vanitatum. For it is a great token of
idleness, to be so earnest, and so copious in proouinge that thing, that no
man denies. And yet he forces the matter so, as if all the right of his cause
lay upon it. He might as well have proved, that the Indians, Arabians,
Ethiopians, Tartarians, understood no Greek. It is a lewd kind of Logique,
so stoutely to prove that thing, that needs no proof: and to leave the
thing, that should be proved. The title of the Cross written in three
sundry languages, as it t^^^ifieth that the Nations of the East part of the
world spoke not al one tongue, which thing is not of any wise man denied, so
it proves plainly against M. Hardinge, that the Death of Christ should be
published in all tongues. For as Albertus, and Lyra M. Hardinges own Doctors
have witnessed, Albertus and Lyra in. 19. Ca. Johan.
writing upon the same, Therefore was the title by Gods special provision,
drawn in the three principal languages, vt omnes, qui de diuersis orbis
partibus venerant, possent illum legere: that al they, that were then come to
Jerusalem out of sundry parts of the world, might be able to read it. S.
Hierome likewise says, Hieron. in Esai. lib. 7. Ca. 20.
the same title was so written, In testimonium vniuersarum gentium, for the
witness of al Nations. For it was the will of God, that every tongue should
confess, that Christ is the Lord in the glory of the Father.

Wherein M. Hardinge much abbridgeth the Glory of the Cross of Christ, that
would the title thereof to perteine only to the wise, and learned of the
Greeks. For Albertus, and Lyra say, It was so written, that al might read it:
and, as S. Hierome says, for witness of al Nations. Neither can we find,
that there was any great number of Philosophers present at Christ's death, to
read that title. As for S. Augustine, by these words Sapientes Graecorum, he
understands All the Greeks. For as all the Jews generally gloried of the
Law, even so all the Greeks generally gloried in their wisdom. 1. Cor. 1.
And S. Paul says generally of them both. Iudaei Signum quaerunt: Graeci
sapientiam. The Jews call for Signs, and miracles: and the Greeks call for
knowledge. And therefore one of the Philosophers said, In old times there were
seven wise men emonge the Greeks: but now there are not so many fools: for
that they al gloried in their wisdom.

The people of Lycaonia spoke unto Paul, Actor. 14.
and Barnabas, Lycaonice: Ergo, says M. Hardinge, they spoke no Greek. But
what if S. Luke had said, they spoke Ionice, Aeolic^, or Doric^, which
tongues were adioininge fast upon Lycaonia, would he therefore conclude, they
sapke no Greek? Uerely if a man by way of contention would say, the
Lycaonical tongue was a corruption, or difference of the Greek tongue, and not
a several tongue of it self, M. Hardinge should have much a do to prove
the contrary. Doubtless, they woorshipped Iuppiter, and Mercury, that were
the Gods of the Greeks: and had the Greek Sacrifice, as it manifestly
appears by the words of S. Luke: and it may be credibly geathered, that
Paul, and Barnabas spoke to them in Greek. How be it, whether it were so, or
otherwise, sauinge that M. Hardinge makes the matter so c^rtaine, it improteth
nothing.

But this one thing, good Reader, I give the further to consider. These
Lycaonians, as M. Hardinge confesses, Actor. 14.
and as plainly appears by S. Luke, being yet Infidels, made their prayers
unto their Idolles, Iuppiter, and Mercury in their own tongue. And may it any
wise seem likely, that the same being afterward become Christians, made
their prayers unto Almighty God, and to Christ his Son in a strange tongue?
If it behooue Idolaters to understand their own prayers, much more it
behooves the people of God, to do the like.

Certainly, if the same Lycaonians were now alive, they would reprove M.
Hardinges error in their own tongue.

The blasinge of the young Emperor Gordians grave with five sundry
languages, like as it was needelesse in this place, as all the reaste, the matter
being confessed, even so it weighs very much against M. Hardinges side.
For if the Barbarous Soldiers of their dewtie, and allegiance toward their
Prince, thought his death worthy to be published in so many tongues: what
may then be thought of them, that can not suffer the Death of Christ to be
published in any one tongue? And if they so fournished a mortal man's memory,
as Capitolinus says, Vt ab omnibus legeretur, that it might be readde of al
men, why then do these men so hide, and bury the immortal memory of the
glory of Christ, that sauinge them selves, they would have it to be readde,
and seen of no Man?

The allegation of the Persians, and Syrians letters: Of the tongue used about
Palmyra: of Epistles written in the Egyptians tongue by Antonius, in the Syrian
tongue by Bardesanes, Ephrem, Isaac, and Samuel: of Mithridates the King of
Pontus, that was hable to answer two and twenty Nations, that were his
subjects, without an Interpreter: of the resort of three hundred sundry
Nations unto the City called Dioscuri^^ in Colchis: and once again of the
Miracle of tongues, and diversity of languages in the Acts of the Apostles,
has some show, and ostentation of learning, and serves well either to fille
up room, or else to reprove, and controlle S. Hierome: for that he says, All the East part of the world speaks Greek: For against us, that neither
write so, nor speak so, it makes nothing.

We know, that by mean of the great Empier, that the Greeks had gotten over
many Countries, and Kingedomes, in all the East, and partly also for that the
Barbarous Nations, whom they had subdued, had great pleasure in their
Philosophy, and other skilful knowledge, the Greek tongue was learned of many,
and carried about into al places of that part of the world: and that Cicero
therefore says, Cicero pro Archia.
Graeca leguntur in omnibus fere gentibus: The Greek tongue is readde in
manner emongst of Nations. And S. Augustine likewise: Quos Paulus dixit
Graecos, eos etiam Gentium nomine significauit: eo quod haec Lingua maxim
excellit in Gentibus: Whom Paul called Greeks, them also he uttered by the
name of the Gentiles: for that the same tongue chiefly excels emonge the
Gentiles. And yet we doubt not, but there were other natural tongues and
speeches too, bisides the Greek: as the Egyptian, the Syrian, the Arabik, the
Persian, the Bactrian, the Indian, the Armenian, the Scythian, and many others.
And it I list here to dally for pleasure, and vainly to carry away the
reader from the purpose, as M. Hardinge doothe, I could say, that
Themistocles Plutarchus in Themistocle. Liberatus ca. 10.
a Gentelman of Athens, before he presented him self unto the Great King of
Persia, first learned to speak ye Persians tongue: yt the Nestorian
Heretics translated their books into the Persian, Armenian, and Syrian
tongue: that S. Augustine says, that S. Hierome understood the Hebrew,
August. ad Cyrill. citatur a Petro Crinito, li. 6. Ca. 6.
the Greek, the Chaldee, the Latin, the Persian, the Arabik, and the Median
tongue: And that S. Chrysostom says, So many tongues and voices there be of
the Scythians, of the Thracians, of the Romans, of the Persians, of the
Moors, of the Indians, of the Egyptians, and of a thousand Nations biside:
with many other authorities to like purpose, Chrysostom. in 1. Corin. 14 hom.
35.
to auoutche the thing, that M. Harding so earnestly proves, and no man
denies: that the Nations of the East part of the world had several tongues,
and spoke not al one only tongue.

Let M. Hardinge therefore consider better, who they be, that, as he says,
deny the Majesty, Utility, and necessity of the gift of tongues. For we
confess, that the knowledge thereof is necessary, not only for the
furtherance, but also for the continuance of the Gospel: neither do we doubt,
but by what tongues the Heathens were converted unto God, by the same tongues
they made their petitions unto God: the contrary whereof, M. Hardinge by his
silence confesses, he can not prove. Which not withstandinge, he passes over
the matter by these words, Hitherto of the Greek, and of the Service in that
language: and so ends this piece of his treaty with a pretty vntruethe,
having in deed proved somewhat of the tongue: but of the Service, whereupon
his whole cause rests, not one word at al.

Which thing, that it may the better appear, let us lay together the parts
and members of his argument. M. Hardinges Syllogismus.
His Mayor is this: Al Asia the Less had the Service in the Greek tongue: The
Minor, But many Countries of the said Asia understood not the Greek tongue:
The Conclusion, Ergo, many Countries had their Service in an unknown tongue.
The Minor he warranteth, but by gheasse only, and none otherwise: although
both S. Luke in the nientienth of the Acts, and also the very story of the
times followinge, be to the contrary. The Mayor he touches not at al.
Therefore his Syllogismus halteth down right of one side, and concludes only
upon the Minor. And thus M. Hardinge shoareth up his strange doctrine, with a
strange Mayor, a strange Minor, and a strange Conclusion.

M. Hardinge. The.11. Division.
Now concerning the Latin tongue, which is the learned tongue of the
VVeast. That the Latin Church, or the VVeast Church, for so it is called,
had the Service in Latin, I grant. The chief Regions, and Countries of the
Latin Church, within the foresaid six hundred years, were these. Italy,
Aphrike, Illyrike, both Pannonies, now called Hungary, and Austria: Gallia,
now France: and Spain: The Countries of Germany, Pole, and Swethen, and
those North parts received the faith long sithence. The Countries of
Britain here had received the Faith in most places, but were driven from the
open profession of it again, by the cruel persecution of Diocletian the
Emperor: at which persecution, S. Albane with many others suffered Martyrdom.

After that these Countries had been instructed in the Faith, as things
grew to perfection, they had their Service accordingely: no doubt such as
was used in the Churches, from whence their first Apostles, and Preachers were
sent. And because.73. The.73. untruth. The first preachinge of the Faith in
these vveast Countries came not first from Rome.
the first Preachers of the Faith came to these VVeast parties from Rome,
directed some from S. Peter, some from Clement, some others afterward from
other Bishops of that See Apostolic: they planted and set up, in the
Countries by them converted, the Service of the Church of Rome, or some other
very like, and that.74. The.74. untruth. For the first Preachers them selue^
spoke no Latin.
in the Latin tongue only, for ought that can be showed to the contrary.
Wherein I refer me only to the first six hundred years. Now that such
Service was understood of those peoples, that spoke and understood Latin,
no man denies. For to some Nations that was a native and a Mother tongue, as
the Greek was to the Graecians.

The B. of Sarisburie.
I find no fault with M. Hardinges Cosmographie: but, I trow, Cosmographie
in this case makes small proof. His proof for the Latin Service, The faith
came not first from Rome.
hangs upon two points. The first is, that all the faith of the Weast part
of the world, came only from the Bishops of Rome: The second is, that the
planters of the same Faith ministered the Common Service every where in the
Latin Tongue. He knows well, M. Hardinge witingely, an^ willingely auoutcheth
untruth.
that either of these points is untrue, and will never be proved. And somewhat
to touch hereof by the way, S. Paul says, that he him self had filled al
places with the Gospel of Christ, even as far as Illyricum: and that not
from Rome, but from Jerusalem: and promises, that he would pass by Rome
into Spain, as, by report of some, afterward he did: and Theodoretus says,
that Paul came into this Ilelande now called England, Ad Roman.15.
Theodoret. de curand. ^raec. affect.
and here planted the Gospel. The like is commonly surmised by the writers of
the Brittishe Chronicles, of Joseph of Arimathaea. And, although Conjectures in
such Antiquities be often uncertain and dark, yet it may seem very likely,
that the Religion of Christ came first into this Ilelande, not from Rome, but
from the Greeks: both for that in the keepinge of Easter day we followed the
Church of Graecia, Beda in Histo. Anglo. li. 2. Galfrid. li. 8. Ca. 4.
and not the Church of Rome: and also for that, when Augustine was sent in
hither by Gregory, we would in no wise acknowledge, or receive the Bishop of
Rome. As for Lazarus, Nathanael, Saturninus, that preached first in France, I
have said before. Auentinus says, Aventinus in historia Boioru^* 2. ad
Timoth. 4.
Lucius S. Paul's companion went into Germany: and S. Paul says, Titus
went into Dalmatia.

It is known, that the Church of Rome, for certain other causes, and namely
for the great state and renoume of that City, even from the beginning was
notable above al others, and was careful in enlarginge the Glory of Christ,
and yielded many Martyrs unto God. Yet may we not think, that al things
therefore came from Rome. Tertull. contra Marcion. li. 2.
For Tertullian calls Jerusalem Matrem, and Fontem Religionis, The Mother,
and the Spring of Religion. And S. Augustine says, August. Epis. 178.
Fides orta est a Graecis: The Faith sprange first from the Greeks.

Now that he further says, The planters of the Faith in all these Weaste
Countries, made the Common Prayers every where in the Latin Tongue: bisides
that it is manifestly false, as, God willinge, hereafter shall well appear, it
has not, no not so much as any likelihoode, or show of truethe.

For, Good Reader, consider this reason: The planters of the Faith came from
Rome: Ergo, they keapte every where the order of Rome. If this argument would
hold, then would I likewise reason thus: The Church of Rome was first
planted by them, that came from Graecia, or from Jerusalem: Ergo, Rome keeps
the order of Graecia, or of Jerusalem. But M. Hardinge presuminge this of him
self, without other proof, that the Churches of these Countries followed the
order of the Church of Rome, concludes further: Ergo, they had their Service
in Latin, as had the Church of Rome. Every Child sees that this is a Fallax,
or a deceitful argument, called, A secundu^ quid ad simpliciter: He might as
well have said thus, They followed the order of the Church of Rome: Ergo, they
had their Exhortations, and Sermons in Latin: for so had the Church of Rome.
M. Harding^s reason against^ him self.
But is M. Hardinge so unadvised, or so negligent in his matters, that he seethe
not, how aptely his own argument reboundeth upon him self? Uerely of this
ground we may in good form, and truly reason thus: These Churches of the
Weast followed the order of the Church of Rome (This he him self has taken as
an undoubted truth) But the Church of Rome had the Service in the natural
known tongue ( which thing he him self also grants) Ergo, These Churches
of the Weast, had the Service in the natural known tongue.

This argument is sound, and perfect, and without Fallax.

Again, he might easily have seen, that of his own position, and principle,
an other necessary argument might soon grow against him in this wise.

Al Churches, that received their Faith from Rome, keapte the orders of the
Church of Rome.

But the Church of England followed not the orders of the Church of Rome: as
it is most manifest by the keepinge of the Easter day, and by refusinge of the
Bishop there, as it is already proved: Ergo, the Church of England received
not her Faith from the Church of Rome. If M. Hardinge had better advised him
self, he would not have builte upon these grounds.

M. Hardinge. The.12. Division.
M. Iuel alleginge for the having of the Prayers, and Service in a Vulgar
tongue (as for England, in the English, for Irelande in the Irishe, for
Douchelande in the Douche tongue etc.) authorities and examples of the
Churches, where in the time of the Primitive Church the Greek, and Latin
tongue was the usual and Common Tongue of the people^ brings nothing for
proof of that, which lies in controversy. Arnobius, says he, called the
Latin tongue Sermonem Italum: S. Ambrose in Millane, S. Augustine in Aphrike,
S. Gregory in Rome preached in Latin, and the people understood them.
Hexameron. hom. 4.
What then? No man denies you this. S. Basile also speaks of a sound,
which the Men, Women, and Children made in their prayers to God, like the
sound of a vvhaue strikinge the sea banks. What can you conclude of this
necessarily M. Iuel? All this may be understood of the soundinge that one
word, Amen, answered at the prayers end, which is done now by the Quier,
and may be done by the people also, in the lower part of the Church. For S.
Hierome leads us so to think. Who commendinge the devotion of the people of
Rome, In. 2. Pro^emio comment. ad Galatas.
says in like manner. Vbi sic ad similitudinem coelestis tonitrui, Amen
reboa^, and vacua idolorum templa quatiuntur? Where else are the Churches, and
the Sepulchers of Martyrs, with so fervent devotion, and with so great
company resorted unto? (which words go before) where does Amen give so
loud a sound, like the thunderclappe out of the air, so as the Temples
emptied of Idols, shake with it, as at Rome?

The people speaks with the Priest at the Mystical prayers, says
Chrysostom, alleged by m. Iuel. What then? So was it long before, even in
the Apostles time, as we read in Clement, and likewise in S. Cyprian,
Constitut. Apostolicarum li. 8. Cap. 16. In oratiombus Mystagogicis.
in Cyrillus Hierosolymitanus, and many others. So is it now. For he shall
find in the old Fathers, that to Per omnia soecula soeculorum (which
Chrysostom speaks of) to Dominus vobiscum: so light as they make of it: to
Sursum corda: and to Gratias agamus Domino Deo nostro, the people answered,
75. The.75. untruth. It is not so now. M. Hardinge knovveth, The people
now ansvveareth not the Priest.
as now also they answer, Amen, and cum spiritu ^uo, habemus ad Dominum,
dignum and iustum est.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Here M. Harding takes in hand to answer the authorities by me alleged,
and that with this special note of remembrance in the Margin, M. Iuelles
allegation soluted. It appears, his solutions be very short. For what so
ever authority be alleged, it is sufficient for him to say, what then? For
where as I said, the Common Service, and Ministration in the Churches of Rome,
and Millane, and other places within Italy, was pronounced unto the people in
Latin, for that then the Latin tongue was the Common Natural speech of that
Country, and that therefore Arnobius calls the same Latin Tongue, Sermonem
Italum: and further said, that long after that time, S. Ambrose in Millane,
S. Augustine in Aphrica, and S. Gregory in Rome preached unto the Uulgare
People in Latin, and in the same tongue ministered the Common Prayers: all this
is soon answered: for M. Hardinge says, What then?

I alleged the saieinge of S. Basile, Basil. Hexamer. 4.
That the sound of Men, Women, and Children prayeinge in the Church
together, seemed like the sound of the whaues beatinge against the sea
banks: Hieron. in Secundo prooemio ad Galat.
the saieinge of S. Hierome, that the noise of the people soundinge out Amen,
together, was like the sound of a thunder: Likewise the saying of
Chrysostom, Communes preces and a populo, Chrysostom. 2. Corin. homi. 18.
and a sacerdote fiunt, and omnes vnam dicunt orationem. Been precatur Sacerdos
populo, and been precatur populus Sacerdoti etc. Common petitions be made
together, both of the people, and of the Priest: al together say one
prayer. The Priest wishes well unto the people, and the people unto the
Priest. But, What then, says M. Hardinge? Why, what then? Thinks M.
Hardinge that thauthoritie of Arnobius, S. Ambrose, S. Augustine, S. Basile, S.
Hierome, S. Chrysostom, and other holy Fathers is so light, that he is hable
to blow them al away, with these two vain syllables, what then? He will say,
I grant you the prayers were used in the Greek, and Latin tongue. But ye
have not proved the same of any other tongue, that was Barbarous. I have
already proved the same of the Syrian tongue, which is neither Greek, nor
Latin: and therefore by M. Hardinges judgment, mere barbarous. Hereafter, God
willinge, I shall show the like largely, and at full, of other tongues. In the
mean season, The privilege of the Greek, and Latin tongue.
it may stand M. Hardinge in good steed, if it shall please him to show these
privileges, granted unto the Greek, and Latin tongue, and how they be
specially sanctified above others: yt in them only we may make our Common
Petitions unto God, and in other tongues we may not make them. Touching the
place of S. Basile, and the other of S. Chrysostom, M. Harding answeareth so, as
though he had no great regard, what he say. M. Hardinge auoutcheth open
untruth.
For he auoutcheth ye thing for true, that the simplest of all the people,
knows to be apparent false: that is, that the people now answeareth the
Priest in the time of the holy Mysteries, as they did in Chrysostomes time. The
people ( says he) ansvveared then, as now also they answer. He takes no
shame to say, The people ansvveareth the Priest, and yet knows, that the
people Answeareth not the Priest. Thus by this Resolution, He Answeareth, that
Answeareth nothing: He Answeareth, that knows not, neither what is
demanded, nor what to Answer: to be short, He Answeareth, that holds his
peace: and so, Answearinge, and not Answearinge, in M. Hardinges judgment is
al one thing. Chrysostom. in 2. ad Corin. homi. 18.
But S. Chrysostom says, Et cum Spiritu tuo, nihil aliud est, quam ea, quae
sunt Eucharistiae, communia sunt omnia. Neque enim ille solus gratias agit, sed
populus omnis. The Lord be with thy Sprite ( which words the whole people
answeareth unto the Priest) is nothing else to say, but, The things that
perteine to thanks geuinge, are al common. For it is not the Priest only,
that gives thanks, but also all the people. Ambros. in 1. Cor. 14.
Likewise S. Ambrose, Imperitus nescit finem orationis, and non respondet Amen,
id est, verum sit, vt firmetur benedictio. Per hoc enim impletur confirmatio
precis, cum respondetur Amen, and omnia dicta rei testimonio in audientium
animis confirmantur. The ignorant knows not the end of the prayer, and
answeareth not, Amen, that is to say, so be it, that the blissinge may be
confirmed. For thereby the confirmation of the prayer is fulfilled, when Amen
is answered, and all the words, that be spoken, by the testimony of the
thing it self are confirmed in the minds of the hearers. Thus in
Chrysostomes time the whole people, and the Priest in their Common Service
talkte, and prayed together.

M. Hardinge. The.13. Division.
As for the place he allegeth out of S. Augustine upon the Psalms, it makes
nothing for his purpose. S. Augustines words be these, otherwise then he
reports the^. In Psalm. 18. in expositione secu^da.
Quid hoc sit, intelligere debemus, vt humana ratione, no^ quasi auiu^ voce,
cantemus. Na^ and merulae, and psittaci, and corui, and picae, and huiuscemodi
volucres, saepe ab hominibus docentur sonare, quod nesciunt. Having prayed to
God (says S. Augustine) that he make us clean of our privy sins etc. We
ought to understand, A bare gloss. For S. Augustine speaks of prayeinge, and
not of preaching.
what this is: that we may singe with man's reason, not with voice, as birds
do. For Owselles, Popiniayes, Ravens, and Pies, and such the like birds,
oftetimes be taught of men to sound, they know not what. These words are
to be taken of the understanding of the sense, not of the tongue, which the
service is songue in. For the people of Hippo, where he was Bishop, understood
the Latin tongue meanly. Which sense can not rightly, and safely be
atteined of the common people, but is better, and more holesomely taught, by
the preachinge of the learned Bishops, and Priests.

The B. of Sarisburie.
First he says, S. Augustines words be otherwise, then I report them. I
assure thee, good Reader, if this great error had been woorthe the shewinge,
it had never been suffered thus to pass in silence.

But to shifte of S. Augustines words, here is brought in a Gloss plain
contrary to the text. For this comparison, says M. Hardinge, between Men,
and Birds, must be taken, not of the words, but of the sense and
understanding. And what reason leads him thus to say: Uerily Birds are
utterly void of reason, and neither understand the words, they be taught to
speak, nor the meaning of the words. And yet must we only upon this
simple warrante, needs believe, that S. Augustine compares Birds with Men
in understanding?

S. Augustines meaning is plain, as is the meaning of other godly Fathers in
this behalf, that the people should know, what they pray, and so singe with
reason agreeable to a Man, and not chatter with voice, as Birds do. For if
they Singe, or Pray, they know not what, he says, that for their sound of
voice, and want of sense, they may be well compared with Owselles, or
Popiniayes. This is the very drifte of S. Augustines meaning. Birds by skill
may be trained to record, and sound Men's words, although they have no
understanding of them: As Plinius writes of the Raven, that was taught to
say, Aue Caesar Imperator, Alhaile Emperor Caesar: an other that had learned
to say, Salve victor Antoni: Alhaile Antonius the Conqueror. and Caelius
Rhodiginus writes that Cardinal Ascanius had a Popiniaye, Caelius Rhodigin.
li. 3. Ca. 32.
that could pronounce distinctly all the articles of the Creed. With such
Birds let us compare such Men, as pray, they know not what. They be taught to
sound words, but understand not the meaning of them: neither Singe they
with reason agreeable to a Man. Whether these words agree aptely to my
purpose, or no, let M. Harding himself be the Judge. Certainly, he shall have
much to do, to rack them to serve for his purpose: Unless perhaps he will
reason thus, S. Augustine exhorts Men to know what they pray: Ergo, they
may pray in an unknown tongue. Or thus, S. Augustine wills Men, not to
Singe, or chatter like Birds: Ergo, they may pray, they know not what.

And if we receive M. Hardinges Gloss of Sense and understanding, yet stands
he in case, as he did before. For if the people understand not the words,
much less can they understand the sense, and meaning of the same words.

Aristotle says, Hearing is the peculiar sense of learning: and therefore
they that hear never, can never learn. Ci. De Oratore.
And Cicero says, Sententia constare non potest, si verba semoueris. Remove
the words, and their meaning cannot stand. Therefore this shifte healpeth
nothing. Onles he think this is a good argument: The people ought to
understand the meaning of their prayers: Ergo, they need not to understand
the words. S. Augustines meaning appears in the next words that
immediately follow. August. in Psalm. 18.
Scienter Cantare, naturae hominis diuina voluntate concessum est. To Singe
with understanding, is granted through Gods will, unto the Nature of Man.
And therefore thus he exhorts the people, Charissimi, quod consona voce
cantauimus, sereno etiam cord nosse, and tenere debemus. Dearly beloved, that
we have songue together with tun^hable voice, we must understand and keep
with pure heart. But this can we not do, unless we understand, what we pray.
Basil. in Psalm. 28.
Therefore S. Basil says, Lingua cantet: men's autem scrutetur sensum ^orum,
quae dicuntur. Let thy tongue singe: but let thy mind search out the meaning
of the things, that thou speak.

M. Hardinge. The.14. Division.
The commandment of Justinian the Emperor, which M. Iuel allegeth, that
Bishops, and Priests should celebrate the holy Oblation, Nam in veteri
translatione nihil tale habetur. (...). Cap. 1.
or Sacrifice, which we call the Mass, not closely, but with utterance, and
sound of voice, that they might be heard of the people: makes nothing for
the Service to be had in the English tongue, in the Church of England, or in
any other Vulgar tongue, in the Church of any other Nation: but requires
only of the Bishops, and Priests, open pronouncinge, De ^^clesiasti^is
diuersis capitulis. Constitutioone.12 3. Greg. Haloandro interpret.
Vocal, not Mental: speakinge, not whisperinge with the breathe only, in the
celebration of the holy Sacrifice, and other Service. Wherein he agrees with
S. Augustine, who in his Book De Magistro, says, that when we pra^e, there
is no need of speakinge, unless perhaps we do as Priests do* who when
they Pray (in Public assembly) use speakinge for cause of Signifieing their
mind, that is, to show, that they Pray, not to the intent God, but men may
hear, and with a certain consent through puttinge in mind (by sound of
voice) may be lifted up unto God. This much S. Augustine there. And this is
the right meaning of that Constitution. 76 The.76. untruth, For it touched
the whole Empiere.
And thus he ordained for the Greek Church only, and thereto only it is to
be referred, for that some thought the Sacrifice should be celebrated rather
with silence, 77 The.77. untruth, For the Priests in Rome prayed aloude, as
appears by S. Hierome Leo, Ambrose. etc.
after the manner of the Church of Rome, specially at the Consecration. And as
that Constitution perteined to the Greeks, and not to the Latins, so was it
not found in the Latin Books, until ^regorius Haloander of Germany, of late
years Translated the place. And where M. Iuel allegeth this commandment of
Justinian, against the having of the Service in a learned tongue, unknown to
the common people: it is to be noted, how he demeaneth him self not uprightly,
but so as every man may thereby know a Scholar of Luther, Calvin, and Peter
Martyr* For where as by th'allegation of that ordinance, he might seem to
bring somewhat, that makes for the Blessed Sacrifice of the Church commonly
named the Mass, he dissembleth the word of the Sacrifice, which Justinian
puts expressly, (...), Id est, diuinam oblationem, The Divine, or holy
Oblation, and terms it otherwise in his replies, by the name of Common
Prayers: and in his Sermon, by the name of the words of the Ministration,
refusinge the word of the Church, no less, then he refuses to be a member
of the Church. Thus through Foistinge and Cogginge their Die, and other false
play, these new perilous teachers, deceive many poor souls, and rob them
of the sure simplicity of their Faith. And where was this commandment
given? In Constantinople, the chief City of Greece, where the Greek tongue
was commonly known.

The B. of Sarisburie.
The Gloss, that M. Hardinge has here imagined, wherewith to defeite this good
Emperors whole purpose, may seem somewhat unto the ignorant.

Justinian (says he) speaks of the open utterance, and sound of voice, and
agrees with S. Augustines place. De Magistro: Therefore it nothing touches
Prayers to be had in the Vulgar tongue. Here is a very Uulgare Conclusion, as,
I trust, hereafter it shall appear. Good Christian Reader, if it shall please
thee, only to peruse these words of the Emperor Justinian, and of S.
Augustine by us alleged, I will make thee Judge, and Arbitrour of the whole.

S. Augustine says, We need no utterance of voice, to Pray unto God. For
the Sacrifice of Justice is sanctified in the Temple of our mind, and in the
secret Chamber of our heart. Clem. strom. li. 7.
As Clemens Alexandrinus also says: God looks not for the voices of our
tongues to declare our meaning: For before our Creation he knows, what
thoughts would come into our minds. Esai. 65.
And therefore God says in the Prophet Esaias, Antequam clament, ego exaudiam.
I will hear them, yea before they cry.

Hereupon S. Augustine demands this Question: Wherefore then does the
Priest lift up his voice, and pray alowde, in the open assembly in the
Church? He answeareth, Not that God, but that men may hear him: that the
people by the sound of his voice, and understanding his meaning, may be put
in mind, and by consent be joined together, and be lifted up to God. This is
the very meaning and mind of S. Augustine, agreeinge fully with these words
of S. Cyprian: The Priest before Prayer prepares the minds of his brethren,
Justinians Constitution.
sayeing thus: Lift up your hearts: To the intent they may be put in mind,
they ought to think of nothing else, but of the Lord. For not the sound of
voice, Cyprian. de Oratione Dominica.
but the mind and understanding must pray unto the Lord with pure intention.

All this (says M. Hardinge) pertains to the sense, and understanding of
the Prayer, and nothing to the Vulgar tongue. And doothe he think, the
people can understand the prayer, without understanding of the tongue? S.
Augustine, if he were alive, would be ashamed to see such a Comment upon his
words. He says further, The Priest lifts up his voice, not that the
people may understand him, but only for a token, to show that he prays. And
thus he makes the Minister of God, worse then a Brazen Trompet, which, if it
give no certain sound, as S. Paul says, no man can prepare him self to
war. 1. Corin. 14.
This is the just judgment of God, that who so seeks to blind others,
shall be given over, and become blind him self.

And not withstandinge S. Augustines mind concerning the speakinge of the
Priest, Augustine. de Magistro.
be plain in it self, yet afterward in the same Book, he opens it in this
manner more at large: Constat inter nos, verba esse signa: At signum, nisi
aliquid significet, non est Signum. We are agreed upon this, that the words
we speak, be tokens. But a token, unless it betoken some thing, is no
token. Now, if the Priest, after M. Hardinges construction, utter his words,
which are the tokens of his meaning, in an unknown tongue, and the people
understand not, what is tokened, according to S. Augustines meaning, he
speaks, and yet says nothing: and shows tokens, and yet tokeneth nothing.
Further S. Augustines words be clear, The Priest in the assembly speaks
alowde Significandae mentis causa, vt homines audiant etc. to the end to
declare his mind, that men may hear him, and by the sound of his voice be
put in remembrance. But M. Hardinge says: No, the Priest speaks not alowde,
to the intent to declare his mind, neither that men may hear him, nor be
put in remembrance, but only to give a token that he prays: And thus by his
Gloss, he utterly destroieth the text.

Now let us resolve both S. Augustines, and Justinians words, into their
causes: which is an infallible way of understanding. The end of them both
is according to the Doctrine of S. Paul, that the people may say, Amen. Then
further: The Resolution of M. Hardinges reason.
The people must answer, Amen, unto the Prayer: then must they understand
the Praie^, Yet futher: The people must understand the Prayer: then must the
Priest utter the same prayer both with a loud voice, and also in the peoples
Vulgar tongue. Let us again resolve it forewarde. The Priest, by M. Hardinges
judgment, may pray openly in a strange tongue: then he needs not to speak
alowde. ^e speaks not alowde: then can not the people understand him. The
people understands not the Priest: Then can they not say, Amen. Thus M.
Hardinge must needs conclude his Gloss with the open breach of S. Paul's
Doctrine.

M. Hardinge says further, This law took place only in Constantinople, and
not in the Church of Rome: M. Hardinge utters two untruths in one
sentence.
And so he coucheth two manifest untruths together in one sentence. But
what? will he say, Justinian was not Emperor of Rome, or had nothing to do in
the Church of Rome? Uerily he writes him self the Emperor of Rome, of
France, of Almaine, and Germany, etc. And deposed two Bishops of Rome, In
2. Tomo Council. in Vita Vigilij.
Siluerius, and Uigilius: whereof it may appear, he had somewhat to do in the
Church of Rome.

Touching this Constitution, the law says, Generaliter dictum, generaliter
est accipiendum. De legatis praes. con. tab. bon. poss. pe. l. 1. gen^raliter.
The thing that is spoken generally, must be taken generally. And it is
commonly said, Vbi lex non distinguit, nos distinguere non debemus. Where the
Law makes no distinction, there ought we to make no distinction. And what
reason has M. Hardinge, or what witness, more then his own, that this only
law took no place in the Church of Rome? Certainly the reast of the same
Nouel Constitutions were made not only for Constantinople, or for Rome, but
also for ye whole Empier. De Ecclesiast. diuersis capitu. (...)
And the Emperor Justinian in the same Title, says thus: What so ever things
touching this matter, were needeful for this Imperial City of Constantinople,
we have comprised in a special Law for the same. But what needs many
words? The Emperor him self calls the Constitution, that concerns the
Cleregie, a Law General, by these words, (...) etc. (...). In authe^. Colla.
1. vt definitus sit numer. Cleri.
We have enacted by a General, and a Common Law. And in the Code intreatinge
namely of Bishops, and Clerks, he has these words: Et hoc, non solum in
veteri Roma, vel in hac Regia Ciuitate, sed and in omni terra, vbicunque
Christianorum nomen colitur, obtinere sancimus. In Cod. De Episcop. and Cleri.
Generaliter.
This law we will have to take place, not only in the City of old Rome, or in
this Imperial City (of Constantinople) but also in all the world, where so
ever the name of Christians is had in honor.

And how can M. Hardinge make him self so sure, that the Church of Rome was
never subject to this Law? Leo de Ieiunio. 7. men. Sermo. 6. Ambro. De
Sacramen. li. 4. ca. 5. Aug. in Psalm. 54. Hieronym. In praefatione lib. 2. ad
Galat. M. Hardinge forgeateth him self.
Certainly, both by Leo Bishop of Rome, and also by S. Ambrose Bishop of
Millane, and other holy Fathers it appears otherwise. S. Augustine says of
the Church of Rome. Vnum Psalmum can^amus: vnum Amen, respondemus: we singe
one Psalm: and we answer one, Amen. S. Hierome says, Even in Rome, at the
end of the Prayer, the people so sounded out Amen, as if it had been a
Thunderclappe.

Again, if this Constitution served only for the Greek Church, and only
the Priests there spoke alowde, and the others of the Latin Church spoke in
silence, how then doothe M. Hardinge expound this Law of Justinian by the
words of S. Augustine, who, as he supposes, did the contrary, and was never
subject unto that Law? Or how can he make contrarieties agree together? Has
he so soon forgotten him self? Or will he expound Speakinge, by Silence? Or
singinge out, by whisperinge?

To conclude, Justinian says, These Constitutions were general: M. Hardinge
alone says, They were not general. Iustiuian says, They took place in all
the world. M. Hardinge alone says, They took place only in Constantinople.
S. Ambrose, S. Augustine, S. Hierome, Leo, and others say, They were observed
in the Church of Rome^ M. Hardinge alone says, They were never observed in
the Church of Rome.

If he will thus deceive us in plain things, how may we then trust him in
doubtful things?

Gregorius Haloander, whom M. Hardinge seems to touch with corruption of
these laws, Gregorius Haloander.
was a learned man, and a faithful Translatour: and for his diligence deserved
thanks: and therefore needs no excuse. He adds nothing more then is to be
found in the Original. In M. Hardinges old Translation, even in this same
very title, De Ecclesiasti^is diuersis capitulis, There wants a whole leaf
or more at the beginning, that is found extant in the Gr^eke.

Touching Cogginge, and Foystinge, I marvel M. Hardinge being so grave a man,
would borrow Ruffians terms to scoff withal. As for the Sacrifice of Christ
upon the Cross, which is represented unto us in the holy Communion, We
believe it with our hearts, and confess it with our mouths. Concerning this
word Oblatio, he knows well, I translated not y^ place, but only touched
it: neither had I then any manner occasion to speak of the Sacrifice, but
only of Prayers: which thing also I did without any Cogging, or any other
^^^ight, folowinge these very words of Justinian: (...). That is to say, To
offer up other prayers also with loud voice: Neither did I avouche any untruth
by Justinian: as M. Hardinge has here d^one by Justinian, and S. Augustine
both together. I know, the Holy Ministration is named of the holy Fathers
sundry ways: The Supper of the Lord: The Lorde^ Table: The Communion: The
Mystery: The Sacrament: The Mystical Table: The Tankes geuinge: The Oblation,
and the Sacrifice. Neither is there any of these names, but we use
indifferently, as occasion serves.

Now, for so much as M. Hardinge takes occasion, for that I past this place
of Justinian so shortly over, only touching it with one word, as the time
then forced me, I think it not amiss for the better contentation of the
Reader, to lay it out fully, as it lies. His words be these: Authen.
Constitut. 123.
We command al Bishops, and Priests, to minister the Holy Oblation, and the
prayer at the Holy Baptism, not under silence, but with such voice, as may be
heard of the faithful people: to the intent, that thereof the hearts of the
hearers may be sturred to more devotion, and honor geuinge to God the Lord.
For so the holy Apostle teaches, 1. Corin. 14.
sayeinge in the first Epistle to the Corinthians: For if thou only bliss
with the spirit, how shall he, that supplieth the room of the ignorant, say
Amen, (...)
(to God) at thy thanks geuinge? For he knovveth not what thou say. Thou
geuest thanks well, but the other is not edified.

For these causes therefore it behooves, that the prayer at the holy Oblation,
and also other prayers, be offered with loud voice of the holy Bishops, and
Priests unto our Lord Jesus Christ with the Father, and the Holy Ghost. And
let the holy Priests understand, that, if they neglecte any of these things,
they shall make answer therefore at the dreadful judgment of the great God,
and our Savior Jesus Christ. And yet nevertheless, we understanding the
same, will not pass it over, nor leave it unpunished.

Here we see, it is lawful for a godly Prince, to command Bishops and
Priests: To make laws, and orders for the Church: To redress the abuses of
the Sacraments: To allege the Scriptures: To threaten and punish Bishops and
Priests, if they offend.

Now, if these words of Justinian make not for us, and that without Foistinge
or Cogginge, much less make they for M. Hardinge: unless he will form his
reasons thus: The Priest must speak a loud, Ergo, He may speak in an
unknown tongue. Or thus: The people must hear the Prayer, and answer, Amen:
Ergo, They need not to understand it.



To be short, where as, to the intent to bring Gods truth out of credit,
and to make it odious emonge the ignorant, he says, We have refused to be the
members of the Church of God. This is only a bitterness of talk inflamed
with malice, whereof it seems he wanted no stoare, and neither furthereth his
cause emonge the wise, nor hinders ours. If we be no members of the Church,
that wish all the people every where to understand, what they Pray, to join
their hearts together, and to be lifted up unto God: what then be they, that
wish all the Church to be drowned in ignorance, and the people to know
nothing? If S. Paul were now alive, he would answer him, as sometime he
answered Elymas. For certainly he him self knows, Actor. 17.
That he wilfully peruerteth the manifest way of the Lord.

M. Hardinge. The.15. Division.
That Emperor had dominion over some Nations, that understood not the Greek
commonly. Yet no man can tell of any Constitution, that ever he made for Service
there to be had in their Vulgar, and Barbarous tongue. So many Nations having
been converted to the Faith, the common people whereof understood neither
Greek, nor Latin: if the having of the Service in their Vulgar tongue, had
been thought necessary to their Salvation, The Fathers that stickte not to
bestow their Blood for their Flocks, would not have spared that small pain
and travail, to put their Service in Vulgar tongues. If it had been
necessary, it had been done: if it had been done, it had been mentioned by
one, or other.

It appear^th by Arnobius upon the Psalms, Psalm 104. li. 1. contra haeres.
Haeresi 39. In Tuscul. q.
by Epiphanius writing against Heresies, Examples
and by S. Augustine in his Books De Doctrina Christiana. that by account of
the antiquity, there were 72. tongues in the world. Cicero says, that they
be in number infinity. Of them al, 78. The.78. untruth, For it shall appear,
that we are hable to show manifest examples to the contrary
neither M. Iuel, nor any one of his side, is able to show, that the Public
Service of the Church in any Nation, was ever for the space of six hundred
years after Christ, in any other, then in Greek, and Latin.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Arnobius, S. Augustine, and Epiphanius say, there be threescore and twelve
sundry Languages in the world: Cicero says, they be infinite. Here must I
note by the way, that Ciceroes words well alleged, do utterly confound M.
Hardinges Doctrine of hearing that thing, that the hearers understand not, in
such sort, as he mainteineth the hearing of Mass. Cicero in Tus^.
quaestionibus.
For thus he says, In his linguis, quas non intelligimus, quae sunt
innumerabiles, surdi profecto sumus. In those tongues, that we understand
not, which be innumerable, certainly we be deaf. By which words, M.
Hardinge might perceive, that the simple people hearing him at his Mass, is
stark deaf, and hears nothing. Yet, says M. Hardinge, is not M. Iuel
hable to show, that ever the Public Service was in any other tongue then in
Greek, or Latin. And thus being required by me, to show any one example,
that the people had their Common Service in a strange tongue: and as it
appears, not hable to show any, he alters cunningly the whole case, and
wills me to show. Which thing notwithstanding I might justly refuse to
do, by the order of any Schools, yet am I well content to yield to his
request, both for the goodness, and pregnancie of the cause, and also
specially, good Christian Reader, for the better contentation of thy mind: not
doubtinge, but of thee self, thou will be hable to find some distrust, and
want in M. Hardinges side: who notwithstanding so many words, and so great
vauntes, yet is hable to show nothing.

And, Eckius in locis Communibus. Durandus. li. 4. Ca. 1. Nicola. Lyra. Et
Thomas in. 1. ad Corin. 14.
to avoid multitude of words, the case being plain, Eckius says, The
Indians had their Service in the Indian tongue. Durandus says, The Jews,
that were Christened, had their Service in the Hebrew tongue. Yet was neither
of these tongues either Greek, or Latin.

Nicolaus Lyra, and Thomas of Aquine say, The Common Service in the Primitive
Church, was in the Common Vulgar tongue.

By these few it may appear, it was but a bravery, that M. Hardinge said,
Neither M. Iuel, nor any one of that side, is hable to show, that the Public
Service was in any other tongue, then in Greek, or Latin. For it is easy to
be showed, even by the Doctors of his own side.

But what if Doctor Hardinge him self have in plain words confessed the
same? Although he have wantonly denied Christ, yet, I trow, he will not deny
him self. Consider, good Reader, his own words hereafter following in this
self same Article. Fol. 69. Diui. 28.
But S. Paul, say they, requires, that the people give assent, and conform
them self unto the Priest, by ansvvearinge Amen, to his prayer made in the
congregation. Hereunto M. Hardinge answeareth thus: Verily, in the Primitive
Church, this was necessary, when the faith was a learning, and therefore
the prayers were made then in a common tongue knovve^ to the people. What can
there be more plainly spoken? M. Hardinge contrary to him self.
Here M. Hardinge not only confesses, that the Common Prayers were pronounced
in a Common tongue known to the people, but also further says, the same at
that time was necessary, and avouches it with his warrant, Verily. Now quite
contrary, as a man that had utterly forgotten him self, he says: The Common
Service was never said, but either in the Greek tongue, or in the Latin: and
therein he offreth stoutely to stand against M. Iuel, and al others of this
side. Which thing is easy for him to do, seeing he dares to stand so
stoutely against him self. Uerily, his sayeinges cannot stand both
together. If he be true in the one, in the other he must needs be false.

Yet, good Christian Reader, for thy better satisfaction, it may please thee to
know, that in the Primitive Church, the Common Service was not ministered by
one man alone, but by the Priest, and whole Congregation altogether, as may
appear by the general consent of the old Fathers. Clemens Alexandrinus says,
Clemens Alexa* ctroma li. 7.
In orationibus veluti vnam vocem habent Communem, and vnam mentem.

In the (Common) prayers they have al as it were one voice, and one mind. S.
Chrysostom says, Chrysostom. in. 2. ad Corin. hom. 18.
Not only the Priest gives thanks to God, but also, all the people: And what
do thou marvel, to see the Priest, and people in the Prayers talk
together? And here to leave S. Augustine, S. Hierome, S. Basile, Nazianzenus,
Dionysius Ariopagita, with many other like Fathers: Isidor. de Eccle. offi. ca.
10.
Isidorus describinge the order of the Church in his time, writes thus:
Opor^es, vt quando psallitur, ab omnibus psallatur: Et cum oratur, vt ab
omnibus oretur: cumque Lectio legitur, facto silentio, aeque audiatur a
cunctis. When they Singe, they must Singe altogether: when they pray, they
must Pray altogether: and when the Lesson is readde, silence being
commanded, they must here altogether.

It were very much for M. Hardinge to say, Al these things were done in a
learned tongue, and that the Vulgar people in every Country, understood
either the Greek, or the Latin. Yet, for that nothing seems hard for him
to say, let us see what the old Fathers will report in that behalf. I have
already showed by Theodoretus, Sozomenus, and S. Hierome, that the Service was
in the Syrian tongue.

Old Father Origens words, Origin. contra Cel^um. li. 8.
in my judgment seem very plain. Writing against one Celsus a wicked
Heathen, he says thus: Graeci quidem Graec^ Deum nominant, and Latin^ Romani:
and singuli item natiua, and Vernacula lingua Deum preca^tur, and laudibus pro
se quisque extollit. Ille enim qui est linguarum omnium Dominus, audit quauis
lingua orantes, idque non secus, quam si vnam vocem exciperet e varijs linguis
expressam. Deus enim cum praesit machinae vniuersi, non est quasi vnus aliquis,
qui linguam vel Graecam, vel Barbaram sit sortitus, vt coeteras nesciat. The
Greeks name God in the Greek tongue: and the Latins in the Latin tongue:
and al several Nations pray unto God, and praise him in their own natural,
and mother tongue. For he, that is the Lord of al tongues, hears men
praieing in all tongues, none otherwise, then if it were one voice pronounced by
diverse tongues. For God, that rules the whole world, is not as some one man,
that has gotten the Greek, or Latin tongue, and knows none other.

S. Ambrose speaking of the Jews, Ambros. in. 1. Corin. 14.
that were converted to Christ, says thus: Hi ex Hebraeis erant, qui
aliqua^do Syria lingua, plaerunque Hebraea in Tractatibus, and Oblationibus
vtebantur. These were ^ewes, which in their Sermons and Oblations, used
sometime the Syrian tongue, and sometimes the Hebrewe.

S. Basil writing unto the learned men of Naeocaesaria, and showing, in what
order the people used to resort to the house of prayer in the night season,
and to singe Psalms in sides, and to pray together: toward the end
thereof, has these words: Basilius in Epist. ad Clericos Naeocaearien.
Tanquam ab vnoore, and ab vno cord Confessionis Psalmum offerunt Domino, and
Verba poenitentiae little quisque proprie ascribit sibi. As it were from one
mouth, and from one heart, they offer up unto the Lord the Psalm of
Confession, and the words of Repentance every of them applies particularely
unto him self. Hereby it is plain, that the people in S. Basils time songue
the Psalms together, and understood, what they songue.

And least M. Hardinge should slip away, as his wont is, and say, All this
was done in the Greek tongue, and not in any tongue Barbarous, S. Basile has
already prevented him. For immediately he adds further, as it follows. Horum
gratia si nos fugitis, fugietis etiam Aepyptios, and vtrosque Lybias, and
Thebanos, and Palaestinos, and Arabas, and Phoenices, and Syros, and eos, qui
ad Euphratem incolunt, and in vniuersum omnes, quibus Vigiliae, and Orationes,
and Communes Psalmodiae in honor habentur. If ye flee us for thus singinge,
and praieinge together, then must ye flee the Egyptians, and both the
Countries of Lybia, and the Thebanes, and the Palestines, and the Arabians, and
the Phenicians, and the Syrians, and the borderers of Euphrates, and generally
ye must flee al them, that have watchinges, and prayers, and common Psalmodie
in estimation. I trow M. Hardinge will not say, Al these nations spoke Greek,
or Latin.

S. Hierome writing unto Heliodorus, Hieronym. ad Heliodorum: Epitaphium
Nepotiani.
of the death of Nepotianus, seems to auouche the same. These be his words.
Nunc Passionem Christi, and Resurrectionem eius, cunctarum gentium and voces,
and literae sonant. Taceo de Hebraeis, Graecis, and Latinis, quas nationes suae
Crucis Titulo Dominus dedicauit. Bessorum feritas, and pellitorum turba
populorum, qui mortuorum quondam inferijs homines immolabant, stridorem suum in
dulce Christi fregerunt melos, and totius mund^ vna vox est Christus. Now both
the voices, and letters of al nations, do sound out Christ's Passion, and
Resurrection. I leave the Jews, the Greeks, and the Latins, which nations
the Lord has dedicate with the title of his Cross. The savage nature of the
Bessians, and people that for their wildenesse go cladde in skins, which
sometimes made Sacrifices of men's Bodies, have turned their Barbarous speech
into the sweet harmony of Christ. Christ is now the voice of the whole
world.

Aeneas Syluius says, Aeneas Syluius historiae Bohemicae. Ca. 13.
that when Cyrillus, and Methodius had converted the Sclauons unto God, which
was about the year of our Lord eight hundred and threescore, and were suitors
that they might minister the Common prayers, and other Service unto them, in
their Common Sclauon tongue, and great stay was made therein by the Pope and
his Cardinales, a voice was heard, as it had been from Heaven, Omnis spiritus
laudet Dominum: and omnis lingua confiteatur ei. Let every sprite praise the
Lord: and let every tongue acknowledge him, And that thereupon they were
suffered to use their own tongue.

Touching this matter, Extra. de Officio Iudicis Ordinarij. Quonia^ in
pla^risque Rituum, and linguarum.
Innocentius the third has decreed thus, and whether it make for the purpose
or no, let M. Harding him self be judge. His words be these: Quoniam in
plaerisque partibus, intra eandem Ciuitatem, atque Dioecesim permisti sunt
populi diuersarum linguarum, habentes sub vna fide varios ritus, and mores,
districte praecipimus, vt Pontifices huiuscemodi Ciuitatum sieve Dioecesium
prouideant viros idoneos, qui secundum diuersitates rituum, and linguarum,
diuina illis officia celebrent, and Ecclesiastica Sacramenta ministrent. For so
much as in many places within one City, and one Diocese, there be n^tions
mingled together of many tongues, having diverse orders and customs under one
Faith, we do therefore straitely command, that the Bishops of such
Cities, or Dioceses, provide meet men to Minister the holy Service, According
to the diversity of their manners and tongues.

Here might I allege much more out of diverse writers, even out of Abdias him
self, whom M. Hardinge so much esteems. But I will only note the complaint
of one John Billet concerning this case, 10. Billet in Summa de diuinis
officijs.
and so make an end. His words be these: In primitiua Ecclesia prohibitum
erat, ne quis loqueretur linguis, nisi esset qui interpretaretur. Quid enim
prodesset loqui, nisi intelligeretur? Inde etiam inoleuit laudabilis
consuetudo, vt pronuntiato literaliter Euangelio, statim in vulgari populo
exponeretur. Quid autem nostris temporibus est agendum, vbi nullus, vel rarus
inuenitur legens, vel audiens, qui intelligat? Videtur ergo potius esse
tacendu^, quam psallendum. It was forbidden in the Primitive Church, that no
man should speak with tongues, unless there were some present to expound
it. For what should speakinge avail without understanding? And hereof grew a
laudable custom, that after the Gospel was readde literally, it should
straight way be expounded in the Vulgar tongue. ^ut what shall we do in our
days, when as there is either none at al, or very seldom, that r^adeth, or
hears, and understands? It seems, it were better now to hold then peace,
then so to singe.

Here have I alleged for proof of our purpose, of the old Fathers, Clemens
Alexandr^nus, Origin, S. Basile, S. Hierome, Theodoretus, Sozomenus, and
Isidorus: of the later writers, Aeneas Syluius, Innocentius T^rtius, John
Billet, Thomas of Aquine, Lyra, Durandus, and Eckius. Therefore I trust, M.
Harding will no more deny, but we are hable to show somewhat, that the Common
Service in the Primitive Church, was in some other tongue, and not only in
Greek, or Latin. Now if M. Hardinge be hable to show any such sufficient
example of his side, I will yield, according to promise.

M. Hardinge. The.16. Division.
For further answer to the authority of Justinians ordinance, we hold well
with it. Good men think it meet, the service to be uttered now also, with a
distinct, and aud^^le voi^e, that al sorts of people, specially so many as
understand it, may the more be stirred to devotion, and thereby the rather be
moved to say Amen, and give their assent to it, through their obedience and
credit they bear to the ^hurche, assuringe themselves, the same to be good
and healthful, and to the glory of God. And for that purpose, we have
commonly seen the Priest, when he spedde him to say his Service, Saunce Bell.
Pater noster.
to ringe the saunce Bell, and speak out alowde Pater noster. By which token,
the people were commanded silence, reverence, and devotion.

The B. of Sarisburie.
I must needs answer M. Hardinge, Cicero pro Coe^io. Cyprian. in oration.
Domini.
as Cicero sometime answered his adversary: Mimi ergo exitus est, non
Fabulae. This gear goes by gesture, and not by spe^che. S. Cyprian declaringe
the order of the Church in his time, says: Sacerdos ante orationem, parat
animos fratrum, dicendo, Sursum corda: The Priest before the ^raiers, prepares
the hearts of the brethren, saying thus unto them, Lift up your hearts.

The Deacons in S. Chrysostomes and Basiles time, used to call upon the people
with these words. Oremus: Attendamus. Let us pray: Let us give ear: Like as
also the Priest in the Heathen Sacrifices, was wont to command silence, and
to say to the multitude, Fauete linguis. This was done in the Church of
Christ, as S. Cyprian says, to put the people in remembrance, that in their
prayers they should think of nothing else, but only of the Lord. And
therefore Chrysostom says, Chrysostom. in. 2. ad Corin. hom. 18.
The Priest in the holy Ministration speaks unto the people, and the people
unto the Priest. But M. Hardinge for ease and expedition, has divised a
shorter way, to teach the people by a Belrope. He turns his back unto his
brethren: and speaks out two words alowde Pater noster: and causes the
Sanctus Bell to play the part of a Deacon, to put the people in remembrance,
that now they must pray. If any other man would say so much, he were a
scoffer: M. Harding speaks it, and it is good earnest, and cause sufficient,
to avoid Justinians law. Suetoni. in Aug. Plutarchus in Catone.
Augustus Caesar warned his son in law Tiberius, Vt ore, non digito,
loqueretur: That he should speak with his mouth, and not with his finger. And
Cato was wont to say, when he saw two Augures meet together, He merueiled,
that either of them could abs^^ine from smilinge: For that their whole
profession, and occupation stood in mockinge of the people. I will not apply
this to M. Hardinge, notwithstanding he seem to profess the like. God
grant, his Bell may remember him to fear God, 1. Corin. 13.
least he him self be leafte, As a soundinge piece of Brass, or as a
tincklinge Cymbal.

M. Hardinge. The.17. Division.
Now to say somewhat touching the Common prayers, or Service of the Churches of
Aphrica, where S. Augustine preached in Latin, as you say, and I deny not,
and thereof you seem to conclude, that the common people of that Country,
understood and spoke Latin, as their vulgar tongue. That the Aphricane
Churches had their Service in Latin, it is evident by sundry places of S.
Augustine in his exposition of the Psalms, in his Books De Doctrina
Christiana, and in his Sermons, and most plainly in an Epistle that he wrote
to S. Hierome, in which he shows, that the people of a City in Aphrica, was
greatly moved and offended with their Bishop, for that in reciting the
Scriptures, for part of the Service to them, he readde out of the fourth
Chapter of Jonas the Propher, not Cucurbita, after the old text, which they
had been accustomed unto, but Hedera, after the new translation of S. Hierome.
Now, as I grant that some understood it, so I have cause to doub^e, whether
some others understood it, or no. Nay rather I have great probability to
think, they understood it not. Lib. 3. 2. belli Pu^ici.
For the bewraieing of Hannibals Ambassadors to the Romans by their Punical
language, whereof Titus ^iuius writes: and likewise the conference betwixt
Sylla the Noble man of Rome, and Bocchus King of Numidia, had by mean of
Interpreters adhibited of both parts, as Salust records In Bello
Iugurthino, declares, that the tongue of Aphrica was the Punical tongue before
the Romans conquest. Now the same people remaininge there until S. Augustines
time, what should move us to judge, that they forgate their own native and
mother tongue, and learned a new the Latin tongue? I confess, that many
understood, and spoke. Latin, by reason of the Romans common resort
thither, of their laws there executed, of their garrisons there abidinge, and
specially of the great multitude of Latin people thither sent to inhabit,
Deductis Colonijs, by August the Emperor first, then by Adrianus, and
afterward by Commodus, who would have had the great City Carthago newly
ree^^^ied, to be called after his own name. Alexandria Commodiana, as
L^^pridius writes. These Roman Colonies, that is to weete multitudes of
people sent to inhabit the Country, placed them selves about the Sea
coasies, in the chief Cities, in Carthago, Vtica, Hippo, Leptis etc* and there
about. And by these means the Roman or Latin speech spredde abroad
there, and became to be very common, as that which remained still among the
Inhabitants, that were of the Roman kind, and was learned by long use and
custom of others, dwellinge amongst them, specially in the Cities, where the
Romans bare the swe^ and government. For these considerations, I think the
Latin tongue was there very common.

But that it was common to the inward parties of the Country also, and to the
vplandishe people, amongst whom the old accustomed language is longest keapte,
as experience teaches: it is not likely. For though the Nobility, and Cities
change their Language, to be the more in estimation, yet the common and base
people of the Country, fall not so soon to a change. In this Realm of
England after William Conquerours time, by occasion of great resortes of
French men hither, and of our Country men into France, also of the French
laws, and special favor by the Princes borne^ and preferrements bestowed upon
them that spoke French: the most part of the Nobility, Law^ers, Marchantes,
Captains, Soldiers, and wel^hy folk, had skill in the understanding and
speaking of the French tongue: but yet the common, and ^plandishe people spoke
little or naught at al. Whereof gr^w this Proverb in England of old time,
^acke would be a Gentleman, but Lack can no French. The like may be thought
of the Latin tongue in Aphrica.

What shall we think of the Vplandishe people there, when as Septimius Seuerus
the Emperor, yea after the Apostles time, had not very good skill in the Latin
tongue, but in the Punical tongue, and that being borne at Leptis? Of whom
Aurelius Victor says thus in ^pitome. La^^nis literis sufficienter instructus,
Punica lingua promptior, quippe genitus apud Leptim Prouinciae Aphricae.
Seuerus was learned in the Latin letters sufficiently, but in the ^unical
tongue he was readier* as being borne at Leptis, within the Province of
Aphrica. Here the Latin tongue is attributed to instruction, and teachinge,
and the Punical tongue to nature. Aelius Spartianus vvriting the life of this
Seuerus to Diocletian, she^^eth, that when his Sister a woman of Lepti^^, came
to Rome to him, Vix Latin loquens. Her Brother the Emperor was ashamed of
her, and blusshed at her, for that she could s^^antly speak Latin, and
therefore commanded her away home again to her Country: for these he the
very words of Sp^r^ianus. Now, if such noble personages lackte the Latin
speech, in the chief part of Aphrica, it is soon understood, (...)is to
be deemed of the common, and vulgar people abroad in the Country.

Let us come down lougher, Aphrica.
even to S. Hieromes time. S. Hierome writing to a noble young Roman
Virgin called Deme^rias being in Aphrica, exhortinge her to keep her self
in that holy state of Virginity, says thus. Vrbs tua quondam orbis Caput. Thy
City, once the head of the world, is become the Sepulcher of the Roman
people. And will thou take a banished husband, thy self being a banished
woman, in the ^hore of Lybia? What woman shall thou have there to bring thee
too and fro? Stridor Punicae linguae procacia tibifescennina cantabit. The
tarringe Punical tongue shall singe the Baudie songs at thy weddinge. Lo, in S.
Hieromes time, they of Aphrica spoke the Punical tongue, and that by the sea
side, where the Romans of long time had made their abode. Of this may be
gathered, that the Latin speech was not in the farther parties within the
Country very common. De verbis Domini secundum Luc. Sermon. 35.
S. Augustine in sundry places of his works shows, that the people of
Aphrica called Punikes, spoke the Punical tongue, acknowledginge a likeness
and coosinage, as it were, to be between that and the Hebrew tongue. But most
evident witness for the Punical tongue, is to be found in his.44. Epistle, Ad
Maximum Madaurensem. In which he answeareth him soberly, for his scoffinge,
and iestinge at certain Punical words, in derogation of the Christians.
After wonderinge that he being an Aphicane borne, and writing to Aphricanes,
should find fault with the Punical names and words, and after commendation
of the tongue, for that many things have right wisely been commended to
memory by great learned men, in books of the Punical language: at length
concluded against him thus. Poeniteat te certe ibi natu^, vbi huiusmodi linguae
cunabula recalent. In good soothe thou may be sorry in thy heart, that thou
were bo^ne there, where the Cradels of such a tongue be warm again. By
which words he seems to charge him with an unnatural grief and repenting,
that he was borne in that Country, where they speak Punike, ere they creep
out of their Cradels. whereby it appears, the mother tongue of those parties
of Aphrica which he speaks of, to be the Punical, and not the Latin.

To conclude, if they had al spoken Latin, and not some the Punical tongue, S.
Augustine vvoulde never have written, Li. 1. de Pecca^orum meritis and
remis^ione. Ca. 24.
Punici Christiani Baptismum, falutem: Eucharistiam, vitam vocant: That those
Christians which speak the Punical tongue, call Baptism in their language,
Health, or Salvation: and the Eucharist, Life. Wherefore we see, that there
were Latin Christians, and Punical Christians in Aphrica, of whom al
understood not the Latin Service.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Here M. Hardinge, as his wont is, takes needless pains without profit, to
prove that thing, that is not denied. I said, that at the City of Hippo in
Aphrica, where S. Augustine was Bishop, the Common Service of the Church
was pronounced in Latin: and that no marvel, for that the whole people there
understood, and spoke the Latin tongue. For answer whereof Reply is made,
and that by Gheasses, and likelyhoodes, that the whole people of Aphrica, in all
the Mountains, and vplandishe Countries, was never trained up in the Latin
tongue. Which thing neither is denied by me, nor anywise touches this
Question. For it is easy to be known by S. Augustine, S. Hierome, and others,
in infinite places, that the people of that Country had a natural tongue of
their own, distinct from al others, and several only to them self. And
therefore to prove the same in such earnest sort, by Titus Liuius, by Salust,
by Aurelius Uictor, by Aelius Spartianus, by S. Augustine, and by S. Hierome,
it was only spending of time, without winninge of matter. S. Augustine, August.
de Verbis Domi. secun. Luc. Sermon. 35. Aug. in Psalm. 123. Hieronym. in Esai. li.
3. Ca. 7. Lib. 1. Ca. 9.
says Eucharistia, in the Punike tongue was called Life: and Baptismus in the
same tongue, was called Health: and rehearses these words, Mammon, and Iar,
and other like words, and certain proverbs, used in the same tongue. S.
Hierome says that Alma, in the Punike tongue signifies a Uirgine, according
to the Hebrew. Quintilian says, that this word, Mappa, was borrowed of the
Punikes, and made Latin, as Rheda, and Petoritum, were borrowed of the Gauls.
Neither is there any reason to lead us, but that they had other words, and
sentences of their own sufficient, to express their minds.

But after the Romans had once subbued them, the better to stablishe, and
confirm their Empiere, they forced them to receive both the Roman laws,
and also the Roman tongue: as they had done before in several Countries
within Italy, and in other places more. Which thing unto some seemed so
grievous, that, Ex origini^. Ca^tonis.
as it is reported by Cato, Turrhe^us the last King of Ethr^ria,
notwithstanding he were content to yield his Country to the Romans, yet
could never be won to yield his tongue. For the better performance hereof,
they had it enacted by a law, that the Judge in every Province should hear,
and determine matters, and pronounce sentence only in Latin, as it appears
by these words: De re iudicata. etc.
Decreta Decreta.
a praetoribus, Latin debent interponi. By mean whereof S. Hierome says,
The Punike tongue in his time, was much altered from that it had been before.

Al these things be confessed, Hieron. in praefatio. in. lib. 2. Commen. ad.
^alathas.
and nothing touch this case, nor serve to any other purpose, but only to
amase ye ignorant Reader with a countenance of great learning.

But that the whole people of the City of Hippo, where the Service was
ministered in the Latin tongue, understood, and spoke Latin, who can witness
better then S. Augustine him self, that was then Bishop of Hippo? And to
pass over that he reports of him self, that being borne in Tagasta a City
of Aphrica, August. Confe^^. li. 1. Ca. 14.
he learned the Latin tongue, In^er blandimenta nu^ricum, As he was plaieinge
under his N^rce, Signi^ieing thereby, that his Nurces understood, and spoke
Latin: De Cathechizandis rudibus. Cap. 9.
In his Book De Catechizandis rudibus; He writes thus: Let them know, there
is no voice, that sounds in Gods ears, but the devotion of the mind. So
shall they not scorn at the head Priests, and Ministers of the Church, if
they happen in making their prayers unto God, to speak false Latin, or not
to understand the words that they speak, or to speak them out of order. He
adds ^urther, Non qu^d ista corrigenda non sint, vt populus ad id, quod plane
intelligit, dica^, Amen. Not for that, such faults should not be amended* to
the end that the people, to the thing that they plainly perceive, may say,
Amen. Here S. Augustine wills that the Priests utter their Latin Service
distinctely, and truly, that the people may understand them. Again he says
thus: Retractation. lib. 1. Ca. 20.
Volens etiam causam Donatistarum ad ipsius humilimi vulgi, and omnin^
imperitorum, atque idiotarum notitiam peruenire, and eorum, quantum fieri
posset, per nos inhaerere memoriae, psalmum, qui eis cantaretur, per Latinas
literas f^ci. Being desirous that the cause of the Donatistes should come to
the knowledge of the lowest sort, and of them, that be utterly ignorant, and
void of learning, and, as much as in us lay, might be fixed in their
memory, I wrote a Psalm for them to singe in the Latin tongue. And
Possidonius Possidonius in Vita Augustini. Ca. 5.
writynge S. Augustines life, says, that Ualerius, that was Bishop of Hippo,
before S. Augustine, for that he was a Greek borne, and had small skill in the
Latin tongue, was the less hable to Preach unto the people, and to discharge
his dewtie there.

I doubt not, but by these few words, it may well appear, that the people
of Hippo understood the Latin, al be it not in such good order, as they that
had learned it at the School: and therefore would oftentimes speak amiss,
placing one word, for an other: and Gender, for Gender: and Case, for Case:
as for example, Augustine. in Johan. tractat. 7.
Dolus, for Dolor. S. Augustine says, Multi fratres imperi^iores La^inita^is,
loquu^tur f^c, vt dicant, Dolus illum torquet, pro eo, quod est, Dolor. And for
that cause in his Sermons unto the people, he submits oftetimes him self
unto their capacity. For thus he speaks unto the people, Saepe and verba non
Latina dico, Augustine. in Psalm. 123.
vt vos intelligatis: Many times I utter words, that be no Latin, that ye
may understand me. And again he says, Ego dicam Ossum: sic enim potius
loquamur.

Melius est, Augustine. in Psalm. 128.
vt nos reprehendant Grammatici, quam non intelligant populi. I will say,
Ossum, for your better understanding: although it be, no Latin word. And so
hardely set us speak. For better is it, that the Grammariens find fault with
us, then the people should not understand us. Hereby it is plain, that at the
City of Hippo, whereof I specially spoke, the Common Service of the Church
was pronounced, and Ministered in the Latin tongue, for that the whole people
there universally understood and spoke Latin.

M. Hardinge. The.18. Division.
And where as S. Augustine, as you allege him, without showing the place (as
your manner is, whereby you may easily deceive the Reader) has these words
in his Sermons to the common people diverse times: N^nc loquar La^ine, vt omnes
intelliga^is, Now vvil I speak Latin, that you may al understand me: of
that sai^ing, if any such be, may be gathered, that sometimes he spoke in the
Punical tongue to the Punical Christians, not understanding the Latin: but
now among the Latin Aphricanes that were of the Roman kind, and
understood not the Punike, he would speak Latin, that al such should
understand him.

Who so d^sireth further to be persuaded, that the people of Aphrica called
Poeni, spoke and understood their own Punical tongue, and not the Latin
tongue, as likewise the people of Spain, named Iberi, spoke that language
which was proper to them: let him read Titus Liuius De Bello Macedonico. For
there he record^th, that when those of Aphrica, or of Spain, and the Romans
came together for parle, and talk, they used an Interpreter.

And Vlpianus the Lawer; In l. fidei commissa* ff. d. leg. 3
a great Officer about Alexander Seuerus the Emperor, at the beginning of
Christian Religion, writes, that Fidei commissa, may be leafte in all Vulgar
tongues, and puts for examples, the Punical, and the French, or rather
Gallical tongue.

The B. of Sarisburie.
I see, there is no pardon to be hoped for at M. Hardinges hands. Because I
noted not, in what Book, and Chapter this place is to be found, therefore he
bears men in hand, I seek means to deceive the Reader. If this poor
quarrel may stand for proof, then is it no hard matter by the same Logique, to
conclude the like against him. For M. Harding oft^times uses the authority of
S. Augustine, and other Fathers, without any noting of the places, as his own
Book is best witness: Ergo, M. Harding seeks means to deceive his Reader.

But in my judgment better it is not to note the places at al, then falsely to
note them, as M. Hardinges manner is to do: as where he untruly allegeth the
Decree of the Council of Ephesus against Nestorius, for the Communion in One
^inde: which Decree neither is to be found in that Council, nor ever was
recorded, or mentioned by any old Father: Or where he allegeth the Decree of
the first Council of Nice, for the Supremacy of the Bishop of Rome: him self
confessinge that the same Decree was burnte, I know not how, and could never
yet be seen until this day. Uerily, this is a ready way to deceive the Reader.

I pass by other petite faults: as that he allegeth the sixth book of
Ambrose De Sacramentis, ^olio. 23. a.
in steed of the fifth: or the.xxxiiij. Chapter of the sixth book of
Eusebius, in steed of the.xliiij: ^olio. 18. b.
Or that Steven Gardener allegeth Theophilus Alexandrinus, in steed of
Theophylactus: Contra Archiepisc. Cantuar. lib. 3.
Or the third book of S. Augustine, De. Sermon Domini in Monte, where as S.
Augustine never wrote but two. The place wherewith M. Hardinge finds him
self grieved, is to be found in S. Augustine De Verbis Apostoli: the words
be these: Contra. Arch. Cantuar. li. 4. De verbis Apos^oli Sermon. 25.
Prouerbium notum est Punicum: quod quidem Latin vobis dicam, quia Punice non
omnes nostis. There is a Common Proverb in the Punike tongue: which I will
report unto you in Latin, because ye do not al understand the Punike. Here
it is plain, that the Latin tongue was known to all the hearers, and the
Punike tongue only unto some. And therefore in an other Sermon unto the
people, Augustine. in Psalm. 50*
he says thus: Omnes nouimus, Latin non dici sanguines, aut sanguina: We
do al know (reckeninge him self with the people) that these words
Sanguines, or Sanguina, are no Latin: and again, as I have before reported,
touching a Latin Psalm that he had made for the common people, he writes
thus: Retract. Lib. 1. Ca, 20.
Being desirous, that the cause of the Donatistes should come to the knowledge
of the lowest sort, and of them that be utterly ignorant, and void of
learning, and, as much as in us lay, might be fixed in their memory, I
wrote a Psalm for them to singe in the Latin Tongue.

This long rehearsal of al these authorities, sauinge that M. Hardinge gave
the occasion, was utterly need less. Notwithstanding, hereby it is evident,
that the people there understood the Latin, wherein their Service was
ministered: and therefore had not their Service in any unknown tongue. Now if
M. Hardinge were hable to show, that other Cities, or Provinces of the same
Country, where the Latin tongue was not known, had not withstandinge the
Latin Service, it would very well serve his purpose. Otherwise, the argument
that he would seem to fashion hereof, is marvelous strange. For thus, as it
appears, he would conclude: Some people in Aphrica spoke the Punike tong^e:

Ergo, they had their Service in the Latin tongue. For other argument that he
can here geather, I s^e none. The rest of Titus Liuius De bello Macedonico, or
of Ulpian De fidei commissis, is utterly out of season, and therefore not
worthy to be answered.

M. Hardinge. The.19. Division.
This much, or more, might here be said of the language of the People of
Gallia, now called France, which then was Barbarous and vulgar, and not
only Latin, and 97 The ^9. untruth, Bold^ly auoutched, but no way proved.
yet had they of that Nation their Service then in Latin: as all the VVeast
Church had. That the common language of the people there was vulgar, the use
of the Latin seruinge for the learned, as we must needs judge: we have first
the authority of Titus Liuius. Ab vrbe condita. li. 7.
Who writes, that a Galloes, or as now we say a French man of a notable
stature, provoked a Roman to fight with him, Man for Man, making his
challenge by an Interpreter. Which had not been done, in case the Latin
tongue had been common to that Nation: Next, the Place of Vlpianus before
mentioned: Then the record of Aelius Lampridius, who writes that a Woman of
the order of the Druides, cried out alowde to Alexander Seuerus, Mammaea her
Son the Emperor, In vita Alexandri Mammae^^.
as he marched forward on a day with his army, Gallico sermon, in the
Gallical tongue, these words, bodinge his death, which right so shortly
after followed: Vadas: nec victoriam speres: ne militi tuo credas. Goo thy way:
and look not for the victory: In prooemio 2. Commen. ad Galatas.
trust not thy Soldiers. Lastly, the witness of S. Hierome: who having
travailed over that Region, and therefore being skilful of the whole state
thereof, acknowlegeth the people of Treueres, and of that territory, to have a
peculiar language, diverse from Latin, and Greek.

If all that I have brought here toutchinge this matter, be well weighed, it will
seem probable, I doubt not, that al sorts of people in Aphrica, understood
not the Service, which they had in the Latin tongue. And no less may be
thought of Gallia^, and Spain. And so far it is proved, against M. Iuels
stout assertion, An easy proof without premises.
that within his six hundred years after Christ, some Christen people had
their Common Prayers and Service, in a tongue they understood not.

The B. of Sarisburie.
A short answer may serve, where nothing is objected. This gheasse stands
upon these two points: The First is this: The people of Gallia understood
not the Latin tongue: The second is this: That not withstandinge, the same
people had their Service in Latin: Whereof the Conclusion follows, Ergo, they
had Service in an unknown tongue. France.
The Mayor hereof is proved with much a do, by Titus Liuius, by Ulpianus, by
Aelius Lampridius, and by S. Hierome. He might as well have added the story of
Brennus: Quintil. li. 1. (...). 9.
Caesar's Commentaries: Quintilian, y^ names two mere French words, Rheda,
and Petoritum: and Cicero, who in his Oration pro Fonteio, Cicero pro Font^io.
and else where, calls the men of y^ Country, Barbaros. Thus M. Harding
takes great pains to prove that thing, that is confessed, and needs no
proouinge.

But the Minor, which is utterly denied, and wherein stands all the doubt^,
and without proouinge whereof he proves nothing, he passes over closely,
and proves by silence. If the matter be doubtful, it has the more need of
proof: if it be plain, and out of doubt, it is the sooner proved. Surely,
to say without any kind of proof, or evidence, only upon M. Hardinges bare
word, The people of Gallia had the Latin Service, it is but a very simple
warrant. For what learning, what authority, what conjecture, what gheasse has
he, so to say? Some hold yt Joseph of Arimathae^, Philip the Apostle,
Nathanael, and Lazarus, were the first that ever opened the Gospel in France.
But these four neither came from Rome, nor to my knowledge, ever spoke the
Latin Tongue: They came from Jerusalem out of Iewrie, and spoke the Hebrew
tongue. Therefore, I reckon, M. Hardinge will not say, that any of these four,
erected there the Latin Service.

The best that he can make hereof, is but a gheasse and a likelihoode: for thus
he says: It will seem probable, I doubt not. But I assure thee, good Reader:
it will prove nothing: I doubt not. For weigh the probability of these
reasons: The people of Galli^ had a speech peculiar to them self, and spoke
no Latin: Ergo, they had the Latin Service. Or thus: The first preachers in
Gallia, came from Hie^usalem, and spoke the Hebrew tongue: Ergo, they ministered
the Service and common prayers in the Latin tongue. These be M. Hardinges
probabilities, wherewith he doubts not this matter is proved.

But once again, let us vewe the Maine Reason: The Mayor, The people of
Gallia^ understood no Latin: The Minor, The same people had the Latin
Service: The Conclusion, Ergo, They had Service in an unknown tongue.

Here, M. Hardinge, we do utterly deny your Minor: which unless ye prove
otherwise, then ye have hitherto begone, very Children may see, that your
Conclusion cannot follow. Ye should not so stoutely have said, ye have so
thoroughly proved the matter, having in deed as yet proved nothing.

But that the Service in the Churches of Gallia, was not said in such order
as M. Hardinge gheasseth, but in a tongue known unto the people, it is evident
by Seuerus Sulpitius in the life of S. Martine. The people of the City of
Tours, in France, then called Gallia, upon the vacation of the Bishoprike,
were desirous to have S. Martine, to be their Bishop: notwithstanding there
were others that thought him a very simple man, and in all respects, unworthy
of any Bishoprike. In this contention the matter fell out in this wise, as
Sulpitius shows. Cum fortuitu Lector, Sulpitius in vita^ Martini.
cui legendi eo die officium erat, interclusus a populo defuisset, turbatis
ministris, dum expectatur, qui non aderat, vnus e circunstantibus, sumpto
Psalterio, que^ primum versum inuenit arripuit: Psalmus autem hic erat: Ex ore
infantium, and lactentium, perfecisti laudem, etc. Quo lecto, clamor populi
tollitur, and pars aduersa co^funditur. Where as by chance the Reader, whose
office was to read in the Church that day, was shut out by mean of the
thronge, and the Ministers were troubled, looking about for him that was not
there, one of the company, took the Psalter, and readde that verse, that came
next to hand. The verse of the Psalm was this: Our of the mouth of Infantes
and sucklinges, thou have wrought praise. As soon as that verse was read, the
people made a shoot, and the contrary part was confounded. Here we see the
practice of the Church of Gallia. The Reader pronounced the Scriptures, and the
people understood them. Whether it were in the vulgar tongue, or in ye
Latin, it was a tongue known unto the people. Therefore M. Hardinge might have
better advised him self, England Augustine.
before he thus assured the world, that the people of Gallia had their Service
undoubtedly in an unknown tongue.

M. Hardinge. The.20. Division.
And thus, al his allegations brought for proof of his saieinge in this
behalf, be answered* the place of S. Paul to the Corinthians excepted.

The B. of Sarisburie.
If vain gheasses without proof: If the corruption of S. Augustine: If the
falsifiynge of the Emperor Justinians law, may stand for an answer, then
are my allegations fully answered.

M. Hardinge. The.21. Division.
Which ere I answer, I will according to my promise prove, that about
nine hundred years past, yea a thousand also, and therefore some deal within
his six hundred years, even in S. Gregorius time, the Service was in an
unknown tongue in this land of England, then called Britain, and begone to
be called England, at least, for so much, as sithence, and at these daye^ is
called by the name of England. Beda an English man, that wrote the
Ecclesiastical story of the English nation, in the year of our Lord.731.
and of their coming to Britain about.285. records that S. Augustine, and
his company, who were sent hither, to convert the English people to the
Faith of Christ, which the Britons had here pro^essed long before, having a
safe conducte granted them by King Ethelbert, to preach the Gospel where
they would: said, and songue their service in a Church, builded of old time
in the honor of S. Martin, adioyninge on the East side of the head City of
Kente, whiles the Romans dwelte in Britain. The words of Beda be these. In
hac (Ecclesia) conuenire primo, Lib. 1. hist. Ecclesiast. Cap. 26.
psallere, orare, missas facere, praedicare, and Baptizare coeperunt. In this
Church they began first to assemble them selves together, to Singe, to
Pray, to say Mass, They were Italia^s, and spoke no English: neither ^as
this the the ordinary service of the English Church.
to Preach, and to Baptize. It is plain, that this was the Service. And no
doubt, they resorted to it, who believed, and were of them Baptized, wonderinge
(as Bede says) at the simplicity of their innocent life, and sweetness of
their heavenly doctrine. In English it was not, for they had no skill of that
tongue, as Bede shows, Lib. 1. Cap. 23. And therefore, ere they entered the
land, Lib. 1. Ca. 25.
they took with them by commandment of S. Gregory, Interpreters out of
France.

Which Interpreters served for open preachinge, and private instruction,
exhortation, and teachinge. In Singinge, and sayeinge the Service, there was no
use of them.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Here is a great bulk, and no Corn. If empty words might make proof, then
had we here proof sufficient. First, I will examine every of these gheasses
particularly by them selves, and in the end, will show the true story of this
Ilelande, as it may be geathered by Tertullian, Origin, Chrysostom,
Theodoretus, and such other old writers.

And least any man be deceived by ambiguitie of names, this Augustine whom M.
Hardinge calls, Saint, and some others, the Apostle of England, was not
that great learned Father, and Doctor of the Church, whom we woorthily call
S. Augustine, but an other of the same name, as far unlike him in learning,
and holiness, so also two hundred years behind him in course of age: a man
as it was judged by them that saw him, and knew him, neither of Apostolic
Sprite, nor any way worthy to be called a Saint: Calfridus Monemuthen. li.
8. cap. 4.
But an Hypocrite, a superstitious man, cruel, bloody, and proud above
measure. And notwithstanding, he withdrewe the English Nation from their
gross idolatry, wherein he had no great travail, yet it is certain, he
planted not Religion in this Realm: for it was planted here, and had grown,
and continued still four hundred years and more, before his coming. But it
is thought of many, that he corrupted the Religion, that he found planted here
before, with much filthe of superstition: and therefore Galfridus says, that
the Bishops, and learned men, of this Ilelande, would none neither of him,
nor of the Pope, that sent him.

And that it may the better appear, what a one this Augustine was, and what
opinion the faithful people of this Realm had of him, I will rehearse a short
story, that is written by Beda in that behalf. ^eda li. 2. C^. 2.
The Bishops of this Country, says Beda, before they would go to the
Council, where as Augustine should be President, f^rste went unto a holy wise
man, that lived an Anchors life, and des^red his Counsel, wheth^r that at
Augustines preachinge, they should leave the traditions, that they had so
long used, ^r ^o. He answered, If he be a man of God, follow him. But how
shall we know, said they, whether he be a man of God, or no? He answered
again, If he be gentle, and lowly of h^rte, it is likely yenough that he
carries the Yoke of the Lord, and offreth unto you to carry the same. But if
he be disdaineful, and proud, then it is certain, he is not of God: Neither
ought you to regard what he says. Then said the Bishops again: But how
may we know whether he be disdaineful, and proud or no? Provide ye, says
this holy man, that he may be in the Counsel sittinge before you come. Then, if
he arise up from his Chair at your cominge, and salute you, Know ye, that he
is the man of God, and therefore harken to him. But if he disdain you, and will
not once move his place, specially seeinge you are the more in number* then set
you as little by him, and disdain him to. And as this holy man had told them,
so did they. When they came into the Council House, Augustine sat still, and
would not move. Whereupon they refused him, and would not hear him, as a man
disdaineful and proud of heart, and therefore no man of God. Upon which
refusal, Ethelb^rtus the King raised his power, and slew great numbers of the
Britains, and a thousand, and two hundred godly Religions men, even as they
were at their prayers. Hitherto Beda. Wherefore, the authority of this
Augustines dooinges, must needs seem the less, yea although it were al true,
that M. Hardinge reports of him. And further, I trust, it will be proved,
that the things that M. Hardinge allegeth, stand without the compass of six
hundred years: and therefore, not withstandinge they were true, yet cannot
greatly further his purpose. This Augustine upon his arriual into England, had
a place allotted him in Kent. There he and his company song, and prai^d, and
said Mass, (this Mass was a Communion, as shall appear) and preached, and
Baptized. In what language, it is not noted by Beda. But be it in Latin.
Hereof M. Hardinge forms up this argument.

Augustine, and his company prayed together in Latin, for that they were
strangers, newly sent in out of Italy, and understood not the English
tongue: Ergo, the English people had the Latin Service.

M. Hardinge should not thus mock the world. He knows well, a Child would
not make such reasons. For Augustine was no Parish Priest, ne served no
Cure, but only had a place severally appointed to him self. Neither did any
English man resort to his Service, unless it were to see the strangeness of
his dooinges. He might as well reason thus: The Jews this day in Venice have
their Service in the Hebrewe tongue: Ergo, the people of Italy have their
Service in the Hebrewe.



Hitherto, I trow, this matter is but simply proved.

M. Hardinge. The.22. Division.
Where as S. Augustine, after that the English Nation had received the faith,
and he had been Archbishop over them, having found, the Faith being one,
diversity of customs in diverse Churches, one mane^ of Masses in the holy
Roman Church, an other in that of France: for this, and certain other
purposes, sent two of his Clergy, Laurence, and Peter to Rome, to be
advertised amongst other things, what order, manner, and custom of Masses, it
liked S. Gregory, the Churches of the English nation should have. Hereunto
that holy Father answered, that what he espied, either in the Roman, or
French, or any other Church, that might be most acceptable to almighty God,
he should choose out, and geather together, and commend the same to the
Church of England, there to be leafte in custom to continue. Li. 1. Ca. 27.
If it had then ben thought necessary, the Service of the Mass to be in
English, or if it had been translated into the English tongue, it is not to
be thought, that Bid, who declares al things concerning matters of Religion
so diligently, specially professing to write an Ecclesiastical story, would
have passed over that in silence. And if the Mass had been used in the
English tongue, the Monumentes, and Books so much multiplied among the
Churches, would have remained in some place, or other. And doubtelesse, some
mention would have been made of the time, and causes of the leauinge such
kind of Service, and of the beginning the new Latin Service. As certain of
S. Gregory's works turned into English by Bid him self have been
keapte, so as they remain to this day.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Here was a short victory. Peter, and Paul could never so easily conquer
Kingdoms. But this matter stood not so much in winninge the unfaithful, as in
killinge the Godly. After that was once done, straight ways Augustine had the
conqueste, and was out of hand made Archbishop, and wrote to Rome both
thereof, and also for resolution of certain questions, meet, as he says,
for that rude people of England: Beda li. 1. Ca. 27.
As, whether a woman might be Baptized, while she were great with Child, or
after her delivery: and how long after she should forbear the Church: with
certain other secret questions toutchinge both man, and wife, so Childishe,
and so rude, that a man may well doubt, whether Augustine were ruder, or the
people. Among other things, he demanded Counsel toutchinge the Mass, for
that in diverse Countries he had seen diverse orders of Masses: and yet, good
Reader, of them al he had seen no Private Mass. For the Mass in Rome at that
time, was a Communion, as I have already showed, and as it appears by these
words, which the Deacon pronounced at every Mass alowde unto the people: He
that receives not the Communion, let him give place. The difference stood in
addition of certain Ceremonies. For the Countries abroad, as we may judge,
keapte still that simple order, that they had first received: But the Church of
Rome was ever alteringe. For Gregory him self, unto whom this Augustine
writes, Platyna in viti^ pontif.
added the Introite, and the Antemes, and Alleluia, and willed the Introite to
be doubled twice, and the Kyrie eleeson nientimes, and added also a certain
portion to the Canon. Sabellicus Ennead. 8. li. 5.
Of these and other like differences Augustine demands: and of the same,
Gregory makes answer. Hereof M. Hardinge gheasseth thus: It appears not
by Beda, The Service was in English. Ergo, the Service was in Latin. What
kind of Logique have we here? Or how may this reason hold? It concludes ab
authoritate negative. I believe M. Harding him self will not allow it. By the
like form of reasoninge a man might as well say: It appears not by Beda, that
the preachers instructed or exhorted the English people in English: Ergo,
they instructed, and exhorted the English people in Latin. Yet again he
gheasseth further: There is no Book to be found of the English Service in
that time: Ergo, the Service was in Latin. O what folly is this? Who is hable
to show any Book written in English a thousand years ago? Or if it could
be showed, yet who were hable to understand it? There is no book to be found
of the prayers, that the Druydes made in France, or the Gymnosophistae in
India: and will M. Hardinge thereof conclude, that therefore the Druydes, or the
Gymnosophistae prayed in Latin? Such regard he has to his Conclusions.

M. Hardinge. The.23. Division. England.

S. Gregory him self is a witness of right good authority unto us, that
this land of England, which he calls Britain, in his time, that is almost
a thousand years paste, had the common prayers, and service in an unknown
tongue, without doubt in Latin, much in like sort, as we have of old time
had, Expositionis in Job. li. 27. Ca. 6.
til now. His words be these. Ecce omnipotens Dominus pene cunctarum gentium
corda penetrauit: ecce in vna fide Orientis limitem Occidentisque coniunxit.
Ecce lingua Britanniae, quae nihil aliud nouerat, quam barbarum frendere, ^am
dudum in diuinis laudibus Hebraeum coepit Halleluia resonare. Behold, our
Lord Almighty has now perced the hearts almost of al Nations. Behold, he
has joined the borders of the East, and the Weast in one F^ithe together.
Behold the tongue of Britain, that could nothing else but gnass he
barbarously, has begone now of late in divine Service to sound the Hebrewe
Halleluia.

The B. of Sarisburie.
S. Gregory in that place upon Job speaks not one word, neither of the
Latin, nor of the English Service. Only he shows the mighty power of God,
that had converted all the world to the obedience of his Gospel. These be his
words, Gregori. in Job. li. 27. Ca. 6.
Omnipotens Dominus coruscantibus nubibus Cardines Maris operuit: quia
emicantibus praedicatorum miraculis, ad fidem etiam terminos mundi perduxit.
Ecce enim pen^ cunctarum ^am gentium corda penetrauit: Ecce, in vna fide
Orientis limitem Occidentisque coniunxit. The almighty Lord with his shininge
Clouds has covered the Corners of the Sea: for he has brought the ends of
the world unto the Faith, at the sight of the glorious Miracles of the
Preachers. For behold, he has welneere perced through the hearts of al
Nations: and has ioygned together the borders of the East, and the Weast in
one Faith. Now, says M. Hardinge, Gregory is a witness of right good
authority, that this Realm of England had the Service in an unknown tongue.
Uerily Gregory's authority in this case were right good, if he would say the
word. But, says M. Hardinge, S. Gregory reports, that the English
people in the praisinge of God, pronounced the Hebrewe Halleluia: Ergo, he is
witness to the Latin Service. This argument may be perfited, and made thus:
The English people in their prayers said, Halleluia:

Hallelu^a is an Hebrewe word: Ergo, The English people had the Latin
Service.

This is an other Syllogismus of M. Hardinges. God wot he might have made it
better. Of S. Gregory's words he might rather have concluded thus: The people
of England in their prayers pronounced the Hebrewe Halleluia: Ergo, they had
the Hebrewe Service:

Which doubtelesse in the English Churches had been very strange: and yet as
much reason in that, as in the Latin. As for these Hebrewe words,
Halleluia, Amen, Sabbath, and other like, they may as well be used in the
English Service, as in the Latin: and at this day are used, and continued
still in the reformed Churches in Germany: and therefore can importe no more
the one, then the other.

M. Hardinge. The.24. Division.
Bid in the end of his second book shows, He lived in the year of our
Lord. 640.
that one James a Deacon of the Church of York, a very conninge man in song,
soon after the faith had been spread abroad here, as the number of beleuers
grew, began to be a Master, or teacher of singinge in the Church, after
the manner of the Romans. Anno Domini. 668.
The like he writes of one Eddi, surnamed Stephanus, that taught the people of
Northumberlande to singe the Service after the Roman manner: and of Putta, a
holy man, Bishop of Rochester, Anno. 668.
commendinge him much for his great skill of singinge in the Church, after
the use and manner of the Romans, which he had learned of the Disciples of S.
Gregory.

These be testimonies plain, Marueilo^s proufes.
and evident enough, that at the beginning the Churches of England had their
divine service in Latin, and not in English. One place more I will recite out
of Bid, most manifest of al other for proof hereof. In the time of Agatho the
Pope there was a reverend man called John Archicantor, Ann^. 680.
that is, chief Chaunter, or singer, S. Peter's Church at Rome, and Abbot of
the Monastery of S. Martin there. Benedicte an Abbot of Britain, having
builded a Monastery at the mouth of the River Murus, (Bid so calls it)
sued to the Pope for confirmations, liberties, fraunchisies, privileges etc. as
in such case has been accustomed. Among other things, he obtained this
cunninge Chaunter John, to come with him into Britain, to teach song.

Because Bedes Ecclesiastical story is not very common, I have thought good,
here to recite his own words, thus Engli^hed. This Abbot Benedicte took
with him the foresaid John, to bring him into Britain, that he should teach
in his Monastery the course of Service for the whole year, so as it was done
at S. Peter's in Rome. John did as he had commandment from the Pope, both in
teachinge the singinge men of the said Monastery, the order, and rite of
singinge, and readinge with utterance of their voice, and also of writing and
prickinge those things, that the compass of the whole year required in the
celebration and keepinge of the holy days. Which be kept in the same
Monastery, til this day, and be copied out of many round about on every
coaste. Neither did that John teach the Brethren of that Monastery only, but
also many other made all the means they could, to get him to other places,
where they might have him to teach. This far Bid. I trow, no man will
think, that this Roman taught, and wrote the order and manner of singinge,
and pronouncinge the Service of the Churches of this land, in the English
tongue. If it had been deemed of the learned, and godly governors of Christen
people then, a necessary point to salvation, to have had the Service in the
English^ no man had been so apt and fit to have translated it, as he, who
in those days had by special grace of God, a singular gift to make songs,
and sonets in English Meter, to serve religion, and devotion. His name was
Cednom, Anno. Domini. 680.
of whom Bid writes marueilouse things. Cednom.
How he made diverse songs conteininge matter of the holy Scripture, with
such exceedinge sweetness, and with such a grace, as many feelinge their
hearts compuncte, and prickte, with hearing and readinge of them, withdrewe
themselves from the love of the world, and were enkendled with the desire of
the heavenly life. Many (says Bid) of the English Nation, attempted after
him to make religious, and godly Poetries: but none could do comparably to
him. Galat. 1.
For he was not (says he, alludinge to S. Paul's words) taught of men,
neither by man, that Art of making godly songs: but received from God that
gift freely. And therefore he could make no wanton, triflinge, or vain
ditties, but only such as perteined to godly Religion, and might seem to
proceed of a head guided by the holy Ghost. Lib. 4. Cap. 24. This divine Poet
Cednom, though he made many and sundry holy works, having their whole
argument out of holy Scripture, The. (...). untruth. His examples reach
nothing so ^arre.
as Bede reports: yet never made he any piece of the Service to be used in
the Church. Thus the faith has continued in this land among^ the English
people from the.14. year of the reign of Mauritius The Emperor, almost
these.1000. years, and until the late King Edwardes time, the English Service
was never heard of, at least way never in the Church of England by public
authority received, and used.

The B. of Sarisburie.
I little thought, M. Harding would so much have bewraied his want, to prove
his matter by Pipers, and Poets: and specially being al without the compass
of.600. years. Beda li. 2. ca. 14.
For it is plain by Beda, yt this James, the Deacon, lived under King Edwine,
about the year of our Lord. Beda li. 4. ca. 21.
640. Putta, and Edda, in the year.668. John the Archechau^ter, Beda li. 4.
Ca. 1.
and Cednom, or Cedman, for so his name is readde in Beda written in
parchement, Distinct. 19.
in the time of Pope Agatho, in the year.680. in whose name this Decree is
written: Sic Omnes.
Sic omnes sanctiones Apostolicae Sedis accipiendae sunt, tanquam ipsius diuina
voce Petri firmatae. All the Constitutions of the Apostolic see, must be
received so, as if they were confirmed by the very heavenly voice of S. Peter.
Unto such a tyranny the Church of Rome at that time was grown. And the
Gloss upon the same says, Papa sanctitatem suam recipit a Cathedra. The Pope
receives his holiness of his Chair. Therefore, herein M. Hardinge has
somewhat misrekened himself. Although all the rest were certain, yet these
witnesses come to late, to make good proof.

Yet, says M. Hardinge, these testimonies be plain, and evident yenough,
that at the beginning, the Churches of England had their Divine Service in
Latin, and not in English. These be very dome testimonies. For neither James
the Deacon, nor John ye Archechaunter, nor Cednom, nor Putta, nor Beda him
self ever said so. Therefore this matter is proved by M. Hardinges gheasse,
and not by the words of the witnesses.

The force of his reason seems to weigh thus, These Musicians taught the
Clerks of England, to singe their Service after the Roman manner: Ergo,
they had the Latin Service.

The substance of this argument may the better appear by some other like:
Triptolemus taught al nations, to plowe their ground after the manner of the
Atheniens: Ergo, he taught al nations in the Athenien tongue.

Or, Abraham taught the Egyptians Arithmetique, and Astronomy: Ergo, Abraham
taught the Egyptians in the Chaldee tongue.

For doothe M. Hardinge believe, it is not possible to learn the Roman
Music, without the Roman speech: or that the Note cannot be taught without
the Dittie? Uerily, I reckon him no good Musician, that will say so. By the like
reason he might say, Damasus ad Hieronymum.
Damasus besought S. Hierome to send to him, Graecorum psallentia^, the
Music of the Greek Church, to the intent to practice the same in the Church
of Rome, Ergo, Dam^sus used the Greek Service in the Church of Rome.

But Beda himself is best able to expound his own meaning. Having
occasion to entreat of Adrianus, and Theodorus, that came into England the
year of our Lord.668. he writes thus: Sonos cantandi in Ecclesia, quos
eatenus in Cantio ^antum nouerant, ab hoc tempore per omnes Anglorum Ecclesias
discere coeperunt. From that time, they began to learn throughout all the
Churches of England, the soundes of singinge, or the notes of Music, which
before that time were known only in Kente. Beda says, they learned the
Soundes, or Notes, or Harmony, and makes no mention of the Tongue, or Dittie.
But let M. Hardinges Conclusions stand for good. Ergo, they had the Latin
Service.

And does he not see, that he concludes fully with me, and directly against
him self? Certainly if the Roman Music importe the Latin Service, then
may I well reason thus: No Latin Service in England within six hundred years.
The Churches of England had not the Roman Music, before James the Deacon
of York, which lived in the year of our Lord.640. Ergo, before that time,
the Churches of England had not the Latin Service: Which thing overthrows
all that M. Hardinge has hitherto spoken, and stands very well with my
assertion.

Again, where he says, that John the Archechaunter, that lived in the year
of our Lord 680. taught the Clerks of England to pronounce the Latin
tongue, it may thereof well be geathered, that before that time, they could not
pronounce the Latin Tongue: and so before that time had not the Latin Service.

Now, for so much as, M. Harding says, By mean of the arriual, and conquest
of the English men, who then were Infidels, the Faith was utterly bannished
out of this Realm, and remained only in a few Britains: and Augustine at
his coming restoared the same again: and therefore is called of some the
English men's Apostle, I think it necessary therefore, shortly to touch
somewhat, of the state of the Church within this Land, both before the
entry of our English Nation, and also in the first time of our being here.
Ghildas ^hildas.
says, that Joseph of Arimathea, that took down Christ from the Cross,
being sent hither by Philip the Apostle out of France, Anno Domi. 38.
Niceph. li. 2. c. 4. Anno. 38.
began first to preach the Gospel in this Realm in the time of Tiberius
the emperor. Nicephorus says, yt Simon Zelotes about the same time, came into
this Ilelande, and did the like. Theodoretus says, that S. Paul immediately
after his first delivery in Rome, Theodor. de curandis Graecoru^ affect. li.
9.
under the emperor Nero, preached the Gospel in this Ilelande, and in other
Countries of the Weast. Tertullian says, The Ilelande of Britain was subject
unto Christ in his time. And Origin witnesses ye like of the same Ilelande in
his time: Tertull. aduersus Iud^^os. Anno. 230.
At which time Lucius the King of this Realm was Baptized, Origin in Ezechiel
hom. 4. Anno. 240.
and received the Gospel, and sent to Rome to Eleutherius the Bishop there for
his advise, touching the orderinge of his Church and Realm. Helena being an
English woman, wife unto Constantius the Emperor, and mother unto
Constantinus, is notably praised for her Faith, Ambrosius de obitu Theodosij.
Eusebi. De vita Constan. li. 3.
and Religion, by S. Ambrose, by Eusebius, by Sozomenus and others.

Chrysostom says, that in his time, the Ilelande of Britain had received
the power of the Gospel.

Now let us consider, in what state this Realm stood touching Religion, at
the coming of Augustine, Sozom. li. 2. ca. 1.
at which time M. Hardinge surmiseth the whole Faith was utterly decayed.
Chrysostom. aduersus Gentiles, to. 5. Beda li. 2. Ca. 2.
First Beda says, there were among the Britains, seven Bishops, and one
Archbishop, and one and twenty hundred Monks about Bancor: and as he
further avouches, Plures viri doctissimi, many more great learned men, that
utterly refused to receive this Augustine, with his new Religion.

As touching the English Nation, it appears by Beda, that the Queen her
self was Christened, and had S. Martines Church appointed her, freely to pray
in with her company. Whereof it may be thought, the King was no great enemy
unto the Faith, and therefore the like also may well be thought of a great
number of the people.

Thus much shortly of the first plantinge of the Religion of Christ within
this Ilelande, and of the continuance of the same, from the time of Joseph of
Arimathea, until the coming in of Augustine. Now, touching the Common

Suscepisti in Regno Britanniae miseratione diuina Legem, and fidem Christi.
Habetis penes vos in Regno vtranque paginam: Ex illis Dei gratia per Concilium
Regni vestri sum legem, and per illam Dei patientia vestrum rege Britanniae
Regnum. Vicarius vero Dei estis in Regno illo. Ye have received in the
kingedome of Britain by Gods mercy, both the Law, and Faith of Christ. Ye
have both the New Testamente, and the Old. Out of the same through Gods
Grace by the advice of your Realm take a Law, and by the same through Gods
sufferance rule you your Kingedome of Britain. For in that Kingedome you are
Gods Vicare. He wills him to order matters according to the Law of God.
Now the Law of God, wills the Service so to be said, as the people may
understand it, and give consent unto it, by saieing Amen: But the people of
this Realm could not have said, Amen, unto the Latin Service: Therefore noman
can well think, that King Lucius appointed the Common Service

Cregor. in Job. li. 274. Ca. 6. Eccelingua ^ritanniae, quae nil aliud nouerat,
quam barbarum frendere.
that the tongue of this Nation was never otherwise taught, but only to roar
out their barbarous language: how then can he so suddenly sa^e, that from
the time of Joseph of Arimathea, they had evermore the Service in the Learned
Latin tongue?

wills him of the sundry orders that he had seen in d^uers Countries, to
take such as he could judge might do most good: But M. Hardinge grants,
that at the first plantinge of the Faith, it is necessary, the Common prayers
be Ministered in the Known Tongue: Therefore it must needs be thought, that
Augustine coming hither, as it is supposed, to plant the Faith, judged that
thing best, that M. Harding says was necessary, and so ministered the Common
prayers, in the Known tongue.



How be it, A^no. 596.
it seems by M. Hardinges Conclusion, that he makes his account only from
the fouretienthe year of themproure Mauritius, which was in the year of our
Lord five hundred, four scoare, and sixtene: sithence which time, he says,
until the time of the King Edward the Sixthe, there was never in this Realm
other then the La^ine Service. I may not greatly blame this division. For of
the six hundred years after Christ, whereupon I join with him in issue,
liberally, and of his own accord, he gives me back five hundred, four
scoare, and sixtene, and of so great a number, reserueth unto him self but
only four poor years, and yet is not very certain of the same. But if
Marianus Scotus Marian. Scotus.
account be true, that Augustine came into this Realm, not the fourtienth
year of the Emproure Mauritius, but four years after, Anno. Do. 600.
which was just the six hundredth year after Christ, then he reserueth not
one year at al unto him self, but yields me back al together.

Surely Abbas Urspergensis writes thus: Abbas Vrspergen. in vita Mauritij.
Gregorius in the year of our Lord sixe-hundred and three, having sent in
Augustine, and Mellitus, converted England to the Faith. All this hitherto
makes with me: unless M. Hardinge will say, The people of this Country had
Christian Service, Anno. 603.
before they were Christened.

M. Hardinge. The.25. Division.
Now, touching the Scripture, by M. Iuel, and by all them of that side
alleged, for the Service to be had in the Vulgar tongue, in the.14. Chapter of
the first Epistle to the Corinthians, S. Paul treats of the use of tongues,
so as it was in the Primitive Church a special gift. As the faithful folk
came together to pray, and to hear Gods Word, some one man suddenly
stood up, and spoke in the Congregation, with tongues of many Nations, Spiritu
insusurrante, as Chrysostom says, that is by inspiration, or promtinge of
the Spirit, so, as neither others, that were present, neither him self, after
the opinion of Chrysostom, understood, what he said. That gift the Apostle
did not forbid. For that every gift of God is good, and nothing by him done
in vain: but dehorted the Corinthians from the vain, and ambitiouse use of
it: and therefore did much extenuate the same, and preferred propheciynge,
that is, the gift to interpret and expound Scriptures, far before it. It
was not in the Church, but in the Apostles time, or a very short while after
them, and that altogether by miracle, the holy ghost being the worker of it.

As concerning the order of the Common prayers, and Public Service, The.81.
untruth. For sundry Doctors both old and nevve allege these words to
this self same purpose.
in such sort as we have now, and that age had not: S. Paul The place of S.
Paul to the Corinthians makes not for the service in the English tongue.
mentions nothing, neither speaks one word in that whole Chapter, but of
the use of the miraculouse gift, as is said before. And therefore his
sayings out of that Chapter, be not fittely alleged of M. Iuel, and the rest
of our adversaries, against the manner of prayers, and Service of the Church,
now received and of long time used, which in the VVeaste is uttered in the
Latin tongue, not by way of miracle, or peculiar gift, but according to the
institution, and ordinance of the Church. Profecto enim coelum Ecclesia tum
fuit. In very deed says Chrysostom, In 1. Cor. 14.
the Church then was a Heaven, Hom. 37.
when as the holy ghost administered al things, moderated all the heads of the
Church, caught each one with his inspiration. As for now, we keep but the
steps only of those things. We speak two or three of us, and that a
sunder, and one holdinge his peace, an other begins. But these be but signs
only, and memorials of things. And so when we have begone (he means D^^s
vobiscu^) and cu^ spiritu tuo, the people answers: meaning to signify
thereby, that so in old time they spoke, not of their own wisdom, but of
the instincte of the spirit of God. This much Chrysostom of the heavenly
manner of the Primitive Church, in the Apostles time. Now, if in these days
the manner were like, if it pleased the Holy Ghost to power upon us the like
abundance of grace, as to do al things for us, to rule the heads of al
faithful people, to carry each one of us with his divine inspiration, and when
we came to Church together for comfort, and edifieing, to give into our
hearts, and put into our mouths by daily miracle, what we should pray, and
what we should preach, and how we should handle the Scriptures: in this case no
Catholic Christian man would allow the unfruitful speaking with strange and
unknown tongues without interpretation, to the let, and hinderance of Gods
Word to be declared, and to the keeping of the people only in gasinge, and
wondering, from saieing, Amen, and geuinge their assent to the Godly Blessinge,
and thanks geuinge. But the order of the Church now is far otherwise. We
have not those miraculouse gifts, and right well may we do without them. For
the speakinge with tongues, was insteede of a sign, or wonder, not to them
that believed, but to the unbelievers. And signs be for the unfaithful: the
faithful have no need of them. In Churches, I mean where ancient order is
kept, whiles the Service is song, or said, the ministers do not speak with
tongues, or with a tongue, in such sort as S. Paul understood: but they do
read, and rehearse things, set forth and appoincted to them. S. Paul
rebukes them, who speakinge with tongues, let the Preachers, so as the
people present might not be edified. The Latin Service is not so done in the
Church, as the exposition of the Scriptures be thereby excluded. In the
Apostles time they came to Church, to the intent they might profitably exercise
the gifts, God gave them, and by the same, specially by the gift of
prophecieinge, edify one an other, and teach one an other. Now a days, they
come not together to Church, one to teach an other, and to expound the
Scriptures in common: but to pray, and to hear the opening of Gods Word,
not one of an other without order, but of some one, to wit, the Bishop,
Priest, Curate, or other spiritual governor, and teacher.

The B. of Sarisburie.
We may safely grant some part of M. Hardinge long talk, without prejudice
of our cause. In deed S. Paul in the place alleged, spoke of the gift of
tongues, as it was a special miracle enduringe only for a while, not gotten by
labor, or study, but freely inspired by the spirit of God.

But the Latin tongue (says M. Hardinge) as it is now commonly used in the
Roman Service, is not given by any such promptinge of the Holy Ghost, nor
is now any Miracle at al. Therefore the place of S. Paul cannot be applied
unto it. We grant well, it is no miracle, as it is now used, nor any way
sauoureth of the Spirit of God. But this is a great miracle, to see either any
man so wicked, that so will use it: or so impudent, that so will defend it: or
so patient, that so will suffer it. This verily is a merueilous miracle.

M. Hardinge seems hereof to reason of this sort. S. Paul forbade the
Corinthians to use the special miracle, and gift of God without profitinge the
Congregation. Ergo, Now having the Latin tongue without miracle, we may
minister the ^^ruice therein, although the Congregation have no Profit by it.
This reason is strange, and holds as simply as the reaste. Yet has he given
special advertisement in the Margin, that this place of S. Paul, serves
nothing to our purpose. If this note be so certain, and so authentical, as he
would seem to make it, then were the Doctors both new and old, that took
it otherwise, not well advised. For Lyra writing upon the same, says thus:
Lyra in 1. Cor. 14.
Si populus intelligat orationem Sacerdotis, melius reducitur in Deum, and
deuotius respondet, Amen. Ideo dicit Paulus, Si tu Sacerdos benedixeris
Spiritu, and populus non intelligat, quid proficit populus simplex, and non
intelligens? Quapropter in Primitiua Ecclesia benedictiones, and coetera omnia
fiebant in vulgari. If the people understand the prayer of the Priest, they
are the better brought unto God, and with greater devotion they answer, Amen.
Therefore S. Paul says, If thou being a Priest Bliss with thy Spirit, and
the people understand thee not, what profit then has the people being simple,
and not understanding thee? Therefore in the Primitive Church, both the
Blissinges, and al other things were done in the vulgar tongue. The vulgar
tongue, says Lyra, was used in the primitive Church upon occasion of these
words of S. Paul. Council. Aquisgran. Ca. 132.
In ye Council of A^on, it is written thus: Psallentium in Ecclesia Domino men's
concordare debet cum voce, vt impleatur illud Apostoli, Psallam spiritu,
psalla^ and mente. The voice and mind of them that singe unto the Lord in the
Church, must agree together. The reason thereof is taken out of this place
of S. Paul: I will singe with my sprite, I will singe with my mind. Chrysostom.
in. 1. Cor. hom. 35.
Chrysostom says, S. Paul drives the whole tenoure of this matter, unto the
profit of the hearers. These be his words: Est autem quod Paulus dicit
huiusmodi: Nisi dixero, quod percipi facile, clareque a vobis possit, sed
linguarum munere praedirum me esse tantum ostendam, nullum ex his, quae non
intelligetis, fructum facientes, abibitis. Nam quae vtilitas esse possit ex
voce non intellecta? S. Paul's saying stands thus: Unless I utter my
words so, as they may clearly, and plainly be perceived of you, but only
show me self to have the gift of tongues, ye shall have no fruit of those
things, that ye know not. For what profit can ye geate of a voice, that ye
cannot understand? And again the same Chrysostom says farther: Sic and
vos, nisi significantem vocem dederitis, verba, quod dicitur, vento, hoc est,
nemini facietis. Even so you, unless you give a sound that may be known, as
the Proverb is, ye shall throw forth your words into the wind, that is to
say, ye shall speak to noman.

So likewise the Emperor Justinian, where he commands al Bishops, and
Priests, to minister the Sacraments, and other Prayers, alowde, and with open
voice, he auoutcheth the same by this place of S. Paul. For thus he says,
Sic enim Diuinus Apostolus docet, De Ecclesiasticis diuersis capitul.
dicens: Si solum spiritu benedixeris, qui impl^t locum idiotae, quomodo dicet,
Amen, super tuam benedictionem? No^ enim intelligit, quid dicas. So the holy
Apostle says: If thou only bliss, or pray with thy Sprite, how shall he
that supplieth the room of the unlearned, say, Amen, unto thy blissinge? for
he knows not, what thou say. It appears by these authorities, not
withstandinge M. Hardinges note, that S. Paul makes somewhat for our purpose.

How be it we build not our proufes upon the Miracle, and Gift of tongues,
that lasted but for a while: but upon these express, and plain words of S.
Paul, which noman can deny: 1. Corinthians. 14.
He that speaks with tongue, speaks not unto men, but unto God: for no
man hears him. If the Trumpet give an uncertain voice, who shall prepare him
self unto the war? Even so you, unless ye utter such words, as have
signification, how shall it be known, what ye say? For ye shall speak into
the wind. I will pray with my sprite, I will pray with my mind: I will singe
with my sprite, I will singe with my mind. If thou bliss with thy sprite, how
shall the ignorant say, Amen, unto thy thanks geuinge? For he knows not,
what thou say. In the Chruche I had lever to speak five words with my
mind, so that I may instruct others, then ten thousand words with my
tongue. Let al things be done to the profit of the people. These words be
evident: the exposition of Lyra, of the Council of Acon, of Chrysostom, and
Justinian is plain. And yet must we upon M. Hardinges warrant needs believe,
that all this makes nothing for the English Service to be had in the Church
of England.

M. Hardinge. The.26. Division.
And, for as much as all the people cannot hear the priests prayers at the
Aultare (which has from the Apostles time hitherto ever been a place to
celebrate the holy oblation at) tourninge him self for the most part to the
East, The.82. untruth. The Aultars, or Communion Tables stood in the midde^
of the Church, as shall appear.
according to the Apostolic tradition, in what tongue so ever they be vttred,
for distance of the place they remain in: it is no inconvenience, such
admitted into the quiere, as have better understanding of that is said, or
song: that the rest remain in seemly wise in the neither part of the
Church, and there make their humble prayers to God, by them selves in silence,
in that language they best understand, conforminge them selves to the
Priests blessinge, and thanks geuinge through faith, and obedience with
their brethren in the quiere, Communion Tables, or Aultars.
and geuinge assent to the same, understanding some good part of that is
done, as declared by often preachinge, and by holy outward Ceremonies, The
people taught by Ceremonies.
perceiuable to the senses of the simplest.

The B. of Sarisburie.
There have been Aultares (says M. Hardinge) even from the Apostles time, and
that even as it is used now, far of from the Body of the Church. Neither
could the people beneathe hear the Priest standinge above at the Altar, or
understand, what he meante: but only were instructed by holy reverend
Ceremonies, and gave consent unto al, that was said by the Priest, and yet
knew not, what he said.

This man could never utter so many untruths together without some special
Privilege. For first, where he says, The Apostles in their time erected
Aultares. It is well known, that there was no Christian Church yet builte in
the Apostles time. For, the Faithful for fear of the Tyrannes were feign to
meet together in Private Houses, in Uacant places, in Woods, and Forestes,
and in Caves under the ground. And may we think, that Aultars were builte
before the Church? Uerily Origin, Origenes Contra Celsum. li. 4.
that lived two hundred years after Christ, has these words against
Celsus, Obijcit nobis, quod non habeamus Imagines, aut Aras, aut Templa. Celsus
charge our Religion with this, that we have neither Images, nor Aultars, nor
Churches.

Likewise says Arnobius, Arnobius lib. 2.
that lived somewhat after Origin, writing against the Heathens. Accusatis nos,
quod nec templa habeamus, nec imagines, nec aras. ye accuse us, for that we
have neither Churches, nor Images, nor Aultars.

And Uolaterranus, Volaterranus.
and Uernerius testify, Vernerius.
that Sixtus Bishop of Rome, was the first, that caused Aultars to be erected.
Therefore, M. Hardinge was not well advised, so confidently to say, That Aultars
have ever been, even sithence the Apostles time.

Neither afterward, when Aultars were first used, and so named, were they
straight way builte of stoane, as Durandus and such others say, Durandus. li. 4.
they must needs be, and that, Quia petra erat Christus, Because Christ was
the stoane. For Gerson says, Gerson contra Florctum li. 4.
that Syluester Bishop of Rome first caused stoane Aultars to be made, and
willed that no man should Consecrate at a wooden Altar, but him self only,
and his Successors there. And notwithstanding both for continuance, and
staidinesse, Gregorius Nyssen. De Sancto Baptismate.
such Aultars were used in some places, as it appears by Gregorius Nyssenus
S. Basiles brother, yet it is plain by S. Augustine, August. ad Bonifacium
Epistola. 50.
that in his time in Aphrica they were made of Timber. For he says, That the
Donatistes in their rage wounded the Priest, and brake a sundre the Aultare
bourdes: And again he says, That the Deacons dewtie was to carry, or remove
the Altar: Which thing cannot be expounded of a heap of stoanes, but only
of the Communion Table. And therefore S. Chrysostom commonly calls it (...),
The holy bourde, And S. Augustine, August. in q. veteris and noui Testam. q.
101.
Mensa Domini, The Lords Table: As other Fathers also do in infinite places.

And notwithstanding it were A Table, yet was it also called An Altar: Not for
that it was so in deed, but only by allusion unto the Aultars of the old
law. And so Ireneus Irenaeus li. 4. ca. 34.
calls Christ our Altar: And Origin Origin in Matthae. tracta. 25.
calls Our heart, our Altar: Not that either Christ, or our hearts be
Aultars in deed: but only by a Metaphore, or a manner of speech. Such were
the Aultars, that were used by the old Fathers, immediately after the Apostles
time.

Now, whether it may seem likely, that the same Aultars stood so far of,
from the hearing of the people, as M. Hardinge so constantly affirms: I
refer me self to these authorities, that here follow.

Eusebius thus describes the form, Eusebius li. 10. ca. 4. Ex oratione
Panegyrica in Encaeniis.
and furniture of the Church in his time: Absoluto templo, ac sedibus
excelsissimis ad honorem praesidentium, and subsellijs ordine collocatis,
ornato, and post omnia Sancto Sanctorum, videlicet Altari, in medio constituto
etc. The Church being ended, and comely furnished with high Thrones, for the
honor of the rulers, and with stalles beneathe set in order, and last of al,
the Holy of Holies, I mean, The Altar, being placed in the midst. Eusebius
says not, the Altar was set at the end of the Q^ter, But in the midst of
the Church among the people.

S. Augustine Augustinus de verbis Domini secu^dum Johan.
likewise says thus, Christus quotidie pascit: Mensa ipsius est illa in medio
constituta. Quid causae est, o audientes, vt mensam videatis, and ad epulas non
accedatis? Christ feeds us daily: and this is his table here set in the
midst. O my hearers, what is the matter, that ye see the table, and yet come
not to the meat? Sermon. 42.
In the Council Council. Constantinopol. 5. Acti. 1.
of Constantinople it is written thus: Tempore Diptychoru^, cucurrit omnis
multitudo cum magno sile^tio circumcirca Altar, and audiebant. When the
Lesson, or the Chapter was a readinge, the people with silence drew together,
round about the Altar, and gave ear. And to leave others, Durandus
examining the cause, why the Priest turns him self about at the Altar,
yeldeth this reason for the same: In medio Ecclesiae aperui os meum. Durandus
li. 5. Platyna.
In the midst of the Church I opened my mouth. And Platyna notes, that
Bonifacius Bishop of Rome, was the first, that in the time of the Ministration
divided the Priest from the people.

To leave farther allegations, we see by these few, that the Quier was then in
ye Body of ye Church, divided with Rayles from the rest, whereof it was
called Cancelli, a Chauncel, and commonly of the Greeks Presbyterium, for that
it was a place specially appointed unto the Priests, and Ministers, and shut
up from al others, Theodore^. li. 5. Ca. 18.
for disturbinge the holy Ministry, as it appears notably by the story of
S. Ambrose, that willed the Emperor Theodosius him self to depart forth,
and by Nazianzenus in the life of S. Basile, Nazianzen. in vita Basilij.
and by a Decree under the name of Clemens, and by the Council of Laodicea
concerning the same: De Con. Did. 2.
and, as it may be geathered by S. Chrysostom, Sacerdotum.
at certain times of the Service was drawn with Courtaines. Council. Laodicen.
ca. 19.


Even at this day in ye great Churches at Millaine, Naples, Lions, Men's, and
Rome, and in the Church of S. Laurence in Florence the Priest at his Service
stands toward the Weast, and so has his face still upon the people. And
therefore Durandus says, In such places the Priest needs not to turn
himself round, when he says Dominus vobiscum, And saluteth the people.

And where as M. Hardinge imagines, that the people for distance of place,
could not hear what the Priest said, a man that has considered the Old
Fathers with any diligence, may soon see, he is far deceived. Chrysos^om. in
Epist. ad Ephesios hom. 3.
For Chrysostom says, The Deacon at the holy Mysteries stood up, and thus
spoke unto the people, Orem us pariter omnes: Let us pray al together. And
again he says, The Priest and the people at the Ministration talk together:
Chrysostom. in. 2. ad. Corin. hom. 18
The Priest says, The Lord be with you: The people answeareth, And with thy
sprite. Justinian the Emperor commanded, that the priest should so speak
alowde at the holy Ministration, As the people might hear him. Clemens
Alexandrinus says, Cleme^s stromali. 7.
Est ergo, quod est hic apud nos Altar, terrestris congregatio eorum, qui sunt
dedicati orationibus: qui veluti vnam vocem habent Communem, and vnam mentem.
The Aultare, that we have, is an earthly Congregation of men given to prayers,
which have, as it were, both voice and mind common together. And to leave
rehearsal of others, ^^ssarion de Sacramento ^ucharistiae.
Bessarion says, Sacerdote verba illa pronunciante, assistens populus in
vtraque part respondet, Amen. The Priest speakinge these words, the people
standinge by at each part of the Sacrament, or on every side, says, Amen.

Now judge thou good Reader, what truth may seem to be, in that M. Hardinge
adds hereto, That the people remaining in seemly wise in the nether part
of the Church, was instructed by certain Ceremonies, and tokens, showed in
the Quier, and gave assent, and said, Amen, unto the Priest praieing at the
Altar, although they understood no part of his prayer. Certainly, S. Paul
says, 1. Cor. 14.
Quomodo dicet, Amen, ad tuam gratiarum actionem? Quandoquidem nescit quid
dicas: How shall he say, Amen, and give assent unto thy thanks geuinge? For he
knows not what thou say. Augustine. de Catechizandis rudibus. Ca. 9.
So says S. Augustine, Vt populus ad id, quod plane intelligit, dicat, Amen:
That the people, unto that they plainly understand, may say, Amen. Likewise
S. Ambrose, Ambrosi. in. 1. Cor. Ca. 14.
Imperitus audiens, quod non intelligit, nescit finem orationis, and non
respondet, Amen: id est, ve^um, vt confirmetur benedictio. Per hos enim
impletur confirmatio precis, qui respondent. Amen: vt omnia dicta very
testimonio in audientium mentibus confirmentur. The unlearned, hearing that he
understands not, knows not the end of the prayer, neither says, Amen:
that is to say, It is true: That the Priests ^lissinge may be confirmed. For
by them that answer Amen, the Prayer is confirmed: whereby is meante, that
what so ever is spoken by the testimony of the truth, be made good in the
minds of the hearers. Se^nge therefore, that neither Aultars were erected in
the Apostles time: nor the Communion Table, that then was used, stood so far
of from the body of the Church: nor the people gave assent to that, they
understood not: so many untruths being found in M. Hardinges premises, we
may well, and safely stand in doubt of his Conclusion.

M. Hardinge. The.27. Division.
Where as you M. Iuel, allege S. Paul for your purpose, and make him to say
thus, otherwise then he wrote, 1. Cor. 14.
If thou make thy prayer in the congregation with thy sprite, or noise of
strange words, how shall the unlearned man thereunto say Amen? For he knows
not what thou say: you bo^bas^e this text with your own counter feit
stuffinge. The translation auctorised by king Edward and his Counsel, is
tru^r, and follows the Greek nearer, which has thus. When thou blessist
with the spirit, how shall he that occupies the room of the unlearned, say
Amen, at thy giving of thanks, saying he understands not, what thou say?
Here the Apostle S. Paul speaks of Blessinge, or thanks geuinge with the
spirit, which spirit, what it is, it is not easy to declare, after the
judgment of your own Patriake John Calvin. S. Ambrose takes it for the
spirit we have received in Baptism, that does incline, and move us to prayer.
S. Thomas, for the holy ghost given to us, for reason, and for the power
imaginatiue. Erasmus, for the voice it self. Isidorus Clarius, for the power
of pronouncing or utterance, some, for the breathe that passes the throat,
some for the intention, S. Augustine very subtily, Pro apprehensione quae
ideas concipit, and signa rerum. Calvin in his Institutions, De oratione Cap.
15. for the sound of the mouth, that is caused of the breathe of a man's
throat, and reboundinge of the aier. Chrysostom, for the spiritual gift, or
the gift of the holy ghost to speak with tongues. Which Calvin him self,
sittinge in judgment as it were, upon this doubtful matter, allows best,
and condemns the mind of al others, and also his own, though vnvvares, as
it seems: and so he vvoulde condemn your noise of strange words likewise,
if he heard it. This text being so doubtful of it self in sense, so put out
of tune by your noise of strange words, wherewith you descant upon the
word, Spirit, so violently applied by your new fangled exposition, makes
little to the condemnation of the Latin Service in the Latin Church: specially
seeing that S. Paul means by that miraculous speakinge with tongues, used,
or rather abused among the Corinthians, a far different manner of speakinge
from that speaking, whereby the Priest utters the Common Service.

The Priest ( I grant) saieinge his Service to his parish, speaks with a
tongue, but such manner of speakinge is not that, which S. Paul meante. For
the priest understands it for the better part, if he be learned, and 83
The.83. untruth, For the simple people understands not one word, or
syllable of the Latin Tongue.
the people be not utterly ignorant, because of often preaching, long custom,
solemn feasts and sundry Ceremonies. And therefore your argument gathered out
of that text, concludes nothing against having the Service in the learned
Latin tongue, not perfitely understood of the unlearned people. Vide
Augustinu^ li. 12* de Genesi ad literam C. 7. 8. and. 9. to. 3.
Verily, if you admit the exact judgment of S. Augustine concerning this
place of S. Paul, then must you seek for other Scriptures, and proufes, of
your English Service. For as he discusseth this point learnedly, by the
tongue, S. Paul means not the Latin, Greek, or Hebrew, among the
unlearned people, or any other alien, or strange tongue: but only, and that
by way of Metaphore, any manner of utterance whereby the signs of things are
pronounced, before they be understood. And by the Sprite, he understands
not a noyce of strange words, after your strange interpretation, but as it is
here in a certain proper and peculiar manner taken, a power of the soul
inferior to the mind, which conceiueth the similitudes of things, and
understands them not. And things so uttered, be uttered with the tongue, and
spirit, whether it be in English, or Latin, or any other language.

And sir, although the people understand not in most exact wise, what the
Priest says in the Latin Service, yet have they commodity, and profit
thereby, so far as it pleases God to accept the common Prayer of the
Church, pronounced by the Priest for them.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Here M. Hardinge has found a sport, to pass the time withal. He makes M.
Calvin a Patriarch, and sets him on high in judgment, to condemn all the
world. S. Paul's meaning is bombasted, and brought out of tune, with a noice
of strange words. And in this point he doubleth, and shows copy, and
plaieth ^ounde about merrily with his own fantasy. Wherein he may not be
much offended, if I say unto him, as S. Hierome said sometime unto S.
Ambrose, for his Commentaries upon S. Luke, Verbis Iudis: senten^ijs dormitas:
That is, your words be pleasant: Ruffinus.
but your senses be half a sleep.

For that I saw, these words of S. Paul, If thou Bliss with thy Sprite,
might seem doubtful, and diverse expositions rising thereupon, I thought it
meet, for the more ease of the unlearned, to open, what S. Paul might seem
to mean by this word, Sprite, in that place. And folowinge the judgment of
sundry old Fathers, I called it a sound, or noyce of unknown words. This
is it, that M. Hardinge here so pleasantly calls Stuffinge, and bomebaste,
and a strange newfangled interpretation. Wherein he shows him self to be
somewhat short witted, as may soon appear. For within a few lines after,
expoundinge these words of S. Paul ( Quam december millia verborum in lingua)
he him self uses the like bomebaste, and the very same stuffinge.

Uerily, if he will utterly condemn al manner Paraphrase, or addinge of other
words for declaration, of that seems hard, or doubteful in the text, then
must he needs condemn not only the Septuagintes, but also al other
Interpreters of the Scriptures. Origin. in Epist. ad Roman. Ca. 3. li. 3.
Hereof Origin, weighing in what sort the Apostle S. Paul allegeth the
words of the Prophet David, writes thus: Sed quod dixit Apostolus, Sicut
scriptum est, Non est iustus quisquam, non est intelligens, non est requirens
Deum, Non ijsdem Sermonibus inuenitur in Psalmo: sed alij permutantur, alij
assuuntur, alij relinquuntur. Quod a studiosis quibusque si obseruetur
diligentius, pu^o dari in hoc Apostolicam authoritatem, vt cum Scripturae
testimonijs vtendum fuerit, sensum magis ex ea, quam verba capiamus. But where
( as S. Paul says) As it is written, There is not one just man, there is not
one of understanding, there is not one that seeks after God, This place is
not found in the Psalm by these words: but some words are altered by S.
Paul, and some others are added unto, and some are leafte out.

Which thing if the Reader advisedly consider, I think that herein the
Apostles authority is declared, that when we have need to use the Testimony
of the Scriptures, we rather take the meaning thereof, then the words.
Origin says, S. Paul both altered ye words of the Prophet, and added to,
and took fro: Yet, I trust, M. Hardinge will not say, S. Paul bomebasted, or
stuffed the Scriptures.

Perhaps he will reply, S. Paul by this word, Sprite, meante not a strange
tongue, or a noice of unknown words: and therefore this stuffinge is
counterfeite. And because M. Hardinge says so, perhaps the simple Reader will
so believe it. But if the old Doctors, and Fathers so expound it, then all this strange mirth, and triumph might have been spared.

S. Ambrose opens S. Paul's meaning, Ambrosi. in. 1. Cor. Ca. 14.
and shows what he understood by this word, Sprite, in this wise: Si tu
benedixeris spiritu, hoc est, Si laudem Dei lingua loquaris ignota audientibus:
If thou bless with thy Sprite, That is to say, If thou utter the Praise of
God, in a tongue unknown unto the hearers. This I trow, is no Bomebast, nor
countrefeite stuffinge: it is S. Ambroses Interpretation. Likewise S.
Chrysostom expoundinge the same words, says thus: Si tu benedixeris spiritu
etc. Chrysostom. in. 1. Cor. 14. hom. 35.
Est quod dicit, huiusmodi: Si peregrina lingua gratias agas, quam nec
intelligas ipse, nec coeteris idem interprete^is, plebeius no^ potest
subijcere, Amen. If thou Bliss with thy Sprite etc. The meaning hereof (
says S. Chrysostom) Is this, If thou give thanks unto God ( or pray) in a
strange tongue, which neither thou know thee self, nor can expound unto
others, the unlearned cannot say, Amen. This, Chrysostom says, is S. Paul's
very meaning: M. Hardinge says, No: it is a strange new fangled
interpretation. Erasmus in 1. Corin. 14.
Erasmus in his paraphrase turns it thus: Si tu decantes lauds Dei, sermon
omnibus incognito, If thou singe out the praises of God, in a tongue unknown
unto al thy hearers. Dionysius Carthusian. in. 1. Cor. 14.
Dionysius ye Carthusian likewise says thus: Si tu Benedixeris Spiritu, id
est, non verbis, quae ab alijs intelligantur, sed tantum lingua. If thou Bliss
with thy Sprite, That is to say, not with such words, as others may
understand, but only with thy tongue.

Anselmus says: Anselmus in 1. Corin. 14.
Spiritus meus orat, id est, flatus oris mei orat, dum loquor in oratione: My
sprite prays, That is, The breathe of my mouth prays, so long as I
continue speakinge. What so ever opinion M. Harding have of Erasmus, yet, I
trow, of his modesty, he will not say, that either Dionysius the Carthusian, or
S. Ambrose, or S. Chrysostom, or Anselmus, devised newfangled expositions, or
discanted upon S. Paul, or set his text out of tune.

But (he says) the place of S. Paul is doubteful: S. Ambrose, S. Augustine,
S. Chrysostom, Isidorus, Erasmus, and Thomas of Aquine understood it
diuersely. And will he thereof conclude thus, These Fathers mistook S. Paul's
sense: Ergo, S. Paul had no sense? Or, diverse Doctors touching this place had
diverse judgments: Ergo, We must have no judgment? Or must we follow none of
them, because some were deceived? Or must we follow them al together, because
they were Doctors? In deed they dissented somewhat in the taking of this
word, Spirit, as it is evident: but whether it were the holy Ghost, that S.
Paul meante thereby, or Imagination, or Reason, or the Gift of tongues, or
the Sound of the mouth, or the power of Utterance, or the Uoice it self, it
is certain, and confessed by these, and al other Doctors, and Fathers, that
S. Paul spoke of an unknown tongue, and as S. Gregory says, Hugo Cardin.
citat Gregoriu^.
De strepitu oris, of the bablinge of the mouth: and so consequently of a
noise of strange words, wherewith M. Hardinges tender ears are so much
offended.

Now, for as much as it is a^outched, that these words of S. Paul make
nothing for our purpose, let us a little examine one, or two, of M. Hardinges
reasons, and see, how well he applies the same to his purpose. The first is
this: S. Paul entreats of the miraculous gift of Tongues: Ergo, His words
make nothing against the Latin Service.

Again, S. Paul wills, that the priest utter the Common Prayers in the
Congregation, in such Language, as the unlearned may be edified thereby, and
answer, Amen: Ergo, (M. Harding seems to say) The Priest may utter the
Common Prayers in an unknown tongue. Surely these arguments would make a
strange noice in the Schools, and set al Logique quite out of tune. But, if S.
Paul's words make nothing against the Latin Service, as it is now used, what
is it then that S. Paul condemns? Why concludes he thus, How shall the
ignorant say, Amen, at thy thanks giving? For he knows not, what thou
say. Why, sets he the whole difference in Knowinge, and not Knowing? Or
what misseliketh he else, The learned Latin Tongue.
but the sound, or noise of a strange tongue, whereby he thinks, the people
in no wise can be edified? If all this be nothing, as M. Hardinge says, then
let him turn the whole course of S. Paul's words, and say thus: Pray thou
in a strange unknown tongue: that the people may say, Amen. For so may they
say, although they know not what thou praiest.

The allegation of the learned Latin tongue, which M. Harding so often uses,
may serve rather to astonne the simple, then to make any good sufficient
proof. So the subtle old Heretics, Marcus, and Heracleon, as it is
reported by S. Augustine, and Arnobius, Augustine. ad Quodu^ltdeu^. Arnobius.
used in their prayers certain Hebrew, and other strange unknown words, to
the intent to amase their hearers with admiration, and the more to commend,
and set forth their treachery.

No tongue is to be accounted learned in it self, but only in respect of
some other thing, and, as the learned term it, Per accidens, That is, either
for the eloquent manner of utterance, or for the substance of learned matter
therein contained, or for the learning, and knowledge of the speaker. But the
Latin Service, bisides that it is not eloquent in it self (as in deed it
needs not to be) sometimes it holds not good congruitie, but is utterly
void of reason. Wherein, let this one example stand for many. In the praises
of the Blessed Uirgin, it is written thus, Cuius Dominus humilitatem
respiciens, Angelo nuntiante, concepit Redemptorem muncli. By the learning of
this learned tongue, we are taught, it was not our Lady, but our Lord, that
was moother unto Christ: For so it falls out in construction, Our Lord
conceived the Redeemer of the world. The substance of the matter therein
contained, is sometimes vain, and full of fables, sometimes wicked, and
Idolatrous. The Priests, that utter this tongue, for the most part such, as
are hardely hable to make it learned. De Consecrat. Did. 4. Retulerunt.
Pope Zachary says, that a Priest in his time Baptized a Child by these
words, In nomine Patria, and Filia, and Spirita Sancta. And S. Augustine
says, August. de C^techizan. rudib. ca. 9.
that diverse Priests in his time, in their common Latin Service, where as the
people understood the Latin Tongue, uttered Barbarismes, and Soloecismes, De
Con. did. 4. Si non.
that is to say, spoke false Latin: and further says, Multa in illis
reperiuntur contra Catholica^ Fidem. In the same prayers many things are
found contrary to the Catholic Faith. Such is this Tongue, that M. Harding
here so highly commends, to be so learned.

But grant we the Latin tongue to be Eloquent, Copious, and Learned above
al others. Yet think these men, that Gods ears be so curious, or so
deintie, that he can abide no prayer, but only in a Learned language? Uerily,
S. Paul requires no brag of learning to be uttered in ye Congregation, but
only plain speech, and understanding, That the simple may be edified.

Caligula the Emperor set golden loaves, and al other Services of whole gold
before his Gheastes, and bade them eat. In deed they had a glorious sight, to
look upon. Yet had they nothing neither to eat, nor to drink, for
contentation of nature. Even so would M. Hardinge set his glitteringe
Service of Greek, Hebrewe, and Latin before the people, and bid them feed.
A goodly show, no doubt, to gase, and to wonder at. But alas, nothing have
they there either to receive, or to taste of: either to move them to
repentance, or to comfort, and quiet their conscience. It is notably well said
by S. Augustine: Augustine. De Doctrina Christiana, li. 4. ca. 11.
Quid prodest Clauis aurea, si aperire quod volumus, non potest? aut quid obest
lignea, si hoc potest? quando nihil quaerimus, nisi patere, quod clausum erat.
What avails a Golden Key, if it cannot open that, we would have opened? Or
what hurts a wodden Key, if it be hable to open? Seeing we desire nothing,
but that the thing, that is shut, may be opened.

The people (says M. Hardinge) is not utterly ignorant what the Priest says.
They understand him, although not perfitely, nor in exact wise: yet they
understand him. Thus he doubts and staggereth between perfect, and vnpersit,
as not having yet well measured the peoples understanding. For to say, The
ignorant perfitely understand the Latin Tongue, were against the manifest
truth: to say, They understand no part thereof at al, were directly against
S. Paul, For he requires understanding. Therefore M. Hardinge divides the
matter, and says, They understand the Latin tongue: although not exactely, or
perfitly: That is to say, they understand neither the Scriptures, nor the
prayers, nor any one thing that is spoaken, nor sentence, nor word, nor
Syllable, nor letter: They hear the Priest speak: and know not, what he
says. They see him turn, and gesture: and know not, what he means. This
(says M. Hardinge) is the understanding of the Latin tongue.

But alas, is this the understanding, that S. Paul requires, That the people
may be edified, and answer Amen? And what pleasure has he, in abbridging,
and bridlinge the understanding of Gods people? Why should they not rather
understand perfitely, what the Priest says? Why should there be any
imperfection in Godly things? Ad Ephesi. 4. Augustine. de Catechizandis rud^b.
ca. 9.
S. Paul wishes that we may al grow unto a perfect man in Christ Jesus: And
S. Augustine wishes, that the people may say Amen, To that they plainly, and
perfitly understand.

M. Hardinge. The.28. Division.
But S. Paul (say they) requires that the people give assent, and conform
them selves unto the Priest, by answearinge, Amen, to his prayer made in the
Congregation.

Verily, in the Primitive Church this was necessary, when the Faith was a
learning. And therefore the Prayers were made then, in a common tongue known
to the people, for cause of their further instruction: Who being of late
converted to the Faith, and of Painimes made Christians, had need in all
things to be taught. But after that the Faithful people was multiplied, and
increaced in great numbers, and had been so well instructed in all points of
Religion, as by their own accord they conformed them selves to the Ministers
at the Common Prayers: in the Latin Church the Service was set out in Latin:
and it was thought sufficient, part of the people in the Quier, to answer
for the whole. And this has been esteemed for a more expedite, and convenient
order, then if it were in the Vulgar tongue of every Nation.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Who so will maintain an untruth, ought to be circumspecte, and to remember
well, how his tales may stand together. M. Hardinge a little before wrote thus:
Cicero says, Tongues be in number infinite. Of them al, Neither M. Iuel, nor
any one of his side, is hable to show, that the public Service of the Church
in any Nation, was ever for the space of six hundred years after Christ in
any other tongue, then in Greek, or Latin. Now contrariwise, either of
forgeatfulnesse what he has said before, or of some other better advise, he
says thus: M. Hardinge contrary to him self.
Verily, in the Primitive Church this was necessary, when the Faith was a
learning. And therefore the prayers were made then in a Common tongue known
to the people, for cause of their further instruction. By these words, he
utterly overthrows, that he so confidently said before: and very well
confirms my assertion. M. Iuel may now take his ease. For M. Hardinge him
self is hable to prove against him self, that in the Primitive Church the
Service was ministered in the Common tongue: and that he confirms for a
verity, and says, It was necessary so to be, and could not be otherwise.
These saieinges of M. Hardinges being directely contrary, cannot possibly
stand both together. If the one be true, the other of necessity must needs
be false.

The reason that he geathereth in this place, stands upon the diversity of
times. Then ( says he) the people was ignorant, and needed of al things to
be taught. Now they are instructed, and understand the Faith, and are
increased in multitude. Therefore it is better now for expedition, the Service
be said in a strange Language, and that only the Clerk make answer to the
priest, in steed of the whole Congregation.

Thus says M. Hardinge, not by the authority of S. Ambrose, S. Augustine, S.
Hierome, S. Chrysostom, or any other like old Catholic Doctor, but only
by warrant of late Doctors, Thomas of Aquine, and Nicolas Lyra: the former of
which two, lived at the least twelve hundred years after Christ. His reason
in short is thus: The people now is instructed* Ergo, They ought to have
their Service in a strange tongue.

If M. Hardinge mind to persuade the world, he had need to bring other
arguments. But what if the people be not instructed? What if they know
nothing, no not the Articles of the Christian Faith? What if there be noman to
instruct them? What if the Priest be even as is the people, and ye blind
lead the blind? Yet, I trow, M. Hardinge will not alter his new Decree: but
his strange Service must continue still. Uerily, the understanding of God is ye
soul, and life of Gods Church: and as it was necessary at the first plantinge
thereof, so is it always necessary for the continuance of the same. S. Hilarie
says, Ecclesiae, in quibus verbum dei non vigilar, naufragae fiunt. The
Churches, wherein Gods word is not watcheful, suffer wrecke. Neither did S.
Paul say, let this order hold for the time, while the faith is a learning,
1. Cori^th* 4.
as M. Hardinge would have him say: but thus he says, Haec quae scribo,
Domini sunt mandata. Omnia ad ae dificationem fiant. The things that I write,
are the commandments of the Lord. Let al things be done to edify. The
edifieinge of the people, which is the final cause hereof, continues still:
therefore ought the understanding of the people, which is the efficient cause
hereof, to continue still.

M. Hardinge. The.29. Division.
I grant, they cannot say, Amen, to the blessinge, or thanks geuinge of the
Priest, so well as if they understood the Latin tongue perfitely. Yet they
give assent to it, and ratify it in their hearts, and do conform them selves
unto the Priest, though not in special, yet in general: that is to wit,
though not in every particular sentence of praise, and thanks giving, or in
every several petition, yet in the whole. For if they come to Church with a
right and good intent, as the simple do no less then the learned: their
desire is to render unto God glory, praise, and honor, and to thank him for
benefits received, and with all, to obtain of him things behooueful for them
in this life, and in the life to come. And without doubt, this godly affection
of their minds, is so acceptable to God, as no understanding of words may
be compared with it. This requisite assent, and conforminge of them selves to
the Priest, they declare by sundry outward tokens, and gestures: as by
standing up at the Gospel, and at the preface of the Mass: by bowinge them
selves down, and adoringe at the Sacrament: by kneelinge at other times, as
when pardon, and mercy is humbly asked: and by other like signs of devotion,
in other parts of the Service.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Yet once again M. Hardinge would make the world believe, that the ignorant
people understands ye Latin tongue, although not perfitely: and that they
may in general, give their consent unto, what so ever the Priest says,
although they know not one word, what he says. And so between S. Paul,
and M. Hardinge there appears a plain contrariety. For S. Paul says, The
unlearned cannot say Amen, to thy prayer, because he knows not, what thou
say. Yes (says M. Hardinge) although he know not, what thou say, yet
may he nevertheless say, Amen: But hereto he lays his correction: I grant
(says he) they cannot say Amen to the blissing, and thanks geuinge of the
Priest, So well, as if they understood the Latin tongue.

O M. Hardinge, who taught you thus to qualify the peoples duties? Why do you
thus openly deceive your brethren? Why teach you them to say, Amen, To edify
them selves, to be thankeful, and to conform their hearts unto God, Nor, so
well, but in worse wise, as you your self confess, then you know, they are
bound to do? Your own tongue confesses against your self, that you lead
the people of God from the better, unto the worse.

I know, the humble affection, and devotion of the heart is more precious
before God, then any understanding, or sound of words. For that in deed is
the praieing in Sprite and Truth. And therefore God complains of the
contrary: Johan. 4.
This people draws near unto me with their lips, Matthae. 15.
says the Lord, but their heart is far from me. Hereof M. Harding
geathereth this reason: The people is devout, and godly disposed, Ergo, They
must have their prayers in a strange tongue.

I would M. Hardinge would consider, and reform his reasons better. This is
to simple: it needs no answer. Certainly, if the simple people be so
devout, and so reverently disposed in the darkness, without any teachinge,
or understanding, much more would they reverently, and deuoutely dispose
them selves, if they heard the godly prayers, and understood them.

Kneeling, bowing, standinge up, and other like are commendable gestures, and
tokens of devotion, so long as the people understands what they mean, and
applies them unto God, to whom they be dew. Otherwise they may well make them
Hypocrites: but holy, or godly they cannot make them. Coelestinus writes thus
unto the Bishops of France: Docendi potius sunt, quam illudendi: Inter
Decret ^ Coelestin. pp. 1.
nec imponendum est eorum oculis: sed mentibus infundenda praecepta sunt. The
people must rather be taught, then mockte: Neither must we deceive their eyes:
but must power wholesome precepts into their hearts.

M. Hardinge. The.30. Division.
And where as S. Paul seems to disallow praieing with tongues in the Common
assembly, because of want of edifieing, and to esteem the utterance of five
words or sentences with understanding of his meaning, that the rest might
be instructed thereby, more then ten thousand words in a strange and unknown
tongue: All this is to be referred to the state of that time, which was much
unlike the state of the Church, we be now in. The tongue of the prayers
which S. Paul speaks of, was utterly strange, and unknown, and served for
a sign to the unbelievers. The Latin tongue, in the Latin Church is not
altogether strange and unknown. For beside the Priest in most places some of
the rest have understanding of it, more, or less, and now we have no need of
any such sign. They needed instruction: we be not ignorant of the chief
points of Religion. They were to be taught in all things: we come not to
Church specially and chiefly to be taught at the Service, but to pray, and
to be taught by preachinge. Their prayer was not vaileable for lack of
faith, and therefore was it to be made in the vulgar tongue, for increace of
Faith: Our Faith vvil stand us in better steed, if we give our selves to
devout Prayer. They for lack of Faith had need of interpretation, both in
prayers, and also in Preachinge, and al other spiritual exercises: we having
sufficient instruction in the necessary rudimentes of our faith, for the rest,
have more need by earnest and fervent prayer, to make suit unto God, for an
upright, pure, and holy life, then to spend much time in hearing for
knowledge. Concerning which thing, Contra. Anom^ hom. 3.
Chrysostom has this saieinge: The words of Chrysostom much abused.
Profecto si orare cum diligentia insuescas, nihil est quod doctrinam tui
conserui desideres, quum ipse Deus sine vllo interpret mentem abundeluce
afficiat. Verily if thou use to pray diligently, there is nothing, why thou
should desire teachinge of thy fellow seruante, seeing God him self doothe
abundantly lighten thy mind without any interpreter.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Here M. Hardinge by countrepointes, and by sundry circumstances of
difference, compares the state of the Primitive Church, and his Church of
Rome together, and thereof would seem to prove, that S. Paul's words,
which S. Paul him self calls Mandata Domini, The Lords commandments,
stood good only for that time present and for no time afterward: as if he
would say, Gods will were mutable, or his commandments hold only for term
of years.

I grant, there appear great notes of difference between the order of the
Primitive Church, and the order that now is in the Church of Rome. For, to
leave all that M. Hardinge has here touched by way of comparison, and to note
that may seem near to this prupose, The rulers there wisshed, and labored
that the people might abound in knowledge: Here, their whole labor and study
is, that the people may abound in ignorance. There, the Ministers spoke with
sundry tongues, that the people of al Nations might understand them: Here,
the Minister speaks in a strange tongue, to the intent that noman may
understand him. There, the simple, and the ignorant were made eloquent: Here,
the Bishops, and Cardinals, and greatest learned are made dumme. And to
prosecute no further, there appeared in the Primitive Church, the undoubted
works of the holy Ghost, and ye very tractes, and steps of Christ's feet:
and therefore Irenaeus, Irenaeus li 3. ca. 3.
and other Old Fathers, in cases of doubt, appealed evermore to the order,
and example of that Church. And Tertullian says, Hoc aduersus omnes haereses
valet, Tertull. aduersus Pra^eam.
id esse verum, quodcunque prius: id esse adulterum, quodcunque posterius. This
Mark prevails agianst al Heresies: That is the truth that was used first,
that is false, and corrupt, that was brought in afterward. And therefore the
Holy Fathers in the Council Council. Nicen.
of Nice made this general shoute, and agreed upon the same, (...). Let the
ancient orders hold still, referringe them selves thereby, to the use and
order of the Primitive Church. Contrariwise, Ualentinus, Marcion, and other
like Heretics, thought them selves wisest of al others, and therefore utterly
refused (as M. Hardinge and his fellows now do) to stand to the Apostles
orders: Thus Irenaeus Irenae. li. 3. ca. 2.
writes of them: Dicent se, non solum Presbyteris, sed etiam Apostolis
sapientiores esse, and sinceram veritatem inuenisse. They will say, that they
are wiser, not only then other priests, but also then the Apostles, and that
they have found out the perfect truth. I say not, M. Hardinge is so wickedly
minded, as Ualentinus, or Marcion was: but thus I say, He utterly refuses, to
stand to the Apostles orders, and follows other late divised fantasies: and
therein undoubtedly doothe, even as the old Heretics Marcion, and Ualentinus
did.

Now let us consider M. Hardinges reasons. The state (says he) of the
Primitive Church was far unlike the state of the Church, we be now in.

Ergo, We are not bound to S. Paul's commandments.

Again he says, Some one, or other in a Parish, understands somewhat of the
Latin Tongue:





Ergo, they ought to have their Service in a strange tongue.

O what means M. Hardinge thus to deal? Loathe I am, to make the comparison.
But true it is: Uery Children do not use, to reason in so childishe sort.

He knows well, that commonly, neither any one of the whole parish,
understands the Latin tongue, nor oftentimes the Priest himself. He knows
that the people of his Church, is not instructed in Religion, nor no man
suffered to instruct them. And, not withstandinge both these parts were
granted true, yet could he not any way conclude, that therefore ye people
should have their Service in a strange unknown tongue. Thus, neither is the
Antecedent true, nor doothe the Consequent thereof follow. Now judge thou, good
Christian Reader, whether these proufes bear weight sufficient to lead thy
conscience.

He says, Prayers in the Common Uulgare tongue were necessary in the primitive
Church, for breedinge of the Faith. But what thing can be bredde by prayers
in a strange tongue? What Knowledge, what Faith, what Charity?

The Apostles were not void of Faith: Lu. 17.
yet they said unto Christ, O Lord increase our Faith. Christ speakinge of
the latter days, says thus: When the Son of man shall come, he shall
scarcely find Faith in the world. Doubtelesse, the thing, that was good to
rear the Faith, is also good to repair the Faith: and that was then
necessary to increase Faith, is also necessary now to continue Faith.

But to what end doothe he allege the words of Chrysostom? Chrysostom.
Did that good Father ever minister the Common Service unto the people in a
strange tongue? Contra Anomaeos homi. 3.
M. Hardinge knows, The people understood Chrysostom, what he prayed: and
answered him in their own tongue: and prayed with him al together. Or did
Chrysostom ever check the people for their knowledge, or discourage them from
reading the Scriptures? Certainly he oftentimes rebukes them for not readinge,
and wills them to bye the Scriptures: Chrysostom. in Mat. hom. 2.
to read the Scriptures: and to confer at home with their families of the
Scriptures. Chrysostom. in Psalm. 43.
And where as M. Harding to withdraw the peoples hearts from readinge, says,
The Scriptures are dark, and dangerous, and no man hable to wade in them
without a guide: S. Chrysostom contrariwise, Chrysostom. ad Coloss. hom. 9.
to encourage ye people to read the Scriptures, says: They be plain, and
easy, and that the ignorant and simple man, by prayer unto God, may atteine the
knowledge of them without any Master, or Teacher, by him self alone. For
these be his words, even as M. Harding has alleged them: Chrysostom. contra*
Anomaeos. homi. 3.
Profecto si orare cum diligentia insuescas, nihil est, quod doctrinam conserui
tui desideres, cum ipse Deus sine vllo interpret, mentem tuam abunde luce
afficiat. If thou use to pray diligently, there is no cause, why thou
should defier the teaching of thy fellow seruante. For God him self will
abundantly lighten thy mind without any interpreter. Chrysostom. in ^en. hom. 35.
The like saieing he has often otherwhere. Declaring ye story of Queen
Candaces Chamberlain, he writes thus: Fieri non potest, vt is, qui Diuinis
Scripturis magno studio, feruentique desiderio vacat, semper negligatur: Licet
enim desit nobis hominis Magisterium, tamen ipse Dominus superne intrans corda
nostra, illustrat mentem, rationi iuba^ suum infundit, de^egit occulta,
doctorque fit eorum, quae ignoramus. It cannot be that any man with great
study, and fervent desire readinge the Scriptures, should still be leafte
destitute. For although we lack the Instruction of man, yet will God him self
from above enter into our hearts, and lighten our mind, and cast a beam of
light into our reason, and open things that be hidden, and become our teacher
of such things, as we know not. Therefore this place of Chrysostom stands
M. Hardinge in small steed, unless it be by the countenance of an ancient
Doctor, to make the simple believe, he has said somewhat: The reason, that
he geathereth hereof, is this: The unlearned man, be he never so simple, may
read the Scriptures in his own Vulgar tongue, and understand the same
without a teacher: Ergo, The Common Service ought to be ministered unto the Lay
people in an unknown tongue.

M. Hardinge. The.31. Division.
I would not here, that any man should lay to my charge the defense of
ignorance, as though I envied the people any godly knowledge. I wisshe them to
have al heavenly knowledge, and to be ignorant of nothing necessary to their
salvation. Yea, even with my very heart I wisshe with Moses: Quis tribuat, vt
omnis populus prophete^, and det Dominus illis spiritum suum? Number. 11.
O that all the people could prophecy, and were learned in Gods holy word,
and that our Lord would give them his spirit. But all the common people to
understand the Priest at the Service, I think, wise, and godly men, judge it
not a thing so necessary, as for the which the ancient order of the Church,
with no little offense, public and universal authority not consulted, should
be condemned. broaken, and quite abrogated, by private advise of a few.

If defaulte were in this behalf justly found, General Councels
it is known, to whom the redress pertains. Concerning the state of
Religion, in all ages the general Council representinge the universal Church,
for all soars has ordained wholesome remedies. Where they be not heard, of
whom Christ said, He that hears you, hears me, and he that dispiseth
you, dispiseth me: it is to be feared, that concerning the Service, the new
learned boldness is not so acceptable to God, as the old simple humility.
It were good, the people having humble, and reverent hearts, understood the
Service: I deny not.

The B. of Sarisburie.
M. Hardinge wissheth unto the people Al manner of knowledge, that is godly, and
heavenly, and necessary for their Salvation. Only his Latin Service he would
in no wise have them know. Whereby he seems privily to grant, that his
Latin Service neither is godly, nor heavenly, nor necessary for the peoples
Salvation.

He would, That all the people were learned in Gods holy word: And,
notwithstanding he know, there is noman to instruct^ them, yet may he not
suffer them either to read the Scriptures, or to understand any part of
their Common Prayers. I trow, he would have them learn only by Revelation.

If any fault were justly found (says M. Hardinge) the redress thereof
belongs to the General Council. I grant, the very name of a Council is
great, and weighs much. But if there were none other possible way to seek
redress, then most miserable were the Church of God. If Christ, and his
Apostles would have waited for a General Council, the Gospel had been
vnpreached, and the Church unplanted until this day. It were good (says M.
Harding) the people understood the Service: I deny not. Forgeat not this,
good Reader: That the people understood their Service, M. Hardinge him self
confesses, it were good. And why so? Doubtless because he is forced to see,
and say, that it would redounde to the glory of God, and to the great
comfort, and profit of the people. Therefore he says, It were good. Whereof
we may well geather this Argument of the contrary: Then, that the people in
this brute sort is keapte still in ignorance, not understanding any portion of
their Common Service, by M. Hardinges own confession, It is il. And is it not
lawful to do that is good, to redress that is il, to seek Gods glory, and
the comfort of his people, without consent of a General Council?

It appears well, God is not bound to such orders. He has oftentimes
restoared his Church, and reformed Abuses, and Heresies, by particular
conference within several Realms, and Countries: as we see by these Private
Councels holden at Carthage under S. Cyprian: Cyprian. to. 2.
at Neocesaria in Pontus: at Ancyra in Galatia: In 1. tomo Council.
at Gangra in Paphlagonia: and by other like, without any consent of a General
Council. In Council. Aquilein. in Collatione cum Palladio.
So likewise says S. Ambrose against Secundus, and Palladius: The Bishops of
the East part, and so the Bishops of the weast, have ever used severally to
assemble them selves together, as occasion was offered, and to reform their
Churches, by them selves, without troublinge the whole world.

But (says M. Hardinge) Christ him self has by special words commended
the authority of Councels: Luc. 10.
Qui vos audit, me audit: He that hears you, hears me: and he, that
despises you, despises me. We deny not the truth of these words:
notwithstanding it is plain, Christ spoke there no more of a Council, then of
any one private man, having Commission from him, and dooinge his
commandment: whereunto the whole Council is bound to yield, no less then
others: and without which the Council, be it never so General, is no Council.
But where did ever Christ give commandment, that the Service should be said
in a strange unknown tongue? Or where did any General Council ever decree it?
Once again I ask M. Harding, and gently desire his answer, where did any
General Council from the beginning of ye world, ever decree, that the people
should hear their Service in a strange unknown tongue? If there be any such
Council, why does he not show it? If there be none, nor never were any, why
does he thus mock the world with the name of a Council?

Cicero says very well of him self, Cicero de legib. lib. 3.
Nihil nobis opus erat Lege, de quibus nihil esset actum Legibus. To restoare
me from exile, I needed no law, against whom there was nothing done by
Law. So may we likewise say, We need no Council, to restoare Gods Truth,
that was taken away from us without a Council. Every Prince is bound in the
whole, to see the Reformation of his own Church, and Country. Neither will
God hold him excused, if he say, I will tarry til al other Princes, and the
whole world do the like. Iosue Iosue Ca. 24.
that noble Prince, when he had assembled all the Tribes of Israel before him,
thus he spoke unto them, Si malum vobis videtur, vt seruiatis Domino, optio
vobis datur: Ego autem, and Domus mea, seruiemus Domino. If ye think it il to
serve the Lord ye shall have your choice: but I, and my house will serve the
Lord. It pleased God, to plant this Church in this Realm, three hundred
years before the first General Council was holden at Nice. Polydor. Childas.
Theodoretus. Esai. 59.
The Lords hand is not shortened. He is likewise hable now to reform the
same by his holy Word, without tarrieinge for a General Council.

How be it, the world may see, these be but pretertes, and vain shifts,
without any simple meaning. They have now had a Council of long continuan^e:
They have heard the great complaints of al Christian Kingdoms, and
Countries, namely touching their Common Service. M. Hardinge him self
conf^sseth, It were good, the people understood it. Yet not withstandinge the
Council says, No, it were il: it were not good: and can in no wise abide it.
And so either the Council condemns M. Hardinge: or else M. Hardinge condemns
his Council. Matthew. 8.
But Christ says unto us, Let the dead bury their dead: come thou, and
follow me.

M. Hardinge. The.32. Division.
Yet al stands not in understanding. Contra Manichaeos epist. fundamenti.
cap. 4.
S Augustine says notably, Turbam non intelligendi viuacitas, sed credendi
simplicitas tutissimam facit. That as for the common people, it is not the
quickenesse of understanding, but the simplicity of beleuinge, that makes
them safest of al. And in another place, Ad Euodiumepist. 102.
Si propter eos solos Christus mortuus est, qui certa intelligent^a possunt
ista disceinere, pene frustra in Ecclesia laboramus. If Christ (says he)
died only for them, which can with certain, or sure understanding,
discern these things (concerning God) then is the labor, we take in the
Church, in manner in vain. God requires not so much of us, how much we
understand, as how much we believe, and through belefe, how much we love.
And when we shall al appear before Christ, in that dreadeful day of
Judgment, 84 The.84. untruth. For it is vvritte^, He that knovveth not, shall
not be known. 1. Cor. 14.
we shall not be required to give an account of our understanding, but, faith
presupposed, of our Charity.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Where as M. Hardinge says, Al stands not in understanding, If he mean
thereby profounde knowledge, and deep conceiuinge of Mysteries, as S.
Augustine also meante, it may well be granted. Otherwise, as touching the
public Service, as Chrysostom says, Chrysostom. in 1.
Onles the unlearned understand, what thou praiest, he is not edified, Corin.
homi. 35.
neither can he give consent unto thy pr^ier: thou throwest thy words into
the wind, and speak in vain. And therefore the very substance of the
Public prayer, reasteth in the understanding of the hearer.

No man may justly presume, of that M. Hardinge says, we shall not render
accoumpte of our knowledge. Roman. 14.
For at that terrible day of the Lord, we shall assuredly render accoumpte of
our wilful Ignorance. 2. Corinthians. 5.
Christ him self, unto whom God has given al judgment, Matthae. 15.
says, If the blind lead the blind, both shall fall into the pit. Johan.
3.
And again, This is the Condemnation of the world: light is come into the
world: and men love the darkness more then the light: This, says Christ,
is the Condemnation of the world. And the wise man says, The wicked at that
terrible time, shall make their moan on this sort: Sapient. 5.
Aberrauimus a via veritaris: and Iustitiae lumen non fulsit nobis: and Sol
intelligentiae non exortus est nobis. We straied from the way of the Truth:
and the light of Justice shined not before us: neither did the Son of
understanding arise unto us. Chrysostom Chrysostom. In Matthae. ho. 2.
oftentimes complains of the peoples negligence in this behalf, Non sum,
inquis, Monachus: Vxorem habeo, and filios, and curam Domus. Hoc illud est quod
omnia quasi vna quadam peste corrumpit, quod Lectionem diuinaru^ Scripturarum
ad solos pu^atis Monachos pertinere etc. Thou will say, I am no Monk, I have
wife, and Children, and charge of householde. This is it, that as it were with
a Pestilence, infecteth al together, that ye think the readinge of the Holy
Scriptures belongs only unto Monks. In eadem Ho^ilia.
He adds further, Multo est grauius, atque deterius, superfluam esse putare
Legem Dei, quam illam omnino nescire. Haec enim verba sunt, quae de Diabolica
prorsus meditatione promuntur. The fault is greater, and more grievous, to
think Gods Law is superfluous (and not needeful for thee) then to be
ignorant, whether there be any such Law, or no: for these words come even
from the persuasion of the Devil.

Again he says, In eadem.
Haec Diabolicae inspirationis operatio est, non sinentis nos aspicere
Thesaurum, ne diuitias acquiramus. Propterea ille suade^, nihil omnino esse
commodi diuinas audire Leges, ne quando ex auditu sequi videat actionem. This
is the workinge of the Devils Inspiration. He would not suffer us to see the
Treasure, least we should geate the riches. Therefore he counseleth us, that
it utterly avails nothing, to hear the Laws of God: least that upon the
hearing, he may see our dooinge follow. Here we see, the doctrine of simple
ignorance, which M. Hardinge so stiffly mainteineth, is called by Chrysostom,
The Devils study: The Devils judgment: the Devils Inspiration. And where he
says, God will call us to no reckeninge of our knowledge, or lack of knowledge,
Chrysostom plainly auoutcheth the contrary by these words: Chrysostom. ad
Hebraeos hom. 17.
Dices, non legi: Non est haec excusatio, sed crimen. Thou will say, I have not
readde the Scripture: This is no excuse, but a sin.

Christian simplicity is not wilful ignorance, that is to say, to believe
every fable that is told, and to examine, and know nothing. As Christ
says, Be ye Simple as Dooues: Matthae. 10.
so he also says, Be ye Wise, as Serpents. Take heed, ye be not deceived.
S. Paul says, Colossen. 2.
He that knows not, shall not be known. Chrysostom hereof writes thus, 1. Corinthians. 14.
Paulus ait, Verbum Christi inhabiter in vobis abundanter. Sed quid ad haec
respondent fucis stultiores? Chrysostom. in Johan. homi. 16.
Benedicta omnis anima Simplex: Et, Qui simpliciter ambulat, in fiducia
ambular. Hoc videlicet omnium malorum est causa, quod non multi Scripturarum
testimonia in opportunis rebus sciunt adducere. Non. n^ eo loco Simplex pro
stulto, aut pro eo, qui nihil nouit, intelligendus est: sed pro homine non
malo, nec versuto. Nam si ita intelligeretur, superuacaneum fuisset dicere,
Estote prudentes, sicut Serpents. S. Paul says, Let the word of God
dwell in you abundantly. But what will these fools say hereto? O, say they,
Blissed is the simple soul. And, He that walks simply, walks surely.
This is the very cause of al mischief, that in cases of necessity, there be
not many hable to allege the Scriptures. For, a Simple man, in that place may
not be taken for a fool, or a man, that knows nothing: but for a man that
means no il, or vvoorketh no fraud. For if it were to be taken so: it had
been in vain for Christ to say, Be ye wise as Serpents. Therefore M.
Hardinge in the defense of ignorance, thus assuringe the world, that God will
not be offended with want of knowledge, deceives the people of God, and says
not the truth. The reason, that M. Hardinge hereof geathereth, stands thus:
S. Augustine says, cannot atteine profounde knowledge: and God bears with
their simpli^itie. Ergo, they ought to have their Service in a strange tongue.

M. Hardinge. The.33. Division.
Now, though the people know not the Latin tongue, and albeit it were
better they had the Service in their own vulgar tongue, for the better
understanding of it: yet as it is, for as much as 85 The.85. untruth. In the
Romish Service there are infinite vanities, bisides the Scriptures.
it consists in manner altogether of the Scriptures: that great profit
comes both to the reader and to the hearer of it, Origin shows at large in
the twentieth homil^e upon Iosue. Because it were over long to bring all that
he says there to this purpose, the sum of the whole may thus be abbridged.
First, that the heavenly powers, and Angels of God, which be within us, have
great likinge in our utterance of the words of the Scripture. Though we
understand not the 86 The.86. untruth. For Origin speaks of the ignorance
of the Allegory, not of the words.
words we utter with our mouth, yet those powers, says he, understand
them, and thereby be invited, and that with delight to healpe us. And speakinge
of the powers that be within us, to whom charge of our souls and bodies is
committed, he says, that if the Scriptures be readde of us, they have
pleasure therein, and be made the stronger toward taking heed to us, yea,
and that if we speak with tongues, and our spirit pray, and our sense be
without fruit. And there he allegeth to that purpose the common place of S.
Paul to the Corinthians, calling it marvelous, and in manner a mystery,
shewinge how the spirit prays, the sense being without fruit. After this,
he declares the evil powers and our ghostly ennemie the Devil by our readinge,
and hearing of the Scriptures, to be driven from us. As by enchauntementes,
says he, Snakes be stayed from dooinge hurt with their venime, so if there
be in us any Serpent of contrary power, or if any Snake wait privily to
mischief us: by virtue of the holy Scripture rehearsed, (so that for weerines
thou turn not away thy hearing) he is put away. S. Augustine S. Augu^^^^
speaks of vtteringe the psalms in a known tongue.
confirms the same doctrine, In prologo Psalmorum.
where he says, Psalmus Daemones fugat, Angelos in adiutorium inuitat. The
Psalm (readde deuoutely or heard) puts Deuilles to flight, and provoke
Angels to healpe. At length Origin shewinge how by meat, or drink, we find
remedy for sore eyes, though we feel no benefit forth with in eatinge, or
drinkinge (he concludes his special part of comparison with these words):
In this wise we must believe also of the holy Scripture, that it is
profitable, and doothe good to the soul, Etiamsi sensus noster ad praesens
intelligentiam non capit, although presently our sense do not atteine the
meaning or understanding: because our good powers by these words be
refresshed, and fed: and the contrary, that is our adversary powers, are
weakened, and put to flight. At length making objection to him self on the
behalf of his hearers, as though they should lay this doctrine to his charge
for excuse of taking further pains, in preachinge, and expoundinge the
Scriptures to them: thereto he answeareth, and says. No, no, we have not
said these to you for that cause, neither have we uttered these things to you
for excuse, but to show you, In Scripturis sanctis esse vim quandam, quae
legenti, etiam sine explanatione sufficiat: that in the holy Scriptures, there
is a certain power, or strength, which is sufficient for one that reads
it, yea without any expoundinge of it. This sufficiency he refers ( I
think) to the procuringe of the good powers to healpe us, and to the driuinge
away the malice of evil powers our ghostly enemies, that they hurt us not.

The B. of Sarisburie.
It appears, M. Hardinge M. Harding alters his judgment.
is not so certain of his doctrine, but he may alter, and vary without
discredit. He held before for certain, that the ignorant people
understands the Latin tongue, although not perfitely, or in exact wise. Now
he seems to be resolved otherwise, that they understand it not at al. These
contrary saieinges will hardely stand together: onles he mean, the peoples
understanding, and no understanding, is al one thing.

Origin, as he is here alleged, says, that the very readinge, or hearing of
Gods Word profits much, and reioiceth the Angels both within, and about
us, although we understand it not. For better understanding hereof, I must
briefly note certain particular opinions, that this godly Father had of
Angels, and heavenly powers. And to leave much that might be said, Origin in
Iosue hom. 23.
he held thus: that Angels have their offices allotted unto them diuersely,
some over trees, some over herbs, some over other things: that some have
power to teach Grammar, some Logique, some Rhetorique, some other Sciences:
Origin. (...)li. 3. Ca. 3.
and that some others are appointed to guide, and guard us in this life, and
shall appear before God, at the General Judgment to yield accoumpte of our
dooinges. Origin. in Numer. hom. 20.
By these it may appear, what Origin means by the Angels, that, as he
says, be about us.

His saieinge is very comfortable unto the simple mind, that deliteth in Gods
Word, although oftentimes not understanding the deep sense of it. Of
readinge the Scriptures, his purpose was to speak, M. Hardinge vvreasteth
Origin from his purpose.
and not of having the Service, or Prayers in a strange tongue. Wherefore M.
Hardinge was the more to blame, thus to wreast his author to a wrong purpose.
Origin oftentimes exhorted the people to the readinge of the Scriptures. Upon
Esaie the Prophet he writes thus: Origin. in Esai. ho. 2.
Vtinam omnes faceremus illud, quod scriptum est, scrutamini Scripturas. I
would, we would al perform, that is written, Search the Scriptures.

In this place upon Iosue, Origin. in Iosue ho. 20.
he lays this objection against him self. It may be said, The Scriptures
be hard. He answeareth, Yet, that not withstandinge, if thou read them, they
shall do thee good. For the Lord Jesus Christ, if he find us occupied in the
Scriptures, and exercised in the study thereof, not only vouchsafes him
self to be refreashed, and fed in us, but also seeinge such a banquet
prepared, brings with him his Father unto us. In the end he concludes thus:
Haec idcirco diximus, ne fastidium capiamus audientes Scripturas, etiamsi eas
non intelligamus. These things have I said, that we loathe not to hear the
Scriptures, although we understand them not. And thus much Origin spoke, not
of the Grammatical, or plain understanding of the Scriptures, that rises of
the letter, but of the Allegory, or profounde sense, whereunto the unlearned
can not well atteine. For so he expounds his own meaning, writing upon the
Gospel of S. Matthew. Origin. in Matthew. tract. 26.
Etiam illi saluantur, qui Literam Euangelij, hoc est, simplicem narrationem
sequuntur. Sola enim narratio simplex sufficit simplicioribus ad salutem. Even
they be saved that follow the Letter, that is to say, The plain story of the
Gospel. For only the simple story is sufficient unto the salvation of the
simple. So far forth may the unlearned have profit by readinge of the
Scriptures, although he further understand them not. So likewise says S.
Augustine: August. in Psalm. 119.
Qui diligit Legem Dei, etiam, quod in ea non intelligit, honorar. Who so
looueth the Law of God, honors in it even that thing, that he
understands not. Likewise he confesses of him self, that at his first
entry into the Faith of Christ, he received great profit by readinge the
Epistle of S. Paul unto the Romans, August. Confess. li. 7. Ca. 12.
although he were not then hable thoroughly to conceive the meaning of it: And
further that by the Counsel of S. Ambrose he readde the Prophet Esaie: August
Confess. li. 9. Ca. 5.
And al though he fully understood him not, yet was he thereby made the meeter
to receive the Grace of God. The like also writes S. Hierome by way of
Prophecy, of the later days before the coming of Christ. In aduentu
Messiae populus eleuabitur, Hieronym. in Nahum Ca. 3.
and prophetabit, qui sub Magistris ante fuerat consopitus, and ibunt ad montes
scripturarum: Ibi inuenient montes Mosen, and Iosue filium Naue, montes
Prophe^as, montes Noui Testamenti, Apostolos, and Euangelistas: Et cum ad tales
montes confugerit, and in huiusmodi montium fuerit lectione versatus, si non
inuenerit qui eum doceat, tamen illius studium comprobabitur, quod confugerit
ad Montes. At the coming of Messiah, the people shall be lifted up, and shall
prophecy, that before lay asleep under their Masters: and they shall go to
the Mountains of the Scriptures: and there shall they find Mountains, Moses,
and Iosue the son of Naue, the Mountains of the Prophets, the Mountains of
the New Testament, the Apostles, and the Evangelists. And when they shall flee
to such Mountains, and shall be occupied in the readinge thereof, if they find
not one to teach them, yet shall their endeavor, and good will be allowed, for
that they have fled unto the Mountains. This may the simple have profit by
the readinge of the Scriptures, albeit he fully understand them not: thus be
the Angels delited: thus is the Devil molested and grieved with the same: as
Origin him self witnesses by these words: Daemonibus super omnia est
tormentorum genera, and super omnes poenas, Origin. in Numer. hom. 27.
si quem videant Verbo Dei operam dare, scientiam Diuinae Legis, and Mysteria
Scripturarum intentis studijs perquirentem. Unto the Devils it is a grief
above al kinds of torment, and above al pains, if they see any man labor the
Word of God, seekinge with earnest mind the knowledge of Gods Law, and
the Mysteries of the Scriptures.

S. Augustine, as M. Hardinge allegeth him, says, August. in prologo in
librum psalm.
The Psalm chaseth away Devils: But S. Augustine gives not such power unto a
Psalm pronounced only with the lips, in a strange unknown tongue: but unto
a Psalm understood, and believed, and pronounced from the heart. For, to
say, The Word of God only because it is written, or spoaken, is available
of (...)without understanding, as M. Hardinge seems to say, is a
superstitious, and a Iewishe kind of folly.

Chrysostom saw, and reproved the superstition thereof in his time by these
words: Chrysostom. in Matthae. in opere imperfecto hom. 43.
Quidam Sacerdotes partem aliquam Euangelij alligant circa collum. Dic Sacerdos
insipiens: Nonne quotidie Euangelium in Ecclesia legitur, and auditur ab
hominibus? Cui ergo in auribus posita Euangelia nihil prosunt, quomodo eum
poterunt circa collum suspensa saluare? Vbi est virtus Euangelij? In figuris
literarum, an in intellectu sensuum? Certain Priests there be, that bind a
piece of the Gospel about their necks. Tell me thou foolish Priest: Is not
the Gospel every day readde, and heard of men in the Church? If the Gospel
do not profit a man being put in his ear, how then can it profit him
being tide at his neck? For wherein reasteth the power of the Gospel? In the
form of the letters, or in the understanding of the sense? So may we say unto
M. Hardinge: Wherein rests the power of the Psalms, wherewith the Devil is
vanquished? In the bare sound of the words, or in the sense, and meaning of
the same? Certainly S. Augustine says, August. tracta. 80. in Johan. Basil.
in psalm. 29.
The word of God woorketh in our hearts, no^ quia dicitur, sed quia creditur:
Not because it is spoken, but because it is believed. Likewise says S.
Basile, Non qui ore profert verba Psalmi, Psallit Domino: sed quicunque de puro
cord proferunt Psalmodiam. He sings not unto the Lord, that utters the
words of the Psalm: but they that from a pure heart pronounce the Psalmodie:
Likewise Origin, Origin. in Matthew. tract. 25.
Fiduciam habet ad Deum, non propter Verba Orationis, vel Psalmi, quamuis
videantur been composita, and de Scripturis electa: sed quia altar cordis sui
been construxit. He that prays, has trust in God, not for the words of his
prayer, or of the Psalm, although they seem to be well made, and chosen out of
the Scriptures: but because he has well made up the Aultare of his heart. This
was Origens whole, and only purpose. He exhorts not the people to hear
Service in a strange language. Neither is M. Harding hable to show, that there
was any such Service in the whole Church of God, either then in Origens time,
or within four hundred years after him. Only he encouraged the people to
read the Scriptures, yea although they were not hable to reatche the bottom
of them: as it plainly appears by his own words folowinge: In Scripturis
Sanctis est vis quaedam, quae legenti etiam sine explanatione sufficiat. In the
holy Scriptures there is a certain virtue sufficient for the Reader, yea
although they be not expounded. And therefore he allegeth these words of S.
Paul, 1. Cor. 14.
My sprite prays, but my sense is without fruit: not to warrant M.
Hardinges strange order of prayer, which neither S. Paul, nor Origin him
self ever knew, but only to show, that as God of his mercy healpeth our
weakness in praieinge, so likewise in readinge the Scriptures, he healpeth
our weakness in understanding. S. Paul says, Roman. 8.
Quid Oremus, quemadmodum oporteat, nescimus: sed ipse Spiritus postulat pro
nobis gemitibus inenarrabilibus. We know not what to pray, as it is meet for
us to pray: But the Sprite of God entreats for us with sighs, that cannot
be expressed. Thus, says Origin, The Angels of God delight to see us
praieinge: thus they delight to see us readinge. But if they delight only to see
us pray, or hear in a strange tongue, we know not what, as M. Hardinge would
geather, then are they the Angels of Darkness, and not of God.

Out of this place of Origin M. Hardinge geathereth these reasons: The Angels
are delited to hear us read, or pray, although we of our weakness know not
thoroughly, what we speak: Ergo, the people in Origens time had the Common
Service in a strange tongue.

The error or fraud hereof may the better appear by that, I have before
declared. It is called Fallacia ab Amphibologia, that is, of the doubteful
taking of one word. For this word (Understanding) has two
significations. For we understand the words, and we understand the meaning
of the words. Origin says, the people understood not the meaning of the
Scriptures: Ergo, says M. Hardinge, they understood not the words of the
Scriptures. Again, Origin says: They had no full, and perfect understanding:
Ergo, says M. Hardinge, They had no understanding at al. And therein
stands the falseheade of his argument. And again, The words that Origin
writes of Readinge the Scriptures, M. Hardinge applies the same to the Common
Service: and so violently, and perforce alters, and depraueth Origens
meaning, and concludes one thing for an other. And thus this good Father is
drawn in to prove that thing, that he never neither knew, nor did, nor
willed to be done.

M. Hardinge. The.34. Division.
I trust wise, godly, and steadfast men, who be not carried about with every
wind of Doctrine, will be moved more with the authority of Origin, a man
always in the judgment of all the Christen world accounted most excellently
learned, then with the scorninge of Calvin, who speakinge of the ancient
Latin Service used in England, and France says, In institutionib.
Ad Ecclesiam ex sono non intellecto nullus penitus fructus redit: that of the
sound not understood, no fruit at al retourneth to the Church: vsinge that
word of despite, that might better be spoken by a Mynstrel, of his Pipe and
Taburret, then by a Preacher, of the Divine Service. Neither hereof with any
milder Spirit speaks his Disciple and Subminister Theodore Beza, the hot
Minister of the deformed Churches of France. Confessionis Ca. 4. sectione. 16.
Quaecunque preces ab aliquo co^cipiuntur eo idiomate, quod ipse no^
intelligat, pro Dei ludibrio sunt habendae. What prayers so ever be made
(says he) of any man in a tongue that he understands not, they be to be
taken for a mockery of God. Who so ever here allows Calvin, and Beza,
condemned of the Church, must condemn Origin, for this point never reproved
or toutched of any, that have not spared him where so ever they could charge
him with any error. If al prayers made in an unknown tongue be a mockinge of
God, as Beza says: then were the prayers uttered by miracle in the Primitive
Church with tongues (which the vtterers them selves understood not after the
mind of Chrysostom) a mockinge of God: For I see nothing, whereby they are
excluded from his 87 The.87. untruth. This ge^eral saieinge of Chrysostom is
untruly reported.
general saieinge, and universal proposition. Verily, this teachinge of Beza is
not sound. I ween, if he were out of the protection of his deformed Churches,
and conuented before a Catholic Bishop, to give an account of this doctrine,
he would step back, and revoke that rasshe saieinge again. For else he
should seem to grant, that God gave at the beginning of the Church, the
gift of tongues to be mockte withal: which were very absurd, and
blasphemous. S. Paul wissheth that all the Corinthians spoke with tongues, but
rather that they Prophesied.

The B. of Sarisburie.
I marvel much, what soundenesse of Doctrine M. Hardinge can mean, having
thus taken upon him to be the proctour of ignorance: or how he can well commend
others for constancy, and steadfastness, findinge him self with so light
winds so often removed: or wherefore he should so highly commend that old
Father Origin, at whose hands he finds so small relief.

That he thus bitterly charge that godly learned Father John Calvin, for
saieinge thus, Of the unknown Service there redoundeth no manner profit unto
the Church, Augustine. Confession. lib. 11. Ca. 3.
it toutcheth many others more, and not him only. S. Augustine says thus: Si
Moses mihi Haebraea voce loqueretur, frustra pulsaret sensum meum, nec inde
mentem meam quicquam tangeret. If Moses should speak unto me in the Hebrewe
tongue (for that I understand it not) he should beat my senses in vain,
neither should there any thing thereof enter into my mind. S. Chrysostom
says, Chrysostom. in 1. Cor. 14. homi. 35.
Nisi dixero quod percipi facile, clareque, a vobis possit, sed linguarum
munere praeditum me esse tantum ostendam, nullum ex his, quae non intelligitis,
fructum facientes abibitis, credo. Nam quae vtilitas esse ex voce non
intellecta potest? Unless I speak that you may plainly and clearly
understand, but only show me self to have the gift of tongues, ye shall
depart away having no fruit of those things, No fruit.
that ye understand not. For, of a voice that ye know not, what profit can
ye have? Again he says, Et vos, nisi significantem sonum dederitis, verba
vento, hoc est, nemini facietis. And you, onles ye utter a sound with
understanding, ye shall speak to the wind, Speak to the wind.
that is to say, ye shall speak to no Body. And to pass by all others, Nicolas
Lyra says thus, Si tu Sacerdos benedixeris spiritu, id est, Nicol. Lyra in 1.
ad Corin. 14.
absque hoc, quod populus intelligat, quid proficit populus simplex, and non
intelligens? If thou being the Priest do bliss with thy Sprite, that is to
say, if the people understand thee not, No profit.
what profit has the simple people thereby, not understanding thee?

Therefore as M. Hardinge says, M. Calvin in this point was a scorner, so
might he as well have said, S. Augustine, S. Chrysostom, Nicolas Lyra, and
others are al scorners.

If al prayers, says M. Hardinge, made in a strange tongue be a mockinge of
God, as Beza says, then were the prayers uttered by Miracle in the primitive
Church with tongue, which the vtterers them selves understood not, after the
mind of Chrysostom, a mockinge of God. This exposition of Chrysostom is very
strange, and agrees with few others: and yet is the same here by M. Hardinge
untruly reported. For Chrysostom says not, that who so ever in the
Primitive Church vttred the prayers with tongue, understood not him self,
what he said, but plain the contrary. For thus he says, Chrysostom. 1. Cor.
14. hom. 35.
Linguis loquens se ipsum aedificat: quod quidem fieri non potest, nisi quae
loquatur norit. He that speaks with tongues profits him self: which
cannot be, onles he understand what he says. And he adds further, Et
hactenus quidem disputat de illis, qui ea, quae loquuntur, intelligunt.
Hitherto S. Paul disputes of them, that understand, what they say. Hereby
it is plain, that M. Hardinges general proposition, is not generally true. But
others, Chrysostom says, there were, that abused the gift of tongues, and
knew not them selves, what they said. And whether this were a mockinge of God
or no, let M. Hardinge judge. Chrysostom says, Eadem homilia.
It was a Confusion of the Church, a bragginge, and ostentation of them
selves: without consideration either of them selves, or of others: that such a
one was Simon Magus: that such were the Jews, that betrayed them selves unto
the Devil. And S. Augustine compares them unto Owselles, Pies, and Ravens,
that cry, and chatter, they know not what.

Therefore I doubt not but M. Bezaes exposition will stand, both before God,
and also before any good Catholic Bishop.

M. Hardinge. The.35. Division.
If our new Masters condemn the Latin Service in the Latin Church, for
that the people understand it not, thereof must it follow, that the English
Service, so much of it as consists of Dauides Psaelmes, which is the most
part, be also condemned. The like may be said of other Nations. For how many
shall we find not of the people only, but also of the best learned men, that
understand the meaning of them, in what tongue so ever they be set forth?
Praefat. in Psalm.
S. Hilarie compares the Book of Psalms to a heap of keys, that be to open
the doors of every house of a great City, laid together. Among whom it
is hard to find which keye serves which lock, and without the right keye
no door can be opened. S. Augustine likeneth the people of Aphrica singinge
the Psalms, which they understood not, to Owselles, Popiniayes, Ravens,
Pies, and such other birds, which be taught to sound they know not what,
and yet they understood the tongue they sange them in. And therefore he
exhorts them to learn the meaning of them at his preachinge, least they
should singe not with humane reason, The Latin Church. The Psalms.
(as it is before recited) but with voice only as birds do.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Al our matter is fully answered, and confuted: For M. Harding has called us
New Masters: even with the same authority, and spirit, that Haman said
unto king Darius, ^sther. 13.
The Jews troubled his country, and professed, and used a Nevve Law.
Certainly, our Doctrine is Christ's Doctrine, and has the Testimony, not
only of the Law, and the prophets, but also of the ancient Councels, and
Old Fathers.

The greatest proof for the Latin Service, that M. Hardinge can find,
stands upon the bare name of the Latin Church. And yet in that whole
Church this day, there is not one nation, that either speaks, or
understands the Latin Tongue. Let M. Hardinge only leave his portuise, and
Latin Service: then has he no further cause to brag of his Latin Church.
For, as it now fares, his Service takes not name of his Church, but his
Church of his Service. Uerily, as it is meet, the Service should be in
Latin in the Latin Church: so is it meet, the Service should be in English
in the English Church.

We grant, the Psalms be hard, as it is alleged: for the deep senses, and
high Mysteries, and secret prophecies of Christ, and of his Church therein
contained. Bisides that, M. Hardinge has found out a buntche of keys in S.
Hilarie, wherewith to shut out all the people. Not withstanding the right use
of keys is rather to open, then to shut. Chrysostom Chrysostom. in opere
imperfecto in Mattha^. Ca. 23. Tertull. contra Marcionem li. 4. Mattha^. 23.
says, Clauis est Verbum scientiae Scripturarum, per quam aperitur hominibus
ianua Veritatis. The keie is the word of knowledge of the Scriptures, by the
which the gate of the Truth is opened unto men. And Tertullian likewise
says, Clauis est interpretatio Legis, The keye is the exposition of the Law.
And therefore Christ says, Woe be unto you ye Scribes and Pharisees, that
shut up the Kingedome of God before men: for ye enter not your selves,
neither suffer others, that would enter. And thus they do, says Tertullian,
Docentes po^ius praecepta, and doctrinas hominum, Teachinge rather the
Commandments, and Doctrines of men. But if there be so many keys bound
together, what if M. Hardinge have missed in his choice, and have taken one
keye for an other?

His reason stands thus, The simple people understands not the deep
meaning of the Psalms: Ergo, they understand nothing in the Psalms. By
this keye M. Hardinge may happen to shut out him self. This is a false kind
of reasoninge, which in the Schools is called A secundum quid, ad
simpliciter. For albeit the people understand not all the high Mysteries of
the Scriptures, yet it follows not, that therefore they understand nothing in
the Scriptures. For in the Scriptures there is both Strong meat for Men,
and also Milk for Children: And in the same, says S. Gregory, Gregorius in
Epistola ad Leandrum.
the Elephant may swim, and the Lamb may wade a foot.

And if the Psalms be hard in the Uulgare Tongue, be they therefore easy in
the Latin Tongue? Or if the Psalms be dark, must the people therefore have
their Service in Latin?

Uerily it appears both by David him self, and also by sundry Old
Fathers, that the simplest of all the people were hable to understand the
Psalms. David exhorts Young Men, Psalm. 138.
and Maids, Old men, and Children, to praise the name of the Lord:
Matthae. 21.
Children were hable to receive Christ with Psalms, and to singe alowde,
Blissed is he, that comes in the name of the Lord, and applied the same
aptely unto Christ. Hieronymus ad Marcellam.
S. Hierome says, The poor husbandeman songue the Psalms at his Ploughe: S.
Basile exhorts the artificer to singe Psalms in his shop. Appollinaris
turned ye Psalms into Greek verses, Basi. in psalmos.
that Children might learn them in the Schools. S. Chrysostom Chrysostom. ad
C^loss homi. 9.
says unto the Father, Teach thy Child to singe the Psalms. S. Augustine
says, Psalms The Psalm^s.
were purposely made, that young Men, and Children might learn to singe them.
Prolog. in Psalmos.
Protogenes in the steed of Poets fables, and other like things, gave
Dauides Psalms to Children to expound. And that every of these understood,
what they songue, Theodoret. li. 4. Ca. 19.
it may appear by these words of S. Augustine, Simul and cantare videmur,
and quod ad animae vtilitatem pertinet, docemur. Both we seem to singe, In
prologo in Psalmos.
and also with all are taught that thing, that is profitable for our soul.
Therefore if any in Aphrica songue, they knew not what, S. Augustine compares
them to Ravens, or Popiniayes. But will M. Hardinge thereof conclude thus, They
that know not what they singe, singe like Ravens, or Popiniayes, Ergo, the
people ought to have their Service in a strange tongue?

M. Hardinge. The.36. Division.
The reast of the Scriptures, whereof the Service consists, is, though not
altogether so obscure as the Psalms, yet verily darker, and harder, then that
the common peoples gross and simple wits, may pearce the understanding of
it, by hearing the same pronounced of the minister in their Mother tongue. And
by this reason, we should have no Service at al gathered out of the
Scriptures, for defaulte of understanding.

The B. of Sarisburie.
The people, says M. Hardinge, is gross, and simple, and cannot understand
the Scriptures, by hearing the same in their Mother Tongue: Ergo, they must
hear it pronounced in the Latin Tongue: I trow, that they may the better
understand it. This seems to be a very simple argument: and a gross
ungentle opinion of the Simplicity of the people. God is not partial, James. 4.
neither hides his truth from ye Simple, because he is Simple: but from the
proud, Psalm. 34.
and reprobate, because he is wilful: and specially chooses the Simple of the
world, 1. Corinthians. 1.
to confound the wise. The simplest and grossest of al them, that M. Hardinge
means, John. 10.
is hable to hear the voice of the Sheephearde, and to follow him: but the
stranger, of whom he has been deceived by double doctrine, he doubts him,
and refuses him, and will not follow.

M. Hardinge. The.37. Division.
And where as, of the Service in the Vulgar tongue, the people will frame
lewd, and perverse meaninges of their own lewd senses: so of the Latin
Service, they will make no constructions either of false doctrine, or of evil
life. And as 88 The.88. untruth. For the vulgar Service in^reaseth devotion,
as by sundry Authorities it shall appear.
the vulgar Service pulls their minds from Private Devotion to hear, and
not to pray, to little benefit of knowledge, for the obscurity of it: so the
Latin geuinge them no such motion, they occupy them selves, whiles the
priest prays for all, and in the person of al, in their Private prayers, al,
for all, and every one for him self.

The B. of Sarisburie.
He, that understands what he hears readde, Says M. Hardinge, has his
mind wandringe, and is drawn abroad with vain imaginations. But who so
understands not one word at al, neither what he hears, nor what he
speaks him self, has his mind cloasely fixed upon that he speaks. Thus
M. Hardinge, as he has made a new Divinity, so is he also bold to make a
new Philosophy. For naturally, the mind understanding what it hears, or
reads, and being attentive unto the same, has less cause to wander, and
straie abroad. S. Basile says, Basil. in Psal^ 28.
Lingua psallat* Men's autem scrutetur sensum eorum quae dicis: vt psallas
spiritu, and psallas etiam mente. Let thy tongue singe: and let thy mind
search out the meaning of that, thou speak: that thou maiste singe with
thy spirit, and singe also with thy mind.

But, for as much as M. Hardinge says, the understanding of the Priest, is
a hinderance unto Private Devotion, in favor whereof he utterly defaceth the
public prayers, it shall behooue us to consider, what the old Fathers have
thought in that behalf. Prayers Common and private.
Chrysostom thereof writes thus: Non aeque exoras, cum solus Dominum
obsecras, a^que cum fratribus tuis. Est enim in hoc plus aliquid, videlicet,
concordia, conspiratio, copula amoris, and charitatis, and sacerdotum clamores.
Praesunt enim ob eam rem Sacerdotes, vt populi orationes, quae infirmiores per
se sunt, validiores illas complexae simul in coelum euehantur. Chrysostom. de
incomprehensibili Dei natura homi. 3.
Thou do not so soon obtain thy desire, when thou prayest alone unto the
Lord, as when thou praiest with thy brethren. For herein there is somewhat
more, the concord, the consent, the ioyninge of love and charity, and the
cry of the Priests. For to that end the priests are made overseers, that
they being the stronger sort, may take with them the weaker prayers of the
people, and carry them up into Heaven. Chrysostom. in 2. ad Thessal. hom. 4.
Likewise again he says, Quod quis apud se ipsum precatus accipere non
poterit, hoc cum multitudine preca^us accipiet. Quare? Quia etiamsi non propria
virtus, tamen concordia multum potest. The thing, that a man can not obtain
praieinge by him self alone, praieinge together with the multitude he shall
obtain. And why so? For although not his own worthiness, yet the Concord,
and Unity prevails much. Thus then stood the order of Christ's Church:
The whole multitude gave ear unto the Priest, and at the end of his prayer
lifted up their voices unto heaven al together, and said, Amen: which voice
oftentimes was so great, that, as it is before said, S. Hierome likeneth it
unto a thunder clappe: S. Basile unto the roaringe of the sea. At that time, M.
Hardinges Private Devotion, as it is now used in his Church, would have
been called Private Superstition. And where as he thus strangely says,
Devotion is hindered by understanding, his own Doctor Nicolas Lyra says
otherwise, and condemns him. Lyra in. 1. Corin. Ca. 14.
Si populus intelligat orationem sacerdotis, melius reducitur in Deum, and
deuotius responder, Amen: If the people understand the prayer of the Priest,
they are the better reduced unto God, and with more devotion they answer, In
Nouellis, De Ecclesiasticis diuersis capitulis. (...).
Amen. The Emperor Justinian, where he commands al Bishops, and Priests,
to minister the Service with a lowdo voice, gives this reason withal, Vt
mentes audientium ad maiorem animi compunctionem, and ad reddendam Domino
gloriam excitentur. That the minds of the hearers, may be stirred up to more
devotion, and to render praise unto the Lord. And S. Basile says, Basili. ad
Clericos Naeocaesar.
Tanquam ab vno ore, and vno cord Confessionis Psalmum offerunt Domino: and
verba poenitentiae eorum quisque proprie ascribit sibi. As it were from one
mouth, and from one heart, they offer up unto the Lord the Psalm of
Confession: and the words of repentance every of them applies particularly
unto him self. So likewise it is written in the Prologue Prologus in Augustine.
super Psalmos.
before S. Augustine upon the Psalms. Quomodo debi^e potest Deo psallere, qui
ignorant quid psallat? How can he singe dewly (or deuoutely) unto God, that
knows not, what he sings? It is thought by these, not withstandinge M.
Hardinges contrary, and Private judgment, that the understanding of the
Public Service is no hinderance unto devotion: and their authority in this
case may serve, unless M. Hardinge will condemn them altogether, as he
doothe others, for New Masters.

M. Hardinge. The.38. Division.
89. The.89. untruth. For the Service in the vulgar^ Tongue never was cause
of Schism, or Heresy.
The Nations that have ever had their Service in the Vulgar Tongue, the people
thereof have continewed in Schisms, errors, and certain Iudaical
obseruances, so, as they have not been rekened in the number of the Catholic
Church: As the Christians of Moschouia, of Armenia, of Prester John his land
in Ethiopia. In epistola ad Graecos.
Bessarion askinge by way of a question of the Greeks his country men, what
Church that is, against the which Hell gates shall never prevail: answeareth
him self and says: Aut Latina, aut Graeca est Ecclesia: tertia enim dari non
potest. Siquidem aliae omnes haeresibus sunt plenae, quas sancti Patres, and
Generales Synodi condemnarunt. Either it is the Latin, or the Greek Church:
for there is no third that can be granted. For all other Churches be full of
Heresies, which the holy Fathers, and General Councels have condemned.
Wherefore of these Churches no example ought to be taken for Service in the
Vulgar Tongue: as neither of the Churches of Russia, and Morauia, and certain
other, to whom above six hundred years paste, it was granted to have the
Mass in the Sclauons Tongue, through special license thereto obtained of the sea Apostolic, by Cyrillus and Methodius that first converted them to the
Faith. Which manner of Service, so many of them as be Catholic, for good
causes have leafte, and used the Latin, as other Latin Churches do.
Concerning the reaste yet keepinge their Sclauone tongue, biside other errors
and defaultes, for which they are not herein to be esteemed worthy to be
followed, we may say of them, the words of Gregory Nazianzene. Priuilelegia
paucorum, non faciunt legem communem: The Privileges of a few, make not a
thing lawful in common.

The B. of Sarisburie.
This argument seems to hold thus: Service in the Vulgar Tongue, is cause
of Schisms, and errors: Ergo, within six hundred years after Christ, it
was ministered in some place in a tongue unknown unto the people. The force of
this Conclusion is evident: A very child may soon see through it. If the
Antecedent were true, then should the Jews, the Greeks, and the Latins,
which evermore had their Service in the Uulgare Tongue, for that cause have
been full of Schisms, and errors. S. Augustine, S. Hierome, and other Fathers
say, that pride, and wilfulnes of mind: Tertullian says, Tertull. contra
Hermogenem.
that Knowledge of Philosophy, and affiance of learning, has caused division
and heresies in the Church, and therefore calls the Philosophers the
Patriarchs of Heretics. Council. Toletan. 4. Ca. 24.
The Bishops in the Council of Toledo say thus: Ignorantia est ma^er omnium
errorum. Ignorance is the Mother of al error. But that the understanding of
the Common Service was ever thought the cause of Schism, or error in the
Church, I think it was never either written, or spoken by any old Doctor,
Epiphan. De Haeresibus.
either Greek, or Latin: or Jew, or Gentile. Epiphanius reckeneth up four
scoare sundry Heresies, that had been before his time: S. Augustine Augustine.
ad Quoduult deu^.
reckeneth four scoare and niene. Yet do they not say, that any one of al
those Heresies, ever sprange of understanding the Common Service. No man
would say thus, but M. Hardinge: neither will M. Hardinge thus say, when,
faction, and contention laid aparte, he shall either say that he knows: or
have regard to that he says.

Touching the Christians, which be in infinite numbers in Moschouia, Armenia,
Ethiopia, and else where, whom upon very short advise, he has condemned
altogether for Schismatiques, if he would have credit given unto his tale,
it would have behooued him, both to have declared their particular errors,
and Heresies, and also substantially to have proved, that their vulgar
Service gave occasion unto the same.

The Christians of Russia, and Morauia, says M. Hardinge, afterward upon
good causes received the Latin Service. How be it, of al these good causes he
utters none. But after Cyrillus, and Methodius, by long preachinge, and
great pains had converted them to the Faith of Christ, and for the better
continuance of that they had begone, were desirous, that the people so
converted might have their Common Service in their mother tongue, and the
matter stood in suspense at Rome, in the Consistory before the Bishop there,
and his Cardinals, a voice was heard by an Angel from Heaven, Aeneas Syluiu^
historiae Bohaemicae Ca. 13.
Omnis Spiritus laudet Dominum: and omnis lingua confiteatur ei: Let every
spirit praise the Lord: and let every tongue make confession unto him. By
this story it appears, the Angel of God from heaven was author, that these
Nations should have their Service in their Common Tongue.

Now, if M. Hardinge be able to show, that either Euangeliste, or Angel, or
voice from heaven, ever willed them to leave their own natural speech, and to
use the Latin, then may he say, they had good causes so to do. Bessarions
authority in this case cannot seem great: both for other sundry causes,
which I leave, and also for that he lived at the least, fouretiene hundred
years after Christ, and being out of his own country, and created Cardinal,
and Bishop of Tusculum, he manifestly flattered the Bishop of Rome.

M. Hardinge. The.39. Division.
Wherefore to conclude, seeing 90 The.90. untruth. The contrary is
sufficiently proved in the.15. Division of this Article.
in six hundred years after Christ, the Service of the Church was not in any
other, then in the Greek, and Latin tongue, for that any man is hable to
show by good proof, and the same not understood of al people: seeinge the
auctorities by M. Iuel alleged, importe no necessary argument, nor direct
commandment of the Vulgar Tongue, but only of plain and open pronouncinge,
and that where the tongue of the Service was understood: seeinge the Church
of the English Nation had their Service in the Latin tongue to them unknown,
well near a thousand years pas^e: seeinge the place of S. Paul to the
Corinthians, either pertains not to this purpose, or, if it be so granted,
for the diversity of states of that, and of this our time, it permit^eth a
diversity of observation in this behalf, A heap of untruths laid
together.
though some likeness and resemblance yet reserved: seeinge great profit
comes to the faithful people having it so as they understand it not:
Finally, seeinge the examples rehearsed herein to be followed, be of small
authority, in respect either of antiquity, or of true Religion: As the bold
assertion of M. Iuel is plainly disproued, so the old order of the Latin
Service in the latin Church, whereof England is a Province, is not rashly to
be condemned: specially whereas 91 The.91. untruth, For the first preachers
of the faith in this ^^lande were Greeks, and Hebrews, and not Latins.
being first committed to the Churches by the Apostles of our Country, and
the first Preachers of the Faith here, it has been auctorised by
continuance almost of a thousand years without control, or gain saieinge, to
the glory of God, the wealth of the people, and the procuringe of healpe from
heaven always to this land.

And to add hereunto this much last of al, though it might be granted, that
it were good, the Service were in the Vulgar tongue, as in English for our
country of England: Yet doubteles good men, and zealous keepers of the
Catholic faith, will never allow the Service devised in King Edwardes time,
now restored again, not so much for the tongue it is in, as for the order it
self, and disposition of it, lackinge some things necessary, and having some
other things 92 The.92. untruth, joined with a sclaunder. Our Service
co^teineth nothing contrary to the faith.
repugnant to the Faith, and custom of the Catholic Church.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Here M. Hardinge, it appears, ye begin to mislike your own dealinge, that
after so many words, and so great a countenance of learning, ye should be
found so nakedly, and so vnsensibly to deceive the people. And therefore
having no manner Authority of ancient Council, or Doctor to allege against
the English tongue in the Church of England, yet least in the end, having
said so much, ye should seem to say nothing, ye begin to find fault
with the order of our Service, and without any manner of proof ye say, there
are many things therein contained, contrary to the Catholic Faith: and so
contrary to your own knowledge, ye maintain one untruth by an other.

You know, that we serve God according to his holy word, and the order of
his Primitive Church. Tertull. in Apologetico.
For (As Tertullian says, the Christian people did in his time) Coimus ad
diuinarum Scripturarum commemorationem, si quid praesentium temporum qualitas
aut praemonere cogit, aut recognoscere. Certe fidem sanctis vo^^bus pascimus,
spem erigimus, fiduciam figimus. We meet together to hear the rehearshal of
the holy Scriptures, if the state of the present time do force us either to
forewarne any thing, or else to call any thing to remembrance. Verily we feed
our Faith with those holy words, we confirm our hope, we assure our trust.
We minister the holy Sacraments in pure, and reverent sort: we Baptize in
the name of God the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost: we receive the
Sacrament of Christ's Body and Blood from the Holy Table: we make our humble
Confession, and fall to the ground, and pray al together, with one heart, and
one voice, in sprite, and truth: and specially we pray for you, and for such
others, that ye may consider from whence ye are fallen, and repent your selves,
and return to God: we Excommunicate open offenders: we receive again them
that show them selves penitent: we instruct our youth in the Faith of
Christ: we make collections, and provide charitably for the poor. Of al
these things, what one thing is contrary to the Catholic faith? Sapien. 1.
O M. Hardinge, it is written, The mouth that lies, destroieth the soul:
Mathaei. 12.
And Christ says, The Blasphemy against the holy Ghost, shall never be
forgeuen, neither in this life, nor in the life to come.

Now, good Christian Reader, for the better contenting of thy mind, I beseech
thee to look back, and to consider the whole substance of al, that M.
Hardinge has laid in for proof of this Article, what weight it bears, and
how well it serves to his purpose. He has entreated largely of singinge in the
Quier, at what time, and where it first began: and likewise has proved by a
great long discourse of situation of countries, and diversity of tongues,
that neither all the east part of the world understood the Greek, nor all the
people of Aphrica, Mauritania, Spain, and France understood the Latin:
which labor in this case was nothing needeful. But that all the Nations of
the East part had their Service in the Greek tongue, and that all the people
of Aphrica, Mauritania, Spain, and France had their Service in the Latin
tongue, which thing only stood in Question, and therefore was only to be
proved, he has hitherto utterly leaft unproven. Touching the Public
Service within this Ilelande, the story of Augustine of Rome, and Edda, and
Putta, and other Poets, and singinge men, as I have showed, stands him in
small steed. Contrary to his own knowledge he says, that the foureteenth
Chapter of S. Paul to the Corinthians cannot necessarily be applied to this
purpose: And further he says, that even from the Apostles time, the Priest
evermore made his Prayers in the Quier, far of from the hearing of the
people: That the ignorant people understands the Latin Tongue, although not
in most exact wise, or perfitely: That they are now better instructed in the
Articles of the Faith, then they were in the time of the Apostles: That it is
sufficient for them now to be taught by Gestures, and Ceremonies: and that they
have great profit by hearing their Service, although they know not what they
hear. Again he says, that the Greek, and Latin be learned tongues, and
therefore all the Service of the Church throughout the whole world, ought to
be ministered in one of them: That all the Psalms, and al other Scriptures are
hard, and far pass the capacity of the people: That understanding of the
matter causes the mind to wander: and to be short, that prayer in the Common
tongue, that evermore bredde Schisms, and Divisions in the Church.

He has openly falsified Strabo, Justinian, Origin, Chrysostom, and others,
and has forced them to say the thing, they never meante.

This is the whole Summarie of all that he had to say. Hereof he would seem to
conclude, that within the first six hundred years after Christ, the Common
Service was ministered openly in a tongue unknown unto the people: Albeit he
has hitherto alleged neitheir Scripture, nor Council, nor Decree, nor Doctor,
nor Example, or Practice of the Primitive Church to prove the same.

Of the other side, Justinian. Lyra. and Thom.
it is sufficiently proved of our part, that the fouretienth Chapter to the
Corinthians must of necessity belong to the use of Common prayers: and that
in the Primitive Church, the Service was every where Ministered in the Uulgare
Tongue, and that the Priest and the people prayed al together: I have proved,
not only that the Nations, that understood Greek, or Latin, had their
Service in the Greek, or Latin tongue, but by Theodoretus, Sozomenus, S.
Ambrose, and S. Hierome, that the Syrians had their Service in the Syrian
tongue: by S. Ba^^le, that the Egyptians had their Service in the Egyptian
tongue: The Lybians, the Th^banes, the Palestines, the Arabians, and the
Phenicians, each of them in their own tongue: by Origin, that al Barbarous
people had their Service in their several Barbarous tongues: by Sulpitius, that
the people of France, then called Gallia, had their Service in the French
tongue. S. Hierome says, Vox quidem dissona, sed vna Religio. Tot pene
psallentium chori, quot gentium diuersitates. The voice is diverse, but the
Religion is alone. There be welneare so many companies of people singinge,
H^eronym ad Marcellam.
as there be diversities of Nations. To be short, I have proved by S.
Chrysostom, and by Lyra, and others, that there can no manner profit redounde
unto the people, of prayers made in a strange tongue.

Seeinge therefore M. Hardinges Doctrine stands upon so simple grounds, as I
have showed, and serves only to maintain ignorance, and the kingedome of
darkness, it is now thy part, gentle Reader, to judge indifferently between
us, both how justly he has colored the same with such a face of antiquity,
and also how truly, and substantially he has answered my assertion.

FINIS.
THE FOVRTH ARTICLE, Universal Bishop.
OF THE SVPREMACIE.
The B. of Sarisburie.
Or that the Bishop of Rome was then called an universal Bishop, or the head of
the universal Church.

M. Hardinge. The.1. Division.
BY what name so ever the Bishop of Rome was called within six hundred years
after Christ's Ascension, this is clear, that his Primacie, that is to say,
Supreme power, and authority over and above al Bishops, and chief
government of al Christ's flock, in matters perteininge to Faith, and
Christen Religion, was then 93 The.93. Untruth, for there was no such power
confessed. Not one at al.
acknowleged and confessed. Which thing being so, whether then he were
called by either of those names that you deny, or no: it is not of great
importance. And yet for the one of them somewhat, and for the other, an infinite
number of good auctorities may be alleged. But thereof hereafter.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Touching these glorious Names, and Titles wherewith the Bishop of Rome has
long sithence fournished, and bewtified his estate, M. Hardinge seems in
part willingly to yield: claiminge nevertheless the Supreme Power, and
Uniuersal Authority unto the Sea of Rome, and that even from the Apostles
time: notwithstanding it was as easy a matter for Christ to give Peter the
power and Title both together, as to give him the power alone without the
Title. But to avoid error that might grow by mistaking of words, him we
call the Universal Bishop, Extra. De elect. and Electi pta^te. Solitae.
or the Head of the Universal Church, that has authority above al General
Councels, and fullness of power to expound the Scriptures: to whose
determinations the whole Church of God must of necessity submitt^ it self
without contradiction: De Maiorit. and obedien. Vnam Sanctam. 9. Quaest. 3.
Nemo.
whom neither Emperor, nor King, nor Clergy, nor the whole Uniuersal
people, in any wise may control, what so ever he do: unto whom al Appeals
ought to lie from al places of the world: and who, wheresoever he happen to
be, has the full Jurisdiction of a Bishop. That ever any such Superiority, or
Uniuersal power was given by Christ to the Sea of Rome, it will be to much for
M. Hardinge well to prove.

But, where as the Bishop there so ambitiousely craves to be known, and taken
for the Uniuersal Bishop, and Head of the Uniuersal Church, happy is he, if he
do the dewtie of one particular Bishop, and be found but a member of
Christ's Church. S. Gregory Gregor. in Caten. in Matthae. Ca. 16.
says, Aduersus quem portae praeualent Inferorum, ille neque petra dicendus
est, supra quam Christus aedificat E^clesiam, neque Ecclesia, neque pars
Ecclesiae. He, against whom the gates of Hell do prevail (as they have often
against the Bishop of Rome) neither may be called the Rock, whereupon Christ
does build his Church, nor the Church, nor any part of the Church.

Certainly, touching these vain Titles, the same Ancient Father S. Gregory
says, Ego fidenter dico: quisquis se Vniuersalem Sacerdotem vocat, Gregor. li.
4. ^^pist. 34.
vel vocari de^iderat, in elatione sua Antichristum praecurrit: I speak it
boldly: who so ever, either calls him self the Universal Bishop, or desires
so to be called, in his pride he is the ^orerenner of Antichriste.

M. Hardinge. The.2. Division.
Now concerning the chief point of this Article, which is the Primacie of
the Pope Peter's successor, De Iure diuino.
First, it has been set up and ordained by God, A heap (...)vntruethe^.
so as it stands in force Iure diuino, by Gods law, and not only by man's
law, the Scriptures leadinge thereto. Next, commended to the world, by decrees
of Councels, and confirmed by edictes of Christen Emperors, for avoiding of
Schisms. Furthermore, confessed and witnessed by the holy Fathers. Again,
found to be necessary by reason. Finally, used and declared by the euente of
things, and practice of the Church. For proof of all this, so much might
easily be said, as should serve to a whole volume.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Here M. Hardinge says, He will Trippe, and Dance lightly over this Article.
And therefore notwithstanding he would seem to hold De Iure diuino, that is
by the Scriptures, yet for haste he allegeth not any one word of the
Scriptures, as of him self, but only upon the report and credit of others.
Howbeit Pope Zosimus in all that long contention, Zosimus in Council. Aphricano.
he had with the Bishops of Aphrica, touching these matters, never alleged
any word of the Scriptures, but only the Council of Nice, which he him
self had falsified. And Meltiades writing hereof to the Bishops of Spain,
Meltiades in epist. ad ^pis. Hispani^e.
seems to claim only by Custom, and not by any right of Gods Word.

Nevertheless sithence that time, they have found out sundry places of the
Scriptures to auouche their Title, John. 17.
and have forced the same to serve their purpose. Christ says, Matthew. 28.
Al power is given to me: Hereof Stephanus the Bishop of Patraca concludes
thus: In Council. Lateran. sub Leone.
Ergo in Papa est omnis potestas supra omnes potestates tam Coeli, quam terrae.
Therefore in the Pope is al power above al powers, as well of Heaven, as of
earth. Some others there be that reason thus: Reginal. Polus aduersus H. 8.
Regem Angliae. De Maiori. and obedien. Vnam Sanctam. 1. Corinthians. 2.
Peter entered into the Grave before John: Peter drew his Net full of Fish: unto
Peter Christ said, Confirm thy brethren: Ergo, The Pope is head of the
Church. Bonifacius the eight says, In principio creauit Deus Coelum, and
terram: non in principijs: God made Heaven, and earth, in the beginning: and
not in the beginninges, as in many: And again, Spiritualis omnia dijudicat,
He that is spiritual judges al things: Ergo, The Bishop of Rome ought to have
an Universal power over all the world. By these, and other like authorities of
the Scriptures they conclude, that the Pope holds his authority, not by any
ordinance of man, but De Iure diuino, That is, even by the right of Gods
undoubted Law. And therefore Pope Bonifacius determines the matter in this
wise to hold for ever: Declaramus, Dicimus, Definimus, Pronuntiamus, omnino
esse de necessitate salutis omni humanae creaturae, De Mayor. etc. Vt supra.
subesse Romano Pontifici. We declare, say, determine, and pronounce, that
undoubtedly it stands upon the necessity of Salvation, for every mortal
creature, Glosa ibidem.
to be subject to the Bishop of Rome. Likewise says the Gloss upon the same:
Quicquid saluatur, est sub summo pontifice. What so ever is saved, is under the
highest Bishop. If ^^ese claims be good, it is no hard matter to hold by
Scriptures.

But, Math. 16.
for as much as they seem to make greatest account of these words of
Christ, Mark. 8.
Thou art Peter, and upon this rock I vvil build my Church, Therefore for
answer hereunto, Luke. 9.
understand thou good Christian Reader, that the Old Catholic Fathers, 1. Corinthians. 10.
have written and pronounced, not any Mortal man as Peter was, Gregor. Nyssen.
in Testimonijs delectis exveteri testam.
but Christ him self, the Son of God to be this Rock. Gregorius Nyssenus
says, Tu es Petrus etc. Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock I vvil build my
Church. He means the Confession of Christ: for he had said before: Thou
art Christ, the Son of the living God. So says S. Hilarie, Haec est vna
fo^lix fidei Petra, Hilar. de Trini. ^i. 2.
quam Petrus ore suo confessus est. This is that only Blessed Rock of Faith,
that Peter confessed with his mouth. Again he says: Upon this Rock of
Peter's Confession, Hilar. de Trini. li. 6.
is the buildinge of the Church. So Cyrillus, Petra nihil aliud est, quam
firma, and inconcussa Discipuli Fides. The Rock is nothing else, but the
strong, Cyril. de Trini. li. 4.
and assured Faith of the Disciple. So likewise Chrysostom, Super hanc
Petra^, id e^t, In hac Fide, and Confessione aedificabo Ecclesiam mea^. Upon
this Rock, that is to say, Chrysostom. in Matthae. hom. 55. De Verbis Domini
secundum Matthae. Sermon. 13 Origin. in Matthae. tracta. 1.
upon this Faith, and this Confession I will build my Church. Likewise S.
Augustine, Petra erat Christus, super quod fundamentum etiam aedificatus est
Petrus. Christ was the Rock, upon which ^undation Peter him self was also
builte. And adds further bisides, Non me aedificabo super te: sed te
aedificabo super me. Christ says unto Peter, I will not build me self upon
thee: but I will build thee upon me. Al these Fathers be plain: but none so
plain as Origin. His words be these, Petra est, quicunque est Discipulus
Christi: Et super talem petra^ construitur omnis Ecclesiastica Doctrina. Quod
si super vnu^ illum Petrum tantum existimas aedificari tota^ Ecclesia^* quid
dicturus es de Iohanne Filio Tonitrui, and Apostolorum vnoquoque? Number audebimus
dicere, quod aduersus Petrum vnum non praeualiturae sint portae Inferorum? An
soli Petro dan^ur a Christo Claues Regni Co^lorum? He is the Rock, who so ever
is the Disciple of Christ: And Upon such a Rock al Ecclesiastical learning
is builte. If thou think, that the whole Church is builte only upon Peter,
Marc. 3*
what then will thou say of John, the Son of the Thunder, and of every of the
Apostles? Shall we dare to say, that the Gates of Hell shall not prevail only
against Peter? Or are the keys of the Kingedome of Heaven given only unto
Peter? By these few it may appear, what right the Pope has to claim his
authority by Gods word, and as M. Hardinge says, De Iure diuino. In deed
touching the same words of S. Matthew, Hieronym. in Matthae. Ca. 16* li. 3.
S. Hierome writes thus, Istum locum Episcopi, and Presbyteri non
intelligentes, aliquid sibi de Pharisaeorum assumunt supercilio. Bishops and
Priests not understanding this place, take upon them some part of the proud
looks of the Phariseis. And again he says, Nouerint Episcopi, se magis
consuetudine, quam dispositionis Dominicae veritate, Presbyteris esse maiores.
Let Bishops understand, that they are greater then the Priests, more of
Custom, then of the truth of Gods ordinance. By this it appears, that the
Bishop of Rome holds by Custom, and not, as M. Hardinge says, De Iure
diuino.

As for the Decrees of Councels, the Edictes of Princes, the saieinges of holy
Fathers, the Necessity of Reason, and the Practice of the Church, how justly
they be avouched by M. Hardinge, they shall be severally examined, as they come.

M. Hardinge. The.3. Division.
But I in this treatise seekinge to avoid prolixitie, having purposed to say
somewhat to this number of the other Articles, and knowinge this matter of the
Primacie to be already largely, and learnedly, Trippe.
handeled of others: will but Trippe, as it were, lightly over at this time, and
not set my fast footinge in the deep debatinge and treatinge of it.

First, as concerning the right of the Primacie by Gods law, by these
ancient authorities it has been avouched. Anacletus that holy Bishop, and
Martyr, S. Peter's Scholar, and of him Consecrated Priest, in his Epistle to the
Bishops of Italy, writes thus. In Nouo Testamento post Christum etc. In the
New Testament the order of Priests began after our Lord Christ of Peter,
because to him Bishoprike was first given in the Church of Christ, where as
our Lord said unto him, Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock I vvil build my
Church, and the gates of Hell shall not prevail against it: and unto thee I
vvil give the keys of the kingedome of Heaven. Wherefore this Peter received
of our Lord first of al, power to bind and to loose: and first of al he
brought people to the faith by virtue of his Preachinge. As for the other
Apostles, they received honor and power in like fellowship with him, and willed
him to be their Prince, or chief governor.

In an other Epistle to al Bishops, alleging the same text, for the Primacie
of the sea of Rome, speakinge of the disposition of Churches committed to
Patriarchs, and Primates, says thus most plainly. This holy and Apostolic
Church of Rome, has obtained the Primacie, not of the Apostles* but of our
Lord and Savior him self, and has gotten the preeminence of power over al
Churches, and over the whole flock of Christen people, even so as he said to
blessed Peter the Apostle: Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock etc.

The B. of Sarisburie. Epistles Decretal.

The authorities here alleged are full of Fogge, and false ground, and can
abide no falt footinge: and therefore M. Hardinge Trippeth them so lightly over.

Touching this Epistle of Anacletus, and other like Epistles Decretal, I will
only give a taste, and leave the judgment thereof unto the Reader.

First one Petrus Crabbe the compiler of the Councelles complains much, that
the examples, from whence he took them, were woonderfully corrupted, and not
one of them agreeing with an other, In admonitione ad lectore^, ante Decret.
Liberij. Did. 20. Decretales.
and expresses the same by these words, Exemplarium intolerabilis nimiaque
differentia, and deprauatio.

Again, Gratian him self upon good advise is driven to say, that al such
Epis^les ought to have place, rather in debatinge of matter of Justice in the
Consistory, then in determininge, and weighing the truth of the Scriptures.

Bisides this, neither S. Hierome, nor Gennadius, nor Damasus, nor any other
old Father, ever alleged these Epistles, or made any account of them: nor the
Bishops of Rome them selves, no not when such evidence might have stand them
in best steed, namely in their ambitious contention for the Superiority over
the Bishops of Aphrica.

The contents of them are such, as a very child of any judgment, may soon
be hable to discrie them.

Clemens informs S. James of the order, Clemen ^pis. 1.
and manner of S. Peter's death: yet it is certain, Hieronym. de Ecclesiast.
Scriptoribus.
and Clement undoubtedly knew it, that James was put to death seven years
b^^ore S. Peter.

Antherus makes mention of Eusebius Bishop of Alexandria, Anther. Epis. 1.
and of Felix Bishop of Ephesus: yet was neither Eusebius, nor Felix, neither
Bishop, nor borne all the time, that Antherus lived.

Marcellinus says, Macellin. Epis. 2. ad Oriental.
The Emperor might not attempt to presume any thing against the Gospel: Yet
was there then no Emperor alive, that understood Christ, or knew the Gospel.

Marcellus writes to the Emperor Maxentius, Marcell. Epis. 2.
and charge him straitely with the authority of Clement: yet was Maxentius
an Infidel, a cruel Tyran, and a persequutor of the Church: and neither knew,
nor cared for the name of Clement.

Zephyrinus says, Zephyrin. epis. 1.
Christ commanded his Apostles to appointe the threescore and twelve
Disciples: Luc. Ca. 10.
Yet S. Luke says, Christ him self appointed them.

S. Luke says, Luc. 3.
John the Baptist gave this counsel to the Soldiers, Be ye contented with your
wages etc. Meltiad. Epist. 1.
Yet Meltiades quite alters the whole story, and names Christ in steed of
John.

It would be tedious, and needless, to open al: these few notes may suffice
for a taste.

Now touching this Anacletus, Anaclet. epist. 1.
whom M. Harding has fournished with his titles, as though it were the very
true Anacletus in deed, First he says, Clemens was his predecessor: Irenaeus
li. 3. ca. 3.
Contrary wise, Irenaeus that lived immediately afterward, and Eusebius say,
Anacletus was predecessor unto Clement. Whereby it may appear, that Anacletus
wrote this Epistle, after that he him self was dead.

He makes mention of S. Peter's Church: yet was there no church built in the
name of Peter, Did. 93. Iuxta Sanctorum.
within three hundred years after Anacletus.

Again, Anacleti Epis. 3.
he allegeth the Decrees and Canons of the old Fathers: His words be these,
Haec ab antiquis Apostolis, and patribus accepimus: These things have we
rece^ued of the Old Apostles, and ancient Fathers, as if the Apostles had
been long before him: notwithstanding S. John the Apostle was yet alive, and
Anacletus him self was one of the oldest Fathers.

Although by that, I have thus shortly touched, the likelyhoode hereof may
soon appear, yet I beseech thee, good Christian Reader, consider also these,
and other like phrases, and manners of speech, which in these Epistles are
very familiar, and may easily be found. Persequutiones patie^ter portare: pe^o
vt pro me orare debeas: Episcopi obediendi sunt, non insidiandi: Ab illis omnes
Christiani se cauere debent. Here is not so much, as the very congruitie, and
natural sound of the Latin Tongue. And shall we think, that for the space of
three hundred years, and more, there was not one* Bishop in Rome, that could
speak true Latin? And specially then, when all the whole people there, both
women, and children were hable to speak it naturally without a teacher? Extra.
De res^riptis. Ad audientiam.
Uerily, the Pope him self says, Falsa Latinitas vitiat rescriptum Papae.
False Latin puts the Popes own write out of credit.

As for the substance and contents of these Epistles, they touch nothing,
neither of the state of the Church in that time, nor of Doctrine, nor of
Persequution, nor of Heresy, nor of the office of the Ministers, nor of any
other thing, either agreeable unto that age, or in any wise greatly worthy to
be considered.

Al their drifte is, by salsi^ieinge of the Scriptures, and by all other means,
only to stablishe the state, Anacle^i. epist. 1.
and Kingdom of the Sea of Rome. Anacletus thus inter^aceth the words of
Christ, Super hanc Petram, id est, super Ecclesiam Romanam, aedifieabo
Ecclesiam meam. Upon this Rock, that is to say, upon the Church of Rome, I
will build my Church. And again, Romana Ecclesia Cardo, and Caput est omnium
Ecclesiarum. Vt enim Cardine ostium regitur, Anaclet. Epist. 3.
ita huius sanctae Sedis authoritate omnes Ecclesiae reguntur. The Church of
Rome is the Hook, and ye Head of al Churches. For as the door is ruled by the
Hook: so al Churches are ruled by th* authority of this holy See (of Rome).

Pope Stephanus says, Did. 79. Oportebat.
Hae^ Sacrosancta Domina nostra Romana Ecclesia. This holy our Lady the Church
of Rome.

And what needed M. Hardinge to allege only Anacletus, being so well stoared
of sundry others? For Pope Euaristus, Alexander, Sixtus, Teles^horus, Higinus,
Pius, Anicetus, Soter, Eleutherius, Uictor, and all the reast of the ancient
Bishops of Rome, whose names have been abused to this purpose, agree in one.
Al they are made to say, We are the Universal Bishops: we are the headdes of
the Universal Church: Al appeals ought of right to lie to us: we cannot
err: we may not be controlled: For it is written, The Scholar is not above
his Master. If these authorities were sufficient, then were the case clear of
M. Hardinges side. But he saw, they were forged, and full of untruth: and
therefore he thought it best to trippe so lightly over them. As for Anacletus
him self, that was Peter's Scholar, and the reast of the ancient Bishops of
Rome, they were holy men, and godly Fathers: and lived in continual
persecution: and were daily taken, and put to death: and had no leisure to
think upon these ambitious, and vain titles.

M. Hardinge. The.4. Division.
S. Gregory writing to Mauritius the Emperor against John the Bishop of
Constantinople, ambitiousely claiminge, and vsurpinge the name of an universal
Bishop, proves the Bishop of Rome succeedinge in Peter's Chaier, to be
Primate, and to have charge over all the Church of Christ, by Scriptures,
thus: Cunctis Euangelium scientibus liquer etc. It is evident to all that know
the Gospel, that the Cure, and charge of the whole Church, has been
committed by the word of our Lord to the Holy Apostle Peter, Joan. 2^.
prince of all the Apostles. For to him it is said, Peter, love thou me?
Luc. 22.
Feed my sheep. To him it is said: Behold Satan has desired to sifte you
as it were wheat, and I have prayed for thee, Peter, that thy faith fail not.
And thou being once converted, strengthen thy brethren. To him it is said,
Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock will I build my Church: and the Gates of
Hell shall not prevail against it. Matthew.16.
And unto thee I will give the Keys of the kingedome of Heaven. And what so
ever thou bindest upon earth, shall be bound also in Heaven, and what so ever
thou lowsest on earth, shall be lowsed also in Heaven. Behold he receives the
keys of the heavenly Kingdom: Cura ei totius Ecclesiae and principatus
committitur.
the power of bindinge and lowsing is given to him: the charge of the whole
Church and principality is committed to him. Thus far Gregory. M. Harding
cutteth of, and corrupts the words of S. Gregory, For it follows
immediately, Tamen P^trus Vniuersalis Apostolus no^vocatur.
But bi^ause our adu^rsaries though without just cause, refuse the witness of
the Bishops of Rome in this Article, as unlawful witnesses in their own
cause, were they never so holy Martyrs, or learned Confess^urs: they may
understand we are hable to allege sundry other authorities to the
confirmation hereof, that be above al exception.

The B. of Sarisburie.
If S. Gregory were now alive, he would charge M. Hardinge with open injury:
not only for alteringe his whole meaning, but also for manglinge, and maiming
his very words. M. Harding to prove, that the Bishop of Rome was called the
Uniuersal Bishop, allegeth these words of S. Gregory: Gregor. li. 4.
Ecce, Petrus claues Regni Coelorum accipit: Epist. 32*
Et potestas ei ligandi, soluendique tribuitur. Cura ei totius Ecclesiae, and
principatus committitur. Behold Peter receives the keys of the Kingedome of
Heaven. To him is given power both to bind, and to loose. The charge and
chief rule of the Church is committed unto him. Thus far Gregory, says M.
Hardinge.

And why no farther? was he stayed with the Choynecough, and forced to break
of his tale in the midst? But mark well, gentle Reader, and thou shall see S.
Gregory set to School, and keapte in awe, and not suffered to utter one word
more, then M. Hardinge will give him leave. The next words that immediately
follow in the same sentence, are these, Tamen Petrus Vniuersalis Apostolus non
vocatur. Yet Peter is not called the Universal Apostle. Petrus vniuersa^lis
Apostolus non vocatur.
M. Hardinge says, The Bishop of Rome was called the Universal Bishop. But
S. Gregory even in the self same sentence, that M. Hardinge has here so
hastily broaken of, says, Peter him self being the Apostle of Christ, yet
was not called the Universal Apostle. And would M. Hardinge have the world
believe, that the Popes power is greater, and more universal then S. Peter's?
These words M. Hardinge thought good to nippe of in the mids. Such is his
dealing in the allegation of the Ancient Fathers. If I list to use his own
terms, I might well call this Foystinge, or Cogging, or, I know not what.
Certainly the holy Fathers in the Council of Constantinople say thus, Non
conuenit orthodoxis, Council. Constantinopol. 8.
ita circumtruncatas Sanctorum Patrum voces deflorare. Haereticorum potius hoc
proprium est. Action 8.
It is not meet for Catholic men, thus to choppe, and to pare the s^^einges
of the holy F^thers. It is rather the very property of Heretics.

M. Hardinge will say, Gregory mis^iked this name of Uniuersal Bishop, only in
John the Bishop of Constantinople, that so ambitiousely, and so greadily sought
for it: and yet nevertheless claimed the same unto him self, as a title only
belonginge to the Sea of Rome: and that we therefore do wrongefully rack S.
Gregory, forcinge his words otherwise, then he ever meante. For answer
hereunto it shall behooue us to consider, both what S. Gregory has written in
general of this title, and also what special claim he has laid unto it for
him self.

Thus therefore generally he writes of it. Ego fidenter dico, quisquis se
vniuersalem sacerdotem vocat, Gregor. li. 4.
vel vocari desiderat, in elatione sua Antichristum praecurrit: quia
superbiendo se coereris praeponit. Epist. 30.
I speak it boldly, who so ever calls him self, Vniue^s^l Bishop, or
desires so to be called, is in his pride the Forer^nn^r of Antichriste:
because in his pride he sets him self before others.

Hac in re a fratre, and Con^acerdo^e meo contra Euangelica^ sententiam etc.
Herein my Brother and fellow Bishop does against the meaning of the Gospel:
Gregor. li. 4.
against S. Peter the Apos^le: against al Ch^rches: Epist. 34.
and against the ordinance of the Canons. In this pride of his, what other
thing is there tokened, but that the time of Antichrist is even at hand? For
he follows him, that despisinge the equality of joy among the Angels,
labored to break up to the top of singularity, ^sai. 14*
saieing thus, I will auance my throne above the stars of Heaven: I will sit in
the Mount of the Testament: even in the corners of the North: I will geate me
up above the light of the clouds, Greg. li. 4. Epi. 38*
and will be like unto the highest. Again, Rex superbiae in foribus est,
Sacerdotum est paratus exercitus.
etc. The king of pride is even in the Gates: and, a horrible thing to
speak, an army of Pri^stes is made ready. For now they play the Soldiers,
and bear then heads on high, that were ordained to be Captains of humility.

Again, Ita in manuscriptis, Melius quam exitus.
I would have al men to be great, and honorable: so that there honor be no
de derogation to the honor of God. For who so will be honored against God,
shall not be honorable unto me. Again, Neither may you say, that the vsinge of
this Title is nothing. For, if we bear this matter quietly, we overthrow the
Faith of the whole Church. The agreeing unto this wicked Title, is the loosinge
of the Faith. Greg. li. 6. ep. 28.
Thus therefore S. Gregory judges generally of the name of Universal Bishop:
Greg. li. 6. ep. 24
which name not withstanding the Bishops of Rome have sithence chosen, Greg.
li. 4. ep. 3^.
and taken to them selves: that is to say, That it is Vain, and Hurteful: the
Confusion, the poison, and Utter, and Universal destruction of the Church: The
corruption, and loosinge of the Faith: against the holy Canons: against S.
Peter the Apostle: against the very sense, and meaning of the Gospel: against
all the Churches of God, and against God him self: that never good, or holy man
would use such titles: that who so ever uses them, in so dooinge follows
Lucifer, and is the very Forerenn^r, and Messinger of Antichriste.

Perhaps M. Hardinge will say, This name belonged peculiarly, and only to the
Bishop of Rome: and therefore Gregory reproved John the Bishop of
Constantinople, for that he so presumptuousely, and by way of intrusion,
claimed the same, as a right, and interest, that was not his. But S. Gregory
calls the same title of Uniuersal Bishop, Li. 6. Epist. 2.
Typhum superbiae: Li. 4. Epist. 32*
Nomen nouum: Li. 4. Epist. 38.
Vocabulum Temerarium, Stultum, Li. 4. Epist. 32.
Superbum, Pompaticum, Li. 4. Epist. 38.
peruersum, Li. 6. Epist. 24.
Superstitiosum, Profanu^, Li. 4. Epist. 39.
Scelestum: Li. 4. Epist. 38.
Nomen erroris: Li. 4. Epist. 32.
Nomen singularitatis: Li. 4. Epist. 39.
Nomen vanitatis: Li. 4. Epist. 39.
Nomen Hypocriseos: Li. 4. Epist. 39.
Nomen Blasphemiae. That is to say, A puff of Arrogancy: A new name: a R^she,
a Poolishe, a Proud, a Pompouse, a Perverse, a Superstitious, an Ungodly, and
a Wicked title: A name of Error: a name of Singularity: a name of Vanity: a
name of Hyprocrisie: and a name of Blasphemy. And doothe M. Harding think, or
would he have the world believe, that S. Gregory would ever take these
names and titles from John the Bishop of Constantinople, to the intent to lay
them upon his own See of Rome? Or is it likely, that M. Harding knows S.
Gregory's mind, better then ever S. Gregory knew it him self? U^rily, S.
Gregory not only misliketh these titles in others, but also disclaimeth the
same from him self, and from his See of Rome for ever. Greg. li. 4. Ep. 32.
For thus he writes, and his words be plain: Nullus Romanorum Pontificum
hoc Singularitatis nomen assumpsit. None of the Bishops of Rome ^uer received
this name of singularity. Nullus decessorum meorum hoc tam profano vocabulo
vti consensit. None of my predicessours ever consented to use this ungodly
name. Greg. li. 4. ep. 3^
Nos hunc honorem nolumus oblatum sucipere. We, being Bishops of Rome, will
not take this honor being offered Unto Us.

And the reason that he forces against the Bishop of Constantinople, may
serve as well against the Bishop of Rome. Greg. li. 4. ep. 3^.
For thus he says, Quid tu Christo Vniuersalis Ecclesiae Capiti, in extremi
Iudi^ij dicturus es examine, qui cuncta eius membra^^bimet conaris Vniuersalis
appellatione supponere? what answer will thou make unto Christ, that in
deed is the Head of the Universal Church, at the trial of the last Judgment,
yt thus go about under the name of Universal Bishop, to subdue al his
members unto thee? This is the very definition of an Uniuersal Bishop. Thus the
Bishop of Rome attempteth to subdue, the whole Church of God, and al ye
members of Christ unto him self. Therefore by S. Gregory's judgment, Gregor.
li. 7.
he is the Forerenner of Antichriste.

And writing unto Eulogius the Patriake of Alexandria, he uses these words:
Sanctitas vestra mihi sic loquitur, ^pist. 30.
Sicut iussistis: Quod verbum Iussionis, Pe^o, a meo auditu remouete. Quia
scio, quis sim, and qui sitis: Loco mihi fratres estis: moribus patres. Your
holiness writes thus unto me, As you commanded. This word of Commanding,
I beseech you, take away from my hearing. For I know both what I am, and also
what you are. Ibidem.
In place (or dignity) ye are my brethren, in life and manners, ye are my
Fathers. Again he says, Ecce in praefatione Epistolae etc. Behold even in
the very preface of the Epistle, that you sent unto me, you have written the
name of that Presumptuous title, calling me the universal Pope,
notwithstanding I have forbidden it. I beseech your holiness to do it no
more. For you do defraude your self, when you give an other more, then reason
would. The self same meaning M. Hardinge might have found twice written,
even in the same place of S. Gregory that he here allegeth, if it had pleased
him to consider, either what went before, or else what followed immediately after.
Gregor. li. 4.
Before, he writes thus, Non mea causa, sed Dei est. Nec solus ego, sed to^a
turbatur Ecclesia. Epist. 32.
Quia piae Leges: quia venerandae Synodi: quia ipsa Domini nostri Jesus Christi
manda^a Superbi, atque Pompatici cuiusdam sermonis inuentione turbantur. It is
Gods cause, it is not mine: Neither only I, but also the whole Church is
troubled. For both the godly Laws, and the Reverend Councels, and the very
co^m^undementes of our Lord Jesus Christ, are com^red with the divise of this
proud pompous Title. Immediately after it follows thus: Nunquid ego in hac re
pijssime Domine propria^ cau^am defendo? O my most Gracious Sou^raine, do I
herein defend mine own right? By these it may appear, that S. Gregory being
Bishop of Rome, would not suffer the name of universal Bishop to be given,
neither to any other Bishop, nor to him self.

And where as S. Gregory says, The charge and chieftie of the whole Church
is committed unto Peter, ^^ Corinth. 11.
in the sense, it is spoken in, we deny it not. S. Paul likewise says of
him self in like sense: Incumbit mihi quotidiana cura omniu^ Ecclesiaru^.
There lies upon me the daily charge of al Churches: ^. Corinth. 11.
And further says, I reckon me self to be nothing inferior in travail to
the highest Apostles. And will M. Harding hereof reason thus, Peter had the
charge of the whole Church: Ergo, The Pope is an universal Bishop?



Certainly S. Gregory says, Gregor. li. 4.
Peter him self, notwithstanding he received the whole charge, Epist. 32
yet is he not called the universal Apostle. And can the Pope be that thing,
that S. Peter him self could not be? Tamen Vniuersalis Apostolus non vocatur.


S. Gregory drives his reason thus: If this title of universality might
belong to any man, it should chiefly belong unto S. Peter: But it belongs
not unto S. Peter: Therefore it can belong to no man.

Hereby it is plain, that the Bishop of Rome challenges this day, a title
that S. Peter never had: that no holy, nor godly man would ever take upon him:
that S. Gregory utterly refused, and detested, and called blasphemy. And yet
will he seem to maintain his estate by the authority of this holy Father. If
S. Gregory Gregor. li. 4.
were now alive, he would cry out, as he did to the Emperor Mauritius, O
tempora: O Mores. The. 94. ^^truth. For S. Cyprian speaks these vvord^ of
every several Bishop: not only of the Bishop o^ Rome,
O what a time is this? O what manners are these? Thus much is M. Hardinge
furthered by the authority of S. Gregory. Epist. 3^^


M. Hardinge. The.5. Division.
S. Cyprian declaringe the contempt of the 93 High Priest Christ's Vicar in
earth, to be cause of Schi^mes and Heresies, writes thus to Cornelius Pope,
and Martyr. Neque enim aliunde Haereses obortae sunt etc. Neither have
Haeresies, or Schisms risen of any other occasion, then of that, the Priest
of God is not obeyed, and that one Priest for the time in the Church, and one
Judge for the time in steed of Christ, is not thought upon. To whom if the
whole brotherhead, (95 The.95. untruth, standing in the manifest corruption and
falsifieinge of S. Cyprian.
that is the whole number of Christian people which be brethren together, and
were so called in the Primitive Church) would be obedient according to
Gods teachinges: S^cundum M^gisteria d^uina.
then no man would make a do against the College of Pries^es: no man would
make him self Judge, not of the Bishop now, but of God, after Gods
judgment, after the favor of the people declared by their voices at the
election, after the consent of his fellow bishops: No man through breach of
unity, and strife, would divide the Church of Christ: No man standinge in
his own conceit, and swelling with pride, would set up by him self abroad
without the Church a new Heresy.

The B. of Sarisburie.
I^ M. Hardinges cause were true, he would not auouche it with such untruth,
and so often corruption of the holy fathers. If S. Cyprian writing this Epistle
to Cornelius the Bishop of Rome, once name him either the High Pri^ste: Or
Christ's Vicar General in earth: Or Universal Bishop: Or Head of the Universal
Church: Or say, that the whole Brotherhoode of al Christian people ought to
be obedient unto him, As M. Hardinge untruly, and contrary to his own^
knowledge expounds it: or if either his words, or his purpose of writing,
may seem any way to lead to that end, then may M. Hardinge seem to have
some honest color for his defense. Otherwise we may justly say, He racketh
the Doctors, and forces them to speak, what him lists, to s^rue his t^rne.

First, it is certain, that in all that Epistle, S. Cyprian never gave unto
C^rnelius any such ambitious Title, but only calls him by the name of
Brother. For thus he saluteth him. Cyprian. li ^* epist. 3.
Cyprian unto his Brother Cornelius sends greetinge: And makes his entry in
this wise: Dear Brother, I have readde your letters. Thus S. Cyprian being
Bishop of Carthage claims brotherhoode, and equality with the Pope. One
special occasion of his writing unto Cornelius, was this emongst others:
Cornelius being Bishop of Rome, and having Excommunicate certain notorious
wicked men, and afterward being threatened, and il used at their hands,
began to fainte, and to be weary of his office. S. Cyprian hearing thereof,
wrote comfortably unto him, and willed him in any wise to proceed, and to
deal boldly, and not to yield, consideringe it was Gods cause, and not his
aw^e.

Among other words he says thus: Christiani non vltra aut durare, aut esse
possumus, si ad hoc ventum est, vt perditorum minas and insidias pertimescamus.
We can no longer continue, or be Christian men, if we being Bishops, once
begin to shrink at the threats, and fetches of the ^icked.

Upon occasion hereof he shows, what hurt and confusion of Sects, and
Schisms, insueth in any Province, or Diocese, w^ere as the Bishops
Authority, and Ecclesiastical Discipline is despised. For every Bishop (says
S. Cyprian) within his own Diocese, is the Priest of God, and for his time, is
a Judge appointed in the place of Christ: and as the Church is one, so ought
he likewise to be but one. And thus he writes generally of the authority of
al Bishops, and not only of the authority of the Bishop of Rome. And
notwithstanding he directs his Epistle only to Cornelius, yet are al his
reasons general, and touch both him self, being Bishop of Carthage, and
also al other Bishops what so ever.

Now therefore to draw that thing by violence to one only Bishop, that is
generally spoken of al Bishops, it is a guileful fetch to mis^eade the Reader,
and no simple, or plain dealinge.

But M. Hardinge seems to ground his error, upon the mistakinge of these
words of S. Cyprian, The occasion of M. Hardinges error.
Vnus Sacerdos, and Fraternitas vniuersa: That is, One Bishop, and, The whole
Brotherhoode. For where as S. Cyprian says, There must be one Bishop in a
Church, he imagines, there must be one Bishop to rule over the whole
universal Church. One Bishop.
And where as again S. Cyprian says, The whole Brotherhoode must obey one
Bishop, He geathereth that al Christian people throughout the whole world,
which he untruly calls The whole Brotherhoode, must be obedient unto one
universal Bishop. And thus he builds one error upon an other. But mistakinge
of the Doctor makes no sufficient prou^e.

It may soon appear, S. Cyprian meante, that for the avoiding of Schisms,
and divisions, there ought to be only one Bishop within one Diocese: and not
one Bishop to rule over all the world. 7. quae. 1. Factus ^^t.
For thus he expounds his own meaning.

Cum post primum esse non possit quisquam, qui post vnum, qui solus esse debet,
factus est, iam non secundus ille, sed nullus est. Seeing that after the first
Bishop is chosen, there can be none other, who so is made Bishop after that
one, which must needs be alone, is now not the second Bishop, but in deed
is no Bishop.

So likewise, when the Heretic Nouatus had by wicked practice divided the
people of Rome into Sects, and had solemnly sworn them, that gave ear unto
him, that they should no more return unto Cornelius the Bishop there, and so
had rent one Bishoprike into two, and made two Bishops in one City:
Cornelius complaining thereof unto Fabius the Bishop of Antioche, ^usebius li.
6.
and informinge him of the same, Ca. 43.
writes thus unto him: Nouatus nescit, vnum Episcopum in Catholica Ecclesia
esse debere. Nouatus knows not, that there ought to be but one Bishop in a
Catholic Church: not meaning thereby the whole universal Church throughout
the world, but only his own particular Church of Rome.

So when Chrysostom the Bishop of Constantinople, Socrates li. 6.
saw Sisinius bear him self as Bishop within the same City, Ca. 22.
he said unto him, One City may not have two Bishops.

So likewise S. Hierome says, Hieronym. in Epist. ad Titum. Ca. 1.
that notwithstanding the power of al priests by the authority of Gods
word be one, and equal, yet men by policy to avoid contention, appointed
one priest in every City, to order and to direct his brethren.

Thus was the unity of the whole Church preserved: Thus were al Churches as
one Church: And all Bishops as one Bishop. For who so dissented from one,
Cyprian. li. 4.
dissented from al. So says S. Cyprian: Ecclesia cohaerentium sibi inuicem
Sacerdotum glutino copulatur. Epist. 9.
The church is coupled, and joined in one, by consent of Bishops agreeing
together.

Likewise again he says, Cyprian. De simplicitate praelatorum.
Hanc vnitatem firmiter tenere, and vendicare debemus, maxim Episcopi,
Hierony. ad Titum. Ca. 1.
qui in Ecclesia praesidemus: vt Episcopatum quoque ipsum vnum, and indiuisum
probemus. This unity must we keep and defend, specially that be Bishops,
and bear rule in the Church: that we may declare in deed, that our
Bishoprike is one, and not divided. And therefore S. Hierome says, Episcopi
nouerint in commune debere se Ecclesiam regere. Let Bishops understand, that
they ought to govern the Church in common* or, as al in one.

In this sense is every Bishop for his time, as S. Cyprian says, in the
steed of Christ: and to every such Christ says, Luke. 10. Ignati. ad
Trallianos.
He that hears you, hears me: and he that despises you, (...)
despises me. And therefore Ignatius says, The Bishop in his Church, is the
form of God the Father of al: And so much as is possible, resembles (in his
office) Christ our God. Cypr. li. 1. epist. 3.
For this cause S. Cyprian says: Hereof spring Schisms, and Heresies, for
tha^ the priest of God (in every several Diocese) is not obeyed. Cyprian. li.
4. epist. 9.
As likewise again he says to like purpose, Qui cum Episcopo non sunt, in
Ecclesia non sunt. They that be not with the Bishop, Ignat ad Philadelphien.
be not in the Church. So likewise Ignatius, They that be of Christ, are with
the Bishop. (...)


Thus S. Cyprian spoke these words generally of the authority of al Bishops
in their several dioceses: and not of any special authority of the Bishop of
Rome: as ^t is here untruly affirmed by M. Hardinge.

But he will reply, The universal Brotherhoode.
S. Cyprian says, Vniuersa fraterni^as, That is, The whole Brotherhoode ought
to be obedient to that one Bishop. And that whole brotherhoode must needs be
the whole company of al Christian people. Notwithstanding this exposition
seem very large, yet if S. Cyprian him self had not opened his own meaning
otherwise, Fraternitas vniuers^^.
perhaps some man either of simplicity, or of ignorance might so take it. But
S. Cyprian, that doubtless best knew his own mind, understands these
words, Fraternitas vniuersa, not of all the universal company of al Christian
people, throughtout all the world, as M. Harding doothe, but of the whole
brotherhoode within every Several, and Particular Diocese. For thus he writes
in the next Epistle folowinge. Cyprian. lib. 1.
Fere per prouincias vniuersas tenetur, vt ad ordinationes rite celebrandas, ad
eam plebem cui praepositus ordinatur, Episcopi Episc. 4.
^iusdem prouinciae proximi quique conueniant, and Episcopus deligatur plebe
praesente, etc. Quod and apud nos factum vidimus in Sabini Collegae nostri
ordinatione: vt de vniuersae fraterni^atis suffragio Episcopatus ei deferretur.
This order is in manner keapte in all Provinces, that unto the dew orderinge,
or installinge of a Bishop, the Bishops of the same province that dwell
nearest come together to the people of that City, unto which a new Bishop
is appointed: and that the Bishop be chosen in the presence of the people.
Which thing we saw done in the Election and orderinge of our fellow Bishop
Sabinus, that the Bishoprike was bestowed upon him by the consent, and voices
of the whole brotherhoode. Here, vniuersa fraternitas, undoubtedly is used for
the whole faithful company of one City. In like manner he writes unto
Cornelius of certain, that were returned from Schisms, Cyprian. lib. 2.
and Errors unto the unity of the Church. Merito illos reuer^entes, summo
gaudio and Clerus, Epis. 12.
and plebis fraternitas omnis excepit. When they came again, both the
Clergy, and the whole brotherhoode of the people, woorthily received them
with great joy. Rescriptum Honorij ad Bonifacium.
So likewise the Emperor Honorius writes unto Bonifacius, If two Bishops
through ambition and contention happen to be chosen, Quem vniuersitatis
consensus elegerit.
we will, that neither of them be allowed as Bishop. But that he only remain
in the Apostolic See, whom out of the number of the Clergy, godly
discretion, and the consent of the whole brotherhoode shall choose by a new
Election.

In these places M. Hardinge cannot deny, but these words Vniuersa
fraternitas, Omnis fraternitas, and Vniuersitatis consensus, must needs be
taken for one whole particular Brotherhoode within one Province, or Diocese. In
the same sense Origin says, Origenes in Esaiam hom. 6.
Qui vocatur ad Episcopatum, vocatur ad seruitutem Totius Ecclesiae. He that is
called unto a Bishoprike, Origin. in Hieremi. homi. 7.
is called unto the service of the Whole Church. Likewise again he says:
Plus a me exigitur, quam a Diacono: plus a Diacono, quam a Laico: Qui vero
Totius Ecclesiae arcem obtiner, pro Omni Ecclesia reddet rationem. There is
more required of me (being a Priest) then of a Deacon: more of a Deacon, then
of one of the people: But he, that keeps the watch, or Castle of the whole
Church (which is every Bishop in his Diocese) shall yield a reckeninge for
the whole.

In these places, every particular Church is called the whole Church. And
therefore Ignatius says, Ignatius ad Trallianos.
Quid aliud est Episcopus, quam quidam obtinens principa^um, and potestatem
supra omnes? (...)
What is a Bishop, but one having al rule, and power over al?

These things well weighed, bisides the manifest corruption and falsifieinge of
S. Cyprians both words, and mind, I doubt not, but the weakness also of M.
Hardinges reason may soon appear. For upon this place of S. Cyprian untruly
reported, he would seem to reason thus: There must be one Bishop in one
Church, or Diocese: Ergo, there must be one Bishop over all the world. Or
thus, The whole Brotherhoode in every Diocese ought to harken only to one
Bishop: Ergo, al Christian people through^ut the world, ought to be in
subjection to the Bishop of Rome.

These arguments bewraie themselves, and therefore need no further openinge.

All this notwithstanding, if M. Hardinge will say, S. Cyprians words must
needs importe one Uniuersal Bishop, and the same of necessity must be the
Bishop of Rome, let him then voutchesafe to read the Epistle, that the same S.
Cyprian wrote unto Florentius Pupianus: There shall he find, that S. Cyprian
even in like form and order, speaks these self same words of him self,
being, as M. Hardinge knows, the Bishop of Carthage in Aphrica, and not the
Bishop of Rome. Cyprian. lib. 4.
His words be these: Vnde Schisma^a, and haereses obortae sunt, and oriuntur,
nisi dum Episcopus, Epist. 9.
qui vnus est, and Ecclesiae praeest, superba quorundam praesumptione
contemnitur, and homo dignatione Dei honora^us, ab hominibus indignis
iudicatur? Wherehence have Schisms and Heresies spronge heretofore, and
whereof spring they now, but that the Bishop, which is one, and governs
the Church, by the presumptuous disdain of certain, is despised, and a man
prefe^red by Gods allowance, is examined, and judged by unworthy men. All this S. Cyprian speaks plainly, and namely of him self, being B. of
Carthage. Therefore it is great oversight, to force the same only to the B.
of Rome, and stoutely to say, It can be applied unto none other.

M. Hardinge. The.6. Division.
Of al other authorities, that of Athanasius and of the Bisshoppes of Egypt
and Libya gathered together in a Synod at Alexandria, is to be regarded. Who
making humble suit to Felix then Bishop of Rome, Athana^i^s forged.
for aid and succoure against the Arrians through^ the whole Epistle,
confessinge the supreme authority of that Apostolic See, In primo tomo
Conciliorum.
utter these very words. Vestrae Apostolicae sedis imploramus auxilium etc.
We humbly beseech you of the healpe of your Apostolic See. Because (as verily
we believe) God has not despised the prayers of his servants offered up to
him with tears, but has constituted and placed you, and your predecessors,
who were Apostolic Prelates, in the highest tower, In summitatis arc^
consti^uit.
or supreme state, and commanded them to have cure and charge of al Churches,
to the intent you help and succor us, and that defendinge us (as to whom
judgment of Bishops is committed) you forslowe not through negligence, to
deliver us from our enemies.

Now if the Apostolic Church of Rome, has obtained the primacie, and
preeminence of power over al Churches, and over the whole flock of Christen
people of our Lord Savior himself as Anacletus says: Anacle^^^ forged.
if it be evident to all that know the Ghospel, that the cure and charge of the
whole Church, has been committed to the holy Apostle Peter, Prince of all the
Apostles, by the woord^ of our Lord, S. Gregory nipped.
as Gregory witnesses: if the whole Brotherhed (that is to say, al Christen
folk) ought to obey the one high Priest or Bishop of God, and the one Judge
that is Christ's Vicar, or in steed of Christ for the time, The next
words immediately folovvinge are these, Ta^men Pet^^^ Vniuersalis Apos^olus
non vocatur.
according to the precepts and teachinges of God, as Cyprian writes: if it
be God, that has placed and ordained the Bishop of Rome in the highest state
of the Church, as Athanasius, with all the Fathers of that Alexandrine Council
records: If this, I say, be true: then is it easily seen, upon how good
ground this doctrine stands, whereby it is affirmed, that the Bishop of Rome
his primacie has his force by Gods Law, and not only by man's Law, much
less by unjust usurpation. The Scriptures, by which as well these, as al
other holy and learned Fathers were leadde to acknowledge and confess the
Primacie of Peter and his successors, were partly such, as Anacletus and
Gregory here allegeth, and Cyprian means as it appears by his third
treatise De simplicitate praelatorum, and sundry more of the New Testament, S.
Cypria^^ mind ^vvise falsified in one place.
as to the learned is known: of which to treat here largely, and pi^h^hely,
as the weight of the matter requires, at this time I have no leisure: neither
if I had, yet might I conveniently perform it in this treatise, which
otherwise vvil amounte to a sufficient bigness, and that matter thoroughly
handled, will ^il a right great volume. Wherefore, referringe the readers to
the credit of these worthy Fathers, who so vnderst^^de the Scriptures, as
thereof they were persuaded the primacie to be attributed to Peter's successor
by ^od him self: I will proceed, keepinge my prefixed order.

Where at the preeminence of power and authority, which to the Bishop of Rome
by special and singular privilege God has granted, is commended to the world
by many and sundry Councelles: for auoidinge of tediousness I will rehearse
the testimonies of a few. Among the Canons made by three hundred and eightene
Bishops at the Nicene Council, which were in number. 70 and 96 The. 96.
untruth, joined with folly, as shall appear.
al burnt by heretics in the East Church save.xx. and yet the whole number 97
The. 97. untruth. For there was no such original kept in the Church of
Rome.
was kept diligently in the Church of Rome in the original it self, sent to
Syluester the Bishop there from the Council, Vide Francise. Turrianum li. 3.
charact. dogmat.
subscribed with the said. 318. Fathers hands: the. 44. Canon which is of
the power of the Patriarche, over the Metropolitanes and Bishops, and of the
Metropolitan over Bishops, in the end has this Decree. Vt autem cunctis
ditionis suae nationibus, etc. As the Patriarch bears rule over al Nations of
his jurisdiction, and gives laws to them, and as Peter Christ's Vicare, at
the beginning set in authority over Religion, over the Churches, and over
al other things perteining to Christ, The. 98. untruth. For there was no
Prince or province Christened in S. Peter's ^ime.
was 98 Master and Ruler of Christian Princes, Provinces, and of al Nations:
so he whose Principality or Chieftie is at Rome, like unto Peter, and equal in
authority, obteineth the rule and soueraintie over al Patriarchs. After a few
words it follows there. If any man repine against this Statute, or dare
resist it, by the Decree of the whole Council he is accursed.

Julius that worthy Bishop of Rome, not long after the Council of Nice, in
his epistle that he wrote to the. 90. Arriane Bishops, assembled in the Council
at Antioche against Athanasius Bishop of Alexandria, reprouinge them for their
unjust treatinge of him, says of the Canons of the Nicene Council, then
fresh in their remembrance: that they command, Non debere praeter sententiam
Romani pontificis vllo modo Concilia celebrari, nec Episcopos damnari. That
without the authority of the Bishop of Rome, neither Councelles ought to be
keapte, nor Bishops condemned. Again that nothing be Decreed without the
Bishop of Rome. Cui haec and maiora Ecclesiarum negotia, tam ab ipso Domino,
quam ab omnibus vniuersorum Conciliorum Fratribus, speciali priuilegio
contradita sunt. To whom, these and other the weighty matters of the Churches,
be committed by special Privilege, as well by our Lord him self, as by all our
Brethern of the whole universal Councelles. Among other principal points,
which he recites in that Epistle of the Nicene Councelles Canons, this is
one. Vt omnes Episcopi etc. That al Bishops who sustain wrong, in weighty
causes, so often as need shall require, make their appeal freely to the Sea
Apostolic, and flee to it for succor, as to their Mother, that from thence
they may be charitably sustained, defended, and delivered. To the disposition
of which See, the ancient authority of the Apostles, and their successors,
and of the Canons, has reserved al weighty, or great Ecclesiastical causes,
and judgments of Bishops.

Athanasius, and the whole company of Bishops of Egypt, Thebaida, and
Lybia, assembled together in Council at Alexandria, complaininge in their
Epistle to Felix the Pope, of great injuries and griefs they sustained at the
Arrians: allegeth the determination of the Nicene Council touching the Supreme
authority, and power of that See Apostolic over al other Bishops. Similiter
and a supradictis Patribus est definitum consonanter etc. Likewise (say they)
it has been determined by common assent of the foresaid Fathers (of Nice)
that if any of the Bishops suspecte the Metropolitan, or their fellow
Bishops of the same Province, or the Judges, that then they make their
appeal to your holy See of Rome, Matth^^. ^^.
to whom by our Lord himself power to bind and louse, by special privilege
above other has been granted. This much alleged out of the Canons of the
Nicene Council, gathered partly out of Julius Epistle, who wrote to them that
were present at the making of them (which takes away al suspicion of
untruth) and partly out of Athanasius and others, that were a great part of
the same Council.

The B. of Sarisburie.
A scarcrowe stufte with straw, and set upright, may seem a far of to be a
man. Even so a forger of lies and fables, prickte up in the apparel of ancient
names, may seem to the ignorant an Old Catholic Father. No marvel though
this authority like M. Hardinge best above al others: for it is most vain,
and shameless above al others: and therefore meetest to help up a shameless
Doctrine. It is no new practice in the Church of Rome, to forge evidence in
the name of Old Fathers: Athanasius forged.
as, God willinge, hereafter it shall better appear. But as for this Epistle
and certain others, that are carried about under the name of that Godly
Bishop Athanasius, I will only rippe up the stuffinge, and open some part of
the contents of them: and so will not refuse M. Hardinge him self, to be the
Judge.

First, that they were never written in Greek, and therefore not by
Athanasius, it may appear by sundry tokens, and namely by the allusion of
these two Latin words, Vertex, and, Vertuntur: Romana Seeds est sacer
vertex, in quo omnes ver^untur. The Latin is rude, and barbarous, and many
times utterly void of sense. The manner of utterance is childishe, and
bablinge, empty of matter, and full of words without measure. The substance of
the whole is nothing else but flatteringe, and auancinge of the Sea of Rome,
farced up, and set out with lies without shame.

The author hereof speaking of ye Church of Rome, says, Inde Ecclesiae
sumpsere Praedicationis exordium. From Rome the Churches received the first
preachinge of the Gospel. Esai. 2*
But God him self says, Ex Sione exibit lex, and Verbum Domini de
Jerusalem: From Sion the Law shall proceed, Miche. 4.
and the Word of the Lord from Jerusalem. And therefore Tertullian calls
Jerusalem, Matrix Religionis.
the Mother of Religion. And Nicephorus says, Nic^phor. lib. 2. Ca. 40.
that Simon Zelotes ran over al Aphrica, and preached the Gospel. Eusebius. lib.
2. Ca. 26.
Eusebius says, that S. Mark the Evangelist first erected Congregations,
and taught the Gospel at Alexandria: Nicephor. li. 2 Ca. 43.
And Nicephorus says further, that S. Mark went preachinge over al Egypt,
Augustine. Epist. 170. and Epi. 178.
and Lybia, and Cyrene, and Pentapolis, and the whole Country of Barbary,
Graecia, vnde ^ides orta est.
in the time of the Emperor Tiberius, which was at the least, six years
before Peter came to Rome. S. Augustine says, the Religion of Christ was
first brought into Aphrica out of Graecia, and not from Rome. Therefore, that
M. Hardinges Athanasius says, the Church received from Rome the first
preachinge of the Gospel, is an open flaterie, and a manifest untruth.

Further, this author says, that in all cases there lay appeals from the
Metropolitan to the Bishop of Rome: and that by the authorit^e of the Nicene
Council. But that thing in the Council of Carthage, Council. Carthaginen. 6.
S. Augustine being then present, was utterly denied by all the Bishops of
Aphrica, Numidia, Mauritania, Byzancena, and Tripolis, to the number of two
hundred and seuentiene, and by the witness of the three Patriarchs of
Antiochia, Constantinopolis, and Alexandria, was found untrue.

This author says, Fuit semper vestrae Sanctae and Apostolicae Sedi
licentia, unjust damnatos, vel exco^municatos potestatiue sua authoritate
restituere, and sua eis omnia reddere. Your holy Apostolic See had evermore a
special Prerogative by your own authority, and by way of power, to relieve
men unjustly condemned, or excommunicate, and to restoore them to their own.
But it shall hereafter appear, that the Bishop of Rome at that time had no
such power: and that it was not he, that restored any man in that case by his
power, but only the Emperor.

S. Paul says, 1 Corinthians. 3.
Other foundation none can be laid, but only that is laid already, which
is Christ Jesus. And finds great fault with the Corinthians that said, I
hold of Apollo: I hold of Paul: I hold of Peter. But M. Hardinges
Athanasius says, Tu es Petrus, and super fundamentum tuum Ecclesiae columnae,
hoc est, Episcopi, sunt confirmatae. Thou art Peter, and upon thy fundation
the pillars of the Church, which are the Bishops, are surely set: and
thus he diuiseth an other foundation bisides Christ, and, contrary to S.
Paul's Doctrine, would have all the Bishops of the world to hold of Peter.

But, to leave al other untruths, wherewith these Epistles be stuffed full,
mark, gentle Reader, only this oversight, and thou shall plainly see with
thine ^tes, that M. Hardinges Doctor is an impudent, and an open lier. For the
true Athanasius him self, of whom we make no doubt, says, that the Arrians
at Alexandria burnte the Catholic men's books, Athanasius in Epistola ad
Orthodoxos.
and therewithal the Canons of the Council of Nice, Socrat. li. 2. Ca. 14.
in the time of the Emperor Constantius, Julius being then Bishop of Rome:
which observation of time, appears also by Socrates in his story. But M.
Hardinges Athanasius is either so forgeatful of his lies, or so impudent, and
careless what he say, that he makes piteous complainte of the said burninge
unto Marcus, that was Bishop in Rome before Julius, and was dead at the least
niene years before the Canons were burnte. By such Doctors M. Hardinge
vpholdeth the state of Rome.

As for Athanasius him self, he never understood, the Bishop of Rome had any
such prerogative power, nor never named him by greater title, then The Bishop
of Rome. And whereas this Epistle alleged in the name of Athanasius, sounds
far otherwise, it is no marvel. For it was dated at Alexandria, and made in
Rome.

Now, if the Decretal Epistle, which M. Hardinge has brought in under the
name of Anacletus, be nothing else but forged evidence, as it is sufficiently
declared: If M. Hardinge have discourteously used S. Gregory, cuttinge of his
tale in the midst, Gregor. lib. 4. Epi. 32.
and purposely leauinge out those words, Tamen Petrus vniuersalis Apostolus
non vocatur, yet is not Peter called the Universal Apostle, which was the only
matter, Gregor. lib. 4. Epist. 36.
that S. Gregory had then in hand: If S. Gregory say, None of my
Predecessors Bishops of Rome, would ever take upon him the name of
Universal Bishop: If S. Gregory say, Gregor. lib. 6. Epist. 30.
It is the puff of arrogancy: the word of pride: a new, a pompouse, a
perverse, a foolish, a rash, a superstitious, a profane, an ungodly, and a
wicked name: a name of singularity: a name of error: a name of Hypocrisy: a
name of Vanity: and a name of Blasphemy: and that who so ever calls him
self, or desires to be called by that arrogant name, in the pride of his
heart is the forerenner of Antichrist: Greg. lib. 6. Epist. 24.
and that the quiet, and indifferent bearinge of the same is the Destruction of
the Faith of the Universal Church: If M. Hardinge have witingly, Cyprian. lib.
1. Epist. 3.
and openly falsified the words of S. Cyprian, and that twice together in
one sentence, as he him self cannot deny: If the Epistle, that he allegeth
under the title of Athanasius, be nothing else, but a shameless counterfeite,
full of vile flatteringe, and apparent lies, Then is this former part hitherto
but weakly proved, neither can M. Hardinge truly say, his Doctrine stands
upon good and sure ground.

O, what luck has M. Hardinge to such authorities, having choice, as he
says, of so many, and trippinge over so lightly, to speed so il? His
Amphilochius lies at Uerona: His Clemens in Candie: His Martial in a Cave
under ground: His Canon of the Council of Ephesus against Nestorius was never
seen: and others otherwise miscarried: The Council of Nice, wherein was the
whole stay of the Primacie of Rome, Cyprian. de I^iunio and Tentatione.
is burnte by the Arrians, and, sauinge only in Rome, no where else in the
world to be found. Ammianus Marcellin.


For answer hereunto, Socrates lib. 4. Ca 29.
me thinks, these words spoken generally by S. Cyprian, had then, and have
yet a special place in the Sea of Rome: Ambitio dormit in sinu Sacerdotum.
Ambition sl^apeth in the bosom of Priests. For, to pass over the great
contention, that even at the beginning happened there between Damasus, and
Ursinus, whether of them two should be Bishop, in which contention a great
number of either part was slain, S. Augustine also complains, that even the
Deacons of Rome in his time, Augustine in quaestionibus veteris and Nou^
Testamenti. Quaest. 101.
auaunced them selves far above their estate. Hi^ro. in praesatione ad Galat.
Romans 11.
These be his words: Falcidius duce stultitia, and Ciuitatis Romanae
iactantia, Diaconos presbyteris aequare contendit. Falcidius leadde by folly,
and by the courrage of the City of Rome, would have Deacons to be nothing
inferior unto Priests. Likewise S. Hierome says, The Romans are noted of
Courteisie, and stoutness of mind: And therefore S. Paul gave this
advertisement specially unto them above al others, The pride of Rome.
Noli altum sapere, sed time. Be not high minded, but stand in awe. Wherefore
it is the less to be marueled, if they have so ambitiousely at al times
attempted dominion over others.

But M. Hardinge says, the preeminence of power, and authority of the Bishop
of Rome is commended to the world by many and sundry Councelles. Wherein I
marvel, he allegeth not the Council of Carthage, of Hippo Regius, and of
Aphrica, in which it was decreed thus, Vt primae sedis Episcopus non
appelletur Princeps sacerdo^um, Council. Carthagin. Can. 26.
aut Summus sacerdos, aut aliquid huiusmodi: sed tantum primae Sedis Episcopus.
Council. Hippon. Ca* 27.
That the Bishop of the first See be not called the chief of Priests, or the
highest Priest, Council. Aphrican. Ca. 6.
or by any other like name, but only the Bishop of the first See: Or the
Council of Aphrica, Council. Aphrican. Ca. 92.
where, toutchinge appeal to Rome, it was specially provided thus: Si
prouocandum putauerint, non prouocent, nisi ad Aphricana Concilia, vel ad
primates prouinciarum suarum. Ad transmarina qui putauerit appellandum, a nullo
intra Aphricam in Co^munionem suscipiatur. If they think it needeful to
appeal from their own Bishops, let them not appeal but only unto
Councelles to be holden within the country of Aphrica. But who so ever shall
think it needeful to appeal to the judgment of any beyond the Sea, (that
is, to the Bishop of Rome) let no man within Aphrica receive him to his
Communion. Why doothe M. Hardinge so warily leave these Councelles, that be
ertant, and to be seen, the authority whereof was never doubted of, and
allege only a patche of the Council of Nice, which he him self confesses
was burnte, and all the Bishops of the East part, who are supposed to have
made it, protest openly under their hands and seals, it was never made? But
M. Hardinge herein doothe much like unto the Arrians, that accused Athanastus:
who were not ashamed to bring in the names of certain men, Synodus
Alexa^drina aduersus accusatores Athanasij.
as being alive, to witness against him, and yet not withstandinge, charged
Athanasius with the same men, that he had slain them.

Neither do I see, wherefore M. Hardinge should need in this case to lean
to the authority of any Council. For his Anacletus thought it better to make
men believe, Anaclet. Epist. 1.
he had his superiority, Not from the Apostles, but from Christ him self.
And Faustinus Episcopus Potentinus, claiminge for the Bishop of Rome in the
Council of Carthage, and findinge him self to have small hold in this Canon of
the Nicene Council, alleged rather Custom and prescription. These be his
words, Tractandum est cum vestra beatitudine de Nicenis Canonibus, Council.
Carthaginen. 6. Ca. 2.
vt conseruentur, and constituta eoru^, and Consuetudo. Quia aliqua ordine, and
Canone tenentur: aliqua Consuetudine firmata sunt* We must deal with your
holiness of the Canons of the Council of Nice, that they may be keapte, both
the Constitutions thereof, and also the Custom. For certain things are
holden by order, and by Canon: and certain things are made good by Custom.
But Pope Nicolas the first, utterly refuses, not only the Council of Nice,
and al other Councelles in this behalf, but also the authority of
Prescription and Custom.

For thus he says, Nicolaus 1. ad Michaelem Imperatorem.
Animaduertendum est, quia non Nicena, non denique vlla Synodus quicquam
Romanae contulit Ecclesiae priu^legij: quae in Petro nouerat eam totius iura
potestatis pleniter meruisse, and cunctarum Christi ouium regimen accepisse. Ye
must consider, that neither the Council of Nice, nor any other Council ever
gave any privilege to this Church of Rome: For this Church knows, that in
Peter she has fully deserved the right of al power, and has atteined the
government of all the sheep of Christ.

But touching the forgerie of this Council of Nice, the very beginning of the
quarrel, and the whole story stands thus: One Apiarius a Priest of the
Church of Sicca in Aphrica, as it appears, a very il man, being justly
excommunicate, both by his own Bishop, and also by a great number of other
Bishops together in the Council there, appealed from them al unto Zosimus
then Bishop of Rome. Zosimus without further knowledge of the cause, The Pope a
forger.
never hearing the other party, pronounced Apiarius to be innocent, and
restoared him to the Communion. And understanding there was a Council
geathered in Aphrica touching the same, sent thither Faustinus the Bishop of
Potentia, with two other priests of Rome, Philippus, and Asellus, not only
to see, that the said Ap^arius without any further trial might be restoared
unto his right, but also to make plea in the open Council, that it should be
lawful for any priest to appeal from his own ordinary, or Metropolitan, or
Council, unto the Apostolic See of Rome. The Bishops of Aphrica answered,
Council. Carthaginen. 6. Ca. 3.
there was no law it should be so. Faustinus laid forth this Canon of the
Council of Nice, not made by the authority of the Bishops there, but only
divised by the Bishop of Rome. The Bishops there, emonge whom was S. Augustine
that famous learned Father, Ca. 4.
thought it was a forged matter, and therefore said, They would not thus have
done, if they had thought, all the Originales, and Copies had been burnte.
they would send unto Alexandria, Antioche, and Constantinople, for the very
Original copies of the said Council, Ca. 7.
and desired the Bishop of Rome to do the same: Council. Aphrican. Ca. 102.
and said, that in the mean while they would do, as they had done before.
Upon this Message, and return of the answer with the true Authentic copies
from Cyrillus the Bishop of Alexandria, and Atticus the Bishop of
Constantinople, it appeared plainly unto the world, that the Canons were
corrupted, and that the Pope had falsified ye holy Council: and to the intent to
auaunce his Apostolic See of Rome, had divised Privileges, and Prerogatives
of his own. Here might^ M. Hardinge well bestow his terms: Here might he
truly say, The Pope coggeth and foisteth the die, The Pope bombasteth the
Canons of Councelles, and the Decrees of holy Fathers with his counterfeite
stuffinge. The Bishops in the Council of Aphrica, Council. Aphrican. Cap. 105.
having thus thoroughly examined the truth hereof, wrote unto Coelestinus
being then Bishop of Rome, in this wise: Decreta Nicena etc. The Decrees of
the Council of Nice, have committed both the inferior Clerks, and also the
Bishopes, unto their Metropolitanes. For it was discreetely, and rightly
considered, that al matters are to be determined, in the places where they
began: and that no Province can lack the Holy Ghost, whereby the Bishops
of Christ may be hable, both wisely to see, and also constantely to maintain
the right: and specially, for that it is lawful for every man, that shall
mislike the discretion of his Judges, to appeal either to a Particular Council
within the same Realm, or else to the universal Council of the whole world.
Onles perchance some man will say, God is hable to inspire the trial of
Justice into one man alone, (because he is Bishop of Rome) and vvil not inspire
the same into a great number of Bishops meetinge together in Council. And
how may such beyondesea Judgment be thought good, whereunto the persons of
the witnesses, which in trial of truth are thought necessary, either for that
they be women, or for the infirmity of their age, or for many other incident
lettes, cannot be brought? Now that any should be sent abroad, as it were
from your holmes side, we find it not decreed in any Council. As for that you
sent us lately by our Brother Faustmus, as part of the Council of Nice, The
Pope taken in manifest forgerie.
we must do you to wite, that in the true Councelles which we have received
from our Holy Felowbishop Cyrillus of Alexandria, and the Reverend Father
Atticus the Bishop of Constantinople, taken out of the very Originalles, it
cannot be found. And send you not any your Clerks hither to execute Justice
at any man's request: least we seem to bring the smokie puff of the
world, Fumosum typhu^
into the Church of Christ. Thus far the words of the Council.

The Bishop of Rome, when he saw he was taken with the manner, and found an
open falsarie, for that the Canons of his making disagreed from the very
Originalles, thought it good policy, to say, the Originalles were burnte by
the Arians, and so no true copy now remaininge, but his only. And therefore
he imagined a letter to be written in the name of Athanasius, and other Bishops
of Aegypte, unto Marcus the Bishop of Rome, wherein they besought him a copy
of the Nicene Council, for that al their Books were utterly destroyed. But
this shifte was to simple. For it were hard for M. Hardinge to show, what
help Athanasius could have found in any of those Canons, that are now
presumed to be burnte, wherewith either to relieve him self in that case, or
else to molest and grieve his adversaries.

But, both Julius the Bishop of Rome, and also Athanasius the Bishop of
Alexandria make mention hereof. Therefore, there is no cause (says M.
Hardinge) why this matter should be suspected of any vntruethe. This remouinge
of suspicion, I know not how, seems somewhat to increase suspicion. If there
were not a soar, what should it thus need to be salued? In Epistola
Decretali Iulij.
In deed, Julius allegeth a Canon of the Council of Nice: But M. Hardinges
Canon he allegeth not. And the compiler of the Councelles, gave this note in
the Margin touching the same. Hoc Statutum solum reducibile est ad quintum,
and sextum Caput Niceni Concilij: Verum aperte non inuenitur. This Decree may
only be reduced to the fifth and sixth Chapter of the Council of Nice: But
expressly it is not found. Such credit is to be given to this Julius in his
allegations.

As for M. Hardinges Athanasius, Manifest forgerie
his tale is so simple, that it will soon bewray it self. Athanasius in Epist.
ad Orthodoxos. Socrates li. 2. cap. 14.
For, as I noted before, he writes unto Marcus the Bishop of Rome, of the
burninge of the Books: and yet Athanasius him self certainly knew, that
Marcus was dead, at the least nine years before that burninge happened.

Even so, the vain forger of the Emperor Constantines great Dotation,
imagines him to Decree, that the Bishop of Constantinople should be subject
unto the Sea of Rome. And yet neither was the City of Constantinople at that
time builte, nor any such name yet known in the world, nor any Bishoprike
there erected. A man might say, Non satis commode diuisa sunt temporibus tibi
Daue haec.

Again the same Athanasius writing unto Foelix, Athanasius in Epistola ad
Foelicem. Athanasius in Epistola ad Marcum.
says, The Arianes had falsified the Nicene Council: but writing unto Marcus
of the same matter, as a man that had utterly forgotten him self, he says, The
Arrianes had burnte the Council of Nice. But if it were burnte, how was it
falsified? If it were falsified, how was it burnte? These tales hang not well
together. But, for as much as M. Harding would so feign have the Pope to hold
by burnte evidence, if it may please thee (gentle Reader) discretely to weigh
the whole circumstance of the matter, thou shalt soon find, that all this
great adoo was nothing else but a great fable. Theodoret. li. 1. cap. 9. and
li. 2. cap. 8.
For first it appears by Theodoretus, that the whole Acts, Marius Victorin.
aduersus Arium. li. 2.
and Copies of the Council of Nice, were sent abroad unto al Bishops that
were away. And Marius Uictorinus writing against Arius, says, that the same
Acts were sent abroad into the whole world, and that many thousand Bishops
subscribed and agreed unto them. Which thing being undoubtedly true, it were
very much for M. Hardinge to say, that al these copies, in all parts of the
world, could be destroyed upon the suddayne: and that altogether in one
place, and with one fire, and at one commandment. The Arianes neither were so
mighty to atchieue it: nor so foolish to attempt it. Cetainely, the like
never happened to any other Council. But what needs words, where ye matter
is plain? Council. Carthaginen. 6. cap. 4.
The Bishops of Aphrica had the very copies of these Canons. Alypius the
Bishop of Tagasta, in this conference with Faustinus, said, Adhuc tamen me
mouet, quoniam cum inspiceremus Graeca exemplaria huius Synodi Nicenae, ista
ibi nescio qua ratione, minime inuenimus. But this one thing much moves me,
that conferringe, and examininge the Greek examples of this Nicene Council,
these matters (of the superiority of the Sea of Rome, that is alleged) I know
not how, we found not there. And Cyrillus the Bishop of Alexandria, being
desired for trial of this matter, to send the true Original of this Council,
made answer in this sort, Necesse habui fidelissima exemplaria ex authe^tica
Synodo vestrae charitati dirigere. Council. Carthaginens. 6. ca. 102.
I thought it needeful to send unto you the true examples of the very
authentic Council. Council. Carthaginen. 6. ca. 103.
Likewise Atticus ye Bishop of Constantinople to the same request answeareth
thus, Canones sicut statuti sunt in Nicaea Ciuitate a Patribus in integro ad
vos direxi. I have sent unto you the Canons in the whole, even as they were
made, and ratified by the Fathers in the City of Nice. Now if these Canons
were quite burnte, as M. Hardinge says, how were they afterward found whole,
as ye godly Father Atticus, and the learned Bishop Cyrillus says? And if they
were afterward found whole, how then were they quite burnte before? Or how
is it, that no man, neither in Aphrica, nor in Europa, nor in Asia: neither in
the East Church, nor in ye Weast, was ever hable to see these Canons, but
only the Bishop of Rome, that so ambitiously claims by them? And if he have
them in deed, and that of such authentic record, under the hands of the
three hundred and eighteen Bishops, as it is boldly avouched, why are they
not showed? Why have they been for the space of these therteene hundred years
still kept invisible? Uerily the Council of Nice were well woorthe the shewinge.

Al these things rightly weighed, may seem sufficient to discrie a Forger.
Yet (gentle Reader) the better to satisfy thy mind, mark how earnestly, and
with what cunninge M. Hardinges Athanasius forces on his fable. He thought it
not sufficient to say, The Canons al were quite burnte, which thing he only
says, and no man else, but because he saw, Wise men would reply, There were
no such Canons ever made, therefore he took pains further to show the
considerations, and causes, and the whole order, and circumstance of the
making, whereat, he says, he him self was present. Athanas. in Episto. ad
Marcum.
Fourscore Canons, he says, were divised in the whole: whereof forty were
laid in in Latin by the Latins: and forty other in Greek by the Grecians.
Of this whole number of Canons, says he, the Fathers there took of ten
Canons, and divided them as they might, most handesomely emonge the rest, and
so made up only the number of threescore and ten Canons: thereby mystically
to represent the threescore and ten Disciples: or else the number of the
threscore and ten Tongues, that be known in the world. Thus of wholesome
and Godly rules of Faith, and manners, M. Hardinges Athanasius has leisure to
fancy preatie Mysteries.

But, for better view hereof, I remember, Cardinal Cusanus touching the
Famous Donation of Constantine, Nicolaus Cusanus De Donatione Constantini.
writes thus: In ipsa scriptura reperi manifesta argumenta falsitatis: Even in
the writing of it, I have found manifest tokens of falsehoode. The like may
be said of these M. Hardinges new Canons: Even in the vtteterance, and
writing of them, we may find plain contrariety, and therefore undoubted
tokens of untruth. For the former twenty Canons, whereof there is no
question, were made in the Council of Nice: But the rest, whereof S. Augustine,
and the Bishops of Aphrica moved doubt, and whereby the Bishop of Rome would
seem to claim, were divised at Rome, and not at Nice. This new Canon here
alleged says, The Bishop of Rome has the rule, and soueraintie over al
Patriarchs: But the very true, and undoubted Council of Nice says far
otherwise: Antiqua consuetudo seruetur per Aegyptum, Lybiam, and Pentapolim: vt
Alexandrinus Episcopus horum omnium habeat potestatem: Council. Nicen. can. 6.
quia and vrbis Romae Episcopo parilis mos est. Let the ancient custom be
keapte throughout Aegypte, Lybia, and Pentapolis: that the Bishop of Alexandria
have the government over al these. For the Bishop of the City of Rome has
the like order. But this Canon the Bishop of Rome has no soueraintie over
other Patriarchs, as M. Hardinge fantasieth, but only a fellowship, and
equality with the rest, to walk carefully within his own division, Parilis
mos.
as others were bound to do within theirs. And in this Canon these two
words, Parilis mos, are specially to be noted: which cannot otherwise be
expounded, but only of like manner, order, and authority of Jurisdiction. M.
Hardinges Canon says, S. Peter was Master, and ruler over al Christen
Princes: and yet is not M. Hardinge hable to prove, that while S. Peter lived,
there was any one Prince Christened in the whole world. And if Peter had had
power over Kings, and Princes, it is not likely, he would have taken up his
lodginge with Cornelius the poor Tanner. Actor. 1^.
In the end he concludes with a terror: If any man repine against this
statute, accursed be he. Wherein he does great wrong both to S. Augustine,
and also to all the Bishops of Aphrica, Numidia, Mauritania, Pentapolis, and
Bizancena: who not only repined openly against this Canon, but also said, It
was falsified: and rebuked the Pope of pride, and ambition for the same.

To be short, what leads M. Hardinge to say, The Bishop of Rome has these
three scoare and ten Canons in safe keepinge? Why does he thus dissemble,
and mock the world? Certainly the Bishop of Rome himself utterly disclaimeth
it, and says, He has them not. For thus he writes touching the same:
Viginti tantum capitula Nicenae Synodi in Sancta Romana Ecclesia habentur:
Did. 16. viginti. Stephanus pp.
sed quo neglectu alia defecerint, ambiguum est. There are in the Church of
Rome only twenty Canons of the Council of Nice. But by what negligence the
rest are lost, it is not known. The Pope says, There are but twenty Canons
extant: M. Hardinge says, There are threscore and ten Canons. I trow, It
is no reason, we should believe M. Harding, and leave the Pope.

But Steuin the Bishop of Rome says, There were sometime in Rome the full
threescore and ten Canons: which thing he geathereth only upon this
forgerie of M. Hardinges Athanasius. And the same being the evidence whereby
he holds his whole title, and such evidence, as was not to be found else
where in all the world, yet cannot he tell neither how he came by it, nor how
long he keapte it, nor how he lost it. But a thing is well lost, that can
not be auoutched, and showed without shame.

M. Hardinges Athanasius says, Power to bind, and loose, is given to the
holy See of Rome by special privilege above al others. And yet the old
Catholic Fathers could never understand any such special privilege. S.
Cyprian says, Quamuis Dominus Apostolis omnibus post Resurrectionem suam
parem potestatem tribuat, Cyprian. De simplicitate praelatorum.
tame^ vt vnitatem manifestaret, Et Honoris, and. Potestatis.
vnitatis eiusdem originem ab vno incipientem sua authoritate disposuit. Hoc
erant vtique and coeteri Apostoli, quod fuit Petrus, pari consortio praediti
and Honoris, and Potestatis. The Lord after his Resurrection gave unto his
Apostles like power: yet to declare unity, he disposed by his authority the
Original of unity, beginning of one. The rest of the Apostles were even the
same, that Peter was: endewed with like fellowship both of Honor, and of
Power.

Origin says, Origin. in Matthae. tract. 1.
An vero soli Petro dantur a Christo Claues Regni Coelorum, nee alius beatorum
quisquam eas accepturus est? Hoc dictum, Tibi dabo Claues Regni Coelorum,
coeteris quoque est commune. What, has Christ given the Keys of the
Kingedome of Heaven unto Peter only? and shall no holy man else receive them?
Verily this saieinge, To thee vvil I give the keys of the kingedome of Heaven,
is common also to the rest. Cyril. in Johan. li. 3. Ca. 20.
S. Cyril says, Apostolis, and ^orum in Ecclesijs Successoribus, plenam
concessit potestatem. Basil. in libello de vita solitavia. Ca. 23.
Christ gave full power unto the Apostles, and unto others that succeeded them
in the Churches. And S. Basile says, Christus Petrum post se suae Ecclesiae
Pastorem constituit, and consequenter omnibus Pastoribus, and Doctoribus ^andem
tribuit potestatem: Cutus signum est, quod omnes ex aequo and ligant, and
absoluunt, quemadmodum ille. Christ appointed Peter to be Pastor of his
Church after him: and so consequently gave the same power unto al Pastors,
and Doctors. A token whereof is this, that al Pastors do equally both
bind, and loose, as well as he.

Now, if Christ gave like power to al his Apostles: If the reast of the
Apostles were the same, that Peter was, endewed al with like honor, and like
power: If Christ's words were common to all the reast: If al Pastors do
equally both bind, and loose as well, as Peter: What a fable then is this,
that M. Harding with his Athanasius has brought in, That power to bind and
loose, is given to the holy See of Rome, by special privilege above al others?

Now, gentle Reader, shortly and simply, to lay all the effect hereof before
thine eyes: M. Hardinges Canons were burnte, before they were ever made.

They were burnte: and yet were they falsified: They were falsified: and yet
were they burnte too. This Athanasius informs Marcus the Bishop of Rome of
the burninge of them, niene years before the fiere was made.

The Pope is found in manifest forgerie, and that by the witness of the
Patriarchs of Constantinople, and Antioche, and of all the Bishopes, and the
whole Council of Aphrica, S. Augustine him self being present.

M. Hardinge says, The Pope has the custody of these Invisible Canons:

The Pope himself says, he has none of them.

These Canons be plain contrary, not only to the old Catholic fathers,
but also to other Canons of the same Council.

The Bishops in the Council of Aphrica openly mislike the Popes attempt in
this behalf, and call it worldly pride, and vain ambition.

Such warrant has M. Hardinge, to auaunce the state of the Sea of Rome.

M. Hardinge. The.7. Division.
For further declaration of this matter, Ca. 4.
it were easy here to allege the Council of Sardica, the Council of Chalcedon,
Ca. 9.
certain Councelles of Aphrica, yea some Councels also holden by Heretics,
and sundry other: but such store of authorities commonly known, these may
suffice.

The B. of Sarisburie.
These Councelles are brought forth, al in a mummerie, saieinge nothing.
Therefore I might safely pass them over, until they had learned to speak
somewhat. Yet, for as much as these men think it good policy to huddle up
their matters in the dark, it will not be amiss to rippe them abroad, and to
bring them forth into the light.

In the Council of Chalcedon it is decreed thus: Council. Chalcedonen. Action.
16.
Teneat and Aegyptus, vt Episcopus Alexandriae omnium habeat potestatem:
quoniam and Romano Episcopo haec est consuetudo. Similiter and, qui in
Antiochia constitutus est. Let Aegypte hold this order, that the Bishop of
Alexandria have the Jurisdiction of al things there: For the Bishop of Rome
holds the same order (within his Division) So likewise let the Bishop of
Antioche. By this Council, every of these Patriarchs had his power limited
within him self: and none of them to have dominion over other.

The Fathers in the Council of Aphrica, wherein M. Hardinge would seem to have
some affiance, Council. Aphrican. Ca. 6.
have decreed thus: Ne primae Sedis Episcopus appelletur Princeps Sacerdotum,
aut Summus Sacerdos, aut aliquid huiusmodi: sed tantum Primae Sedis Episcopus.
That the Bishop of the First See be not called the chief of Priests, or the
highest Priest, Can. 102.
or by any other like title: but only the Bishop of the First See. And again,
If any shall think it good to appeal, let them appeal only to Councelles to
be holden within Aphrica: or else to the Primates of their own Provinces. But
who so ever shall appeal beyond the Seas (that is, to the Bishop of Rome) let
no man within Aphrica receive him to his Communion. Thus much only for a
taste. I think M. Hardinge will not geather hereof, that the Bishop of Rome was
called universal Bishop, or the Head of the universal Church.

M. Hardinge. The.8. Division.
The Christen Princes, Papa.
that ratified and confirmed with their Proclamations and Edictes, the Decrees
of the Canons concerning the Popes primacie, and gave not to him first that
authority, as the Adversaries do untruly report, were 99 The. 99. untruth,
Phocas gave this title to the Bishop of Rome: but Iustinia^ gave it never.
Justinian, and Phocas the Emperors. The words of Justinians edicte be
these: In authen. De Ecclesi. tit.
Sancimus secundum canonum definitiones, Sanctissimum senioris Romae Papam,
primum esse omnium Sacerdotum. We ordeine according to the determinations of
the Canons, that the most holy Pope of the elder Rome, be formest, and chief
of al Priests.

About three scoare and ten years after Justinian, Phocas the Emperor in
the time of Bonifacius, to repress the arrogancy of the Bishop of
Constantinople, Lib. 4. histor.
as Paulus Diaconus writes, who vainly, Longobardicae Ca. 36.
and as Gregory says, contrary to our Lords teachinges, and the Decrees of
the Canons, and for that, wickedly, took upon him the name of the Universal,
or ecumenical Bishop, and wrote him self chief of al Bishops: made the
like Decree, and ordinance, that the holy See of the Roman and Apostolic
Church, should be holden for the Head of al Churches.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Emperors, Princes, and others have been favorably inclined sometime to the
parties in respect of their places: sometime to the places for the admiration
and reverence of the parties. Theodoret. li. 5. Ca. 18.
Theodosius The Emperor said, He never saw Bishop, that bare him self as a
Bishop in deed, but only S. Ambrose. Constantinus The Emperor said of Eusebius
the Bishop of Caesaria, Sozom. li. 7. Ca. 24.
Dignus est qui sit Episcopus, non tantum vnius Ciuitatis, sed etiam prope
Vniuersi Orbis. He is worthy to be the Bishop, not only of one City, Socrat.
lib. 1. Ca. 24.
but also in a manner of the whole world.

In respect of places, they were moved either for their Antiquity: or for
their Authority and Civil power: or for the commodity of the situation: or
for some other good consideration, and circumstance, to favor them, and to
grant them privileges above others. Thus the Emperor Justinian had a special
inclination to the City of Constantinople, for that it was now grown in
wealth, and puisance, and for the state, Authen. De Ecclesiast. titulis
Collatione. 9. Id^oque Sancimus.
and nobility thereof called Noua Roma, New Rome: And for that it was, as he
says, Matter pietatis nostrae, and Christianorum Orthodoxae Religionis omnium.
That is, The Mother of his Majesty, and of al Christian men of the Catholic
Faith. For like consideration the Emperor gave out this special privilege in
favor of the Sea of Rome. Sancimus secundum Canonum definitiones, sanctissimum
Senioris Romae Papam primum esse omnium Sacerdotum. Cod. De Sacrosanctis Eccle.
Decernimus Sacrosanctam. Authen. Collat. 9. De Ecclesias. titul.
We Decree, according to the determinations of the Canons, that the most holy
Pope of the Elder Rome, be the first, or formest of al Priests. And by the
way, least any error happen to grow of this word, Papa, it behooves
thee, good Reader, to understand, that, Papa, in old times in the Greek
tongue signified a Father, as appears, by that, Iuppiter the great Idol,
that was honored as God in Bithynia, was called Papa, (...), Iuppiter Papa.
And further, that in S. Augustines time, and before, the same name was given,
Coelius Rhodigin. li. 11. Ca. 21. Iuppiter Papa. Cyprian. lib. 2. Epis. 7.
not only, or specially, to the Bishop of Rome, but also generally to al
Bishops. The Priests, and Deacons of Rome write thus unto S. Cyprian the
Bishop of Carthage, Cypriano Papae: Unto Pope Cyprian. And Galerius the Judge,
having S. Cyprian in examination for the Christian Faith, said thus unto
him, Tu es, quem Christiani Papam suu^ nominant? Art thou he, whom the
Christians call their Pope? Pontius in passione Cypriani. Inter Epistolas
Augustini Epist. 11.
So likewise S. Hierome intitleth his Epistles unto S. Augustine being Bishop
of Hippo. Hieronymus beatissimo Papae Augustino. Hierome unto Augustine the
most holy Pope. Thus much only by the way.

But to return to the matter, M. Hardinge may not of every thing, that he
reads, conclude, what he lists. This privilege granted unto the Bishop of
Rome, to be the first of al Priests, was not, to bear the whole swaye, and
to over rule all the world: but only in General meetinges, and Councelles to
sit in plac^ above al others, and for auoidinge of confusion, to direct, The
first Bishop.
and order them in their dooinges. Cod. De Sacrosanctis Ecclestis. Decernimu^.
Themperours words be plain, Praerogatiua in Episcoporum Concilio, vel extra
Concilium ante alios residendi. A prerogative in the Council of Bishops, or
without the Council to sit in order above others. This prerogative in Greek is
called (...), that is, the privilege of the first place. And these phrases in
that tongue be known, and common: (...). Like as also these in the Latin
Tongue, Obtinere primas, secundas, tertias: That is, To have the preeminence of
the First, Second, or Third place. And that the Emperor Justinian meante
only thus, and none otherwise, it is manifest even by the self same place,
that M. Hardinge has here alleged. His words stand thus, Sancimus etc.
Senioris Romae Papam, (...).
primum esse omnium Sacerdotum: Beatissimum autem Archiepiscopum
Constantinopoleos Nouae Romae secundum habere locum. We ordeine, that the Pope
of the Elder Rome shall be the first of al Priests: and that the most holy
Archebyshop of Constantinople, which is named New Rome, have the Second
place. Hereby it is plain, that this privilege stands only in placinge the
Bishop of Rome in the first seat above others. But I beseech thee, gentle
Reader, weigh well the words, that follow in the same Law, and thou shall see,
both that M. Hardinges dealinge herein is not upright, and also, that the
Bishop of Rome was then excluded by plain words from that Uniuersal power,
which he now so deeply dreameth of. It follows immediately, Beatissimum
Archiepiscopum Primae Iustinianae Patriae nostrae habere semper sub sua
Jurisdiction Episcopos Prouinciaru^ Daciae, and Daniae, and Dardaniae, and
Mysiae, atque Pannoniae: Et ab eo hos ordinari: ipsum vero a proprio ordinari
Concilio: and in subiectis sibi prouincijs locum obtinere eum Sedis Apostolicae
Romae. We ordeine, that the most holy Archbishop of Iustiniana the first,
which is in our Country, shall have for ever under his Jurisdiction the
Bishops of the Provinces of Dacia, Dania, Dardania, Mysia, and Pannonia: and
that they shall be invested by him: and he only by his own Council: and that he
in the Provinces subject unto him, shall have the place of the Apostolic See
of Rome. Here we see, The Bishop of Iustiniana set in as high Authority, and
power within his own Jurisdiction, as the Bishop of Rome within his. Cod. De
Sacrasanctis Ecclesijs. Omni innouatione.
In like sort the Emperor Justinian says, Ecclesia vrbis
Constantinopolitanae Romae veteris praerogatiua laetatur. The Church of the
City of Constantinople enjoys now the Prerogative of Rome the Elder.

Now, if the Bishop of Iustiniana, and the Bishop of Rome, in their several
divisions, have like authority: And if the Church of Constantinople in all
prerogatives, and privileges be made equal with the City of Rome, then is not
the Bishop of Romes power Uniuersal, Authen. vt Determinatus sit numerus
Clericorum.
neither can he justly be called the Head of the Uniuersal Church. Uerily
Justinian him self writing unto Epiphanius the Bishop of Constantinople,
calls him the Universal Patriarch: which thing he would not have done, if
he had thought, that title of right had belonged to the Bishop of Rome. (...).


The argument, that M. Hardinge geathereth of Justinians words, is this: The
Bishop of Rome had the first place in General Councels, Ergo, he was an
Uniuersal Bishop. Which argument what weight it bears, I leave to M.
Hardinge to consider.

But the Emperor Phocas gave this special grant to the Sea of Rome, that the
Bishop there should be called The Head of al Churches. But M. Harding knows,
this grant was made unto Bontfacius the third, which was Bishop in Rome in
the year of our Lord si^e hundred and.viii. Anno Domi^^* 608.
even at the same very time, that Mahomet first began to plant his Doctrine in
Arabia: and therefore makes nothing to this purpose, as being without the
compass of six hundred years. Notwithstanding both Platyna, Platyna.
and Sabellicus say, that Bonifacius hardly, and with much a do got the
same then to be granted. Sabellicus.
How be it, for as much as M. Hardinge would seem to found his supremacy,
upon some godly man, it may please thee, good Reader, to understand, that this
Phocas being but a Souldeour, by treason, and conspiracy laid hands upon his
liege Lord, and Master the Emperor Mauritius, and in cruel sort did him to
death. The manner whereof was this: Abbas Vrspergensis in Mauritio.
First he commanded forth the Emperors youngest son, and caused him to be
slain, even in the sight of his Father: and so the second: and then the
third: and afterward the wife: Mauritius heavily lookinge on, and lamentinge,
and saieinge unto God, O Lord, thou art just, and just is thy judgment.
Last of al, he used the like tyranny upon him also, and laid the Emperor,
his wife, and his children, Carrion in Chronicis.
in a heap together. Afterward, duringe the time of his Phocas, God seemed
utterly to withdraw his blissing: Abbas vrspergensis.
France, Spain, Germany, Lombardie, and the greatest part of the East, fell
from the Empier for ever: such a wrecke to ye state, as never had been seen
before. After he had thus lived, and committed sundry Murders, and other
great mischiefs (Post multa homicidia, and alia malefacta) the people took
him, and slew him, and threw him into the fire. This was he, that first
proclaimed the Bishop of Rome, to be head of the Uniuersal Church.

M. Hardinge. The.9. Division.
Of the Doctors what shall I say? Verily, this matter is so often, and so
commonly reported of them, that their saieinges laid together, would scantly
be comprised within a great volume. The recital of a few shall here give a
taste, as it were of the whole, and so suffice.

Ir^naeus having much praised the Church of Rome, Lib. ^. ca. ^.
at length utters these words, by which the soueraintie thereof is
confessed. Ad hanc Ecclesiam propter potentiorem principalitatem, necesse est
omnem conuenire Ecclesiam, hoc est, eos, qui vndique sunt fideles. To this
Church (of Rome) it is necessary, all the Church, that is to say, all that be
faithful any where, to repair, and come together, for the mightier
principality of the same: that is to wit, for that it is of mightier power
and authority then other Churches, and the principallest of al.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Touching the Doctors, M. Hardinge finds him self much troubled with the
number of them: yet can he not find any one of them al, that calls the
Bishop of Rome the Uniuersal Bishop, or Head of the Uniuersal Church.

Ireneaeus speaks neither of Supremacy, nor of Headship of the Church, nor
of any other Uniuersal power. Therefore M. Hardinge mistelleth his authors
tale, and avouches that, he never meante. For Irenaeus in that place writes
only against Ualentinus, Cerdon, and Marcion, which, contrary to the Doctrine
of the Apostles, had divised sundry strange Heresies, and Fantasies of their
own. For trial whereof, he bids them to behold the Churches, which the
Apostles had planted. Irenaeus. li. 3. Ca. 3.
The Church of Ephesus (says he) first instructed by S. Paul, and afterward
continued by S. John, is a sufficient witness of the Apostles learning.
Polycarpus being converted, and taught by the Apostles, instructed the Church
of Smyrna: and all the Churches of Asia follow it. Yet none of al these Churches
ever allowed, or received your strange doctrine. Irenaeus li. 3. Ca. 4.
yea the very wild Barbarous nations, that have received the faith of Christ
at the Apostles hands only by hearing, without any book, or letter, if they
should hear of these Heresies, they would stop their ears. Thus Irenaeus
calls forth these Heretics, as we do now our Adversaries, to be tried by
the Doctrine, and Churches of the Apostles. But he says, Valde longum est, in
hoc tali volumine omnium Ecclesiarum enumerare successiones. It would be very
long in such a book as this is, to reckon up the successions of al Churches.
Therefore he reasteth specially upon the example of the Church of Rome, which
he calls Maximam, antiquissimam, and omnibus cognitam: The greatest, most
ancient, and known to al men. And says, By the example of this Church, we
confound al perverse Doctrine: And adds further, Ad hanc Ecclesiam, propter
potentiorem principalitatem, necesse est omnem Ecclesiam conuenire: quia in hac
semper conseruata est ea, quae est ab Apostolis Traditio. Unto this Church of
Rome every other Church must agree: The reason is, For that in this Church
the Tradition of the Apos^les has ever been keapte. Cod. De Summae Trini.
Cunctos popul.
So the Emperors Gratian, Ualentinian, and Theodosius Commanded al them to be
called Catholics, Sozomen. li. 7. Ca. 4.
that follow the Faith, that S. Peter delivered to the Sea of Rome. For the
Apostles Doctrine is the trial, and rule of Faith. This Doctrine at the
beginning was exactly observed in Rome without corruption: and therefore was
that Church in reverence, and estimation above others.

But they will reply: Irenaeus says, Propter potentiorem principalitate^. Of
these words grows their error. They dream of a Kingdom, and
Principality. But Christ says to his Disciples, Matthae. 20.
The kings of Nations rule over them: Vos aute^ non sic: Luke. 22.
But you may not so. And Origin says, Qui vocatur ad Episcopatum, non vocatur
ad principatum, Origin in Esai. Ca. 6.
sed ad seruitutem totius Ecclesiae. He that is called to be a Bishop, is not
called to a principality, 1. Timoth. 3.
but unto the Service of the whole Church. The Principality, that Irenaeus
meante, was the Civil Dominion, and temporal state of ye City of Rome, in
which God had then planted the Empier of the world, and made al Nations
subject unto it. And therefore the Church of God being once inkendled there,
was more notable, and better known unto al Nations. As for the Bishops of Rome
that then were, they had neither lands, nor rentes: but lived still under the
swearde in continual persecution: as S. Paul says, The ofshauinge of the
world, and the vilest of al people, Far from any show, or color of
Principality. Yet that notwithstanding, the Church there was called a
principal, and a chief Church above others, because of the Dominion, and
Principality of the City. And in this sense, Ecclesia principalis, Is
sometime used in the Old Fathers. 7. Quest. 1. placuit.
In the Council of Carthage it is written thus: Placuit, vt nemini sit
facultas, relicta principali Cathedra, ad aliquam Ecclesiam in Dioecesi
constitutam se confer. We think it good, it be lawful for no man, leauinge
the principal Cheyre, or Church, Inter Epistolas Augustini. ep. 35
to go to any other Church within the Diocese. Likewise Paulinus unto
Alypius, Dominus in suis te ciuibus principalem cum principibus populi sui,
sede Apostolica merito collocauit. The Lord has woorthily placed thee in the Sea Apostolic, a principal one emonge his Citizens, with the Princes of his
people. Thus the Principality, that Irenaeus means, stood not in the
preachinge of the Gospel, but in the Civil estate, and worldly Dominion: not
in the Bishop that professed Christ, but in the Emperor, that was an Heathen:
not in the Church, but in the persecutors, and enemies of the Church.
Therefore M. Hardinge reasoninge thus, Rome had the power, and Princehoode of
the world: Ergo, The Bishop there was Head of the Universal Church, seems
not well to weighe his own Conclusion. For of the same grou^des we might well
reason thus: Rome now has lost that power, and Princehoode of the world:
Ergo, The Bishop there, is not now the Head of the Universal Church.

To be short, If the Church of Rome would now faithfully keep the
Traditions, and Doctrine of the Apostles, we would frankely yield her all that
honor, that Iraeneus gives her. But she has shaken of the yoke of Christ,
and wilfully breaks Gods commandments, to the intent to uphold her own
Traditions. For proof whereof, to pass over an infinite number of other
disorders, the Bishop there presumes now to entitle him self, Gregor. li. 4.
The Universal Bishop. But S. Gregory says, Epist. 36.
Nemo decessorum meorum hoc tam profano vocabulo vti consensit. None of my
predecessors ever consented, to use this ungodly name. Therefore like as
Irenaeus says of his time, The Church of Rome has ever hitherto keapte the
Tradition, and Doctrine of the Apostles: Primatus
Ergo, al Churches ought to take her for an example, and to agree unto her: So
may we in contrary wise say of our time, The Church of Rome has now broken
the Traditions and Doctrine of the Apostles: Ergo, No Church ought to follow
her example, and to agree unto her.

M. Hardinge. The.10. Division.
Androw followed our Savior before that Peter did. In. 2. Cor. 12.
Et tamen primatum non accepit Andreas, sed Petrus: And yet Androw received not
the Primacie, but Peter, says Ambrose.

The B. of Sarisburie.
This error holds only of the missevnderstandinge of this word, Primatus:
which by M. Hardinges ^^dgement, must needs signify an Uniuersal power over
the whole world. B^t it is easy to be showed, that, Primatus, emonge the Old
Fathers, is far (...)I mean, for any superiority, or preferrement before
others. In Sermon. 35.
And first to begin with S. Ambrose, thus he writes, Esau pe^ (...)Primatus
amisit. De Ieiunio.
(...)of Rise potage lost the hon^^^ of (...). Augustine. in Euange Johan.
In like sort writes S. Augustine, Esau Primatus suos, non prop^^^ (...), sed
(...)perdidit. Tract. 73.
Likewise the Council of Chalcedo^ in the condemnation of the Heretic Abbate
Eutych^s, Council. Chalcedone^, ^^^ione (...)*
uses these words, De^^^imus eum extraneum esse ab omni officio (...),
Council. Toleta. 6 Ca. 13.
and a nostra Communione, and a Primatu Monasterij. We decree, that he shall be
removed from his office of Priesthood, and from our (...), and from the
Primacie of (...)Abbie. So the Council of Toledo, Prim^^^ (...)honorabiles
hab^ntur in palatio: They are counted hono^able in the Court, (...)Primacie of
their dignity. In these places, I reckon, we need not to take, (...) for an
Uniuersal, or infinite Government.

Likewise the same word, Primatus, is often taken for the Superiority of
every (...), and not only for the dominion, that is claimed by the By^^^p of
Rome. (...)Ca. 2.
In the Council of Constantinople it is written thus, Alexand^^^ Episcopi
solius Orienti^ cura^ gerant, seruatis honoribus Primatus Ecclesiae An^^^^^ Let
the Bishops of Alexandria have the charge only of the East, the honor of
(...)to the Church of Antioche. In like manner it is written in the
(...)Chalcedon: Council. Chalcedon. Actio. 16.
Episcopus qui in A^^iochia co^stitutus est, and qui in ^^^^eris prouincijs,
(...)ampliorum. The Bishop that is appointed for Antioche, (...)Provinces, let
them have the P^^^acies of the greater Cities. So the Emp^^^^^ (...), and
Ualentinian wrote unto ^^^^^rus the Bishop of Alexandria, Council. Chalcedonen.
Actio. 1.
(...)reported in the Council of Chalcedon, Authoritatem, and Primatum tuae
praebemus Bea^^^^^.

Now, if this word, Primatus, must needs signify that power* and
gou^^^^ment, that M. Harding fantasieth, then must it follow of (...), that
Esau, Eu^^^^, the Bishop of Antioche, and the Bishop of Alexandri^* had the
Uniuersal Power, and gouern^ment of the whole world. But if it may well be
taken for any manner prefer^ement, or preeminence, or prioritie before others,
then is M. Hardinges argument much acra^ed, and concludes not so much, as is
pretended. Uerily Tertullian says, Tertullian. De Praescriptio. contra Haereti.
(...)Eccle^^^ vna est illa ab Apostolis prima, ex q^^ omnes. Sic omnes primae,
and omnes Aposto^^^^^, dum vnam omnes probant vnitatem. So many and so great
Churches, are all that F^^^^ one Ch^^che erected by the Apostles, fr^^ whence
came al. And so are al Churches both the first, and also the Apostolic
Churches, for as much as they al allow one truth.

As touching S. Peter's preeminence, Cyprian. De Simplicitate Praelatorum.
Cyprian says, Hoc erant alij quod Petrus, pari consortio praediti, and
Honoris, and Potestatis. The reast of the Disciples were even the same that
Peter was, al endewed with like fellowship, both of honor and also of power.
Even so says S. Ambrose too, and that in the very same place that M. Hardinge
has alleged. Inter Petrum, and Paulum, quis cui praeponatur, incer^um est. Of
Peter, and Paul, whether ought to be preferred before other, it is not known.

Certainly, if Peter had had the Uniuersal soueraintie over all the Apostles,
he should have had the like over S. Paul. And so perhaps M. Hardinge will say:
notwithstanding S. Ambrose by plain words denies it: Gregor. lib. 4.
and although S. Gregory say, Epist. 32.
Petrus Vniuersalis Apostolus non vocatur: Peter is not called an Universal
Apostle.

Of S. Ambrose words, M. Harding reasons thus: Peter was the chiefest of
the Apostles: Ergo, The Pope is Head of the Uniuersal Church. This argument
would be better considered: for as it is, it holds but weakly.

M. Hardinge. The.11. Division.
In the Epistle of Athanasius, This Epistle is forged, and (...)vvritre^ by
(...).
and the Bishops of Egypt to Liberius the Pope, in which they sue for
healpe against the oppressions of the Arianes: we find these words. Huius
rei gratia, vniuersalis vobis a Christo Jesus commissa est Ecclesia etc. Even
for this cause the Universal Church has been committed to you of Christ
Jesus, that you should travail for all, and not be negligent to healpe every
one. Luc. 11*
For whiles the strong man being armed keeps his house, al things that he
possesses are in peace.

The B. of Sarisburie.
This Epistle under the name of Athanasius, bisides that it is vain and
childishe, and full of needelesse, and idle talk, has also evident tokens of
manifest forgerie. For further answer hereunto, I refer me self unto that
is before answered unto the Epistle written under the name of Athanasius unto
Felix.

M. Hardinge. The.12. Division.
Hilarious speakinge much to the extollinge of Peter, De Trinita. li. ^.
and his 100 The.100. ^^trueth. For Hilarie ^^eaketh no^ one word of Peter's
(...).
Successor in that See, says, Supe^ eminentem bearae fidei suae confessione
locum promeruit: that for the Confession of his blessed faith, ^e deserue^ a
place of preeminence 101. The. (...)^^anding in (...)
above al other.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Hilarious by M. Hardinges report, speaks much to the extollinge of S.
Peter, and his successor in that See. Here is first a great untruth. For
Hilarious in that whole place, speaks not one word neither of Rome, nor of
the Sea, nor of the Successor of Peter. Only he commends S. Peter's faith,
wherein (...)confessed that Christ is the son of the living God: De Trinit.
li. 6.
and says, Haec fides est fundamentum Ecclesiae: Super have Confessionis
Petram, Ecclesiae aedificatio est. This faith is the fundation of the Church:
Upon this Rock of Confession the Church is builte. And ^^deth further.
Augustine. in Johan. tractatu. 11. and. 124.
By the Confession of his blessed Faith, he obtained a place of preeminenc^,
as M. Harding adds of his own, 1. Corinthians. 15.
above al other. Wherein also he commits an other untruth. 1. Corinthians. 4.
For Hilarious says only, He obtained a special place, and speaks not one
word of any other. Roman. 9.
S. Augustine says, Petrus pro omnibus dixit, and cum omnibus accepit: Matthew.
5.
Peter spoke for all the reast: and received promise with all the re^st. As the
Confession was one, 1. Timoth. 3.
so the place of preeminence was al one. The preeminence was, Luc. 22.
that they should be the first fruits of Gods Saints: The vessels of
Election: The Fathers of the people: Act. 7.
The Light of the world: The pillars of the Church: Act. 6.
and the Angels of God. That they should sit upon twelve seats, and judge the
twelve Tribes of Israel. Reuelat. 1.
This was the special preeminence of the Apostles of Christ, Reuelat. 2.
and was equally given unto them al.

But M. Hardinge cannot believe, there is any place of Preeminence, but only
in Rome: and therefore imagines, that upon this confession, Christ said unto
Peter, Blissed art thou Simon Bariona: for thou shall be Pope: and shall be
exalted above thy Brethren: and shall be fournished with all worldely power:
and all the Princes of the world shall stoop unto thee This is the preeminence
that by M. Hardinges fantasy, Christ promised unto S. Peter.

Of these words of Hillarie, M. Hardinge seems to reason thus, Peter
obtained a place of Preeminence: Ergo, The Bishop of Rome is head of the
Uniuersal Church. This argument is open, and shows it self.

M. Hardinge. The.13. Division.
S. Ambrose confessinge him self to believe that the largenes of the Roman
Empire was by Gods providence prepared, that the Gospel might have his
course, and be spreadde abroad the better, says thus of Rome: De vocatione
gentium lib. 2. Ca. 6.
Quae tamen per Apostolici Sacerdotij principatum amplior facta est Arce
Religionis, quam solio potestatis. Which for all that, has been advanced
more by the chieftie of the Apostolic Priesthood in the Tower of Religion,
then in the Throne of temporal power.

The B. of Sarisburie.
These words of S. Ambrose be true, and not denied, and further no part of
M. Hardinges purpose. But here is a whole sentence ouerhipte, that quite
overthrows his whole purpose. The words that immediately go before, are
these. Quamuis gratia Christiana non contenta sit, eosdem limits habere, quos
Roma, mul^osque iam populorum sceptro Crucis Christi illa subdiderit, quos
armis suis ista non domuit: Howbeit the grace of Christ is not content to have
the same limits that Rome has: but has subdued more Nations by the scepter of
Christ's Cross, then Rome ever subdued by force of war. If the Grace and
Salvation of God have larger limits, and reach further then the power of
Rome, how then claims the Bishop of Rome his Uniuersal power? Many that live
without the compass or obedience of Rome, are notwithstanding partakers of
the Grace of Christ: how then is it, that Bonifacius the Bishop there says,
Extra. de Maior^. and obedientia Vnam Sanctam.
Subesse Romano Pontifici omni humanae creaturae declaramus, dicimus,
definimus, pronuntiamus, omnino esse de necessitate salutis. We declare, say,
determine, and pronounce, that to be subject unto the Bishop of Rome, is
undoubtedly of the necessity of Salvation.

S. Ambrose, that the Glory of the Gospel of Christ might the better appear,
compares it with the power, and puisance of the Empire of Rome, which then
ouerrea^ched a great part of the world. One said, Romanos rerum Dominos. S.
Ambrose says, Ambros. in Ser^^ne. 66.
R^ma principatum and Caput obtinet Nationum. Rome has the Empire and
soueraintie of al Nations. Thus he seems to compare the Church, with the
City: the power of the Gospel, with the power of the Empier: the Scepter of
the Cross, with the Scepters of the Prince: and the Glory of the one side,
with the Glory of the other. Although Rome were glorious for the Empire, yet
was she much more glorious for the Gospel. The Emperor there with his power
subdued Nations: but the Gospel of Christ subdued the Emperor. Constantinus,
Theodosius, Ualentinianus, and other Emperors of Rome, with all their power
confessed them selves to be subjects unto Christ. And S. Ambrose writes unto
Ualentinian the Emperor, Ambros. Epist. 32.
Quid honorificentius, quam vt Imperator dicatur Filius Ecclesiae? What can
be more honorable, then that the Emperor be called a child of the Church?
This was the whole, and only meaning of S. Ambrose. And in that sense S.
Augustine says, Augustine.
Ostendatur mihi Romae in honor tanto Templum Rom^li, in quanto ego ibi
ostendo memoriam Petri. In Petro quis honoratur, nisi ille defunctus pro nobis?
Sumus enim Christiani, non Petriani. Show me the Temple of Romulus in Rome,
in so great honor, as I will show you there the memory of Peter. And who is
honored in Peter, but he that died for us? For we are Christian men, and not
Peter's men. So likewise Chrysostom, Ad populum
Contigit primum Antiochiae Discipulos appellari Christianos. Hoc autem
Ciuitatum, Antiochen. hom. 17.
quae sunt in mundo cunctarum habet nulla, nec ipsa Romuli Ciuitas. It
chanced, that the Disciples in this City of Antioche were first called
Christians. Of all the Cities, that be in the world, none ever had this giste,
no not the City of Romulus. Therefore S. Ambroses meaning is, that Rome was
never so noble before for the Empier of the world, as it was afterward for
the Gospel of Christ. But S. Ambrose says, Apostolici Sacerdo^ij principa^um,
The principality of the Apostolic Priesthood, With which words worldely
eyes may soon be daseled. But M. Hardinge knows, that S. Peter, being in
Rome, had no manner show, or state of Princehoode. His whole power was
spiritual, and stood only in the Preachinge of the Gospel, 2. Corin. 10.
with which armor God is hable to pull down Kings and Princes to the
obedience of his Christ. Hieremi. 1.
Thus says God unto Hieremie, Constitui ^e super Gentes, and Regna. I have set
the over Nations, and Kingedomes. And S. Peter speakinge generally unto al
Christian people, 1. Petr. 2.
says, Vos estis Regale Sacerdotium. You are that kingely Priesthood. This
principality and tower of Religion was not only in Rome, but also in every
place, where the name of Christ was received. Albeit, I grant, both for the
multitude of Idols that there had been honored, and also for the nobility
of the Empier, the Uictorie of Christ in Rome appeared most glorious.

Now let us consider M. Hardinges reasoninge. The state of Rome was more famous
for the Gospel, then ever it had been before for the Empier: Ergo, The Pope
was called the Head of the Universal Church. This argument is such, as
needs no answer.

M. Hardinge. The.14. Division.
S. Augustine in his.162. Epistle says, In Ecclesia Romana semper Apostolicae
Cathedrae viguit principatus. The primacie, or principality of the Apostolic
Chaier, has evermore been in force in the Roman Church. Li. 1. contra. 2.
Epistolas Pel^gianorum. Ad Bonifacium, ca. 1.
The same S. Augustine speakinge to Bonifacius Bishop of Rome, This care (says
he, complaining of the Pelagians) is common to us al, that have the office of a
Bishop, albeit therein thou thy self have the preeminence over al, being on
the top of the pastoral watchetower. In an other place he has these words.
The.102. untruth. standing in the false Translation, and corruption of S.
Augustines words.
Caeterum magis vereri debeo, ne in Petrum contumeliosus existam. Quamuis ipse
in co praeemineas celsiore fastigio speculae pastoralis. Lib. 2. de Baptismo
contra Donatistas. Ca. 17.
Quis enim nescit, illum Apostolatus principatum, cuilibet Episcopatui
praeferendum? But I ought rather to be afraid, least I be reprocheful toward
Peter. For who is he that knows not, that that principality of Apostleship,
is to be preferred before any Bisshoprike that is? An other most evident place
he has in his Book De Vtilitate credendi ad Honoratum. Cum tamen auxilium Dei
etc. Whereas (says he) we see so great healpe of God, so great profit and
fruit, shall we stand in doubt whether we may hide our selves in the lap
of that Church, which (though Heretics bark at it in vain round about,
condemned partly by the judgment of the people them selves, Culmen
auctoritatis obtinuit Cui primas dare nolle, vel summae profecto impietatis
est, vel praecipitis arrogantiae.
partly by the sadness of Councelles, and partly by the majesty of miracles
even to the confession of mankind) for the Apostolic See by successions of
Bishops, has obtained the top, or highest degree of authority? To which
Church if we will not give, and grant the Primacie, soothly it is a point
either of most high wickedness, or of headlonge arrogancy.

The B. of Sarisburie.
These places of S. Augustine may soon be answered. For here is neither
Uniuersal Bishop: nor Head of the Uniuersal Church: nor superiority, or
dominion over al others: nor any other word tendinge to that end. M.
Hardinge knows, Council. Carthaginen. 3. Ca. 26.
that S. Augustine was present at the Council of Carthage, and gave his
consent, That the Bishop of the first See, should not be called neither the
Prince, or Chief of Priests, nor the Highest Priest, nor by any other like
title.

He knows also that S. Augustine afterward confirmed the same in a Council
holden at Hippo Regius in his own Diocese. Council. Hipponen. Cap. 27.
Likewise he knows, that the same S. Augustine Decreed among other Bishops
to the number of. Council. Aphrican. Cap. 92.
217. in the Council of Aphrica, that it should not be lawful for any man of
those countries, to seek for aid over the Seas, and to appeal to the Bishop
of Rome: and that whosoever so appealed, should stand Excommunicate: and so
utterly condemned that Infinite Dominion, and Uniuersal Power, that so many
have sithence dreamed of. Augustine. in Johan. tracta. 13.
Again, writing upon the Gospel of S. John he says, Petrus erat oculus in
Capite, Peter was an eye in the Head: He says not, Peter was the Head. In
these words appears plainly S. Augustines certain, and undoubted
judgment touching this matter. The reast, that is here brought in, stands
only upon M. Hardinges geatheringe.

It is true, that as well S. Augustine, as also other Godly Fathers, rightly,
and well, in old times yielded great reverence to the Sea of Rome, both for
the Antiquity of the Church: and for the honor and memory of S Peter: and
for the constancy of the Holy Martyrs, that there had suffered: and also for
the purity of Religion, which was preserved there a long time without
spotte, and might be a standerde unto others. But the greatest increase of
outward estimation in ye world unto that See, Council. Constantinopol. 1. ca.
5.
was the Imperial Seat, and Presence of the Prince, as notably appears by
the first Council of Constantinople. Distinct. 22. Constant inopolitanae.
For these causes S. Augustine says, The Sea of Rome had the highest place,
and chief preeminence above others.

Perhaps M. Hardinge will press me further with this word, Principatus:
which he expounds, The Principality. Howbeit, I believe, he will not say,
P^incipatus, signifies an Uniuersal power, or Supreme government: and so his
advantage of this word is not so great. Uerily Princeps, in the Latin
tongue, is often used for a man, that for his virtue, or room, or any singular
quality, is to be had in estimation above others. De natura Deorum.
So Cicero says, Socrates princeps Philosophorum: Grauitate dicendi princeps
Plato: De oratore. Pro domo su^.
princeps orbis terrarum Pompeius. Like as also Chrysostom says, Chrysostom.
ad Ro^a. Homi. 18.
Caput Prophetarum Elias: Elias the Head of the Prophets. In these places,
Princeps is taken, not for a Prince, or Governor, but only for a man, that
for his qualities is to be esteemed above the reaste. And in this sense S.
Augustine calls the Sea of Rome, as it was in his time, Principatum Sedis
Apostolicae, and not in respect of any Supreme government: for that he
himself in the Council of Aphrica, as it is already proved, utterly denied
him. I grant, as S. Augustine says, The Bishop of Rome truly, and
diligently dooinge the part of a Bishop, he that then would have denied him
the chief preeminence, for the respects above touched, had been wicked, or
arrogant. But the same Bishop of Rome now claiming to him self the title of
Uniuersal Bishop, as S. Gregory says, Gregor. li. 6. Epist. 30. and li. 4.
Epist. 39.
Is the Forerenner of Antichriste: and the consenting to the same, as the same
Gregory says, Is the renouncinge and forsaking of the faith.

I could further say, that M. Hardinge in these authorities of S. Augustine
has leafte out, and transposed what he thought good: and so has showed no
simple dealinge. In the first place, S. Augustines words be these, Episcopus
videbat se Romanae Ecclesiae, in qua semper Apostolicae Cathedrae viguit
principatus, per Communicatorias literas esse coniunctum: He saw him self by
Letters of Conference to be joined with the Church of Rome, ^^gustin. Epist.
(...)
in which Church the chief preeminence of the Apostolic See had ever
flourished. S. Augustine says, The Bishop there was joined with the Church of
Rome, not by way of Obedience, or Subjection, but by Letters of Conference,
wherein is implied an equality, or a fellowship. And afterward in ye same
Epistle S. Augustine says, That Meltiades the Bishop of Rome with certain
other Bishops, heard the matter between Caecilianus and Donatus A casis nigris,
not by any his Uniuersal, or Supreme Power, as M. Harding imagines, but by
special Commission from the Emperor. And so was the Bishop of Rome the
Emperors Delegate: and that, not in any Sovereign Authority, but felowlike,
and equally joined with other Bishops: and, That afterward the same cause upon
complainte, and mislikinge of Donatus, was by the Emperor taken out of the
Bishop of Romes hands, and by a new Commission was put over to the hearing of
the Bishop of Arle in France. But where was then the Bishop of Romes supreme
government?

In the second place M. Hardinge has notably falsified, Augustine. li. 1.
both S. Augustines words in the Latin, Contra Epist.
and also his own Translation in the English. S. Augustines words be these,
Pelagianor. ca. 1.
Co^munis est nobis omnibus, qui fungimur Episcopatus officio, quamuis ipse in
eo praeemineas celsiore fastigio, Specula pastoralis. Which words M. Hardinge
by wilful deprauation has altered thus, Celsiore fastigio speculae pastoralis:
And so has leafte the Adjective, Communis, without a Substantive, and ye
principal Uerbe, Est, without a Nominative Case: And, to serve his turn, has
caused S. Augustine to speak false Latin. This place of S. Augustine may be
Englished thus, The pastoral Watch Tower is common to us al, that bear the
office of Bishops: albeit thy preeminence is greater, as sittinge in the higher
room. M. Hardinges Translation is thus, Thou thy self have the preeminence
over al, being in the top of the pastoral Tower: Wherein these words (Over
al) are not sound in S. Augustine, but only divised at pleasure by M.
Hardinge. In the third place, bisides other corruption, De Baptismo co^tra
Donatist. li. 2. ca. 1.
he dissembleth the words that S. Augustine in the very same place allegeth
out of S. Cyprian, Cyprian. ad Quirinum.
very well serving to this purpose. The words be these, Nec Petrus vindicauit
sibi aliquid, aut arroganter assumpsit, vt diceret se primatum tenere, and
obtemperari sibi a nouellis, and posteris potius debere. Neither did Peter
challenge any thing, or proudely presume of him self, to say, that he had the
primacie, and that therefore others as Nouices, and underlings should be
obedient unto him. Al these things M. Harding dissembleth, and so to fournishe
out his matter, and to smouthe his Reader, he leaves out, what he lists.

M. Hardinge. The.15. Division.
The notable saieing of S. Hierome may not be let pass. Contra Luciferianos.
Ecclesiae salus a summi Sacerdotis dignitate pendet: cui si non exors quaedam,
and ab omnibus eminens detur potestas, tot in Ecclesiis efficientur schismata,
quot Sacerdotes. The safety of the Church hangs of the worship of the high
Priest (103 The.103. untruth. S. Hierome means not the Pope, but any other
several Bishop.
he means the Pope Peter's successor) to whom if there be not given a power
peereles, and surmounting al others, in the Churches we shall have so many
schisms, as there be priests.

The B. of Sarisburie.
This place of S. Hierome is notably well noted. But if it might have pleased M.
Hardinge, to note but the two lines that went before, he should soon have
seen, that this note was not woorthe the notinge. For it is certain, that S.
Hierome there speaks generally of al Bishops: and not one word specially of
the Bishop of Rome. He entreats there of ye order of Confirmation, which, he
says, by the usage of the Church for quietness, and unity, in many places
was ministered only by the Bishop, and not by any other Priest: and that, he
says, Ad honorem magis Sacerdotij, quam ad necessitatem Legis. More for the
honor of the state of Bishops, then for the necessity of the Law. And this
(as I said) he speaks generally of al Bishops. Immediately after he adds
these words that M. Harding here allegeth, Ecclesiae salus etc. The safety
of the Church hangs of the dignity of ye high priest. Herein S. Hierome
agrees thoroughly with S. Cyprian, that is, That for avoiding of Sects, and
Schisms, one high Priest, that is to say, one Bishop, was by good policy
appointed in every Division, to whose dooinges and Doctrine, the reast of the
Clergy should c^nforme them selves. And by this order, the unity of ye
Church was well preserved. S. Cyprian says, Cyprian. li. 4. Epist. 9.
Ecclesia cohaerentium sibi inuicem Sacerdotu^ glutino copulatur. The Church
is joined together by the consent of Bishops agreeinge in one. Hierony. ad
Nepotian.
So says S. Hierome. Singuli Ecclesiaru^ Episcopi: singuli Archiepiscopi:
singuli Archidiaconi: and omnis ordo Ecclesiasticus suis Rectoribus nititur.
There be several Bishops of Churches: several Archbishops: and several
Archedeacons: and all the Ecclesiastical order is stayed by the governors.

And the Gloss thereupon says thus, 7. Quest 1. in Apibus.
Hieronymus probat h^c, plures praelatos non debere esse in vna Ecclesia:
Hierony. ad Titum. Ca. 1.
sed singulos debere esse in singulis Eccles^s. S. Hierome here proves, that
there may not be two, or mo Bishops in one Church: But that a several Bishop
must be in every several Church. To the like purpose S. Hierome writes upon
the Epistle unto Titus. Haec propterea, vt ostenderemus, apud veteres ^osdem
fuisse Presbyteros, quos and Episcopos. Paulatim vero, vt dissensionum
plantaria euellerentur, ad vnum omnem sollicitudinem esse delatam. These
things have I spoken to the intent to show, that in old time Priests, and
Bishops were al one: and that in process, and by degrees, the whole charge
was brought unto one man (he means within one Diocese) that the occasions of
dissension might be rooted out. Cyprian. li. 1. Epist. 3.
And therefore, as it is before declared* S. Cyprian says, Hieronym. contra
Luciferian.
Hereof spring Schisms, for that the Priest of the Lord is not obeyed. And
therefore also says S. Hierome, Unless the Bishop have a special power above
others, there will be as many Schisms in the Church, as there be Priests. But
al these things thus uttered generally of al Bishops, M. Hardinge wreasteth,
and forces only unto one Bishop: and thus, that is General, he makes
Special: and, that is Special, he makes General, at his pleasure: and as
before he misreported S. Cyprian, even so does he now likewise misreporte S.
Hierome, and so shoareth up a ruinous matter with the falsification of his
Doctors.

But M. Hardinge will say, S. Hierome uses these special words, Summus
Sacerdos, The highest Priest: which can not otherwise be taken, but only of
the Pope. And therefore he gave this note with a special Parenthesis (He
means the Pope Peter's successor.) Yet M. Hardinge knows, there is no such
necessity, Amphilochius.
wherefore these words should so be taken. His own Amphilochius calls S.
Basile, Summus Sacerdos: and yet he knows, S. Basile was never Bishop of
Rome. Every Bishop within his own Diocese may be called the highest Priest,
Lactantius li. 4. Ca. 30.
in respect of other Priests, that live under him. And in this sense
Lactantius seems to call every Bishoprike Maximum Sacerdotium.

As for the Bishop of Rome, S. Hierome auaunceth him not so high, as M.
Hardinge would seem, Hieronym. ad Euagrium.
but rather makes him equal, and leuel with all other Bishops. For thus he
writes unto Euagri^s, Si authoritas quaeritur, Orbis mayor est Vrbe. Vbicunque
fuerit Episcopus, sieve Romae, sieve Eugubij, sieve Constantinopoli, sieve Rhegij
etc. eiusdem est meriti, eiusdem Sacerdotij. If we seek for Authority, the
World is greater, then the City of Rome. Wheresoever there is a Bishop,
whether he be at Rome, or at Eugubium, or at Constantinople, or at Rhegium,
etc. He is of like worthiness, and of like Priesthood.

Here S. Hierome specially, and by name, rekeneth the Bishop of Rome among
others, and makes him equal unto the rest. And again he says, Quid mihi
profers Vnius Vrbis consuetudinem? What show thou me the order, or manner
of one City? So much S. Hierome seems to set by the Sea of Rome. And to
this end S. Cyprian says, Cyprian. de simplicitate praela^orum.
Hoc erant coeteri Apostoli, quod fuit Petrus, pari consortio praediti, and
Honoris, and Potestatis. The reast of the Apostles were the same that Peter
was, al indewed with like fellowship both of Honor, and also of Power. And so
S. Cyprian calls Cornelius Bishop of Rome, Cyprian. li. 1. epist. 3.
his Brother: and Cyrillus calls Coelestinus likewise Bishop of Rome, his
Felowseruant. And therefore, when I hear M. Harding by his strange
interpretation, Cyrill. in Epis. ad Coelestin. Durand. li. 2.
give unto the Bishop of Rome A power peereles, and surmounting al others, Me
thinks I hear Doctor Durandus say, Hic est Melchisedech, cuius Sacerdotium
non est coeteris comparatum: Ille est Caput omnium Pontificu^, a quo illi,
tanqu^m a capite membra, descendunt, and de cuius plenitudine omnes accipiunt.
This is Melchised^^^, whose priesthood is not comparable unto others. He is
the Head of al Bishops, from whom al they grow, as members grow from the
head, and of whose fullness al they receive. Me thinks I hear, that is
written by the Canonistes, Extrauag. Johan. 22. Cum inter. In Glosa. Impressum
Lugduni, anno. 1556. and antea Lugduni, anno. 1513. Gregori. li. 4. Epist. 76.
Dominus (...) Our Lord God the Pope. And where as he further says, The
safety of the Church hangs of the high priest, whom he supposes, to be ye
Bishop of Rome. Uerily S. Gregory says, Quando is, qui appellatur
Vniuersalis, cadit, vniuersa Ecclesia (...)suo corruit. When so ever he, that
is called the Universal Bishop, falls, the whole Church from her state
must needs fall to the ground.

M. Hardinge. The.16. Division.
There is an Epistle of Theodoretus Bishop of Cyrus extant in Greek, written
to Leo Bishop of Rome: wherein we find a worthy witness of the primacie of
the Sea Apos^^like. His words may thus be engli^^ed. If P^ule (says he) the
preacher of the truth, and trumpet of the ^oly Ghost, ran to Peter, to
bring from him a determination, and declaration, for them, who at Antioche
were in argument, and contention concerning living after Moses law: much
more we, who are but small, and vile, shall run unto your throne Apostolic,
that of you we may have salve for the sores of the Ch^^ches, (there follow
these words) (...), (...).
Id est, per omnia enim vobis conuenit primas tenere: That is to say, For in all
things (perteininge to Faith, or Religion, so he means) it is meet, that
you have the chief dooinges, or that you have the Primacie. For your high
seat, or throne is endewed with many prerogatives, and privileges.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Here might I say, Council. Constantinopol. actio. 5. Euagri li 4. ca. 38.
That this Theodor^t was a deadly enemy of S. Cyrillus, and a Nestorian
Heretic, and condenmed by that name in the General Council of Constantinople:
as appears by Euagrius, Nicephorus, and others. Uerily although he were
brought into the Council of Chalcedon by the authority, and favor of the
Emperor Martianus, yet the Bishops of Illyricum, Egypt, and Palestine cried
out against him, Nicephor. li. 17. Ca. 27.
Fides perit: istum Canones eijciunt: Mitte hunc fo^as, magistrum Nestorij:
Nolite istum dicere Episcopum: Non est Episcopus: Impugnatorem Dei for as mitte:
Council. Chalced Actio. 1.
Haereticum for as mitte: Iudaeum for as mitte. The Faith is lost: this man the
Canons throw out: Out with this fellow: out with Nestorius Scholemaister: Call
him not Bishop: He is no Bishop: Out with him that fights against God: Out
with this Heretic: Out with this Jew.

But I will not use this advantage. I judge rather, that this Theodoretus, as he
was a man of deep learning, and great renoume, so he was also a careful, and
godly Bishop. As for the Nestorian Heresy, he defied it in the Council of
Constantinople, and openly pronounced, Council. Constantinopol. Actio. 8.
Anathema Nestorio, Accursed be Nestorius.

In these words that M. Hardinge has here alleged, he says nothing, that of
our part is denied. Certainly, here is not one word, neither of the Head of
the Church, nor of Uniuersal Bishop.

But if Theodoretus think, S. Paul went up to Jerusalem, either to visit
Peter, as the Head of the Church, as M. Hardinge seems to gheasse, or else to
be better resolved of his Doctrine, as standing in some doubt, whether he had
thitherto preached ye truth, or no, then does he quite overthrow S. Paul's
whole meaning. For it is plain, that S. Paul knows not Peter for his Head,
but contrary wise takes him as his equal: Ad Calat. 2.
For thus he says, Videbant mihi concreditum esse Euangelium praeputij, sicut
petro Circuncisionis. They saw, that I was put in trust with the Gospel over
the Heathens, Dextras dederunt (...).
even as Peter was over the Jews. And again, James, Peter, and John, that
seemed to be the pillars, gave unto me, and B^rnabas the right hands of
fellowship. Here we see between Peter, and Paul a Couenante of equality, and
neither superiority, nor subjection.

And therefore S. Ambrose says, Ambros. Sermon. 66.
as it is before noted, Inter Petrum, and Paulum, quis cui praeponatur,
incertum est: Between Peter, and Paul, whether ought to be pre^^rred before
other, I can not tell.

Neither went he up, Act. 15.
to be better informed of the Truth, as being doubtful of his own Doctrine.
Al his reasoninge, and the whole drifte of that (...)is to the contrary. Galat*
ca. 1.
For thus lie his words: I never (...)with Fle^she, and Blood ( that is to
say, with any man) neither did I return to Jerusalem to them, (...)had been
Apostles before me: I received not the Gospel, that I have preached, of any
man, but by the revelation of Jesus Christ. If any preach unto you any other
Gospel, then that I have preached, accurse^ be he. Galat. ca. 2.
They that were in chief regard emonge the Apostles, touching the Truth of
the Gospel, added nothing unto me. I withstoode Peter even in the face, and
spoke unto him before all the people: for he walked not uprightly, but was
worthy to be blamed. Hereby it may sufficiently appear, that S. Paul's
goeinge to Jerusalem was, not to bring from Peter a determination of any
matter of Truth, that la^ in Question; as it is here supposed. Hieronym. in
^pist. ad Galat. (...).
And therefore S. Hierome says, Ad hoc iuit Hierosoly man. vt videret Apostolum
(Petrum) non discendi studio, qui and ipse eundem praedica^o^s habere^
authorem: sed honoris priori Apostolo deferendi. Paul went to Jerusalem, to
the intent to see Peter the Apostle, not to learn any thing of him, as having
the same ^uth^ur of his preachinge that Peter had: ^ut to show reverence unto
him, that had been Apostle before him. And again, Hieronym. ^od^m. loco.
^alat. 2.
Propterea quindecim ponit dies, vt ostendat non fuisse grande tempus, quo
po^uerit aliquid a Petro discere: vt ad illum sensum, a quo coepit, cuncta
referantur, se non ab homine doctum esse, sed a Deo. Therefore he names
fifteen days, to show, that he had no long time, that he might learn any
thing of Peter: to the intent to drive al his words to that sense,
wherewith he began, That he was t^ught, not by man, but by God. Likewise
says Hugo Cardinalis a barbarous writer, Hugo Cardinali^ in Epist. ad Gala^.
Ca. 1.
Secundum Literam ^struimur de mutua dilectione, quam deberent habere
praedicatores, and doctores: quia Paulus venit videre Petrum, quoniam bona
audierat de eius doctrina. According to the l^tter we are here instructed of
mutual love, which ought to be between al preachers and Doctors. For Paul
went to visit Peter, because he had heard good of his Doctrine. But what can
be so plain, as that is written by Chrysostom touching the same? His words
be these: Chrysostom. in Epist. ad Galat. ca. 2.
Paulus nihil opus habebat Petro, nec eius egebat voce: sed hono^e par erat
ill^: nihil enim hic dicam amplius. Pau^e had no need of Peter: neither needed
he to be taught at his mouth: but he was equal to him in honor: I will say no
more. And immediately after, Sicut nunc multi fratrum nostroru^ ad viros sanctos
proficiscuntur^ ^odem affectu tunc Paulus ad Petrum profectus est. Like as now
a days many of our Brethren go to holy men, so then with like affection went
Paul unto Peter.

As for the reast, that the Bishop of Rome had an estimation, and a credit,
and a prerogative before others, it is not denied. For of the four Patriarchs
he had the first place, both in Council, and out of Council: and therefore the
greatest authority, and direction of matters in all assemblies. And this was
(...), To have the first, or highest room: and (...), A dign^tie, or
privilege: Which words M. Hardinge has noted in the Margin.

Here M. Hardinge seems to reason thus, The Bishop of Rome had a privilege
or dignity above others:

Ergo, He was an Universal Bishop.

This Argument concludes A genere ad speciem affirmative: and, as M. Hardinge
knows, was never allowed in any Schools.

Likewise he seems to say, Paul went up to Jerusalem to visit Peter:
Ergo, The Bishop of Rome is Head of the Church.

Such weak gear M. Harding has brought forth. And yet with his furniture
of words, it seems somewhat. By the same reason he may prove, that S.
James also was Head of the Church, Galat. Ca. 1.
as well as Peter: for Paul says, he visited him, Hieronym. in Prooemio in
Epist. ad Ephesios Hugo Cardinal. in Epist. ad Galat.
as well as Peter. And S. Hierome says of (...)self, That he purposely went
to Alexandria, to see Didymus: yet was not Didymus therefore Head of the
Church.

In deed Hugo Cardinalis says, Deuter. 16.
Hereof it first began, that Bishops, and Archebishops made a vow to visit
the Pope (...)Paul w^nt to Hierus^lem to see Peter: And says further, that
Custom has added to the same, this Commandment written in the Deuteronomie.
Non appa^ebis in conspectu Domini vac^^s. Thou shall not appear in the
presence of the Lord without some what.

M. Hardinge trippinge, as he says, so nicely over the Doctors, has not yet
once touched that thing, that was lookte for, and that ^e has only, and with
such affiance taken in hand. For not withstanding^ a great pomp of ^oordes,
and the names of many holy Fathers, yet has he not hith^rto showed, that the
Bishop of Rome within the space of six hundred years after Christ, was ever
called the Uniuersal Bishop, or the Head of the Uniuersal Church. Which
thing if he could have showed, I believe, he would not s^ lightly have
tripte it over.

M. Hardinge. The.17. Division.
Now let us see, whether this chief authority may be f^^nde necessary by
(...). That a multitude which is in it self one, cannot continue one, unless
it be (...), and holden in by one, both learned philosophers have declared,
and the common nature of thin^es (...). For every multitude of their own
nature goes a sunder into many: and from an other it comm^^h that it is one
and that it continues one. And that whereof it is one, and is keapte in union
or (...), it is necessary that it be one, else that self also, shall need
the help of an other, that it be (...). For which cause that saieinge of
Homere was alleged by Aristotle, (...).
as most notable. It is not good to have many rulers, let one be ruler. Whereby
is meante that plurality of sovereign rulers, is not fit to contain and
keep unity of a multitude of subjects. Therefore, sith that the Church of
Christ is one* (for as there is one Faith, one Baptism, one calling, so
there is one* Chur^he* yea al we are one Body, and members one of an other, as
S. Paul says: and in our Creed we al prof^sse to believe one holy Catholic
and Apostolic Church) therefore I say, it has need of one Prince and ruler,
to be keapte, and holden in. If i^ be otherwise, unity mustneedes forth with
be sparkled and broken a sunder. And therefore it behooved that the rule and
government of the Church should be committed to one.

The B. of Sarisburie.
All this is proved by Aristotle the Philosopher, by one verse of the Poet
Homere, and by M. Hardinges drifte of reason, and none otherwise. Aristoteles
and Homeres authority in this case cannot be great. And yet they speak only
of one Captain General in one field, and of one King in one Realm: where as
number, or fellowship must of necessity breed confusion. But neither of them
ever dreamed this new fantasy, that one King should rule over the whole
world.

M. Hardinges reasons would weigh the more, if either Christ, or Peter, or
Paul, or any old Doctor, or Catholic Father had ever used the same.
Otherwise S. Augustine speakinge of discourse of Reason in the understanding
of the Scriptur^s, Augustine. de doctrina Christiana li. 3. Ca. 28. Quintus
Curtius.
says thus, Haec consuetudo periculosa est. Per Scripturas enim diuinas multo
tutius ambulatur. This manner of expoundinge is very dangerous. The saf^r way
is to walk by the Scriptures. The force of M. Hardinges reason caused
Alexander the ambitious King of Macedonie to say, As the Heavens can have but
one Sun, so may the whole world have but one King: And likewise Pope
Bonifac^us the eighth to say, De Maioritate and obedienti^. Vnam Sanctam.
as is before, In principio creauit Deus coelum, and terram: non in principijs,
In the be^inninge, as in one, God made Heaven, and Earth, and not in the
beginninges, as in many: Ergo, the Pope is head of the Church.

But, says M. Hardinge, every multitude naturally goes a sunder: and the
thing that keeps it together, m^st needs be (...). That is to say, It is
the Pope only, that preserves the vniti^ of the (...), and mak^th it one. And
therefore the Pope him self must needs be one: otherwise being two, or more,
says M. Hardinge, they should need some other thing, to make them (...).
And yet he rem^mbreth, that the Council of Syrmium* to take up the contention
between Felix, Sozomen. li. 4. Ca. 15.
and Liberius, that ambiti^usely strove together for the S^^ of Rome, willed
them to be Bishops there both together* (...).
which thing notwithstanding, they meante not therefore, neither to dissolve
the unity of the Church, nor to make the Church a Monster with two Heads.
Roffensis.
And so Roffensis says, The Church is one, not because of Christ, but
because of the Pope; that keeps it in one. This reason that M. Hardinge
uses, is newly divised, and was never r^membred of any of the Old Fathers. S.
Gregory says, Gregor. lib. 4. epist. 32.
None of ^y predecesso^^s: would ever take upon him, to use this ungodly name*
(...)be (...)* the V^iuersal Bishop: And yet it appears not, but the Church
was then (...)in unity.

Neither ^^nne (...)infini^e power, that is imagined, stand without infinite
great dangers. And, for as much, as it pleases M. Hardinge to auoutche the
government of Christ's Church by Philosophers, and Poets, that never knew
Christ, it may also please him to remember, that his Poets likewise say,
That when Phaeton an indiscreet, and a fond young man would needs leap
into Phoebus his fathers Charet* to carry the Sun Beams about the Heavens,
for lack of skill, he soon set a ^ier the whole world. It may not much
displease M. Harding, that I compare the Bishop of Rome, with Phaeton, a rash
yo^nge man: For S. Gregory, Gregor. li. 4. Epis. 34. and Epis. 38.
for the same attempt, and enterprise, as it plainly appears by his
words, compares him with Lucifer, and with Antichriste. And further says,
Si hanc causam acquanimi^er portamus, vniuersae Ecclesiae Fidem corrumpimus* If
we take this matter quietly, Gregor. li. 7. Epi. 69.
we destroy the faith of the whole Church.

This reason stands thus: The Church of Christ is one, Ergo, Gregor. li. 6.
Epis. 24.
the Pope is an Uniuersal Bishop. If any man deny this sequel, I marvel, by
what Logique M. Hardinge will ever be hable to make it good.

M. Hardinge. The.18. Division.
And where as these Gospellers say, that Christ is the governor of the
Church, and that he being one keeps the Church in Unity: we answer,
that, although the Church be first and principally governed by Christ, as al
other things are, yet Gods high goodness has so ordained, as each thing
may be provided for, according to his own condition and nature. Therefore,
where as mankind depends most of sense, and receives al learning, and
institution of sensible things, therefore it has need of a man, to be a
governor and ruler, whom it may perceive by outward sense. And even so the
Sacraments, by which the Grace of God is given unto us, in consideration of
man's nature, being so made of God, as it is, are ordained in things
sensible. Therefore it was behooueful, this government of the Church to be
committed to one man, which at the first was Peter, and afterward ^che
successor of Peter for his time, as is before declared. Neither can this one
man have this power of any consent, The.104. untruth. For Christ^ never
appointed any such^ Vicate.
or company of men, but it is necessary he have it of God.104 For, to ordeine
and appointe the Vicare of Christ, it pertains to none other, then to
Christ. For where as the Church, and all that is of the Church, is Christ's,
as well for other causes, as specially for that we are bought with a great
price, ^. Corinth. 3.
even with his Blood, as S. Paul says: how can it perteine to any other,
then to him, to institute and appointe to him self a vicare, that is, one to
do his steed?

The B. of Sarisburie.
M. Hardinge stands very long, in discoursinge this matter by natural reason*
And for that he knew, S. Augustine says, Si ratio contra Diuinarum
Scripturarum authoritatem redditur, Augustine. ad Marcellinum Epis. 7.
quamlibet acuta sit, fallit verisimilitudine: Nam veta esse non potest. If
natural reason be alleged against the authority of the holy Scriptures, be it
never so subtle, it beguileth men by a likeness, or color of the Truth: for
true it cannot be. And for that he also saw, the reasons he has brought, are
very simple, and carry no weight, he has therefore thrust a great many of
them in a thronge together, both to fill the Hearers senses, and also, that
the one might the better aid the other.

For his entry, in mirthe, and game, he calls us Gospellers. God open the
eyes of his heart, that he may see the brightness of Gods Gospel, and
consider, what it is, yt he has refused. Surely, it is an horrible thing, for
a Christian man, thus to make mockery of the Gospel of Christ. 1. Corinthians. 4.
S. Paul says, Si opertum est Euangelium, in illis, qui pereunt, est
opertum: If the Gospel be covered, it is covered from them, that perish.

It misliketh him that we build the unity of the Church upon Christ only,
and not also upon the Pope: and this he calls these New Gospellers Doctrine.
God be thanked: these Gospellers have good warrant for their Doctrine. S. Paul
says, Ad Ephesians. 1.
Eum dedit Caput super omnia ipsi Ecclesiae, quae est Corpus eius. God has
given Christ to be Head over al, Ad Ephesians. 5.
even to the Church, which is his Body. And again, Ille est Caput, qui dat
salutem Corpori. Christ is the Head, that gives health unto the Body.
Christ is our peace: Ad Ephesians. 2.
Al we are one in Christ Jesus. Therefore S. Gregory says, Nos quoque a
vobis non long sumus: Gregor. li. 4. Epis. 36. Ad Eulogium.
quoniam in illo, qui vbique est, vnum sumus. Agamus ergo ^i gratias, qui
solutis inimicitijs in Carne sua, fecit, vt in omni orb terrarum vnus esset
Grex, and vnum Ouile, sub se Vno Pastore. We are not far away from you:
because in him, that is every where, we are al one. Therefore let us give him
thanks, that enemitie being broken in his Fleashe, John. 10.
has caused that in all the world there should be one Flock, and one Fold
under him self, being the one Shepehearde. These places, and infinite other
like, are good warrantes of our Doctrine.

Now, if M. Hardinge be hable by the Scriptures, or Holy Doctors, to say as
much for the Bishop of Rome, that he is the Head of the Church, that is to
say, the Head of Christ's Body: or that the Church receives influence, or
health from him: Or that he is our Peace: or that we are al one in him: or that
all the world is one Flock, Ad Ephesians. 4.
and one Fold, and he the one Sheepehearde: Or that S. Paul, as he said,
There is one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, so he said also, There is one
Pope: then have we some cause, to think according to M. Hardinges fantasy,
that the unity of the whole Church is founded, and builte upon the Pope.
Certainly, it seems, S. Augustine would not give this privilege unto S.
Paul. His words be plain, August. contra literas Petiliani li. 3. Ca. 42.
Johan. 15.
Nec Paulus radix eorum erat, quos plantauerat: sed ille potius, qui ait, Ego
sum vitis: vos estis Sarmenta. Caput etiam eorum quomodo esse poterat, cum
dicat, Nos omnes vnum esse Corpus in Christo, ipsumque Christum Caput esse
vniuersi Corporis? Neither was Paul the root of them, whom he had planted:
but rather he, that says, I am the vine, and you are the sprigges. But the
Head of them how could he be, Ephesians. 1.
seeinge he him self says, Al we in Christ are one Body: and, That of the
whole Body Christ him self is the Head? If S. Paul, as S. Augustine
says, could not be Head of the Church, how may we then think, that the
Bishop of Rome may be Head of the Church?

But mankind, says M. Hardinge, depends most of sense: Therefore the
whole Church must have one man to rule and govern over it: and that man is
Peter's successor, and Christ's Vicare in Earth. I marvel that none of the
Old Fathers could ever understand, either the necessity of this reason, or
this special name, and title of Christ's Uicare. How be it, one true word M.
Harding has uttered amongst many others: that is, that to apointe Christ
Uicare, it pertains only unto Christ, and to none other. Of which ground
we may well reason thus: Christ never ordained, nor appointed, nor once named,
the Bishop of Rome, or his Successoure to be his Uicare, that is, to be an
Uniuersal Bishop over the whole Church: Christ's Vicare.
therefore by M. Hardinges own position, the Bishop of Rome has of long time
usurped a power against Christ, without Commission, and in deed is not
Christ's Uicare. S. Hierome says generally of al Bishops, Hieronym. in
Epist. ad Titum.
Nouerint Episcopi, se magis Consuetudine, quam dispositionis Dominicae
Veritate, Presbyteris esse maiores. Let Bishops understand, that they be
greater then the priests by order, and Custom (of the Church) and not by the
truth of Gods ordinance. If Christ, as S. Hierome says, appointed not one
priest above an other, how then is it likely, he appointed one Priest to be,
as M. Hardinge says, Prince and ruler over al Priests throughout the whole
world?

As for the Uniuersal supplieinge of Christ's room, Tertullian says, The
Holy Ghost is Christ's Vicare. Tertul. De praescriptionib. co^tra Haereticos.
For thus he writes, Sedet ad dextram Dei Patris: misit Vicariam vim Spiritus
Sancti, qui credentes agat. Christ sits at the right hand of God the
Father: and insteede of him self, sent the power of the Holy Ghost as his
Vicare, to direct them that believe.

But because we are not only led inwardely by Gods Sprite, but also
outwardely by our senses, therefore has Christ appointed, not one man to be
his Uicare General over al, but every of his Apostles, and so every Priest to
be his Uicare within his Division. Eusebij Episcopi Romans Epist. 3.
So says Eusebius Bishop of Rome, Caput Ecclesiae Christus est: Christi autem
Vicarij Sacerdotes sunt, qui vice Christi, legatione funguntur in Ecclesia.
Christ is the Head of the Church: and his Vicares be the Priests, that do
their Message in the Church, 2. Corinthians. 5. Hieronym. ad Euagriu^ tom. 2. Page
329.
in the steed of Christ. Therefore says S. Hierome, Potentia diuitiarum, and
paupertatis humilitas, vel sublimiorem, vel inferiorem Episcopum non facit*
Caeterum omnes Apostolorum successores sunt. The stoutnes of ri^ches, or the
humility of poverty, makes a Bishop neither higher, nor lower: But al
Bishops be the Apostles successors. Other universal Uicar of Christ, there
is none named in the Scriptures, unless it be he, 2. Thessalon. 2.
of whom S. Paul forewarneth us, Homo ille sceleratus, filius perditus etc.
That wicked man, that Child of perdition, that sets him self up against
God, and that so far forth, that he will sit in the Temple of God, and
show him self, as if he were God. But this Uicare Christ shall destroy with
the spirit of his mouth.

To conclude, M. Hardinge seems to reason thus, Mankind depends most of
sense: Ergo, the Pope is the Head of the universal Church. Here is a very
insensible argument: nor sense, nor reason can make it good. By as good sequel
he might say,

Mankind depends most of sense: Ergo, one King must rule over the whole
world.

M. Hardinge. The.19. Division.
Wherefore to conclude, except we would wickedly grant, that Gods
providence has lacked, or does lack to his Church, for love of which he
has given his only begotten Son, and which he has promised never to
forgeate, so as the woman can not forgeate the Child, she bare in her womb: A
sort of simple reasons.
reason may soon induce us to believe, that to one man, one Bishop, the chief
and highest of al Bishops, the successor of Peter, the rule and government
of the Church by God has been deferred. For else if God had ordained, that
in the Church should be sundry heads and rulers, and none constituted to be
over other, but al of equal power, each one among their people: then he
should seem to have set up so many Churches, as he has appointed governors.
And so he shall app^are to have brought in among his faitheful people, that
unruly confusion, the destruction of al commonweals, so much abhorred of
Princes, which the Greeks call Anarchian, which is a state, for lack of
order in governors, without any government at al. Which thing, sith that
the wise, and politic men of this world do shun and detest in the
government of these earthly Kingedomes, as most pernicious and hurteful, to
attribute to the high wisdom of God, and to our Lord Christ, who is the
auctor of the most ordinate disposition of al things in earth, and in
Heaven: it were heinous, and profane impiety. Wherefore if the state of a
Kingedome, can not continewe salfe, unless one have power to rule, how shall
not the Church spredde so far abroad, be in danger of great disorders,
corruption, and utter destruction, if, as occasion shall be given, among so
great strifes and debates of men, among so many fire brandes of discord,
tossed to and fro by the Diuelles, enemies of unity: there be not one head
and ruler, of al to be consulted, of al to be heard, of al to be followed, and
obeyed? If strife and contention be stirred about matters of Faith, if
controversy happen to arise about the sense of the Scriptures, shall it not be
necessary, there be one supreme judge, to whose sentence the parties may
stand? If need require (as it has been often seen) that General Councels be
keapte, how can the Bishops, to whom that matter belongs, be brought
together, but by the commandment of one head governor, whom they owe
their obedience unto? For elies being summoned, perhaps they will not come.
Finally, how shall the contumacie and pertinacie of mischievous persons be
repressed, specially if the Bishops be at dissension within them selves: if
there be not a supreme power, who toward some may use the rod, toward
other some the spirit of lenity, (...)su^he discrete temperament, as malice
be vanquished, right defended, and concord procured: least, if the small
sparks of strife be not quenched by authority at the beginning, at length a
great flame of Schisms and heresies flashe abroad, to the great danger of a
multitude? Therefore as there is one Body of Christ, one Flock, one Church,
even so is there one head of that his mystical body, one shepeherde, and one
chief servant made steward, ouerseer, and ruler of Christ's householde in his
absence, until his coming again.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Who so denies the Bishop of Romes supreme government, says M. Hardinge, he
utterly denies Gods providence: and thus the great providence of God, is
brought forth to serve M. Hardinges simple reason. The like consideration, as
may be supposed, moved Petrus Bertrandus to write this special Gloss upon the
Decretalles, De Maiorit^^ and obedient.
Non videretur Dominus discretus fuisse, vt cum reuerentia eius loquar, nisi
vnicum post se talem Vicarium reliquisset. Vnam Sanctam. In Glosa.
Otherwise Christ should not seem to have dealte discreetely, sauinge his
reverence, unless he had left some one such Vicare b^h^nde him: And
therefore he says further, Christo data est omnis potestas in Coelo, and in
terra: Ergo Summus Pontifex, qui est eius Vica^ius, habet eandem potestatem. Al
manner power both in Heaven and Earth is given to Christ, Therefore the
highest Bishop, which is his Vicare, has the same power. Likewise they say,
De Sentent. Excommu. ^a. Si aliquid. Hos^ien.
Papa potest facere omnia, quae Christus ipse potest. The Pope may do, what so
ever Christ him self may do. And, De translatione Epis^o. (...)Quanto.
Innocen. 3.
Papae, and Christi, est vnum Tribunal. The Pope and Christ have one
Consistory, and keep one Court.

Upon occasion hereof, M. Hardinge seems to reason in this sort: Onles there
be one appointed by God to be the Universal Bishop of the world, having Omnia
iura in scrinio Extra. de Constitutionibus. licet Romanus.
pectoris sui, al manner law, and right in the closet of his breaste: De
transla. Episcop. Ca. Quanto. in Glosa.
Cui sit pro ratione voluntas, whose pleasure may stand in steed of law:
Unto whom, what so ever he do, noman may say, De concessione prabende. Ad
Apostolatus. in Glosa.
Domine cur ita facis? Sir, why do you so? And the same neither exhort, nor
teach, nor minister Sacrament, nor exercise Discipline, nor do the dewtie
either of Bishop, or of Priest, or of Deacon, or any other the meanest officer
of the Church, but only take upon him to rule, and govern the whole Church:
Onles there be some such one, then, says M. Harding, God has no providence,
neither is careful for his Church.

If controversy grow, about the understanding and sense of Gods word,
if it be necessary that a Council be called, if contention fall out between
any other inferior Bishops, then says M. Hardinge, it is necessary, there
be one supreme Judge, that may in fallibly declare Gods meaning, that may
summon the Council, that may hear, and determine matters between the
Bishops. Touching the searchinge out of the sense of the Scriptures, De
Doctrina Christiana. li. 3.
S. Augustine gives sundry good rules: But this strange rule of recourse to
the Pope, he touches not, nor takes it for any rule.

But they say, The Scriptures be dark: therefore we must seek the meaning of
them in the Doctors. The Doctors agree not: Then must we weigh and try them
by the Master of the Sentences. Magister non ^enetur.
The Master of the Sentences him self sometimes is not holden: then must we
seek further to the School Doctors. The School Doctors can in no wise
agree: there is Scotus against Thomas: and Occam against Scotus: and
Alliacensis against Occam: the Nominales against the Reales: the
Scholasticalles against the Canonistes: the contention is greater, and the
doubts darker, then ever they were before. Neither is there any resolution to
be hoped for, but only of the Bishop of Rome: whom M. Hardinge calls the
supreme Judge: Baldus.
who, as one says, is Doctor vtriusque Legis, Authoritate, non Scientia,
Doctor of both Laws, by Authority, not by knowledge. How be it, it appears
his knowledge, and authority in such cases are both like. For not
withstandinge any his determination, the contention stands still as it did
before. Truly Alphonsus de Castro, Alphonsus de Castro li. 1. Ca. 4.
a Doctor of the same side, says, Cum constet plures Papas adeo illiteratos
esse, vt Grammaticam penitus ignorent, qui fit, vt sacras Literas interpretari
possint? Seeinge it is well known, that many Popes be so void of learning,
that they be utterly ignorant of their Grammar, how may it be, that they can
expound the holy Scriptures? Thus that supreme Judge, at whose only hands M.
Hardinge would have all the world to seek for the very sense of Gods
word, as Alphonsus says, may go to school to learn his Grammar. And what
if the Pope be an Heretic, as Liberius was an Arrian: Alphonsus de Castro li.
1. Ca. 4
Honorius an Eunomian: Anastasius was a Photinian: and as Lyra says, Multi
Papae inuenti sunt Apostatae, Many Popes have been rennegates of the Faith:
Nico. Lyra in Matthae. 16. ca.
Or what if he be a ^orcerer, and have league and conference with the Devil, as
had Syluester the second? Platyna in Syluestro.
Yet must we needs have recourse unto such a one, as unto the mouth of God,
for the certain sense and meaning of Gods word? Uerily, in the old
times, men that stood in doubt of any matter of learning, and would gladly
be resolved, sought unto the best learned, and not unto the Pope. Leo Episto.
37. ad Episcopum Rauennatem.
Pope Leo himself in a case of doubt, thought it good to confer with other
Bishops. The Bishops of Numidia sent, not to the Bishop of Rome to be
resolved, but unto S. Cyprian, and other Bishops within Aphrica. Cyprian. li.
1.
So likewise S. Hierome writes of him self, Ob hanc causam vel maxim
Alexandriam nuper perrexi, vt viderem Didymum, Epis. 4.
and ab eo in Scripturis omnibus, quae habebam, Hiero. in procemio in Epist. ad
Ephesians.
dubia omnia exquirerem. For this cause chiefly I went of late to Alexandria,
to the intent I might see Didymus, and be resolved by him in all such doubts, as
I had found in the Scriptures. And S. Ambross says, that certain learned
men in matter of question, having received answer, and determination from
the Bishop of Rome, yet not withstanding for their better satisfaction,
sought further unto him. Thus he writes, Ambros. li. 10.
Post Romanae Ecclesiae definitionem, meam adhuc expectant sententiam. Epis 83.
After the discussinge of the Church of Rome, they yet look for my sentence.

As for General Councelles, it is well known, and, God willinge, shall appear
hereafter more at large, that they were called and summoned by the Emperors
only, and not by the Bishops of Rome. Sozomenus says, Sozomenus, citatur
inter Acta Liberij.
Imperator praeceperat, Concilium Mediolani celebrari. The Emperor had
commanded a Council to be keapte at Millane.

Matters of variance between Bishops were taken up, not only by the Bishop
of Rome, whose greatest practice these many years has been to inflame, and
maintain discord among Princes, but also sometimes by the Prince, sometimes
by Councelles, sometimes by other Bishops, sometimes by some inferior
persons, that were no Bishops. Ambro. De obitu Vale^tiniani. Bernardus in
Canti^a Canti. Sermo. 22.
S. Ambrose was sent for into France, to pacify the Bishops there. Bernarde
being but an Abbate, compounded that great dissension, that was between Pope
Innocentius, and Peter in the Church of Rome. Therefore to these purposes, it
is nothing needeful to erect a new Uicare General, or to give any man this
Uniuersal power over the Church of God.

M. Hardinges reasons proceed thus, God is careful, and has a special
providence for his Church: Doubteful places of the Scripture mus^e be
expounded: General Councelles must be summoned: Bishops being at variance
must be reconciled: Ergo, The Bishop of Rome is Christ's Universal Vicare, and
Head of the Universal Church. Otherwise, says he, the Church can never
be rightly governed, nor preserved in Unity. But Gods name be blissed for
ever. God is hable to govern his Church, not only without such a Uicare,
but also maugr^ such a Uicare. Miserable were Gods Church, if it stood
only at the Bishop of Romes government. Long it were to open the loosenes,
and dissolution of his own Church, that lies before him. S. Bernarde
speakinge of the same says thus, Bernard. ad Eugenium li. 4.
Mali ibi proficiunt: boni deficiunt. Il men there go foreworde: But good
men go backewarde. A planta pedis, vsque ad verticem Capitis, non est in ea
sanitas. Bernard. de Conuers. Pauli. Esa. 1.
From the sole of the foot, unto the crown of the head, there is no whole
part in it. And again, Serui Christi seruiunt Antichristo. They would be
called the Servants of Christ, and yet in deed they serve Antichr^st. If the
Bishop of Rome can no better rule a few Churches in one City, Bernard. in
Cantica Canti.
how then is he hable to rule the infinite multitude of the whole Uniuersal
Church of God?

But God has other ways, and means, whereby he has ever governed his
Church. S. Cyprian says, Cyprian. ad Stephan. lib. 3.
Ideo plures sunt in Ecclesia sacerdotes, vt vno haeresim faciente, coeteri
subueniant. Therefore there be many Bishops in the Church, that one runninge
into Heresy, the rest may healpe. Epis. 13.
And again, The Church is preserved in unity, Cyprian. li. 4.
by the consent of Bishops agreeinge in one: And to this end S. Hierome
says, as is before alleged, Nouerint Episcopi, se debere in commune Ecclesiam
regere. Epis. 9.
Let Bishops understand, Hieronym. in Epis. ad Titum. Ca. 1.
that they ought to rule the Church, as al in one.

As for the unity, that M. Hardinge means, it is a vile subjection, and
servitude: it is no unity. S. Hierome says, Nomine vnitatis, and Fidei
infidelitas scrip^a est: Hieron. contra Luciferianos.
Nam illo tempore nihil tam pium, nihil tam conueniens seruo Dei videbatur,
quam vnitatem sequi, and a totius mundi communione non scindi. Infidelity has
been written under the name of Faith, and Unity. For at that time, nothing
seemed either so godly, or so meet, for the Servant of God, as to follow
unity, and not to be divided from the Communion of the whole world. They
seemed, says S. Hierome, to follow unity, and yet notwithstanding they
honge in infidelity. So likewise says the wise man, In tanto viuentes
ignorantiae bello, Sapientiae. 14.
^ot, and tanta mala pacem appellabant, Where as they lived in such a war of
ignorance, so many, and so great mischiefs they called Unity.

M. Hardinge. The.20. Division.
But here perhaps some will say, it can not appear by the euente of things,
and practice of the Church, that the Pope had this supreme power, and
Authority over al Bishops, and over al Christ's flock in matters touching
Faith, and in causes Ecclesiastical. Verily, whosoever peruseth the
Ecclesiastical stories, and vie weth the state of the Church of al times and
ages, can not but confess this to be most evident. And here I might allege
first certain places of the New Testament, declaring, that Peter practiced
this preeminence among the Disciples at the beginning, and that they yielded
the same, as of right apperteininge unto him. As when he first, Act. 1.
and only moved them to choose one in the steed of Judas, and demeaned him
self, as the chief auctour of all that was done therein: when he made
answer for all, at what time they were gased, Act. 2.
and wondered at, and of some mo^kte, as being dronken with new wine: for that
in the.50. day they spoke with tongues of so many Nations: when hevsed that
dreadful severity in punishing the falsehead, and hypocrisy of Ananias and
Saphira his wife: Act. 5.
when variance being risen about the observation of certain points of Moses
law, Act. 15.
he as chief, and head of the rest, said his mind before al others. Among
many other places left out for brevity, that is not of least weight, that
Paul being returned to Damasco out of Arabia, after three years went to
Jerusalem, Galat. 1.
to see Peter, Peter Head.
and abode with him fiftene days.

105. The.105. untruth, joined with a sclaunder.
But because our adversaries do wreathe and wreaste the Scriptures (be they
never so plain) by their Private and strange constructions, to an
understanding quite contrary to the sense of the Catholic Church: I will
refer the reader for further proof of this matter to the stories bearinge
faithful witness of the whole state and condition of the Church in all ages.
In which stories, the practice of the Church is plainly reported to have been
such, as thereby the primacie of Peter's Successor may seem to al men
sufficiently declared. For, perusinge the Ecclesiastical stories with writings
of the Fathers, beside many other things perteininge hereto, we find these
The.106. untruth, As afterward it shall appear.
of every Nation have made their appeal in their weighty affairs to the
Pope, and always have sued to the sea Apostolic, as well for succor and
healpe against violence, injuries, and oppressions, as for

The B. of Sarisburie.
Here M. Hardinge assaieth to prove the Possession, and Occupation of this
Uniuersal Authority, by the Practice both of S. Peter him self, and also of
other Bishops in Rome, that followed after him. And touching S. Peter, he
thinks it sufficient to say thus, Peter being among the rest, showed his
advise first before al others: and at the sound of his words, Ananias, and
Saphira fell down dead, Ergo, Peter was the Head, and had an Universal power
over the whole Church. Here be very weak proufes, to maintain so great a
Title. I think M. Hardinge him self doothe not believe, that who so ever
first vttreth his mind in any Council, or woorketh any strange miracle by the
power of God, is therefore the Head of all the world. For oftentimes in great
Councelles, the youngest, or lowest begins first: and the eldest, and Head
of al speaks last. Certainly, in this assembly of the Apostles, after that
S. Peter had opened his mind, and all the reast had done, last of al, not S.
Peter, Act. 15.
but S. James pronounced the Sentence, which thing belonged only to the
Head, and President of that Council. He must be very simple, that will be leadde
with such simple gheasses.

But who so ever well, and thoroughly considers S. Peter's whole dealinge at al
times emonge his Brethren, shall soon see, that neither he bare him self, nor
the reast received, or used him, as the Head of the Uniuersal Church. He
calls the reast of the Disciples, his Brethren: Actorum. 15.
he calls himself Compresbyterum, Fellow elder. 1. Petr. 5.
He commands not, nor charge any man, but hears, and entreats others,
Actor. 8.
as his equalles, and fellows: Being sent into Samaria by his brethren, he
repined not, as being their Head, and governor: but went his way, as their
Messenger: And being reproved for goeinge to Cornelius, and dealing^ with
Heathens, Actor. 11.
he excused him self, and came to his answer.

The reast of the Apostles, no doubt, honored S. Peter, as the special member
of Christ's Body, with all reverence: But it appears not, that any of them
ever took him, or used him, as their Head, or yielded him this Infinite, or
Uniuersal power. S. Paul compares him self with him in Apostleship, and
says, Mihi concreditum est Euangelium Praeputij, Galat. 2.
sicut Petro Circuncisionis* To me is committed the Gospel among the
Heathens, even as unto Peter emonge the Jews. And James, Peter, and John,
which seemed to be the pillars, gave unto me, and Barnabas the right hands of
fellowship. And afterward he says, I withstoode Peter even unto the face: for
that he was worthy to be rebuked. And again unto the Corinthians, Arbitror me
nihil inferiorem esse eximijs Apostolis. 2. Corin. ^.
I take me self to be nothing inferior unto the chief Apostles. Hereby, it
plainly appears, that Paul esteemed and took Peter, as his Fellow, and not
as his Head.

Where as it likes M. Hardinge to say, that we wreathe and wreast the
Scriptures, if it would have pleased him also particularly to show, how, and
wherein, he might have had the more credit. But it is commonly said, Dolosus
versatur in generalibus. He that walks in generalities, means not plainly.
I trust the indifferent Reader sees, the Scriptures are plain yenough of our
side, and need no wreastinge. And therefore touching this case, S. Cyprian
says, Cyprian. De simplicitate Prelatorum.
as is before alleged, Idem erant alij quod Petrus: The reast were the same,
that Peter was: And Origin Origin. in Matthae. tract. 1.
likewise, Nos quoque efficimur Petrus: and nobis dicetur illud, quod hunc
sermonem sequitur, Tues Petrus, and super hanc Petram aedificabo Ecclesiam
meam. Petra enim est, quisquis est Discipulus Christi. Even we are become
Peter: and unto us the same shall be said, that follows these words: Thou
art Peter, and upon this Rock I vvil build my Church. For he is the Rock,
who so ever is Christ's Disciple. And so it is written in S. Augustine against
the Donatistes: Clarus a Mascula dixit, August. De Baptismo contra Donat. li.
7. Ca. 43.
Manifesta est sententia Domini nostri Jesus Christi Apostolos mittentis, and
ipsis solis potestatem a Patre sibi datam permittentis: quibus nos successimus,
eadem potestate Ecclesiam Domini gubernantes. The saieinge of our Lord Jesus
Christ sendinge out his Apostles, and geuinge unto them only the same power,
that he had received of his Father, is plain: into which Apostles rooms we
have succeeded, gouerninge the Church with the same power, that they did.
These be good witnesses that we wreaste not Gods words, but use them
simply, as they were spoken.

Now it were a long labor to show at full, how M. Hardinge, with others of
that side, have dealte herein. The words that be specially, and only spoken
of God him self, and of his Christ, it is lawful for them to apply the same
unto the Pope without any wreathinge, or wreastinge of the Scriptures.

Cornelius a Bishop in the last Council of Trident uses these words,
Cornel. Episcopus Bitontinus, in Oratione ad Synodum.
Papa lux venit in mundum: sed dilexerunt homines magis tenebras, quam lucem.
The Pope being the light, is come into the world: but men loved the
darkness, more then the light. And Stephanus the Archbishop of Patraca, in
the Council of Laterane directs these words unto the Pope, Stephan.
Archiepiscop. Patracen. in Council. Lateran. sub Leone, Sessione. 10.
Tibi data est omnis potestas in Coelo, and in terra. Unto thee is al power
given both in Heaven, and Earth. Likewise says Pope Bonifacius, Spiritualis
a nemine iudicatur, The man, that is spiritual, is judged of no man: Ergo, no
man may judge the Pope. And again, Quae sunt potestates, a Deo ordinatae sunt:
The powers that be, are ordained of God: Ergo, The Pope is above the Emperor.
Now, to pass by other like places which are innumerable, whether this be
wreastinge of the Scriptures, or no, I leave it to the discrete Reader to
consider. De Maioritate and obedient.
Uerily, as I have said before, Camotensis thus reports of them, Vim faciunt
scripturis, vt habeant plenitudinem potestatis. Vnam Sanctam.
To the intent they may have the fulness of power, they do violence to the
Scriptures, 1. Cor. 2.
and divise strange constructions contrary to the sense of the Church of God.
Roma. 13.


But, Citatur a Cornelio Agrippa de vani scien.
for as much as M. Hardinge utterly leaves the Scriptures, wherein he seethe,
he has so simple hold, and refers the whole right of his cause to the
continual practice of the Church, I trust it shall not seem neither tedious,
nor unprofitable unto the Reader, only for a taste, and by the way, to touch
somewhat concerning the same: nothing doubtinge, but even thereby it shall well
appear, that within the compass of six hundred years after Christ, the
Bishop of Rome was never neither named, nor holden for the Head of the
Uniuersal Church.

First of al, The Bishops of other countries, writing to the Bishop of
Rome, Cyprian. li. 1. Epis. 3.
call him not their Head, but their Brother, or Fellow. S. Cyprian unto
Cornelius writes thus, Cyprianus Cornelio Fratri. Cyprian unto Cornelius
Council. Carthaginen. 5.
my Brother. The Bishops in the Council of Carthage unto Innocentius,
Honoratissimo Fratri: To our most honorable Brother. And John the Bishop of
Constantinople unto Hormisda, In Decretal. Hormisdae.
Frater in Christo Charissime. My dear Brother in Christ. So likewise
Dionysius the Bishop of Alexandria calls Stephanus, and Sistus Bishops of
Rome, Eusebius. li. 7. Ca. 5.
his loving Brethren. So the Bishops of Aphrica call Anastasius,
Consacerdotem, their fellow Bishop: Eusebius. li. 7. Ca. 9
Like as Cyrillus also calls Coelestinus: and Marcellus the Bishop of
Ancyra calls Julius Comministrum, In Council. Aphricano.
his Fellow servant. These words, Brother, and Fellow, seem rather to
signify an Equality between Bishops, In Council. Ephesino.
then any such Sovereign Power, or Uniuersal Authority, as the Bishop of Rome
now claims.

Further, Epiphan. li. 3. tom. 1. haeresi. 72.
toutchinge the order of outward government, the Council of Nice limiteth
unto the Bishop of Rome, not the Jurisdiction of the whole world, but his
own several portion emonge other Patriarchs. Council. Nicen. Ca. 6.
The Council of Aphrica straitely forbids, any man out of that Country to
appeal to Rome. The four Patriarchs of Rome, Council. Aphrican. Ca. 92.
of Constantinople, of Antioche, and Alexandria, used to write letters of
conference between them selves, thereby to profess their Religion one to an
other: Literae Synodicae.
which was a token of Fellowship, and not of Dominion. The Council of
Alexandria committed full authority to Asterius to visit, and to redress all the Churches in the East Part of the world, Gregor. li. 1.
and to Eusebius, to do the like in the Weast: Epis. 25. and li. 6. Epis. 24.
and so seemed to have small regard to the Bishop of Rome, or to acknowledge
him as the Uniuersal Bishop. And what needs many words? Rufinus li. 1. Ca.
29.
Aeneas Syluius being him self afterward Bishop of Rome, for certain proof
hereof writes thus, Ad Episcopos Romanos aliquis sane, sed tamen paruus,
Aeneas Syluius.
ante Nicenum Concilium respectus erat. Some regard there was unto the
Bishops of Rome before the Council of Nice, although but small. To be short,
I trust it shall appear even by M. Hardinges own proufes, that is to say, by
the order of Appeals, by Excommunications, by the Allowance of Elections, by
the Approuinge of Councelles, by restoaringe of Bishops, and by receiuinge of
Schismatikes into favor, that the Bishop of Rome was not taken for the
Head of the Church, nor had any such absolute authority, as is supposed.
And so M. Hardinges sixefolde proof, which is noted in the Margin, in
Conclusion will appear but single soulde.

M. Hardinge. The.21. Division.
First, for the appellation of Bishops to the sea Apostolic, beside many
other, we have the known examples of Athanasius that worthy Bishop of
Alexandria, and light of the world: who having sustained great, and sundry
wrongs at the Arianes, appealed first to Julius the Pope, and after his
death to Felix: of Chrysostom, who appealed to Innocentius against the
violence of Theophilus: of Theodoretus, who appealed to Leo. Neither made
Bishops only their appeal to the Pope by their Delegates, but also in
certain cases, being cited, appeared before him in their own persons. Which
is plainly gathered of Theodoretus his Ecclesiastical story, who writes
thus. Eusebius Bishop of Nicomedia (who was the chief pillar of the Arianes)
and they that joined with him in that faction, falsely accused Athanasius to
Julius the Bishop of Rome.

I^^ius folowinge the Ecclesiastical rule, commanded them to come to Rome, and
caused the reverend Athanasius to be cited to judgment, regulariter, after
the order of the Canons. He came* The false accusers went not to Rome, knowinge
right well, that their forged lie might easily be deprehended. In the cause, and
defense of John Chrysostom, these Bishops came from Constantinople to
Innocentius the Pope, Pansophus Bishop of Pisidia, Pappus of Syria, Demetrius
of the second Galatia, and Eugenius of Phrygia. These were suitors for
Chrysostom. He him self treated his matter with Innocentius by writing. In
his Epistle emonge other things he writes thus, Least this outrageous
confusion run over al, and bear rule every where, write ( I pray you) and
determine by your authority, such wicked acts done in our absence, and when
we withdrewe not our selves from judgment, to be of no force, as by their own
nature truly they be void, and utterly none. Furthermore, who have committed
these evils, 107 The.107. Untruth, S. Chrysostomes words untruly reported.
put you them under the Censure of the Church. And, as for us, sith that we
are innocent, neither conuicte, neither found in any defaulte nor proved
guilty of any crime: give commandment, that we be restored to our Churches
again, that we may enjoy the accustomed charity, and peace with our
brethren. Innocentius, after that he understood the whole matter, pronounced,
and Decreed, the judgment of Theophilus, that was against Chrysostom, to be
void, and of no force. This whole tragedy is at large set forth by
Palladius Bishop of Helenopolis In vita Iohannis Chrisostomi, who lived at that
time. By this Appeal of Chrysostom, and by the whole handelinge of the matter,
and specially by the purporte of his Epistle to Innocentius, The Superiority
of the Pope is evidently acknowleged. And so is it plainly confessed by
Athanasius, and the Bishops of Aegypte, Thebais, and Lybia, assembled in
Council at Alexandria, by these words of their Epistle to Foelix, Vestrum est
enim nobis manum porrigere etc. It is your part (say they) to streatche
forth your helpinge hand unto us, because we are committed unto you. It is
your part to defend us, and deliver us: it is our part to seek help of
you, and to obey your Commandments. And a little after: For we know that you
bear the cure, and charge of the Universal Church, and specially of
Bishops, who in respect of their contemplation, and speculation, are called
the eyes of our Lord, as always the Prelates of your See, first the
Apostles, then their Successors have done.

Theodoretus that learned Bishop of Cyrus, beside the Epistle he wrote to Leo
for succor and help in his troubles, in an other, that he wrote to Renatus a
priest near about Leo, says thus, Spoliarunt me Sacerdotio etc. They have
violently robbed me of my Bishoprike, they have cast me forth of the Cities,
neither having reverenced mine age spente in Religion, nor my hoare hears
Wherefore I beseech thee, that thou persuade the most holy Archbishop (he
means Leo) to use his Apostolic authority, and to command us to come unto
your Council, or Consistory. For this Holy See holds the Rudther, and has
the government of the Churches of the whole world, partly for other
respects, but specially for that it has evermore continued clear from
stinche of Heresy, and that none ever sat in it, who was of contrary opinion,
but rather has ever kept the Apostolic grace undefiled. In which words of
Theodoretus, this chiefly is to be marked, that the holy See of Rome (as he
says) has the government of the Churches of all the world, most for this
cause, that it was never infected with Heresy, as al other Churches founded by
the Apostles were.

The B. of Sarisburie.
It is certain, that the Bishops of Rome, to atteine the preeminence, and
fulness of power over all the world, let not to use many ambitious, and
importune means, and manifestly to falsify the Canons of the Holy Council of
Nice. Sithence which time they have not been idle: but have forged new Canons
to this purpose under the name of Clemens, Anacletus, Euaristus, Telesphorus,
Higinus, and other Martyrs: and bisides have divised other like Canons of their
own. The Decretal Epistle, that is abroad under the name of Julius, seems to
savor of some corruption, both for sundry other causes, and also for that it
agreeeth not with the very true Epistle of Julius, which Athanasius allegeth
in his Apology: Athanasius in Apologia. 2.
and yet ought both these Epistles to be al one without difference. Wherefore
we have good cause to think, That al is not Gospel, that comes from Rome.

Thus ambitiously to auance them selves, under pretense of such Appeals,
Appeals.
oftentimes not understanding the case, as it well appears by that is written
of Apiarius, and by the story of Flauianus, and Eutyches, they found fault
with good Catholic Bishops, and received Heretics into their favor:
wherwithal the Bishops in the General Council of Aphrica, find them selves
much grieved.

First therefore I must show, that there lay no such ordinary Appeal from
al Countries of the world to the Bishop of Rome, and that therefore the same
is by M. Hardinge untruly avouched. That done, I trust, it shall not be hard
to answer these places of Chrysostom, Athanasius, and Theodoretus here
alleged. And that there lay not any such Appeal to Rome, it is plain by
consent of General Councelles, by the authority of Holy Fathers, and by the
Laws, and Ordinances of Emperors, and Princes: By which grounds, it is
easy to understand the practice, and order of the Church in those days.

In the Council of Nice it is Decreed thus, Council. Nicen. 1. Cap. 5.
Ab alijs excommunicati, ab alijs ad Communionem ne recipiantur. Let not them
that stand Excommunicate by one Bishop, be received again to the Communion by
any other. M. Hardinges Appeals, and these words can not well stand
together. But he will say, The Bishop either of ignorance, or of malice may
Excommunicate the party wrongfully. In this case the same Council has
provided remedy of Appeal, not unto the Bishop of Rome, but unto a Prouincial
Synod within the Country. These be the words, Council. Nicen. 1. Can. 5.
Ergo, vt haec possint digna examinatione perquiri, rect^ visum est, per
singulos annos, in singulis prouincijs, bis in anno, Episcoporum Concilium
fieri, vt simul in vnum conuenientes ex communi Prouincia, huiusmodi
quaestiones examinent. Therefore that these things may be well examined, it is
well provided, that every year in every Province, at two several times, there
be holden a Council of Bishops, that they meetinge together out of al parts
of the Province, may hear, and determine such complaints.

The Bishops in the Council holden at Tela in Spain, ordained thus,
Presbyteri, and Clerici, ne appellent, nisi ad Aphricana Concilia: Council.
Telen. te^pore Zosimi Can. 17.
Let it not be lawful for Priests, or Clerks, to Appeal ( to Rome) but only
to the Councelles holden in Aphrica.

So in the Mileuitane Council, Council. Mileuitan. Can. 22.
Si ab Episcopis appellandum putauerint, non prouocent, nisi ad Aphricana
Concilia, vel ad Primates Prouinciarum suarum. Ad transmarina autem qui
putauerint appellandum, a nullo intra Aphricam in Communionem recipiantur: If
they think it meet to Appeal from their Bishops, let them not Appeal, but
only to the Councelles of Aphrica, or unto the Primates of their own
Provinces. But if they shall make their Appeal beyond the Seas, ( that is, to
Rome) let no man in Aphrica receive them to the Communion.

So likewise in the Council of Aphrica, Council. Aphrican. Can. 62.
Si fuerit prouocatum, eligat is, qui prouocauerit, Iudices, and cum eo and
ille, contra quem prouocauerit, vt ab ipsis deinceps nulli liceat prouocare. If
Appeal be made, let him that shall Appeal, choose other Judges of his side,
and likewise letthe other do the same against whom he Appealeth: that from
them afterward, it be lawful for neither of them to Appeal.

And again in the same Council, Non prouoce^t, nisi ad Aphricana Concilia,
Council. Aphrican. Can. 92.
Let them not appeal, but only unto the Councelles holden within Aphrica, and
so forth word by word, as is alleged out of the Council of Mileuita. But
here I may not well pass over Gratians Gloss, touching this matter. For, where
as the Council has determined, that if any man appeal beyond the Seas, he
stand Excommunicate, Gratian has expounded, and salued it with this preatie
exception. Nisi forte Romanam Sedem appellauerint, Unless they appeal to the Sea of Rome. 2. Quest. 6. Ca. Placuit.
And so by his construction, he excepteth that only thing out of the law,
for which only thing, the whole law was made. For it is plain, and without
al question, that the Council of Aphrica specially, and namely meante to cut of
al appeals to the Sea of Rome. And yet those only appeals, Gratian by his
Construction would have to be saved.

But what can be so plain, as the Epistle of the two hundred, and seventeen
Bishops in the Council of Aphrica, sent unto Coelestinus Epistola Aphricani
Concilij ad Coelestinum.
Bishop of Rome, declaringe at length both the state, and conueyance of the
cause, and also their grief, and mis^iking of the whole matter. The words lie
thus, Decreta Nicena sieve inferioris gradus Clericos etc. The Decrees of the
Council of Nice, have evidently committed both the Clerks of inferior
roumes, and also the Bishops them selves unto their Metropolitanes. For both
justly, and discretely they provided, that al manner actions should be
determined in the same places, where they began: and likewise thought, that
no Province should want the Grace of the Holy Ghost, whereby Christian
Bishops, might be hable both wisely to consider, and also constantly to
maintain the right. And specially seeinge that liberty is given, that if
either party mislike his Judges order, he may lawfully appeal either to a
Convocation of Bishops within the same Country, or else to a General Council.
Unless any man will think, Iustitiam examinis vnicuilibet.
that God is hable to inspire the Justice of trial into one man alone ( meaning
thereby the Bishop of Rome) and will deny the same to a great number of
Bishops, being in Council altogether. And how can your beyond sea
judgment appear good, seeinge that the witnesses, which be parties
necessary, either for that they be women, or for that they be aged, and weak,
or for many other incident impedimentes, cannot come unto it? As for any
Delegates, that should be sent, as from your side, we find no such matter
determined in any Council. And touching that you sent us of late by Faustinus
our felowbishop, as part of the Nicene Council, in the very true Councelles of
Nice, which we have received from holy Cyrillus the Bishop of Alexandria, and
from Atticus the Bishop of Constantinople etc. we find no such matter.
Executores Clericos vestros.
Neither send ye, nor grant ye, your Clerks to execute causes at any
man's request, least we seem to bring a smokie puff of worldly pride into
the Church of Christ, which unto them that desire to see God, shows the
light of simplicity and humility etc.

The Bishops of the East part of the world, being Arians, writing unto
Julius the Bishop of Rome, Sozomenus. li. 3. Ca. 8.
took it greeuousely, that he would presume to over rule them: and showed
him, It was not lawful for him, by any slight, or color of appeal, to undo
that thing, that they had done.

S. Cyprian Cyprian li. 1. Epis. 3.
findinge fault with such renninge to Rome, and defeatinge of Justice,
writes unto Cornelius the Bishop there in this sort: Cum aequum iustumque
sit, vt vniuscuiusque causa illic audiatur, vbi crimen est admissum, and
singulis pastoribus portio gregis sit adscripta, quam regat vnusquisque, and
gubernet, rationem sui actus Domino redditurus, oporte^ vtique cos, quibus
praesumus, non circumcursare, nec Episcoporu^ concordiam cohaerentem sua
subdola and fallaci temeritate collidere: sed agere illic causam suam, vbi and
accusatores habere, and testes sui criminis possint: nisi paucis desperatis,
and perditis, minor videtur esse authoritas Episcoporum in Aphrica
constitutorum, qui iam de illis iudicauerunt etc. Seeinge, it is meet, and
right, that every man's cause be heard there, where the fault was committed,
and seeinge, that every Bishop has a portion of the flock allotted unto him,
which he must rule, and govern, and yield account unto the Lord for the
same, therefore it is not meet, that they, whom we are appointed to ouersee,
do thus ren about ( with their appeals) and so with their subtle, and
deceiteful rashenesse, break that concord and consent of Bishops. But there
ought they to plead their cause, where they may have both accusers, and
witnesses of the fault. Lewd, and d^sperate.
Unless perhaps a few desperate, and lewd fellows, think the authority of
the Bishops of Aphrica, which have already judged and condemned them, to be
less, then is the authority of other Bishops.

Hereby it is clear, that the godly Fathers, and Bishops in old times,
misliked much this shiftinge of matters to Rome, for that they saw it was the
hinderance of right, the increase of ambition, and the open breach of the holy
Canons.

And therefore the Emperor Justinian, foreseeinge the disorders, that hereof
might grow, to bridle this ambitious oultrage, thought it necessary for his
sub^^^^es, to provide a strait Law in this wise to the contrary. Si quis
Sanctissimorum Episcoporum eiusdem Synodi dubitationem aliquam adinuicer
^habeat, sieve pro Ecclesiastico iure, sieve pro alijs quibusdam rebus, Authen De
(...)Episcopis, Collatio. 9. Si quis Vero.
prius Metropolita eorum, cum alijs de sua Synodo Episcopis, causam examiner,
and iudicet. Quod si vtraque pars rata non habuerit ea, quae iudicata sunt,
tunc beatissimus Pa^riarcha Dioceseos illius inter eos audiat, and illa
determinet, quae Ecclesiasticis Canonibus, and Legibus consonant, Nulla part
eius sententiae co^tradicere valente. (...).
If any of the most holy Bishops, ^einge of one Synod, have any matter of
doubt, or question among them selves, whether it be for Ecclesiastical right,
or any other matters, First let their Metropolitan with other Bishops of the
same Synod, examine, and judge the cause. But if both the parties stand not
to his, and their judgments, then let the most holy Patriarch of the same
Province, hear, and determine their matter according to the Ecclesiastical
laws, and Canons. And neither of the parties may vvithstande his
determination. And immediately after, Patriarcha secundum Canones, and Leges
Praebeat finem. In eodem. (...).
Let the Patriake according to the Laws, and Canons, make an end. By these
words al Appeals be quite cut of from the Sea of Rome.

Likewise the Emperors Honorius, and Theodosius have taken Appeals away from
the Bishops of Rome, and have commanded the same to be entered before the
Bishop, and Synod of Constantinople. The Law is written thus, Omni
innouatione cessante, Cod. De Sacrosanctis Ecclesiis Omni.
vetustatem, and Canones pristinos Ecclesiasticos, qui vsque tunc tenuerun^,
per omnes Illyrici prouincias seruari praecipimus: vt si quid dubietatis
emerserit, id oportear, non absque sententia viri Reuerendissimi Sacrosanctae
Legis Antistitis Ecclesiae vibis Constantinopolitanae, quae Romae veteris
praerogatiua laetatur, Conuentui Sacerdotali, and Sancto iudicio reseruari.
Cod. De Epis. and Clericis. Actor in nullo alio foro, vel apud quenquam alterum
Iudicem, Clericos (Ecclesiae Constantino politanae) litibus tentet irretire.
Al innovation set aparte, we command, that the old order, and the ancient
Ecclesiastical Canons, which hitherto have holden, be keapte still through all the Provinces of ^llyricum: that if any matter of doubt happen to arise, it be
put over to be determined by the holy judgment, and assembly of Bishops,
not without the discretion of the most Reverend the Bishop of the City of
Constantinople, which City now inioieth the Prerogative of Old Rome. Here M.
Hardinge may not forgeate, that the Church of Constantinople had as great
prerogative in all respects, of Preeminence, Superiority, and Uniuersalitie of
charge, as ever had the Church of Rome. Wherefore if the Bishop of Rome were
Head of the Uniuersal Church, it must needs follow, that the Bishop of
Constantinople was likewise Head of the Uniuersal Church.

And again, the Emperor Leo in plainer words: Omnes qui vbicunque sunt, vel
post hac fuerint, Cod. De Episcopis, and Clericis. Omnes.
Orthodoxae Fidei Sacerdotes, and Clerici, cuiuscu^que gradus sint, Monachi
quoque, in causis ciuilibus, ex nullius penitus maioris, minorisue sententia
Iudicis commonitoria, ad extraneaiudicia periraha^tur, aut prouinciam, vel
locum, vel regionem, quam habitant, exire cogantur. All that be, or hereafter
shall be, Priests, or Clerks, of the Catholic Faith, of what degree so ever
they be, Monks also, let them not in any Civil Actions be drawn forth to
f^ren Judgment, by the summone, or commandment of any Judge, more, or less:
neither let them be driven to come forth of, either the Province, or the
place, or the Country, where they dwell. Thus, whether the Action were
Ecclestastical, or Civil, the party was to be heard within his own
Province, and could not be forced, to appear abroad.

Certainly, what good likinge S. Bernarde had herein, it appears hy his
words: For thus he writes to Eugenius the Bishop of Rome. Quousque non
euigilat consideratio tua ad tantam Appellationum confusionem? Ambitio in
Ecclesia per te regnare molitur: praeter ius, Bernard. ad Eugenium de
Consideratione. li. 3.
and fas, praeter morem, and ordinem fiunt. Repertum ad remedium, reperitur ad
mortem: Antidotum versum est in venenum* Murmur loquor, and querimoniam
Communem Ecclesiarum. Truncari se clamant, and demembrari. Vel nullae, vel
paucae admodum sunt, quae plagam istam aut non doleant, aut non timeant. When
will thy consideration ^wake to behold this so great confusion of Appeals?
Ambition, and pride strives through thee to reign in the Church. These
Appeals be made biside al Law, and Right, biside al manner, and good order.
It was divised for a remedy: it is found turned to death: That was Triakle,
is changed into poison. I speak of the murmuringe, and common complainte of
the Churches. They complain, they be maimed, and dismembered. There be either
no Churches, or very few, but either smarte at this plague, or stand in fear
of it. This is that worthy ground, whereupon M. Hardinge has laid the
first fundation of his Supremacy: A Confusion, a Death, a Poison, a Terror,
and Dismembringe of the Churches: practiced against Law: against right:
against manner: and against good order: misliked by the Holy Fathers:
disallowed by godly Councelles: and utterly abrogated, and abolished by sundry
worthy, and noble Princes. This is M. Hardinges principal fundation of his
Primacie.

But yet these men will say, Chrysostom, Athanasius, and Theodoretus being
Godly Fathers, and holy Bishops, appealed to Rome, and acknowleged the Popes
authority, and besought him to use the same. For the true understanding
hereof, it shall be necessary to consider the state, that these godly Fathers
then stood in, and the miserable confusion of the East part of the world in
those days. Chrysostom thereof writes thus, Epist. 2. Chrysostom. ad
Innocentiu^.
Certamen est totius orbis: Ecclesiae vsque ad genua humiliatae sunt: populi
dispersi: Clerus diuexatus: Episcopi exules: constitutiones Patrum violatae. It
is the contention of the whole world: The Churches are brought upon their
knees: the people is scatered: the ministry is oppressed: the Bishops are
banished: the constitutions of our Fathers are broken. Socrates li. 2. Cap. 11.
The Emperors Captain with a band of soldiers besette the Church, where
Athanasius was prayeing: Of the people, that was with him, Sozomen. li. 3. Cap.
6.
some were spoiled, and bannished, some trodden under the soldiers feet,
some slain where they went. Paulus the Bishop of Constantinople was hanged:
Marcellus the Bishop of Ancyra was deprived: Athanas. in Episiola ad solitariam
vitam agentes.
Lucius the Bishop of Adrianopolis died in prison: Theodulus, and Olympius two
Bishops of Thracia, were commanded to be murdered. The Emperor had
commanded Athanasius to be brought unto him, either dead, or alive.

These Godly Fathers, being thus in extreme misery, and seeinge their whole
Church in the East part so desolate, Theodor^t. li. 2. Cap. 14.
were forced to seek for comfort, whersoeuer they had hope to find any: and
specially they sought to the Church of Rome: which then, both for multitude
of people, and for purity of Religion, and Constancy in the same, and also
for healping of the afflicted, Athanas. Apolog. 2.
and intreatinge for them, was most famous above al others. In like sort
sometimes they fled for healpe unto the Emperor. Socrat. li. 1. Cap. 23.
So Athanasius being condemned in the Council at Tyrus, fleadde to
Constantinus the Emperor: Flauianus unto the Emperors Theodosius, and
Ualentinianus: Cassiodorus lib. 4. Cap. 20.
Donatus a Casis Nigris unto Constantinus. And the Emperors sometimes called
the parties, and heard the matter them selves: Ambros. lib. 10. ^pist. 78.
Sometimes they wrote favorable letters in their behalf. The Emperor
Constans wrote unto his brother Constantius, to call before him the Bishops of
the East part, Augustine. Epist. 162.
to yield a reckeninge of their dooinges against Athanasius. The Emperor
Honorius gave his endeavor that Athanasius might be restoared. Inter Decret^
Iulij, e Sozomeno.
Constantinus the Emperor upon Athanasius complainte, commanded the Bishops
of the Council of Tyrus to appear before him. The words of his Summon be
these, Quotquot Synodum Tyri habitam compleuistis, sine mora ad pietatis
nostrae Castra properetis: Sozomen. lib. 8. Cap. 28.
ac re ipsa, quam sincere, ac recte iudicaueritis, ostendatis: idque, Coram me,
quem sincerum esse Dei ministrum, ne vos quidem ipsi negabitis. Socrat. lib. 1.
Cap. 33.
As many of you, as were at the Council of Tyrus, high you unto our Camp, or
Court without delaie, and show us, how sincerely, and uprightly ye have
dealt: and that even before me, whom you your selves can not den^e, to be the
sincere Servant of God. Coram me.


Thus Holy men being in distress, sought healpe, wheresoever they had hope
to find it. This seekinge of remedy by way of Complainte, as it declares
their misery, so is it not sufficient, to prove an ordinary App^ale.

But it is most certain, and out of al question, that Chrysostom Appealed
unto Innocentius: for M. Hardinge has here alleged his own words. I
grant, M. Hardinge has here alleged Chrysostom: but in such faithful, and
trusty sort, as Pope Zosimus sometimes alleged the Council of Nice. Good
Christian Reader, if thou have Chrysostom, peruse this place, and weigh well
his words: if thou have him not, yet be not ouerhastie of belief. M.
Hardinges dealinge with thee herein is not plain. The very words of
Chrysostom in Latin stand thus: Ne confusio haec omnem, quae sub Coelo est,
Epist. Chrysostom. ^d Innocen. in Tom. 5.
nationem inuadat, obsecro, vt scribas, quod haec tam inique facta, and
absentibus nobis, and non declinantibus iudicium, non habeant robur: Sicut
neque natura sua habent. Illi autem, qui inique egerunt, poenae
Ecclesiasticarum Legu^ subiaceant. Nobis vero, qui nec conuicti, nec redarguti,
nec habiti vt rei sumus, literis vestris, and charitate vestra, aliorumque
omnium, quorum an^esocietate fruebamur, frui concedite. Which words into
English may truly be translated thus. Lest this confusion ouerrenne al
nations under heaven, I pray thee write, (or signify) unto them, that these
things so unjustly done, I being absent, and yet not fleeynge judgment, be
of no force, as in deed of their own nature they be of none: and (write) that
they, that have done these things so wrongfully, be punished by the Laws of
the Church: and grant you, that we, that are neither convicted, nor reproved,
nor found guilty, may enjoy your letters, and your love, and likewise the
letters, and love of al others, whose fellowship we inioyed before. In these
few words M. Hardinge has notably falsified three places, quite alteringe
the words that he found, and shufflinge in, and interlacinge other words
of his own. For these words in M. Hardinges translation, that seem to
signify authority in the Bishop of Rome, and to importe the Appeal, Write,
and determine by your authority: M. Hardinge falsifieth, and untruly
translateth S. Chrysostom.
Put you them under the Censure of the Church: Give commandment, that we be
restoared to our Churches: These word, I say, are not to be found in
Chrysostom, neither in the Greek, nor in the Latin: but only are pretily
conveyed in by M. Hardinge, the better to furnishe, and fashion up his Appeal.
He sees well, this matter will not stand upright, without the manifest
corruption, and falsifieinge of the Doctors. This therefore is M. Hardinges
Appeal, and not Chrysostomes.

For, that Chrysostom made no such Appeal to the Bishop of Rome, it may
sufficiently appear, both by Chrysostomes own Epistles, and by the Bishop of
Romes dealinge herein, and by the end, and Conclusion of the cause. Touching
Chrysostom him self, he makes no mention of any Appeal: nor desires the
parties to be cited to Rome: nor takes Innocentius for the Bishop of the whole
Church, or for the universal Judge of all the world: but only saluteth him
thus, Innocentio Episcopo Romae Johannes: John to Innocentius Bishop of Rome
sends greetinge. And again in the same Epistle, he utterly auoideth al such
foren Judgments, according to the determinations of the Councelles of
Carthage, Mileuitum, and Aphrica. These be his words, Neque congruum est, vt
hi, qui in Aegypto sunt, iudicent eos, Ad Innocen. Epistpriore.
qui sunt in Thracia. It is not meet, that they, that be in Egypt, should be
Judges over them, that be in Thracia.

Neither do the Bishop of Romes own words importe any appeal, but rather
the contrary: for he uses not his familiar words of biddinge, or
commaundinge, but only in gentle, and frendely manner exhorts them to
appear: and that not before him self, but only before the Council of sundry
Bishops summoned specially for that purpose. For thus Julius writes unto the
Bishops of the East: Epist. Iulij, in Athanasij Apol.
Quae est causa offensionis? An quia adhortati vos sumus, vt ad Synodum
occurreretis? What is the cause of your displeasure? Is it because we exhorted
you to come to the Council? Here he exhorts, and entreats them: he
commands them not: he calls them to come, not before him self, but before
the Council. Again he says, Legati vestri Macarius Presbyter, and Hesychius
Diaconus, In Apolog. 2.
Concilium indici postulauerunt: Your own ambassadors Macarius being a
Priest, and Hesychius being a Deacon, required that a Council might be
summoned. And again, Epistola Iulij ad Orientales, inter Decreta Iulij.
Vellem vos magis ad iam dictam Canonicam conuenire vocationem, vt coram
universally Synodo reddatis rationem. I would you rather to come to this
Canonical calling, that ye may yield your account of your dooinges before the
General Council. So likewise S. Basile writes to Athanasius by way of counsel
in that heavy time of trouble: Basil. Epis. 48. ad Athanasi.
Viros igitur Ecclesiae tuae potentes ad Occidentales Episcopos mitte, qui,
quibus calamitatibus premamur, illis exponant. Send some worthy men of your
Churches (not unto the Bishop of Rome, but) unto the Bishopppes of the Weaste,
that may let them understand, with what miseries we are besette. Likewise
again he says, Visum mihi est consentaneum, Basil. ad Athan. Epis. 52.
vt scribatur Episcopo Romae, vt ea, quae hic geruntur, consideret, detque
Concilium: I think it good, ye write to the Bishop of Rome, that he may
consider that is here done, and may appointe us a Council.

Neither did the Bishop of Rome by his own authority summon the Bishops of
the East, but by the counsel, and conference of other Bishops. Athanasi in
Epist. ad solitarid vitam agentes.
For so Athanasius says, Misit omnium Italicorum Episcoporu^ consilio Julius
ad Episcopos Orientales, certum illis Synodi diem denuntians. Julius sent unto
the Bishops of the East, by the counsel of all the Bishops of Italy, giving
them to understand the certain day of the Council. Which thing Julius also
him self avouches by these words, Epist. Iulij in Apologia Athanasij. 2.
Tametsi solus sim, qui scripsi, tamen non meam solius sententiam, sed omnium
Italorum, and omnium in his regionibus Episcoporum scripsi. Not withstandinge I
alone wrote, yet it was not mine own mind only, that I wrote, but also the
mind of the Bishops of Italy, and of al other Bishops of these Countries.

So likewise Innocentius the Bishop of Rome, Nicephorus li. 13. Ca. 33.
being very desirous to restoare Chrysostom, and to recover the unity of the
Church, not of him self, or by his own authority, but by the Decree, and
consent of a Council holden in Italy, sent Messingers into the East. And
sittinge with others in the Council, he took not upon him that Uniuersal
power, that is now imagined, but had his voice equal with his brethren, as it
appears by Meltiades Bishop of Rome, Optatus li. 2.
that satte with three Bishops of Gallia, and fourteen other Bishops of
Italy, to determine the controversy between Caecilianus, and Donatus a casis
nigris.

Now, to come to the prosecution of the matter, M. Hardinge knows, that the
Bishops of the East understood not this singular Authority, or Prerogative
of the Bishop of Rome, and therefore being called, obeyed not the summon, nor
had any regard unto his sentence, as it is many ways easy to be seen.
Therefore they returned unto Julius this answer: Inter Decreta Iulij, Council.
tomo 1.
Si nostris placitis assentiri volueritis, pacem vobiscum, and Communionem
habere volumus. Sin vero aliter egeritis, and eis amplius, quam nobis assentiri
iudicaueritis, contraria celebrabimus: and deinceps nec vobiscum congregari,
nec vobis obedire, nec vobis, vestrisue fauere volumus. If you will agree unto
our orders, we will have peace and communion with you. But if you will
otherwise do, and rather agree unto our adversaries, then unto us, then will we
publishe the contrary: and hencefoorthe neither will we ^itte in Council with
you, nor obey you, nor bear good will either to you, or to any of yours.

This imperfection, and weakness of their own dooinges, the Bishops of
Rome them selves understood, and confessed. For thus Innocentius writes unto
S. Augustine, Alypius, and others in Aphrica touching Pelagius: Inter Decreta
Innocentij, Epistol. 27.
Si adhuc taliter sentit, cvm sciat se damnandum esse, quibus acceptis literis,
aut quandose nostro iudicio committet? Quod si accersendus esset, id ab illis
melius fieret, qui magis proximi, and non Iongo terrarum spatio videntur esse
disiuncti. If he continue still in one mind, knowing that I will pronounce
against him, at what request of letters, or when will he commit him self to our
judgment? If it be good, he were called to make answer, it were better some
others called him, that are near at hand etc.

And therefore Julius the Bishop of Rome, findinge his own infirmity herein,
wrote unto the Emperor Constans, Sozomenus li. 3. Ca. 10.
and opened unto him the whole matter, and besought him to write unto his
brother Constantius, that it might please him, to send the Bishops of the
East, to make answer to that, they had done against Athanasius. Even so the
Clergy of the City of Antioche, in the like case of trouble, and spoil,
wrote unto John the Patriarch of Constantinople, Council. Constantinopol.
quintu^ Actio. 1.
to entreat the Emperor in their behalf. It appears hereby, that this
Infinite Authority, and Prerogative power over all the world, in those days
was not known.

I think it hereby plainly, and sufficiently proved, first that the Bishop
of Rome had no authority to receive appeals from al parts of the world, and
that by the Councelles of Nice, of Tele, of Mileuitum, and of Aphrica: by S.
Cyprian, and by the Emperors Martian, and Justinian. Next, that M. Hardinge,
the better to furnishe his matter, has notoriousely falsified Chrysostomes
words, three times in one place. Thirdely, that Chrysostomes letter unto
Innocentius contained matter of complainte, but no appeal: which thing is
also proved by the very words, and tenor of the letter: by the Bishops of
Romes own confession: and by the imperfection, and weakness of their
dooinges. For the law says, Iurisdictio sine modica coerctione nulla est.
Jurisdiction without some compussion is no Jurisdiction. De officio eius, cui
mandata est Iurisdictio. Mandatam.


In deed by way of compromisse, and agreement of the parties, matters were
sometimes brought to be heard, and ended by the Bishop of Rome, as also by
other Bishops: but not by any ordinary process, or course of Law. And so
it appears, this matter between Athanasius, and the Arians was first brought
unto Julius: for that the Arians willingely desired him, for trial thereof, to
call a Council. For thus Julius him self writes unto the Bishops of the
East, as it is before alleged. Epist. Iulij, in Apologia Atha. 2.
Si Macario, and Hesychio nullam Synodum postulantibus adhortator fuissem, vt
ad Synodum, qui ad me scripsissent, conuocarentur, idque in gratiam fiatrum,
qui se iniuriam pati conquerebantur, etiam ita iusta fuisset mea cohortatio: I
am vero, vbi i^dem illi, qui a vobis pro grauibus viris, and fidedignis habiti
sunt, authors mihi fuerint, vt vos conuocarem, cert^ id a vobis aegre ferri
non debuit. If I had given advise unto (your messingers) Macarius, and
Hesychius, that they, that had written unto me, might be called ^o a Council,
and that in consideration of our Brethren, which complained, they suffered
wrong, although neither of them had desired the same, yet had mine advise
benne void of injury. But now, seeinge the same men, whom you took to be
grave, and worthy of credit, have made suite unto me, that I should call you,
verily, ye should not take it in il part.

Hereby it is plain, that Julius took upon him to call these parties, not by
any such Uniuersal Jurisdiction, as M. Hardinge fansieth, but only by the
consent, and request of both parties. And therefore Julius says, He caused
Athanasius to be cited Regulariter, Regulariter.
that is, according to order: for the order of judgment is, that a man be
first called, and then accused, and last of al condemned: but he means not
thereby the order of the Canons, as M. Hardinge expounds it. For touching
appeals to Rome, there was no Canon yet provided. The counterfeite Epistle of
Athanasius to Felix is answered before.

Theodoretus Theodoretus.
was deposed, and bannished, and cruelly entreated, as it appears by his
letters unto Renatus: and therefore, the words, that he uses, are rather
tokens of his miseries, and want of healpe, then certain testimonies of his
judgment. For every man is naturally inclined to extolle him, and to auance
his power, at whose hand he seeks healpe.

But if it were granted, it was lawful then for the Bishop of Rome, to
receive al manner appeals, in such order, as it is pretended, yet cannot M.
Harding thereof necessarily conclude, that the Bishop of Rome was the Head of
the Uniuersal Church. For Ostiensis says, Appeals may be made, not only
from the lower Judge unto the higher, but also from equal to equal: And in this
order, as it shall afterward be showed more at large, Donatus a Casis nigris,
August. epist. 162 Extra. de appellationib. in Sexto. Roma. Ecclesi. In Glosa.
was by the Emperor lawfully removed from the Bishop of Rome, to the Bishop
of Arle in France.

Ostiensis words be these, Non nocebit error, si appelletur ad Maiorem, quam
debuerit, vel ad parem. The error shall not hurt, if the appeal be made,
either to a higher Judge, then was meet, or to an equal. Where also it is thus
noted in the Margin, Appellari potest ad parem, si de hoc sit consuetudo.
Appeal may be made unto the equal, if there be a custom of it. Hereby it is
plain, that the right of appeal by fine force of Law, concludes not any
necessary superiority: much less this infinite power over the whole
Uniuersal Church.

But M. Harding might soon have foreseen, that this his first principle of
Appeals would easily be turned against him self.

First, for that it is well known, that Appeals then, even in the
Ecclestastical

Secondely, for that the Bishop of Rome determined such cases of Appeal,

Thirdly, for that matters being once heard, and determined by the Bishop

As touching the first, Eusebi. li. 10. ca. 5.
that appeals in Ecclesiastical causes were lawfully made unto the Prince,
Socrat. li. 1. ca. 34.
it is clear by Eusebius, by Socrates, by Nicephorus, and by S. Augustine in
sundry places. Nicephor. li. 7. ca. 43.
Donatus being condemned by threescore and ten Bishops in Aphrica, appealed
unto the Emperor Constantinus, and was received. S. Augustine says, Augusti.
Ep. 162 Contra Epist.
Parmenianus vltro passus est suos adire Co^stantinu^: Parmenianus willingly
suffered his fellows to go unto The Emperor Constantinus. Again he says
Infero adhuc and verba Constantini ex literis eius, Parmentani. li. 1 Ca. 5.
vbi se inter parts cognouisse, and innocente^ Caecilianu^ comperisse,
restatur. Here I bring in the words of Constantine out of his own letters,
wherein he confesses, that he heard the parties, Contra Cresconium Grammati.
li. 3. ca. 71.
and found Caecilianus to be innocent. Likewise he says, An forte de
Religione fas non est, vt dicat Imperator, vel quos miserit Imperator? Cur ergo
ad Imperatore^ legati vestri venerunt? What, is it not lawful for ye Emperor,
or for such as shall be sent by the Emperor, to pronounce sentence of Religion?
Contra Epist. Parmen. li. 1. ca. 7.
Wherefore then came your Ambassadors unto the Emperor? And so likewise
again, Si nihil debent in his causis Imperatores iubere, Si ad Imperatores
Christianos haec cura pertinere no^ debet, August. epist. 68.
quis vrgebat maiores vestros causam Caeciliani ad lmperatore^ mittere? If
Emperors have nothing to command in these cases, or if this matter nothing
touch a Christian Emperors charge, who then forced your predecessors to
remove Caecilianus matter unto the Emperor? Therefore the Emperor Constantinus
summoned the Bishops of the East, that had been in the Council of Tyrus, to
appear before him, to render account of their dooinges. His words be these,
Socrat. li. 1. ca. 33.
Vt re ipsa quam sincere, ac recte iudicaueritis, oftendatis: idque Coram me. I
will you, to make your appearance, and to show in deed, how sincerely, and
justly, ye have dealte: And that even before me. By these few examples it may
well appear, that appeals in Ecclesiastical causes in those days were made
unto the Prince: and that it was thought lawful then, for ye Prince to have the
hearing of the same. Yet was not the Prince therefore ye Head of ye Uniuersal
Church. Certainly S. Gregory thought it not amiss, Gregor. li. 11. Epis. 8.
to commit a Spiritual matter, touching ye purgation of a Bishop, to Brunichilda
the French Queen. Notwithstanding it be noted thus in ye Gloss: 2 Quest. 5.
Mennam.
Fuit tamen hic nimiu^ papaliter dispensa^um: As touching the Bishop of Romes
power herein, it is certain, he heard such matters of appeal, by warrant of
the Emperors Commission, and not as haui^ge authority of him self. S.
Augustine Augusti. Epist. 162.
openinge the contention between Caecilianus, and Donatus a Casis nigris,
utters this matter at large in this wise. An forte non debuit Romanae
Ecclesiae Episcopus Mil^iades cum Collegis transmarinis Episcopis illud sibi
vsurpare iudicium, quod ab Aphris septuaginta, vbi Primas Tigisi^anus
praesedit, fue^at termina^um? Quid, quod nec ipse vsurpaui^? Rogatus quippe
Imperator Iudices misit Episcopos, qui cum eo sederent. But should not the
Bishop of Rome Mi^^icdes, with other h^s fellows, Bishop^es beyond the seas,
joined togeat^er in Commission take upon him the iudge^ent of that thin^e, that
was determined before by thre^score and ten Bishops of A^hrica, amongst
whom the Primate of Tigi^ita s^te as President? And what if he never took it
upon him? (as of him self) For the Emperor being intre^ted by the party,
sent other Bishops to sit with him. The very copy of this Commission is
yet to be seen both in Eusebius, Eusebius. li. 10. ca. 5.
and also in Nicephorus. Nicephor. li. 7. Ca 43.
Neither was the Bishop of Rome alone in that Commission, but joined together
with Rheticius, Maternus, Marinus, and Marcus, whom the Emperor calls his
Commission fellows. Collegas.
The words of the Commission be these: Constantinus Imperator Mi^tiadi
Episcopo Romano, and Marco etc. Constant^nus the Em^erour unto Miltiades the
Bishop of Rome, and unto Marcus. For as much as, sundry letters have been
sent unto me, from Aml^inus ^ur most Noble President of A^hrica, wh^^ein
Caecilianus the Bishop of Carthage is ^ccused of many mate^s, by ce^taine his
f^lowes of the same Country etc. Therefore I have thought it good, that the
^aide Caecili^nus together with ten Bishops his accusers, and other ten,
such as he sh^l th^nke meet, sa^le to Rome: that there in your presence
together with Rheticius, and M^ternus, and Mar^nus your Fellow Commissioners,
whom for that cause I have w^lled to tr^vel to ^ome, he may be he^rde etc.

Here it is evident to be seen, that the Bishop of Rome was the Emperors
Delegate, and in Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction had his authority, and power (not
from S. Peter) but from the Emperor. Whereby it is easy to be geathered, that
the Bishop of Romes power was not so Uniuersal then, as M. Hardings would
seem now to make it: and that the world then understood not this Decree of
Pope Clemens the fifth, Clemens. 5.
which, as it is reported, he afterward published in the Council of Uienna,
Omne ius Regum pendet a Papa: All the right of the Prince is (...)from the Pope.

Neither was the Bishop of Romes determination of such force, but that it was
lawful then for the party grieved, to refuse his Judgment, and to appeal
further. And therefore Donatus being condemned before Miltiades appealed from
him, and upon his complaint unto the Emperor, was put over unto the Bishop of
Arle in France, August. Epist. 68.
and to certain others. And in conclusion, understanding, that judgment
there would pass against him, last of al he appealed to the Emperors own
person. Augustine. contra Cresconium Grammati. li. 3. Ca. 71.
And the Emperor him self confesses by his letters, that he sat in
judgment, and heard both parties.

Now, if receiving of appeals necessarily importe this Uuiuersal power, then
was the Emperors power Uniuersal: for he received al appeals out of al
Countries without exception, and that even in Causes Ecclesiastical. Again,
then was the Bishop of Romes power not Uniuersal: for it was lawful then to
refuse him, and to appeal to some other. And thus M. Hardinges reasons run
roundely against him self,

M. Hardinge. The.22. Division.
For which cause* that See has ever hitherto of al Christian Nations, and now
also ought to be heard, and obeyed in all points of Faith. For that See,
though it has failed sometimes in Charity, and has been in case, Matthew. 25.
as it might truly say the words of the Gospel, spoken by the foolish
Virgins, Our Lamps be without light: Yet it never failed in faith, as
Theodoretus witnesses, and S. Augustine affirms the same. Which special
Grace, and singular Privilege, is to be imputed unto the prayer of Christ, by
which he obtained of God for Peter and his successoues, 108 The.108. Untruth.
For many Popes have erred in Faith, as shall appear.
that their Faith should not fail. Therefore the evil life of the Bishops of
Rome, ought not to withdraw us from beleeuinge and folowinge the Doctrine
preached and taught in the holy Church of Rome.

For better credit hereof, that is earnestly to be considered, which S.
Augustine writes, Epistola 165. where, after that he has rehearsed in order
all the Popes, that Succeeded Peter, even to him, that was Pope in his time, he
says thus, In illum ordinem Episcoporum etc. In to that rewe of Bishops, that
reaches from Peter him self to Anastasius, which now sits in the same
Chair, if any traitor had creapte in, it should nothing hurt the Church,
and the innocent Christen folk, over whom our Lord having providence, says
of evil rulers: Matthew. 23.
What they say unto you, do ye, but what they do, do ye not: For they
say, and do not: to the intent the hope of a faithful person may be certain,
and such, as being set not in man, but in our Lord, be never scattered
abroad with tempest of wicked Schism. And in his 166. Epistle (he satthe) Our
Heavenly Master has so far forewarned us, to be ware of al evil of
dissension, that he assured the people also of evil rulers, that for their
sakes, S. Augustine speaks generally of al Bishops: and not one word namely
of the B. of Rome.
the seat of wholesome doctrine should not be forsaken, in which seat even the
very evil men be compelled to say good things. For the things which they
say, be not theirs, but Gods, who in the seat of unity, has put the
doctrine of verity.

By this we are plainly taught, that al be it the successors of Peter
Christ's Vicares in earth, be found blame worthy for their evil life, yet we
ought not to dissent from them in Doctrine, nor sever our selves from them in
Faith. For as much as, notwithstanding they be evil, by Gods providence for
the surety of his people, they be compelled to say the things, that be good,
and to teach the truth: the things they speak, not being theirs, but Gods,
who has put the doctrine of verity, in the seat or chayer of unity: which
singular Grace comes specially to the Sea of Peter, either of the force of
Christ's prayer, as is said before, or in respect of place, and dignity,
which the Bishops of that See hold for Christ, M. Harding compares the Pope
with Balaam and Caiphas.
as Balaam could be brought by no means to curse that people, whom God would
have to be blessed. And Caiphas also prophesied, because he was high Bishop of
that year, and prophesied truly, being a man otherwise most wicked. And
therefore the evil dooinges of Bishops of Rome, make no argument of
discreditinge their Doctrine. To this purpose the example of Gregory
Nazianzene may very fittely be applied, of the Golden, Siluerne, and Leaden
Seal. As touching the value of Metalles, Gold and Silver are better, but for
the goodness of the Seal, as well does Lead imprinte a figure in wax, as
Silver or Gold. For this cause that the Sea of Rome has never ben defiled
with stinkinge Heresies, as Theodoretus says, and God has always keapte in
that Chair of Unity, the doctrine of Verity, as Augustine writes: For this
cause (I say) it sits at the stern, and governs the Churches of the
whole world: For this cause Bishops have made their Appellations thither,
judgment in doubts of Doctrine, and determination in all controversies and
strifes, has been from thence always demanded.

The B. of Sarisburie.
This is a very poor healpe in deed. M. Hardinge here is feign to resemble
the Bishops of Rome touching their Doctrine, to Balaam, to Caiphas, and to a
Leaden Seal: and touching their lives, to confess, they are Lamps without
light. Yet (says he) all this notwithstanding, we may not therefore depart
from them. Matthew. 23.
For Christ says, The Scribes, and Phariseis sit in Moses Charie: Do ye,
that they say: but that they do, do ye not: for they say, and do not. For
as much, as it likes M. Hardinge to use these comparisons, it may not much
mislike him, if some man upon occasion hereof happen to say, as Christ said
in the like case, Woe be unto you ye Scribes, Lucae. 11.
and Phariseis: ye blind Guides: ye painted Graves: Ye shut up the Kingedome
of Heaven before men: ye neither enter your selves, nor suffer others, that
would enter: Ye have made the House of God, a Cave of Thieves.

Certainly Balaam, not withstandinge he were a False Prophet, Numer. 23. and
24.
yet he opened his mouth, Johan. 11.
and blissed the people of God: Caiphas, although he were a wicked Bishop,
whether the Pope may err.
yet he prophesied, and spoke the truth: A seal, although it be cast in
lead, yet it gives a perfect printe: The Scribes, and Phariseis, although they
were Hypocrites, and lived not well, yet they instructed the Congregation, and
said well: August. Confession li. 3. ca. 6.
The Manichees, although they were Heretics, and taught not well, yet
outwardly in the conversation, and sight of the world, as S. Augustine says,
they lived well. But these, unto whom M. Hardinge claims the Uniuersal power
over all the world, Retractat. li. 1.
neither bliss the people of God: nor preach Gods Truth: Ca. 7.
nor give any printe of good life, or Doctrine: nor instruct the Congregation:
nor say well, as the Scribes, and Phariseis did: nor, by M. Hardinges own
Confession, live well, as the Manichees did. S. Augustine says, Qui nec
regiminis in se rationem habet, 2. Quaesti. 7. Qui nec.
nec sua crimina detersit, nec filiorum culpam correxit, Canis impudicus
dicendus est magis, quam Episcopus. He that neither regards to rule him
self, nor has washte of his own sins, nor corrected the fa^ltes of his
Children, may rather be called a filthy dog, then a Bishop.

Yet, all this corruption of life notwithstanding, M. Hardinge says, The Sea
of Rome can never fail in Faith. Luc. 22.
For Christ said unto Peter, I have prayed for thee, that thy Faith may not
fail. The like confidence, and trust in them selves the Priests had in the
old times, as it may appear by these words of the Prophet Micheas: Miche.
3.
Sacerdotes in mercede docuerunt, and Prophetae in pecunia Prophetauerunt, and
super Dominum requiescebant, dicentes: nonne Dominus est in medio nostri? The
Priests taught for hiere, and the Prophets Prophesied for money: and yet they
rested them selves upon the Lord, and said: Is not the Lord in the midst
emongst us? With like confidence the Priests said, Hieremi. 18.
as it is written in the Prophet Hieremie, Non peribit lex a Sacerdote, nec
consilium a Seniore. The Law shall not decay in the Priest, nor counsel in the
Elder. But God answeareth them far otherwise, Nox vobis erit pro visione,
Miche. 3.
and tenebrae pro diuinatione. Ye shall have dark night in steed of a vision:
and ye shall have darkness in steed of prophecy. Certainly, the very Gloss
upon the Decretalles puts this matter utterly out of doubt: These be the
words, 24 Quae. 1. in Glosa.
Certum est, quod Papa errare potest. It is certain, that the Pope may err.

And Alphonsus de Castro, Omnis homo errare potest in Fide, etiamsi Papa sit.
Every man may err in the Faith: Alphons. contra Haereses. li. 1. Ca. 4.
yea although it be the Pope. And for proof hereof he says, De Liberio Papa,
constat fuisse Arianum. Touching Pope Liberius, it is certain, he was an
Arian Heretic. Pope Honorius was an Heretic, of the sect of them, that
were called Monothelitae, Council. Constantino. 6. Acti. 12. Council. tomo. 1. in
Vita Marcellini.
condemned for the same in the sixth Council holden at Constantinople. Pope
Marcellinus openly made Sacrifice unto an Idol.

Pope John the.22. held a wicked heresy against the Immortality of the
Soul, and for the same was reproved, not by his Cardinals, but by Gerson,
and the School of Sorbona in Parris.

Pope Syluester the.2. was a Sorcerer, Gerson. Holcote in lib. Sapien. lecti.
189 Did. 19. Anastasius.
and had familiar conference with the Devil, and by his procurement was made
Pope. Pope Anastasius Communicated with Photinus the Heretic, and therefore
was forsaken of his Cleregie. Pope Hildebrande, that first of al others in
these Countries forbadde the lawful marriage of Priests, bethe for his life,
and also for his Religion, is set out at large in a Council holden at Brixia:
Abbas Vrsperg. in Chronicis.
where he is called, and published to the world, to be a Uitious man: a burner
of houses: a Robber of Churches: a mainteiner of Murders, and Periuries: an
Heretic against the Apostolic Doctrine: the old Disciple of Berengarius: a
Sorcerer: a Necromancer: a man possessed with the Devil: and therefore out of the
Catholic Faith. The Fathers in the Council of Basile say, Council. Basilien.
in Epist. Synodali.
Multi pontifices in errores, and Hereses lapsi esse leguntur. we read, that
many Bishops of Rome, have fallen into errors, and Heresies. And the Bishop
of Rome him self says, Notwithstanding the Pope draw innumerable companies
of people by heaps with him into Hell, yet let no mortal manne once dare to
reprove him, Nisi deprehendatur a Fide deuius, Unless it be found, that he
straye from the Faith. To conclude, Nicolaus Lyra is driven to say, Multi
Papae inuenti sunt Apostatae. Did. 40. Si Papa. Nic. Lyra in 16. Caput Matthae.
We find, that many Popes have forsaken the Faith.

All this notwithstanding, by M. Hardinges resolution, the Sea of Rome never
failed from the Faith, nor never can fail. The Ualentinian Heretics, as
Irenaeus reports, were wont to say of them selves, that they were naturally
made of a Heavenly substance, and therefore needed not to slay from sin, as
as others needed. For lived they never so wickedly, yet said they, Irenae. li.
1. Ca. 1.
We are spiritual still: no sin can hurt us. For we are as pure tried
Gold, which not withstandinge it be laid in a heap of donge, yet keeps it
still the brightness, and nature of Gold, and receives no com^ption of the
donge. Even so these men seem to say, that whatsoever the Pope either
believe, or speak, or do, his Faith still remains sound, and can never
fail, because he sits in Peter's Chair: as if he had a lease of the Church
of God, without any manner Empeachement of Waste. And therefore they say, Quod
si totus mundus sententiet in aliquo aduersus Papam, De electi. and elect.
potestate. Significasti. In Glosa. Idem Albert. Pigghius li. 6. Ca. 13.
tamen videtur, quod magis standu^ est sente^tiae Papae, If all the world give
sentence in any thing contrary to the Pope, it seems, we ought rather to
stand to the Popes judgment, then to the judgment of all the world. Again
they say, In Papa si desint bona acquisita per meritum, sufficient ea quae a
loci praedecessore praestantur. If there want in the Pope good things gotten
by merit, yet the things that he has of (Peter) his predecessor in that
place, are sufficient.

Likewise again, Papa Sanctitatem recipit a Cathedra: The Pope receives his
holiness of his Chair. Epist. Sixti. 2.
And Pope Sixtus says, Matthae. 3.
that S. Peter dwells in the Bishop of Rome, Did. 40. No^nos.
and directs him in his dooinges, Did. 40. Si. Papa.
and bears al Burdens.

Thus they feast, Did. 19. Sic oes.
and cheer them selves, and smouthe the world with vain talk. In Glosa,
(...).
But S. John says, Nolite dicere, Patrem habemus Abraham, Never say (Peter
or) Abraham was our Father. S. Paul speakinge of his successors, says thus,
Equidem scio, quod post discessum meum, ingressuri sint ad vos lupi graves, non
parcentes gregi. I know, that after my departure from you, there shall
raueninge woulues come amongste you, that shall not spare the flock. And S.
Hierome says, Non sunt Sanctorum Filij, Actor. 20.
qui tenent Ioca sanctorum. They be not evermore the children of holy men,
Did. 40. Non est facile.
that sit in the rooms of holy men.

Now, where as M. Hardinge says, Christ prayed for Peter, that his Faith
should not fail, that prayer perteined to all the reaste of the Apostles, and
not only unto Peter. Origin says, Number audebimus dicere etc. Origin. in
Matthae. tractat. 1.
Shall we dare to say, that the Gates of Hell prevailed not only against
Peter* but shall prevail against the reast? Why may we not rather say, that
the words, that Christ spoke, were verified in every of them, of whom they
were spoken? Nam and, quae prius dicta sunt, and quae sequuntur, velut ad
Petrum dicta, sunt omnium communia. For both the things that were spoken
before, and also the things that follow, as spoken unto Peter, are common to
al. Beda in Lucam. Ca. 22.
So likewise Beda expounds the same generally of all the faitheful, and not of
Peter only. And so Christ him self expounds his own words, For thus he
prays unto his Father, Johan. 17.
Pater Sancte, serua cos per nomen tuum etc.

O holy Father, save them for thy names sake. I pray not for them only, but
for all them, that by their preachinge shall believe in me.

But (says M. Hardinge) be the Bishop of Romes life never so wicked, yet may
we not sever our selves from the Church of Rome. How be it, S. Cyprian says
otherwise, Cyprian. li. 1.
Plebs obsequens praeceptis Dominicis, and Deum metuens, Epist. 4.
a peccatore Praeposito separare se debet: The people obeieinge Gods
commandments, and fearinge God, must sever them selves from the wicked, that
rules over them. And Pope Nicolas has straitely commanded upon pain of
Excommunication, that no man should be present, Did. 32. Nullus.
to hear Mass said by a Priest, that he knows undoubtedly to live in
aduoutrie. How be it in deed, it is not their life only, that the Church of
God is offended withal, but also, and specially the filthe, and corruption of
their Religion, the oppressinge of Gods Word, the open deceiuinge of the
people, and the manifest maintenance of Idolatry. Esai. 1.
And what if the Silver of Rome be turned into Dross? What if the City that
was Faithful, be become an Harlot? What if they can abide no sound Doctrine?
2. Timoth. 4.
What i^ they have made the House of God, a Cave of Thieves? What if Rome be
become the great Babylon, Hieremie. 7.
the Mother of Fornication, imbrewed, and dronken with the Blood of the
Saints of God? Matthew. 21.
And what if Abomination sit in the holy Place, Apocal. 17.
even in the Temple of God? Yet may we not depart from thence? Daniel. 9.
Yet must that be the Rule, and Standarde of Gods Religion? Truly Christ
says, 2. Thessalonic. 2.
Take heed of the leaven of the Scribes and Phariseis: And God him self
says, Matthew. 16.
Exite de illa populus meus, ne participes sitis delictorum eius, and de plagis
eius ne accipiatis. Apocal. 18.
O my people, come away from her, least ye be partakers of her sins, and so
receive part of her plagues. Irenaeus says, Presbyteris illis, qui sunt in
Ecclesia, obaudire oporter, qui successionem habentab Apostolis: qui cum
Episcopatus successione charisma Veritatis certum, Irenae. li. 4. Ca. 43.
secundum placitum Patris acceperunt. We ought to obey the Bishops in the
Church, that have their Succession from the Apostles, which together with the
Succession of the Bishoprike, have received the certain gift of the Truth,
according to the will of the Father. This holy Father says, Bishops must be
heard, and obeyed with a limitation, that is, not al, what so ever they be, or
what so ever they say, but that have the undoubted gift of Gods Truth. And,
for that M. Hardinge seems to claim by the Authority of the Scribes, and
Phariseis, sayeinge, They sit in Moses Chair: and that therefore we ought to
do, that they say, S. Augustine Augustine. in Johan. tractat. 46.
expounds the same place in this sort: Sedendo in Cathedra, Legem Dei
docent: Ergo per illos Deus docet. Sua vero si illi docere velint, nolite
audire, nolite facere. By sittinge in the Chair (is meante) they teach the
law of God: Therefore it is God, that teaches by them. But if they will teach
any thing of their own (as the Church of Rome has done, and yet doothe
above number) then, says S. Augustine, hear it not, then do it not.

M. Hardinge. The.23. Division.
Now, that the Bishop of Rome had always cure, and rule over al other Bishops,
109. The.109. untruth. For the Bishops of the East never yielded such
subjection to the Pope
speacially of them of the East (for touching them of the weast Church it is
generally confessed) beside a hundred other evident arguments, this is one
very sufficient, that he had in the East to do his steed, three Delegates, or
Vicares, now commonly they be named Legates. And this for the commodity of the
Bishops there, whose Churches were far distant from Rome. The one was the
Bishop of Constantinople, as we find it mentioned In Epistola Simplicij ad
Achatium Constantinopolitanum. The Second was the Bishop of Alexandria, as the
Epistle of Bonifacius the Second to Eulalius records. The third was the
Bishop of Thessalonica, as it is at large declared in the 82. Epistle of Leo,
ad Anastasium Thessalonicensem. By perusinge these Epistles every man may see,
that all the Bishops of Greece, Asia, Syria, Egypt, and to be short of all the
Orient, rendered and exhibited their humble obedience to the Bishop of Rome, and
to his arbitrament referred their doubts, complaints, and causes, and to him
only made their appellations.

The B. of Sarisburie.
What we may think of the other Hundred proufes, which M. Hardinge, as he
says, has leafte untouched, it may the sooner appear, for that this one
proof that is here brought forth in steed of al, is not only untrue, but
also utterly without any shadow, or color of truth. These authorities of
Leo, Symmachus, and Bonifacius, for as much as they are alleged without
words, may likewise be past over without answer. Howbeit this Bonifacius
the second, in defense of this quarrel, is forced to say, that S. Augustine
that Godly Father, and al other the Bishops of Aphrica, Numidia, Pentapolis,
and other countries adioyninge, that withstoode the proud attempt of the
Bishops of Rome, and found out their open forgerie in falsifieinge the Nicene
Council, were altogether inflamed, and leadde by the Devil.

But how doothe this appear to M. Hardinge, that the Bishop of Rome had all the Bishops of the East in Subjection, to use, and command them, as his
Servants? In what Council was it ever Decreed it should be so? who subscribed
it? who recorded it? who ever saw such Canons? Nicolaus. PP. ad Michaelem
Imperat.
The best Plea, that Pope Nicolas can make in this behalf, is, that Peter was
first Bishop of Antioche, and after of Rome: and S. Mark his Scholar Bishop
of Alexandria. Hereof, he thinks, it may very well and substantially be
geathered, that the Bishops of Rome ought to have all the world in Subjection.
In deed in the counterfaite Chartar* or Donation of the Emperor Constantine,
authority is given to the Bishop of Rome over the other four Patriarchs, of
Antioche, of Alexandria, of Constantinople, and of Jerusalem. But the Bishops
of Rome them selves, and of them selves divised and forged this Chartar, and
that so fondely, that a very Child may easily epsy the folly. For biside a
great number of other untruths, at that very time, when it is imagined, that
Chartar was drawn, there was neither Patriarch, nor Bishop, nor Priest, nor
Church in Constantinople, nor the City it self yet builte, nor known to the
world by that name. This notwithstanding, the Bishop of Rome upon this simple
title, has besette his Miter with three Crowns, in token, that he has the
Uniuersal power over the three Divisions of the world, Europa, Asia, and
Aphrica. And so as the King of Persia in old times entitled him self, Frater
Solis, and Lunae, even so Pope Nicolas Nicol. PP. ad Michaelem Imperatorem:
Princeps super omnem terram. Council. Nicen. Can. 6.
calls him self, The Prince of al Lands and Countries.

But what duty the Bishops of the East parts owed to the Bishops of Rome,
whosoever has read, and considered the story and practice of the times, may
soon perceive. First the Council of Nice appointed every of the three
Patriarchs to his several charge, none of them to interrupte, or trouble other:
and willed the Bishop of Rome, as Rufinus reports the story, to ouersee
Ecclesias Suburbanas, which were the Churches within his Province: Rufinus, li.
1. c. ^ Athanas. in Epist. ad solitaria^ vitam age^^es: Metropolis Romanae
ditionis.
and therefore Athanasius calls Rome, the Chief, or Mother City of the
Roman Jurisdiction. And for that cause, the Bishops of the East in their
Epistle unto Julius, call him their Fellow Seruante: and Cyrillus the Bishop
of Alexandria, writing unto Coelestinus, calls him his Brother. Fellows, and
Brothers be titles of Equality, and not of Subjection.

Certain it is, Cassiodor. li. 4 ca. 24.
that sundry of the Bishops of Rome, began very rathe, to seek this
Preeminence, even with manifest forgerie, and corruption of Councels, as is
already proved. Cyril. Epist. 27. page 294.
But the Bishops of other countries never yielded unto them, nor understood
these vain titles. The Bishops of the East, writing unto Julius, allege that
the Faith, that then was in Rome, came first from them, Sozom. li. 3. c. 8.
(...).
and that their Churches, as Sozomenus writes, ought not to be accounted
inferior to the Church of Rome: And as Socrates further reports, That they
ought not to be ordered by the Roman Bishop. Gennadius the Bishop of
Constantinople, together with the Council there, thus writes unto the Bishop
of Rome, Curet sanctitas tua vniuersas tuas custodias, tibique subiectos
Episcopos: Socra^. li. 2. c. 15. (...).
Let thy Holiness see unto thine own charge, and unto the Bishops appointed
unto thee.

The Council of Alexandria committed the Uisitation, and Reforminge of all the
Churches in the East, unto Asterius: Rufin. li. 1. c. 29.
and of all the Churches in the Weast, unto Eusebius the Bishop of Uercellae.
Rufinus, li. 1. ca. 30. and. 31.
By Authority of which Commission, Eusebius together with Hilarious, Uisited,
and corrected all the Churches of Illyricum, France, and Italy. A man might
say, where was then the Uniuersal power of the Bishop of Rome? S. Basile
says, Basil. Epist. 48.
The state and safety of the Church of Antioche, depends of Athanasius the
Bishop of Alexandria, and not (as M. Hardinge here says) of the Bishop of
Rome. And therefore he desires Athanasius, to see unto it.

The Emperors Honorius, Cod. De Sacrosanctis Eccle. lege 6.
and Theodosius appointed over al matters of doubt arisinge within the Country
of Illyricum, to be heard, and ended before the Bishop of Constantinople, and
not before the Bishop of Rome. And the very Close upon the Decrees, expoundinge
that same Law of Honorius, and Theodosius, has these words, Did. 22.
Renouantes. In Glosa
Imperator dicit, quod Patriarcha Constantinopolitanus habet idem in suis
subditis, quod Papa habet in suis. The Emperor says, the Patriarch of
Constantinople has the same authority over the people of his Province, that
the Pope has over his. The Emperors words be these, Cod. De Sacro. Eccle.
lege. 6.
Constantinopolitana Ecclesia Romae veteris praerogatiua laetatur: The Church
of Constantinople enjoys now the Prerogative of old Rome. And therefore,
for more proof hereof, whenever any Patriarch, in any of these four
principal Sees, Literae Synodicae.
was newely chosen, he wrote letters of Conference, and Freendship unto the
other Patriarchs: wherein every of them declared unto other their Religion,
Greg. li. 1. epis. 24. 25. and li. 6. Epistol. 5.
and consent of Faith. Thus did the Bishop of Rome unto others: and thus did
others unto him. This is an infallible toke^, yt their authority was equal,
and none of them had power, and government over his fellows. And therefore,
when Eulogius ye Bishop of Alexandria had written thus unto Gregory, being
then Bishop of Rome, Sicut iussistis, as ye commanded, Gregory utterly
shunned, and refused that kind of writing: Gregor. li. 7. Epist. 30.
for thus he answers him. Hoc verbum Iussionis, quaeso, a meo auditu
remouete. Scio enim quis sim, and qui sitis. Loco mihi Fratres estis: Moribus
patres. Non ergo Iussi, sed quae vtilia visa sunt, indicare curaui. I pray you,
have away this word of Commaundinge from my hearing. For I know, both,
what I am, and also, what you are. Touching your place, you are my Brethren:
touching manners, you are my Fathers. Therefore I Commanded you not: but
only showed you what I thought good.

Finally, for that Michael Palaeologus the Emperor of the East parts, in the
Council holden at Lions, Paulus Aemylius in Historia Gallorum. li. 8.
about the year of our Lord. 1442. after great entreaty made unto him by
the Bishop of Rome, had acknowleged the Bishops of the East to be subject
unto him, after he returned home again into his Empire, and was dead, his
Cleregie would not suffer him to be buried. Yet, says M. Hardinge, All the
Bishops of Graecia, Asia, Syria, Aegypte, and to be short, all the Orient,
rendered, and exhibited their humble obedience to the Bishop of Rome.

M. Hardinge. The.24. Division.
Of the Bishop of Rome his punishinge of offenders, by Censures of the Church,
and otherwise, as by Excommunication, Eiection, Deposition, and enioyninge
penance for transgressions: we have more examples then I think good to recite
here. They that have knowledge of the Ecclesiastical stories, may remember,
how Timotheus Bishop of Alexandria was Excommunicated with Peter his Deacon,
by Simplicius the Pope: Nestorius Bishop of Constantinople, by Coelestinus:
Theophilus Bishop of Alexandria with Arcadius the Emperor, and Eudoxia the
Empress, by Innocentius, for their wicked demeanor toward Chrysostom: How
Dioscorus Bishop of Alexandria was deposed, though the whole 2. Ephesine
Council stood in his defense: How Peter Bishop of Antioche, was not only put
out of his Bishoprike, but also of al Priestly honor: How Photius was put out
of the Patriarkeship of Constantinople, into which he was intruded by favor
of Michael the Emperor, at the suit of his wicked uncle, by Nicolas the first.

For proof of this authority, the Epistle of Cyprian which he wrote to
Stephanus Pope in his time, against Martianus the Bishop of Arelate in Gallia,
makes an evident argument. For that this Martianus became a mainteiner of the
Heresy of Nouatianus, and therewith seduced the faithful people. Cyprian
having intelligence of it by Faustinus from Lions, advertised Stephanus of it,
and moved him earnestly to direct his letters to the people of Arle, by
authority of which, Martianus should be deposed, and an other put in his
room, to the intent (says he there) the flock of Christ. which hitherto by
him scattered abroad and wounded, is contemned, may be gathered together.
Which S. Cyprian would not have written, had the Bishop of Rome had no such
authority.

The B. of Sarisburie.
This reason makes no great proof. For it was ever lawful, not only to the
Bishop of Rome, but also to al other Bishops, both to rebuke, and also to
Excommunicate wicked dooers. Council. Constantinopol. 5. Act. 1.
Anthymus with his fellows was Excommunicate by every of the Patriarkal Sees:
Nicephor. li. 6. Ca. 28.
Paulus Samosatenus, as Nicephorus says, by all the Bishops under Heaven:
Auxentius, and Iouinianus, by S. Ambrose: Dioscorus, and Eutyches by the
Council of Constantinople: Cyrillus, albeit he were a Catholic, Ambros. li.
10.
and a Godly Bishop, by all the Bishops of the East. Yet were none of these,
Epist. 81.
that thus used the right of Excommunication, either Bishops of Rome, Council.
Constantino. 5. Actio. 5.
or Heads of the Uniuersal Church. And, whereas M. Hardinge says, we may
remember by the Ecclesiastical stories, that Innocentius the Bishop of Rome
Excommunicated Arcadius the Emperor, Council. Chalcedon. Actio 10.
it may please him also to remember, by the same Ecclesiastical stories, that
S. Ambrose Excommunicated the Emperor Theodos^us: Nicephor. li. 13. Ca. 24.
and Anastasius the Bishop of Antioche, both by Private letters reproved the
Emperor Justinian for his Heresy, and also oftentimes said of him openly in
the Church, Theodor. li. 6. Ca. 18.
Whosoever follow any other Gospel, accursed be he. Yet was neither S. Ambrose,
nor Anastasius the Bishop of Rome.

As for the Execution of Sentence, Euagri. li. 4. Ca. 40.
and Depriuinge, or Deposinge of Bishops, M. Hardinge knows, the Bishop of
Romes authority was to weak. And therefore Innocentius says of Pelagius,
Inter decreta Innocen^ij.
Quibus acceptis literis, aut quando committer se nostro Iudicio? Upon what
letters, or when, will he yield him self to my judgment? For this cause Felix
the Bishop of Rome, Council. Constantinopol. 5. Act. 1.
prayed aid of the Emperor Zeno: And the Emperor answered, Admisimus
depositionem Anthymi. We have admitted the Deposition of Anthymus: Council.
Constantinopol. 5. Act. 4.
Otherwise the Popes sentence had been in vain. And therefore the Emperor
Constantinus says of him self, Si quis Episcoporum inconsulte tumultuatus
sir, Theodoret. li. 1. Cap. 19.
Ministri Dei, hoc est, mea executione, illius audacia coercebitur. If any
Bishop indiscreetly rear tumulte, his rashenesse shall be repressed, by the
hands of Gods Minister, Authen. De Ecclesiast diuersis capitulis. (...).
that is, By my Execution. And likewise the Emperor Justinian has set out a
law in this sort, Si quis Episcopus definitum tempus emanserit etc. If any
Bishop tarry out his time appointed, and being called home refuse to come, let
him be deprived, and put from his Church, and an other better chosen in his
room, (he adds) by the virtue of this present Law. By the force of this
Law Bishops were deposed: For without it, the Pope was not hable to put his
sentence in execution.

Now, if M. Hardinge will reason thus, The Pope excommunicated other Bishops,
Ergo, He was Head of the Church:



Then of the same principle we may well to the contrary reason thus: The Pope
him self was Excommunicate by other Bishops: Ergo, The Pope was not the
Head of the Church.



For the Antecedent, That the Pope was pronounced Excommunicate by other
Bishops, it is out of question. For it is recorded in the Ecclesiastical
story, that Julius being Bishop of Rome, Sozomen. lib. 3. Cap. 11.
was Excommunicate by the Bishops of the East: Did. 21. In tantum.
Pope Leo was excommunicate by Dioscorus: Pope Uigilius was Excommunicate by
Menna the Bishop of Constantinople: And Pope Honorius was Excommunicate by the
sixthe Council holden at Constantinople. Ni^^phor. li. 17. Ca. 26.


Or if M. Hardinge repose more force in deposinge of Bishops, then in
Excommunication, then let him likewise remember, Council. Constantinopolitan. 6.
Actio. 13.
That Pope Julius was deposed by the Bishops of the East, as it is recorded
by Sozomenus: Pope Hildebrande, by the Council of Brixia: Sozomen. li. 3.
Pope John, by the Council of Constance: Pope Eugenius, by the Council of
Basile: and two Popes together, Syluerius, and Uigilius, by the Emperor
Justinian. Ca. 11. (...).
Thus M. Hardinges own grounds overthrow his whole buildinge, and conclude
plainly against him self.

M. Hardinge. The.25. Division.
For the Popes authority concerning Confirmation of the Ordinations and
Elections of 110 The.110. V^trueth. For the Bishop of Rome Confirmed the
Bishops of his own province: but not Al Bishops throughout the world.
al Bishops, many examples might easily be alleged, In vita Vigilij.
as the request made to Julius by the.90. Ariane Bishops assembled in Council
at Antioche against Athanasius, that he would voutchsafe to ratify and
confirm those, that they had chosen in place of Athanasius, Paulus, Marcellus,
and others, whom they had condemned, and deprived.

Also the earnest suit, which Theodosius the Emperor made to Leo for
confirmation of Anatolius, and likewise that Martianus the Emperor made to
him, for confirmation of Proterius, both Bishops of Alexandria, as it
appears by their letters written to Leo in their favor. And as for
Anatolius, Leo would not in any wise order and confirm him, unless he would
first profess, that he believed, and held the doctrine, which was contained
in Leo his Epistle to Flauianus, and would further by writing witness, that
he agreed with Cyrillus, and the other Catholic Fathers, against Nestorius.
For this, if nothing else could be alleged, the testimony of holy Gregory
were sufficient to make good credit. Who understanding, that Maximus was
ordered Bishop of Salonae a City in Illyrico, without the authority and
confirmation of the Sea Apostolic, standinge in doubt, least perhaps that
had been done by commandment of Mauritius the Emperor, who did many other
things wickedly: thereof writes to Constantina the Empress thus, Salonitanae
ciuitatis Episcopus, me, ac responsali meo nesciente, ordinatus est. Et facta
est res, quae sub nullis anterioribus Principibus euenit. The Bishop of the
City of Salonae (says he) is ordered, neither I, nor my deputy made privy to
it. And herein that thing has been done, which never happened in the time of
any Princes before our days. Thus it appears, that before a thousand years
pas^e, Bishops had their Ordination and Election confirmed by the Sea
Apostolic.

The B. of Sarisburie.
If this reason may stand for good, and who so ever has the allowinge of the
Election, or Consecration of Bishops, must therefore be taken as Head of
the Church, then must the Church of necessity have many Heads. For it is
certain, the allowance hereof pertains to many. Ambros. li. 10. Episi. 82.
S. Ambrose says, that all the Bishops both of the East, and of the Weast,
gave their Consent, and Allowance to his Election. Theodosius the Emperor
standinge in the defense of Flauianus the Bishop of Constantinople, says,
Theodoret. li. 5. ca. 23. (...).
That all the Bishops of the East, of Asia, Pontus, Thracia, and Illyricum, had
allowed his Election. Sozomen. li. 4. ca. 12. (...).
Eudoxius entered into the Bishoprike of Antioche, without the allowance, and
Consent of Georgius the Bishop of Laodicea, and of Marcus the Bishop of
Arethusa, and of other Bishops, that had interest therein: and is reproved
for the same. Gregor. Presb. in vita Nazian. (...).
Gregorius Presbyter says, for that the Election, and Installation of
Gregory Nazianzene was paste, before the Bishops of Egipte, and Macedonia
were come, and so made without their consent, that therefore they utterly
refused to allow him, or to admit him as Bishop there, not for any
mislikinge in the party, but for that they thought them selves defrauded of
their voices.

Anacletus Anaclet. Epist. 2.
decrees thus, Episcopus non minus, quam a tribus Episcopis, reliquisque
omnibus assensum praebentibus, vllatenus ordinetur. Let a Bishop in no wise be
ordered of less then three Bishops, all the rest geuinge their assent to the
same.

Hereby it appears, that to the ratifieinge of the Election of any one
Bishop, the consent of al other Bishops within that Province was thought
necessary. Which Consent they testified emonge them selves, by writing
letters of conference one to an other. And therefore, when John the Bishop of
Constantinople had entitled him self the Uniuersal Bishop, Gregor. li. 4.
Gregory counseled Eulogius the Bishop of Alexandria, Epis. 36.
and other Bishops of the East, neither to write to him, nor to receive
letters from him by that title. Likewise the Bishops of the East, when they
had Excommunicate Julius the Bishop of Rome, Sozomen. li. 3. Ca. 11.
gave commandment, that no man should either receive his letters, or write
unto him, in token they held him for no Bishop.

Neither did only Bishops allow such Elections, but also both the Prince,
and the people. Theodoret. li. 4. ca. 7. (...).
When S. Ambrose being once chosen, and appointed Bishop of Millane, began
roughly to deal with the nobles of the Court, and to rebuke their faults,
the Emperor Ualentinian said, All this I knew before: and therefore I not
only said not naie, but also gave my Voice, and Assent to his Election.

Touching the Election of N^ctarius, Sozomenus writes in this wise: The
Bishops that were present at the Election, gave unto the Emperor in writing
sundry names of such, Sozomen. li. 7. Ca. 8.
as they thought meet for that room: The Emperor weighinge the persons, set
his seal upon Nectarius name, and elected him.

Gratianus the Emperor at his coming to Constantinople embraced Gregory
Nazianzene, and after some conference with him had, (...).
said unto him, O Father, unto thee, and unto thy labors, God through us,
commits this Church. Behold I give unto thee this Holy House, and the
Stal. And the people besought the Emperor, to set the Bishop in his Chair.
Gregorius presbyter in vitae Nazianzeni.
The like might be said of the Consent, and Allowance of the people.
Anacletus, as he is commonly alleged, writes thus: Sacerdotes a proprio
ordinentur Episcopo: ita vt Ciues, and alij Sacerdotes assensum praebeant. Let
Priests be ordered by their own several Bishops: (...).
so that the people, and other Priests give their assent thereunto. S. Cyprian
says likewise, The people being obedient unto Gods commandments, has
power specially, either to choose worthy Priests, or to refuse the unworthy.

Thus many voices were then thought necessary to the Admission of any Bishop.
Anaclet. Epist. 2.
Therefore, Cyprian. li. 1.
this seems no sufficient ground, to prove that the Bishop of Rome is Head
of the Church. Epist. 4.
For M. Hardinge might soon have seen, that the Bishop of Rome him self,
touching his own Election, was wont to be allowed by other Bishops. Uerily
S. Cyprian writes thus of the Allowance of Cornelius Bishop there: Cyprian.
li. 4.
Vt Cornelium noueris Coepiscoporum testimonio, quorum numerus vniuersus per
mundum concordi vnanimitate consensit. Epist. 2.
That thou maiste know Cornelius by the testimony of his Felowbishoppes, the
whole number of whom throughout the world has agreed ( to the allowinge of
his election) with one consent. Afterward in an Epistle unto Cornelius
himself, Cyprian. li. 4.
he writes thereof more at large: Ad comprobandam ordinationem tuam, Epist. 8.
facta authoritate maiore, placuit vt per Episcopos omnes omnino in ista
Prouincia positos, literae fierent, vt te vniuersi Collegae nostri, and
Communicationem tuam, id est, Ecclesiae Catholicae vnitatem, pariter, and
charitatem probarent pariter, and tenerent. To allow thy Consecration, more
authority being geathered, I thought it good, that letters should be sent
unto all the Bishops of this Province, that al our brethren might both allow,
and hold, both thee, and thy Communion, that is to say, the Unity of the
Catholic Church. If M. Hardinge will say, This was not the Confirmation of
the Election of Cornelius, it follows immediately: Sic Episcopatus tui veritas,
pariter and dignitas, apertissima luce, and manifestissima, and firmissima
confirmatione, fundata est. Thus is the truth, and dignity of thy Bishoprike
founded in the open light, and with most manifest, and most certain
Confirmation. Thus when so ever any Bishop was either installed, or deposed,
knowledge thereof was given unto the other Bishops, and the same either
allowed, or disallowed by his brethren.

But that the Bishop of Rome ordered, and admitted all the Bishops throughout
the world, bysides that it has no possibility, or color of truth in it
self, it is also easy by good record, and authority to be reproved.
Agapetus Bishop of Rome, about the year of our Lord. 540. after he had upon
occasion Consecrate Menna, the Bishop of Constantinople, he uttered these
words in commendation of the party, Council. Constantinopol. 5. Actio. 2.
Et hoc dignitati eius (Mennae) accedere credimus, quod a temporibus Petri
Apostoli. nullum alium vnquam Orientalis Ecclesia suscepit Episcopum manibus
nostrae Sedis ordinatum. And this is an augmentation of Mennaes dignity, that
fithens the time of Peter the Apostle, the East Church never received any
other Bishop Consecrate by the hands of our See. Now advise thee self (good
Reader) whether thou will believe Pope Agapetus, or M. Hardinge.

And let not M. Hardinge find fault, for that I place the Orderinge of
Bishops, in steed of their Confirmation. For he him self seems to make
Confirmation, and Ordering both one thing: or, at least, to join them both
together. These be his words, Leo would not in any wise order, and Confirm
Anatolius.

Truly Liberatus Liberatus. c. 20.
says, the manner was in Alexandria, that who so ever was chosen Bishop
there, should come to the Bear, and lay his Predecessors hand upon his
head, and put on S. Marks Cloak: and then was he sufficiently Confirmed
Bishop, without any mention made of Rome. And S. Cyprian writes unto the
Bishops of Spain, Cyprian. lib. 1
that Sabinus, whom they had lawfully chosen Bishop, should so continue still,
Epist. 4.
yea notwithstanding Cornelius, being then Bishop of Rome, misliked him, and
would not Confirm him. And that very Counterfeite Decree of Anacletus* that
requires al Bishops once in ye year to present them selves in Rome, extends
not his commandment throughout all the world, but only to the Bishops of the
Province of Rome. Thus stand the words, Omnes Episcopi, Anaclet. Epist. 3.
Did. 93. Iuxta Sanctorum.
qui huius Apostolicae Sedis ordinationi subiacent etc. Al Bishops, that be
bound to have their Orders Confirmed by this Apostolic See etc. Whereby it
may be geathered, ye other Bishops were not subject to the Ordinance of that
See. And this was ye fault, that Gregory found in the Bishop of Salonae,
that being within ye Jurisdiction of his Province, he was Consecrate without
his knowledge. And that Gregory meant it not of al Bishops, but only of y^
Bishop within his own charge, it is evident by his words. For thus he
writes, Episcopi mei: Episcopi mihi commissi. Gregor. li. 4.
My Bishops: Bishops being within my Cure. And that the City of Salonae
standinge in Illyricum, Epist. 34.
was sometime within the Province of Rome, it is plain by the Epistle, that
Damasus the Bishop of Rome sent unto the Bishops of Illyricum. Sozomen. lib. 6.
Ca. 23.
These be his words, Par est, omnes, qui sunt in orb Romano magistros,
consentire. It is meet, that all the teachers, that be within the precinctes of
the Roman Jurisdiction, agree together. (...).


Where as it is alleged, that the Bishop of Rome was required to ratify the
Election of Flauianus, Anatolius, and of the Arrian Bishops, that was meante of
a General allowance, such as was common to al Bishops, specially to the four
Principal Patriarchs, and not only to the Bishop of Rome. Neither was the
Bishop of Romes Admission thought so necessary, as if he only had a Uoice
Negative, to take in, and to put out whom he listed: but only of Congruitie,
and Consent, that it might appear, there was no Bishop in the Church, but was
liked, and allowed of al his Brethren. For otherwise the Bishops of the East
wrote thus unto Julius, Sozomen. li. 3. Ca. 8.
Si ordinatos a nobis Episcopos etc. If you will allow the Bishops, that we
have ordered, we will be at peace, and Communicate with you: If not, we will
proclaim the contrary. Sozomen. li. 7. Ca. 8.
And the Emperor Gratian made Nectarius Bishop of Constantinople, contrary to
the minds of the most part of the Bishops. Therefore M. Hardinges argument
might better have benne framed thus: The Bishop of Rome Confirmed the Bishops
withein his own Province: and had no other special authority to confirm al
other Bishops in the world, no more then others had to Confirm him:
Therefore he was not then taken for the Head of the Church, nor was thought to
have this Universal Power.

M. Hardinge. The.26. Division.
That the Bishops of Rome by accustomed practice of the Church had
authority to approve or disprove Councelles, I need to say nothing for
proof of it, seeinge that the Ecclesiastical rule (as we read in the
Tripartite story) commands (111) The.111. Untruth, Standing in the willful
falsifieing of the Text.
that no Council be celebrate and keapte, Lib. 4. Ca. 19.
without the advice and authority of the Pope. Verily, the Councelles holden
at Ariminum, at Seleucia, at Syrmium, at Antiochia, and the second time at
Ephesus, for that they were (112.) The.112. untruth. For in those days the B.
of Rome had no authority to Summon Councelles.
not summoned, nor approved by the authority of the Bishop of Rome, have not
ben accoumpted for lawful Councelles: but as well for that rejected, as also for
their Heretical determinations. The Fathers assembled in the Council of Nice,
Quas Romana suscipiens co^firmauit Ecclesia. In praefatione Niceni Co^cilij*
sent their Epistle to Syluester the Pope, beseechinge him with his consent to
ratify, and confirm, what so ever they had ordained. Isidorus witnesses,
that the Nicene Council had set forth rules, the which (says he) the Curche
of Rome received, and confirmed. The second general Council holden at
Constantinople, was likewise allowed and approved by Damasus, specially
requested by the fathers of the same, thereto. So was the third Council holden
at Ephesus ratified, and confirmed by Coelestinus, who had there, for his
Vicares, or deputes, Cyrillus the famous Bishop of Alexandria, and one
Arcadius a Bishop out of Italy. As for the fourth Council kept at Chalcedon,
the fathers thereof also in their Epistle to Leo the Pope, subscribed with the
hands of.44. Bishops, made humble request unto him, to establishe, fortify,
and allow, the Decrees, and ordinances of the same. This being found true,
for the four first chief Councelles, we need not to say any thing of the
rest that followed. But for the suer proof of all this, that chiefly is to be
alleged, that Constantius the Arian Emperor made so importune, and so earnest
suit to Liberius the Pope, to confirm the Acts of the Council holden at
Antioche by the.90. Arian Bishops, wherein Athanasius was deprived, Li. ^5.
and put out of his Bishoprike. For he believed, as Ammianus Marcellinus
writes, that, what had been done in that Council, should not stand, and take
effect, unless it had been approved, and Confirmed by the Authority of the
Bishop of Rome, which he terms the Eternal City.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Here M. Hardinge has avouched two great untruths: the one in his
Translation in the English: the other in the allegation of the story.
Touching the first, Cassiodor. li. ^. ca. 19.
Cassiodorus in his Latin Translation writes thus, Canones iubent, extra
Romanum nihil decerni Pontificem: Socrates in the Greek, out of which the
Latin was taken, Socrat. li. 2. ca. 17.
writes thus, (...): The English hereof is this, It is provided by the
Canons, that rules to bind the Church, be not made, without the consent of
the Bishop of Rome.

Wherein M. Harding has purposely corrupted, and falsified altogether both
the Greek, and the Latin, not reporting one word, that he found in the
original. (...), or Decernere, he Englisheth to Keep, or, as he terms it, to
Celebrate a Council. (...), which is Praeter sente^tia^, or, as Cassiodorus
turns it, Extra, he Englisheth, without ye advise, and Authority. No, he
would not suffer, no not him, in whose quarrel he thus fights, to pass
without a venewe: for where he saw him named in the Greek (...), Confirmation
of Councels.
and in the Latin Romanum Pontificem, The Roman Bishop, he thought it best
to leave both the Greek, and the Latin, and to call him the Pope. And thus to
increase the Popes authority, he has altered, and corrupted the whole place,
and not translated one word as he found it.

Touching the story, he says, The Arians Councelles were not allowed, for
that they were not Summoned by the Pope. And yet he knows right well, it was
no part of the Popes office in those days, to Summon Councelles. For it is
evident even by the policy, and practice of that time, that Co^stantinus the
Emperor Summoned the Council of Nice: Theodosius the first, the Council of
Constantinople: Theodosius the.2. the Council of Ephesus: and Martianus, the
Council of Chalcedon. Socrat. lib. 5. in prooemio.
And Socrates in his story says thus, Id^irco Imperatores in historia
complexus sum, quia ex quo tempore coeperunt esse Christiani, Ecclesiastica
negotia pendent ab illis, (...). Theodoret. lib. 5. cap. 9. (...). Inter Acta
Concilij Constantinopol. 5.
and maxima Concilia de illorum sententia and facta sunt, and fiunt. Therefore I
have comprised the Emperors within my Story, for that sithence they began
to be Christened, the state of the Church dependethe of them, and the greatest
Councelles have benne keapte, and be still keapte by their advise. And the
Bishops in the Council of Constantinople, witness that they were summoned to
come to the Roman Counsel by Damasus the Bishop of Rome: but they add
withal, by warrant of the Emperors letters: not by any his own authority.
And likewise in their Epistle to the Emperor Theodosius they write thus,
Literis, quibus nos co^uocasti, Ecclesia^ honor prosecutus es. Your Majesty
has honored the Church, by the letters, wherewith ye Summoned us together.

As for the Bishop of Rome, he was not yet of Authority hable to call a general
Council. For the world as yet had no skill of his Uniuersal power over al
others: neither would they have appeared upon his Summon. Gregorius being
Bishop of Rome, could not cause the Bishop of Salonae being but one man, to
come before him. Thus he writes by way of complainte unto the Empress
Constantia: Contempto me atque despecto, Gregor lib. 4.
ad me venire secundum iussionem Dominorum noluit. He despised me, Epist. 34.
and set me at naught, and would not come unto me, according to my lords the
Emperors commandment. Therefore Leo findinge this weakness in him self,
wrote unto the Cleregie, Leo Epist. 23.
and people of Constantinople, and willed them to crave a general Council at
the Emperors hand. Exposcite, vt petitioni nostrae, qua plenariam indici
Synodum postulamus, Clementissimus Imperator dignetur annuere. Make your
request, that the Emperors Majesty would voutchsaue to grant my humble
petition, wherein I besought him to Summone a general Council. Liberat. ca. 12.
Genibus prouolutis.
Liberatus says, yt Leo the Bishop of Rome, with other more Bishops of
Italy, fell upon their knees, and desired the Emperor Ualentinian, and the
Empress Eudoxia to appointe a Council: Leo Epist 11. ad Theodos. August.
and yet could not obtain it. Afterward he desired the Emperor Theodosius,
that he would call a Council to some place within Italy: and the Emperor,
contrary to the Bishop of Romes petition, appointed it to be holden at
Ephesus. Leo Epist. 13.
After that, he made the same request to the Emperor Martianus: and the
Emperor likewise, Leo Epist. 50.
contrary to the Bishops humble request, commanded the Council to be keapte at
Chalcedon. Leo Epist. 13. 44. ^8.
And, where as Leo had besought both these Emperors, that it might please
them to take a longer day for the Council, for that the time of the Summon
seemed very shortie, and the ways were laid with enemies, and therefore
dangerous for the Bishops to travel, yet would neither of them alter one
day, but charged each man to appear, as they were Summoned. And Leo the
Bishop of Rome with all his Uniuersal power, was feign to yield. Hereby we may
soon conjecture, how true it is, either that Pope Gelasius writes, That
only the Apostolic See of Rome decreed by her Authority, Epist. Gelasij ad
Episcopos Dardaniae.
that the Council of Chalcedon should be Summoned: Or else, that M. Hardinge
would have us believe, That al Councelles were summoned by the Pope.

Neither was the Bishop of Rome, nor his legate in his absence, evermore the
President, or Chief of the Council. For it is known, yt in the Council of
Nice, Eustathius ye Patriarch of Antioche was the president, and ye Bishop of
Romes Legates, Uitus, and Uincentius sat in the fourth room beneath. In the
Council of Constantinople Menna was ye chief: In the Council of Sardica, Osius
of Corduba in Spain: In the Council of Aquileia, S. Ambrose of Millane: In the
Council of Carthage, Aurelius the Bishop there. In the Council of Chalcedon,
Leo the Bishop of Romes Legate had chief room, but by way of entreaty only,
and by ye Emperors special grant, and not of dew right, or Uniuersal
Authority.

But (says M. Hardinge) the Bishop of Rome allowed General Councels. This is
not denied. So did others, not only Patriakes, or Bishops, but also Civil
Princes. In the Council of Chalcedon it is written thus, Council. Chalcedon.
Action. 1.
Diuae memoriae Theodosius confirmauit omnia, quae iudicata sunta Sancta, and
Universally Synodo Generali Lege. Theodosius the Emperor of godly memory, has
confirmed al things by a General Law, that were determined in the Universal
Council. Council. Chalcedon. Acti. 3.
So likewise ye Emperor Martianus, Sacro nostrae Serenitatis edicto,
venerandam Synodum confirmamus. By the holy Edicte of our Ma^estie we confirm
that reverend Council. So Eusebius witnesses, that the Emperor Constantinus
confirmed the Determinations of the Council of Nice. Eusebius in vit^
Constantini.
So the Bishops in the Council of Constantinople wrote unto the Emperor
Theodosius by these words, Inter Acta Concilij Constan. 5.
Rogamus tuam clementiam, vt per literas tuae Pietatis ratu^ esse ^ubeas,
confirmefque Concilij Decretum. We desire your favor, by your Highness
letters to ratify, and Confirm the Decree of the Council.

Now, saying it was lawful for Princes, and Civil governors to confirm the
Decrees, and Determinations of Councels, how can we doubt, but it was lawful
for Bishops also, Theodor. li. 1. ca. 9. and li. 2. ca. 8. Victorin. li. 2.
to do the same? Therefore Theodoretus says, The Conclusions of the Council
of Nice, were sent abroad to other Bishops, that were away. And Uictorinus
says, That many thousands of Bishops allowed that same Council, and agreed
unto it.

Above al others, the Subscription, and Confirmation of the four Principal
Patriarchs was specially required, for that both their charge, and also their
Countenance, and Credit was greater then others. Emonge which four, the
Bishop of Rome was ever the first, and therefore his consent seemed to bear
greatest weight. Leo Epist. 60.
And for that cause the Emperor Martianus required Leo the Bishop of Rome, to
write unto ye Council of Chalcedon, and to declare, that he gave his consent to
the Rule of Faith, that was there determined. Inter Acta Con^cil. Chalcedon.
And in like sort the Emperor Theodosius requires al Bishops, to
Subscribe, and to give their assente to the Council of Nice. For it is a rule
agreeable unto Law, and Reason, Quod omnes tangit, Regula iuris.
ab omnibus debet approbari. The thing that touches al, ought to be allowed
by all. And therefore Julius being Bishop of Rome pronounced, that all the Acts
of the Council of Antioche were void, and of no force, for that he, being one
of the four Patriarchs, was not called thither, as well as others. For it
appears by Eusebius, Eusebius. Oration. 3. de Vita Co^stan.
Theodoretus, and others, that to al General Councels, al Primates, and
Metropolitanes were specially summoned. And this seems to be that Canon,
Theodoret. li. 1. ca. 7. (...).
that Julius allegeth, that it was not lawful to make rules, and orders for the
whole Church, without the consent of the Bishop of Rome, being one of the
four chief Patriarchs, and having in his Province one great portion of the
Church. And therefore Leo Bishop of Rome testifies his consent to the
Council of Chalcedon by these words, Leo Epist. 61.
Fraternitas vestra nouit, me definitionem Sanctae Synodi toto cord complexum
esse. Your brotherhoode knows, that I have embraced with my whole heart the
Determ^nation of that holy Council. And likewise unto the Emperor Martianus he
writes thus, Leo Epist. 59.
Constitutionibus Synodalibus libens adieci sententiam meam. Unto these
Constitutions of the Council, I have gladly given my assent. The end hereof
was not to show his Sovereign Power above al others, but that the Decrees so
ratified by him, and others, might be had in more estimation. So Leo him self
writes, Leo Epist. 59.
Clementia vestra arbitratur, malum facilius delendum, si per vniuersas
Ecclesias, Definitiones sanctae Synodi Apostolicae Sedi placuisse doceantur.
Your Highness thinks this ^uil will the rather be suppressed, if it be declared
throughout al Churches, that the Decrees of the holy Council be well liked of
the Apostolic See.

But, that the whole ratification of Councelles depended, not only of the
Bishop of Rome, but also of others, no less then of him, it is easy to be
proved. The Bishops in the Roman Council in the time of Damasus, Sozomen.
li. 6. ca. 23.
condemned the Council of the Arians holden at Ariminum, for that, neither the
Bishop of Rome, whose mind should have been known before al others, nor
Uincentius, nor any of the reaste had agreed unto it. Likewise the Council of
Carthage, and of Aphrica are allowed for good, not withstandinge the Bishop of
Rome would not allow them. The Council of Chalcedon decreed, that the Bishop
of Constantinople should be in dignity next unto the Bishop of Rome, and
should Consecrate the Metropolitanes of Asia, Leo Epist. 13.
Pontus, and Thracia. This decree Leo the Bishop of Rome very much misliked,
and would never assent unto it: yet that not withstandinge, it is in force, and
continues still. Liberatus ca. 13.
Liberatus thereof writes thus, Cum Anatolius consentiente Concilio Primatum
obtinuisset, Legati vero Romani Episcopi contradicerent, a ludicibus, and
Episcopis omnibus, illa contradictio suscepra non est. Et licet seeds
Apostolica nunc vsque contradicat, tamen quod a Synodo firmatum est,
Imperatorio patrocinio permanet. When Anatolius by consent of the Council had
obtained the primacie, and the Bishop of Romes Legates stood against it,
their gain saieinge of the Judges, and Bishops there was not received. And
al be it the Apostolic See of Rome even hitherto stand against it, yet the
Decree of the Council by the maintenance of the Emperor stands still in
force. Hieronym. ad Euagrium.
Which thing seems agreeable to that S. Hierome writes, Mayor est
authoritas orbis, quam vrbis. The authority of the world is greater, then the
authority of one City: meaning thereby the City of Rome.

It may appear by that, I have thus shortly touched, that the Bishop of Rome
had authority neither to Summone Councelles, nor to be President, or chief in
Councelles, nor to ratify, and Confirm the Decrees of Councelles, more then
any other of the four Patriarchs: and last of al, that Councelles may stand in
force, although the Pope mislike them, and allow them not. I think it will be
hard hereof together M. Hardinges Conclusion, That the Bishop of Rome was
Head of the Universal Church.

M. Hardinge. The.27. Division.
Now, what authority the Bishops of Rome have ever had, and exercised in the
assoilinge of Bishops unjustly condemned, and in restoringe of them again to
their Churches, of which they were wrongefully thrust out by Heretics, or
other disorder: it is a thing so well known of all that read the stories, in
which the ancient state of the Church is described, that I need not but
rehearse the names only. Athanasius of Alexandria, and Paulus of
Constantinople, deprived and thrust out of their Bishoprikes by the violence of
the Arians assisted with the Emperor Constantius, appealed to Rome, to Julius
the Pope, and Bishop there, and by his 113 The.113. untruth. For the Emperor
restoared Athanasius, and not the Pope.
authority were restoared to their rooms again. Pope Nicolas died in the
year of our Lord 868.
So Leo assoiled Flauianus the Bishop of Constantinople excommunicated by
Dioscorus. So Nicolaus the first restoared Ignatius to the Sea of
Constantinople, though Michael the Emperor wrought all that he could against
it. Many other Bishops have been in all ages assoiled, and restoared to their
Churches by the authority of the Sea Apostolic, who have been without deserte
excommunicated, deprived, and put from al their dignities. But to have
rehearsed these few, it may suffice.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Athanasius, and Paulus, says M. Hardinge, being deposed by the Arians,
assisted with the Emperor Constantius, appealed to the Pope, and by the Popes
authority were restoared. Here I Appeal unto the judgment, and discretion of
the Reader, that can consider the state of that time: how likely it may
seem, either that Athanasius should Appeal from the Emperor to the Pope: or
that the Popes commandment should be of sufficient force, and authority
against the Emperor. For neither was Pope Bonifacius the. 8. Me Mayor. and
obedient. Vnam Sanctam. Extra. de Mayor. and obedien. Solitae. Et in Glosa.
yet borne, y^ determined, That ye Emperor should be inferior to ye Pope: nor
Pope Innocentius ye. 3. or his Gloss, that rated the matter by good Geometrical
proportion, and pronounced, that the Pope is fifty and seven degrees above the
Emperor, even just as much, as the Sun is above the Moon: Nor Pope
Alexander the third, that set his foot in the Emperors neck.

Uerily, the Pope then by his authority was hable, neither to depose, nor to
restoare, nor to call before him any Bishop: Carrion in Frederico.
as appears by that I have already alleged of Pope Innocentius, and Pope
Gregory, by their own Confessions. Epist. Decretalis Innocent. 27.
No, Pope Leo him self confesses, that he was not hable to remove a poor
Monk Abbate Eutyches from his Abbie: but was feign to desire the Empress
Pulcheria to see him removed. Gregor. li. 4.


As touching Athanasius, Epist. 34.
it was the Emperor Constantinus the great, that by his authority removed,
Leo Epist. 45.
and bannished him, as it appears by Socrates: Socrat. li. 1. ca 25.
and therefore the Emperor Justinian says, If any Bishop offend herein, let
him be deprived by force of this Law. De Ecclesiast. diuer. capitul.
And as he was bannished by the Emperor Constantinus the Father, so by his
Son Constantinus the Emperor, and not by the Pope, he was restoared: (...).
Socrat. li. 2. ca. 3.
which thing is testified, not only by Socrates, that wrote the story, but
also by sundry Epistles, and letters, taken out of the Emperors Records
concerning the same.

First it is known, that the Emperor Constans, that ruled the Weast part of
the world, Sozomen. li. 3. Ca. 20.
unto whom Athanasius being deposed, flead for aid, wrote in his behalf unto
his Brother Constantius, that then was the Emperor of the East, and besought
him, to see Athanasius restoared unto his room. Theodoret. li. 2. ca. 8.
Otherwise he threatened, that he him self would come with his power to
Alexandria, and restoare him. Theodoret. li. 2. ca. 11.
Upon the sight of which letters, the Emperor Constantius wrote unto
Athanasius, and willed him to repair with speed unto his Court, that he
might be restoared unto his Country: and at his coming, he directed out his
letters unto ye Cleregie, and people of Alexandria, commaundinge them to
receive him with favor, and to abolishe al such Acts, as they had before
made against him. To report the whole letters at large, it would be tedious.
Emonge other words the Emperor Constantius writes thus, Cassiodor. li. 4.
ca. 31.
Recipiat voluntate Dei, nostroque indicio Patria^ suum, pariter and Ecclesiam.
And again, Omnes Episcopu^ superno iudicio, nostraque sententia destinatum,
libenter, and pie suscipite. Let him both by Gods appointement, and by our
Decree recover both his Country, and his Church etc. Further says
Cassiodorus, Cassiodor. li. 4. ca. 30.
His literis co^fidens Athanasius, redijt in Orie^tem. Athanasius upon trust of
these letters returned again into the East. Likewise the Bishopes in the
Council of Jerusalem wrote abroad letters of gratulation upon his return, in
this form: Cassiodor. li. 4. ca. 36.
Debetis ergo etia^ etc. You ought also continually to pray for the Emperors
Majesty's, for that, understanding your desires, they have restoared Athanasius
again unto you. And Theodoretus touching the same, writes thus, Proceru^
Senatorumque Coniuges etc. Theodoret. li. 2. ca. 17.
The Lords, and Counselors wives be sought their husbands, to entreat the
Emperors Majesty, that he would restoare Athanasius unto his flock: and
said further, unless they would so do, they would forsake them, and go to
him.

So likewise the Bishops, that the Arians had deposed with Flauianus, were
restoared again by the Emperor, and not by the Pope. For Pope Leo him self
thereof writes thus unto the Empress Pulcheria: Leo Epist. 39.
Vos Sacerdotes Catholicos, qui de Ecclesijs suis iniusta fuerunt eiecti
sententia, reduxistis. Your Majesty's have restoared home again the Catholic
Bishops, which by wrongeful sentence were thrust from their Churches.

Pope Nicolas, as upon occasion I said before, was the second Bishop in Rome
after Pope Iohane the Woman, which was almost. 900. years after Christ.
Wherefore his authority might well have been spared. It is well known, that as
the Popes power increased, so the Empire abated. Therefore was Platyna forced
to say: Platyna in Adriano 2.
Perijt and potestas Imperatorum, and virtus Pontificum. Now the Emperors
have lost their Civil power, and the Popes have lost their holiness. In old
times the Emperor confirmed the Pope: Now the Pope confirms the Emperor. In
old times the Emperor called the Pope to the Council: now contrariwise the
Pope calls the Emperor.

As touching the restoaring of Athanasius, Pope Julius entreated The Emperor in
his behalf: which, as it appears, was his greatest request: For thus he
writes unto Liberius, Epistola Athanasij ad Liberium.
Precamur vt vestris exhortationibus, tam per vos, quam per Apocrisiarios
vestros adiuuemur. We beseech you, that through your good exhortations, both
by your self, and by other your agentes we may be helped. More over, for that
he was a Patriarch, he summoned a particular Council, and labored the
Bishops. For the Arians said: Sozomen. li. 4. ca. 8.
There was on Ecclesiastical Canon, That noman being once deposed should be
restoared again, unless he had first cleared him self before a Council: and
that the Bishops that would restoare him, ought to be more in number, then
were they, that had deposed him. Orientalium Epistola ad Iulium.
And therefore Chrysostom was much blamed of his adversaries, for that he,
being once deposed, had recovered his room without a Council of other
Bishops. Socr. li. 6. ca. 18.
And therefore Flauianus being wrongefully put from his Bishoprike, offered up
his Bille of Appeal, not unto the Bishop of Rome alone, but unto him with
other Bishops. The truth hereof may well appear by these words of Leo
Bishop of Rome unto the Emperor Theodosius: Leonis Epist. 24.
Omnes partium nostrarum Ecclesiae, omnes mansue^udini vestrae cum gemitibus,
and lachrymis supplicant Sacerdotes, vt, quia eisdem Libellum Appellationis
Flauianus Episcopus dedit, generalem Synodum iubeatis intra Italiam celebrari.
All the Churches of these our countries, and all the Priests with sighs, and
tears beleeche your highness, that, for as much, as Flauianus has offered up
his Bille of Appeal unto them, it may please you to command, a General
Council to be keapte in Italy.

In such Councelles the Bishop of Rome being sometimes the chief, pronounced
the party worthy, either to be restoared, or to be deposed. But that Sentence
was not always put in Execution. Sozomen. li. 3. ca. 11.
The Council of Antioche deposed Pope Julius: yet was not Julius therefore
deposed. The Council of Basile deposed Pope Eugenius: (...). Council. Basilien.
Athanas. in Apolog. 2.
yet Eugenius continued Pope still. The Decree of Bishops in such cases
without the Emperors authority was then of small force. Cassiodor. li. 4. ca.
34.
And therefore Athanasius him self reports, that the Emperor gave his
consent to the determination of the Council of Sardica, and so commanded him
to be sent for home.

But, M. Harding will say, The words be plain, that Julius restoared
Athanasius. It is true, and not denied. But the meaning of these words is,
that Julius pronounced him clear in that, he was accused of, and therefore
worthy to be restored. For it is certain, and M. Hardinge well knows,
Sozomen. li. ^ ca. 8.
that Athanasius upon Pope Julius letters was not restoared. The like is also
written of others. Cassiodorus Cassiodor. li. 4. ca. 34.
says, Maximus quoque restituit beato Athanasio, and Communionem, and
dignitatem. Maximus also restoared unto Athanasius, both his Communion, and
also his dignity: That is to say, pronounced him worthy, to be restored. For
Maximus was not the Bishop of Rome.

These things considered, M. Hardinge may make up his reason thus: The Pope
had no authority to restore them, that were deposed: Ergo, The Pope was not
Head of the Church.

Or thus, The Emperor restoared such as were deposed: Ergo, The Emperor was
Head of the Church.

M. Hardinge. The.28. Division.
Concerning the Reconciliation of the Prelates of the Church, both
Bishops, and Patriarchs to the Bishop of Rome, 114 The.114. untruth. For
Reconciliation is no necessary token, neither of primacie, nor of Subjection.
whereby his Primacie is acknowledged, and confessed, I need not say much, the
matter being so evident. After that the whole Church of Aphrica had continued
in S. Augustine was one of these Schismatiques.
Schism, and withdrawn them selves from the obedience of the Sea Apostolic,
through the entisement of Aurelius Archbishop of Carthago, for the space of
one hundred years, Duringe the same time Rome it self was six times sacked:
Which thing M. Hardinge has quite forgotten.
during which time by Gods punishment they came into captivity of the
Barbarous and cruel Vandales, who were Arians: at the length when it pleased
God of his goodness, to have pity on his people of that Province, sending
them Bellisarius the valiant Captain, that vanquished, and destroyed the
Vandales, and likewise Eulalius that godly Archbishop of Carthago, that
brought the Church home again, and joined the divided members unto the whole
body the Catholic Church: a public instrument conteininge the form of their
repentance, and of their humble submission, was offered, and exhibited solemnly
to Bonifacius the second then Pope, by Eulalius in the name of that whole
Province, which was ioifully received, and he thereupon forthwith reconciled.
Of this reconciliation, and restoaringe of the Aphricane Churches to the
Catholic Church, the mystical body of Christ, Bonifacius writes his letters
to Eulalius Bishop of Thessalonica, requiringe him, with the Churches there
about, to give almighty God thanks for it.

But here, if I would show what Bishops diuidinge themselves through
Heresy, Schism, or other enormitie, from the obedience of the Sea of Rome,
have upon better advise submitted them selves to the same again, and thereupon
have been reconciled: I had a large field to walk in. As inferior Bishops
of sundry provinces have done it, so have the great Patriarchs done
likewise. Among them, that, to satisfy the malicious mind of Eudoxia the
Empress, practiced their wicked conspiracy against Chrysostom, through
which he was deposed, and carried away into bannishement, Alexander Bishop of
Antioche, and Primate of the Orient, was one: 115 The.115. untruth. This story
is here interlaced with many untruths.
who at length stricken with repentance, for that he had been both a
consenter, and a promotour of that wicked act, submitted him self humbly to
Innocentius the Pope, and by all means sought to be assoiled and reconciled.
And therefore sent his Legates to Rome, to exhibit to Innocentius a solemn
instrument of his repentance and lowly submission, and to accept what should
be enjoined. By which his humbleness Innocentius moved, granted to his
petitions, received him into the lap of the Catholic Church again, and
thus was he reconciled. Sundry the like reconciliations of the Patriarchs of
Alexandria, and Jerusalem to the Sea the Rome in like cases, might easily be
recited: which for auoidinge of tediousness I pass over, as likewise of the
Patriarchs of Constantinople, which, as we read in ancient stories, have
forsaken the Church of Rome twelve times, and have been reconciled to the same
again.

The B. of Sarisburie.
First, M. Hardinge supposes, that this Latin word, Reconciliatio, can in
no wise stand emongst equalles: and bisides that, touching the Reconciliation
of the Church of Antioche, as it shall appear, he misreporteth the whole
story.

Upon such grounds these proufes be builded. For M. Harding knows, that, as
Submission is made by the subject toward his Prince, so Reconciliation
Reconciliation.
in proper manner of speech, is made bitweene equal friends.

Concerning that is here touched of Eulalius, the matter needs no long
answer. The story being truly known, is sufficient to answer it self.
It is certain, as we have before declared more at large, and as it plainly
appears by the Acts of the Council of Aphrica, that Zosimus the Bishop of
Rome, to the intent to auance him self over al other Bishops, manifestly
falsified the Nicene Council. This forgerie in the Council of Aphrica was
disclosed, and laid abroad to the eyes of all the world. The Bishops there
being in number two hundred and seuentiene, saw, that one Apiarius a Priest,
whom they for his open oultrage, and wickedness had Excommunicate, was without
any further examininge of the matter, only upon his bare complainte, admitted
again unto the Communion, and received into favor, in despite of al their
dooinges, by the Bishop of Rome.

They saw, that the accusers, and witnesses, without whom no ordinary
judgment can proceed, either for age, or for sickness, and other causes,
could not well travel so far. Therefore they desired the Bishop of Rome by
their letters, that he would bring no such ambitious puff of vanity into
the Church: Fumosum saeculi Typhum.
and made a strait Decree in ye Council emonge them selves, that it should not
be lawful for any man, to appeal out of Aphrica to any foren Bishop. An
hundred years after that, this Eulalius the Bishop of Carthage, if it be true
that is reported of him, and not forged at Rome, as were many things more,
reconciled him self to the Church of Rome, in the time of Bonifacius the
Second, as it is recorded in the Pontifical: for other record thereof to my
remembrance there is none. The words of the Reconciliation be these, Inter
Decret^ Bonifa. 2.
Hanc professionem meam manu mea subscripsi etc. This profession I have
subscribed with mine own hand, and have directed the same to Bonifacius the
holy, and Reverend Pope of the City of Rome, utterly condemninge my
Predecessors, and Successors, and al others that shall go about to frustrate
the Privileges of the Apostolic See of Rome. Likewise Bonifacius writes
hereof unto Eulalius the Bishop of Alexandria in this wise, Aurelius
Carthaginensis Ecclesiac olim Episcopus cum Collegis suis, Epist. ^onifa. 2. ad
Eulalium.
instigante Diabolo, superbire temporibus praedecessorum nostrorum contra
Romanam Ecclesiam coepit: Aurelius sometime Bishop of Carthage together with
his fellows (his fellows were S. Augustine, Alypius, and two hundred and
fifteen other Bishops) being set on by the Devil, in the time of my
predecessors, began to bear him self disdainefully against the Church of
Rome.

The one of these by a public instrumente under his hand and seal, utterly
condemns and accurseth S. Augustine, S. Augustine condemned, and accursed, and
set on by the Devil.
with two hundred and sixteen other godly Bishops, together with four
General Councelles, of Aphrica, Carthage, Mileuitum, and Hippo: the other
says, they were al set a work, and prickte forth by the Devil, and
lived out of the Church of God, and died in Schism.

If this be true, then ought S. Augustine no longer to be holden for a Saint,
neither to have any room in the Calendar.

But if al these godly Fathers, Pope Zosimus a forger of Councels.
that justly and truly defended the holy Council of Nice, were leadde with the
Devil: with what sprite then was he leadde, that openly, and in the sight of all the world, durst to corrupt, and falsify the same Council? Uerily,
Dionysius the Bishop of Corinthe complains thus, Rogatu fra^rum meorum
scripsi Epistolas: Eusebius. li. 4. ca 23 (...).
sed illas Apostoli Diaboli alia eximentes, alia interserentes, impleuerunt
Zizanijs: quibus vae reponitur. At the request of my brethren, I wrote certain
Epistles: but the Devils Apostles by puttinge to, and taking fro, have filled
them full of Tares and Cockle. But woe be unto them.

But in the mean while (says M. Hardinge) the Country of Aphrica even by the
punishment of God, was Brought into subjection, and spoiled by the Vandales.
Here M. Hardinge enters into Gods Judgments, and pronounces, that all this
Misery happened unto that Country, for leauinge the Sea of Rome, which
thing he reckeneth al one, with the leauinge and forsakinge of God him self.
Howbeit M. Hardinge might soon know, that about the very same time, Rome
six times taken by ^nimies, and sack^e within the space of. 140 years.
while Aphrica was thus afflicted, the City of Rome it self was six times
taken by wild, and Barbarous enemies, the Visigotthi, Ostrogotthi, Heruli,
Vandali, Hunni, and Longobardi, within the space of an hundred, and forty
years. The Walls were rased: the Towers thrown down: the Howses burnte: the
Nobility taken captive: the People spoiled, and banished: the City it self a
long time leafte waste, and desolate without inhabiter. Gregor. li. 4. Epist.
32.
If M. Hardinge can gheasse so rightly of the miseries of Aphrica, how
happens it, that he can gheasse nothing of sixefolde greater miseries, that
at the same time befell upon Rome? If the Bishops, and people of Aphrica were
thus plagued for their Schism, wherefore then were the Bishops, and people of
Rome plagued, that, as it is supposed, continued still, without Schism?
Notwithstanding Possidonius says, That God of special mercy granted S.
Augustine, who then was beseeged by the enemies, that duringe his life, his
City of Hippo should not be taken. And yet was the same S. Augustine the
greatest discloaser of the forgerie, and pride of the Bishop of Rome, that is
to say, the greattest author, and mainteiner of all this Schism.

Touching the Reconciliation of Alexander the Bishop of Antioche, M. Hardinge
for the better furniture of the tale, has wouen in, and interlaced many
words of his own. For in all that is written thereof by Innocentius, there is
no manner mention, neither of Solemn Instrument of Repentance: nor of
acceptinge of Penance: nor of Subjection, or humble Submission. In deed this
Alerander at his first entry into the Bishoprike of Antioche, findinge his
Church full of Division, by mean of one Eustathius, by his wisdom, and Godly
exhortations, brought the whole people there unto unity: Theodoret. li. 5. Ca.
25.
and afterward wrought the like Godly policy in other Churches, Nicephor. li.
14. ca. 26.
and ceased all the strife that had long continued for the condemnation of
Chrysostom: and caused his name, that his enemies had rased out, to be
enrolled again among other Catholic Bishops: and likewise wrote unto the
Emperor Theodosius the younger, and to the Bishops of other Countries, to do
the like. In the end, having appeased al contentions, in token, not of
subjection, as M. Hardinge surmiseth, but of full consent, and agreement, he
desired that his Church might be joined in Communion, and fellowship with the
Church of Rome, and other Churches of the Weast, from whence before by reason
of their Dissentions, they had been divided. Which thing also appears by
the words of Innocentius him self unto Alexander touching the same. Gratias
agens Domino Communionem Ecclesiae vestrae ita recepi, Innocentij Epist. 17. ad
Alexandrum.
vt prae me feram, Apostolicae Sedis Condiscipulos primos dedisse caeteris viam
pacis: I geuin^e God thanks, so received the Communion, and fellowship of your
Church, that I profess, that you being our Schoolefelowes of the Apostolic
See, have first opened unto others the way of piece. Here Innocentius calls
Alexander his Schoolefelowe, not his Subject, or Underlinge. And therefore he
calls him his Schoolefelowe of the Apostolic See, for that S. Peter sat
first at Antioche, and after that in Rome, and for that cause, both these Sees
of Peter the Apostle, were called Apostolic.

Again in an other Epistle unto the same Alexander he writes thus, Innocentij
Epist. 15.
Voluit Compresbyter noster Cassianus, hanc amicitiarum nostrarum paginulam,
quasi primitias pacis nostrae, conscribi etc. Cassianus our felowepriest,
would have this instrument of our friendship to be written, as the first
fruits of our peace. Therefore I greet well your brotherhoode, and al others
of that Church, that are of your mind. Here Innocentius him self calls
this Composition an Instrument of Friendship, or fellowship, not of Repentance,
or Humble Submission, as it pleases M. Hardinge untruly to translate it.
Neither does this word, Reconciliation, necessarily importe a Superiority,
or a Ma^stership: but also, and that most commonly, a Fellowship, or Equality,
as it is said before. Ephesians. 2.
So says S Paul, Christ has reconciled both the Jew, and the Gentile in
one Body. And what is meante by that Reconciliation, he expounds thus: Omnes
vnum sumus in Christo Jesus: We are al one in Christ Jesus. So says Pliny the
younger, Galat. 3. Plini. in Pane^^rico.
Principis est reconciliate aemulas Civitates. It is a Princes part to
reconcile Cities, that contend for the Soueraintie: Not that the one may be
brought into Subjection to the other: but that they may be made friends, and
live in peace. So likewise says Christ, Matthae. 5.
Vade, Reconcilieris Fratri tuo. Go, and be reconciled unto thy Brother.

Thus therefore was the Patriarch of Antioche reconciled to the Bishop of
Rome: not as a Subject unto his Prince, but, as in a Body one member unto an
other: Innocen. Epist. 17.
and (for as much as Innocentius him self uses this word Condiscipuli) as
in a School, one Scholar unto his fellow.

So, where as there was matter of dissension between the Church of Rome, and
the Church of Alexandria, Council. Aphrican. Ca. 68.
it seemed good to the Fathers in the Council of Aphrica, to entreat bitweene
them, not that the Church of Alexandria should submit her self, as unto
her Head, and live in Subjection, but that they might be reconciled, Liberatus
ca. 18.
and live in peace together. So Liberatus says, Petrus Moggus was reconciled
unto Asatius: not as unto his Superior, but as unto his Brother. In this sense
writes Hormisda Bishop of Rome unto Epiphanius the Bishop of Constantinople: A
equale studium, Council. Constantinop. 5. Actio. 2.
and aequalem curam sus^ipiam^s, quibus vna est in Communione, and fide
amicitia: Seeinge we have one friendship in Communion, and in faith, let us
therefore take like study, and like care.

This manner of Reconciliation is largely set forth by Socrates in his
story, and may be abbridged in this sort. Socrates lib. 4 Cap. 12. and 13.
The Macedonian Heretics having forsaken their Heresies, sent their
messingers Eustathius, Syluanus, and Theophilus unto Liberius the Bishop of
Rome, and to other the Bishops of the Weast. Liberius understanding, that
their Faith agreed fully with the Council of Nice, and with the Faith that he
him self, and all the other Bishops of the Weaste Church professed, received
them unto the Communion, and wrote favorably unto the Bishops of the East in
their behalf. These Messingers departinge thence went into Sicilie, and in a
Council of the Bishops there likewise Reconciled them selves unto them: and
being returned home, they sent abroad into all the Churches of those
countries, and willed them to consider the letters sent from Liberius the
Bishop of Rome, and from other Bishops of Italy, Aphrica, France, Sicilie, and
all the Weast, and to agree, and to Communicate together with them.

An other like example of Reconciliation we have made by one Arsenius the
Bishop of Hipsilitae unto Athanasius the Bishop of Alexandria. The words of
the Reconciliation are these: Athanas. Apolo. Secunda.
Nos volentes Ecclesiastico Canoni etc. We desiringe to be subject to the
Ecclesiastical Canon, according to the ancient order, do write these unto
you (Dilecte Papa) beloved Pope, and like wise do promise in the name of our
Lord, that we hencefoorthe will not Communicate with any Schismatikes, or with
any, that have not peace with the Catholic Church, whether they be Bishops,
Priests, or Deacons. This Submission, or Reconciliation was made unto
Athanasius: yet was not Athanasius the Bishop of Rome.

This then was the manner of Reconciliation of Churches, without any such
Humble Subjection, as M. Hardinge fansieth, or knowledge, or token of
Supremacy, or any manner Uniuersal Power.

M. Hardinge. The.29. Division.
Thus having declared the Supreme authority, and Primacie of the Pope by the
Common practice of the Church, I need not to show further, how in (116)
The.116. Vtruthe. For many great questions were never removed to Rome.
al questions, doubts, and controversies, touching Faith and Religion, the Sea of Rome has always been consulted, how the decision of al doubtful
cases, has been referred to the judgment of that See: and to be short
(117) The.117. Vatruthe. For Rome it self had her light from Graecia.
how all the world has ever fetched light from thence. For proof whereof,
because it cannot be here declared briefly, I remitte the learned reader to
the Ecclesiastical stories, where he shall find this matter amply treated.

The B. of Sarisburie.
As Rome having achieved the Empier of the whole world, both for renoume,
and honor, and also for wisdom, and learning, which commonly follow the
Empier, was the noblest, and most famous of al other Cities, so for
commodity of access out of al Kingdoms, and Countries, both of the East,
and of the Weast, and also out of Aphrica, and Aegypte, and other countries of
the Sowthe, and also for receiuinge of Questions, and Resolution of doubts, it
seemed to be planted in the fittest place of all the world. (...). Coelius
Rhodiginus. lib. 18. Ca. 25.
For as Thucydides calls the City of Athens, Graecia of al Graecia: so some
called the City of Rome in those days of her honor, Epitome orbis
terrarum, The abbridgeme^t of the whole world. The Admiration of this glory
drew such resort of people thither, that Beda a learned man of this Country
being there, and seeinge the multitude of strangiers, that came only ot gase,
and to see news, expounded these four solemn letters S. P. Q. R. in this
wise. Stultus populus quaerit Romam. Foolish Folk Flee to Rome. Therefore for
opportunity of the place, and expedition of answer, many matters of question,
and doubtful cases were brought thither. Many, I say, but not al. For men
that wanted Council, wrote, and sought unto them, that had the fame of
learning, and were thought best hable to make them answer. So Marcellinus,
Dulcitius, Bonifacius, Euodius, and others, sent their questions to S.
Augustine, and desired his Counsel. S. Ambrose says, Ambros. lib. 10.
as it is before alleged, that many that had been with the B. of Rome, Epist.
83.
would afterward for their better satisfaction send to him. And Leo Leo
Epist. 27.
him self being B. of Rome, and therefore as M. Hardinge thinks, the Oracle
of all the world, thouht it not amiss to submit him self, and to ask
counsel of other Bishops. Therefore this saieinge of M. Hardinges neither is
universally true, nor proves his purpose. For if he will say, Some men in
cases of doubt sought to Rome for counsel: Ergo, the Bishop there was called
the Head of the Church, this Conclusion will hardely follow.

King Josias in a great case of Religion, Regum. 2. ca. 22.
sent to a woman named Olda, the wife of Sellum, to know her Counsel: And it
was a proverb emonge the Jews, Qui interrogat, Paralipom. 2. ca. 34.
interroget in Abila. Who so will seek Council, Samuel 2. ca. 20.
let him seek it in Abila. Yet neither was Olda the Head of the Church: nor
Abila the chief town in Israel, or Judah.

But all the world says M. Hardinge, has received light from Rome. But all the world seethe, this is an other manifest untruth: and nevertheless being
granted, yet would it not conclude of his side.

In deed in a kind of speech both Rome, and Antioche, and Alexandria, and
any other great City famous for Religion, may be called the Head, or
Spring of the Gospel. Apocalyp. ^^.
So. S. John callethe Babylon. Magna matter fornicationu^, and abominationum
terrae. The great mother of the Fornications, and of the Abominations of the
earth. And so Arnobius calls Hethruria, Arnob. li. 2. aduersus gentes.
which is ye country wherein Rome stands: and S. Ambrose calls Rome it
self, Caput superstitionis, The Head of Superstition.

But if we seek the place it self, Ambrosi. Sermon. 66.
from whence the light of Religion first sprange forth, we must needs
confess, it was Jerusalem, and not Rome. For so it is written in the Prophet
Esaie, Esai. 2.
De Sion exibit lex, and verbum Domini de Jerusalem: The Law shall proceed
from Sion, and the Word of God from Jerusalem. And therefore the Bishops of
the East being in a Convocation at Constantinople, Theodo. li. 5. ca. 9
call Jerusalem, The Mother of al Churches. Yet nevertheless, every great
Metropolitan City within her own Province, may be honored with the like
Title. So says Nazianzenus of the City of Caesarea, where S. Basile was
Bishop, Caesarea prop^ Matter est omnium Ecclesiarum etc^ Caesarea is in a
manner the Mother of al Churches: Cregor. Nazianzen. in Epist. ad Caesarienses.
Ad populum Antiochen. ^om. 3.
and the whole Christian Common wealth so embraces, and beholds it, as the
Circle embraces, and beholds the Center. So Chrysostom likewise auaunceth
the City of Antioche, Cogita Vrbis magnitudinem, quod non de vna, vel de
duabus, vel de tribus, vel de december animabus, nunc nobis est consideratio: sed
de millibus infinitis, de totius Orbis Capite. Consider the greatness of this
City: we have to deal not for one, two, three, or ten souls: but for
infinite thousands, even for the Head of the world. Thus Chrysostom calls
Antioche, the Head of the world, for that, in that Province of Syria it was
the Head: like as Rome also was the Head City, and principal Church of the
Weast.

M. Hardinge. The.30. Division.
Now for a brief answer to M. Iuel, who denies, that within. 600. years
after Christ the Bishop of Rome was ever called an Universal Bishop, or Head of
the Universal Church, and makes him self very suer of it: although it be a
childishe thing to stick at the name any thing is called by, the thing by the
name signified being sufficiently proved: yet to th'intente good folk may
understand that al is not truth of the old Gospel, which our new Gospellers
either affirm, or deny: I will bring good and sufficient witness, that the
bishop of Rome was then called both Universal Bishop, or Ecumenical
Patriarch, which is one, to wit, Bishop, or principal father of the whole
world, and also Head of the Church. Leo that worthy B. of Rome, was called the
Universal Bishop, and Universal Patriarch, of six hundred and thirty Fathers
assembled together from al parts of the world in General Council at
Chalcedon: which is both 118 The.118. untruth. There is no mention made
hereof in any Canon in that Council.
expressed in that Council, and also clearly affirmed by S. Gregory in three
sundry Epistles to Mauritius the Emperor, to Eulogius Patriarch of
Alexandria, and to Anastasius Patriarch of Antioche. Thus that name was
deferred unto the Pope by the Fathers of that great Council: which by them
had not been done, had it been unlawful. In very deed neither Leo him
self, nor any other his successor, ever called or wrote him self by that
name, as S. Gregory says, much less presumed they to take it unto them: But
rather used the name of humility, calling them selves each one Seruum
Seruorum Dei, The Servant of the Servants of God. Yet sundri^ holy Martyrs
Bishops of Rome used to call them selves Bishops of the universal Church (119)
The.119. untruth. For these names importe not one thing, as shall appers.
which in effect is the same, as the fathers of Chalcedon understood. al
these be bastrade Epistles with out credit.
So did Sixtus in the time of Adrianus the Emperor, in his Epistle to the
Bishops of all the world. So did Victor writing to Theophilus of Alexandria. So
did Pontianus writing to all that believed in Christ, before. 1300. years
past. So did Stephanus in his Epistle to al Bishops of al Provinces, in the
time of S. Cyprian. And al these were before Constantine the great, and before
the Council of Nice, which times our adversaries acknowledge and confess to
have been without corruption. The same title was used like wise after the
Nicene Council, by Felix, by (120) The.120. untruth. For immediately before, M.
Hardinge confesses, that Leo never vvrote him self by that name.
Leo, and by diverse others, before the six hundred years after Christ^ were
expired. Neither did the Bishops of Rome use this title and name only them
selves to their own advancement, as the adversaries of the Church charge
them, but they were honored there with also by others* as namely Innocentius,
by the Fathers assembled in Council at Carthago, and Marcus by Athanasius, and
the Bishops of Egypt.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Here M. Hardinge secretly confesses, that in all, he has hitherto alleged,
he has not yet found, that the Bishop of Rome was known in the world within
the space of the first six hundred years after Christ, by the name either of
the Uniuersal Bishop, or of ye Head of the Uniuersal Church: notwithstanding
he has much gheassed about the matter, both by misreportinge the practice of
government, that then was used, and also by wreasting^, and misconstruinge the
words of the Holy Fathers. Thus hitherto he has taken great pains to small
purpose.

But hereunto he putt^th his Rhetorical Correction, and says, It is a Childis
he thing, to stick at the name of any thing. And so all this long talk is
driven in the end to a Childishe Conclusion. How be it, it appears, S.
Gregory was not so persuaded of it, not thought the matter to be so childish.
For after y^ John of Constantinople had entitled him self the Uniuersal
Bishop, Gregory Gregor. li. 4.
being then Bishop of Rome withstoode him earnestly, and wrote against him in
this wise: Deus ab vnitate, Epist. 36.
atque humilitate Ecclesiae hoc malum Superbiae, and Confusionis auertat. God
turn away this mischief of Pride, and Confusion from the unity, and
humility of the Church.

Again, Omnibus viribus prouidendum est, ne in vnius Veneno Sermonis, viuentia
in Christi Corpore membra moriantur. We must labor, and provide with all that
we can do, least the members that live in Christ's Body, happen to perish in
the Poison of one word. Moreover, as it is before at large declared, he
calls it a New, a Perverse, a Superstitious, an arrogant, an ungodly, an
Antichristian name: a name of Singularity: a name of Error: a name of
Confusion: a name of Blasphemy: against the Canons, against the whole Church,
against S. Peter, and against ye Gospel. Yet says M. Harding, To stick at
this name, it is but a childis he matter. How be it, if ye thing it self, that
this name imports, had been lawful, then had this name not been so
horrible. But contrary wise, the very usurpation of the name is horrible:
Therefore the thing it self thereby signified, must of necessity be much
more horrible.

Now for a brief answer, M. Hardinge has found six hundred and thirty
Bishops, that gave this title to Leo Bishop of Rome, in the Council of
Chalcedon, and called him the Uniuersal Bishop: which thing (as he says) is
recorded by S. Gregory in three sundry places. Here, good Christian Reader,
by the way, this one thing (I trust) thou will consider of thee self. If the
name of Uniuersal Bishop were given to the Bishop of Rome in ye Council of
Chalcedon, which was holden in the year of our Lord. 488. then by M.
Hardinges own grant, and by the witness of this Council, the Bishop of Rome
before that time had not the name of Uniuersal Bishop. Otherwise, how could
either they give, that they had not to bestow: or he receive, that he had
already? In deed such bestowinge of gifts had been very childishe. Thus of
the whole number of six hundred years, M. Hardinge freely, even at the sight,
has yielded us back four hundred, four score, and eight years toward the
reckening. Before we pass further, let us (...), what credit the Pope him
self gives to this Council of. 630. Gelasius inter acta Council. Tarracon. Per
incompetentem praesumptionem ventilata.
Fathers, holden at Chalcedon. Pope Gelasius says, The Apostolic ^ee of Rome
in part allowed it not: for that, things were there borne out by inordinate
presumption. Pope Leo accuses the whole Council of Ambition, and wilful
Rashenesse. And S. Hierome in the case of Matrimony Inter Raptore^, and
Raptam, is received against al those.630. Bishops, and against ye Determination
of ye whole Council. In such regard they have ye Councils when they list. But
y^ law says, Absurdu^ videtur, licere eidem partim comprobare iudiciu^
defuncti, partim eue^^ere. Leo, Ambitione^, and inconsultam Temeritatem. 36.
Quaest. 2.
It is against reason, that one man should in part allow the will of the dead
(so far forth, as it makes for him) and in part overthrow it (where it
seems to make against him.)

But M. Hardinge will say, Tria legitima Pan. De bonis libertor. Nam absurdu^.
Caius.
Of what credit so ever this Council ought to be, it gave Leo the name of
Universal Bishop. And what if all this be utterly untrue? What if there were no
such title either given, or offered in ye Council? Certainly, ye whole Council
of Chalcedon is extant abroad, both written, and printed, and may soon be
seen. why does not M. Hardinge allege, either the place, or ye Canon, or the
words? At ye least, why gives he no note in ye Margin, where this
authority may be found?

Perhaps he will say, This Canon was burnte by some Heretics, as he said
before of the Council of Nice. How be it, it were much for him to say, That of
that whole Council, only six Lines should be burnte, and that in all the
examples throughout the world: and yet all the reast of the same Council
remain safe: Or that the words, whereby the Pope claims his title, should so
negligently be lost, and that in Rome it self, in the Popes own Library: and
yet the words that the Pope reprooueth, and condemns, should stand whole.
M. Hardinge has no other Council within six hundred years after Christ to
hold by, but only this. And yet the same cannot be found. But S. Gregory is
witness sufficient: He says, that.630. Bishops in the Council of Chalcedon,
named the Bishop of Rome the Universal Bishop. This is an untruth to beguile
the Reader. For Gregory says not, the Bishops in that council Saluted,
Entitled, Proclaimed, or Called the Bishop of Rome by that name. Only he
says, Romano pontifici Vniuersitatis nomen oblatum est. Gregor. li. 4. Epist
32. and. 36.
The name of Universal Bishop, was offered by the Council of Chalcedon to the
Bishop of Rome. He says, they offered to call him so: but that they called him
so in deed, he says not. Therefore M. Harding herein ouerreatcheth, and
mistelleth his authors tale. But S. Gregory says further, That neither Leo,
nor any other of his Predecessors Bishops of Rome, Superbum, prophanum nomen.
would ever receive that Arrogant, and Ungodly name, or suffer him self to be
so called: not withstanding it were offered by the Council.

The Bishops of Rome never used that name, notwithstanding it were offered
them: Therefore, they ought to loose it by non usure.

M. Hardinge will say, This was only their humility, and not want of right.
And therefore they chose rather to be called Serui Seruorum Dei, The Servants
of Gods Servants. Uerily it may well be thought, that Gregory, who first used
these words, as his familiar style, named him self so without Hypocrisy,
only in respect of his intolerable pains, and continual travails. For so he
him self complains, Veni in altitudinem Maris, Gregor. li. 1. Epist. 7. and.
25.
and tempestas demersit me. I ^m come into the deep of the Sea, and the rage
of tempest has drowned me up. So S. Augustine long before S. Gregory's time,
for that he was likewise troubled, used sometimes the like style. For thus he
writes of him self, De Meritis and remissione Peccatorum, ad Marcellinum. li.
3. ca. 1.
Augustinus Episcopus Seruus Christi, Seruorumque Christi. Augustine Bishop,
the Seruante of Christ, and the Servant of Christ's Servants. But he that
neither feeds the flock: nor ploweth ye Lords ground: nor dresseth his
Uine^ nor ministers the Sacraments: nor conforteth, nor exhorts, nor
teaches: that is carried on high through the streets on noble men's backs, and
may not touch the ground for holiness: that causes that noble Prince, the
French King, to hold his stirrup: the Emperor of al Christendom, to lead
his horse by the rain: and the Princes, and governors of the world of kiss
his shue: that does no manner of Service, or ministry in Christ's Church,
how can he call him self, either the Servant of Christ, or the Servant of
Christ's Servants without Hypocrisy?

This in deed is open dissimulation, and a childish plaieing with words, and
an open mocking of the world. Dion.
So one writes of Julius Caesar, Deposuit nome^ Dictaturae, at vim retinuit.
He refused the name of Dictator: but the power, and force thereof he keapt
still. Appianus.
So likewise says Appianus, The Princes of Rome name them selves, Imperatores,
Emperors, which was a name of government in ye field, and lasted but for y^
while: but Kings they will in no wise be called, for yt the name of a King
emonge them then was odious. (...).
How be it (he says) in deed they are very Kings. So Augustus Caesar,
notwithstanding he were a Tyran, and had oppressed ye people, yet the chose to
be called Tribunus plebis, The Defender, and Patron of ye people. And Uerres,
notwithstanding he had miserably wasted, Cornelius Taci^us in Augusto.
and consumed the whole Ilelande of Sicilie, yet in his title he would be
called, (...), Pope not universal.
that is, The Keeper, and Saueour of that Ilelande. Thus they dissemble openly,
and as one says, With fair names they cover foul faults. Cicero in Verrem.
But it was not any such Dissimulation, or countenance of Humility, that
moved Leo, Gregory, or any other Godly Bishop of Rome, to refuse this name, as
M. Hardinge imagines: (...).
but the very iniquity, and injury therein contained. For thus says S.
Gregory, Si vnus Patriarcha Vniuersalis dicitur, Patriarcharum nomen cocteris
derogatur etc. If one be called the Universal Patriarch, then is the name of
Pa^riatkes taken from others. But God keep it farre^from any Christian mind,
that any man should take so much upon him. Gregor. li. 4. Epis. 36.
The consenting unto this wicked name, is the loosinge of the Faith. Therefore
in the Council of Carthage it is decreed thus: Primae sedis Episcopus ne
appelletur Princeps Sacerdotu^, Greg. li. 4. ca. 39. Council. Carthaginen. 3.
can. 26.
vel Summus Sacerdos, vel aliquid huiusmod^* sed tantum Primae Sedis Episcopus.
Vniuersalis autem nec etiam Romanus pontifex appelletur. Let not the Bishop of
the first See be called the chief of Bishops, or the Highest Bishop, or by
any other like name. But the Bishop of Rome him self may not be called the
Universal Bishop. The Bishop of Rome may not be called, The Universal Bishop.
This later clause of that Canon ( Vniuersalis autem Episcopus nec etiam
Romanus pontifex appelletur) one Peter Crabbe the setter forth of the
Councels, of purpose, and contrary to good Faith dissembled, and least out. How
be it, the fraud is soon discovered. For y^ same Clause is to be found
whole, both in written examples of the Councels, Did. 99. prime Sedis.
and also in Gratian, that compiled the Decrees: and in the very Barbarous
Gloss upon the same, by these words, Hic dicitur, quod Papa non debet vocari
Vniuersalis. Here it is said, that the Pope may not be called, The Universal
Bishop. M. Harding says, The Pope was called by that name: and for prouse
thereof allegeth a Council without a Canon. But the whole General Council of
Carthage says, The Bishop of Rome may not in any wise be so called: and the
Canon thereof is apparent, and may be seen. Now let the Christian Reader judge,
to whether he will give greater credit.

This Council (says M. Harding) would not have offered this name unto Leo,
unless it had been lawful. Yet he knows, al is not law, that is moved in
Council. Leo, and Gelasius, as it is before said, Inter Decreta Council.
Tarracon.
condemned certain Decrees of this same Counsel of Chalcedon, as Unlawful:
notwithstanding the Determination of.630. Bishops. The Fathers in the Council
of Nice attempted, contrary to Gods commandments, to break the lawful
Matrimony of Priests, and Bishops. But their attempt, because it was
unlawful, Socrates li. 1. ca. 11.
was reproved, and stayed by Paphnutius. M. Harding therefore might better
conclude thus, Leo, Gregory, and other holy Fathers Bishops of Rome refused
the name of Uniuersal Bishop, as it appears by their words, for that it was
injurious unto other Bishops, and a corruption of the Faith: and for the same
cause the General Council of Carthage determined, that ye Bishop of Rome should
not, ne might not so be called: Therefore that name was not lawful.

All this notwithstanding, Council. Chalc^^don. Actio. 3.
true it is, that M. Harding says, Leo in that Council of Chalcedon was thus
called. The places be known: and may not be denied. He is so saluted in three
sundry Epistles: the one sent by one Athanasius a Priest: the other by one
Ischyrion a Deacon: the third by one Theodorus likewise a Deacon. But of that
whole number of six hundred, and thirty Bishops there assembled, I trow M.
Hardinge is not well hable to show, that any one ever saluted, or called him so.

Therefore, whereas M. Hardinge, the better to put his Reader in remembrance,
has set this note in the Margin, that the Bishop of Rome was called the
Uniuersal Bishop, and Head of the Church above a thousand years sithence, he
might with more truethe, and much better have noted his book thus: S.
Gregory's words misalleged: The Council falsified: This only Canon lost: all the reast whole and safe: A strange Priest, and two poor Deacons, in their
Private suites for their goods, and Legacies, named Leo the Universal Bishop*
Bishop of the Universal Church.
But of the six hundred and thirty Bishops, that had voices in the Council,
not one ever named him so. Thus much M. Hardinge might truly have noted in
the Margin.

Yet (says M. Hardinge) the Bishops of Rome* that were godly Fathers and holy
(...) used this name, as it appears by their Epistles. And here are brought
in the titles of letters under the names of Sixtus, Pontianus, and certain
others, written, as it is before declared, a long time after the writers were
dead. Such ruinous fundations M. Hardinge has chosen to build upon.

But what are these Old Fathers taught to say? Or how is M. Hardinge
relieved by their words? In the Salutation before their letters they write
thus, Sixtus, Pontianus, Victor, Bishop of the Universal Church. This (says
M. Hardinge) is even alone thing with, Vniuersalis Episcopus* there is no
manner difference. O what ranginge, and huntinge here is, to beat up that
thing, that will not be found. M. Hardinge, because he can not find the
Uniuersal Bishop, that he sought for, therefore he has sought out the next of
kin, that is, The Bishop of the Uniuersal Church: and these two, he says,
be both one. Howbeit, this matter neede^ no great seekinge: every Child might
soon have found it. But if an Uniuersal Bishop, and a Bishop of the Uniuersal
Church, be al one thing, how then is it true, Gregor. li. 4. Epist. 32 and
36.
that S. Gregory says, Nemo decessorum etc. None of my Pred^cessours would
ever consent to this name? Or how can he find such fault with the name of
Uniuersal Bishop, and bear so easily with the name of Bishop of the Uniuersal
Church, which, he knew, his Predecessors had used, if he took them both for
one thing, without difference? To be short, if these names, as M. Hardinge
assures him self, be both one, how is the one Godly, the other Ungodly: the
one Arrogant, the other not Arrogant: the one blasphemous, the other not
blasphemous?

This error rises of misvnderstandinge these words, Vniuersalis Ecclesia.
For the Church Uniuersal, and the Church Catholic, the one being Greek,
the other Latin, are both one: and are commonly used of the learned Fathers,
as contrary to a Particular Church, as be the Churches of Heretics, and
Schismatiques. In this sense, every Godly Bishop, is a Bishop of the
Catholic, or Uniuersal Church: like as also every Godly man is a member of
the same. Thus writes Calixtus, Calixti Epist. Decret. 1.
Calixtus Archiepiscopus Ecclesiae Catholicae V^bis Romae. Thus Marcellus,
Marcelli Epist. 2
Marcellus Episcopus Sanctae and Apostolicae, and Catholicae Vrbis Romae. In
these places Rome is called* a Catholic, that is to say, an Vniuesal City:
partly to exclude the Churches of Heretics, which were mere Particular:
and partly also to signify, that the Church there, was then a Church of the
Catholic, and Uniuersal Doctrine. So likewise it is written in the Council of
Constantinople: Council Constantinop. 5. Actio. 1.
Clerici, and Monachi Apostolici Throni Antiochenae magnae Ciuitatis,
Catholicae, Sanctae Ecclesiae Dei. The Clerks, and Monks of the Apostolic
Throne of the great City of Antioche, of the Catholic, or Uniuersal Holy
Church of God.

Again, every Bishop may be called the Bishop of the Uniuersal Church, for
that it is his duty to care, not only for his own flock, but also for all
others of the whole Church of God. Origin in Es^i, Hom 6. Chrysostom. in 2.
Corin. Hom. 18. Epistola Eleuther^ ad Episcopos Calliae*
So says Origin, Qui vocatur ad Episcoparum, vocatur ad Seruitutem totius
Ecclesiae: Who so is called to a Bishoprike, is called to the service of the
whole Church. So Chrysostom exhortinge the whole people together, says
unto them, Vni^ersae Ecclesiae curam geramus, Let every one of us take the care
of the Vni^ersal Church. So likewise Pope Eleutherius writes unto the Bishops
of France, Huius rei gratia Vniuersalis vobis a Christo commissa est Ecclesia,
vt pro omnibus laboretis, and cunctis opem far non negligatis. Universal
Bishop.
For that cause the whole Universal Church is committed unto you, that you
should travail for all, and not be negligent to healpe al. Thus, many ways
the Bishops both of Rome, and of Antioche, and of France, were called the
Bishops of the Uniuersal Church. But the Uniuersal Bishop none of them al was
ever called. Of John of Constantinople, that first began to usurp that name,
Gregory the Bishop of Rome writes thus, Despectis omnibus, Gregor. li. 4.
Epist. 34.
solus conatur appellari Episcopus. Despisinge al other Bishops, he would
only be called a Bishop. So likewise says Pope Pelagius, Pelagij 2. Epist.
1. Did. 99.
If the chief Patriarch be called Universal, then the reast have lost the name
of Patriarchs.

This is the meaning of an Uniuersal Bishop, and the very self same Infinite,
and Immoderate Power, that M. Hardinge claims for the Bishop of Rome. Nullus.
For so he has already said, That the other three Patriarchs are no
Patriarchs in deed, but only his Delegates, and Servants, to do that shall
please him to command them. Folio. 86. Diuisio 23.
In steed hereof M. Hardinge has found out a Bishop of the Uniuersal
Church: and so leauinge the thing, that is demanded, he answeareth to that,
is not in question: and privily confesses by his silence, that hitherto he
has not found, nor can find his Uniuersal Bishop.

This answer may serve, to that is here alleged of the Council of Aphrica,
and the Epistle of Athanasius: saving that the Epistle bearinge that holy
Fathers name, Council. Aphric. Can. 12.
as it is already proved, is nothing else but apparante forgerie. The
Bishops in the Council of Aphrica, bisides that they utterly denied the Popes
Uniuersal Power, forbiddinge their Clerks upon pain of Excommunication to
appeal to him, Canon. 101. and 105.
sundry times in the same Council writing unto him, they use the name of
Familiarity, and equality, and call him their Brother.

Now, for a surplussage, for as much as, M. Harding with all his study, and
conference with his friends, cannot yet ^inde out his Uniuersal Bishop in ye
Church of Rome, let us see, whether we may find him in some other place, and
that not by the witness of a simple Priest, or a Deacon, but by the authority
of Catholic Emperors, and Councels, and of the Bishop of Rome him self: and
that not by shiftinge of terms, one for an other, as M. Hardinge is driven for
want, in steed of an Uniuersal Bishop, to bring in a Bishop of the Uniuersal
Church, but in plain, manifest, express words, and such, as in no wise may
be denied.

In the Council of Constantinople, the Bishop there is scarcely saluted, or
entitled by other name. Council. Constantinop. 5. Act^o. 1.
For this is his common style, Oecumenico Patriarchae Iohanni: To John the
Universal Patriarch. To John the Father of Fathers, and Universal Bishop. The
holy Universal Archbishop, and Patriarch Mennas.

Nicephorus says, Nicephor. li. 14. ca. 34.
The Bishop of Alexandria was entitled Iudex vniuersi orbis. The Judge of the
whole world. Clement Clementis Epist. 1.
unto S. James the Bishop of Jerusalem writes thus, Clemens Iacobo Fratri
Domini, Episcopo Episcoporum, regenti Hebraeorum Sanctam Ecclesiam
Hierosolymis, sed and omnes Ecclesias, quae vbique Die prouidentia fundatae
sunt. Clement unto Imaes the Brother of our Lord, the Bishop of Bishops,
governing the holy Church of the Jews at Jerusalem, and bisides that, all the
Churches, that be founded euerywhere by Gods providence. Authen. Constitutio 3.
(...).
The Emperor Justinian writes thus, Unto Epiphanius the Archbishop of this
Emperial City (Constantinople) and Universal Patriarch. To conclude, The
Bishop of Rome him self thus saluteth the Bishop of Constantinople, Therasio
Generali Patriarchae, Adrianus Seruus Seruorum Dei.

Unto Therasius the General Patriarch, Adrian the Servant of Gods Servants.
Council Nicen. 2. Actio. 2.
And in the last Council holden at Florence, Joseph the Bishop of
Constantinople being there, used the same title, and wrote him self The
Archbishop of New Rome, and the Universal Patriarch. If M. Hardinge had so
good evidence for the Bishop of Rome, I believe, he would not thus pass it
away in silence.

M. Hardinge. The.31. Division.
Concerning the other name (Head of the Church) I marvel not a little that
M. Iuel denies that the Bishop of Rome was then so called. This is a freashe
kind of Rhetorique
Either he does contrary to his own knowledge, wherein he must needs be
condemned in his own judgment, and of his own conscience, or he is not so
well learned, as of that side he is thought to be. For, who so ever trauaileth
in the Readinge of the ancient Fathers, finds that name almost every where
attributed to Peter the first Bishop of Rome, (121) The.121. Untruth. For
Peter only is so called: yet was not Peter then Bishop of Rome.
and consequently to the Successoure of Peter, that name (I say) either in
terms equivalent, or expressly. Math. 10.
First the Scripture calls Peter Primum, The first among the Apostles. The
names of the twelve Apostles (says Matthewe) are these. These terms be not
equivalent.
Primus Simon, qui dicitur Petrus. First Simon, who is called Peter. And yet
was not Peter first called of Christ, but his brother Androwe before him, De
diuinis Nominibus. Ca. 3.
as is before said. Dionysius that ancient writer calls Peter sometime
Supremum decus, The highest honor, for that he was most honorable of all the
Apostles, sometime Summum, Sometime verticalem, the chiefest, and the highest
apostle. Origin upon the beginning of John says: Let no man think that we
set John before Peter. Who may so do? for who should be higher of the
Apostles then he, Li. 1. Epis. 3.
who is, and is called the top of them? Cyprian calls the Church of Rome
in consideration of that Bishops supreme authority, Ecclesiam principalem,
vnde vnitas Sacerdotalis exorta est. The principal or chief Church, from
whence the unity of Priests is spronge. Eusebius Caesariensis speakinge of
Peter sent to Rome by Gods providence, (...).
to vanquis he Simon Magus, calls him, Potentissimum, and maximum
Apostolorum, and reliquoru^ omnium principe^: The mightiest of power, and
greatest of the Apostles, and Prince of all the reaste. Augustine commonly
calls Peter Primum Apostolorum, First, or chief of the Apostles. Hierome,
Ambrose, Leo, and other doctors, Prince of the Apostles. Chrysostom upon the
place of John cap. 21. Sequere me, Follow me, among other things says thus.
These words are craftily added to Chrysostom, as to the discrete Reader may
soon appear.
If any would demand of me, how James took the Sea of Jerusalem, that is
to say, how he became Bishop there, I would answer, that this, (he means
Peter) master of the whole world, made him gouernoure there. Homil. 87. In
Matthae. homil. 55. Ierem. 1.
And in an other place bringinge in that God said to Hieremie, I have set
thee like an iron Pillar, and like a brazen wall: But the father (says he)
made him over one nation, but Christ made this man (meaning Peter) ruler over
the whole world etc. And least these places should seem to attribute this
supreme Authority to Peter only, and not also to his Successors: it is to be
remembered, that Irenaeus and Cyprian acknowledge and call the Church of Rome
chief, and principale. And Theodoretus in an Epistle to Leo, calls the same
in consideration of the Bishop of that See his primacie, Orbi terrarum
praesidentem, President, or (122) The.122. untruth, standing in untrue
translation.
bearinge rule over the world. Ambrose upon that place of Paul 1. Timoth. 3.
where the Church is called the pilloure, and stay of the truth, says thus.
Cu^ totus mundus Dei sit, Ecclesia tamen domus eius dicitur, cuius hodie rector
est Damasus. Where as the whole world is Gods, yet the Church is called his
house, the ruler whereof at these days is Damasus.

Al these words notwithstanding, M. Harding has not yet found the Head
of the universal Church.
I would not werie and trouble the Reader with such a number of allegations,
were it not that M. Iuel bears the world in hand, we have not one sentence,
or clause for us, to prove either this, or any other of al his Articles.

But perhaps some one will say, yet I hear not the Bishop of Rome called
Head of the Universal Church. what forces it whether that very term be
found in any ancient writer, or no? Other terms of the same virtue and power
be oftentimes found. Is it not one to say, Head of the universal Church, and
to say, Ruler of Gods house, which Ambrose says? whereof this argument may
be made. A miserable Syllogism: It concludes in Secunda figura affirmative.
The Church, yea the Universal Church is the house of God: But Damasus Bishop
of Rome is ruler of the house of God, after Ambrose: Ergo Damasus is ruler of
the Universal Church. And by like right and title is the Pope, who is Bishop
of Rome now also ruler of the same. What other is it to call the Church of
Rome the principal Church, In locu^ Joan. 21. homil. 87. Exponens illud,
Sequere me. In Matthae, homil. 55.
respect had to the Bishop there, and not otherwise (wherein a figure of
speech is used) as Irenaus and Cyprian do, and President, or (123) The.123.
untruth. For Leo has not one such word.
set in authority over the whole world, as Leo does: then to call the
Bishop of Rome, Head of the Universal Church? What means Chrysostom
calling Peter, totius orbis magistrum, The Master and teacher of all the
world: and saieinge in an other place Eue^ so S. Gregory says of Paul,
Obtinuit totius Ecclesiae principatum, in. 1. Reg. li. 4. ca. 4.
that Christ made Peter not ruler ^uer one nation, Peter Chief.
as the father made Jeremy over the Jews, but over the whole world? What
other (I say) means he thereby, then that he is head of the whole world,
and therefore of the Universal Church?

The (...)of Sarisburie.
Touching the name of the Uniuersal Bishop, M. Hardinge has but one
authority: and yet the same can not be found. Touching the other name, of
Head of the Church, he comes in only with ioyly bragges, and great
vauntes, as if he were plaieinge at post, and should win al by vicinge. He
says, If M. Iuel know this, then he speaks against his conscience: If he
know it not, then is he not learned. To contend for learning, it were a
childishe folly. He is sufficiently learned, that says the truth. But if M.
Hardinge with all his learning be hable to find out his Head of the Church,
he shall have his request: I will grant him to be learned.

He says, The Bishop of Rome is so named, either in terms equivalent, or
expressly. Thus he doubts at the matter, and stammereth, and faltereth at the
beginning. But if the Bishop of Rome were the Head of the Church in deed,
and so allowed, and taken in the world, why was he never expressly, and
plainly named so? Was there no man then, in the world, for the space of six
hundred years, hable to express his name? Terms equivalent.
His terms of like force, and meaning, which he calls equivalent, must
needs importe thus much, That the Bishop of Rome is above al General
Councelles: that he only has power to expound the Scriptures, and cannot
err, nor be judged of any man: and that without him, there is no health: and
that all the world ought to know him for the Uniuersal Head, upon pain of
damnation. Thus much the Pope him self claims by that name. If M. Hardinges
terms sound not thus, they are not equivalent. It had been the simpler, and
plainer dealinge for M. Hardinge, to have said, This name can not yet be
found: and so to have taken a longer day.

As for the matter, the question is moved of the Bishop of Rome: the answer is
made of S. Peter: as if S. Peter continued there Bishop still until this day.
But it is presumed, that, what so ever privilege was in Peter, the same must
needs be in the B. of Rome by Succession, yea although he have not one spark
of Peter. S. Peter in the Old Fathers is diuersely called, the First, the
Chief, the Top, the High Honor of the Apostles, and in Eusebius, and S.
Augustine (...), and Princeps Apostolorum: In which last words of S.
Augustine, and Eusebius, I must do thee, good Reader, to understand, that,
Princeps, is not always taken for a Prince, Exodus 6. Numer. 10. 4. R^g. 25.
Dis. 44. Cum autem. In Bruto.
or a Governor indewed with power, but oftentimes for the first man, or best
of a company. So we read in the Scriptures, Princeps Familiae: princeps
legationis: princeps Coquorum: that is, The Chief of the house, or stock: The
chief of the embassage: the chief of the Cooks. In this sense, Cicero
says, Tusculana. 2. Augusti. de verbis Do. in Eua^g. Matth^. cap. 14. Ambros.
Sermon 66.
Seruius Princeps in iure civilly: Philosophorum Princeps Aristippus. Seruius
the Chief in the Civil Law: Aristippus the Chief of Philosophers. So is S.
Peter called Princeps Apostolorum: And therefore S. Augustine calls him,
Primum, and Praecipuum, that is, The First, and the Chief of the Apostles. We
may not imagine, as M. Hardinge seems to do, that Peter was made a Lord, or
Prince, and had Power, and Dominion over his brethren. S. Ambrose, as it is
before alleged, comparinge Peter and Paul together, says thus, Inter ipsos,
quis cui praeferatur, incertum est. Whether of these two I may set before
the other, I cannot tell. Likewise S. Cyprian says, Cyprian. De simplicitate
praelaetorum.
Hoc erant ^oeteri Apostoli, quod fuit Petrus, pari consortio praediti, and
Honoris, and Potestatis. The reast of the Apostles were the same that Peter
was, endewed with like fellowship both of Honor, and of Power. Paul Chief.
S. Ambrose says, He cannot discern between Peter, and Paul, whether he
may set before other: S. Cyprian says, All the Apostles had like Honor, and
like Power: Yet by M. Hardinges fantasy, Peter only was the Prince: and all the reaste were subjects, and underlings unto him.

But Chrysostom says, Chrysostom. in Matthae hom. 55.
Christ made Peterruler over the whole world. I know not, what special power
M. Hardinge will geather of these words. For the same Commission, that was
given to Peter, in as large, and as ample sort was given also to the reast of
the Apostles. Matthew. 28.
Christ said unto them al, Ite in vniuersum mundum etc. Mark. 16.
Go into the whole world, and preach the Gospel. And S. Paul says, it was
prophesied of them before, Psalm. 19.
In omnem terram exiuit sonus eorum. The sound of them went out into all the
world. Romans 10.
Therefore, that S. Chrysostom speaks hereof S. Peter, the same otherwhere
he speaks in like form of words of all the Apostles. Thus he writes upon
S. John, Chrysostom. in Johan. homil. 87. Chrysostom. in Acta. homi. 3. Chrysos.
in Epist. ad Romanos. homi. 18.
Apostoli suscipiunt curam totius Mundi.

The Apostles receive the charge of all the World. Likewise he writes of S.
Paul, Michaeli Gens commissa est Iudaeoru^: Paulo vero Terrae, ac Maria, atque
Vniuersi Orbis habitatio. Unto Michael is committed the nation of the Jews:
but Land, and Sea, and all the habitation of the world, is committed unto
Paul. And again, Paulo Deus omnem praedicationem, and res Orbis, and Mysteria
cuncta, vniuersamque dispensationem concessit. God has given unto Paul al
manner preachinge, the matters of the world, al Mysteries, and the ordringe of
al. Gregor. in Job. li. 27. ca. 6.
So likewise says S. Gregory, Paulus catenis vinctus Roman petit occupaturus
Mundu^. Paul being bound with cheines went to Rome, to conquiere the whole
World. And again he says, Paulus ad Christu^ conuersus, ^regor. in. 1. Regum.
li. 4. ca. 4.
Caput effectus est Nationum: quia obtinuit totius Ecclesiae principatum. Paul
being converted unto Christ, was made the Head of Nations, because he
obtained the chieftie of all the Church. This was that Uniuersal power, that,
Chrysostom says, was given unto S. Peter: and that not severally unto him
alone, but iointely, and together, with all the reaste of Christ's Apostles.
Which thing the same Chrysostom other where plainly declares by these
words. Chrysostom. in Psalm. 44.
Apostoli vniuersum Orbem terrarum peruaserunt, and omnibus Principibus fueru^t
magis proprie Principes, Regibus potentiores. The Apostles ranged over the
whole World, and were more like Princes, then the Princes in deed, and more
mighty then the Kings. Thus was not only Peter, but also all the reast, and
every of the Apostles made rulers over the whole world.

It is further alleged, That Peter appointed James Bishop of Jerusalem, and
the same avouched by Chrysostom. Chrysostom. in Johan. homi. 87.
Although this place of Chrysostom importe not greatly, yet being well fifted,
and considered, it may seem very suspicious, as nothing agreeinge either with
that went before, or with that follows afterward: but altogether sauering of
some corruption. If M. Harding him self would consider the words with
indifferent judgment, I doubt not, but he would marvel how they came thither.

Neither is it likely, That James took authority of Peter, having before
taken sufficient authority of Christ himself. Lucae. 24.
For this Commission Christ gave to every of his Apostles al alike: Johan. 15.
As my living Father sent me, so do I send you: Ye shall be witnesses to me,
Act. 1.
even to the ends of the World. And if Peter gave authority unto James,
Johan. 17.
who then gave authority unto Paul? Certainly, S. Paul dwelte in no
Peculiar, Johan. 20.
but was as much subject to Jurisdiction, as S. James. But S. Paul says,
Galat. 1.
He was an Apostle non ab hominibus, neque per hominem* neither of men, nor by
men, Galat. 2.
but by Jesus Christ, and God the Father. They that were the chief of the
Apostles, give nothing unto me. The preachinge of the Gospel emonge the
Gentiles was committed unto me, even as unto Peter the preachinge of the Gospel
emonge the Jews. And Chrysostom e^poundinge the same place says thus,
Chrysostom. in Epist. ad ^alat. ca. 2.
Paulus nihil opus habebat Petro, nec illius egebat voce: Sed honor par erat
illi: nihil hic dica^ amplius. Paul had no need of Peter's healpe, nor stood
in need of his voice: but was in honor as good, as he: I will say no more.
Hereby it may appear, that the reast of the Apostles took not their
Apostleship, (...)authority of S. Peter.

But being granted, that Peter appointed James to preach in Jerusalem, yet
will it not follow therefore, that Peter had rule, and Dominion ^uer the
Apostles. For thereof would follow this great inconvenience: The Apostles at
(...)appointed Peter, Actor. 8.
to go, and to preach in Samaria: Ergo, The Apostles had rule, and Dominion
over Peter. Which were an overthrow of M. Hardinges gr^attest principle.

But let us grant, that Peter was the Head of the Apostles, as a matter
nothing perteininge to this question. Will M. Hardinge thereof conclude, that
the Pope is therefore the Head of the Uniuersal Church? For what is there in
the Pope, that was in Peter? Preachinge of the Gospel? He preaches not.
Feeding of the flo^ke? He feeds not. He will say, Succession, and sittinge in
Peter's Chair, which is in Rome. Matthew. 2^.
A man may answer, The Scribes, and Phariseis sat in Moses Chair. But M.
Hardinge knows, that Peter, when he received this Privilege, was in
Jerusalem, and not in Rome. Therefore this argument would better stand thus:
Peter neither had Dominion over the reaste of the Apostles: nor was Bishop of
Rome, when Christ spoke unto him; Therefore the Bishop of Rome cannot justly
claim hereby the Uniuersal Power, and Dominion over all the world. August.
contra literas petiliani li. 1.
Uerily S. Augustine says, Paulus ipse non poterat esse Caput eorum, quos
plantauerat etc. P^ule him self could not be the Head of them, that he had
planted: For ^e says, that we (...)many are one Body in Christ: and that
Christ him self is the Head of that Vn^u^rsal Body. 1. Corinthians. 12. Roma.
12.
Of these words of S. Augustine we may geather this reason: Ephesians. 1.
S. Paul could not be the Head of them, that he had planted: Therefore much
less may the Pope be the Head of them, that ^e never planted.

Yet reply will be made, That Theodoretus calls the Church of Rome (...),
which words M. Hardinge untruly translateth, President, or bearinge rule
over the world. For he knows, That the Greek word (...), signifies,
Sitting in the first place, and forces not of necessity any rule, or
government over others. He might better have turned it, Ecclesiam orbis
terrarum primariam, The most notable, or chief Church of the world: And so
would his translation have well agreede with the Constitutions of the Emperor
Justinian: wherein the preeminence of sittinge in the first place in all
Councelles, Authen. Colla. ^ De Eccles. titul. 1.
and Assemblies, is by special Privilege granted to the Bishop of Rome.

Likewise it will be replied, That Cyprian calls the Church of Rome, Ecclesiam
Principalem, Cod. De Sacrosanctis Eccl. ca* Decernimus.
The principal Church: whereof it were much for M. Harding to reason thus:

The Church of Rome is a Principal Church, Ergo, The Bishop of Rome is Head
of the Universal Church.

For Cyprian him self in the same Epistle in plain express words says,
Cyprian. li. 1. Epis 3.
The authority of the Bishops of Aphrica is as good, as the authority of
the Bishop of Rome.

Cicero, Cicero. in Caetil. ^rat^^ 4. ^etrus Crmit. li. 1. ca. 18.
to blase the nobility of that City, calls it, Lucem orbis terrarum, atque
Arcem omnium Gentium, The light of the World, and the Castle of al Nations.

Frontinus likewise, Roma Vibs indiges, terrarumque Dea. Rome is a wantles
City, and the Goddess of the world. And S. Hierome of the same in his time
says, Romanum Imperium nunc Vniuersas Gentes tenet The Empi^^e of Rome n^we
possesses al Nations. Hieron^. ad Algasiam quas. 11.
And therefore in the Council of Chalcedon the Emperor of Rome is called
Dominus Omnis Terrae, and Dominus Vniuersi Mundi. The Lord of all the Earth:
Council. Chalcedon. Actio^^.
and, the Lord of the Whole World. In consideration as well of this worldly
state, and Majesty, as also of the number, and constancy of Martyrs: of the
place of Peter's travail: of the Antiquity of the Church: and of the purity
of D^^ctrine, the Church of Rome was called the Principal Church of al
others. But he adds further, Vnde vnitas Sacerdotalis ex^rta est. From whence
the Unity of the Priesthood first began. For that, these words seem to
weigh much, I think it good herein to hear the judgment of some other man,
that may seem indifferent. Polydorus Uergilius expoundinge the same words
of Cyprian, Polydor. Vergil. de inuentorib. rerum lib. 4.
writes thus, Ne quis erret, nulla alia ratione Sacerdotalis ordo a Romano
Episcopo profectus esse dici potest, nisi apud Italos duntaxat id factum esse
intelligatur: cum perdiu ante aduentum Petri in vrbem Romam, apud Hierosolymos
Sacerdotium rite institutum fuisse, liquid^ liqueat. Least any man hereby
deceive him self, it cannot in any other wise be said, that the order of
Priesthood grew first from the Bishop of Rome, unless we understand it
only within Italy. For it is clear, and out of question, that priesthood
was orderly appointed at Jerusalem a good while, before peter ever came to
Rome. This commendation therefore, by the judgment of Polydore, was given by S.
Cyprian to the Church of Rome in respect of Italy, and not in respect of
the whole world. And therefore S. Augustine says, Augusti. de consensu
Evangelist. lib. 3.
Ciuitas, quasi Matter, and Caput est Caeterarum: vnde etiam Metropolis
appellatur. The City is as the Mother, and the Head of other towns: and
thereof (in respect of such towns) it is called the Mother City. And in
this sense Chrysostom calls the City of Antioche Metropolim Fide The
Mother of the Faith. Ad populum Antiochen. hom. 17.


M. Hardinge says further, The Church is called the House of God: the ruler
whereof (says S. A^^rose) in these days is Damasus. Here is narrow
seekinge, to find out somewhat: and yet the same somewhat will be worth
nothing. First, what opinion S. Ambrose had herein, Ambros. lib. 5. Epist. 30.
it is easy else where of other his words to be seen. In his Epistle unto the
Emperor Ualentinian, he calls Damasus, not Prince of the people: nor Head
of the Church: nor Uniuersal Bishop: but only Bishop of the Church of Rome.
Ambros. lib. 10. Epist. 81.
And writing unto Siricius the Bishop of Rome, he calls him his Brother.

But he calls Damasus by express words, the Ruler of Gods Church. He
might have had the like witness of S. Hierome, In Apologia aduersus Iouinianum.
Damasus virgo, Ecclesiae Virginis Doctor est. Damasus being a Virgin, is the
teacher of the Church, that is a Virgin. And what will M. Hardinge geather
hereof? Or what thinks he of Ambrose him self, and of other Bishops? was
not every of them the Ruler of the Church of God? Uerily S. Paul thus
exhorts the Cleregie of Ephesus at his departinge thence: Take heed to your
selves, Actor. 20.
and to the whole flock, wherein the Holy Ghost has made you O^erseers to
rule the Church of God, which he has gotten with his Blo^de. There appears
no other difference bytweene thiese words of S. Paul, and the other of S.
Ambrose, sauinge only, that S. Ambrose says, Rector Ecclesiae, and S. Paul
says, Regere Ecclesiam. Yet did not S. Paul by his words appointe, the
Ministers of Ephesus to rule over the whole Church of God. Hieronym. de locis
Hebraicis. Theodoret. lib. 5. cap. 32.
Thus S. Hierome calls Origin, Magistrum Ecclesiarum, The Master, or teacher
of the Churches. Thus Theodoretus calls Chrysostom, Doctorem Orbis terrarum,
The te^cher of all the world. Thus Nazianzene calls S. Basile, The Pillour,
and Butresse of the Church.

But mark well, Nazianzen. in laudem patris sui. (...).
gentle Reader: and thou shall see, that M. Hardinge has pretily wreasted up
this place of S. Ambrose quite out of tune, and of an Indefinite, or a
Particular Proposition, contrary to his rules of Logique, will needs conclude
an Uniuersal, the better to maintain the Popes Uniuersal power. For that S.
Ambrose speaks indefinitely of a Church, without limitation of one, or
other, that M. Hardinge streatcheth, and forces to the whole Uniuersal
Church: as if the whole Church of God had benne at Rome. The like kind of
error leadde Boni^acius the De Mayor* and Obedien. Vnam Sanctam.
.8. to reason thus, Dominus dixit generaliter, Pasce oues meas, non
singulariter has, aut illas: Ergo, commisisse intelligitur Vniuersas. The Lord
said generally unto Peter, John. 2^.
Feed my sheep: he said not specially, Feed these, or them: Therefore we
must understand, that he committed them unto Peter altogether. If M. Hardinge
had not taken S. Ambrose up so short, by the words that immediately follow,
he might well have known his meaning. For thus he opens, what he meante by
the House of God: Ambrosi. in 1. Timoth. ca. 3.
Ibi necesse est dicatur esse Domus Dei, and veritas, vbi secundum voluntatem
suam timetur. There we must needs say, Gods House, and Truth is,
wheresoever God is feared according to his will. This house was in all places,
where God was known, and served: and not only in the Church of Rome.

Yet will M. Hardinge say, These be euasions. For S. Ambrose seems to
acknowledge a special Rule, and Government in Damasus, that was not common unto
others. Certainly, his words importe not so. And how can we know his
meaning, but by his words? But to put the matter out of doubt, let us
consider whether the self same form of speech, have benne applied unto any
others in like sort. Arsenius in his submission writes thus unto Athanasius:
Athanas. in. Apolog. 2.
Nos quoque diligimus pacem, and vnanimitatem cum Ecclesia Catholica, cui tu
per Dei gratiam praefectus es. We also love Peace, and Unity with the
Catholic Church, over which you by the Grace of God are made governor. Here
Athanasius is pronounced Gouernoure of the Catholic Church: Yet was he not
the Bishop of Rome. So likewise says S. Cyprian, Cyprian. ad Iubaianum de
Hereticis Baptizandis.
Haec Ecclesia vna est, quae tenet, and possidet omnem sponsi sui Gratiam: in
hac praesidemus. This Church is one, that keeps and holds the Grace of her
Spouse: In this Church we are the Rulers. Here S. Cyprian calls him self the
president, or ruler of Gods Church: Yet was he the Bishop of Carthage, and
not of Rome. To be short, in like sort Origin pronounces generally of al
Priests, Origin. in Matthae. tractatu. 1.
Si tales fuerint, vt a Christo super illos aedificetur Ecclesia. If they
besuche, as upon them the Church of God may be builte. Here Origin imagines,
that every priest is the fundation of Gods Church: Yet were it hard to
say, Every Priest is Bishop of Rome. S. Ambroses meaning therefore is, That
every Bishop or Patriarch within his Precinctes, or Province, is the Ruler of
the whole Church. And this is it, that Cyprian seems to say, Cyprian. de
simplicitate Praelatorum
Episcopatus vnus est, cuius a singulis in solidum pars tenetur. The Bishoprike
is one, a portion whereof is possessed in whole of every Bishop. Therefore M.
Hardinge seems to do wrong to S. Ambrose, thus violently to abuse his
words, to prove the Bishop of Romes Uniuersal power.

Here M. Hardinge doubtinge, least his Reader being weary of these cold
sclender shifts, and lookinge for some other more substantial, and formal
reasons, would say, I hear not yet the Head of the Universal Church,
purposely preuenteth the matter, and says: what forces that, whether that very
term be used in any ancient writer or no? Gentle Reader, I beseech thee,
mark well this dealinge. This name, the Head of the Uniuersal Church, is the
very thing, that we deny, and that M. Hardinge has taken in hand to prove:
and boldly avouches, that he has already plainly showed, and proved the
same. Yet now in the end findinge him self destitute, he turns it of, as a
thing of naught, and says, What forces that, whether he were called by that
very name or no? As though he would say, All the old Fathers of the Church
both Greeks, and Latins, wanted words, and eloquence, and either they
could not, or they durst not call the Head of the Church by his own peculiar
name. How be it, if the Bishop of Rome be so called, it may be showed: If
not, then is my first assertion true. Uerily, touching the title of Uniuersal
Bishop, Gregor. li. 4. Epist.
S. Gregory calls it, Nouum Nomen, A New Name, unacquainted, and unknown
unto the world. And says further, If we quietly take this matter, we destroy
the Faith of the Universal Church. 32. Gregor. li. 6. Epist. 24. vniuersae
Ecclesiae fidem corrumpimus*
This therefore was the cause, that the ancient Doctors never called the Bishop
of Rome the Head of the Church: for that they knew he was neither reputed,
nor taken so, nor was in deed the Head of the Church.

M. Hardinge, having not yet found the thing yt he so long sought for, at the
last is feign to make it up by shifte of Reason. The Universal Church (says
he) is the house of God.

Damasus is the Ruler of the House of God: Ergo, Damasus is Ruler of the
Universal Church. This Syllogismus is a manifest Fallax, and has as many
faults, as lines.

The house of God. For both the Uniuersal Church, and also every particular
Fallax, which they call, Ex meris particularibus, or A non Distributo ad
Distributum.

in Secunda Figura Affirmatiu^, Where as M. Hardinge knows, all the Moodes, or
Forms of the Second Figure must needs Conclude Negative. The weakness hereof
will the better appear by the like. The Universal Church is the Catholic
Church: But Arsenius says, Athanasius the Bishop of Alexandria was Ruler of
the Catholic Church: Ergo, Athanasius the Bishop of Alexandria was Ruler of
the Universal Church.

Thus hitherto M. Iuel may truly say, M. Hardinge has yet brought, neither
Clause, nor Sentence sufficient to prove, that the Bishop of Rome was called
either the Uniuersal Bishop, or the Head of the Uniuersal Church.

M. Hardinge. The.32. Division.
But to satisfy these men, and to take away occasion of cauille, I will
allege a few places, where the express term (head) is attributed to Peter
the first Bishop of Rome, and by like right to his successors, and to the Sea
Apostolic. Chrysostom speakinge of the virtue and power of Peter, and of the
stedfastnes of the Church, in the.55. Homily upon Matthew has these words
among other. Cuius pastor, and caput, homo piscator, atque ignobilis etc. A
Head for vvoorthi^es and boldenes of Sprite. So S. Gregori^ says, Paulus C^put
effectus est nationu^. In. 1. Reg^^ li. 4. ca. 4.
By which words he affirms that the pastoure, and head of the Church,
being but a fisher, a man, and one of base parentage, passes in firmnes the
nature of the diamant. Again, in an Homily of the praises of Paul, he says
thus. Neither was this man only such a one, but he also which was the head
of the Apostles, who oftentimes said, he was ready to bestow his life for
Christ, and yet was full sore afraied of death. If he were head of the
Apostles, then was he head of the inferioure people, and so head of the
universal Church.

Hierome writing against Iouinian says, Propterea inter duodecim vnus
eligitur, vt capite constituto, Schismatis tollatur occasio. For that cause
among the twelve, one is specially chosen out, that the head being ordained,
occasion of schism may be taken away. Whereby it appears, that Peter was
constituted head, for auoidinge of division, and schism. Now the danger of
the inconvenience remaininge still, yea more then at that time, for the greater
multitude of the Church, and for sundry other imperfections: the same remedy
must be thought to continewe, unless we would say, that Christ has less
care over his Church now that it is so much increased* then he had at the
beginning, when his flock was small. For this cause, except we deny Gods
Providence toward his Church, there is one head for auoidinge of schism
also now, as well as in the Apostles time. Which is the Successor of him,
that was head by Christ's appointement then, the Bishop of Rome sittinge in
the seat, that Peter sat in.

Cyrillus says, Petrus vt princeps, Caputque caeterorum, primus exclamauit, tu
es Christus filius Dei viui. Peter as Prince, and head of the rest, first
cried out, thou art Christ the son of the living God. S^rm. 124.
Augustine also in a Sermon to the people, calls him head of the Church,
saieinge. Totius corporis membrum, in ipso capite curat Ecclesiae, and in ipso
vertice componit omnium membrorum Sanitatem. He heals the member of the whole
Body, in the head it self of the Church, and in the top it self, he
orders the health of all the members. And in an other place, Li. Quaest. vet.
and no. testam. q. 75
Saluator quando pro se, and Petro exolui iubet, pro omnibus exoluisse videtur.
Quia sicut in Saluatore erant omnes causa Magisterij, ita post Saluatorem in
Petro omnes continentur: ipsum enim constituit Caput (124) The.124. Untruth,
standinge in the willful falsifieinge of S. Augustine.
omnium. Our Savior, says Augustine, when as he commands payment (for the
Emperor) to be made for himself, and for Peter, he seems to have paid for all. Because, as al were in our Savior for cause of teachinge, so after our
Savior, al are contained in Peter, for he ordained him Head of al. Here have
these men the plain and express term, Head of the reast, Head of the
Church, Head S. Augustine says, Caput eoru^: not, Caput omnium.
of al, and therefore of the Universal Church. What will they have more?
Neither here can they say, that although this authority and title of the
Head be given to Peter, yet it is not derived, and transferred from him to his
Successors. For this is manifest, that Christ instituted his Church so, as
it should continewe to the worlds end, according to the saieinge of Esaie
the Prophet. Cap. 9.
Super solium David etc. Upon the seat of David, and upon his Kingedome, shall
Messiah sit to strengthen it, and to es^ablis he it in judgment and
rightuousenes: from this day for evermore. And thereof it is evident, that he
ordained those, who then were in ministry, so as their authority and power
should be derived unto their aftercommers, for the utility of the Church for
ever, specially, Matthew. vlt. Lib. 2.
where as he said, Behold, I am with you until the end of the world. And
therefore, as Victor writes in his story of persecution of the Vandales,
Eugenius Bishop of Carthago conuented of Obadus a great Captain of Hunerike
king of the Vandales, about a Council to ^e kept in Aphrica, for matters of
the Faith, betwixt the Arians supported by the King, and the Catholics, said
in this wise: S^nostram fidem etc. If the kings power desire to know our
Faith, which is one, and the true, let him send to his friends. I will write
also to my brethren, that my Felowbishoppes come, who may declare the faith
that is common to you and us, (there he has these words) Et praecipue
Ecclesia Romana, quae Caput est omniu^ Ecclesiaru^. And specially the Church
of Rome, which is the Head of all the Churches. Naminge the Church of Rome, he
means the Bishop there, or his legates to be sent in his steed.

Thus it is proved by good and ancient auctorities, that the name, and title
of the Head, Ruler, President, chief, and principal governor of the Church,
is of the Fathers attributed, not only to Peter, but also to his successors
Bishops of the Sea Apostolic. And therefore M. Iuel may think himself by
this charitably admonished, to remember his promise of yeeldinge, and
subscribinge.

The B. of Sarisburie.
I might well pass al these authorities over without answer, as being no
part of this question. For, I trust, the indifferent Reader of him self will
soon believe, we seek no quarrel against S. Peter, nor go about to scanne
his titles, or to abridge him of his right. It is known that S. Peter by
these Fathers here alleged, Augustine, Hierome, Chrysostom, and Cyril, is
called the Top, and Head of the Apostles. And if need so required, the same
might be auoutched by authorities many more. For who is he, that knows not
this?

But M. Hardinge knows, the case is moved, not of S. Peter, but specially,
and namely of the Bishops of Rome: And of them, he knows, he should have
answered, if his mind had been to deal plainly, and, as he says, fully
to satisfy his Reader. Within the space of the first six hundred years,
there were in Rome.68. Bishops, for their Constancy in the Faith, for their
Virtue, and learning far exceedinge the reast, that have been sithence. The
number of them being so great, their learning so notable, their life so holy,
it is marvel, M. Hardinge should not be able to show, that any one of them
al, in so long a time, was once called the Head of ye Church, and therefore
should thus reast only upon S. Peter: who, when he received these Titles, was
not Bishop of Rome: and of whom there is no question moved. Wherefore M.
Hardinge may better consider his note in the Margin: and where as he has
written thus, Peter and his Successors called the Head of the Church
expressly: He may rather amend it, and make it thus, Only Peter, and not one
of his successors, called Head of the Church expressly: So should his
note, and his text agree together: and so should he not deceive his Reader.

Here by the way, I must put M. Hardinge in remembrance: notwithstanding, for
his estimations sake, he would feign have his forth in these matters, yet
should he not therefore thus beguile the eyes of the Simple, Head.
and thus misreporte, and falsify the words of the Ancient Fathers. M.
Hardinge misallegeth the Old Doctors.
For alleging S. Hierome, he leaves out words, and altogether dissembleth
the whole meaning: In S. Augustine he has shifted, and placed one word for
an other. S. Hierome in that place with great contention of words, commends
S. John above S. Peter, namely for that S. Peter was a Married man, and S. John
a Uirgin. In the heat of his talk, he lays this objection against him
self. Hieronym. aduersus Iouinianum. li. 1.
At dices, Super Petru^ fundatur Ecclesia: licet id ipsum in alio loco super
omnes Apostolos fiat, and cuncti Claues Regni Coelorum accipiant, and ex aequo
super eos Ecclesiae fortitudo solidetur. But thou will say, The Church was
builte upon Peter (and not upon John) Al be it in an other place the same is
done, (that is, the Church is builte) upon all the Apostles: The Apostles al
equal.
and al receive the Keys of the Kingedome of Heaven: and the strength of the
Church is builte equally upon them al. M. Hardinge thought it good, to skippe,
and dissemble these words, not withstandinge they be joined altogether in
one sentence with the reast. It follows, Tamen propterea inter duode^im vnus
eligitur, vt, Capite constituto, Schismatis tollatur occasio. Sed cur non
Johannes electus est virgo? Aetati delatum est: quia Petrus Senior erat: ne
adhuc Adolescens, and pene Puer progressae aetatis hominibus praeferretur.
Notwithstanding the Disciples were al equal, yet therefore one is chosen among
the twelve, that a Head being appointed, occasion of Schism might be taken
away. Thou will say again, And why was not John being a virgin, chosen to be
this Head? He answeareth, Christ gave the preeminence unto age. For Peter was
an aged man: least that John, being a young man, and in manner a Child,
should be placed before men of years. This therefore is S. Hieromes meaning,
that Christ, to avoid confusion, which lightly happens in all companies,
where as is none order, appointed S. Peter, for that he was the eldest man, to
speak, and to deal for the reaste, as the Chief, Hieronym. ad Nepotian. 7.
quaest. 1. in Apibus.
and Head of al his brethren. Which order also was afterward universally
taken throughout the world: that in every congregation of Priests, one
should have a special preeminence above others, and be called Episcopus, the
Bishop. This was thought a good politic way, to avoid contention in the
Church: Hierony. in Epist. ad Titum. Cap. 1.
and not, as M. Hardinge imagines, To make one man the Universal Ruler over all the world. But touching this whole matter, I have answered more at large in
the.15. Division of this Article.

In the allegation of S. Augustines words, Hierony. Contra Luciferian. M.
Hardinge misreporteth S. Augustine.
M. Hardinge for his pleasure, has uttered manifest corruption, in the steed
of this word, Eorum, purposely vsinge this word, Omnium. For where as S.
Augustine says, Ipsum constituit Caput eorum, Christ appointed him to be the
Head of them, M. Hardinge thought it better to allege it thus, Ipsum constituit
Caput Omnium: Christ appointed him to be Head of al. Augustine. in qu^stio.
Veter. and Noui Testa. question. 75.
He saw right well, that corrupt Doctrine would not stand without some
corruption.

Further, I doubt not, but M. Harding does well remember, that the question,
that lies between us, rises not of any extraordinary name, once, or twice,
given upon some special affection: but of the usual, and known style of the
Bishops of Rome. Pan. De Legib. and Senatus^on. and Lon. Con. Nam ad ea.
Chryso^t. ad Populum Antiochen. Hom. 2.
For Theophrastus says, Quae semel, aut bis accidunt, contemnu^t Legislatores.
The law makers have no regard to such things, as never happen, but once, or
twice. Neither what so ever name is given to any man of favor, or admiration
of his virtue, is therefore to be reckened, as his ordinary title. S.
Chrysostom writes thus of the Emperor Theodosius, Laesus est, qui non habet
parem vllum super terram, Summitas, and Caput omnium super terram hominum. He
is offended, that in the Earth has no peer: the Top, and the Head of al men
in the world. Eleutherius the Bishop of Rome, gave this title unto Lucius ye
King of this Ilelande: Vos estis Vicarius Christi, You (being the King) are
Gods Vicar. Chrysostom. in Epis. ad Roman. 11. Hom. 18.
Chrysostom speakinge of Elias, calls him Prophetarum Caput, The Head of the
Prophets. The Council of Ephesus writing unto the Emperors Theodosius, and
Ualentinianus, expresses Cyrillus ye Bishop of Alexandria by this title, Head.
Caput Episcoporum co^gregatorum Cyrillus. Cyrill. Tom. 4. Epist. 5.
Cyrillus the Head of the Bishops there assembled. Likewise Gregory intitleth
S. Paul in this wise: Paulus ad Christum conuersus, Gregor. in. 1. Regum. li.
4. ca. 4. Did. 96. Satis euidenter.
Caput effectus est nationum. Paul being converted unto Christ, was made the
Head of Nations. And to take nearer view of the Bishop of Romes own special
titles, Pope Nicolas thereof writes thus, Constat, Pontificem a Pio Principe
Constantino Deum appellatum. It is well known, that the Pope, of that Godly
Prince Constantinus was called God. And further they say, Papa est in primatu
Abel, in zelo Elias, in mansuetudine David, in potestate Petrus, in unction
Christus. The Pope in Primacie is Abel: in zeal is Elias: in mildness is
David: in power is Peter: in anointinge is Christ. These names, as I have
said, of Affection, and favor have been given: yet will not M. Hardinge
therefore say, that, either the Emperor ought to be called the Head of al men
upon earth: Or the King, Christ's Uicare: Or Elias, the Head of the Prophets:
Or Cyrillus, the Head of the Council: Or S. Paul, the Head of Nations: Or the
Bishop of Rome, God, or Christ: as by an usual, and ordinary Title. And
although, as I have said, S. Peter's titles be nothing incident to this
Question, yet we may examine M. Hardinges argument touching the same.

Peter (says he) was Head of the Apostles: Ergo, He was Head of other
inferior people: And so Head of the Universal Church.

This is a deceiteful kind of argument, and rises by degrees, and steps:
and in the Schools is called Sorites. In like sort M. Harding might conclude
thus:

Elias, as Chrysostom says, was Head of the Prophets: Ergo, He was Head of
the inferior people: And so of the whole Universal Church.

But the error hereof will better appear by that argument, that The mistocles
the governor of Athens sometimes made of him self, his wife, and his child.
Thus he said:

The people of Athens is ruled by me: I am ruled by my wife: My wife is ruled
by my child: Ergo, The people of Athens is ruled by my Child.

In this Reason, this one word, Rule, has three significations. For
Themistocles ruled, as a Governor: His wife, as a Shrew: his Child, as a
wanton. And therein stands the error of the argument. So likewise this
word, Head, signifies sometime the chief in learning: sometime the chief
in dignity: sometime the chief in Government. And hereof also in reasoning
rises great error. For it were great folly to reason thus: Paul in
learning, and dignity was the Head of al others: Ergo, He was the Head in
Government over al others.

Touching Uictor, that wrote the Story of the Uandales, he is neither
Scripture, nor Council, nor Doctor, nor writes the Order, or Practice of the
primitive Church: nor is it well known, either of what credit he was, or when
he lived: nor does he call the Bishop of Rome the Head of the Uniuersal
Church. Only he says, Rome is the Chief, or Head Church of al others.
Which thing of our part, for that time, is not denied: as may better appear
by that is written before in sundry places of this Article. Prudentius i^
Enchiridio. Chrysostom. Ad populum Antioch. Hom. 3.
So does Prudentius call Bethleem the Head of the World: Sancta Bethlem Caput
est Orbis So likewise Chrysostom giving instructions unto Flauianus touching
the City of Antioche, says unto him, Cogita de totius Orbis Capite. Think
thou of (Antioche, that is) the Head of all the World. Hereby is meante a Head
of Dignity, or Honor: and not of Rule.

M. Hardinge findinge not one of the whole number of the Bishops of Rome, once
named the Head of the whole Church, therefore thought it best to found his
proof upon S. Peter. And for that cause, others of his side have auanced S.
Peter above al Creatures. Boni^acius says, That God took Peter in Consortium
Indiuiduae Trinitatis, Peter not Head.
into the Fellowship even of the Indivisible Trinity: and that from him, as
from the Head, Extra, de election. and electi potestate. Bonif. S. Fundamenta.
Ab ipso, quasi quodam capite, dona ^ua omnia diffundit in Corpus.
he powers al his gifts into the Body. Hereof M. Hardinge forces his
argument thus: Peter was the Head of the Apostles, and so of al other
inferiors: Ergo, The Bishop of Rome is the Head of the Universal Church.

Thus, as Iulianus the Emperor in his phrenesie sometimes imagined, that the
Great Aleranders Soul was come by Succession to dwell in him: even so now the
Bishops of Rome imagine by like fantasy, or phrenesie, yt S. Peter's Soul
comes by Succession to dwell in them: and that therefore they ought to have,
what so ever Title, or Interest Peter had. And for that cause they say, We are
Peter's Successors: even as the Phariseis sometime said, We be the Children of
Abraham. But S. John the Baptist said unto them, Socra^es li. 3. Ca. 21.
Put not your affiance in such Succession. For God is hable even of the stones
to raise up Children unto Abraham. And when the Children of Scaeua being
Sorcerers, Matthae. 3. Actor. 19.
and Infidelles began to practice in the name of Christ, and Paul, the man
possessed made them answer* Christ I know: and Paul I know: But what are
you? Surely Peter was not the Head of the Apostles, because he was Bishop of
Rome. For he was so appointed by Christ, in consideration of age, and boldenes
of Sprite, long before he came to Rome: Yea, and had so been, and so had
continued, although he had never come to Rome. Therefore M. Hardinges argument
is a Fallax, and in the Schools is called Fallacia accidentis.

Thus, notwithstanding S. Peter were Head of the Church, yet cannot the B. of
Rome therefore of right claim the same title. Paul the Head as well as Peter.
And albeit S. Peter of special reverence, and admiration of his Sprite, and
virtues, were sometimes so called, as S. Paul sometimes upon like
consideration also was, yet understanding this Chieftie for Uniuersal Power,
and Government, and Authority to command, S. Peter neither was the Head of
the Uniuersal Church in deed, nor was so esteemed, or taken emonge his
brethren: as many ways it may well appear. And therefore S. Gregory says,
Cregor. li. 4. Epis. ^8.
Paulus membra Dominici Corporis certis extra Dominu^ quasi Capitibus, and
ipsis quidem Apostolis subijci particulariter euitauit. S. P^ule forbade, that
the members of Christ's Body, should not be subject particul^rely unto any
certain Heads bysides the Lord, no not unto the Apostles themselves. So
says S. Augustine, as it is before alleged, August. contra literas Petiliani.
li. 1. ca. 5.
Nec Apostolus Paulus Caput est, and Origo eorum, quos plantauerat. Neither is
Paul him self the Head of them, whom he planted. Likewise again he says,
Paulus Apostolus, quanquam sub Capite praecipuum Membrum, tamen Me^bru^ est
Corporis Christi. August. contra Epistolam Far^^niant. li. 2. c. 8. ^regor. li.
4. Epist. 38.
Paul the Apostle, although he be a special member under (Christ) the Head,
yet is he a member (and not the Head) of Christ's Body. To conclude, S.
Gregory says: Cer^e Petrus Apostolus primum membrum Sanctae, and Vniuersalis
Ecclesiae est. Paulus, Andreas, Johannes, quid aliud, quam singularium sunt
plebium Capita? Et tamen sub vno Capite omnes membra sunt Ecclesiae. Atque vt
cuncta breui cingulo locutionis astringam, Sancti ante Legem, Sancti in Lege,
Sancti sub Gratia: Omnes hi perficie^tes Corpus Domini, in membris sunt
Ecclesiae constituti: Et nemo se vnquam Vniuersalem vocari voluit. In deed
Peter the Apostle is the Chief Member of the holy Universal Church. Paul,
Andrewe, and John, what are they else, but the Heads of several peoples? Yet
notwithstanding under one Head they are al members of the Church. To be
short, The Saints before the Law: The Saints in the Law: the Saints
under Grace: al accomplishinge the Lords Body, are placed emonge the members
of the Church: And there was never yet none, that would call him self
Universal.

Hereof we may well conclude thus, S. Peter touching government, and Ordinary
Rule was not the Head of the Uniuersal Church. Ergo, Much less is the Pope
the Head of the Uniuersal Church.

M. Hardinge. The.33. Division.
I will add to all that has been hitherto said of this matter, a saieinge of
Martin Luther, that such as do little regard the gravity of ancient Fathers
of the old Church, may yet some what be moved with the lightness of the
young Father Luther, Patriarch, and founder of their new Church. Lightness I
may well call it, for in this saying, which I shall here rehearse, he does not
so soberly allow the Popes primacie, as in sundry other treatises he does
rashly, and furiousely inueigh against the same. In a little treatise entitled,
Resolutio Lutheriana super propositione sua. 13. De po^estate Papae: His words
be these: Primum quod me mouet Romanum Pontificem esse alijs omnibus, quos
saltem nouerimus se Pontifices gerere, Superiorem, est ipsa voluntas Dei, quam
in ipso facto videmus. Neque. n. sine voluntate Dei, in hanc Monarchiam vnquam
venire potnisset Romans Pontifex. At voluntas Dei, quoquo modo not^a fuerit, cum
reuerentia suscipienda est, ideoque non licer temer^ Romano Pontifici in suo
primatu resistere. Haec autem ratio tanta est, vt si etia^ nulla scriptura,
nulla alia causa esset, haec tamen satis esset ad compescendam temeritatem
resistentium. Et hac sola ratione gloriosissimus Martyr Cyprianus, per multas
Epistolas confidentissime gloriatur contra omnes Episcoporum quorumcunque
aduersarios. Sicut. 3. Regum legimus, qu^d december Tribus Israel discesserunt a
Roboam filio Salomonis, and tamen quia voluntate Dei, sieve auctoritate factum
est, ratum apud Deum fuit. Nam and apud Theologos omnes, voluntas Signi, quam
vocant operationem Dei, non minus quam alia signa voluntatis Dei, vt praecepta
prohibitiua etc. metuenda est. Ideo non video, quomodo sint excusati a
Schismatis reatu, qui huic voluntati contrauenientes, sese a Romani Pontificis
auctoritate subtrahunt. Ecce haec est vna prima mihi insuperabilis ratio, quae
me subijcit Romano Pontifici, and primatum eius confiteri cogir. The first
thing, that moves me to think the Bishop of Rome to be over al other, that
we know to be Bishops, is the very will of God, which we see in the fact, or
deed it self. For without the will of God the Bishop of Rome could never have been commen unto this Monarchy. But the will of God, by what mean so ever it be
known, is to be received reverently. And therefore it is not lawful rashely to
resist the Bishop of Rome in his primacie. And this is so great a reason for
the same, that if there were no Scripture at al, nor other reason, Yet this
were enough to s^aie the rashenes of them, that resist. And through this only
reason, the most glorious Martyr Cyprian in many of his Epistles vaunteth him
self very boldly against all the adversaries of Bishops, what so ever they
were. As in the third book of the Kings we read, that the ten Tribes of
Israel departed from Roboam Salomons son. Yet because it was done by the will
or authority of God, it stood in effect with God. For among all the Divines,
the will of the Sign, which they call the workinge of God, is to be feared no
less, then other Signs of Gods will, as commandementes prohibitiue etc.
Therefore I see not, how they may be excused of the gilte of schism, which
goinge against this will, withdraw them selves from the authority of the
Bishop of Rome. Lo this is one chief invincible reason, that makes me to be
under the Bishop of Rome, and compels me to confess his primacie. This
far Luther.

Thus I have briefly touched some deal of the Scriptures, of the Canons and
Councelles, of the Edictes of Emperors, of the Fathers saieinges, of the
reasons, and of the manifold practices of the Church, which are wont to be
alleged for the Popes primacie, and supreme authority. With al, I have
proved that, which M. Iuel denteth (125) The.125. Untruth* For, Peter only
excepted, either of these titles rests yet unproven.
that the Bishop of Rome Withein six hundred years after Christ, has been
called the Universal Bishop, of no small number of men of great credit, and
very ostentimes head of the Universal Church, both in terms equivalent, and
also expressly. Now to the next article.

The B. of Sarisburie.
The case goes somewhat hardely of M. Hardinges side, when he is thus driven
for want of other authorities, to crave aid at Luthers hand. Touching
alteration in religion, which it pleases him to name lightness, if he would
soberly remember his own often chaunges, and the light occasions of the same,
he should find small cause to condemn others. Certainly D. Luther, after God
had once called him to be a minister of his Truth, never lookte backewarde
from the plough, nor refused the Grace, yt God had offered him, notwithstanding
he saw, all the powers of the world were against him. His argument is taken of
the effects, or tokens of Gods will. The Pope, said he, is auanced unto a
Monarchy, or Emperial state of a Kingedome: But he could never be so auanced
without Gods will: Ergo, it was Gods will, it should be so.

Arguments, that be taken of Gods permission, or of the tokens of his will,
make no necessary proof, either that the things in them selves be good, or
that God is pleased with them. Esai. 36.
For God suffered Nabucodonozor, Sennacherib, Pharao, and others: and their very
estates, and proceedinges were evident tokens of Gods will. For if his will had
been otherwise, they could not have reigned. Yet neither were they good men,
nor was God pleased with their dooinges. So shall God suffer Antichriste to
sit even in the holy place. Daniel Daniel Cap. 7.
says, Faciet, and prosperabitur. He shall take his pleasure, Matthew. 24.
and shall prosper. And again, Roborabitur fortitudo eius, and non in viribus
suis. Daniel. 8.
His power shall be confirmed, but not through his own strength: but through ye
strength of God. Yet shall not God therefore love, or favor Antichriste, or
delight in his wickedness. For S. Paul says, 2. Thessalon. 2.
The Lord shall kill him with the sprite of his mouth, and shall destroy him with
the brightness, and glory of his coming.

Now, for as much as, it has pleased M. Harding, for the Conclusion hereof,
to touch the Effects of Gods will, I trust, it shall not be paineful to thee,
gentle Reader, likewise shortly to consider the effects, and sequeles of this
Uniuersal power. It is granted, that the Church of Rome, for sundry causes
before alleged, was evermore from the beginning the chief, and most notable
above al others. Notwithstanding Eneas Syluius, Aeneas Syluius.
being him self a Bishop of Rome, says, Ad Romanos pontifices ante Nicenum
Concilium, aliquis sane, and si non magnus, respectus fuit. Verily there was
some respect had to the Bishops of Rome before the Council of Nice, although
it were not great. S. Cyprian Cyprian in Sermon de Ieiunio and Tent at ione.
Origin. in Matthae. tractat. 12. Did. 99. Primae Sedis.
in his time complained, That Pride, and Ambition seemed to lodge in priests
bosoms. Origin in his time complained, that the Ministers of Christ seemed
even then to pass the outrage of worldly Princes.

Yet was the Church of God in those days euerywhere, under cruel, and
vehement persecution. Therefore to abate this ambitious courrage, order was
afterward taken in the Council of Carthage, that no man should be entitled
the Highest Bishop, or the Prince of Bishops, or by any other like name. The
Greek Bishops in the Council of Antioche, Sozom. li. 3. ca. 8. Council.
Aphric. Epist. ad Coelest. ^regor. li. 4. Epist. 34. 38. etc.
and the Bishops of Aphrica, being in number two hundred and seventeen, in
the Council there found them selves grieved with the Pride and Arrogancy of
the Sea of Rome. For that John the Bishop of Constantinople took upon him, to
be called the Uniuersal Bishop, therefore Gregory the Bishop of Rome called
him Lucifer, and the Messenger of Antichrist: and said, He had chosen unto him
a proud, and arrogant, a pompous, and a blasphemous name. Anno. Domini. 602.
But after that, by great suit made unto the Emperor Phocas, the Bishops of
Rome them selves had once obtained the same title, and had possessed, and
enioied the same a long while, in the end their pride was such, that it
seemed intolerable. De Mayor. and Obedien. Vnam Sanctam.
Then they began to decree, and determine, That every mortal man is bound,
to be subject to the Sea of Rome, and that upon pain of damnation: and that
without the Obedience of that See, noman is saved: That the Bishop of Rome is
an Uniuersal Judge over al men: Ibide^ in Glosa. 9. Ques. 3. Nemo Did. ^1.
Inferior seeds.
and that he him self may be judged by noman, neither by Emperor, nor by
King, nor by all the Cleregie, nor by the whole people, For that it is written
by the Prophets Esaie, The Axe shall not glory against him, that heweth with
it: That what so ever he do, noman may presume to say unto him, Esai. 10.
Domine cur ita facis? Sir, why do you thus? That he has al manner Law, De
Concessione Praebendae, in Glosa.
and Right in Scrinio pectoris sui, in the Closet of his breaste. That al other
Bishops receive of his fulness: De electio. and electi potestate. Significasti.
That no Councelles can make laws for the Church of Rome: and that the Bishop
of Romes authority is plainly excepted out of al Councelles: Did. 40. Si pp.
That, Extra. de Constitution. Licet. Durand. li. 2.
notwithstanding the Pope draw innumerable companies of people after him into
Hell, yet no mortal man may dare to re^roue him. De translatio. Episcopi,
Qu^to In Closa.
That the Popes will, or pleasure stands as a law. In illis, quae vult, est
ei pro ratione volu^tas: And that there is none other reason to be yielded of
his dooinges, but only this, Quia ipse voluit, For he would. De concessio.
Praebend^. Proposuit, In Glosa.
For of that, yt is nothing, he is hable to make some thing. Quia de^eo, quod
nihil est, potest facere aliquid: De Mayor. and obedien. Vnam Sanctam.
That he has the right of both sweardes, as well of the Temporal, as of the
Spiritual: That the Temporal Prince may not draw his swearde, but only at his
beck, and sufferance: ad nutum, and Patientiam Ecclesiae: Clem. de
Appellationib. Pastoralis.
That he is Haeres Imperij, the Heir apparent of the Empier, De Mayor. and
Obedien. Solitae in Glosa.
and is seven and fifty degrees greater then the Emperor: and that because in
such proportion the Sun is greater then ye Moon: Desenten. and re iudicata.
Ad Apostolicae.
That it is lawful for him to depose kings, and Emperors: as he did the
Emperor Henry the sixthe, and Chilpericus the French King. Psalm. 91.
Did. 96. Si Imperator. In Glosa.


Then he made the Emperor of Christendom to lie down flat before him, and
spared not to set his foot upon his neck, addinge withal these words of
the prophet David, Thou shall walk over the aspe, and the cockatrise: Then he
was content that the Emperor should be called Procurator Ecclesiae Romanae,
The Proctoure, or steward of the Church of Rome: Did. 96. Satis euidenter.
Then, as if had been Nabucodonozor, or Alexander, or Antiochus, or Domitian,
he claimed unto him self the name, and title of almighty God: and said
further, That being God, he might not be judged of any Mortal man: Johan. 22.
De verbor. signifi^. In glosa. Cu^ inter.
Then he suffered men to say, Dominus Deus noster Papa, Our Lord God the
Pope: In Council. Lateranen. Sub Iulio.
Tu es omnia, and super omnia, Thou art al, and above al. Al power is given
unto thee, as well in Heaven, as in Earth. I leave the miserable spoil of the
Empier: the loosinge of sundry great Countries, and Nations, that sometimes
were Christened: the weakeninge of the Faith: the encourraginge of the Turk:
the ignorance, and blindenes of the people. These, and other like, be the
effects of the Popes Uniuersal power. Would to God, he were in deed, that he
would so feign be called, and would show him self in his own particular
Church to be Christ's Uicare, and the 1. Corin. 4.
Dispenser of Gods Mysteries. Then should godly men have less cause to
complain against him. As now, although, that he claims, were his very
right, yet by his own judgment, he is worthy to loose it. 11. Quaest. 2.
Priuilegium.
For Pope Gregory says, Priuilegium meretur amittere, qui abutitur potestate.
He that abuses his authority, is worthy to loose his privilege. And Pope
Syluerius says, 25. Quaest. 2. Sic decet.
Etiam quod habuit, amittat, qui, quod non accepit, vsurpat. He that usurps
that he received not, let him loose, that he had.

Now, briefly to lay abroad the whole contents of this Article:













Therefore, to conclude, I must subscribe, and rescribe, even as before, That
albeit M. Hardinge have travailed painefully herein, both by him self, and
also with conference of his friends: Yet cannot he hitherto find, neither in
the Scriptures, nor in the old Councelles, nor in any one of all the ancient
Catholic Fathers, that the Bishop of Rome within the space of the first six
hundred years after Christ, was ever entitled either the Uniuersal Bishop, or
the Head of the Uniuersal Church.

FINIS.
THE FIFTHE ARTICLE OF REAL PRESENCE.
The B. of Sarisburie.
Or that the people was then taught to believe, that Christ's Body is Really,
Substantially, Corporally, Carnally, or Naturally in the Sacrament.

M. Hardinge. The.1. Division.
(126) The.126. Untruth, For M. Harding is not hable to prove, that the people
in the Primitive Church was thus taught.
Christen people has ever ben taught, that the Body, and Blood of Jesus
Christ by the unspeakable workinge of the grace of God, and virtue of the holy
Ghost is present in this most holy Sacrament, and that verily, and in deed.
This doctrine is founded upon the plain words of Christ* which he uttered in
the institution of this Sacrament, expressed by the Evangelists, and by S.
Paul. As they were at Supper (says Matthewe) Jesus took bread, and blissed
it, and brake it, Matthew. (...).
and gave it to his Disciples, and says: Take ye, eat ye, This is my Body.
And taking the Cup, he gave thanks, and gave it to them, saieinge: Drink
ye al of this: For this is my Blood of the New Testament, which shall be shed
for many in remission of sins. Withdraw like words almost, Mark, Mar^. 14
Luke, and Paul do describe this divine institution Neither said our Lord
only, Luc. 22.
This is my Body, but least some should doubt how his words are to be
understood: 1. Cor. 11.
For a plain declaration of them, he adds this further, Which is given for
you. Likewise of the Cup he says not only. Luc. (...).
This is my Blood, but also, as it were to put it out of al doubt, which
shall be shed for many.

Now, as faithful people do believe, that Christ gave not a figure of his
Body, but his own true, and very Body in substance, and likewise not a
figure of his Blood, but his very precious Blood it self at his passion and
death on the Cross for our Redemption: so they believe also, that the words of
the institution of this Sacrament, admit no other understanding, but that he
gives unto us in these holy Mysteries, his self same Body, and his self
same Blood, in truth of substance* which was crucified, and sheadde forth for
us. Thus to the humble beleuers Scripture it self ministers sufficient
argument of the truth of Christ's Body, and Blood in the Sacrament, against
the Sacramentaries, who hold opinion, that it is there but in a figure, sign,
or token (127) The.127. Untruth, For this is no part of our Doctrine.
only.

The B. of Sarisburie.
I know not well, whether M. Hardinge do this of purpose, or else it be his
manner of writing. But this I see, that being demanded of one thing, he
always turns his answer to an other. The question is here moved, whether
Christ's Body be Really, and Corporally in the Sacrament: His answer is,
That Christ's Body is joined, and united Really, and Corporally unto us: And
herein he bestows his whole treaty, and answeareth not one word unto the
question.

In the former Articles, he was hable to allege some forged Authorities: Some
contrefeite practice of the Church: Some words of the ancient Doctors,
although mistaken: Some show of natural, and worldly reason: or at the least
wise, some color, or shifte of words. But in this matter, for direct proof
he is habl^ to allege nothing: no not so much as the healpe, and drifte of
natural Reason.

Where he says, Christen people has ever been thus taught from the
beginning, It is great marvel, that either they should be so taught, without
a teacher: or theirs teacher should thus instruct them, without words: or
such words should be spoken, and never written. Uerily M. Hardinge by his
silence, and want herein, secretly confesses, that theis^ wo^rdes, Really,
Carnally etc. in this matter of the Sacrament, were never used of any Ancient
Writer. For if they were, either he, or his fellows would have found them.

But Christ says, This is my Body: This is my blood: And to put the matter
out of doubt, Dissension and Contradiction of M. Hardings side.
he adds, Which is given for you: which shall be sheadde for you. Here^pon
M. Harding foundeth his Carnal Presence: notwithstanding Christ him self
uses not any of these words, nor any other word leadinge thereunto. And D.
Fisher sometime Bishop of Rochester, a famous man of M. Hardinges side, says
expressly, that this sense cannot in any wise be geathered of the bare words
of Christ. For thus he writes* Hactenus Matthaeus: qui and solus Testamenti
Noui meminit. Neque vllum hic verbum positum est, Io. Fischerus co^tra
Captiuita. Babilonica^. N. 8. andO.
quo probetur, in nostra Missa veram fieri Carnis, and Sanguinis Christi
Praesentiam. Hitherto S. Matthewe: who only makes mention of the New
Testament. Neither are there any words here written, whereby it may be
proved, that in our Mass is made the very presence of the Body, and Blood
of Christ. And further he avouches it thus, Non potest igitur per vllam
Scripturam probari. Therefore it cannot be proved by any Scripture. Here we see
great variety of judgment in M. Hardinges own side, and that in matters of
greatest weight. M. Hardinge thinks his Carnal Presence is proved
sufficiently by these words of Christ, This is my Body: D. Fisher contrary
wise says, It cannot be proved, neither by these words of the Scripture,
nor by any other. And yet it was ever thought, M. Fisher was as learned in
every respect, as M. Hardinge.

And, albeit M. Hardinge lay such hold upon these words of Christ, as if
they were so plain, yet others of his friends by their diverse, and sundry
Constructions touching the same, have made them somewhat dark, and doubteful,
and cannot yet thoroughly agree upon them. Some of them say, Christ's Natural
Body is in the Sacrament, how be it not Naturally: Some others say, D.
Smythe De Eucharist.
It is there both Naturally, and also Sensibly: Stephan. Gardinerus.
Some of them say precisely, Never man used either of these two terms,
Naturally, or Sensibly, in this case of Christ's Presence in the Sacrament. Yet
others of them put the matter out of doubt, and say, Christ is there present
Naturally: D. Smythe. Ste. Gardener in the Devils Sophistry. fol. 6.
And in the Council holden in Rome under Pope Nicolas. 2. it was determined,
and Berengarius forced to Subscribe, That Christ is in the Sacrament Sensibly,
or, as they the^^ grossly vttred it in Latin, Sensualiter. Some of them say,
Christ's Body is not divided, or broken in the Sacrament, De Con. Did. 2. Ego
Berengarius Ste. Gardener in the Devils Sophistry. fo. 15.
but only the Accidents: But Pope Nicolas, with his whole Council says,
Christ's Body it self is touched with fingers, and divided, and broken, and
rent with teethe, and not only the Accidents. Thus to leave other more
contrarieties, it is plain hereby, that the best learned of that side, are not
yet fully agreed upon the sense of Christ's words: notwithstanding their
suitors, and well willers are otherwise persuaded of them. De Con. Did. 2. Ego
Bereng. Manibus tractari, frangi, dentibus atteri.
And does M. Hardinge believe, that Christian people were thoroughly resolved
herein, when their Doctors and Teachers were not resolved: or that the
Scholars were better instructed, then their Masters?

Now, if this Article cannot be proved, neither by any words of the
Scriptures, as D. Fisher says, and as it further appears by the dissension
of the Teachers, nor by any one of all the Old Doctors, and Fathers, as M.
Hardinge graunfeth by his silence: then may Godly, and Catholic Christian
people well stay their judgments, and stand in doubt of this Carnal, and
Fleashely Presence. In deed the question bitweene us this day, is not of the
Letters, or Syllables of Christ's Words: for they are known, and confessed
of either party: but only of the Sense, and Meaning of his words: Hierom.
ad Gala Cap. 1.
which, as S. Hierome says, is the very pith* and substance of the Scriptures.
And the Law (...)self says, In fraudem Legis facit, qui saluis verbis Legis,
Sententiam eius circumu^ri^^. He commits fraud against the Laws, that,
sauinge the words of the Law, overthrows the meaning. Pan. De Leg. and
Senatuscon. and longa consuetud. Contra legem. August. De fide, and operib. ca.
4.
And S. Augustine seems herein to find fault with certain in his time. His
words be these, Cum in vnam part^m procliuiter ire co^perint, non cespiciunt
Diuinae authoritatis alia testimonia, quibus possint ab illa intention
reuocari, and in ea, quae ex vtrisque temperat^ est, Veritate, ac moderatione
consistere. Figure.
When they once begin to run headlonge of one side, they never consider
other testimonies of Divine authority, whereby they might be withdrawn from
their purpose, and so might reast in that Truth, and measure, that is
te^pered, and tuned of both. If it be true that M. Hardinge says, That this
is the only sense, and meaning of Christ's Words, That his Body is in such
gross sort Really, and fleashely in the Sacrament, and that unless Christ
mean so, he means nothing: it is great wonder, that none of the Ancient
Catholic Doctors of the Church, no not one, could ever see it: or if they
saw it, yet, being so eloquent, lacked words, and were never hable to
express it.

But he says, It is no bare Figure, as the Sacramentaries hold opinion, And
therefore he thinks, he may conclude, that Christ's Body is Really present.
So might he also say, The Sacrament of Baptism is no Bare Figure, Therefore
Christ is therein Really present. Certainly S. Augustine speakinge of the
Rock in the wilderness writes thus, Augustine. Super Leuiticu^ quaest. 57.
Hinc est, quod dictum est, Petra erat Christus. Non enim dixit, Petra
Significat Christum, sed tanquam hoc esset: quod vtique per Substantiam non hoc
erat, sed per Significationem. Therefore it is written, The Rock was Christ.
For S. Paul says not, The Rock Signified Christ, but as though it had been
Christ in deed: where as it was not Christ in Substance, but by way of
Signification, or by a Figure. S. Paul says not, 1. Corin. 10.
The Rock was a Figure of Christ, but the Rock was Christ. And S. Basile in
like sort says, Basil. De Poenitentia*
Christus re vera ^etra estimmobilis, and inconcussa. Christ in deed is the
suer and the firm Rock. Yet, I trow, M. Hardinge will not therefore say,
Christ was Really, or Carnally in the Rock.

Neither can I think, M. Hardinge is such a deadly enemy unto Figures, as
he would now seem to be. For he him self in these few words of Christ,
touching the Institution of this Holy Sacrament, as it shall be showed here
after more at large, is feign to seek healpe of sixteen, or more sundry
Figures: and the same so strange, so gross, and so insensible, that neither S.
Augustine, nor S. Hierome, nor any other Old Divine ever knew them, nor any
good Grammarian would allow them. So many, and such figures, it is lawful
for him to divise, and use, to maintain the Falsehoode. But for us, in defense
of the Truth, it may not be lawful, to use one.

Uerily, the Old Catholic Fathers were never so curiouse in this behalf, nor
thought it such Heresy, to expound Christ's words by a Figure. Briefly for
a taste hereof, S. Augustine says, Augustine. (...)Psalmum. 3.
Christus adhibuit Iudam ad Conuiuium, in quo Corporis, and Sanguinis sui
Figuram Discipulis suis commendauit, and tradidit. Christ received Judas to his
banquet, wherein he gave unto his Disciples the Figure of his Body, and Blood.
Likewise Tertullian says, Tertul. contra Marcionem. li. 4.
Christus acceptum Panem, and distributum Discipulis, Corpus suum illum fecit,
Dicendo hoc est Corpus meu^, hoc est, Figura Corporis mei: Christ receiuinge
the Bread, and the same being divided unto his Disciples, made it his Body:
saieinge, This is my Body, that is to say, The Figure of my Body. Ambros. de
illi^ qui initiantur Mysterijs. Cap. Vltimo.
S. Ambrose says, Ante Benedictionem verborum Coelestium alia species
nominatur: post Consecrationem Corpus Christi Significatur. Before the
Blissinge of the Heavenly Words, it is called an other kind: after the
Consecration, the Body of Christ is Signified. Here I must protest, That, as
M. Hardinge is troubled with want of witness in this case, so am I oppressed
with multitude. If I should allege all the reaste of the Ancient Godly Fathers,
that write the like, I should be over tedious to the Reader. And an other
place hereafter folowinge, will serve more aptely to this purpose. But by the
way, Gentle Reader, I must give the to understand, that S. Augustine hereof
writes thus, Augusti de Doctrina Christiana li. 3. Cap. 5. The Bondage of the
Soul.
Ea demum est miserabilis Animae seruitus, Signa pro rebus accipere: and supra
Creaturam corpoream, oculum mentis ad hauriendum aeternum lumen leuare non
posse. In deed, this is a miserable bondage of the Soul, to take the Signs
in the steed of things, that be signified: and not to have power, Figure.
to lift up the eye of the mind above the bodily creature, to receive the
light, that is everlasting. And again, Ibidem.
In principio cauendum est, ne Figurat^ locutionem ad Literam accipias. Et ad
hoc enim pertinet, quod ait Apostolus, Litera occidit: Spiritus autem
viuificat. Cum enim Figurate dictum sic accipitur, tanquam proprie dictum sit,
carnaliter sapitur. Neque vlla mors animae congruentius appellatur. First of
al, thou must beware, that thou take not a Figurative speech ^ccordinge to the
Letter. For thereunto also it apperteineth, that the Apostle says: The letter
kills, the Sprite gives life. For when the thing, that is spoken in a
Figure, is so taken, as if it were plainly spoken (without Figure) there is
fleashely understanding: neither is there any Death more fitly called, the
Death of the Soul. The Death of the Soul.
By these words, Good Reader, S. Augustine sturreth up thy senses, to
consider well, what thou do, least perhaps thou be deceived.

And where as M. Hardinge thus unjustly reports of us, That we maintain a
naked Figure, and a Bare Sign, or Token only, and nothing else, If he be of
God, he knows well, he should not thus bestow his tongue, or hand, to bear
false witness. It is written, Deutero. 5.
God will destroy them al, that speak untruth. He knows well, we feed not
the people of God with bare Signs, Exodus 20.
and Figures: but teach them, that the Sacraments of Christ be Holy
Mysteries, Psalm. 5.
and that in the Ministration thereof Christ is set before us, Galat. 3.
even as he was Crucified upon the Cross: and that therein we may behold the
Remission of our sins, Roman. 5.
and our Reconciliation unto God: and, Chrysostom. ad populum Antioch.
as Chrysostom briefly says, Christ's great Benefit, and our Salvation.
Herein we teach the people, not that a naked Sign, or Token, but that
Christ's Body, and Blood in deed, Hom. 60.
and verily is given unto us: that we verily eat it: that we verily drink it:
Ephesians. 5.
that we verily be reliued, and live by it: that we are Boanes of his Boanes,
1. John. 4.
and Fleashe of his Fleashe: that Christ dwells in us, and we in him. Yet we
say not, either that the Substance of the Bread, or Wine, is done away: or
that Christ's Body is let down from heaven, or made Really, or Fleashely
Present in the Sacrament. We are taught, according to the Doctrine of the Old
Fathers, Sursum corda. Chrysostom. in. ^. Corint. 10. Hom. 24.
to lift up our hearts to heaven, and there to feed upon the Lamb of God.
Chrysostom says, Ad alta contendat oporte^, qui ad hoc Corpus accedit. Who so
w^l reach to that Body, must mount on high. S. Augustine likewise says,
Quomodo tenebo absentem^ Quomodo in coelum manum mittam, vt ibi sedentem
teneam? Fidem ^ni^te: and tenuisti. Augustine. in Johan. tractat. 50.
How shall I take hold of him being absent? How shall I reach up my hand
into heaven, and hold him sittinge there? Send up thy faith, and thou have
taken him. Thus Spiritually, and with the mouth of our Faith we eat the Body
of Christ, and drink his Blood, even as verily, as his Body was Uerily
broaken, and his Blood Uerily sheadde upon the Cross. And thus S. Augustine,
and S. Chrysostom, and other holy Fathers taught the people in their time to
believe. In deed the Bread, that we receive with our bodily mouths, is an
carthly thing, and therefore a Figure: as the water in Baptism is likewise
also a Figure: But the Body of Christ, that thereby is represented, and there
is offered unto our Faith, is the thing it self, and no Figure. And in
respect of the glory thereof, we have no regard unto the Figure. Therefore
S. Bernarde alludinge to the same, says thus, Bernard. De Coena Domini.
Annulus non valet quicquam: haereditas est, quam quaerebam. The sealinge ringe
is nothing worth: it is the inheritance, that I sought for.







And in this last point appears a notable difference bytweene us, and M.
Hardinge. Figure.
For we place Christ in the heart, according to ye Doctrine of S. Paul:
Ephesians. 3.
M. Harding places him in the mouth. We say, Christ is eaten only by
Faith: M. Hardinge says, He is eaten with the mouth, and teeth. But Gods
name be blessed: a great number of godly people does already perceive the
vnconfortable, and unsavory vanity of this Doctrine. For they have learned of
S. Cyprian, that Christ's Blessed Body is Cibus mentis, non ventris: Meat for
the mind, not for the belly: And they have heard S. Augustine say, Quid paras
dentem, and ven^re^? Creed, and manducasti: What preparest thou thy tooth, and
thy belly? Believe, and thou haste already eaten.

Now consider thou, good Christian Reader, with thee self, whether it be
better to use this word, Figure, which word has been often used of
Tertullian, S. Augustine, and of all the reast of the Ancient Fathers, without
controlment: or else these new fangled words, Really, Corporally, Carnally,
etc. Which words M. Hardinge is not hable to show, that in this case of
being Really in the Sacrament, any one of all the Old Fathers ever used.

M. Hardinge. The.2. Division.
Again (128) The.128. Untruth, Joined with dangerous Doctrine.
we cannot find, where our Lord performed the promise, he made in the.6.
Chapter of John: The Bread, which I will give, is my Fleashe, which I will
give for the life of the world: but only in his last Supper. Where, if he
gave his Fleashe to his Apostles, and that none other, but the very same,
which he gave for the life of the world: it follows, that in the blessed
Sacrament is not mere Bread, but that same his very Body in substance. For it
was not mere Bread, but his very Body, that was given and offered up upon the
Cross.

The B. of Sarisburie.
This Principle is not only false in it self, but also full of dangerous
Doctrine, and may soon lead to Desperation. For if noman may eat the Fleash
of Christ, but only in ye Sacrament, as here by M. Harding it is supposed,
then al Christian Children, and al others who so ever, that depart this life
without receiuinge the Sacrament, must needs be damned, and die the Chrildren
of Gods anger. For Christ's words be plain, and general. Joan. 6.
Unless ye eat the Pleashe of the Son of Man, ye shall have no life in you.
Whereunto we may add this Minor: Christian Children receive not the Sacrament,
and therefore by M. Hardinges judgment, eat not the Fleashe of the Son of
Man: Hereof it must needs follow, That Christian Children have no life in them,
but are the Children of Damnation. This is the Conclusion of M. Hardinges
Doctrine. But little care these men, who, or how many perish: so their
fantasies may stand upright. But our Doctrine grounded upon Gods holy Word,
is this, That as certainly as Christ gave his Body upon the Cross, so
certainly he gives now yt self same Body unto the Faithful: and that, not
only in ye Ministration of the Sacrament, as M. Harding untruly imagines,
but also at al times, when so ever we be hable to say with S. Paul, I think,
I know nothing, but Jesus Christ, and the same Christ Crucified upon the
Cross. Therefore S. Ambrose writes thus, 1. Corinthians 2. Ambrosi. in Psalm. 118.
Sermo. 18.
Quid petis O Iudaee? vt tribuat tibi Panem, que^ dat omnibus, dat quoridie,
dat semper? O thou Jew, what desire thou? That Christ should give thee
Bread? He gives it to al me^: he gives it daily: he gives it at al times. If
it be true that S. Ambrose says, that Christ gives that Bread, which is
his Body, at al times, then is it false yt M. Harding says, that Christ
performs his promise, and gives his Body only at the Ministration of the
Sacrament. And therefore S. Augustine says, Non tantum in Sacramento, sed etiam
re ipsa comedunt Corpus Christi. They eat Christ's Body, not only in the
Sacrament, but also in very deed. Augustine. de C^uita. li. 2^. ca. 20. Non
solum.
Here S. Augustine says, contrary to M. Hardinges Doctrine, that we eat
Christ's Body, not only in the Sacrament, but also otherwise: yea, and so
far he for^eth this difference, that he makes the eatinge of Christ's Body
in the Sacrament, to be one thing, and the very true eatinge thereof in deed
to be an other thing. Again, touching the Fathers of the Old law, he says,
that Abraham, Moses, Aaron, and others received the Body of Christ truly,
and effectually, long time before that Christ, Augustine. de Vtilitate
poenitentiae. ca. 1.
either had received Fleashe of the Blessed Uirgin, or had ordained the
Sacrament: Manducauerunt eundem cibum quem nos.
and that even the self same Body, that is received now of ye Faithful. To be
short, of Christian Children, and other Faithful, that never received the
Sacrament, he writes thus, Nulli est aliquatenus ambigendu^, tunc vnumquenque
Fidelium Corporis Sanguinisque Domini participem fieri, quando in Baptismate
efficitur Membrum Christi etc. No man may in any wise doubt, but that every
faithful man is then made partaker of the Body, Augustine. in Sermon ad
infantes. Citatur a Beda. 1. Cor. 10.
and Blood of Christ, when in Baptism he is made a Member of Christ: and
that he is not without the fellowship of that Bread, and of that Cup,
although before he eat of that Bread, and drink of that Cup, he depart
this world, being in the Unity of Christ's Body. For he is not made
frustrate of the Communion, and benefit of that Sacrament, while he finds
that thing, which is signified by the Sacrament. Quando ipse hoc, quod illud
Sacramentum significat, inuenit.
So far S. Augustine. By these we may see, It is not al true, that M.
Harding so constantly avouches. If it might have pleased him to take advise of
Beda, S. Augustine, S. Ambrose, and other godly Fathers, he should soon have
found, that ye Faithful may otherwise eat Christ's Body, and that verily, and
in deed: and not only in the Sacrament.

M. Hardinge. The.3. Division.
If the words spoken by Christ in S. John of promise, that he performed in
his holy Supper. The Bread that I will give is my Fleashe, had been to be
taken, not as they seem to mean, plainly, and truly, but Metaphorically,
Tropically, Symbolically, and Figuratively, so as the truth of our Lords
Fleashe be excluded, (129) The.129. untruth, loined with v^true report For
we understand these words of Christ's very Fleash and Blood.
as our Adversaries do understand them: then the Capernaites had not any
occasion at al of their great offense. Then should not they have had cause to
murmoure against Christ, Ca. 6.
as the Evangelist shows: The Jews (says S. John) strove among them
selves, sayeinge, how can he give us his Fleashe to eat? And much less his
dear Disciples, to whom he had showed so many, and so great miracles, to
whom he had before declared so many parables, and so high secrets, should have
had any occasion of offense. And doubtless if Christ had mente they should
eat but the sign, or figure of his Body, they would not have said, Durus
est hic Sermo, This is a hard saieing, and who can abide to hear it? For then
should they have done no greater thing, then they had done oftentimes before
in eatinge the Easter Lamb. And how could it seem a hard word, or
saieing, if Christ had meante nothing else, but this, The Bread that I will
give, is a Figure of my Body, that shall cause you to remember me?

The B. of Sarisburie.
This reason holds only of the ignorance of the Capernaites, and hangs
thus: The Capernaites mystooke Christ's words, and understood not what he
meante:

Ergo, Christ's Body is Really, and Carnally in the Sacrament. And thus M.
Harding, as his manner is, builds one error upon an other.

For understanding hereof, it shall be necessary, first, to open the very sense,
and meaning of Christ's words: Next, to show how peruersely, and grossly
the Capernaites were deceived: and last of al, to consider M. Hardinges
Conclusion.

First of al, the Jews desired Christ to give them Bread in the Wilderness,
as Moses had given before unto their Fathers. Christ, to pulle them from the
gross, and material cogitations of their bellies, promised them an other kind
of Bread, that should be sp^ritual, and last for ever. Thus he said unto
them, John. 6.
My Father gives you true Bread from Heaven. Who so eats of this Bread shall
live for ever.

And that they might understand, what he meante, he said further: I am the
Bread, that came from Heaven. The Bread, that I will give you, is my Fleashe,
which I shall give for the life of the world. Thus he spoke of the spiritual
eatinge, and digesting of his Fleashe in the hearts of ye Faithful. Spiritual
eatinge.
And so immediately after he opened his own mind. For, when he saw, The Jews,
for that they understood him not, were offended, he said further unto them,
It is the Spirit, that gives life: the Fleashe profits nothing. The
words, that I speak, are Spirit and life. Which words S. Augustine in
plainer sort expounds thus. Spiritualiter intelligite, quod locutus sum. Non
hoc Corpus, quod videtis, manducaturi estis, and bibituri illum Sanguinem,
Augustine. i^ Psalm. 98.
quem fusuri sunt, qui me Crucifigent. Sacramentum aliquod vobis commendaui:
Spiritualiter intellectum viuificat vos. Understand ye spiritually, that I
have spoken. Ye shall not eat ( with your bodily mouth) this Body that you
see: nor shall ye ( with your bodily mouth) drink that Blood, which they shall
sheadde, that shall Crucify me. I give you a certain Sacrament. The same
being spiritually understood gives you life. Basilius in Psalm. 33.
So says S. Basile, Gustate, and videre, quoniam suauis est Dominus. Taste ye,
and see, that the Lord is gracious. And further he says: We have oftentimes
marked ( in the Scriptures) that the inward powers of the mind, have their
names of the outward members of the Body. (...)
Therefore, for as much as our Lord is the true Bread, and his Fleashe the
true food, It must needs be, that the desectation, and pleasure of the same,
be moved and caused within us, by a spiritual kind of taste. Again he says,
Further we say, that there is a certain Spiritual mouth of the inner man,
wherewith he is feadde, receiuinge the Word of life, which is the Bread that
came from Heaven. Likewise says S. Augustine, Fides habet oc^los suos. Faith
has eyes of her own, to see with all. Again, Intus bibendo foelix sum. Happy
am I, when I drink ( in my heart) within. And again, Panis iste interioris
hominis quaerit esuriem. This Bread seeks the hunger of the inner man. So
says Leo, Circa hoc Corpus Aquilae sunt, quae alis circumuolant spiritualibus.
About this Body be Egles, that flee about it with spiritual wings. So
likewise Origin: August. Epist. 95.
Idcirco and verum lumen dicitur, vt habeant oculi animae, August. in Joan.
tracta. 26.
quo illuminentur: idcirco and verbum, vt habeant aures, quod audiant: and
idcirco Panis vitae, vt habeat gustus animae, quod deguster. Therefore is
Christ called the Light, that the eyes of the Soul may have whereby they may
be lightened: Ibidem.
Therefore he is called the Word, De consecratione Did. 2. In quibus.
that the ears of the soul may have, what to hear: and therefore he is
called the Bread of life, that the sense of the soul may have, what to taste.
So Tertullian, Auditu deuorandus est, intellectu ruminandus, and Fide
digerendus. Christ by hearing must be devoured: by understanding must be
chewed: Origin. in Canti. Cantico. hom. 2.
and by Faith must be digested. In like sort Chrysostom, Magnus iste Panis,
qui replet mentem, non ventrem. This is that great Bread, that feeds, not
the belly, but the mind. Therefore S. Augustine says, Christus dixit, se
esse Panem, qui de Coelo descendit, hortans vt credamus in ipsum. Credere enim
in eum, hoc est manducare Panem viuum. Christ named him self the Bread,
Tertul^. De Resurrecti. carnis. Chrysostom. ex varijs locis in Matthae. hom. 9.
that came from Heaven, exhortinge us to believe in him. For beleeuinge in him,
is the eating of the Bread of life.

Hereby it is plain, that Christ's meaning is spiritual, as Christ him
self, and all the Old Fathers, and Doctors of the Church have expounded it:
not Real, Augustine. in Joan. tracta. 26.
Carnal, Gross, and Fleashely, as M. Hardinge imagines. M. Hardinge will say,
That the Eatinge with the mouth, and the grindinge with the teeth, is a Work
Spiritual. By this sense, he is a good Proctour for the Capernaites, and must
needs say, that they had a Spiritual understanding. How be it, Chrysostom
will not well suffer this evasion. His words be plain, Chrysostom. in Johan.
hom. 47.
Quid est Carnaliter intelligere? Simpliciter, vt res dicuntur: neque aliud
quippiam cogitare. what is it to understand Carnally? It is to understand
plainly, even as the things be uttered: and to think upon nothing else.
Therefore S. Augustine says, Figura est, praecipiens Passioni Domini
communicandum esse, Augustine. De doctrina Christiana. li. 3. ca. 16
and suauiter, atque vtiliter recondendum in memoria, quod Christus pro nobis
mortuus sit. The saieing of ^hriste, touching the Eating of his Fleashe, is a
Figure, or manner of speech, commaundinge us to be partakers of Christ's
Passion, and with conforte, and profit to lay up in our memory, that Christ
has suffered Death for us. This therefore was Christ's meaning, and this is
the very Eatinge of his Fleashe.

Now let us see, Origin. in Prologo in Cantica Canticorum.
what sense the Capernaites geathered hereof. Origin says Accidit, vt
simpliciores nescientes distinguere, quae sint, quae in Scripturis Diuinis
interiorihomini, quae exteriori depu^anda sint, vocabulorum similitudinibus
falsi, ad ineptas quasdam fabulas, and figmenta inania se contulerint. It
happens sometime, that simple men, being not hable to put difference
bytweene those things in the Scriptures, that perteine to the inner man, and
those things, that perteine to the utter man, are deceived by the likeness of
words, Hieronym. li. 3. in Matthae. cap. 17.
and so fall into foolish fables, and vain fantasies. So says S. Hierome,
Cum Seniores putentur in Ecclesia, and Principes Sacerdotum, Simplicem sequendo
Literam, occidunt Filium Dei. Where as they are taken for the Elders in the
Church, and the Chief of the Priests, by folowinge the Plain Letter, they
kill the Son of God. Even thus it happened unto the Capernaites: that Christ
spoke Spiritually of eatinge with Faith, Augustine in Johan. tracta. 11.
they understood grossly of eatinge with the teeth: as though they should
swallow down his Fleashe into their bodies, as other meats: even in such
gross sort, as M. Hardinge would now teach the people to eat Christ's
Body.

Tertullian opens their error in this wise, Tertull. De resurrectione Carnis.
Durum, and intolerabilem existimarunt sermonem eius: quasi vere Carnem suam
illis edendam determinasset. They thought, his speech was hard, and
intolerable: as though he had determined to give them his Fleashe verily, and
in deed to be eaten (with their mouths.) Therein, says Tertullia^, stood
their error. Now, to consider M. Hardinges gheasses: first he says, The
Capernaites were offended with Christ's words: Ergo, it is likely, Christ
meante, he would give his Body Really, and Carnally in the Sacrament. Nico.
Lyra in Psalm. 110.
First, Nicolas Lyra, M. Hardinges own Doctor, says, That these words of
Christ in the sixthe of John, perteine not unto the Sacrament: Again, it is
but a simple gheasse, to build Religion upon an Error. He might rather say
thus: The Capernaites thought they should eat Christ's Fleashe Really, and
Fleashely with their mouths: But that was not Christ's meaning, as it well
appears: for they were deceived: Ergo, Christ meante not, they should eat
his Fleashe Really, and Fleashely, with their mouths.

He adds further, If Christ had meante, He would give them only a Figure
of his Body in his remembrance, there had been no cause, why either the
Capernaites, or any other should be offended. Neither do we say, That
Christ in the sixthe Chapter of John, speakinge of the Spiritual Eatinge by
Faith, made mention of any Figure: but only of his very Fleashe, and very
Blood, in deed, and verily to be eaten, and dronken. Notwithstanding we
say, that Christ afterward in his Last Supper, unto the same Spiritual
Eatinge added also an outward Sacrament, which of the Old Fathers is
oftentimes, and commonly called a Figure. But hereof grows M. Hardinges
error, Origin. in Prologo in Cantica Canticorum.
for that, as Origin says, He puts no difference bytweene the Body, and
the Sprite: and things severally perteininge to them both. The Bread is a
Figure: but Christ's Body is the thing it self, and no Figure.

The Bread is in the Earth: Christ's Body is in Heaven. The bread is
subject to Corruption: Christ's Body is Immortal, and Glorious, and subject
to no Corruption. Raban. Maurus. li. 1. ca. 31.
Therefore Rabanus Maurus says, Sacramentum ore percipitur: virtute
Sacramenti interior homo satiatur. Sacramentum in alimentum Corporis redigitur:
virtute Sacramenti aeternam vitam adipiscimur. The Sacrament is received with
the mouth: by the Virtue of the Sacrament the Inner Man is repaired. The
Sacrament is turned into the nourishinge of the Body: by the Virtue of the
Sacrament we geate everlasting life. And S. Augustine says, Augustine Johan.
tracta. 26.
Sacramentum de Mensa Dominica sumitur, quibusdam ad vitam, quibusdam ad
exitium: Res vero ipsa, cuius Sacramentum est, omni homini ad vitam, nulli ad
exitium, quicunque eius particeps fuerit. The Sacrament is received from the
Lords Table, of some unto life, of some unto destruction. But the thi^^ it
self whereof it is a Sacrament, ( that is, the Body of Christ) is received
of every man unto life, and of nom^^ unto Destruction, who so ever be partaker
of it.

M. Hardinge. The.4. Division.
To conclude shortly: A simple proof. For Christ like wise shows his
Omnipotent power in the water of Baptism.
If Christ would so have been understood, as though he had meante to give
but a Figure only of his Body, it had been no need for him to have alleged
his Omnipotency, and almighty power to his Disciples, thereby the rather to
bring them to belief of his True Body to be given them to eat. Hoc vos
scandalizat? Does this offend you? says he. What if you see the Son of man
ascend, where he was before? it is the spirit that gives life etc. As though
he had said: ye consider only my humanity, that seems weak, and frail,
neither do you esteem my divine power by the great miracles I have wrought:
But when as ye shall see me by power of my Godhead ascend into Heaven, from
whence I came unto you, will you then also stand in doubt, whether ye may
believe, that I give you my very Body to be eaten? Thus by signifieing his
divine power, Christ confounded their unbelief, touching the verity, and
substance of his Body, that he promised to give them in meat.

The B. of Sarisburie.
M. Hardinge wandreth still about his Figures, and out of Gods Omnipotent
Power, diuiseth a very feeble argument. For thus he reasons:

Christ makes mention of his Ascension into Heaven: Ergo, His Body is Really
in the Sacrament.

He has no just cause to be offended, for that I lay his Logique thus abroad.
It behooves the Reader to see, by what force each thing is proved. Uerily,
if he Conclude not thus, he renneth at riotte, and Concludes nothing.

As touching Christ's Ascension into Heaven, S. Augustine, and other Ancient
Fathers seem to use the same, to prove, That there is no such gross presence
in the Sacrament. Augustine. in Joan. tractat. 27 Illi enim putabant eum
erogaturum corpus suum. Certe vel tunc intelligetis, quod Gratiae eius non
consumitur morsibus: Chrysostom. in. 1.
S. Augustine thereof writes thus, Si ergo videritis Filium hominis
Ascendentem etc. If you shall see the Son of man ascendinge up, where he was
before etc. And what is this? Hereby he opens that thing, wherewith they
were offended. For they thought, he would give them his Body: But he told
them, that he would Ascend into Heaven, and that whole as he was. When ye shall
see the Son of man Ascend thither, where he was before, then shall you see,
that he gives not his Body in such sort, as you imagine: then shall you
perceive, that his Grace is not consumed, or wasted by morsels.

S. Chrysostom says, as it is before alleged, Ad alta oportet eum contendere,
qui ad hoc Corpus accedit. Aquilarum, non graculorum, est haec Mensa. He must
mount on high, that will come to this Body. For this Table serves for Egles,
and not for Iayes. So says S. Hierome, Ascendamus cum Domino in Coenaculum
magnum, stratum, and mu^datum: and accipiamus ab eo Sursum Calicem Noui
Testamenti. Let us go up with the Lord (into Heaven) into that great Parlar
spreadde, Corin. 10. ho. 24
and clean: and let us receive of him above the Cup of the New Testament.
Hieronym. ad Hedibia^ quae. 2.
The like might be alleged of other more Catholic, and Ancient Fathers. For
Cyrillus says in most plain words, Sacramentum nostrum Hominis
manducationem non asserit, mentes credentium ad crassas cogitationes
irreligiose inducens. Cyrill. ad objection. Theodor. Anathematis. 11. (...)
Our Sacrament avouches not the Eatinge of a Man, leadinge the minds of the
Faithful in ungodly manner to gross (or fleashly) cogitations.

Doublesse it seems to make very simple proof of M. Hardinges side, to say
thus:

Christ's Body is Ascended into Heaven: Ergo, The same Body is Really, and
Fleashely in the Sacrament. But M. Hardinge will say, Christ speaking to the
Capernaites, made mention of his Omnipotent Power, Therefore in ye Sacrament
there must needs be a Fleashly Presence. Nico. Lyra in Psalm. 110.
First, as it is before alleged, Nicolas Lyra says, Christ's words to the
Capernaites perteine nothing to the Sacrament, but only unto the Spiritual
Eatinge of Christ's Body, which in deed is the Omnipotent Work of the
Spirit of God.

And again, would M. Harding make all the world believe, if Christ's Body be
not fleashly, and grossly in the Sacrament, according to his fantasy, that
then God therefore is not Omnipotent? Uerily, the old Catholic Fathers
acknowledge Gods Omnipotency in the Water of Baptism: yet is not Christ
therefore Really Present in the water. Chrysostom. in Matthae. hom. 51.
S. Chrysostom says, Cum Baptizaris, Sacerdos te non Baptizat: Sed Deus est,
qui Caput tuum Inuisibili Potentia continet: and nec Angelus, nec Archangelus,
nec vllus alius audet accedere, and tangere. When thou art Baptized, it is not
the Pr^est that dippeth thee: but it is God, that by his Invisible Power
holds thy head: and neither Angel, nor Archangel, nor any other power dares
to approach, and touch thee.

S. Augustine says, August. in Ioha^. Tract. 5.
Paulus Baptizauit tanquam Minister: Dominus Baptizauit tanqua^ potestas. Paul
Baptized as a Seruante: The Lord Baptized, as the power it self. August.
contra literas Petiliani li. 3. ca. 49.
Again, Nec iam Baptizare cessauit Dominus: sed adhuc id agit: Non ministerio
Corporis, sed Inuisibili opere Maiestatis. The Lord lets not yet to
Baptize: but continues Baptizing still: not by the Ministry of his Body, but
by the Invisible work of his Majesty. So likewise says Leo the Bishop of
Rome: Leo de Natiuita. Sermon. 4.
Christus dedit Aquae, quod dedit Matri. Virtus enim Altissimi, and obumbratio
Spiritus Sancti, quae fecit vt Maria pareret Saluatorem. eadem facit, vt
Regeneret Vnda Credentem. Christ give unto the Water, the same, that he gave
unto his Mother. For the power of the Highest, and the ouershadowing of the
holy Ghost, that caused Marie to bear the Saueour, the same causes, that
Water does Regenerate the Beleuer. It appears by these authorities, that
Christ in the Water of Baptism shows his Invisible, and Omnipotent power.
Yet will not M. Hardinge say, that Christ is therefore Really, and Fleashly
Present in the Water of Baptism.

Therefore it was but vain labor to allege Christ's Omnipotent power, to
prove this Fleashly Presence in the Sacrament.

M. Hardinge. The.5. Division.
These places of the Scripture, and many other reportinge plainly, that Christ
at his Supper gave to his Disciples his very Body, even that same, which the
day folowinge suffered Death on the Cross, have ministered just cause to the
(130) The.130. Untruth. For not one of the Ancient Fathers ever used any of
these terms, touching Christ's presence in the Sacrament.
godly and learned Fathers of the Church, to say, that Christ's Body is
Present in this Sacrament Really, Substantially, Corporally, Carnally, and
Naturally. By use of which Aduerbes they have meante only a truth of being,
and not a way, or mean of being. And though this manner of speakinge be not
thus expressed in the Scripture, yet is it deduced out of the Scripture. For if
Christ spoke plainly, (131) The.131. Untruth. For M Hardi^ge him self is
forced in the same words to acknovvledge a great many figures.
and used no Trope, Figure, nor Metaphore, as the Scripture it self
sufficiently declares to an humble beleuer, and would his Disciples to
understand him, so as he spoke in manifest terms, when he said, This is my
Body, which is given for you: Then may we say, that in the Sacrament his very
Body is Present, yea, Really, that is to say in deed, Substantially, that is,
in Substance, and Corporally, Carnally, and Naturally: by which words is
mente, that his very Body, his very Fleashe, and his very human Nature is
there, not after Corporal, Carnal, or Natural wise, but inuisibly,
unspeakably, miraculously, supernaturally, spiritually, divinely, and by way
to him only known.

The B. of Sarisburie.
By these words, that Christ at his last Supper spoke unto his Disciples,
This is my Body, it is plain (says M. Hardinge) that he gave unto them the
very same Body, that was Crucified the next day upon the Cross: and upon
occasion thereof the learned Fathers had just cause to say, that Christ's Body
is Really, and Carnally in the Sacrament. This argument is called Petitio
Principij, which is, when a thing is taken to make proof, that is doubtful,
and stands in question, and ought it self to be proved. This Fallax may well
beguile Children: but emonge the Learned, it is counted in reasoninge a great
folly. The Order, or Form hereof is naught: the Antecedent unproven: the
Consequent false, as shall appear.

M. Harding says, These words, This is my Body, must needs be taken without
Metaphore, Trope, or Figure, even as the plain letter lies, and none
otherwise. So says M. Hardinge only upon his own credit. But the old
Catholic Doctors of the Church, of whom (he says) he has such stoare,
say not so. S. Augustine, S. Ambrose, S. Hierome, S. Chrysostom, S. Basile,
Tertullian, and others call the Sacrament a Figure, a Token, a Sign, an
Example, an Image, According to the letter.
a Similitude, a Remembrance: as hereafter, God willinge, shall be showed more at
large upon better occasion, in an Article specially touching the same. Even
Duns him self, with sundry others of that side, saw, that folowinge the very
bare Letter, we must needs say, That the Bread it self is Christ's Body.
For so the words stand. This (Bread) is my Body: which were a great
inconvenience, and a repugnance in Nature. For saluinge whereof, they are
driven to say, That Christ, Hoc.
when he pointed to the Bread, and said, This, meante not, This Bread, but,
as they call it, Indiuiduum vagum, Which is one certain thing in general: but
what one thing, they cannot tell: but sure they be, it was no Bread. Est, Est.
they expound, Erit, Erit.
that is to say, This shall be: Again, Erit, hoc est, transubstantiabitur, that
is, The Substance of th^s uncertain General one thing, that noman knows,
shall be changed into the Substance of my Body. Is given, Traditu^.
They expound, shall be given: Is broake^, they expound, Frangitur.
shall be broaken: Do ye this, they expound, Sacrifice ye this. This Bread,
they expound thus, Facite.
This, that was Bread. And, where as these Uerbes stand together in order,
Panis.
and Construction, and rule al one Case, Accepit, Benedixit, Fregit, dedit:
Accepit,
He took, He Blissed, He Brake, He gave: They are feign to shifte it thus: He
took the Bread: Benedixit,
He blissed it away, and in place of it put an other substance: He Brake the
Accidents, Fregit,
or Shows of Bread: He Gave his Body. Upon these few words of Christ,
thus many Figures have they imagined: Dedit.
and bisides these, a great many more: as in place more convenient it shall be
declared: Yet says M. Hardinge, These words of Christ must of fine force be
taken even according to the order, and Nature of the bare letter. And this, he
says, is sufficient to the humble believer. Howbeit, Christian humility
stands not in error, August. de Doctrina Christiana. li. 3. ca. 5.
but in truth: And S. Augustine says, as it is before alleged, Ea demum est
miserabilis animae Seruitus, Signa pro Rebus accipere. To take the Signs in
steed of the things, that thereby be signified, (is not the Humility of a
Christian Faith, but) the miserable Servitude of the Soul. And Origin y^ old
learned Father says, Origin. Hom. 7. In Leuiticum.
Si secundum Literam sequaris id, quod dictum est (Nisi manducaueritis Carnem
Filij Hominis, non habebitis vitam in vobis) Litera illa occidit. If you
follow these words of Christ according to the Letter (Unless ye eat the
Fleashe of the Son of Man, ye shall have no life in you) this Letter kills.

Upon these grounds of his own, M. Hardinge reareth up this Conclusion: Then,
says he, may we say, that Christ is in the Sacrament Really, etc. In deed
a man may say much, that has no regard, what he say. But if he will say,
as the Old Godly Fathers said, Tertull. contra Marcio. li. 4.
then must he say, Hoc est corpus meum: hoc est, Figura Corporis mei. This is
my Body: that is to say, a Figure of my Body: For so the Old learned Father
Tertullian says. Then must he say, Christus Corporis sui Figuram Discipulis
suis commendauit, Augustiin. in Psalm. 3.
Christ delivered unto his Disciples a Figure of his Body: For so the Old
learned Father S. Augustine Augustine. Ad Bonifacium Epist. 23.
says: Then must he say, Sacramentum Corporis Christi secundum quendam modum
Corpus Christi est. The Sacrament of Christ's Body after a certain phrase, or
manner, or Trope, or Figure of speech, is the Body of Christ: For so again
S. Augustine says.

Here M. Hardinge seeinge the inconveniences, and absurdities of his Doctrine,
thought good to heal it up with some plaster. By these words, Really,
Carnally, etc. The Godly learned Fathers, says he, Meante that Christ's very
Body, and Flesh is there, but not in any Natural, or Carnal wise. And thus M.
Hardinges Doctors wrote one thing, and meante an other. For M. Hardinge
knows, that al Aduerbes, taken of Nownes, signify evermore a quality, and
never the Substance: which thing Children are taught to know in the Grammar
School: and may be resolved thus, Viriliter, virili modo: muliebriter,
muliebri modo. And therefore his very Canonistes say in their manner of
Eloquence, Deus non est remunerator Nominu^* sed Aduerbiorum. God rewards not
Nownes, but Aduerbes: That is to say, God regards not the Dooinge of any
thing, but the Manner of the Dooinge. But M. Hardinge thinks he may take
upon him to ouerlooke, and to master the Grammar Rules. For unless we make
Nownes, Aduerbes: and Aduerbes, Nownes: these men's Divinity cannot stand.
Therefore, as they have divised a new Divinity: so must our Children learn
for their pleasure a New Grammar.

But what are these Old Learned Fathers, that say, Christ's Body is thus
Really, and Fleashly in the Sacrament? Where be their Words? What be their
Names? If they have neither Names, nor Words, how can they be allowed for
sufficient witnesses? M. Hardinge well knows, that the Old learned Fathers
never said so: yet must he needs imagine both causes, that moved them so to
say: and also Expositions, what they meante by so saieinge. So Montanus the
blind Senator, being at supper with the Emperor Tiberius, highely commended
the great Mullet, that, he heard say, was set on the table before them: and
showed, how round, how fair, how fat it was: how it filled the Charger, and
how it lay: and evermore turned his face, and pointed with his finger, to the
higher end of the table: and yet was not the Mullet there, but far beneath
at the lower end. Reason would, that M. Hardinge had first been sure of the
Effect, before he had thus gonne about to gheasse the causes.

M. Hardinge. The.6. Division.
(132) The.132. Untruth. For the Fathers never used these terms.
And the Fathers have been driven to use these terms, for the more ample and
full declaration of the Truethe, and also for withstandinge and stoppinge
objections made by Heretics. And because the Catholic faith touching the
verity of Christ's Body in the Sacrament, was not impugned by any man, for
the space of a thousand years after Christ's being in earth, and about that
time (133) The.133. Vntru^th. For biside S. Augustine, S. H^^^rome. S. Ambros^,
and others, Johan. Scotus, and Bertramus vvrote here of 200. years before
Berenga^^.
Berengarius first began openly to sow the wicked seed of the
Sacramentarie Heresy, which then soon confuted by learned men, and by the
same first Author abiured and recanted, now is with no less wickedness, but
more busily, and more earnestly set forth again: the Doctors that sithence
have written in the defense of the true and Catholic faith herein, have (134)
The.134. Untruth, For the Old vvriters in this case used them never.
more often used the terms before mentioned, then the Old and Ancient
Fathers that wrote within M. Iuelles six hundred years after Christ. Who
doubtless would no less have used them, if that matter had been in
question, or doubt in their time. And albeit these terms were strange, and
new, as used within these five hundred years only, and that the people were
never taught for six hundred years after Christ, as M. Iuel says more
boldly, then truly, and therefore more rashely, then wisely: Yet the Faith
by them opened and declared, is Universal, and old: verily no less old, then
is our Lords Supper, where this Sacrament was first instituted.

The B. of Sarisburie.
M. Hardinge thinks he may lead alonge his simple Reader, and easily carry
away the matter under the bare Titles, and Names of the Learned Fathers. But
what privy mystery is this? As I said before, have M. Hardinges Doctors no
names? Or is not he hable to name his own Fathers? He should have set them
out, as his wont is, with all their Circumstances, what they were, when, and
where they lived, what they wrote, and how they have been ever, and are now
esteemed emonge the learned. But he well knew, that these Good Fathers lived al
within the compass of two hundred, or three hundred years paste, as Thomas,
Duns, Ockam, Henricus de Gandauo, Robertus de collo torto, and such others.
These be M. Hardinges great Fathers, by whom he claims his new Doctrine:
in respect of S. Augustine, S. Hierome, S. Chrysostom, S. Ambrose, and others,
not worthy to have the name of Children.

But the Catholic Faith touching the Sacrament, says M. Hardinge, for the
space of a thousand years stood upright. Berengarius was the first that
began to sow the seed of the Sacramentarie Heresy. Berengarius.
It is likely, M. Hardinge has no great regard, how his tales hang
together. The.33. Division
For before in the First Article, to serve his turn, he said, The Messalians
were the first Fathers of this Heresy. Now he seems to be otherwise
advised: and says, This Heresy was never heard of within six hundred
years, after the Messalians were repressed: and that the first founder of it
was Berengarius. Yet M. Hardinge might soon have known, that one Johannes
Scotus, Johannes Scotus.
a famous learned man, and Scholar unto Beda, and one Bertramus, Bertramus.
as appears by his book, held and maintained the same Doctrine in the time
of the Emperor Lotharius, two hundred years and more before Bere^garius.
Wherefore, it seems not to be so true, as M. Hardinge assuereth it, That
Berengarius was the First Author of this Doctrine.

But, for further declaration hereof, it shall be necessary to open Berengarius
whole judgment in this matter: and afterward to consider the Confutation of
the same. Lanfrancus De Sacramen. Eucharistiae.
Thus therefore Berengarius wrote, as his greatest adversary Lanfrancus
reports of him. Per-Consecrationem Altaris, Panis, and Vinum fiunt
Sacramentum religionis: non vt desinant esse, quae erant, etc. By the
Consecration of the Altar, the Bread, and the Wine are made a Sacrament of
Religion, not that they leave to be the same, they were before: but that they
be altered into an other thing, and become that, they were not before, Ambros.
De Sacramentis. li. 4. ca. 4. Sacramentum, and res Sacramenti.
as S. Ambrose writes. And the Sacrifice of the Church stands of two
things, the one Visible, the other Invisible: that is to say, the Sacrament,
and the matter, or Substance of the Sacrament. Which Substance
notwithstanding, that is to say, the Body of Christ, if it were before our
eyes, it should be Visible. But being taken up into Heaven, and sittinge at
the Right hand of the Father, until al things be restoared, according to the
words of the Apostle S. Peter, Acta Apost. c. 3. Augustine. De Con. Did. 2.
Qui Manducas.
it cannot be called thence. Therefore S. Augustine says, When Christ is
eaten, life is eaten: and when we eat him, we make no parts of him. And
again S. Augustine says, Sacramentum est sacrum signum: A Sacrament is a holy
token.

And what this word, Signum, means, he declares in his book De doctrina
Christiana. Signum est res, Augustine. De Doctrina Christiana.
praeter speciem, quam ingerit sensibus, aliud quiddam faciens in cogitationem
venire. A Sign is a thing, that bisides the sight, that it offreth unto the
eyes, causes an other thing to come into our mind. Again, unto Bonifacius,
Unless Sacraments had some likeness of the things, Augustine. ad Eonifaci.
Epist. 23.
whereof they be Sacraments, then were they no Sacraments at al. And again,
Sacraments be Visible Signs of heavenly things: but the things them selves
being invisible, Augustine. De Catechizandis Rudibus.
are honored in them: neither is that eleme^t being Consecrate by the
blissinge, so to be taken, at it is in other uses. This is the judgment of
Berengarius, agreeinge thoroughly with the words, and sense of the Holy
Fathers: and confirmed, and avouched by the same.

Now let us see the Confutation hereof. In a Council holden at Rome under Pope
Nicolas the. 2. Berengarius was forced to recante in this wise, De Consec.
Did. 2. Ego Berengarius.
Credo Corpus Domini nostri Jesus Christi Sensualiter, and in veritate, manibus
Sacerdotum tractari, and frangi, and fidelium dentibus atteri. I believe, that
the Body of our Lord Jesus Christ sensibly, and in very deed, is touched
with the hands of the Priests, and broaken, and rent, and ground with the
teethe of the Faithful. This is an horrible blasphemy.
This was the consent, and judgment of that Council. And what thinks M.
Hardinge of the same? Certainly the very rude Gloss finds fault herewithal,
and gives this warninge thereof unto the Reader, Nisi sane intelligas verba
Berengarij etc. Unless you warily understand these words of Berengarius,
you will fall into a greater Heresy, then ever he healde any. ^losa. ibidem.
Thus these Fathers by their own friends Confession, redress the less
error by the greater: and in plain words, in General Council, by solemn
way of Recantation, profess a greater Heresy, then, by their own judgment,
ever was defended by Berengarius.

Further, if this be in deed the Catholic Faith, as M. Hardinge would so
feign have all the world to believe, and Bertramus, and Johannes Scotus, both
very famous, and great learned men, wrote openly against it, with the good
contentation of the world, and without the apparent controlment of any man,
two hundred years, or more before Berengarius was borne: let him better advise
him self, whether these words were truly, or boldly, or rashely, or
wisely, with such affiance uttered, and avouched of his side, That this his
Faith was never impugned by any man before the time of Berengarius.

But, that M. Hardinge calls the Catholic Faith, is in deed a Catholic
Error, the contrary whereof has evermore been taught, and defended by all
the old learned Catholic Fathers, as may well appear, by that is already,
and hereafter shall be alleged of their writings. Certainly, they, that now
condemn Berengarius for vsinge the plain words, and Expositions of the Old
Fathers, would as well condemn S. Augustine, S. Hierome, S. Ambrose, and the
reaste, were it not for the Credit, and Authority of their Names.

The Doctors, that have been sithence the time of Berengarius, (says M.
Hardinge) have more often used these terms, Really, Carnally, etc. then other
Old Doctors within six hundred years after Christ. In these few words,
M. Hardinge has handsomely conveyed in a great untruth. For this Comparatiue
(More often) presupposes the Positive. Therefore the sense hereof must be
this, The Old Doctors often used these Terms, Really, Fleashly, etc. albeit
not so often, as others of the later years. But. M. Hardinge knows, this is
untrue. For neither has he here yet showed, nor is he hable to show, that in
this case of the Sacrament, any of these terms was ever used by any one of all the Old Ancient writers. Whereof we may well reason thus, The Old Catholic
Fathers intreatinge of ye Substance of the Sacrament, never used any of these
words, Really, Carnally, etc. Therefore it is likely, they never taught the
people to believe, that Christ's Body is present Really, and Fleashely in the
Sacrament. Contrariwise, they in their Sermons called the Sacrament a Figure, a
Sign, a Remembrance of Christ's Body: therefore it is likely, they would
have the Catholic people so to judge, and believe of the Sacrament.

M. Hardinge. The.7. Division.
Here, before that I bring in places of ancient Fathers, reportinge the same
Doctrine, and in like terms, as the Catholic Church does hold, concerning
this Article: least our opinion herein might happily appear our Carnal, and
Gross: I think it necessary briefly to declare, what manner a true Body,
and Blood is in the Sacrament. Christ in him self, has but one Fleashe,
and Blood in Substance, which his Godhead took of the Virgin Marie once, and
never afterward leafte it of. But this one Fleashe, and Blood in respect of
double quality, has a doubleconsideration. For at what time Christ lived
here in earth among men in the shape of man, his fleashe was thralle, and
subject to the frailty of man's nature, sin, and ignorance excepted. That
fleashe being passible unto death, the soldiers at the procurement of the
Jews crucified. And such manner Blood was at his passion sheadde forth of
his Body, in sight of them, which were then present. But after that Christ
rose again from the dead, his Body from that time forward ever remainethe
immortal, and lively, in danger no more of any infirmity, or sufferinge,
much less of death: but is become by divine gifts and endowementes, a
spiritual, and a divine Body, as to whom the Godhead bathe communicated
Divine, and Godly properties, and excellencies, that been above al man's
capacity of understanding. This Fleashe, and Body thus considered, which
sundry Doctors call Corpus Spirituale, and Deificatu^, A Spiritual, and a
Deified Body, is given to us in the blessed Sacrament. This is the doctrine of
the Church, uttered by S. Hierome in his Commentaries upon the Epistle to the
Ephesians: Lib. 1. Cap. 1.
where he has these words, Dupliciter vero Sanguis and Caro intelligitur, vel
Spiritualis illa atque Diuina, de qua ipse dixit, Caro mea vere est cibus, and
Sanguis meus vere est porus: Et, Nisi manducaueritis Carnem meam, and Sanguinem
meu^ biberitis, non habebitis vitam aeternam: Vel Caro, quae Crucifixa est, and
Sanguis, qui militis effusus est lancea. That is, The Blood, and Fleashe of
Christ is understood two ways: either that it is that spiritual, and divine
Fleashe, of which he spoke him self, My Fleashe is verily meat, and my Blood
is verily drink: and, Except ye eat my Fleashe, and drink my Blood, ye
shall not have life in you: Or, that Fleashe, which was crucified, and that
Blood, which was sheadde by pearcinge of the soldiers spear. And to the
intent a man should not take this difference according to the substance of
Christ Fleashe and Blood, but according to the quality only, S. Hierome
brings a similitude of our Fleashe, as of which it has been in double
respect said: Luc. 3^ 1. Cor. 15.
Iuxta hanc diuisionem, and in Sanctis etiam diuersitas Sanguinis, and Carnis
accipitur: vt alia sit Caro, quae visura est salutare Dei, alia Caro, and
Sanguis, quae Regnum Dei non queant possidere. According to this division,
diversity of Blood, and Fleashe is to be understood in Saints also, so as
there is one Fleashe, which shall see the Salvation of God, and an other
Fleashe, and Blood, which may not possess the Kingedome of God. Which two
states of Fleashe, and Blood seem (as it appears to the unlearned) quite
contrary.

But S. Paul dissolueth this doubt, in the fiftenth Chapter of his first
Epistle to the Corinthians, saieinge, that Fleashe of such sort, as we bear
about us in this life, earthly, mortal, frail, and bourthenous to the soul,
cannot possess the Kingdom of God, because corruption shall not possess
incorruption. But after Resurrection, we shall have a spiritual, gloriouse,
incorruptible, and immortal Fleashe, and like in figure to the gloriouse Body
of Christ, as S. Paul says: This corruptible Body must put on incorruption:
and this mortal, immortality. Then such Fleashe, or our Fleashe of that
manner and sort, shall possess the Kingdom of God, and shall behold God him
self. And yet our Fleashe now corruptible, and then incorruptible, is but one
Fleashe in substance, but diverse in quality and property. Even so it is to
be thought of our Lords Fleashe, as is before said. The dew weighinge of this
difference gives much light to this matter, and ought to stay many horrible
blasphemies wickedly vtered against this most blessed Sacrament.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Here M. Hardinge much troubles his head with a needles labor, and in the
end concludes against him self. For that the Son of God was made man, even
like unto one of us, thral, and subject to the infirmities, and miseries of
this mortal life: Psalm. 22
and that, as he him self complains in the Psalm, He seemed a vile woorme,
and no man: the shame of the world, and the outcaste of the people: and that
God the Father afterward auanced him with Glory, Ephesians. 1. Philippen. 2.
and set him at his right hand, above al Powers, and Principalities: and
gave him a name above al names, and endewed him with a Spiritual, and a
glorious Body: and united the same unto the Godheade, and crowned him with
Honor, and Glory: Al these things are known even unto babes, and Children,
that have benne Godly brought up, and have learned the principles of their
Faith: And are so far from al doubt emongst us, Philippen 3. Augustine.
co^tra Adimantum ca. 13.
that we believe, Christ shall transform our mortal bodies, and make them like
unto the Body of his Glory. And therefore S. Augustine says, Corpus Domini
pro ipsa coelesti habitatione, coelestem accepit mutationem: and hoc nos
sperare in die vltimo iussi sumus. Idoe dicit Apostolus, qualis Coelestis,
tales and Coelestes: id est, immortales, non solum animis, sed etiam
corporibus. The Body of our Lord, according to that Heavenly habitation,
has received a heavenly change: and we our selves are commanded, at the last
day to hoape for the same. Therefore the Apostles says, As he is, that is
Heavenly, 1. Corin. 15.
so are they, that are Heavenly: that is to s^ie, Immortal: and that, not only
in Soul, but also in Body. This is the confortablest Article of our belief,
and therefore with us, and with all other faitheful, it is out of al doubt, and
question.

Only Steven Gardener, who for his Constancy, and fastenes in his Religion,
would needs be called Constantius, Marcus Antonius Constantius Ad obiectum,
144.
has given the world to understand by public writing, that Christ is not
yet fully possessed in this Glory. These be his words, Tempus humilitatis
Christi in conuersatione visibili, and terrena praestandae plane praeterijt:
Christ's Body Deified.
Sed humilis Dispensationis tempus eo vsque manet, d^onec tradiderit R^gnum
Deo, and Patri. The time of Christ's humility in visible, and earthely
conversation is undoubtedly past. But the time of the dispensation, or service
of his humility remains still, until he deliver up the Kingdom unto God his
Father. Thus one of them says, Christ's Body is Deified, and become God: An
other says, it is yet still in the dispensation, and Service of humility, and
therefore is not yet Deified. It seems they be not yet well resolved of
Christ's Glory, how much, or how little they may allow him. Neither in
deed have they any certain direction to guide them selves herein: But only,
as occasion is offered, to shifte of objections, they are feign to take hold in
any thing, true, or false, to serve their turn. A man may well say unto
them, as S. Augustine sometime said unto the Heretic Faustus Manicheus,
Augusti. contra Faust. Manichaeum. li. 11. ca. 2.
Dices, Hoc pro me facit: illud contra me. Tu es ergo Regula Veritatis.
Quicquid contra te fuerit, non est verum. Thou will say, This thing is for
me. That thing is against me. Then art thou the rule of truth. What so ever
is against thee, is not true.

But to what end allegeth M. Hardinge the Spiritual state of Christ's Glorious
Body? Eutyches in Concilio Chalcedon.
does he not remember that the Old Heretic Abbate Eutyches maintained his
fantasies by the same, and was deceived? Christ's Body, said he, is glorious:
Therefore it is changed into the very substance, and nature of God, and has
now no shape, or proportion of a Body. This is an old Heresy, long
sithence repreued by Leo, Gelasius, and other Old Fathers, and condemned by
the Council of Chalcedon, very much like unto this of M. Hardinges, if it be
not fully the samo. We believe, The Body of Christ is endewed with
Immortality, Brightness, Light, and Glory: Yet is it nevertheless the same
Body, it was before. And therefore S. Augustine says, August. Retracta. lib.
1. cap. 22. Augustine. Epist. 57. ad Dardanum.
Corpus Domini secundum substantiam, etiam post Resurrectionem Caro appellata
est. The Body of our Lord in respect of the Substance of it, yea after it is
risen again, is called Fleashe. And again, Dominus Corpori suo immortalitatem
dedit: Naturam non abstulit. The Lord gave to his Body immortality: But he
took not away the Nature, or Substance of it.

And, notwithstanding certain of the Old Fathers call the Body of Christ,
Corpus Deificatu^, as M. Hardinge allegeth, Yet it is not their meaning, that
the same Body, according to the natural signification, and sound of that
word, is changed, and transformed into a Divine Nature, and made God: and so
is no longer a natural Body. For, as it is true, That God was made man, even
so, and in like sense, it is also true, that Man was made God, without any
change of Substance of either Nature. And therefore the Fathers say, Christ's
Body is Deified. or made God, for that it is united in person, and Glory
with the Nature of God. To this purpose, Augustine. in Psalm. 49. Dionysius De
Eccle. Hierar. cap. 1.
although not altogether in like sense, S. Augustine seems to say, that
men are Deified, and made Gods. Thus he writes, Homines dixit Deos, ex
Gratia sua Deificatos, non de Substantia sua natos: He called men Gods, as
being Deified, and so made by his Grace: but not as borne so of his Substance.
So says Dionysius, Pontifex ipse mutatur in Deum. The Bishop him self is
turned into God. Likewise S. Cyprian calls the Scriptures, (...)
Scripturas Deificas, The Scriptures, that make men Gods. And Clemens
Alexandrinus says, Sacrae literae nos Deificant: The holy Scriptures make us
Gods. Cypria^ de zelo, and liuore. Et li. 2. Epist. 8.
By these, and other like words is meante, not that men are changed from
their own Natural Substance, and in deed become Gods, as the letter
seems to importe, Clemens in Protreptico.
but only, that men are endewed with Godly virtues, and qualities, and so
made the Children of God. And so Dionysius him self also says, Dionysi. De
Ecclesiast. Hierar. cap. 1.
Hae mutatio nostri in Deum, est Dei in nobis similitudo, quantam capere natura
potest. This changinge of us into God, is the Likeness, or Image of God within
us, as far, as nature can receive.

But S. Hierome says, Christ's Fleashe has double understanding, and may be
taken either for his Spiritual, or Divine Fleashe, or else for his Mortal
Fleashe, as it was Crucified: And is thought to make much for M. Hardinge. For
answer hereunto, first of al, this one thing I pray thee, good Reader, to
consider, that S. Hierome in that whole place speaks not one word, neither
of the Sacrament, nor of any Real, or Fleashly Presence. Therefore M. Hardinge
can have but very poor healpe hereof, to prove his purpose. Only he
expounds, what S. Paul meante by these words, Ad Ephesi. 1.
We have Redemption by his Blood: And his meaning, as it appears by the
whole drifte of his words, is this, That the Salvation, which we have in
Christ, stands not in that, he was a mere natural man, as were Codrus,
Decius, Curtius, or such others, that died for the safety and delivery of
their Countries: but in that his Humanity was united, and joined in one
person with the Nature of God. Hieronym. ad Ephesians. ca. 1.
His words be these, Quis iste, aiunt, tantus, ac talis, qui possit pretio
suo Totum Orbem redimere? Jesus Christus Filius Dei proprium Sanguinem dedit,
and nos de Seruitute eripiens liberate donauit. Et re vera, si historijs
Gentilium credimus, quod Codrus, and Curtius, and Decij Mures pestilentias
vrbium, and fames, and bella suis mortibus represserint: quanto magis hoc in
Dei Filio possible iudicandum est, quod cruore suo, non Vrbem vna^ purgauerit,
sed Totum Orbem? They say, What was he, such a one, and so mighty, that by his
price was hable to redeem the whole world? Jesus Christ the Son of God gave
his own Blood, and deliueringe us from bondage, has made us free. And in
deed, if we believe the Heathen stories, that Codrus, Curtius, and Decii Mures
removed Pestilences, Famines, and wars from their Cities by their death:
how much more may we judge the same possible in the Son of God, that he by
his Blood has purged, not only one City, but also the whole world?
Immediately after this follow the words that M. Hardinge has here alleged:
Dupliciter vero, etc. For the Blood, and Fleashe of Christ has double
understanding. By the whole course of these words thus gooinge before, it is
easy to perceive S. Hieromes meaning: that is, That we have our Salvation in
Christ, and do Eat him, and Drink him, and live by him, not for that his
Fleashe was mortal only, and Crucified upon the Cross: but for that it was
Spiritual, and Divine, that is to say, the Fleashe of the Son of God. And
herein stood that great contention, that Cyrillus, and other Godly Fathers
had against Nestorius: as it is well known unto the learned. And therefore S.
Paul says, Galat. 2.
That I live now in the Fleashe, I live in the Faith of the Son of God.

Therefore notwithstanding S. Augustine say, Augustine. in Johan. tractat. 88.
Christus Crucifixus est Lac sugentibus, and Cibus proficientibus: Christ
Crucified is Milk unto the sucklinges, and harder meat unto the strong:
Angelomus in. 1. Regum. ca. 1.
And notwithstanding Angelomus say, Christ's Body is hay, whereby the
Gentiles are feadde, Yet must both these, and also al other like places be
taken, not of bare mortal Fleashe alone, but of the Fleashe of the Son of
God: which S. Hierome calls Divine, and Spiritual, for that it is
personally, and inseparably joined with the Godheade.

Again, S. Hieromes meaning is, that the same Fleashe of Christ, being thus
Divine, and Spiritual, must also Spiritually be received, and not in any such
Carnal, or Fleashly wise, as is here imagined by M. Hardinge. For
notwithstanding Christ's Body be Spiritual, yet is that no sufficient
warrant, to prove, that therefore M. Hardinges opinion is not, as he says,
over Gross, and Carnal. For the Manichees, and the Messalian Heretics had
Gross, and Carnal imaginations of God him self, notwithstanding God be only
Sprite, and most Spiritual. And therefore S. Augustine says of them, Ecce ego
derideo Carnales homines, Augusti. contrae Epistolam Fundamenti. cap. 23.
qui nondum possunt Spiritualia cogitare: Behold, I laughe to scorn these
Carnal, and Fleashly men, that are not yet hable to conceive things Spiritual.

For proof hereof S. Hierome him self says, De Cons. Dis. 2. De hac.
De hac quidem Hoftia, quae in Christi Commemoratione mirabiliter fit, edere
licet: De illa vero, quam Christus in Ara Crucis obtulit, secundum se nulli
edere licet: Of this Oblation, which is marueilously made in the remembrance of
Christ, it is lawful to eat: But of that Oblation, which Christ offered
upon the Altar of the Cross, according to it self (that is to say, in
Gross, and Fleashly manner) it is lawful for noman to eat. By these words
S. Hierome also shows a great difference bitweene the Sacrifice, that is
made in the Remembrance of Christ, and the very Sacrifice in deed, that
Christ made upon the Cross. So S. Chrysostom says, Chrysostom. in Johan.
hom. 47.
Si Carnaliter quis accipiat, nihil lucratur: If a man take it Fleashly, he
gains nothing. So likewise S. Augustine says, Augustine. de Doctrina
Christiana. li. 3. ca. 16. Clemens Alexdrin. in Paedagogo lib. 2. ca. 2.
as it is alleged before, It is a Figure, or Form of speech, willinge us to
be pertakers of Christ's Passion, and confortably to remember, that Christ
has died for us. This S. Hierome calls the Eatinge of the Divine, and
Spiritual Fleashe of Christ. Therefore Clemens Alexandrinus says, not only
in like sense, but also in like form of words, Duplex est Sanguis Domini:
alter Carnalis, quo redempti sumus: alter Spiritualis, quo vncti sumus. Er hoc
est Bibere Jesus Sanguinem, participem esse incorruptionis Domini: There are
two sorts of Christ's Blood: the one Fleashly, where with we are redeemed:
the other Spiritual, wherewith we are anointed. And this is the drinkinge of
the Blood of Christ, to be partaker of his Immortality. Augusti. Contra
liter. Petilian. lib. 2. cap. 8.
In like sort S. Augustine says, Judas Christum Carnalem tradidit, tu
Spiritualem: Furens Euangelium Sanctum flammis Sacrilegis tradidisti: Judas
betrayed Christ Carnal: but thou have betrayed Christ Spiritual. For in thy
fury thou betraiedst the Holy Gospel, to be burnt in wicked fiere. Here S.
Augustine calls Christ Spiritual, for that the manner of the betraieing was
Spiritual. Likewise that Ancient Father Clemens calls Christ's Blood
Spiritual, not in respect of difference in it self, but only in respect of
the Spiritual receiving. And I think, M. Harding will not deny, but these
words of Clemens, and Augustine agreeing so near both in sense, and phrase,
with the words of Hierome, may stand for sufficient exposition to the same.
Certainly, as Christ's Blood is not Really, or Bloudily Present to annoynte
us, so is it not Really, or Bloudily Present to nourishe us. For this
Nourishinge, and this Annointinge are both Spiritual. And therefore the Old
learned Father Athanasius writes thus: Athanasius de Peccato in Spiritum
Sanctum.
Quomodo vnum vnius hominis Corpus Vniuerso Mundo suffice^et? Quod, tanquam in
illorum cogitationibus versatum, Christus commemorat. A quibus cogitationibus
vt eos auocaret, quemadmodum paulo ante sui Descensus e Coelis, ita nunc
Reditus sui in Coelum mentionem facit. The Capernaites demanded, how one Body
of one man might suffice the whole world: which thing, as being in their
cogitations, Christ calls to remembrance. To remove them from which
cogitations (of gross and fleashely eatinge) as he before made mention of his
coming down from Heaven, so now likewise he makes mention of his repair
again into Heaven.

To conclude, once again, gentle Reader, I must do thee to remember, that S.
Hierome in this whole place never spoke one word, neither of any Real, or
Fleashely Presence, nor of the Sacrament. Yet notwithstanding, M. Hardinge, as
though S. Hierome had plainly, and undoubtedly spoken of both, hereof
geathereth his reason thus: S. Hierome says, We eat not the Fleashe of
Christ, that was Crucified: Ergo, Christ's Fleashe is Really, and Fleashly in
the Sacrament. This Argument is evident to the eye, and needs no answer.

His Reason would better have framed thus: S. Hierome says, We can not
eat the Fleashe of Christ, that was Crucified: Ergo, We cannot Really, and
Carnally eat the Fleashe of Christ. Whereof it must necessarily follow, even
by the Authority, that M. Hardinge has here alleged, that Christ's Body is
not Really, and Fleashly in the Sacrament. Such relief has M. Hardinge
found in these words of S. Hierome.

M. Hardinge. The.8. Division.
Now, whereas M. Iuel denies, that Christen people were of old time taught
to believe, that Christ's Body is Really, Substantially, Corporally, Carnally,
or Naturally in the Sacrament, I do plainly affirm the contrary. Yet I
acknowledge, that the learned Fathers (135) The.135. untruth. For the old
Fathers never taught (...)so.
which have so taught, would not thereby seem to make it here outwardly
sensible, or perceptible. For they confess al with S. Chrysostom, Homil. 83.
in Matthew. and.60. ad popul. Antioch.
that the thing, which is here given us, is not sensible, but that under
visible signs, invisible things be delivered unto us. But they thought good
An other untruth, as before.
to use the aforesaid terms, to put away al doubt of the being of his very
Body in these holy Mysteries, and to exclude the only imagination, fantasy,
figure, sign, token, virtue, or signification thereof. For in such wise the
Sacramentaries have uttered their Doctrine in this point, as they may seem by
their manner of speakinge, and writing, here to represent our Lords Body
only, in deed being absent, as Kings oftentimes are represented in a
Tragedy, or mean persons in a Comedy. Verily, the manner, and way, by which
it is here present, and given to us, and received of us, is secret, not
human, ne natural: true for all that. And we do not atteine it by sense,
reason, or nature, but by faith. For which cause we do not over basely
consider, and attend the visible elements, but as we are taught by the
Council of Nice, Liftinge up the mind. Behold by Faith.
liftinge up our mind and spirit, (...).
we behold by Faith on that holy Table put, and laid (so for the better
signification of the Real presence their term sounds) the Lamb of God that
takes away the sins of the world. And here (say they) we receive his
Precious Body, and Blood, (...), that is to say, verily, and in deed: which
is no otherwise, nor less, then this term, Really, imports.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Here M. Harding once again, as before, will teach us, what the old Fathers
meante by those words, that they never vttred. I trow, he has some privy
Divination, that thus takes upon him, to know what men mean, before they
speak. Cicero Cicero de Diuinatione. 2.
says, Peritum esse necesse est eum, qui Silentium quid sit, intelligat: It
must needs be some conning fellow, that understands, what Silence means,
and knows what they speak, that speak nothing. He says, The Fathers
thought good, to use the aforesaid terms, to put away al doubt of the being
of Christ's very Body in these holy Mysteries. Uerily, this is a merueilous
boldness, so often, and with such confidence, and countenance to say, The
Old Fathers used these terms, and yet not once to show any one of them al,
that ever used them. It may be thought, that he has, either to great affiance
in him self, or to little regard unto his Reader. As for this vain muster of
the names of Chrysostom, Hilarie, Gregory Nyssene, and Cyril, as it shall
appear by the view, it healpeth him nothing.

The Sacramentaries (says M. Hardinge) utter their Doctrine by these terms,
Figure, Sign, Token, Signification, and Virtue. I may not answer this
discourtesie of talk with like discourtesie. Only I will say of these men,
August. contra Sermon. Arianorum. Ca. 36.
as S. Augustine sometime said of the Arians. Cum se tanta voragine impietatis
immergant, nos, tanquam opprobrio noui Nominis, Homousianos vocant: quia contra
illoru^ errore^ Homousion defendimus. Where as they have drowned them selves
in such a Dungeon of wickedness, now they call us Homousians, to reproach us
with a new name: because we defend the Unity of the Holy Trinity against
their error. But if they be al Sacramentaries, that use these terms, then
must S. Augustine, S. Hierome, S. Chrysostom, S. Ambrose, and al other the
holy Fathers, that used the same, needs be condemned for Sacramentaries. But
if they be Sacramentaries, that shamefully abuse, and corrupt the holy
Sacraments, then may M. Hardinge, and his friends rightly be called
Sacramentaries. M. Harding adds, Chrysostom says, In Visible signs,
things Invisible be delivered: Ergo, The Body of Christ is Really, and
Fleashely in the Sacrament. First, if M. Hardinge had well considered that whole
Homily, happily he would have charged Chrysostom him self with his
Sacramentarie quarrel, as now he doothe others. For, Chrysostom. in Matthae.
hom. 83.
touching the Sacrament, Chrysostom even there writes thus, Quando dicunt,
vnde patet, Christum fuisse immolatum, haec afferentes Mysteria, ora ipsorum
consuimus. Si enim mortuus Jesus non est, cuius Symbolum, ac Signum hoc
Sacrificium est? When they say, How may we know, that Christ was offered,
bringing forth these Mysteries, we stop their mouths. For if Christ died
not, whose Sign, and Token is this Sacrifice? But to return to the matter, O
how light occasions these men take to deceive the simple? M. Hardinge kn^weth,
that Chrysostom speaks not these words only of the Sacrament of Christ's
Body, but also generally of al other Mysteries. For he adds immediately, Sic
and in Baptismo, per Aquam, quae res Sensibilis est, donum illud conceditur.
Quod autem in ea conficitur, Regeneratio, scilicet, and Renouatio,
Intelligibile quiddam est. Even so in Baptism, the gift is granted by water,
which is a thing Sensible. But the Regeneration, and Renouation, that therein
is wrought, is a thing Spiritual. Wherefore, if M. Hardinge, upon occasion of
these words, will force his Real and Fleashely presence in the one Sacrament,
he must likewise force the same in the other.

And for as much, as these two Sacraments, being both of force like, these
men to auance their Fa^tasies in the one, by comparison so much abase the
other: and specially for y^ better opening of Chrysostomes mind, I think it
good, briefly, and by the way, Council. Nicen. (...).
somewhat to touch, what ye old Catholic Fathers have written of Gods
Invisible working in the Sacrament of Baptism. Dionysius Dionysi. Ecclesiast
hierar. ca. 1.
generally of al Mysteries writes thus, Angeli Deum etc. The Angels being
creatures Spiritual, so far forth as it is lawful for them, behold God,
and his godly power. But we are leadde as we may, Chrysostom. in 1. Cor in.
ca. 2. hom. 7.
by Sensible outward tokens (which he calls Images) unto ye Contemplation of
Heavenly things. The Fathers in ye Council of Nice say thus: Baptism must be
considered, not with our bodily eyes, but with the eyes of our mind. Thou
see the Water: Think thou of the power of God, Ego non simpliciter video,
quod video.
that in the Water is hidden. Think thou, that the water is full of Heavenly
fire, and of the Sanctification of the holy Ghost. Chrysostom speakinge
likewise of Baptism says thus, Ego non aspectu iudico ea, quae videntur, sed
mentis oculis, etc. Nazianzen. De Sancto Baptismate.
The things that I see, I judge not by sight, but by the eyes of my mind. The
Heathen, when he hears the Water of Baptism, takes it only for plain
water: But I see not simply, or barely, that I see: I see the cleansing of the
Soul by the Spirit of God.

So likewise says Nazianzenus, (...).
Mysterium (Baptismi) maius est, quam ea quae videntar. The Mystery of
Baptism is greater, then it appears to the eye. So S. Ambrose, Aliud est,
quod Visibiliter agitur: aliud quod Inuisibiliter celebratur. In Baptism there
is one thing done Visibly to the eye: an other thing is wrought Inuisibly to
the mind.

Again he says, Ambrosi. de Spiritu Sancto. li. 3. ca. 11.
Ne Solis Corporis tui oculis credas: magis videtur, quod non videtur, etc.
Believe not only thy bodily eyes ( in this Sacrament of Baptism) the thing
that is not seen, is better seen: The thing, that thou see, is
corruptible: The thing, that thou see not, is for ever. Ambrosi. de his, qui
initiantur Myster. ca. 3.
To be short, in consideration of these Invisible effects, Tertullian says,
The holy Ghost comes down, and halloweth the Water. S. Basile says, The
Kingdom of Heaven is there set open: Chrysostom says, God him self in
Baptism, Tert. de Baptis. Basil. de Sancto Baptismo.
by his Invisible Power holds thy head. S. Ambrose says, The Water has the
Grace of Christ: in it is the Presence of the Trinity. S. Bernarde says,
Lauemur in Sanguine eius: Let us be washed in his Blood.

By the authorities of thus many Ancient Fathers it is plain, Chrysostom. in
Matthae. hom. 51.
that in the Sacrament of Baptism by the Sensible sign of Water, the
Invisible Grace of God is given unto us. Ambr. De Sacr. li^. ca. 5.
Wherefore, as M. Hardinge, by force of Chrysostomes words, proves his
Fleashly Presence in the one Sacrament, so may he by the force of the same
words as well prove, Bernard. super Missus est Gabriel. Sermo. 3.
that ye Power of God, the Heavenly Fire, the Grace, and the Blood of Christ
is Really, and Fleashely Present in the other.

All this notwithstanding, he hoapeth to find some healpe in two words,
uttered, as he says, in the Council of Nice: (...), (...).
and, (...): One of which words, Laid on the Table.
either of forgeatfulnes, or of purpose, be has divised, and set to of him
self. For as this whole Greek Authority, all^ged here by M. Harding, was
never found in the Old allowed Nicene Council, but only has been sought
out, and published of late years: even so this word, (...), was never found
in the Greek, neither as it is commonly set abroad, De Eucharis^i^ li. 1.
nor, as it is alleged by D. Cuthbert Tonstal.

But let it be lawful for M. Hardinge to use some corruption, and to do in
this place, as he commonly does in other, the better to furnishe out the
matter. Yet must this word, (...), which signifies to be Set, or Placed*
needs sound a Real Presence? Ephesians. 3.
Or when S. Paul says, Christus habitat in cordibus nostris per Fidem,
Chr^ste dwells in our hearts by Faith, must he needs mean, that Christ is
Really, and Fleashely placed within our hearts? Uerily, S. Hierome writing
unto Marcella of the Holy Grave, wherein Christ's Body sometime was laid,
has these words, Hieronym. ad Marcellam.
Quoties ingredimur in Sepulchrum Domini, toties iacere in sindone cernimus
Saluatorem. As often as we enter into the Se^ulchre of our Lord, so often we
see our Savior Lieinge in his shrowde. Council. Chalcedon Actio. 1. (...).
And in the Council of Chalcedon it is written thus, In qua Scriptura duae
naturae iacent? In what Scripture ^ye these two Natures of Christ? Here is the
same self word, that M. Hardinge has added of his own to the Council of
Nice. Yet, I think, he will not therefore say, that either the two Natures of
Christ are Really contained in the Scriptures: or the very Body of Christ
lies still shrowdid Fleashly, and Really in the Grave. Again, this word,
(...), which signifies to be Laid, or Placed, in the natural signification
requires both situation of place, and also a bodily Description, and order of
parts. But M. Hardinge him self in the next Article folowinge says, In the
next Arti^^e, Division. 1.
Christ's Body is not here by Local Presence, either by fillinge, or by
changeinge of place: Therefore it follows, that Christ's Body is not laid on
the Table by any Natural, or Fleashly presence.

The words of the Council of Nice, only withdraw us from the Natural, and
Uisible Elements of the Bread* and the Wine, and require our Inner Spiritual
sight, (...).
and the Contemplation of the mind. The words be plain, Ne proposito Pani,
and Poculo humiliter intenti simus. That we consider not basely the Bread, and
the Wine, that are set before us. And therefore S. Augustine says, In
Sacramentis Fidelium dicitur, Augustine. de Bono perseuerantiae.
Surium corda. In the Sacraments of the Faithful it is said, Lift up your
hearts. By which words we are put in remembrance, that there is nothing in
ye action to be considered, but only Christ the Lamb of God, that has taken
away the sins of the world. Chrysostom 1.
And therefore Chrysostom says, We must become Egles, and soar above, if we
list to come near to that Body. Cor. hom. 24.
Thus with the Spiritual eyes of our hearts we see the Lamb of God. And as S.
Ambrose says, Ambros. de his qui in^^iantur myster. ca. 3.
Magis videtur quod non videtur, The thing is better seen, that (with our
bodily eyes) is not seen. For the same cause S. Augustine saith^, Augustine.
contra Maximin. li. 3. ca. 22.
In Sacramentis vide^dum est, non, quid sint, sed, quid ostendant. Signa enim
rerum sunt, aliud existentia, and aliud Significantia. In Sacraments we must
consider, not what they be in deed, but what they represent. For they are
Tokens of things, being one thing in them self, and signifieing an other.
And as touching our beholdinge of Christ in the Sacrament, in most plain
wise he wr^teth thus, De Co^sec. did. 2. Semel Christus. Et in Psalm. 20. De
Co^sec. did. 2. Qu^a Corpus.
Sic nos facit moueri, tanquam videamus Praesentem Dominu^ in Cruce. It works
such motions in us, as if we saw our Lord him self Present upon the Cross.
And this is it that Eusebius Emissenus writes, as he is alleged of Gratian, Vt
colererur iugiter per Mysterium: and perennis illa Victima viueret in Memoria,
and Semper praesens esset in Gratia. That the Body (that was once offered for
our Price) should evermore be worshipped by a Mystery: and that, that
Everlasting Sacrifice should live in Remembrance, and be Present ^n Grace for
ever. In this spiritual sort is Christ Laid Present upon the Table: but not
in M. Hardinges Gross, and Fleashely manner. And therefore S. Augustine says
in like sense unto the Faithful Communicantes: Vos estis in mensa, Truly.
vos estis in Calice. You are upon the Table, you are in the Cupp^. As S.
Augustine Augustine. in Sermon ad Infantes. Citatur a Beda in 1. Corinthians. 10.
says, The people is laid upon the Table, even so, and none otherwise, the
Council of Nice says, The Lamb of God is Laid upon the Table.

The other Greek word, that M. Hardinge holds by, is (...), which is,
Uerily, or Truly: and that, in his judgment, sounds no less, then Really,
or Fleashely. (...).
And thus, although he hunte like a wanton Spaniel, and range at riot, and
beat up Butterflies, yet at the last he thinks* he has found somewhat.

How be it, I marvel, he sees no better his own error. For he might soon
have known, that these two words, Truly, and Fleashely, have sundry
meaninges: and that in the sense, that Christ spoke unto the Jews, the one of
them doothe utterly exclude the other. For neither doothe he, that eats
grossly, and sensibly with his teethe, eat Truly, and Verily, as Christ
meante: nor doothe he, that eats Spiritually with his Faith, eat Grossly,
and Fleashely, as the Capernaites meante. Therefore it is great folly to say,
Uerily, and Fleashly, are al one thing. In deed, the Spiritual Eatinge of
Christ's Body by Faith, is the true Eatinge: And he that Eats the same
most Spiritually, Eats most truly. Johan. 15.
Otherwise Christ says, Ego sum vitis vera. I am the True Vine. S. Hierome
Hieronym. in 2. ca. Hieremi. li. 1.
calls the Faithful people, Vitem Veram, The True Vine. Cyrillus calls
Christ, Verum Manna, The True Manna: S. Hierome says, Nos ver^ sumus vnis
Panis, We are Verily one Bread: Cyrill. li. 3. ca. 24. in Johan.
Origin says, Apostoli vere erant Coeli, The Apostles verily were the Heavens.
And to be short, they were wont to singe at the blissinge of the Paschal
Taper, Hieronym. ad Galat. ca. 4.
Haec sunt festa Paschalia, in quibus vere Agnus occiditur. This is the Paschal
Feast, wherein verily, and indeed the Lamb is slain. By these few
examples, Origin. in Genes. ca. 1. homi. 1. In Manuali.
both the difference bytweene these two words, Truly, and Fleashely, and
also the sclendernes of M. Hardinges Collection may soon appear. For,
notwithstanding we do verily Eat Christ, yet it follows not, that we do
Grossly, and Naturally Eat him with our bodily mouths: and although Christ
be verily meat, yet it follows not, that he is therefore Really, and
Fleashely in the Sacrament. And therefore S. Augustine in this respect utterly
remooueth the natural office of the Body. Augustine. in Johan. tractat. 26.
His words be plain, Quid paras dentem, aut ventrem? Creed, and manducasti.
What preparest thou thy toothe, or thy belly? Believe, and thou have Eaten.
Again, Credere in eum, hoc est manducare Panem Viuum. Beleeuinge in him, is
the Eatinge of the Bread of life.

M. Hardinge. The.9. Division.
And touching these terms, first. Verily, or (136) The.136. Untruth. For
these terms ar^ not al one.
which is al one, Really, and Substantially, me thinks M. Iuel should bear
the more with us for use of the same, sith that Bucer him self, one of the
greattest learned men of that side, has allowed them: yea, and that after
much writing against Luther in Defense of Zwinglius, and Oecolampadius by
him set forth, and after that he had assured him self of the truth in
this Article by Divine Inspiration: as most constantly he affirms with these
words: In responsione ad Lutherum.
Haec non Dubitamus diuinitus nobis, and per Scriptura^ reuelata de hoc
Sacramento. We doubt not ( says he) but these things concerning this
Sacrament, be reveled unto us from God, and by the Scripture. If you demand,
where this may be found: in the Acts of a Council holden between the
Lutheranes, and Zwinglianes, for this very purpose in Martine Luthers house at
VVittenberge, in the year of our Lord.1536. you shall find these words:
Audiuimus D. Bucerum explicantem suam sententiam de Sacramento Corporis and
Sanguinis Domini, hoc modo. Cum Pane, and Vino vere, and Substantialiter adest,
exhibetur, and Sumitur Corpus Christi, and Sanguis. Et Sacramentali Union
Panis est Corpus Christi: and porrecto Pane, vere adest, and vere exhibetur
Corpus Christi. We have heard M. Bucer declaring his mind touching the
Sacrament of the Body and Blood of our Lord, in this sort. With the Bread
and Wine, the Body of Christ, and his Blood is present, exhibited, and
received ver^ly, and Substantially. And by Sacramental Union, the Bread is the
Body of Christ: and the Bread being given, the Body of Christ is verily
present, and verily delivered.

Though this opinion of Bucer, by which he recanted his former Zwinglian
Heresy, be in sundry points false, and Heretical, yet in this he agrees
with the Catholic Church against M. Iuels negative assertion, that the Body
and Blood of Christ is present in the Sacrament Verily, that is, Truly, and
Really, or in Deed, and Substantially: (137) The.137. Untruth, For the
Ancient Fathers in this matter of the Sa^ram. spoke not so.
wherein he speaks as the Ancient Fathers spoke long before a thousand
years past.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Hitherto M. Hardinge has alleged neither Ancient Doctoure, nor Old Council,
to serve his purpose. The first, that he can find, is Doctor Bucer, that
died in Cambridge the fourth year of King Edward the Sixth, in the year of
Our Lord.1551. Of his judgment herein I will say nothing. What reasons
leadde him to yield to the other side for quietness sake, I remitte it wholly
unto God. But thus much I may well, and justly say, If M. Hardinge could
have found any other Doctoure, he would not thus have made his entry with M.
Bucer.

Touching that brotherly, and sobre Conference, that was bytweene D. Luther,
and D. Bucer, Philip Melan^thon, and other Godly learned men of Germany in the
University of Wittenberge, I see no great cause, why M. Hardinge should thus
sport him self with it, and call it a Council. He might rather, and more
justly have scofte at the vain Council of the Eight Special Chosen Cardinals
holden in Rome under Pope Paulus the third, Anno D. 1538. Concilium se^^ctoru^
Cardinalium Romae. A^. 1538.
two years after that Conference at Wittenberge. For if he will compare voices,
they of Wittenberge were more in number: If knowledge, they were better learned:
if Purposes, they sought Peace in Truth, and the Glory of God: if Issue, God
has blissed their dooinges, and given force, and increase unto his Word, as
it appears this day. His holy name be praised therefore for ever. But these
Eight piked Cardinals, after great study, and long debatinge of the matter,
espied out only such faults, as every Child might have soon found without
study: and yet never redressed any of the same. If M. Hardinge had been in
the Apostles times, perhaps he would have made some sport at their
Councelles. For where, Augustine. Epist. 178. in Domo Anitiana.
or in what house assembled they together? What Bishop, or Pharisie was emonge
them? Certainly S. Augustine had Conference, and Disputation with Pascentius
the Arian at Hippo in the Private house of one A^^tius: and yet was never scoft
at for his dooinge. Thus there be ever some, that laugh, and storne at the
repairinge of Jerusalem. Origin Origin. in Cantica Canti. hom.
says, Inimici Veritatis, vide^tes, sine Philosophia co^surgere muros
Euangelij, cu^ irrisione dicu^t, Hoc facile posse destrui calliditate Sermonum,
and per astutas fallacias. The enemies of the Truth seeinge the walls of the
Gospel rise without worldly Policy, say scornefully emonge them selves, All this by our crafty speech, and falseheade, will soon be overthrown. But he
that sits in Heaven, will laugh them to scorn.

M. Hardinge. The.10. Division.
Let Chrysostom for proof of this be in steed of many that might be alleged.
In 26. cap. Mat^* Hom. 83.
His words be these. Nos secum in vnam (vt ita dicam) Massam reducit, Christ
makes him self one with us: not with the Sacrament.
neque id fide solum, sed re ipsa Corpus suum efficit. By this Sacrament (says
he) Christ reduces us (as it were) into one loumpe with him self, and that
not by Faith only: but he makes us his own Body in very deed, Re^psa:
which is no other to say, then Really. Untruth As before.
The other Aduerbes, Corporally, Carnally, Naturally, be found in the Fathers
not seldom: specially, where they dispute against the Arianes. And therefore
it had been more convenient for M. Iuel, to have modestly interpreted them, then
utterly to have denied them. The old Fathers of the Greek, and Latin
Church, deny that faithful people have an habitude, or disposition, Union, or
Conjunction, with Christ only by Faith, and Charity, or that we are
spiritually joined, and united to him only by hope, love, religion, obedience,
and will: Yea further they affirm, that by the virtue and efficacy of this
Sacrament duly, They proved the same by the Sacrament of Baptism, by faith,
by the Birthe of Christ etc.
and worthily received, Christ is Really, and in deed, communicated by true
Communication, and participation of the Nature, and Substance of his Body and
Blood, and that he is, and dwells in us truly, because of our receiuinge
the same in this Sacrament. The benefit whereof is such, as we be in Christ,
and Christ in us, Johan. ^.
according to that he says, Qui manducat meam carnem, manet in me, and ego in
illo. who eats my Fleashe* he dwells in me, and I in him. The which
dwellinge, union, and ioyninge together of him with us, and of us with him,
that it might the better be expressed, and recommended unto us: they thought
good in their writings to use the aforesaid Aduerbes.

Hilarious writing against the Arianes, alleginge the words of Christ. 17.
John. Vt omnes vnum sint, sicut tu Pater in me, and ego in te, vt and ipsi in
nobis vnum sint: That al may be one, as thou Father art in me, and I in the,
they also may be one in us: gooinge about by those words to show, that the
Son and the Father, were not one in Nature, and Substance, but only in
Concord and Unity of will: among other many and long sentences for proof of
unity in substance, both bytweene Christ and the Father, De Trinita. li. 8.
and also bytweene Christ and us, has these words. Si enim vere verbum caro
factum est, and nos vere verbum carnem Cibo Dominico sumimus, quomodo non
Naturaliter manner in nobis existimandus est, qui and Naturam Carnis nostrae
iam inscparabilem sibi homo natus assumpsit, and Naturam Carnis suae ad Naturam
aeternitatis sub Sacramento nobis Co^municandae Carnis admiscuit: If the word
be made fleashe verily, and we receive the word being fleashe in our Lords
meat verily: S. Hilade says, Christ dwells Naturally in us: But not in
the Sacrament.
how is it to be thought not to dwell in us naturally, who both has taken
the nature of our fleashe now inseparable to him self, in that he is borne
man, and also has mengled the nature of his own fleashe to the nature of his
euerlastingnesse under the Sacrament of his fleashe to be received of us in the
Communion? There afterward this word, naturaliter, in this sense that by the
Sacrament worthily received, Christ is in us, and we in Christ naturally,
that is, in truth of nature, is sundry times put, and rehearsed: who so
lists to read further his eight book De Trinitate, he shall find him
agnise, Not in the Sacrament: bu^ in us.
Manentem in nobis carnaliter filium, That the Son of God (through the
Sacrament) dwells in us Carnally, that is, in truth of f^eashe, and that by
the same Sacrament, we with him, and he with us are united and knitte
together, Corporaliter, and inseparabiliter, Corporally, and inseparably: In
lib. De vita Mosis.
for they be his very words. Gregory Nyssene speakinge to this purpose,
says, Panis qui de Coelo descendit, non incorporea quaeda^ res est. Quo enim
pacto res incorporea corpo^i cibus fiet^res vero quae incorporea non est,
corpus omnino est. Huius corporis panem non aratio, non satio non agricolarum
opus effecit, sed terra intacta permansit: and tamen pane plena fuit, quo
famescentes, Mysterium virginis perdocti, facile saturantur. (138) The 138.
Untruth. For Grego, Nysse^us in this place speaks not one word of the
Sacrament*
which words report so plainly the truth of Christ's Body in the
Sacrament, as al manner of figure, and signification must be excluded And thus
they may be englished. The bread that came down from Heaven, is not a
bodilesse thing. For by what mean shall a bodilesse thing be made meat to a
body? And the thing which is not bodilesse is a body, without doubt. It is
not earinge not sowinge, not the work of tillers, that has brought forth the
Bread of this Body: but the earth which remained untouched, and yet was full
of the Bread, whereof they that wax hungry, ben thoroughly taught the
Mystery of the Virgin, sone have thetre fille. Of these words may easily be
inferred a Conclusion, that in the Sacrament is Christ, and that in the same
we receive him Corporally, that is, in verity, and substance of his Body: For
as much as, that is there, and that is of us received, which was brought
forth and borne of the virgin Marie.

Cyrillus that ancient Father and worthy Bishop of Alexandria, for
confirmation of the Catholic Faith in this point, says thus, In Johan. lib.
10. cap. 13.
Non negamus recta nos Fide, Charitateque syncera Christo Spiritualiter
coniungi: Sed nullam nobis Coniunctionis rationem secundum Carnem cum illo
esse, id profecto pernegamus, idque a Diu^is Scripturis omnino alienum dicimus.
We deny not, but that we are joined Spiritually with Christ, by right
Faith, and pure Charity: but that we have no manner of ioininge with him
according to the Fleashe (which is one as to say Carnaliter, Carnally) that
we utterly deny, and say, that it is not agreeable with the Scriptures*
Again, least any man should think this ioininge of us, and Christ together
to be (139) The.139. Untruth. For Christ^ dwells in us; and (...)are
incorporate into him by Baptism etc. as shall appear.
by other means, then by the Participation of his Body in the Sacrament, in
the same place afterward he says further. An fortassis putat ignotam nobis
Mysticae Benedictionis virtutem esse? Quae cum in nobis fiat, nonne
Corporaliter quoque facit Communicatione Corporis Christi, Christum in nobis
habitare? What, trovveth this Ariane Heretic perhaps, that we know not the
virtue of the Mystical blessinge? (whereby is meante this Sacrament) which
when it is become to be in us, In us.
does it not cause Christ to dwell in us Corporally by receiuinge of Christ's
Body in the Communion? And after this he says as plainly, that Christ is in
us, Non habitudine solum, quae per Charitatem intelligitur, verumetiam, and
Participatione Naturali: not by Charity only, but also by Natural
participation.

The same Cyril says in an other place, Lib. in. Johan. 11: Cap. 26.
that through the holy Communion of Christ's Body, we are joined to him in
Natural Union. Quis enim eos, qui vnius Sancti Corporis union in vno Christo
unity sunt, ab hac Naturali Union alienos putabit? Who vvil think (says he)
that they which be united together by the Union of that one holy Body in one
Christ, be not of this Natural Union? He calls this also a Corporal Union in
the same book: and at length after large discussion, how we be united unto
Christ, not only by Charity, and obedience of Religion, but also in
Substance, concludes thus: Sed de Union Corporali satis. But we have treated
enough of the Corporal Union, Yet afterward in diverse sentences he uses
these Aduerbes (140) The.140. Untruth. For here is not one word of presence
in the Sacracramente.
(for declaringe of the Verity of Christ's Body in the Sacrament)
Naturaliter, Substantialiter, secundum carnem, Or Carnaliter, Corporaliter, As
most manifestly in the.27. Chapter of the same book. Corporaliter filius per
benedictionem mysticam nobis, vt homo vnitur, Spiritualiter autem, vt Deus. The
Son of God is united unto us Corporally, as man: and Spiritually, as God.

Again, where as he says there: Filium Dei natura Patri vnitum Corporaliter,
Substantialiterque accipientes, clarificamur, glorificamurque etc. We
receiuinge the Son of God, united to the Father by nature Corporally, and
Substantially, are clarified, and Glorified, or made Glorious, being made
partakers of the Supreme Nature. The like saieinge he has Lib. 12. cap. 58.

Now this being, and remaininge of Christ in us, and of us in Christ
Naturally, and Carnally, and this vnitinge of us and Christ together
Corporally, presupposes a participation of his very Body, (141) The.141.
untruth, joined with pernicious, and dangerous doctrine.
which Body we cannot truly participate, but in this Blessed Sacrament. And
therefore Christ is in the Sacrament, Naturally, Carnally, Corporally, that is
to say, according to the truth of his Nature, of his Fleashe, and of his
Body (142) The.142. Untruth. For Christ is likewise joined Corporally to us
by the Sacrament of Baptism.
For were not he so in the Sacrament, we could not be joined unto him, nor he
and we could not be joined and united together Corporally.

Diverse other Ancient Fathers have used the like manner of speech: but none so
much as Hilarious, and Cyrillus: (143) The.143. Untruth. For they neither
understand so, nor write so.
whereby they understand, that Christ is present in the Sacrament, as we
have said, according to the truth of his Substance, of his Nature, of his
Fleashe, of his Body and Blood.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Now at the last M. Hardinge draws near the matter, and bringth forth the
Old Fathers with these very Terms, Really, Substantially, Corporally,
Carnally, etc. and allegeth these few, as he says, in steed of many,
having in deed no more to bring. And although these Fathers speak not any
one word, that is either denied by us, or any wise serves to this purpose,
yet he cunningely leads away the eyes of the Ignorant, with the show of
Old Names, and like a Iugglar, changes the natural countenance of things,
and makes them appear, what him lists.

For, where as he has taken in hand to prove, That Christ's Body is Really,
and Fleashely in the Sacrament, he findinge his weakness, and want therein,
altreth the whole case, and proves that Christ's Body is Really, Fleashely,
and Naturally within us. But this matter was not in question: and therefore
needed no proof at al. Herein stands the whole guile: and thus the simple is
deceived. To this end M. Hardinge so uses the words, and witness of these
Holy Fathers, as Cacus the Outlawe sometime used Hercules keen: Because he
cannot handesomely drive them forewarde, he takes them by the tails, and
pulls them backewarde.

But, because M. Hardinge will hereof reason thus, If Christ's Body by mean of
the Sacrament be Really, and Carnally in us: Christ dwells in us.
It is likely the same Body is also Really, and Carnally in the Sacrament. For
answer hereunto, it shall be necessary, first to understand, how many ways
Christ's Body dwells in our Bodies, and thereby afterward to view M.
Hardinges reason. Four special means there be, whereby Christ dwells in
us, and we in him: His Nativity, whereby he embraced us: Our Faith, whereby
we embrace him: The Sacrament of Baptism: and the Sacrament of his Body. By
every of these means, Christ's Body dwells in our Bodies: and that not by
way of Imagination, or by Figure, or Fantasy: but Really, Naturally,
Substantially, Fleashely, and in deed.

And touching Christ's Nativity, S. Bernarde says, Bernard. De Epiphan.
Sermo. 1. Basilius in Apologia ad Caesarienses.
Corpus Christi de meo est, and meum est: Paruulus enim natus est nobis, and
Filius datus est nobis. The Body of Christ is of my Body, and is now become
mine: For a Babe is borne unto us: and a Son is given unto us. So says S.
Basile, Participes facti sumus Verbi, and Sapientiae per Incarnationem, and
Sensibilem vitam. Carnem enim, and Sanguinem appellauit omnem illam Mysticam
Conuersationem. (...).
We are partakers of the word, and of the wisdom (which is Christ) by his
Incarnation, and by his Sensible life. For Fleashe, and Blood he called al his
Mystical Conversation. In dictu^ Apostoli, Tunc etiam ipse filius subijcietur
ei.
So says Gregorius Nyssenus, Corpus Christi est omnis humana Natura, cui
admixtus est. His Body is al mankind, whereunto he is mingled. And thus,
Christ being in the womb of the Blissed virgin, became Fleashe of our
Fleashe, and Boane of our Boanes: And in that sense S. John says, Verbum Caro
factum est, and habitauit in nobis: The word was made Fleashe, and dwelt in
us. And therefore Christ calls him self the Uine, and us the Branches: S.
Paul calls Christ the Head, and us the Body: which be names of most
near, and Natural Conjunction. Ephesians. 5.


Touching Faith, Johan. ^.
S. Paul says, Christus habitat in Cordibus nostris per Fide^. Christ by
Faith dwells in our Hearts: Johan. 15.
And S. Peter says, Hereby we are made partakers of the Divine Nature. Ephesi
4.
So says Ignatius, By his Passion, and Resurrection, (that is, by our Faith in
the same) we are made the Members of his Body. Colossen. 2.


And notwithstanding by these means Christ be in us, Ephesi. 3.
and we in him, yet for as much as, 2. Petri.1.
both our life, and Faith is imperfect, as we daily desire God to amend our
Life, Ignatius ad Trallian.
and to augment our Faith, even so we daily pray, that this Conjunction
bytweene Christ, and us may be increased, that Christ may come near, Ephesi.
4.
and near into us, and that we may grow into a Perfect Man in him. And to
this end God has specially appointed us his holy Sacraments. Romans 6.
And therefore S. Paul says, Galat. 3.
concerning the Sacrament of Baptism, They, that are Baptized, are planted
into Christ: 1. Corin. 12.
they have put Christ upon them: by one Spirit they are Baptized into one
Body. De Consec. Did.
S. Augustine says, Ad hoc Baptismus valet, vt Baptizati Christo
incorporentur. 4. Ad hoc.
This is the use of Baptism, that they, that be Baptized, may be incorporate
into Christ. De Ecclesiast.
Which word, Incorporari, he uses also in sundry other places, speakinge
of Baptism. Hierar. cap. 1.
In this respect Dionysius says, Baptizati transimus in Deum. Being
Baptized, we are turned into God. And Pachymeres says, We are grafte into
Christ, and made one nature with him by Holy Baptism. Pachymeres in Dionys.
ca. 4.


Thus much may suffice to discrie M. Hardinges sclender argument. (...).
For, notwithstanding by the Sacrament of Baptism Christ be Naturally in us,
yet may not he therefore conclude, that Christ is Naturally in the Sacrament
of Baptism. Bonauentura says well: Non est aliquo modo dicendum, quod Gratia
continetur in Sacramentis essentialiter, tanquam aqua in vase. Hoc enim dicere,
est erroneum. Sed dicuntur continere Gratiam, quia eam Significant. B^nauen. in
4. senten. Did. 1. quae. 3.
We may not in any wise say, that the Grace of God is contained in the
Sacraments, as Water in a vessel. For so to say, it were an error. But they
are said to contain Gods Grace, because they signify Gods Grace.

But Chrysostom says, Christ mingleth his Body with our Bodies, Christ
mingled with us.
and drives us, as it were, into one lump of dough with him self. This place
would have stand M. Hardinge in better steed, if Chrysostom had said,
Christ mingleth his Body with the Sacrament, and drives him self and it
into one lump. For this is it, that should be proved. Neither will M.
Hardinge say, That, either Christ mingleth him self with us, or, we are made
one lump of dowgh with him Simply, and according to the letter, and without
Figure. Whereof, he sees, it must needs follow, that much less is Christ's
Body in the Sacrament, according to that, he would have the letter to
sound, Plainly, Simply, or, as he says, Really, and Fleashly, and without
Figure. It is a vehement, and a hoate kind of speech, such as Chrysostom
was most delited with, far passinge the common sense, and course of truth:
and therefore he him self thought it necessary, to correct, and to qual^fie
the rigor of the same, by these words, Vt ita dicam: which is, As it were,
or, If I may be bold so to say. Anaclet. Epist 2.
In such phrase of talk Anacletus says, In oleo virtus Spiritus Sancti
inuisibilis permista est: The invisible power of the Holy Ghost is Mingled with
the Oil. Inter decret. Alexandri. 1.
And Alexander says, In Sacramentorum Oblationibus Passio Domini miscenda
est. The Passion of Christ must be Mingled with the Oblations of the
Sacraments. So says Gregorius Nyssenus of S. Steven, Gratia Sancti Spiritus
permixtus, and contemperatus, per illum sublatus, Gregor. Nissen. De S.
Stephano.
and euectus est ad contemplationem Dei. S. Steven being Mingled, and Tempered
with the Grace of the Holy Ghost, was by him auanced, and taken up to the
sight of God. These, and other such like saieinges of holy Fathers, may not be
hardly priest according to the sound of the letter: but rather must be gently
expounded, and qualified, according to the sense, and meaning of the writer.

Chrysostomes purpose was, by this word, Massa, which in this place
signifies a lump of dowgh, to make resemblance unto these words of S.
Paul, Corinth. 10.
We are one Loaf, and one Body: And by such Majesty of speech, the more to
quicken, and lift up our sprites, and to cause us thereby the better to
consider that wonderful Conjunction, and knittinge, that is bitweene Christ
and us, whereby either is in other, he in us, and we in him: and that even in
one person: in such sort, as he is neither in the Angels, nor in the
Archangelles, nor in any other power in Heaven. And therefore S. Paul says,
The Angels he took not: Ad Hebraeos. 2.
but he took the seed of Abraham. But this wonderful Conjunction, and, as
Chrysostom calls it, this mixture is wrought, not only in the holy
Mysteries, but also in the Sacrament of Baptism. And in that sense Leo says,
Susceptus a Christo, Leo Sermon. 14.
Christumque suscipiens, non est idem post Lauacrum, qui ante Baptismu^ fuit:
Sed Corpus Regenerati fit Caro Crucifixi. De passione.
A man received of Christ, and receiuinge Christ (in Baptism), is not the
same after Baptism, that he was before: But the Body of him, that is
Regenerate, is made the Fleashe of him, that was Crucified. Augustine. in Johan.
tractatu. 21.
Likewise S. Augustine says, Ergo gratulemur, and agamus gratias, non solum
nos Christianos factos esse, sed etiam Christum. Intelligitis, Fratres, Gratia^
Dei super nos: Capitis: Admiramini: gaudete: Christus facti sumus. Si enim ille
Caput est, and nos membra, totus ille homo, and nos: Let us rejoice, and give
thanks, that we are not only made Christian men, but also made Christ.
Brethren ye understand the Grace of God, that is upon us. Ye understand it:
Ye wonder at it: Rejoice ye: we are made Christ. For if he be the Head, and
we the members, both he and we are one whose man.

Now, gentle Reader, as Leo says, our bodies by Baptism are made Christ's
Fleashe: as S. Augustine says, we are made Christ him self: and as Gregory
Nyssene says, S. Steven was Te^pered, and Mingled with the Grace of the Holy
Ghost: even so, and in the same sense Chrysostom says, We are made one Lump
of dowgh with Christ, and Christ has tempered, and mingled him self with
us. These things considered, the force of M. Hardinges reason must needs
fail. Certainly Prsmasius says, Primasius in. 1.
As the Breakinge of this bread is the Partakinge of the Body of Our Lord,
even so the Bread of Idols is the Partakinge of Devils. Corinth. 11.
And adds further, Si de eodem pane manducamus, quo Idololatrae, vnum cum
illis Corpus efficimur. If we eat of one Bread with Idolaters, we are made
one Body with them.

These other three authorities, of Hilarie, Gregory Nyssene, and Cyril, may
well be discharged with one answer: sauinge that Gregory Nyssene an old
writer, Gregorius Nissenus.
newly set abroad with sundry corruptions, is brought in only to make a
show, not speakinge any one word, neither of Christ's Natural dwellinge in
us, nor of the Sacrament. His purpose was only to speak of Christ's Birth,
and of that Body, which he received of the Blissed Uirgin: which was not a
shadow, or a fantasy, but Real, Fleashly, and in deed. And in like manner of
speech S. Hierome says, Hieronym. in Esai. cap. 62.
Triticum, de quo Panis Coelestis efficitur, illud est, de quo loquitur
Dominus, Caro mea vere est cibus: The wheat whereof the Heavenly Bread is
made, is that, of which Our Lord says, My Fleashe is meat in deed. And to
this purpose Amphilochius says, Cyrillus in ApoIogetico.
as he is alleged by Cyrillus, Nisi Christus natus fuisset Carnaliter, tu natus
non fuisses Spiritualiter. Unless Christ had been borne Carnally, thou
had not been borne Spiritually. Touching Gregorius Nyssenus, as he says,
Christ is made our Bread, So he says likewise in the same place, Gregori.
Nyssenus in vita Mosis.
Quicquid assumenti conueniens sit, in id mutatur. Fit perfectioribus solidus
cibus, inferioribus olus, infantibus lac. What so ever thing is convenient for
the receiver, into the same thing Christ turns him self. He becomes strong
meat unto the perfect: Herbs unto the weak: and Milk unto Children. And as
Christ is Herbs, or Milk, even so, and none other wise, he is Bread, or
Fleashe. Neither will this Ancient Father agree unto M. Hardinges error, That
we cannot receive Christ's Body, but only in the Sacrament. For even in the
same plac^ he holds the contrary. Ibidem.
His words be these, Qui abundanter ex Apostolicis fontibus biberit, is iam
totum recepit Christum. Who so has abundantly dronken of the Apostles
springes, has already received whole Christ. The argument, that M. Hardinge
geathereth hereof, must needs stand thus: Christ was borne of the Virgin,
Ergo, his Body is Really, and Fleashly in the Sacrament. This Conclusion is
but childishe: Yet if he conclude not thus, he concludes nothing.

The greatest weight of this matter lies upon two Old Fathers, Cyril, and
Hilarie. Hilarious de Trinitate li. 8.
For Hilarie says, We receive Christ, vere sub mysterio, verily under a
mystery: And either of them uses these terms, Carnally, Corporally,
Naturally: and that not once, or twice, but in sundry places. The authorities
be great: the words be plain. But God be thanked, these places be common,
and not unknown. And for answer of the same, once again remember, good
Christian Reader, that notwithstanding M. Hardinge have found in these two
Fathers, that Christ's Body is Corporally, and Naturally in us, yet has he
not hitherto found that thing, that he sought for, neither in these Fathers,
nor in any other: that is, yt Christ's Body is Naturally, or Corporally in the
Sacramen^. Wherefore I much marvel, that either he would auouche this matter
so strongely, findinge him self so weak: or else thus vainly daly, and
show one thing for an other, and deceive his Reader.

That we verily, and undoubtedly receive Christ's Body in the Sacrament, it is
neither denied, Augustine. in Psalm. 103.
nor in question. S. Augustine says, Panis est Cordis: Intus esuri: intus
siti. It is the Bread of the heart: Hunger thou within: Thirste thou within.
And the thing, that is inwardly received in Faith, and in Sprite, is received
verily, and in deed. Bernard. super. Missus est Gabriel. Sermo. 3.
S. Bernarde meante no falseheade when he said, Lauemur in Sanguine eius. Let
us be washte in the Blood of Christ. Notwithstanding he meante not, that our
bodies Really, and in deed should be washte with the Blood of Christ. And
whereas S. Augustine says, Corporally, Naturally.
Quid paras de^tem, and ventre^? Augustine. in Johan. Ca. 6. tracta. 26.
Creed, and ma^ducasti: What preparest thou thy toothe, and thy belly? Believe,
and thou have eaten: We may not think, yt he meante any fantastical, or false
eating: notwithstanding he utterly refuses in this behalf, both the teeth,
and the belly, and al other office of ye Body. And therefore Cyrillus says,
Sacramentu^ nostrum hominis manducationem non asserit, mentes credentiu^ ad
crassas cogitationes irreligiose introducens. Cyrillus ad obiectiones
Theodoreti.
Our Sacrament teaches us not to eat a man (with the material mouth of our
Body) in ungodly sort leading the minds of the Faithful unto gross
cogitations. It is a holy Mystery, and a Heavenly action, forcinge our minds
up into Heaven, and there teaching us to eat the Body of Christ, and to
drink his Blood: not outwardly by the service of our Bodies: but inwardely by
our Faith, and that verily, and in deed. The truth hereof stands not in any
Real, or Corporal Presence, but, as Hilarious says, in a Mystery, which is, in
a Sacrament: whereby outwardly, and unto our senses, we express ye thing in
our Bodies, yt must be wrought inwardly in our minds. Dionysi. Ecclesiast.
hierar. ca. 2.
For this cause Dionysius says, Regeneratio naturali illa purgatione, quae fit
per aquam, Corporali quodam modo denuntiat animae purgationem. Our
Regeneration, which we have in Baptism, by that Natural Purgation, that is
wrought by Water, (...).
in a certain Bodily sort teaches us the purgation of the mind. Thus are we
truly washed with Christ's Blood in yt Holy Mystery of Baptism: thus are we
truly, and in deed feadde with Christ's Body in the Holy Mystery of his
Supper. And albeit Christ be in neither of these Mysteries in Bodily, and
Fleashly Presence, yet does not y^ thing any wise hinder, either the Substance
of yt holy Mystery, or the Truth of our receiving. Augustine. de verbis
Apostoli. Sermon. 16.
And for ye cause S. Augustine says, No^ fallit nos Apostolus, qui dicit,
Christu^ habitare in cordibus nostris per Fidem. In te est* quia ipsa fides in
te est. The Apostle deceives us not, in saieing, that Christ dwells in our
hearts by Faith. He is in thee (not Really* or Bodily, but) because his Faith
is within thee. M. Hardinge will Reply, This cannot suffice. For Cyril, and
Hilarie say, That Christ, not only by Faith, but also Corporally, Carnally,
and Naturally is within us. These words in their own rigor, without some
gentle Construction, seem very hard. Hilarious li. 8. d^ Trinitate.
Even so Hilarious in y^ same Book of the Trinity says, That we are one with
God the Father, and the Son, not only by Adoption, or Consent of mind, but
also by Nature: Non tantum adoptione, aut consensu, sed etiam natura.
Which saieing, according to the sound of ye letter, cannot be true.
Therefore the Fathers have been feign to expound, and to mollify such
violent and excessive kinds of Speech. Chrysostom, where he says, We are
made one lump with Christ, adds, as it is said before, his correction
withal, Vt ita dicam, As it were, or, If I may use such manner of Speech.
Chrysostom. in Matthae. hom. 83
In like manner says S. Augustine, Qui in Christum credit, credendo in
Christum venit, and in eum Christus, and quodammodo vnitur in eum, and membru^
in Corpore eius efficitur. Augustine. De Verbis Domini Secun. Johan. Sermon. 60.
He that believes in Christ, by believing comes into Christ, and Christ
into him, and, after a certain manner, is united unto him, and made a member
in his Body. In a manner, he says, but not according to the force of the
letter. Again he expounds this word, Corporaliter, in this wise, Non
vmbraliter, sed vere, and solid. Not, as in a shadow, but truly, and
perfitely. Augustine. in Psalm. 67.
So Cyrillus expounds his own meaning. Naturalis vnio non aliud est, quam
vera. Natura sumus filij irae, id est, vere. Natural Union is nothing else, but
a true Union. we are by Nature the Children of Anger, that is, we are in deed,
and truly the Children of Anger. Cyril^us in Apologetico ad Anathem. 3.
Ephesi. 2. (...)*
In which sense S. Paul says, Gentes factae sunt Cohaeredes, and
Concorporales, and Comparticipes promissionis in Christo Jesus: The Heathens are
become Coenheretours, Concorporal, and partakers of the promise in Christ
Jesus. Thus much of these words Corporally, Naturally etc. Whereby is meante a
full perfect spiritual Conjunction, excludinge al manner of Imagination, or
Fantasy: not a Gross, and Fleashly being of Christ's Body in our Bodies,
according to the appearance of the letter. Otherwise there must needs follow
this great inconvenience, yt our Bodies must be in like manner Corporally,
Naturally, and Fleashly in Christ's Body. For Hilarious says, Hill. De Tri.
li. ^. Cyril. in Ioha^* li. 10. ca. 13.
Nos quoque in eo sumus Naturaliter; We also are Naturally in him: and
Cyrillus, as he says, Christ is Corporally in us: so he says, We are
Corporally in Christ.

Further, that we be thus in Christ, and Christ in us, requires not any
Corporal, or Local Being, as in things Natural. We are in Christ sittinge in
Heaven: and Christ sittinge in Heaven is here in us, not by a Natural, but by
a Spiritual mean of Being. August de Trinit. li. 6.
S. Augustine says, Postquam ex morruis Resurrexit, and Ascendit ad Patrem,
est in nobis per Spiritum. After that Christ is Risen from the dead, and
Ascended unto his Father, he is in us by his Sprite. Basilius de Sancto
Baptismate.
Which saieing agrees well with these words of S. Basile, Paulus ait, Si
quis Spiritum Christi non habet, hic non est eius. Deinde addit, Si tamen
Christus sit in vobis: ac si diceret, Si Spiritus Christi sit in vobis. S.
Paul says, If any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is not of him. He
adds further these words, If Christ be in you: (...).
which is as much, as if he had said, If the Sprite of Christ be within
you. So likewise S. Augustine imagines Christ to say unto Marie Maudlen,
Ascendam ad Patrem meum: tum tange me. I will Ascend up unto my Father: then
touch thou me: Meaning thereby, that distance of place cannot hinder
Spiritual touching. August. Sermo de Tempore. 153.
Again S. Augustine imagines, Christ thus to say unto the people, Qui venit
ad me, incorporatur mihi. He that comes unto me, is Incorporate into me.
August. in Johan. tractat. 25. 1. Corinthians. 13.
He adds of his own, Veniamus ad eum: Iutremus ad eum: Incorporemur ei: Let
us go unto him: let us enter unto him: let us be Incorporate into him: Thus,
notwithstanding Christ were in Heaven, and distant in place, yet was he
present in S. Paul: for so S. Paul him self says, Will ye have a trial of
Christ, that speaks within me? This Conjunction is Spiritual, and therefore
needs not, neither Circumstance of Place, Cyprian. De Coena Domini.
nor Corporal Presence. Likewise S. Cyprian says, Nostra and Christi
Coniunctio, nec miscet Personas, nec unit Substantias: sed affectus consociat,
and confoederat voluntates. The Conjunction, that is bitweene Christ and us,
neither do the mingle Persons, nor unite Substances: but it does knitte our
affectes together, and join our wills. Yet notwithstanding, the same
Conjunction, because it is Spiritual, true, full, and perfect, therefore is
expressed of these Holy Fathers by this term, Corporal: which remooueth al
manner light, and Accidental ioininge: and Natural, whereby al manner
Imagination, or Fantasy, and Conjunction only of Will, and Consent is
excluded: not that Christ's Body is Corporally, or Naturally in our Body, as
is before said: no more then our Bodies are Corporally, or Naturally in
Christ's Body: but that we have Life in us, and are become Immortal, because
by Faith, and Sprite, we are partakers of the Natural Body of Christ. M.
Hardinge says, We are thus joined unto Christ, and have him Corporally
within us, only by receiving yt Sacrament, and by none other means. This is
utterly untrue, as it is already proved, by ye Authorities of S. Augustine S.
Basile, Gregory Nazianzene, Leo, Ignatius, Bernarde, and other holy Fathers:
neither doothe either Cyrillus, or Hilarie so auouche it. Certainly, neither
have they al Christ dwelling in them, that receive the Sacrament: nor are they
al void of Christ, that never received the Sacrament. Bisides the vntru^th
hereof, this Doctrine were also many ways very uncomfortable. For what may the
godly father think of his Child, that being Baptized, departs this life,
without rec^iuinge the Sacrament of Christ's Body? By M. Hardinges
Construction, he must needs think, His child is damned: for that it had no
Natural Participation of Christ's Fleash, without which there is no Salvation:
which Participation, as M. Harding assuereth us, is had by none other means,
but only by receiving of the Sacrament. Chrysostom. in Epist. ad Ephesians. si. ^om.
20.
Yet S. Chrysostom says, In the Sacrament of Baptism we are made Fleashe of
Christ's Fleashe, and Boane of his Boanes.

For better trial hereof, understand thou, gentle Reader, that both Cyrillus,
and Hilarious, in those places dispute against the Arians, whose error was
this, that God the Father, and the Son are one, not by Nature, but only by
Will, and Consent. Against them Hilarious reasoned thus,

Christ is as really joined unto the Father, as unto us. Naturally Corporally.


The Minor, Hilari. de Tri^nitat. lib. 8.
that is, That Christ is joined unto us by nature, he proves thus. We are
joined unto Christ by Faith, that is, by the nature of one Faith, and that
is to say, Naturally: Likewise he says, Per Naturam vnius Fidei, id est,
naturaliter. Eiusdem Regeneratione Naturae.
We are joined unto Christ by the Regeneration of one Nature: And again, We
are joined to Christ by the Nature of one Baptism: Hereof he Concludes:
Therefore are we Naturally joined unto him. Thus it appears by S. Hilarie, we
may have Christ Naturally within us, by three other sundry means: and
therefore not only, as M. Hardinge holds, by receiuinge of the Sacrament.
And like as Christ is naturally, Corporally, and Carnally in us by Faith, by
Regeneration, and by Baptism: even so, and none otherwise, he is in us by the
Sacrament of his Body. Per Naturam eiusde Baptism^.
In which Holy Mystery Christ is joined unto us Corporally, as being man,
because we are feadde in deed, and verily with his Fleashe: and Spiritually is
joined to us, as God.

Thus much unto Cyrillus, and Hilarious: in whom M. Hardinge is not yet hable
to find, that Christ's Body is either Corporally received into our Bodies: or
Corporally present in the Sacrament: which was the only thing, that M.
Hardinge has here taken in hand, and should have proved: and now not
having proved that, notwithstanding all this great a do, has proved
nothing.

But he says, It had benne more convenient, rather modestly to have
interpreted these words, then thus utterly to have denied them. Uerily,
perhaps it were so for him, that can make somewhat of nothing: and divise a
Commentary without a Text: and imagine Constructions, as M. Hardinge does, of
words, that were never spoken.

Hereof M. Hardinge gheasseth thus,

These Fathers say, That Christ is Naturally, and Corporally in us: Ergo, it
is likely their meaning was, that Christ is Naturally, and Corporally
present in the Sacrament. This reason is very simple: For notwithstanding
Christ were Naturally within our bodies, yet the like Being in the Sacrament
would not follow. But this argument would conclude the contrary, and hold
better, in this wise. Christ's Body is not Naturally, or Corporally present
within us.



M. Hardinge. The.II. Division.
And the Catholic Fathers, Al these were very young Fathers.
that sithence the time of Berengarius have written in defense of the truth in
this point, vsinge these terms sometimes for excludinge of Metaphores,
Allegories, Figures, and Significations only, whereby the Sacramentaries
would defraude faithful people of the truth of Christ's pretiouse Body in
this Sacrament: do not thereby mean, that the manner, mean, or way, of
Christ's Presence, dwellinge, union, and conjunction with us, and of us with
him, is therefore Natural, Substantial, Corporal, or Carnal: but they, and al
other Catholic men confess the contrary, that it is far higher, and
worthier, supernatural, supersubstantial, invisible, unspeakable, special, and
proper to this Sacrament, True, Real, and in deed notwithstanding: and not
only Tropical, Symbolical, Metaphorical, Allegorical: not Spiritual only, and
yet spiritual: not figurative, or significatiue only. And likewise concerning
the manner of the presence, and being of that Body and Blood in the
Sacrament, they and we acknowledge and confess, that it is not Local,
Circumscriptiue, Diffinitiue, or Subiectiue, or Natural, but such, as is
known to God only.

The B. of Sarisburie.
These Doctors lived within these two, or three hundred years, and are
such, as M. Hardinge thought not worth the naminge. Their Doctrine in these
cases is very unsavory, and without comfort. Generally they hold, that
Christ's Body remains no longer in our Bodies, but only until the forms of
the Bread, and Wine begin to alter. Some others say, that as soon as our
teeth touch the Bread, straight ways Christ's Body is taken up into Heaven.
The words be these: De Conse. did. 2.
Cerrum est, quod quam cito Species dentibus teruntur, tam cito in coelum
rapitur Corpus Christi. Tribus gradibus. In Glosa.
This Doctrine notwithstanding, they say, That Christ is Naturally, and
Corporally within us. Here may a man say unto M. Hardinge, as he did before to
the Arian Heretic: The absurdities of M. Hardings Doctrine.
What, troweth M. Hardinge, or his New Doctors, that Christ comes to us
from Heaven, and by and by forsakes us? Or, that we eat Christ, and yet
receive him not? Or, that we receive Christ, and yet have him not? Or, that
Christ is Corporally within us, and yet enters not? Is this Christ's natural
being in us? Is this the Vert^e of the Mystical Benediction? Is this the
meaning of these holy Fathers? Or troweth M. Hardinge, that holdinge, and
mainteininge such absurdities, his Reader, be he never so simple, will believe
him?

Last of al, to declare the manner of Christ's Presence in the Sacrament, he
says, it is not Local, not Circumscriptiue, not Diffinitiue, not Subiectiue.
By these terms his Reader may rather wonder at his strange Divinity, and
Eloquence, then well conjecture, what he means. And as it appears, he him
self is not yet hable to conceive his own meaning. For thus he says, This
Presence is known to God only. Then it follows, M. Hardinge knows it not.
And so this Article at last is concluded with an Ignoramus. How be it the Old
learned Fathers never leafte us in such doubts. De Conse. did. 2.
Emissenus says, as it is before alleged, Quta Corpus.
Praesens est in Gratia: Christ is Present by his Grace: S. Augustine says,
Est in nobis per Spiritum: Christ is in us by his Spirit. Augustine. de
Trinita.
Likewise again he says, Non hoc Corpus, quod videtis, manducaturi estis:
Sacramentum aliquod vobis trado. Augustine. in Psalm. 98.
Ye shall not eat this Body, that ye see. It is a certain Sacrament, that I
deliver you. Thus the Holy Fathers say, Christ is Present: not Corporally,
Carnally, Naturally: but, as in a Sacrament, by his Sprite, and by his Grace.

FINIS.
THE SIX THE ARTICLE, OF BEING IN MANY PLACES.
The B. of Sarisburie.
Or that Christ's Body is, or may be in a thousand places, or more at one
time.

M. Hardinge. The.1. Division.
(144) The.144. Untruth, for none of the ancient Fathers ever knevv this
miracle.
Among the miracles of this blissed Sacrament, one is, that one, and the same
body, may be in many places at once, to wit, under al consecrated hosts.
As for God, it is agreeable to his Godhed to be every where, Simpliciter, and
proprie. But as for a creature, to be but in one place only. But as for the
body of Christ, (145) The.145. Untruth. And a Doctrine hitherto seldom heard
of.
it is after a manner bytvveene both. For where as it is a creature, It ought
not to be made equal with the creator in this behalf, that it be every
where. But whereas, it is united to the Godhead, herein it ought to excel other
bodies, so, as it may in one (146) The.146. Untruth. For, ^otvvithstandinge
the Body of Christ be joined with the Godhead, yet it remains still a
creature.
time be in more places under this holy Sacrament. For the vnitinge of Christ's
natural body unto the almighty Godhead, duly considered, brings a true
Christian man in respect of the same, to forsake reason, and to lean to
Faith, to put aparte al doubts, and discourses of human understanding, and
to rest in reverent simplicity of belief.

Thereby through the holy Ghost persuaded, he knows, that although the Body
of Christ be natural, and human in deed, yet, through the union and
conjunction, many things be possible to the same now, that to al other
bodies be impossible: Matthew. 14.
as to walk upon waters, to vanishe away out of sight, Luc. 24.
to be transfigured and made bright as the Son, to ascend up through the
Clouds: Matthew. 17.
and after it became immortal, death being conquered, to rise up again out of
the grave, and to enter through doors fast shut. Luc. 24.
Through the same faith, he believes, and acknowlegeth, that (147) The.147.
Untruth, For Christ utters no such word: and Faith without Gods
Word is no Faith.
according unto his word, Act. 1.
by his power it is made present in the blessed Sacrament of the Aultare,
Matthew. 28.
under the form of Bread and wine, where so ever the same is duly
consecrated, Johan. 20.
according unto his institution in his holy supper: and that not after a
gross, or carnal manner, but spiritually, and supernaturally, and yet
substantially, not by local, but by substantial presence: not by manner of
quantity, or fillinge of a place, or by changinge of place, or by leauinge his
sittinge on the right hand of the Father, but in such a manner, as God only
knows, and yet does us to understand by faith the truth of his very
presence, far passinge al man's capacity, to comprehend the manner how.

Where as some against this point of belief do allege the article of
Christ's ascension, and of his being in heaven at the right hand of God the
Father, bringinge certain textes of the scriptures perteininge to the same,
and testimonies of ancient Doctors signifi^inge Christ's absence from the
earth: It may be rightly understood, that he is verily both in heaven at the
right hand of his Father, in his visible and corporal form, very God and
man, after which manner he is there, and not here, and also in the Sacrament
inuisibly, and spiritually, both God and man in a mystery: so as the
grauntinge of the one may stand without denial of the other, no contradiction
found in these beinges, but only a distinction in the way, and manner of
being.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Having somewhat largely answered the five first Articles, wherein seemed to
lie the greatest weight, I trust, I may now the more slightly pass over the
reast. Herein M. Hardinge seems in words thoroughly to yield unto us
without exception. For where as the question is moved of the being of Christ's
Body in a thousand places, or more, his answer is, that Christ's Body is
Local only in one place, and so cannot be in a thousand places, but only in
one place at one time. How be it, thus saieinge, he swarueth much from the
Old Fathers, whose words, as it shall appear, sound far otherwise.

Further, for the better understanding hereof, it shall behooue thee, gentle
Reader, to understand, that touching the Body of Christ, Errors touching
Christ's Body.
there have benne sundry great errors raised, and maintained in the Church
of old time, and that not only by Heretics, Augustine. ad Q^^duultdeu^.
but also by holy learned Fathers. The Mani^hees healde, that Christ had only
a fantastical Body, without any material Fleashe, Blood, or boane, in
appearance, and in sight somewhat, but in very deed, and in substance,
nothing. Leo Epist. 95.
Eutyches healde, that Christ's Body after his Incarnation, was made equal
with his Divinity: Epistola Flauiani ad Leonem.
an error much like unto this, that is now maintained by M. Hardinge. S.
Hilarie healde, that Christ received no Fleashe of the Blissed Uirgin, Hilarious
de Trinitate li. 10.
but brought the same from Heaven: and, that his Body was impassible, and
fealte no more grief, when it was stricken, then water, fiere, or air, when it
is divided with a knife. Theodoret. De Fabulis H^reticorum li. 2.
Theodoretus says, that the Heretics called Helces^ei healde, that there be
sundry Christ's, two at the least: the one dwellinge in heaven above, the
other in the world here beneath. Al these, and other such like errors, and
Heresies grew only of admiration, and reverence toward Christ's Divine
Nature: and the Authors, and Mainteiners of the same, leauinge reason,
according to M. Hardinges counsel, and cleauinge wholly to their imagination,
which they called Faith, were far deceived.

But M. Hardinge lays the fundation hereof upon a Miracle: whereof
notwithstanding, touching this gross, and fleashely Presence, he has no
manner warrant, neither in the Scriptures, nor in any of the Holy Fathers. As
for that, is alleged of Chrysostom, and Basile, it is to a far other
purpose, as shall appear, and may soon be answered. S. Augustine wrote three
special Books, Augustine. de Mirabilibus Sacrae Scripturae ^om. 3. Nazianzea.
namely of the Miracles of the Old, and New Testament: and Gregory
Nazianzene wrote in like sort of the same: yet did neither of them both ever
make mention of this Miracle. And albeit this kind of reasoninge, Ab
authoritate negative, in such cases implie no great necessity, yet must it
needs be thought either great negligence, or great forgeatfulnes, writing
purposely, and namely of Miracles, to leave out untouched the greatest Miracle.
Certainly, S. Augustine hereof writes thus: Augustine. de Trinit. li. 3. c. 10.
Quia haec hominibus nota sunt, quia per homines fiunt, honorem, tanquam
religiosa, habere possunt: stuporem, tanquam mira, non possunt. These things,
(speakinge of the Sacrament of Christ's Body) because they are known unto
men, and by men are wrought, may have honor, as things appointed to
Religion: but wonder, as things marvelous, they cannot have. Thus S.
Augustine overthrows M. Hardinges whole fundation: and says, that in his
great Miracle, there is no wonder, or Miracle at al.

He says further, It is agreeable to the Godheade, to be every where,
Simpliciter, and Proprie: For a creature, it is agreeable to be in one place.
But as for the Body of Christ, he says, it is after a manner bitweene
both. This is the whole countenance of this matter. And this whole place M.
Hardinge has borrowed even word by word out of Gerson. Gerson contra
Floretum.
But where as he adds, That the Body of Christ, as it is united unto the
Godheade, may be at one time in sundry places, he should have remembered,
that this is an old error, long sithence reproved, and condemned by S.
Augustine, Augustinus ad Dardanum. Epis. 57.
and other learned Fathers. S. Augustine says thus: Cauendum est, ne ita
Diuinitatem astruamus Hominis, vt veritatem Corporis auferamus. No^ est autem
consequens, vt, quod in Deo est, ita sit vbique, vt Deus. We must beware, that
we do not so maintain the Divine Nature of Christ being man, that we take
away the Truth of his Body. Neither does it follow, that the thing, that is
in God, is therefore euerywhere, as God is. S. Augustines words be plain,
that who so says, The Body of Christ is every where (or in infinite places
at one time, which is al one thing, the reason, and miracle being like)
utterly denies the verity of Christ's Body.

But what a fantasy is this, That Christ's Body is, neither the Creator, nor
a Creature, but, as it is here avouched, after a manner bitweene both? A mean
bitvveene Both.
Who ever would warrant this Doctrine, but that Old Heretic Abbate
Eutyches? Uerily S. Augustine says, Omnis substantia, quae Deus non est,
Creatura est: and quae Creatura non est, Deus est. Et quod Deo minus est, In
libro Sententiaru^ Prosperi.
Deus non est. Every Substance, that is not God, is a Creature: and that is not
a Creature, is God: and, what so ever is less then God, is not God. Here S.
Augustine knows a Creator, and a Creature: but M. Hardinges mean bytweene
both, he knows not. Leo writing against Eutyches, of whom M. Hardinge
seems to have received this learning, writes thus: Leo Epist. 95. ad Leonem
August.
Emergunt alij, qui Carnem Domini, and Diuini^atem dicunt vnius esse Naturae.
Quae tantum Sacrilegium inferna vomuere? Tolerabiliores sunt Ariani, etc. Up
there starte others, that say, The Fleashe of Christ, and his Divinity are
both of one Nature. What Hell has powered us out such wicked sacrilege? The
very Arianes are more to be borne withal, then these men. S. Augustine says,
Augustine. Epis. 57.
Quod ad Hominem attinet, Creatura est Christus. Christ, as concerning his
Manhood, is (not a mean bitweene both, but) a Creature. Again he says,
Duas Substantias, id est, Naturas esse fatemur: Diuinitatis, scilicet, and
Humanitatis: De verbis Domini in Euangelio Secundum Johan, ca. 58.
Creatricis, and Creatae: quae tamen substantiae, non confusae, sed vnitae,
atque in vna, eademque Persona inseparabiles, and in sua semper proprietate
manentes. We confess, there are in Christ two Substances, or Natures: The
one, of the Godhead, the other, of the Manheade: The one of the Creator, the
other of the Creature: Which Substances notwithandinge, are not Confused, but
United, and in one self same Person inseparable, and remaininge ever more in
their own Properties. The like writes Leo, Cyrillus, Gelasius, and all the
reast of the Old Learned Fathers. Therefore M. Hardinge was much ouerseene,
either to teach the people, that Christ's Body is neither the Creator, nor
the Creature, but a mean bitweene both: or else to say, that the same Body,
being united unto the Godheade, may therefore be in sundry places at one
time. Herein rested the old Heresy of Eutyches. For thus Flauianus writes of
him: Flauianus ad Leonem.
Corpus Domini Humanum quidem vocat: tamen negat esse nobis Co^substantiale. He
calls the Body of our Lord, a Man's Body: but yet he says, it is not one
in Substance with our bodies.

But M. Hardinge replieth, Christ's Bodies is now become Immortal, and
Glorious. This is most true, and without al question. How be it, it may please
him to remember, that, when Christ ministered the holy Communion to his
Disciples, his Body was then Mortal, and subject to Death, and other
injuries, and not Glorious. Therefore if Christ's Body in the Sacrament be
Immortal, and Glorious, it must follow, that, for that present, Christ had
two manner Bodies: the one Mortal, the other Immortal: the one Glorious, the
other not Glorious. Thus M. Hardinges Rules and Examples match not together.

He adds further, Christ's Body walkte upon the waters: vanisshed out of
sight: ascended through the Clouds: and entered through the doors being fast
shut, etc. These were the reasons, that deceived the Old Manichees. I
marvel, that M. Hardinge, being, as he says, lately become a professor of
the Catholic Faith, would found the whole substances of his Doctrine upon
Heretics. Touching the special trust, that the Manichees reposed in this
argument, Hieronym i^. Psalm. 119.
S. Hierome writes thus: Cum dicit Manichaeus, and similis Manichaeorum,
Dominus non Resurrexit in Corporis Veritate, and, vt scias, non fuisse verum
Corpus, clausis ingressus est ostijs, nos quid dicemus? Domine libera animam
meam a labijs iniquis, and a lingua dolosa. When the Manichee, or any other
like the Manichees, says, The Lord arose not again in the Truth of his
Body, and for proof thereof, says thus, He entered in, when the doors were
shut, what then shall we say? Even thus, O Lord, deliver my soul from
wicked lips, and deceiteful tongues. Here we see, M. Hardinge is driven to
seek upon old condemned Heretics, and to borow their weapons: wherefore it
shall be good to follow S. Hieromes counsel, and to say, O Lord deliver my soul
from wicked lips, and deceiteful tongues.

Likewise S. Ambrose says, The Apostles of Christ, Ambrosi. in Lucam li. 10.
ca. 24.
by the same manner of reasoninge, were deceived. For upon that, Christ
entered, the gates being shut, he writes thus: Denique conturbati Discipuli
aestimabant, se Spiritum videre. Et ideo Dominus, vt speciem nobis
Resurrectionis ostenderet, palpate, inquit, et videte, quia Spiritus Carne^,
and Ossa no^ habet: sicut me videtis habere. The Disciples being astonned,
thought they saw a Spirit, or a Fantasy. Therefore the Lord, to show a token
of his Resurrection, said unto them, feel, and see: for a Spirit, or
Fantasy, has not Fleashe and Bone, as you see, that I have. Now, if these
arguments were hable to deceive the Apostles of Christ, it is not impossible,
but they may likewise deceive M. Hardinge. Chrysostom says, Chrysostom. in
homilia De Johan. Baptisia.
Clausa erant ostia, and ingressus est Jesus: Non erat phantasma: Non erat
Spiritus: Vere Corpus erat: habebat Carnes, and Ossa. The doors were shut,
and Jesus entered: It was no Fantasy: it was no Sprite: it was verily a Body:
it had Fleashe and Boanes. Thus, notwithstanding these Marvelous effects,
yet the Ancient godly Fathers said, Christ's Body nevertheless is, and
continues still a Creature: not a mean bitweene both: as M. Hardinge here
strangely has imagined.

Now let us consider M. Hardinges arguments: Christ's Body walkte upon the
waters: Ergo, It may be at one time in sundry places.



Although this argument may soon be espied, having utterly no manner sequel
in reason, yet the folly thereof may the better appear by the like.

S. Peter walkte upon the water: Matthew. 14. 2. Regum. 2.
Elias was taken up into the Clouds: Ergo, S. Peter, Elias, and S. Bartholomew
may be at one time in sundry places.

And that I allege here of S. Bartholomew, Aldias in Bartholomaeo.
although it be but a vain Fable, yet it may not easily be denied. For it is
recorded by Abdias, the Bishop of Babylon, who, as M. Harding supposes, saw
Christ in the Fleashe, and was one of the Apostles Fellows.

Over all this M. Hardinge throws a sweet myste, to carry away the simple in
the dark. Christ's Body (says he) is in the Sacrament, not by Local, but by
Substantial presence: Carnally, but not in carnal manner: placed in the Pyxe,
in the hand, in the mouth: and yet in no place at al: a very Natural Body,
even as it was upon the Cross: yet without al manner Quantity, and
Dimensions, or Proportions of a Body, that is, neither thick, nor broad, nor
short, nor long: there now, where before it was not: and yet without any
shiftinge, or change of places. Unless this man were fast asleape, he could
never fall into so deep a Dream. In these Fantasies he seems well to agree
with the Old Heretics, Eutyches, and Manichee. For even such a Body they
imagined, that Christ received of the Blissed Uirgin: and yet were they
Heretics notwithstanding. For which of all the Old learned Fathers ever
taught us this strange Doctrine? Who ever durst to spoil Christ of his Place,
of his Quantity, and of the natural Proportions of his Body? If the Doctors
of the Church say thus, why are they not alleged? If they say not thus, why is
this matter carried away with such countenance of Antiquity? Or why doothe M.
Hardinge thus auouche this insensible and unsavory learning, only upon his
own credit, without the Authority of any Doctor? Epiphanius. Augustine. ad
Quoduu^ deum.
The Manichees in old times, ye better to maintain their error, and to
avoid absurdities, were driven to say, there were two Gods: The one Good: the
other I^. Even so M. Hardinge, to maintain his errors, and to avoid infinite
absurdities, is driven to say, There are two Christ's: The one Local, the
other not Local: The one above, the other beneathe: The one with proportion of
Body, the other without proportion.

How be it he seems to publishe this principle unawares against him self.

For if Christ's Body in the Sacrament be not Local, as he says, then is it
no Natural, or Real Body. This rule S. Augustine takes to be infallible.
August. Epis^^.
His words be these: Toll loca Corporibus, and nusquam erunt: and qui
nusquam erunt, nec erunt. Take away the places from the Bodies, and the Bodies
shall be no where: and because they shall be nowhere, they shall have no beeinge:
and so shall be no Bodies at al. And he speaks not thus only of other natural
Bodies, but specially, and namely of the Body of Christ.

Certainly, the more spiritual a thing is, the more it is void from the
circumstance, and necessity of place. Christ's Body more Glorious in the
Sacrament, then in Heaven.
Wherefore, when M. Hardinge says, The Body of Christ is in Heaven, as in a
place, and in the Sacrament without place: he seems secretly to say, that
Christ's Body in the Sacrament is more Glorious, more Spiritual, and Divine,
then is the very Body of Christ in deed, that is in Heaven, in the Glory of
God the Father. Which conclusion, how well it may stand, either with the reast
of his own Doctrine, or with the truth of our Christian Religion, I leave it
in consideration to the Reader.

But what needs this new divised difference, of Christ's Body Local, and
Christ's Body not Local? Or what forces these men to say, that only the bare
Substance of Christ's Body is in the Sacrament, without length, breadthe, or
any other respect of Quantity? Will M. Hardinge now at the last forsake the
Reverent Simplicity of his belief, and lean to Reason? Or will he in Gods
secret Mysteries give credit to his eyes, and harken to the course of Nature?

Uerily God, as he is hable by his Omnipotente Power, to make Christ's Body
present without Place, and Quantity: so is he likewise hable, to make y^ same
Body present in Place, and with Quantity, and al other natural Dimensions. If
M. Hardinge will say nay, Duns him self, his own Doctor will reprove him.
His words be plain, Idem Corpus localiter, and dimensiue potest esse in
diuersis locis: Scotus. 4. Sent. Did. 10. q. 2.
Et Deus potest quodcunque Corpus vniuersi conuertere in Corpus Christi, sicut
Panem, and facere Corpus Christi vbique esse, non solum Sacramentaliter, sed
etiam Localiter, and Dimensionaliter. One Body both Locally, and with the
natural Dimensions of a Body, may be in sundry places. And God is hable to
turn any Body in the world, into the Body of Christ, as well as Bread: and
to cause Christ's Body to be euerywhere, not only by way of Sacrament, but
also by way of place, and Dimensions. Lib. 4. De 6. part Canoni^.
Which saieinge seems also to be well liked, and allowed of Durandus.

Therefore M. Hardinge should not thus nicely shrink back, and so dissemble
in dark speeches: but should rather boldly, and plainly say: Christ's Body
is in the Sacrament, not only Substantially, but also Locally, and by way of
place: as having as good warrante for the one, as for the other. For it is a
Catholic man's part, to be bold of Gods Omnipotent Power: and what so ever
God, being Omnipotent, is hable to do, to believe, it is already done,
without any regard had to his will, or promise. If he think it lawful for him,
without cause to deny this manner of Christ's Presence, let him not be
offended, if we upon good, and just cause, deny the other, Uerily, Alexander
de Hales, a great Doctor of that side, reckeneth M. Hardinge to be in a
great error in this behalf. This is his Resolution, Alexander de Hales. 4.
q. 40. m. 3.
Quidam ponebant Corpus Christi esse sub Sacramento, non secundum quantitatem
etc. Sed haec positio est erronea. Some healde, that Christ's Body is under
the Sacrament, not according unto Quantity: But this Opinion is erroneus.
Thus much I thought good only to touch: not so much for any great credit
of the Author, but that it may appear, That, notwithstanding al these men
would so feign have Christ Really, and Fleashly Present, yet they reprove
one an other of error, and ignorance, and cannot agree emonge them selves, in
what sort they may have him Present. How be it, the Ancient Fathers of the
Church have written far otherwise in this behalf. For like as Athanasius
says, Aequalis patri secundum Diuinitatem: Gregor. Nazianzenus contra
Apollinarium.
Minor patre secundum Humanitatem: Christ according to his Divine Nature is
equal unto the Father: and according to his Manheade, is inferior unto the
Father: Even so says Gregory Nazianzene, Christ according to his Body, is
within the limitation of place: (...).
according to his Spirit, and Godhead, he is without the limits of any
place. But, that any one of all the Old Fathers ever said, Christ's Body is
sometime in one place, and sometime in many: sometime limited, and sometime not
limited: I think it not easy for M. Hardinge well to prove.

As for the difference, that he has divised, of Uisible, and Unuisible: Local,
and not Local: which is both Trenche, and Bulwerke to maintain this piece,
it is a very toye, only meet to beguile Children: as neither having
fundation in the Scriptures, or holy Fathers, nor effectually seruinge to
prove his purpose. For we reason not of Respects, and Qualities: but as S.
Augustine, S. Cyril, and other Catholic Doctors do, of the very Nature, and
Substance of Christ's Body. Neither can M. Hardinge well maintain, That, what
so ever is Invisible, is therefore of Nature Infinite, or may be at one time in
a thousand places. As touching Christ's Being in a Mystery, as it requires
no Local Presence, according to M. Hardinges own Confession, so likewise it
requires no Natural, or Real Body: as hereafter, God willinge, it shall be
showed more at large.

M. Hardinge. The.2. Division.
And how the ancient Fathers of the Church have confessed, and taught both
these beinges of Christ in Heaven, and in the Sacrament together, contrary to
M. Iuels Negative, by witness of their own words we may perceive. Basile in
his Liturgy, that is to say, Service of Mass, says thus in a prayer. Look
down upon us Lord Jesus Christ our God from thy holy Tabernacle, and from
the throne of Glory of thy Kingedome, and come to sanctify us, which sit
above with thy Father, and art Not bodily, but by Sprite, and Grace.
conversant here Inuisibly: and vouchsafe to imparte unto us thine undefiled
Body, and pretiouse Blood, and by us, to al thy people.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Touching these Ancient Fathers, that here be alleged, notwithstanding the
credit of some of them might well come in question, as namely that Chrysostom
in his Liturgy prays for the Emperor Alexius, which was not borne within
five hundred years after, that Chrysostom was dead: yet will I spare both
this, and also al other like advantages, and receive al these Authorities, as
if they were good, and perfect without exception.

But first, for the clearer conceiuinge of the answer hereunto, understand,
good Christian Reader, that by the record of the Old Fathers, Christ is
present emongst us sundry ways. Cyrill. in Johan. li. 8. ca. 7. Emissen. De
Con. Did. 2.
By his holy Sprite, as Cyrillus says: By his Grace, as Eusebius Emissenus
says: By his Divinity, and Majesty, as S. Augustine says: By Faith
dwellinge in our hearts, as S. Paul says. Thus is Christ most confortably
Present in his Holy Word: in the Mystery of Baptism: and in the Sacrament
of his Body. Quia Corpus. Augustine. Tractatu in Ioha^. 50 Ephesians. 3.
We deny only that Gross, and Fleashly Presence, that M. Hardinge here
defends: wherein we have the authority, and consent of the Old learned
Fathers. For to allege one in steed of many, S. Augustine says, Corpus, in
quo Resurrexit, in vno loco esse oportet. The Body, wherein Christ rose
again, Augustine. De Co^secra. Did. 2. Prima.
must be in one place.

Here M. Hardinge, as his manner is, takes one thing in hand, and proves
an other. For to prove, that Christ is Really, and Fleashely Present in the
Sacrament, he allegeth the Old Fathers, that never spoke one word of this
Real, or Fleashely Presence. And therefore settinge such countenance upon the
matter, with the names of holy Fathers, and not once coming near that thing,
wherein stands the whole question, he dallieth vainly, and abuses the
simplicity of the people. For touching Chrysostom, and Basile. we grant,
that Christ being in Heaven in his Humanity, and in y^ Substance of his
Body, is nevertheless by his Sprite, and Grace Inuisibly Present in his
Sacraments. Which answer, notwithstanding it might serve generally to al
these authorities here brought in, yet I have thought it not amiss, to
consider them al severally, as they come.

M. Hardinge. The.3. Division.
S. Chrysostom prays with the very same words also in his Liturgy, or
Mass. Where we read further, that the Priest, and the Deacon do adore, and
woorship, Et populus ^^mil^ter omnis cum pietate adorant.
saieinge three times secretly, God be merciful to me a sinner, and that the
people do al likewise deuoutely adore. Now sith he will adoration to be made,
he acknowlegeth Christ present, whom he grants to be also at the same time
in Heaven.

The B. of Sarisburie.
It is likely, says M. Hardinge, that Christ is Fleashely Present in the
Sacrament, for that the Priest, and the people adoureth him. This gheasse has
very sclender hold. For would he, that the people should never woorship
Christ, but only when they have him present before their face? Certainly, S.
Hierome writes thus of a Gentelwoman named Melania, Ad Christi pedes prouoluta
est: Hierony. ad Paulam de obitu Blesillae. Chrysostom. in Marcum Ho. 1^.
She fell down, and woorshipped at Christ's feet: notwithstanding she had not
Christ there bodily present. Likewise Chrysostom teaches us, to woorship
Christ in the Sacrament of Baptism: For thus he says unto the people, Et
vos, qui accepturi estis Baptisma, Tenete pedes Saluatoris: Lauate lachrymis:
C^^ne ^ergite. You, that will receive Baptism, hold the feet of our Saueour:
wash them with your tears: wipe them with your hear. Yet will not M. Hardinge
therefore say, that Christ is Bodily, and Carnally present in the water of
Baptism. Thus the Faithful then were taught to woorship Christ, although they
had him not Corporally in Real Presence. The Idolaters woorshipped the Sun,
and the Moon: yet they pulled them not down from Heaven, to receive their
woorship. Therefore M. Hardinges argument of Adoration can stand him but in
little steed. For we are taught to woorship Christ sittinge in Heaven: not
lieinge Bodily Present before our eyes.

M. Hardinge. The.4. Division.
Which he utters more plainly in these words, Chrysostom. de S^cerdotio.
li. ^.
O Miraculum, O Dei Benignitatem, etc. O Miracle, O the goodness of God, who
sits above with the Father, at that very instante of time, is handled with
the hands of al, and gives him self to those, that will receive, and embrace
him. And that is done by no crafty sleightnesse, but openly in the sight of
all that stand about. How say thou, seem these things no better to thee,
then to be contemned, and despised? By which words of S. Chrysostom we may
see, that Christ's being in Heaven, makes no proof, that he is not in Earth,
sith both these verities may well stand together.

The B. of Sarisburie.
This argument would serve well, if there were none other Miracle, but Carnal
Presence. But if M. Hardinge had conferred with the Old Catholic Fathers, he
should have found Miracles in the Sacrament of Baptism, no less, then in
this Sacrament of Christ's Body. Leo Epist. 13.
Leo says, Deus Mirabile nobis Sacramentum Regenerationis indulsit. God has
granted us the Marvelous Sacrament of Regeneration. So says Eusebius
Emissenus: Homil* Sexta Feriae De Baptismo.
Veniant nunc, qui futurae Resurrectionis gloriam ^itiunt^iam nunc de
Remissione peccatorum digno Miracul^ reficiant Fide^ suam. Homo in font
tingitur, etc. Let them draw near, that thirst after the Glory of the
Resurrection that is to come: even now let them refreashe their Faith with
that worthy Miracle Miracle.
of Remission of sin. A man is washte in the font, etc. In like sort
writes Chrysostom touching the same. Chrysostom. in Johan. homi. 24.
Nullo pacto de intellectuali per Baptismum Regeneratione, and Admirabili partu
rationem reddemus. Nam and Angeli, qui adfuerunt, ta^ in enarrabilis operis
modum minime possunt enarrare. Adfuerunt tantum, and viderunt: nihil autem
operati sunt: Sed Pater tantum, and Filius, and Spiritus Sanctus. We are never
hable to yield a reason of the Spiritual Regeneration, and Miraculous Birthe,
that we have by Baptism. The very Angels, that were present, are not hable
to utter the manner of that unspeakable work. They were present only, and
saw: but they wrought nothing: but only the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Ghost. Here we see a Miracle in Baptism, and such a Miracle, as the Angels
of God are not hable to utter it. Yet will not M. Hardinge say, that Christ's
Body is therefore Really Present in the Water of Baptism. So weakly these
proufes hang together.

But Chrysostomes words are very vehement: That Christ is Present at the
Holy Ministration: that every man, both touches him with his fingers, and also
sees him with his eyes, and that clearly, and openly, without guile, or
error. I grant, these words be very vehement, and much excede the common
sense. But here would I learn of M. Hardinge, whether he will take these
words plainly, and simply, as they lie, or else will rather qualify them with
a courteous, and gentle Interpretation. If he follow the rigor of the
words, then appears there a manifest contradiction: and Chrysostom in
vtteringe one sentence, is found clean contrary to him self. For first, he
says, Christ is there inuisibly, in such sort as noman can see him: And
yet immediately after, with one breath he says, Every man sees him with his
eyes plain^ly, and without guile, or error. Again, by the rigor of the
same words, we must needs grant, that the people both verily, and in deed
sees Christ's very Body, and also handles, and touches it with their
fingers: De Consecra. Dis. 2. Ego Berengarius. In Glosa.
which is not only a manifest untruth, but also a greater Heresy, then ever
was defended by Berengarius, as it is confessed by the Doctors of M. Hardinges
own side. In deed, the marvelous effects that God works in the Faithful,
in that dreadful time of the holy Communion, wherein the whole Mystery of our
Redemption, that we have in the Blood of Christ, is expressed, Chrysostom
calls a Miracle: and therefore the more to stir the peoples minds to the
consideration of the same, he inflameth his speech with Rhetorical
Amplifications, and heat of words. He says, Christ is Crucified before our
eyes: his blood gussheth out of his ^ide, and streameth, and flows over the
holy Table: and the people is therewith made readde, and bloody. This
auancinge, and rauishinge of the mind, he calls a Miracle: but of any
Corporal, or Fleashely Presence, he speaks nothing. By such Figurative, and
fiery speech, he meante not that we should understand him precisely
according to the sound of his words, but sought only to lift up, Calat. 3.
and inkendle his hearers minds. So S. Paul says to the Galathians:
Hieronym. in Psalm. 85.
Christ was Crucified before your eyes. So S. Hierome: Our faces are marked in
Baptism with the Blood of Christ. So says Tertullian, We are washed in the
Passion of our Lord. Tertul. De Baptismo.
So S. Gregory says: Eundum Agnum Johannes ostendendo, Esaias praeuidendo,
Abe^ offerendo locutus est: Et quem Johannes in ostensione, quem Esaias in
locutione, hunc Abel Significa^do in manibus tenuit. S. John the Baptist spoke
of the same Lamb by pointinge, Esaias by seeinge, Abel by offeringe. And the
Lamb, that John healde in his hand by pointinge, and Esaie by speakinge, the
same Lamb Abel healde in his hand by Signifieinge. Gregori. in Job. lib. 29.
cap. 16.
These saieinges, and other like are vehement, as is that of Chrysostom: and
as M. Harding knows, may not be taken, as they lie, but must be mollified
with a gentle Construction.

M. Hardinge. The.5. Division.
The same Father confesses the Body of Christ to be in diverse places
likewise in his Homilies Ad populum Antiochenum, most plainly alludinge to
Elias. Hom. 2.
Elias, says he, Melotem quide^ Discipulo reliquit, Filius autem Dei
ascendens suam nobis Carnem dimisit. Sed Elias quidem exutus: Christus autem
and nobis reliquit, and ipsam habens ascendit. Elias (when he was carried up in
the fiery Chariot) leafte to his Disciple Eliseus his mantel of Sheep
skins: but the Son of God, Chrysostomes words not justly, and fully
reported.
when he ascended, leafte to us his Fleashe. But Elias did put of his Mantel:
and Christ both leafte his Fleashe to us, and also Ascended having it with
him. Nothing can be spoken more plainly, whereby to show, that we have the
same fleashe here in Earth, that was received into Heaven, which Christ has
not put of, to give it to us. By which doctrine of S. Chrysostom, (148)
The.148. untruth. For the very order of the Comparison plainly concludes the
con^ary.
we are taught to believe, that Christ's Fleashe, or his Body, is both in
Heaven, and also in the Earth, in how many places so ever this Blessed
Sacrament is rightly Celebrated.

The B. of Sarisburie.
This place well considered, both opens it self, and also gives light unto
other like. Chrysostom shows, in what sort Christ has both taken up his
Fleash into Heaven, and also leafte the same here emongst the Faithful in the
Earth: and to that end compares Elias, and Christ together. 4. Reg. 2.
The story is known, that when Elias was taken up in a fiery Chariot, he let
down his Coat unto Elizaeus, that stood beneath: who took it up, and by the
power of the same, divided the water of Iordane. Upon occasion hereof,
Chrysostom says, Tanquam maximam haereditatem Elizaeus melotem suscepit.
Chrysostom. ad populum Antiochen. homi. 2.
Etenim vere maxima fuit haereditas omni auro pretiosio^. Et erat postea duplex
Elias: Et erat sursum Elias, and deorsum Elias. Elizaeus received the coat
made of Sheep skins, as a great inheritance. And doubtelesse it was an
inheritance more Precious then any Gold. After that time, Elias was double.
For there was Elias abooue, and Elias beneath. Abooue was the very true Elias
in the Natural Substance, and Presence of his Body: Beneathe was nothing
else, but Elias coat: which coat notwithstanding, because of the powers,
that were wrought with it, he calls Elias. Thus Chrysostom compares Elias
with Christ, and Elias coat with the Sacrament: And thus he says, Christ is
above, and Christ is beneathe: as he says, Elias is above, and Elias is
beneathe. For as Elias coat was called Elias, even so the Sacrament of
Christ's Body, is called Christ's Body. Which saieinge agrees well with
these words of S. Augustine: Sacramentum Corporis Christi secundum quendam
modu^ Corpus Christi est. The Sacrament of Christ's Body, after a certain
manner, is the Body of Christ: Augustine. Epist. 23. ad Bonifacium.
not Substantially, or Really, or in deed, but as Elias coat is Elias.

Hereof M. Hardinge might well have formed this argument:

Elias being above, was not verily, and in deed, present beneath in his Coat.

Therefore by Chrysostomes Comparison, Christ's Body is not in deed Really,
and Fleashely present in the Sacrament.

M. Hardinge. The.6. Division.
(149) The.149. Untruth, joined with a scla^der.
And where as many, measuringe Al things by the common order, and Laws of
Nature, believe nothing can be done above Nature, and therefore think, that
the Body of Christ, for as much as it is of Nature finite, cannot by power
of God be in many places at once: of which opinion M. Iuel seems to be him
self: it shall not be biside the purpose, though the places already alleged
prove the contrary, to recite the testimonies of an Old Doctor, or two,
wherein they confess most plainly, that which by this Article is most
untruly denied.

The B. of Sarisburie.
M. Hardinge hoapeth to win the Uictorie by vntru^ reports. For, with what
Truth, or Modesty can he say, That we measure al things by the Laws of
Nature, and believe nothing above the judgment of our senses? He knows well,
Cyprian. De Coena Domini. Cibus mentis non ventris.
Our Doctrine is, according to the Doctrine of S. Cyprian, S. Augustine, and
other Old Fathers, that Christ's Body is meat for our minds, and not for
our Bellies: and that the same cannot be eaten with our Mouth, or Teethe, or
by any other Natural, or Material means, but only Spiritually by Faith,
which is the mouth of the Inner Man. He knows, we teach the people,
Chrysostom. 1. Corinthians. homi. 24.
to lift up their hearts, and, as S. Chrysostom says, To become Eagles in
this life, and to mount up unto the Gates of Heaven, even unto the Heavens of
Heavens, and so to draw near to Christ's Body. He knows, we say, Christ
is Present by his Godheade, by his Sprite, and by his Grace, and works
Miraculousely in the Sacrament of his Body, as he doothe in the Sacrament of
Baptism. All this it pleases M. Hardinge to call the Law of Nature, and the
judgment of our senses. Uerily we yield no more unto Nature, then it is meet
we should. Neither do we abridge Gods Omnipotent power. But al vain
fantasies of man's head may not be measured by the power of God. This argument
ye Heretic Praxeas used against Tertullian. For thus he said, God is
Omnipotente, and can do it: Therefore we must believe, that he does it. But
Tertullian answeareth him, Si tam abrupte in praesumptionibus nostris hac
sententia vtamur, Tertullian. aduersus Praxea^.
quiduis de Deo confingere poterimus: quasi fecerit, quia facere potuerit. Non
autem, quia omnia^ potest facere, ideo credendum est illum fecisse: Sed an
fecerit, requirendum. If we use this saieynge so rashely in our presumptions,
we may imagine of God what we list: as though, because God can do it, that
therefore in deed he has done it. But we may not believe, that God has
done every thing, because he is hable to do it: but rather we must search
out, whether he have done it, or no: Thus M. Hardinges New Catholic Faith is
called of Tertullian a vain Presumption.

M. Hardinge. The.7. Division.
S. Ambrose has these words. In Psalm. 9^.
Etsi Christus nunc non videtur offerre, S. Ambrose speaks only of the
Spiritual sight, and fru^io^ of the mind, and requires no manner Gross, or
Corporal Presence.
tamen ipse offertur in terris, quando Christi Corpus offertur. Im^ ipse
offerre manifestatur in nobis, cuius sermo sanctificat Sacrificium, quod
offertur. If Christ now be not seen to offer, yet he is offered in earth,
when the Body of Christ is offered. Yea it is manifest, that himself
offers in us, whose word Sanctifies and Consecrateth the Sacrifice, that
is offered. Now if Christ's Body be offered in earth, as this Father
affirms, and that of Christ him self, in respect that the Sacrifice,
which is offered, is by his word Consecrated: then it follows, Christ's
Body to be in so many places, as it is offered in. Where by the way, this
may be noted, that the Sacrifice of the Church, (150) The.150. untruth. For
S. Augustine calls it the Sacrifice of Praise, and Thanks geuinge.
is not thanks geuinge (as our new Masters do teach) but the Body of
Christ it self, which of the Fathers is called an unbloody, Sacrificium
in^rue^tum, and viuificum.
and quickeninge, or lifegeuinge Sacrifice.

The B. of Sarisburie.
In all these words, there is no mention of Carnal Presence: and therefore M.
Hardinges purpose is hereby but weakly furthered. But (good Christian Reader)
to put thee out of al doubt of S. Ambroses judgment in this behalf, I beseech
thee, to consider these words, yt he writes upon the Gospel of S. Luke. Quae
sursum sunt, sapite: Coloss. 3. Ambrosi. in Lu^am li. 10. ca. 24.
non quae supra Terram. Ergo no^ supra Terram, nec in Terra, nec secundum
Carne^ te quaerere debemus, si volumus inuenire. Se^ke the things, that be
above: not the things that be upon Earth. Therefore we must seek thee neither
upon the Earth, nor in the Earth, nor according to the Fleashe, if we list
to find thee. This is S. Ambroses undoubted, and most certain judgment:
from which we may not be removed, by any amplification, or show of words. If
M. Harding will needs force, and press the bare letter, as I said before of
S. Chrysostom, he will make S. Ambrose in one sentence plain contrary to him
self. For first he says, Vidimus Principe^ Sacerdotu^, etc. We have seen
(Christ) the Prince of Priests coming unto us: we have seen him, and heard
him offeringe up for us his Blood. He adds immediately, Etsi nunc Christus non
videtur offerre, etc. Although Christ be not seen to offer, yet is he offered
in the Earth. If we follow the very force, and sound of the words, this
Contradiction of seeing, and not seeinge can not be salued. Wherefore, to avoid
this inconvenience, we must say, that S. Ambrose speaks of the Spiritual
eyes of our Faith, with which eyes we see Christ in deed offeringe up him
self upon the Cross. And thus, De ijs qui initiantur Mysterijs ca. 3.
as S. Ambrose says, Magis videtur, quod non videtur: The thing is the better
seen, that is not seen. It is best seen with our Faith, that is least seen
with our Body. For our Faith is sharper, then our eye. And in like sense S.
Augustine says, Augustine. Sermon. 119. De tempore.
Non vides, quomodo rubeat pars Christi? Interroga oculos Fidei. Si Crucem
vides, attend and cruorem. Si vides quod pendet, attend, quod fudit. See
thou not, how Christ's portion is readde with Blood? Ask the eyes of thy
Faith. If thou see the Cross, behold also the Blood. If thou see, that
hangs, behold also that it sheadde. Of these eyes, and of this sight S.
Ambrose speaks: unto which is required, neither circumstance of place, nor
any manner Corporal, or Fleashly presence. Ambro. De Virginib. li. 2.
In this sense S. Ambrose writes unto certain Holy Uirgines. Vestras mentes
confidenter altaria dixerim, in quibus quotidi^ pro Redemptione Corporis,
Christus offertur. I may boldly call your minds Aultars: for that in them
Christ is daily offered for the Redemption of the Body.

Hereof M. Hardinge reasons thus: Christ is offered in the Earth,

If this argument were good, then would this argument likewise be good:

The Lamb, that is, Apocalyp. ca. ^
Christ, was offered from the beginning of the world,

Ergo, Christ's Body was Really in sundry places, before it was borne in the
world.

M. Hardinge might better have reasoned thus, and have concluded the contrary:
Ergo, Christ's Body is not Really, and Fleashely present in many places.

But M. Hardinge says, The Sacrifice of the Church is not Thanks geuinge: as
our new Masters teach us. Certainly our Sacrifice is the very Body of
Christ, Hebrae. 6. 7. 10.
and that for ever, according to the order of Melchisedech, Roman. 8.
evermore standinge in Gods presence, and evermore obteininge pardon for us:
not offered up by us, but offering us up unto God the Father. For the same, it
is our part to offer unto God our Sacrifice of Praise, and Thanks giving. And
this is the Doctrine, not only of them, whom it likes M. Hardinge to call new
Masters, but also of the Oldest, and most Catholic Doctors of the Church.
And to allege one in steed of many, Augustine. ad Petrum Diaco^^. ca. 19.
S. Augustine hereof writes thus: In illis Carnalibus victimis, Figuratio fuit
Carnis, quam Christus fuerat oblaturus. In isto autem Sacrificio est gratiarum
actio, and Commemoratio Carnis, quam pro nobis ob^^lit. In those Fleashely
Sacrifices (of the Jews) there was a Figure of the Fleashe, that Christ
afterward would offer: but in this Sacrifice of the Church, there is Thanks
giving, and a Remembrance of that Fleashe, which Christ has already offered
for us. If M. Hardinge will happily refuse S. Augustine, as mistrusted for one
of these new Masters, yet he may not well refuse his own Mass Book. There he
himself even at his Mass is taught to say, Qui tibi offerimus hoc Sacrificium
Laudis. We, that do offer up unto thee, this Sacrifice of Praise. Wherefore,
unless M. Harding will leave his Mass, he him self must needs pass in the
number of these New Masters.

But to conclude, who can better expound S. Ambroses meaning, then S.
Augustine, that was sometime his Scholar? He shows us, by how many ways we
may have Christ present emonge us. His words be these: Augustine. in Johan.
Tract. 50.
Habes Christum and in praesenti, and in futuro. In praesenti per Fidem: in
praesenti per Signum: in Praesenti per Baptismatis Sacramentu^: in praesenti
per Altaris Cibum and Potum. Thou have Christ both in the time Present, and
also in the time to come. In the time Present thou have Christ by Faith: in
the time present by his Token: in the time present by the Sacrament of
Baptism* in the time present by the Meat, and Drink of the Altar. Origin.
in Diuersos. Homi. 1.
The like hereof is written also by Origin, and that in like order, and form
of words: Sauinge that he adds, By the Preachinge of the Apostles: and in
steed of, Signum, has these words, Per gloriosum Crucis Signaculum. Origin.
in Matthae. tract. 33.
Uerily the same Origin says, Si virtus Jesus vna sit cum eis, qui
congregantur in nomine eius, no^ peregrinatur a suis, sed semper praesto est
eis. If the power of Jesus be together with them, that be assembled in his
Name, he is not away from his own, but is still present with them. And again
he says, Nihil est contrarium, Origin. eodem tracta.
ipsum Iesum secundum quendam intellectum esse vbique: secundum alium
intellectum peregr^nari. It is no inconvenience, nor contrariety, that Christ
in one sense, be euerywhere: and in an other sense, be a stranger, and absent
from us. Thus many ways, says S. Augustine, and Origin, we have Christ
present emongst us: And even thus says S. Ambrose, Christ is offered in the
Earth. Whereupon we may conclude thus: We have Christ in Faith, in the Sign,
and in the Sacrament of Baptism without Real, or Fleashely Presence:
Therefore, we have him likewise without any such Real Presence in the
Sacrament of his Body.

M. Hardinge. The.8. Division.
We find in Chrysostom a most manifest place for the being of Christ's
Body in many places at once, so as, though he be offered in many places, yet
is he but one Christ, not many Christ's. His words be these. In Epis. ad
Heb. ^omi. 17.
Vnum est hoc Sacrificium: alioquin hac ratione, quoniam multis in locis
offertur, multi Christi sunt? Nequaquam: sed vnus vbique est Christus,
Chrysostom expounds him self. He calls it a Co^memoratio^, a Figure, a
Remembrance: whereunto is required no Corporal Presence. Bernarde lived after
Christ. Anno. (...)
and h^c plenus existens, and illic plenus. Vnum Corpus. Sicut enim qui vbique
offertur, vnum Corpus est, and non multa corpora: ita etiam and vnum
Sacrificium. This Sacrifice is one: else by this reason, sith it is offered
in many places, be there many Christ's? Not so, but there is but one Christ
euerywhere, being both here fully, and there fully also, one Body. For as
he, that is offered euerywhere, is but one Body, and not many Bodies, so
likewise it is but one Sacrifice. By this place of Chrysostom we see, what
has been the Faith of the Old Fathers touching this Article: even the
same, which the Catholic Church professes at these days, that one Christ
is offered in many places, so as he be fully, and perfitely here, and fully,
and perfitely there. And thus we perceive, what force their arguments have in
the judgment of the learned Fathers, by which they take away from Christ
power to make his Body present in many places at once. S. Bernarde utters
the Faith of the Church in his time agreeable with this, in these words:
Sermo. in Coena Domini.
Sed vnde hoc nobis pijssime Domine, vt nos vermiculi reptantes etc. From
whence comes this, most louinge Lord, that we seely worms creapinge on the
face of the earth, yea we that are but duste and ashes, be admitted to have
thee present in our hands, and before our eyes, which al, and whole sit at
the right hand of thy Father, which also art present to al in one moment of
time, from the East, to the VVeast: from the North, to the Southe: one in
many, the same in diverse places: from whence (I say) comes this? Soothely,
not of our duty, or deserte, but of thy good will, and of the good pleasure of
thy Sweetness. for thou have prepared in thy sweetenes for the poor one, O God.
In the same Sermon exhortinge the Church to rejoice of the presence of
Christ, he says, In terra Sponsum habes in Sacramento, in coelis habitura es
sine velamento: and hic, and ibi veritas: sed hic palliata, ibi manifestata. In
the earth thou have thy spouse in the Sacrament, in Heaven thou shall have him
without veil, or coueringe: both here, and there, is the Truth (of his
Presence) but here covered, there opened.

The B. of Sarisburie.
This place is uttered by S. Ambrose, Primasius, Remigius, Haimo, Sedulius in
like manner, and form of words, and has been often alleged, and often
answered. If it had pleased M. Harding to suffer S. Chrysostom to tell out his
own tale, the place had been plain of it self. Chrysostom. in epist. ad
Hebrae. ^omil. 17.
For thus he says: Offerimus quidem, sed Recordationem facientes Mortis eius.
Hoc Sacrificium Exemplar illius est. Hoc, quod nos facimus, in Commemorationem
fit eius, quod factum est. Christus enim ait, Hoc facite in meam
commemorationem: Id ipsum semper offerimus: magis autem Sacrificij
recordationem operamur. Christ whole here, and whole there.
We offer in deed: but we do it in Remembrance of his Death. This sacrifice
is an Examplar, or Figure of that Sacrifice. The thing, that we do, is done
in Remembrance of that thing, that was done before. For Christ says, Do
this in my Remembrance. We offer up the same thing: Nay, rather we work the
Remembrance of a Sacrifice. By thus many sundry ways, Chrysostom opened his
own meaning. Yet all this M. Hardinge thought best to dissemble closely, and
to pass it in silence. Certainly, the Commemoration, or Figure, or
Remembrance of Christ's Death, makes small proof for Corporal, or Fleashly
Presence. True it is, that whole Christ is fully at every Communion, as
Chrysostom says: not, that he is there in Fleashely, or Bodily Presence, For
so S. Chrysostom says not: but for that by his Grace, and holy Sprite, he
woorketh wholly, and effectually in the hearts of the Faithful. S. Augustine,
and other learned Fathers, have used the like manner of speech, and in the
same seem fully to express Chrysostomes mind. S. Augustine writes thus,
Veritas vna est, qua illustrantur animae Sanctae: Augustine. in Psalm. 11.
Sed quoniam multae sunt animae, in ipsis multae Veritates dici possunt, Sicut
ab vna facie multae in speculis imagines apparent. There is but one Truth,
wherewith the Blissed Souls are lightened. But, for as much as, the Souls be
many, it may be said, that in the same are many Truethes: as sundry Images
appear in sundry glasses, notwithstanding the face be one. Again, S.
Augustine says, Sapientia Dei, verbum Dei, Dominus Jesus Christus vbique
praesens est: August. in Johan. tracta. 35.
quia vbique est Veritas, vbique est Sapientia. Intelligit quis in Orient
Iustitiam: intelligit quis in Occidente Iustitiam. Nunquid alia est Iustitia,
quam ille intelligit, alia, quam iste? The Wisdom of God, the Word of God,
our Lord Jesus Christ is euerywhere Present: for the Truth is euerywhere,
and Wisdom is euerywhere. One Man understands Righteousenes in the East: an
other understands Righteousness in the Weast. And does the one of them
understand one Righteousness, and the other, an other? So likewise, and
somewhat near to the manner of Chrysostomes speech, Origin speaks, Et hodie
in hac Congregatione Dominus loquitur: Origin. in Lucam homi. 32.
and non solum in hac, sed etiam in alio Coetu, and in toto orb docet Jesus,
quaerens organa, per quae doceat. And even this day, in this Congregation the
Lord speaks: and not only in this, but also in an other company, and in
the whole world Jesus teaches, seekinge instruments, by which he may
teach. In this sort is Christ Present at the holy Ministration, because his
Truth, his Wisdom, his Righteousness, his Word is there Present, as the
face is Present in the Glass: not by any Bodily, or Fleashely Presence. In
this manner S. Ambrose writes: Coelum aspice: Jesus illic est. Terram intuere:
Ambros. in Lucam li. 2 ca. 1.
Jesus adest. Si Ascenderis in Coelum, Jesus illic est: si descenderis ad
Infernum, adest. Hodie, cum loquor, mecum est: intra hunc punctum, intra hoc
momentum. Et, si in Armenia nunc loquatur Christianus, Jesus adest. Nemo enim
dicit Dominum Iesum, nisi in Spiritu Sancto. Look up into the Heaven: there is
Jesus. Behold the Earth: Jesus is there. If thou Mount up into Heaven, there
is Jesus: If thou go down into Hell, Jesus is present. Even now, while I
speak, Jesus is with me: even at this Hour, even at this Minute. And, if any
Christian man speak now in Armenia, so far hence, Jesus is with him. For no
man says, The Lord Jesus, but in the Holy Ghost. And such kind of Presence
at one time in sundry places, is avouched by S. Chrysostom, not only of
Christ's Body, which is Immortal, and Glorious, but also of any other godly
Mortal Man. For thus he writes: Chrysostom. ad populum Antiochen. homil. 51.
Vidistis Chari^a^is excellentiam, quemadmodum vnum hominem inexpugnabilem
reddat, and multiplicet: and quemadmodum vnus in multis locis esse possit: idem
and in Perside, and Romae. Nam quod Natura non potest, potest Charitas. Nam
eius hoc quidem hic erit, hoc autem illic. Quin potius integer hic, and integer
illic. Itaque* si mill habeas amicos, vel duo millia, perpende, quorsum possit
potentia peruenire. Vides, quemadmodum Charitas res sit augmentatiua. Hoc enim
est mirabile, quod vnum facit mill cuplum. Thou have seen the excellent
workinge of Charity, how it fortifieth a man, as it were in a Castle, and
multiplieth him, and being one Man, makes him many. Thou have seen, how one
Man may be in many places: one man in Persia, and the same man in Rome. For
Charity can do, Argum. taken of Christ's Humanitic.
that nature cannot do. Of one man, one portion shall be here, and an other
portion there. Naie rather, he shall be whole here, and whole there. Therefore if
one man have a thousand friends, or two thousand, consider, how far he
may reach by this power. Thou see, how that Charity is a matter of
increase. And this is a wonder, It makes one man to be a thousand fold
more, then he is, and as if he were a thousand men.

The same answer may serve also for S. Bernarde: How be it his Authority in
this case is not great, as living in the v^ry time of Corruption, at the least
eleven hundred years after Christ, and so five hundred years at the least
without the compass of the first six hundred years.

M. Hardinge. The.9. Division.
Thus al these Fathers, as likewise the rest, confess as it were with one
mouth, that Christ sits at the right hand of his Father, and yet is here
present in the Sacrament the same time, that he is in Heaven and in Earth at
once, in many and diverse places, one, and the same is eueriewhere offered, the
one true Sacrifice of the Church. And this article is by them so clearly, and
plainly uttered, that (151) The.151. Untruth. For these very words of
Ambrose, and Chrysostom are full of Figures, as shall appear.
Figures, significations, tropes, and Metaphores can find no appearance nor
color at al. Whereby the new Masters reasons seem very peeuishe: Christ
is ascended, Ergo, he is not in the Sacrament. Christ is in heaven sittinge at
the right hand of his Father, Ergo, he is not in Earth. Christ's Body is of
nature finite, Ergo, it is contained in a place circumscriptiuely, Ergo, it is
not in many places.

The B. of Sarisburie.
M. Hardinge needs no great study, to answer our Arguments. It is
sufficient for him to pronounce by Authority, These new Masters arguments
be al peeuishe. Uerily it appears by the whole Substance, and Course of M.
Hardinges Book, that he has sum good pretty skill in peeuishe Arguments:
otherwise he could not have them, and use them in such plenty. But the Old
learned Fathers oftentimes, and commonly used such Arguments of Christ's
Humanity, and yet were they never reproved, as peeuishe for the same, but
only by Heretics. S. Augustine says, De Con. Did. 2. Prima.
Donec saeculum finiatur, sursum est Dominus: Sed tamen etiam hic nobiscum est
Veritas Domini. Corpus enim, in quo Resurrexit, in vno loco esse oportet. Until
the world be ended, the Lord is above: Yet notwithstanding, even here is the
Truth of the Lord. For the Body, wherein he rose again, must needs be in
one place. S. Cyrillus says, Cyrill. in Johan. li. 11. ca. 3.
Christus non Poterat in Carne versari cum Apostolis, postquam Ascendisset ad
Patrem. Christ could not be conversant with his Apostles in his Fleashe,
after that he had Ascended unto his Father. So S. Augustine writing against
the Heretic Manichee, that seemed much to favor of M. Hardinges error,
August. contra Faustum Manichaeum* li. 20.
says, Christus secundum Praesentiam Corporalem, simul and in Sole, and in
Luna, and in Cruce esse non potuit. Christ, according to the presence of his
Body, could not be both in the Sun, and in the Moon, and upon the Cross
at one time. Again he says, Christus venturus est, illa Angelica voce
testante, quemadmodum ire visus est in Coelum, cap. 11.
id est, in eadem Carnis Forma, atque Substantia: August. Epist. 57
Cui profecto Immortalitatem dedit, Naturam non abstulit. Christ shall come
again, as it is witnessed by the Angel, even as he was seen to goo into
Heaven: that is, in the same shape, and Substance of his fleashe: unto which
fleashe, as he has given Immortality, so has he leafte unto it the same
Nature, that it had before. Thus S. Augustine. And further he says, That who
so holds, that Christ's Body is both in Heaven, and in Earth at one time,
utterly dissolueth, and destroieth the Nature of the Body of Christ. To be
short, Augustine. Devnitate Ecclesiae Cap. 10.
and not to ouercharge the Reader with allegations, S. Augustine seems to
give a special note by way of prophecy, touching this same. For thus he
says, His dictis, mox Ascendit in Coelum: praemunire voluit aures nostras
aduersus eos, quos, procedentibus temporibus, exurrecturos esse praedixerat,
and dicturos: Ecce hic Christus, Ecce illic: quibus, ne crederemus, admonuit.
Nec vlla nobis excusatio est, si crediderimus aduersus vocem Pastoris nostri
tam claram, tam apertam, tam manifestam, vt nemo vel obtusus, and tardus cord,
possit dicere, Non intellexi. These words spoken, he Ascended into Heaven.
Hereby he gave our ears a Praemunire against them, which, he foretold us,
would rise in process of time, and say: Math. 24.
Behold, here is Christ: behold, there is Christ. Lucae. 17.
Unto whom he warned us, we should give no credit. Neither have we now any
manner excuse, if we believe them against the voice of our Sheephearde, being
so clear, so open, and so plain, that noman, be he never so heavy, or dulle
of heart, can justly say, I understood him no^. Thus the old Catholic
Doctors thought, they might warrant the Arguments for good, and effectual,
that they took of Christ's Humanity, and of the Natural Substance of his
Body. But perhaps, they must al go for new Masters, and their arguments
likewise be condemned for peeuishe.

Let us therefore consider the arguments, that M. Harding, and his company
have founded hereupon. Actor. 1.
Thus therefore reason they, Christ is Ascended into Heaven in his Humanity:
Actor. 3.
The Heavens must hold his Body, as S. Peter says, until al things be
^stoared: Philippen. 3.
S. Paul says, Our Conversation is in Heaven, from whence we look for our
Savior Jesus Christ: Johan. 16.
Christ says, I leave the world, and go to my Father: The poor ye shall
still have emonge you, but me ye shall not have: Matthae. 26.
Ergo, say they, Christ is still here in the world in his Corporal, and
Fleashely Presence. Christ's Body is of nature, and substance Finite: Ergo, It
is in places Infinite. Christ has two sorts of Bodies: One only Local: all the reast of the other sort not Local. It is in place: yet it occupies, or
fills no place. It is a very Natural Man's Body: Thomas in.3. quae. 76. ar.
30.
yet is it neither round, nor square, nor thick, nor broad, nor short, nor
long. It has in it no distance, or difference of parts: as bytweene eye and
eye: or eye, and ear: or head, and foot: but Eye, Ear, Arm, Hand, Heel,
Toe, Head, and Foot are al together, and each is other, and al is one. In
ten thousand several places Christ's Body is full, and whole: and yet al
these are but one Body. Thus One is Many, and Many are One: Above is Beneath,
and Beneath is Above: Local, is not Local: and not Local, is Local: and all this
without the authority, either of Gods holy Word, or of any one Old
Catholic Father. These be M. Hardinges Catholic Conclusions: even the very
same, that were used, and avouched by Eutyches, Apollinarius, Manichaeus, and
other like Heretics in old times: and therefore they may not now be counted
peeuishe. And that thou maiste the better feel the savor, and soundenesse of
these men's Doctrine, I beseech thee, Gentle Reader, to consider these words
of Robert Holcot, a great Doctor of y^ side. Holcot. in 4* Senten. q. 3.
Si fuissent mill hostiae in mill locis, eo te^pore, quo Christus pepe^dit in
Cruce, Christus fuisset Crucifixus in mill locis. If there had been a
thousand hosts, in a thousand places, at that very time, when Christ honge
upon the Cross, then had Christ benne Crucified in a thousand places. Again
he says, Pono, quod tempore illo, etc. I suppose, that at the same time, the
soul of Christ, departinge from his Body upon the Cross, had come unto, and
reasted in one of the said hosts. If so, then had Christ's Body benne both
quick, and dead at one time. Thus much D. Holcot. Here have thou, Good
Reader, a taste of M. Hardinges Doctrine: in respect whereof al other Doctrine
must needs be condemned, and cast as peeuishe. Alas, they wander up and down
in mere vanities, and, as S. Paul says, They would be Doctors of the Law,
not understanding, 1. Timoth. 1. Augustine. in Johan. Tracta. 40.
neither what they say, nor what they affirm. Uerily S. Augustine says,
Quando de forma Serui cogitas in Christo, Humanam effigiem cogita, si est in te
Fides. When thou think of the form of a Seruante in Christ, think of the
form of a man, if thou have any Faith in the.

This matter, says M. Hardinge, is so clearly uttered by these fathers, that
Figures, Significations, Tropes, and Metaphores can have no place. M.
Hardinge would not thus have said, if he had any regard unto his Reader. By
the very order, and tenoure of these Fathers words, Christ comes: and yet
comes not. Christ is not seen: and yet is seen. Christ is touched with
hands: yet noman can touch him. Every man sees him without guile, or
error: yet noman sees him. Elias is above: and at the same time, the same
Elias is beneath. Elias Coat is called Elias: Chrysostom, and Ambrose are
feign both to correct the rigor of their speech, and to use these words,
Memory, Examplar, Commemoration, and Remembrance. And what is there here else
but Figures? Yet says M. Hardinge, Significations, and Figures here can have
no place. It is to great tyranny, so much to mock, and abuse Gods people.

M. Hardinge. The.10. Division.
In making of which sclender arguments, they will not seem, to acknowledge,
whose Body it is, even that, which is proper to God, whose power is over al,
and to whom al things obey.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Yes undoubtedly, we acknowledge, the Body of Christ to be the Body of the
Son of God, and therefore the Body of very God. Yet nevertheless we know,
and M. Hardinge also ought to know, that the same Body of Christ is a
Creature, and therefore no God. And surely, if M. Hardinge had well considered
the Principles of his own Doctrine, he might soon have found out the folly
of this reason. For Albertus Magnus his own Doctoure is full against him. Thus
he writes, Albertus Magnus in Dionys. Eccl. Hierarch.
Corpus Christi non est in pluribus locis ratione Vnionis, sed ratione
Consecrationis, quia Consecratur in pluribus locis. The Body of Christ is not
in many places by mean of the Union, it has with the Godhead, but by mean of
the Consecration, because it is Consecrate in many places. Thus Albertus wrote
of Christ's Body, contrary to M. Hardinges meaning, notwithstanding he was
not ignorant, whose Body it was.

In deed Eutychianus says, Eutychiani PP. Epist. 1.
Haec fallendi simplices, atque ignorantes Haereticis occasio est, etc. This
occasion Heretics have, to beguile the simple, and the ignorant: that the
things, that are spoken of Christ according to his Manheade, they imagine the
same to be spoken according to the infirmity of the Divine Nature: and
because Christ being one Person, speaks al things of him self, they say,
he spoke al things of his Godheade. Thus Eutychianus says, M. Hardinges
reason served well Heretics in old times, therewith to beguile the people
then, as he does now. So the old Heretics, Saturninus, Athanasius De
Incarnatione Christi.
Manichaeus, and Marcion denied the Ueritie of Christ's Fleashe, because it is
joined, and united to the Godheade. So Athanasius, and Epiphanius say, that
the Heretic Apollinarius held, and taught the people, that Christ's Body
was of one Substance with the Deity.

In consideration of the same Union, Epiphanius De Ebionaeis. (...).
the Emperor Justinian was leadde into the Heresy of certain, that were
called (...), and held, that Christ's Body was evermore Glorious, and without
corruption. So likewise was Eutyches deceived: likewise the Godly learned
Father S. Hilarie, as it is said before. Al these Heresies, and errors
sprange only of M. Hardinges reason, for that the Authors, and mainteiners
thereof, Euagr li. 4. c. 39.
yelding reverence unto Christ's Body, as dewtie required, Nicephor. li. 17.
ca 29.
ouermuche considered, whose Body it was.

It is in deed, as I said before, the Body of God. But S. Augustine says,
Non, Hilari. li. 10.
quod in Deo est, est vbique, vt Deus. What so ever is in God, is not therefore
every where, as God is. De Trinita. August. Epis. 57. ^d Dardanum. Epiphan. li.
3.
And again, Cauendum est, ne ita Diuinitatem astruamus Hominis, vt veritatem
Corporis auferamus. We must beware, that we do not so defend the Godheade of
the Man, that we destroy the truth of his Body. And therefore Epiphanius
expressinge the state of Christ's Immortal Body, In breui declaratione de Fide
Catholica.
as it is now in heaven, writes thus: Sedet ad Dextram Patris, etc. He
sits at his Fathers Right hand in Glory, not puttinge away his Body, but
ioininge the same in Spiritual condition in the perfection of one Godheade:
even as our bodies, (...) etc.
that now are sown according to the Fleashe, shall be raised again according
to the Spirit. So says the Godly Martyr Uigilius, Caro Christi, quando in
terra fuit, non erat in Caelo: and nun^, quia est in Coelo, non est vtique in
terris. The Fleashe of Christ, when it was in the Earth, Vigilius contr^
Eutychem. li. 1. Qui^ est in Coelo.
was not in Heaven: and now because it is in Heaven, is not verily in the
Earth. This holy Father assuereth it, and avouches it for true, and says,
Verily it is not in the Earth: And his reason is only this, Because it is in
Heaven. And he concludes thus at the last: Haec est Fides, and Professio
Catholica, quam Apostoli tradiderunt, The Catholiqu^ Faith.
Martyrs roborauerunt, and Fideles hucusque custodiunt. This is the Catholic
Profession, and Faith, which the Apostles have delivered, the Martyrs have
confirmed, and the Faith^ul hitherto do continewe. Thus the Old Catholic
Fathers in old times believed, and wrote of Christ's Body: and yet they had
not forgotten, whose Body it was.

M. Hardinge. The.II. Division.
But because M. Iuel, and they of that sect, seem to set little by these
Fathers, though very Ancient, S. Bernarde excepted, and of the Church holden
for Saints, I will bring forth the Authority of Martin Bucer, a late
Doctor of their side, though not Canonizate for a Saint as yet* for that I
know. This new Father, whom they esteem so much, and was the Reader of
Divinity in Cambridge in king Edwardes time, very vehemently, and for so
much truly, affirms the true Real presence of Christ's Body in the
Sacrament. For he says, Christ said not, This is my spirit, This is my
Virtue: But this is my Body. Wherefore we must believe (says he) Christ's
Body to be there, even the same that did hang upon the Cross, our Lord
himself. Which in some part to declare, This Similitude of the Son
clearly opens the whole matter. For the Substance, or Body of the Son is
Really present only in one place.
he uses the similitude of the sun for his purpose, contrary to M. Iuelles
Negative, to prove Christ's Body present, and that Really, and Substantially,
in what places so ever the Sacrament is rightly Ministered. In Comme^t^. i^.
16. cap. Matthaei.
His words be these. Vt sol vere vno in loco Coeli visibilis circumscriptus
est, radijs tamen suis praesens Vere and Substantialiter exhibetur vbilibet
Orbis: Ita Dominus, etiam si circumscribatur vno loco Coeli arcani, and Diuini,
id est, Gloriae Patris, Verbo tamen suo, and Sacris Symbolis, vere, and totus
ipse Deus, and homo praesens exhibetur in Sacra Coena, eoque substantialiter,
quam praesentiam non minus certo agnoscit men's credens Verbis his Domini, and
Symbolis, quam oculi vident, and habent Solemn praesentem demonstratum, and
exhibitum sua corporali luce. Res ista arcana est, and Noui Testamenti, res
Fidei: non sunt igitur huc admittendae cogitationes de praesentatione Corporis,
quae constat ratione huius vitae* etiam pa^ibilis, and fluxae. Verbo Domini
simpliciter inhaerendum est, and debet Fides sensuum defectui praebere
suppleme^tum. Which may thus be Englisshed. As the Sun is truly placed
determinately in one place of the visible heaven, and yet is exhibited truly,
and substantially by his beams euerywhere abroad in the world: So our Lord,
although he be contained in one place of the Secret and Divine Heaven, that is
to wit, the Glory of his Father, yet for all that, by his Word, and holy
Tokens, he is exhibited present in his holy Supper truly, and him self whole,
God, and Man, and therefore Substantially, or in Substance. Which presence
the mind geuinge credit to these our Lords words and tokens, does no less
certainly acknowledge, then our eyes see, and have the Sun present showed
and exhibited with his Corporal light. This is a secret matter, and of the New
Testament^a matter of Faith: therefore herein thoughts be not to be admitted of
such a presentation of the Body, as consists in the manner of this life
passible, and transitory. We must simply clea^e to the word of our Lord,
and where our senses fail, there must Faith help to supply. Thus we see,
how Bucer in sundry other points of Faith both deceived, and also a
deceiuour, confirms the truth of this article pithily, and plainly. Such
is the force of truth, that oftentimes it is confessed by the very enemies of
truth.

Fight not with the Church M. Iuel, but fight with the enemy of the Church.
Fight with him, Whom you have followed in departinge from the Church, who
nevertheless by force of truth, is driven against you to confess the truth
in those most plain words, Vere and rotus ipse Deus and homo praesens
exhibetur in Sacra Coena, ^oque Substantialiter. In this holy Supper him
self*God, and man is exhibited present truly, and whole, and therefore
Substantially.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Gods name be praised: neither do we refuse the judgment of the Ancient
Fathers in these cases: neither has M. Hardinge, for ought, that may yet
appear, any just cause, thus to vaunte him self of the same. Here he allegeth
the Authority of D. Bucer: In Council. Chalcedon. Actio. 1.
even as the Heretic Eutyches sometime, to maintain his Heresy alleged S.
Cyprian: or as the Nestorian Heretics alleged the Authority of the Nicene
Council. Council. tom^. 1. in Apologetico Cyrilli.
For, notwithstanding D. Bucer, to avoid contention, as a man desirous of
peace, was content to yield unto certain indifferent terms, as Osius that
learned Father sometime did in the Council of Ariminunt to ye Arians, yet was
his resolution herein evermore thoroughly, In praefatione Council. Sardicen.
Hilarious.
and fully known. And the very similitude, or example, that he uses of the
Son, puts the matter out of al question. For like as the Body, or Compass
of the Son being in one certain place of the Heavens reaches out his
beams, The Sun.
and gives influence into the world: even so Christ the Son of Justice,
being in Heaven in one place at the Right hand of God, likewise reaches out
his beams, and gives his influence into the Faithful, and so feeds them,
not by bare Imagination, or Fantasy: but Truly, Substantially, and in deed.
And as the Son is more comfortable, and more refreasheth the world, being
absent, by his beams, then if his very Natural Substance, and compass lay
here upon the Earth: even so the Body of Christ being in the Glory of his
Father, in the very Substance, and Nature of our Fleashe, and there evermore
intreatinge Mercy for our sins, is much more comfortable unto us, and more
quickens both our Bodies, and Souls by his heavenly, and Spiritual
influence, then if it were here present Fleashely before our eyes. And as the
Sun not coming down from heaven, nor leaving his place, is nevertheless
present with us in our houses, in our faces, in our hands, and in our
boosomes: even so Christ being in heaven, not coming down, nor leauinge
his room there, yet nevertheless is present with us in our Congregations: in
our Hearts: in our Prayers: in the Mystery of Baptism: and in the Sacrament
of his Body, Ambros. in Lucam. li. 10. ca. 24.
and Blood. Therefore S. Ambrose says: Marie, quia quaerebat in terra, tang^re
non potuit: Stephanus te^igi^, quia quaerebat in Coelo. Marie could not touch
Christ, because she sought him upon the Earth: But Steven touched him, because
he sought him in Heaven. Ibidem.
And again he says, Non enim corporali tactu, sed Fide tangimus. For we
touch not Christ by any bodily mean, but by our Faith: Ambros. Sermo. 58. De
Maria Magdal.
And therefore again he says, Step^anus intra Coelos Dominum cernit absentem.
Steven sees Christ being absent, within the Heavens. So says Origin, Per
Euangelistarum, and Apostolorum praedicationem: per sui sancti Corporis,
Origin. in diuer sos Euangelij locos, hom. 1.
and Sanguinis Sacramentum: per Gloriosum Crucis signaculu^ nobiscum Deus. God
is with us by the preachinge of the Evangelists, and Apostles: by the
Sacrament of his Body, and Blood: and by the Glorious Sign of his Cross. So
S. Augustine, O stulta infidelitas persequentis: Si quaeris exilium, Augustine.
de Natalt B. Cypriani Sermon. 12.
quo Christianus iubeatur ire, prius si potes inueni, quo Christus cogatur
exire. O the fond infidelity of this persecutour. If thou seek a place of
bannishement, whither thou may command a Christian man to go, first, if
thou can, find a place, from whence thou may command a Christ to
depart. And again, thus he writes unto the Godly widow Italica. Augusti.
Epist. 6.
Non debes ^e desolatam arbitrari, cum in interiore homine habeas Christum
praesentem per fidem in cord tuo. Thou may not think the ^^elf to be
desolate, while thou have Christ present in thy heart, in the Inner Man by
Faith. So again, August. De Sermon Domini in monte. lib. 1.
Non est Iudaeus, non est Graecus, etc. Sed omnia, and in omnibus Christus.
There is no Jew, there is no Gentile: but Christ is al, and in all. In like
sense S. Hierome says, Hieronym. aduersus errores ^ohan. Hierosoly.
Tangat digitulo: and vltro exibimus. Domini est terra, and plenitudo e^us.
Christus loco non tenetur inclusus. Let him pushe us with his finger: and we
will forth willingly. The Earth is the Lords: and the fulness thereof. Christ
is not holden prisoner in any place.

Thus is Christ present emongst us: thus we feel him: thus we see him. But
all this is the work of Faith: it needs no Fleashely, or Local presence.
Therefore S. Augustine says: Augustine in Johan. tract. 121. Bernard. in Ca^ti.
Canticorum Sermon. 26.
Non recte tangitur, id est, non recte in illum creditur. He is not touched
well: That is to say, He is not believed well. So says S. Bernarde, Tangitur,
sed affectu, non manu: voto, non oculo: Fide, non sensibus. He is touched, but
with devotion, not with hand: with Zele, not with eye: with Faith, not with
sense. And thus we say, we have Christ present, not, as M. Hardinge says,
only for a minute of an hour, wherein is neither sauoure, nor comfort: but
verily, effectually, and, if he be delited with that word, Substantially, and
for ever, even unto the consummation of the world. Neither does he deny,
that Christ is present, that denies this Imagination of Gross, and Fleashely
Presence. Origin says, Origin. in Matthae. tractatu. 33
Si Virtus Jesus congregatur cum his, qui congregantur in nomine eius, non
peregrinatur a suis, sed semper praesto est eis. If the power of Jesus be
together with them, that are geathered in his name, then is not he absent from
his own, but is evermore present with them.

By these few, I trust, it may appear, that we neither are departed from the
Church of God, nor fight against the Church. But you, M. Hardinge, under this
glorious title of the Church, think to carry your self invisible. How be
it, as there be two sorts of Faithes, so are there two sorts of Churches: the
one True, the other False. Your Church, being as now utterly void of Gods
word, is as a Lantern without light. Leo writing against such, as you he,
says thus, Ecclesiae nomine armamini: and contra Ecclesiam dimicatis. Ye arm
your self with the name of the Church: and yet ye fight against the Church.
Leo ad Palaestinos.
S. John in his Revelations says, They name them selves Jews, that is,
Apocalyp. 2.
The people of God: but they are the Synagoge of Satan. O fight not, M.
Hardinge, thus against God: fight not against your own Conscience. It is hard
for you, thus to kike against the prick. Act. 9.
The more ye fight, the more ye bewray your own nakedness. These colors,
and shadows must needs vade: God with his Truth will have the Uictorie. Amen.

M. Hardinge. The.12. Division.
Now to be short, where as the chief arguments, that be made against the
being of Christ's Body in many places at once, be deduced of nature, in
respect that this article seems to them, to abolishe nature, it may please
the^ to understand, that God, who is auctour of nature, can by his power do
with a Body that, which is above the nature of a Body, nature not destroyed,
but keapte and preserved whole. Which Plato the Heathen Philosopher would
soon have been induced to believe. if he were alive. Who asked, what was
nature, answered, Quod Deus vult, that which God will. M. Hardi^g seems not
well to consider, what Plato meante.
And therefore we believe, that Enoch, and Elias, yet mortal by nature, do by
power of God live in Body, and that above nature. Abacue was by the same power
caught up, and in a moment carried from Iewrie to Babylon, his nature reserved
whole. S. Peter by God according to nature walked on the earth, the same by
God bisides nature, walked upon the waters. Christ after condition of nature
assumpted, suffered death in Body: the same Christ by his divine power entered
with his Body in to his Disciples through doors closed.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Our proufes are grounded, not only upon Natural Reason, but also upon the
express, and known Will of God. And by such Arguments the learned Fathers
were wont in old times, to dispute of Christ's Humanity against
Apollinarius. Manichaeus, Eutyches, and other like Heretics, without
controlment. For Natural Reason holden within her bands, is not the enemy,
but the daughter of Gods Truth. And therefore he must be very unreasonable,
that will thus without cause be angry with Reason. But it appears, that M.
Hardinge, as he is utterly without Scriptures, and Doctors in these cases, so
is he also void of Reason. As touching Plato, it seems, there was hard
hold, when a Natural Philosopher must stand forth, to prove Christ's
Mysteries. This matter, within these few hundred years, has benne attempted
many ways: by Logique: by Philosophy: by the Metaphysiques: and by the names
of Old Fathers. But, when none of al these healpes would serve, they
imagined, and brought forth Animosam Fidem, a Faith without any word of God,
bold to believe, they knew not what. In the end findinge their want, and
weakness herein, for that this Faith had no ground, they divised Miracles, and
fieres yenough, and joined them with it: Then was the matter sufficiently, and
fully proved.

But Plato says, Natura est, quod Deus vult. Nature is that thing, that God
will. First, what if M. Hardinge understand not, what Plato meante? And what if
Plato never understood, what M. Hardinge means? Yet must Platoes name serve
to prove al M. Hardinges fa^tasies? Plato says, Nature is what so ever God
will. Must we therefore conclude, That Cold is Hoate: White is Black: Accident
without Subject: Subject without Accident: a Body is no Body: a Nature
Finite is Infinite? What a strange kind of Philosophy has M. Hardinge found
out? It is a simple weapon, that these men will refuse, to serve their turn.

The Philosophers called Epicuraei, held this fantasy, that God sits in
Heaven idly, and at ease, never incombringe or troublinge him self with the
rule of the world: and that therefore Nature rules it self only by chance,
and at adventure, without any certain direction of Gods government: and
that, what so ever is done therein, is no part of Gods dooinge. Contrary
wise the Philosophers called Stoici, held an other fantasy, that God him self
is nothing else but nature, and that therefore al things are wrought by
necessity, and force of Destine, and that God is hable to work no Miracle,
nor to do any thing contrary to the common course of Nature. Both these
folies Plato reproved by this short answer, Natura est, quod Deus vult. His
meaning is, that Nature is subject, and obedient unto God, and that there is,
neither Chance, nor Necessity in the course of Nature: but al things are
ordered by Gods appointement, and Natural Causes are only the instruments of
Gods Will. And therefore some compare Nature to the horse, and God to the
horseman, that bridleth her, and turns her, whither he lists. And for the
same cause Origin Origin. (...). li. 2. ca. 1.
says, Anima mundi est Virtus Dei: The Soul of the World is the power of
God. And S. Ba^ile says, The World is the school of our souls, to lead us
to know God. Therefore God was hable by his power to divide the Sea: Basil.
Hexamero^. hom. 1.
to pull back, and to stay the Son: to open the Earth: to make the water of
Iordane to stand as a wall: to stay the Fire from burninge, and the water
from drowninge. (...).
If any man list to know the cause hereof, there is none other, but Gods
Will. In this sense the Philosopher Simonides was wont to say, Solus Deus est
Metaphysicus. God alone is Supernatural. And Pindarus for the same called God
(...), The best, or skilfullest Artificer. Likewise S. Augustine says, Quomodo
est contra Naturam, quod Dei fit voluntate, cum voluntas tanti Conditoris sit
cuiuscunque rei Natura? How is it against Nature, that is done by Gods Will,
seeinge the Will of so noble a Creator is the Nature of every thing? Augustine.
De Ciuitate Dei. li. 21. cap. 8.
This undoubtedly was Platoes meaning. Now let us examine M. Hardinges
reasons.

Nature is what so ever God will: Elias, and Enoch are yet alieue in their
bodies: Abacuc was caught, and carried to Babylon: S. Peter walkte upon the
Sea: Ergo, Christ's Body is at one time in a thousand places. These
arguments hold A posse, ad Esse, and might have stand the Heretics
Manichaeus, and Eutyches in some good steed: but in Catholic Schools they
have no place.

But how is M. Hardinge so well assuered of Gods will? How knows he, that
God will have Christ's Body to be in a thousand places at one time: to be
euerywhere: to be infinite: to be no Body? Uerily, the Ancient Fathers, for
any thing that may appear, never knew it. Christ in his own hands.
Contrary wise, he might have said, Gods holy Will was, that Christ should
take the Natural Substance of a Man's Body: and, that in all things he should
be like unto his Brethren: and, that his Body should be a Creature: Hebrae. 2.
and, as S. Augustine says, should be in one place.

This is Gods known, and express Will: August. De Consecra. Dis. 2* prima.
therefore by Platoes judgment, this is Nature. Certainly S. Augustine says,
as it is before alleged, Christus Corpori suo Immortalitatem dedit: Naturam non
abstulit. Christ gave Immortality to his Body: but he took not from it the
former Nature of a Body. August. epist. 57
Thus much has M. Hardinge gotten by the Authority of Plato.

M. Hardinge. The.13. Division.
Christ at his last Supper according to Nature sat down with his twelve
Disciples, and among them occupied a place at the Table visibly, by his divine
power there he held his Body in his hands inuisibly (152) The.152. untruth,
standing in insufficient reporting, and misco^struinge S. Augustines words.
for, (as S. Augustine says) Ferebatur manibus suis, In expositione Psalm. 33.
he was borne in his own hands: where nature gave place, and his own Body
was in more places then one. Verily, Non est abbreuiata manus Domini, The hand
of our Lord is not shortened, his power is as great, as ever it was. And
therefore let us not doubt, but he is able to use nature finite, infinitely:
specially now, the nature of his Body being glorified after his Resurrection
from the dead. And as the living is not to be sought among the dead, so the
things that be done by the power of God above nature, are not to be tried by
the rules of Nature.

The. B. of Sarisburie.
S. Augustine says, Christus ferebatur in manibus suis. Christ was borne in
his own hands. These words are often alleged, and seem at the view to
sound somewhat of M. Hardinges side. But being well weighed, and considered,
they discharge them self, and are soon answered. First it is known, and
confessed, that S. Augustine in reportinge these words, either by mean of
the Translation, or by some other error, was much ouerseene, and alleged that
for Scripture, that in deed neither is any portion of the Scripture, nor else
where to be found. For where he says, David was borne in his own hands,
the very Te^te is this, Collabebatur in manibus eorum: He went reylinge in
their hands. 1. Samuel. 21.
And so S. Basile allegeth, Basil. in Psalm. 33.
and expounds the same place,(...), Carried a long in the servants hands.
And thus S. Augustine being deceived in the Text, was feign, to force the same
to some violent Construction.

Yet says M. Harding, S. Augustines words be plain, Christ was borne in
his own hands. It is neither indifferent, nor true dealinge, thus to nippe,
and to proine the Doctors saieinges: and alleginge a few words, to leave out
the reast, and especially such words, as be material, and hable to give
light unto the whole. For S. Augustine says not, Christ bare him self
Really, Substantially, and in deed in his own hands, as it is here untruly
supposed: neither, as M. Hardinge has added of his own, By his divine power,
or Inuisibly: But contrary wise he expounds him self by these words,
Quodammodo*
Ipse se quodammodo portabat: In a manner, and after a sort he carried I him
self. This word, Quodammodo, in the Schools is called, Terminus diminuens:
which oftentimes in reasoning breeds error. For these words, Quodammodo,
After a sort, and, Vere, verily, or in deed, are ever contrary. So says S.
Augustine, August. epist. 23. ad Bonifa.
Sacramentum Corporis Christi, secundum quendam modum Corpus Christi est. The
Sacrament of Christ's Body, in a certain sort, is the Body of Christ.
Ibidem.
And this sort, or manner he expounds thus, Nisi enim Sacramenta
similitudinem quandam earum rerum, quarum Sacramenta sunt, haberent, omnino
Sacramenta non essent. Unless Sacraments had sum likeness of those
things, whereof they be Sacraments, they should utterly be no Sacraments.

Likewise says Bertramus, Secundum quendam modum Corpus Christi est. Modus hic
in Figura est, and in Imagine. The Sacrament after a certain manner is the
Body of Christ: This manner stands in a Figure, and in a Representation. So
likewise the very Barbarous Gloss upon the Decrees expounds the same:
Bertramus De Sacramen Eu. De Consecra. Did. 2. Hoc est. In Glosa.
Coeleste Sacramentum, quod vere repraesentat Corpus Christi, dicitur Corpus
Christi, sed improprie. Vnde dicitur, suo modo: sed non rei veritate, sed
significante Mysterio: vt sit sensus, vocatur Corpus Christi: id est,
Significat Corpus Christi. The Heavenly Sacrament, which verily does
represent the Fleashe of Christ, is called Christ's Body: but not in plain
kind of speech. Therefore S. Augustine says, Suo modo, after a sort: which
is, not in the very truth of the matter, but by a Mystery signifieinge: that
the meaning be thus, It is called the Body of Christ, because it signifies
the Body of Christ. Touching the thing, that Christ held in his hand, S.
Augustine confesses, it was Bread: for thus he writes, Augus^in. De verbis
Domini in Euangelium Matthae. Sermo. 33.
Quamuis Panem, quem Dominus gestauit in manibus, oculis suis non aspexerint.
Albeit they never saw with their eyes the Bread, that the Lord held in his
hands. Yet the same Bread, because it is a Sacrament of Christ's Body, after
a sort, as S. Augustine says, is also called Christ's Body. Thus does S.
Augustine oftentimes use this word, Quodammodo. For example, he writes thus:
Augustine. in psalm. 30.
Ecclesia, quos lucrata fuerit aliquo modo, eos manducat quodammodo. The
Church after a sort eats them, whom by any mean she has gotten. And
again upon the same Psalm, Quid est haerere Cornibus, nisi quodammodo
Crucifigi? Figura est ista de Christo. What was it else, that the weather was
tied by the horns, but after a sort to be Crucified? Therefore this is a
Figure of Christ. In this sense S. Augustine says, Christ, Quodammodo, After
a sort, not Uerily, or in deed, but in a Sacrament, or in a Figure bare him
self in his hands.

But M. Hardinge will reply: Augus^in. in Psalm. 33.
S. Augustine says thus, Hoc quomodo intelligatur in ipso David secundum
Literam non inuenimus: in Christo autem inuenimus. How this may be taken in
David him self, according to the letter, we find not. But in Christ we
find it. Therefore, he will say, this must be verified in Christ, even
according to the letter. Secundum Lite^^m.
This error rises of ye misunderstandinge of these words of S. Augustine,
Secundum literam: Which sometime are used for the Literal Sense, or the very
sound of the bare words: sometime for the Historical Sense, that is to say,
for the course, and tenoure of the story. Now says S. Augustine, that David
should any way bear him self, Secundum literam, According to the Story
written of him, it does not appear: but that Christ, After a sort, that is,
by way of a Sacrament, thus carried him self, even in the Story of the Gospel,
which is to say, Secundum literam, it doothe appear. And that these words,
Secundum literam, be oftentimes thus used, any man may soon perceive, that
shall diligently note, and consider the Ancient Fathers. First S. Augustine in
the place alleged, utters this matter of David, in this sort: In regnorum
libris, vbi omnia nobis scripta sunt, quae pertinent ad res gestas David, non
inuenimus hoc. Augustine. in Psalm. 33.
In the Books of the Kings, where as al things are written to us, that
perteine to the dooinges of David, this thing we find not. And again in the
same place, Christus cum commendaret Corpus, and Sanguinem suum, Ibidem.
Humilitatem suam commendauit, in eo, quod in ipsa Historia Scriptum est in
illo quasi furore Dauidis, Concion. 2.
When Christ recommended unto us his Body, and Blood, he recommended unto us
his Humility, in that thing, that is written in the very Story touching that
madness of David. This is it, that S. Augustine meante by these words,
Secu^dum Literam. Now, y^ this word, Litera, is often taken for y^ Story, it
does many ways appear. Augustine. De Sanctis Sermon 35.
S. Augustine says thus, Ambrosius cum tractaret hunc locum. ait: nec
Historia, nec Litera ^ocet, Mariam gladio finiuisse vitam. Ambrose writing
hereof, says thus: Neither the Story, nor the Letter does teach us, yt Marie
was slain with a swearde. So S. Hierome, Escam dedit timentibus se. He gave
food to them, that fear him. In the time of hunger he feadde Elias: in the
wilderness he rained Manna unto the Jews: Being in a Mysteri^.
He adds, Et hoc secundam Litera^. And this according to the Letter:
Hi^ronym. in Psalm. 110. and. 111. Gregorius in Iobum. li. 13. c. 6.
which is, according to the Story. So likewise S. Gregory, Subditur, quod de
eo minime scriptum legitur: Effudit in terram vise era mea: Ex qua re necesse
est, vt, dum hae^ Iuxta Literam inuenire non possumus, ea, quae in verbis eius
Secundum historiam sonant, iuxta Spiritum inquiramus. Thus S. Augustine uses
these words, Secundum Literam, not for the Literal Sense, as these Men would
feign have it, but for the Record, and knowledge of the Story written of
David. M. Hardinge should have remembered, that misunderstandinge of his
Doctor makes no sufficient proof.

How be it, it is much to be feared, that M. Hardinge of purpose leafte out
this word, Quodammodo: and not of ignorance, but witingely, and willingely
misreported, and falsified S. Augustines meaning. Certainly S. Augustine has
not one of al these words, neither, By Divine Power: nor, Inuisibly: nor,
Nature gave place: nor, Christ's Body was in more places, then one.

M. Hardinge. The.14. Division.
And that al absurdities, and Carnal grosnes be severed from our thoughts,
where true Christen people believe Christ's Body to be in many places at once,
Being in a Mystery requires no Corporal, or Real Presence.
they understand it so to be in a Mystery. Now, to be in a Mystery, is not
to be comprehended in a place, but by the power of God to be made present in
sort, and manner as he him self knows, verily so, as no reason of man can
atteine it, and so, as it may be showed by no examples in Nature. Whereof that
notable saieinge of S. Augustine may very well be reported. O Homo, si rationem
a me poscis, non erit mirabile: exemplu^ quaeritur, non erit singular:
Augusti. Epist. ad Volusianum. Item Ser. 159. De tempore.
that is, O Man, if (153) The.153. Vntruethe. For these words of Augustine,
and Gregory perteine nothing to the Sacrament.
(herein) thou require reason, it shall not be marvelous: seek for the like
example, and then it shall not be singular. If Gods workinge be comprehended
by reason, (says Holy Gregory) it is not wonderouse: neither Faith has
meede, whereto Man's reason gives proof.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Being in a Mystery, as it is before answered, like as it requires no
Circumstance, or Necessity of place, so it requires no Bodily, or Real
Presence. Contrariwise, if Christ's Body were Present in deed, and that in
such Gross, and Fleashly sort, as is here conceived, then were it no
Mystery. For, to be Present in a Mystery, and to be Bodily, and Fleashly
present, are taken for contraries. And therefore the Gloss says, as is before
alleged, Sacramentum dicitur Corpus Christi, non rei Veritate, sed significante
Mysterio. De Conse. did. 2. Hoc est. in Glosa.
The Sacrament of Christ's Body is called Christ's Body: not in Truth of the
matter, but by a Mystery Signifi^inge.

But, where as it is further said, that this Mystical presence is known only
unto God, and, I trow, to M. Hardinge, and to noman biside, all this is
nothing else, but a Religious Folly, imagined only to astonne, and amase the
Simple. For the Scriptures, and Holy Fathers are acquainted with no such
Mystery. The Sacrament of Baptism is a Mystery, even as is the Sacrament of
Christ's Body: and as Christ is Present in the one, so is he also Present in
the other: that is to say, Truly, Uerily, effectually, and in deed: how be it
not in this Gross manner of M. Hardinges Fleashly Presence. The places of S.
Augustine, and S. Gregory concern only Christ's Incarnation, the Union of
the Divinity, and the Humanity, and other such Articles, and grounds of
Christian Religion, wherein Nature, and Reason utterly have no place: and
therefore being spoken of one thing, are applied by M. Hardinge unto an other.
Neither is M. Hardinge hable truly to say, that in any of al those places,
there is either mention once made, or one Word spoken of the Sacrament.
Wherefore it seems, M. Hardinge would purposely misleade his Reader, and
teach him to Reason in this sort: Christ was Miraculously Incarnate of the
Blissed Virgin: Ergo, Christ's Body is Really, and Fleashely in the Sacrament.
Christ's Body in one place.




True it is, That the Faith of our Religion cannot be proved by discourse of
Reason. Roman. 10.
But every fantasy may not go for Christian Faith. S. Paul says, Fides ex
auditu: Audi^us ex Verbo Dei. Faith comes by hearing: Hearing comes by the
Word of God. Certainly, M. Hardinges New Faith, or Fantasy, in the time
of the Old Catholic Fathers, was neither Christened, nor known in the
world: as may appear by their own witness of good Record. For bisides
others, whom in this treatise I have touched upon occasion by the way, S.
Augustine writes purposely hereof unto Dardanus in this wise. Noli dubitare,
ibi nunc esse Hominem Christum Iesum, Augustine. Epist. ^^.
vnde venturus est etc. Doubt thou not, but Christ Jesus, as Man, is there,
from whence he shall come: and have thou in Remembrance, and Faithfully hold
the Christian Confession, That he is Risen from the Dead: that he is Ascended
into Heaven: that he sits at the Right hand of his Father: and that from
thence, and from no where else, he shall come, to Judge the quick, and the
Dead, even as he was seen goinge into Heaven: that is, Cui profecto
Immortalitate^ dedit: Naturam non abstulit. Cauendum est, ne ita Diuinitate^
astruamus Hom^^is, vt Veritatem Corporis auferamus. August. De verbis Domini in
Euangel. Secundum Johan. Sermo. 60.
in the same Form, and Substance of his Body: To which Body undoubtedly he
has given Immortality: but has not taken from the same the Nature of a
Body. According to this form (of Man) we may not think, that Christ is
powered abroad into al places. For we must beware, We do not so defend the
Godhead of the Man, that we destroy the Truth of his Body. Again, Vnus
Christus Jesus: vbique per id, quod Deus est: in Coelo autem per id, quod Homo.
Christ Jesus is one Person, and the same euerywhere in that he is God: but
he is in Heaven, in that he is Man. Again he says, Semper quidem Diuinitate
nobiscum est: Sed, nisi Corporaliter abiret a nobis, semper eius Corpus
Carnaliter videremus. Christ by his Godheade is ever with us: but unless he
had departed away Bodily from us, we should evermore Carnally see his Body.
These words are specially to be noted. If Christ were Bodily here, he
should Carnally be seen: Therefore, by S. Augustines judgment, if Christ
were Bodily present in the Sacrament, we should see him Carnally in the
Sacrament. Again, Et abijt, and h^c est: and redijt, and nos non deseruit.
Corpus enim suum intulit Coelo: Maiestatem autem non abstulit mundo. He is
gonne, and yet is here. He is returned to his Father, and yet has not forsaken
us. Augustine. in Johan. tracta. 50.
For he has carried his Body into Heaven: but he has not taken his Majesty
from the world. Again, Pauperes semper habebitis vobiscum etc. The poor ye
shall evermore have with you: Ibidem.
but me you shall not have. Let good men hear this, and not be careful. For
this he spoke of the presence of his Body. For according to his Majesty,
according to his Providence, according to his unspeakable and Invisible
Grace, it is fulfilled, that he said, I am with you always, until the
Consummation of the World. But according to the Fleashe, that the Word
received: according to that, he was borne of the Virgin: according to that,
he was taken of the Jews: according to that, he was nailed to the Cross:
according to that, he was taken down, and lapte in a shrowde, and laid in
the Grave, and roase again, and showed him self: in this respect, it is
true, that he said, Ye shall not evermore have me with you.

Likewise again, Augustine. in Epist. Johan. tracta. 1.
Dominus consolatur nos, qui ipsum iam in Coelo sedentem manu contrectare non
possumus, sed Fide contingere. The Lord doothe comfort us, that cannot touch
him with our hand sittinge now in Heaven: But may touch him notwithstanding
with our Faith. Augustine. in Epist. Johan. tractat. 2.
And again, Si illi propterea crediderunt, quia tenuerunt, and palpauerunt,
nos quid facimus? Iam Christus Ascendit in Coelum, and non est venturus, nisi
in fine, vt iudicet de viuis, and mortuis. If they therefore believed in
Christ, because they held him, and touched him, what do we then? For Christ
is now Ascended into Heaven, and will not come again, but in the end, to judge
the quick, and the Dead. So says Origin. Orige^. in Matt. tractat. 33.
Christus secundum Diuinitatis suae Naturam non peregrinatur a nobis: Sed
peregrinature Secundum dispensationem Corporis, quod suscepit. Christ
according to the Nature of his Godhead is not a stranger unto us: but he is a
stranger to us, touching the dispensation of the Body, which he has
received. Again, Origin. in eade^ homil.
Nec est Homo, qui est, vbicunque duo, vel tres in eius nomine fuerint
congregati etc. It is not Christ, as Man, that is, wheresoever two or three be
geathered in his name: neither is Christ, as Man, with us always until the
Consummation of the world. Hieronym. in Proverb. li. 1. c. 8.
So likewise says S. Hierome, Christus non est Corporaliter in Ecclesia:
Surgens enim a mortuis Ascendit in Coelum. Christ is not now Bodily in the
Church: for being risen from the dead, he is Ascended into Heaven.

I pass over S. Ambrose, S. Gregory, S. Cyril, S. Basile, Uigilius,
Fulgentius, Didymus, Beda, and other like Ancient Fathers. Thus were they then
resolved of Christ's Body: and this they took to be the Catholic Faith.

Yet neither were they therefore condemned for N^we Masters: nor followed they
only the Judgment of Nature: nor leadde they the world with peeuishe
Reasons: nor, touching Christ's Body, had they forgotten, whose Body it was:
nor were they counted the enemies of Gods Omnipotent Power: nor were they
then thought to fight against the Church. But M. Hardinge with his new
divised Fantasy, is a Patron, and a mainteiner of the Manichees, of the
Appollinaristes, of the Eutychians, and other more horrible, and old condemned
Heretics.

FINIS.
THE SEVENTHE ARTICLE, OF ELEVATION.
The B. of Sarisburie.
Or that the Priest did then hold up the Sacrament over his Head.

M. Hardinge.
Of what weight this ceremony is to be accounted, catholic Christen men, whom
you call your adversaries, M. Iuel, know no less then you. Verily, where as it
pleases you thus to ieste, and like a Lucian, to scoff at the Sacraments of
the Church, and the reverent use of the same, calling al these Articles in
general the highest Mysteries, and greatest Keys of our Religion, without
which our doctrine can not be maintained, and stand upright: understand you,
that this, as sundry other Articles, which you deny, and require proof of,
is not such, ne never was so esteemed. The Elevation of the Sacrament is now
no Article of Religion* yet in the late time of Tyranny it was more lookte
unto, then any one Article of the Trinity.
The Priests lifting up, or shewinge of the Sacrament, is not one of the
highest Mysteries, or greatest keys of our Religion: and the Doctrine of the
Catholic Church may right well be maintained, and stand without it. But it
appears, you regard not so much, what you say, as how you say somewhat for
color of defacing the Church: which whiles you go about to do, you deface
your self more, then you seem to be ware of, and do that thing, whereby
among good Christen men, specially the learned, you may be ashamed to show
your face. For as you have over rashely, yea I may say, wickedly affirmed the
Negative of sundry other Articles, and stoutely craked of your assurance
thereof, so you have likewise of this. For, perusinge the ancient Fathers
writings, we find record of this Ceremony used even (154) The.154.
Untruth, As shall appear.
from the Apostles time forward. S. Dionyse that was S. Paul's scholar,
shows, that the Priest at his time after the Consecration, was wont to (155)
The.155. Untruth, for Dionysius has no such words.
hold up the dreadful Mysteries, so as the people might behold them. His
words be these according to the Greek. Pontifex diuina munera laud
prosecutus, Ecclesiast. Hierarch. Ca. 3.
sacrosancta and augustissima Mysteria conficit, and collaudata in conspectum
agit per symbola sacre proposita. The Bishop, after that he has done his
service of praisinge the divine gifts, consecrateth the Holy, and most worthy
Mysteries, and brings them so praised into the sight of the people, by the
tokens set forth for that holy purpose. On which place the ancient Greek
writer of the Scholies upon that work says thus, (...) Loquitur de vnius
benedictionis, nimirum panis diuini, eleuatione, quem pontifex (156) The 156.
Untruth, Standinge in False Tra^slatio^. He means, Liftinge up a little from
the Table: Not over the Head. Chrysostom. says, Modicum.
in sublime attollit, dicens, Sancta Sanctis. This Father speaks in this
place, of the lifting up of the one Blessinge (that is to say, of the one
form, or kind of the Sacrament) even of that divine Bread which the Bishop
lifts up on high, saieing, Holy things for the Holy. Here is no mention of
liftinge over the Head. M. Harding mistaketh one thing for an other.
In S. Basiles and Chrysostomes Mass, we find these words. Sacerdos eleuans
Sacrum Panem, dicit, Sancta Sanctis. The Priest holdinge up that Sacred Bread,
says: Holy things for the Holy. In S. Chrysostomes Mass we read, that, as
the people is kneelinge down after the example of the Priest, and of the
Deacon, the Deacon seeinge the Priest stretchige forth his hands, and
taking up that Holy Bread (...), Ad sacram Eleuationem peragendam palam
edicit, attendamus, To do the Holy Elevation, speaks out alowde, let us be
attent: and (then) the Priest says (as he holds up the Sacrament) Holy
things for the Holy.

Amphilochius, of whom mention is made before, in the life of S. Basile,
speakinge of his wondrous Celebratinge the Mass, A Fable.
among other things says thus. Et post finem orationum, exaltauit Panem,
fine intermissione orans, and dicens: Respice Domine Jesus Christ etc. And
after that he had done the prayers of Consecration, he lifted up the Bread,
without ceasing praieing and saieinge, look upon us Lord Jesus Christ etc.
The same S. Basile meante likewise of the Elevation and holdinge up of the
Sacrament after the custom of the Occidental Church, in his Book De Spiritu
Sancto, Cap. 27.
where he says thus: Inuocationis verba, dum ostenditur Panis Eucharistiae,
and calix benedictionis, quis Sanctorum nobis scripto reliquit? Which of the
Saints has left unto us in writing the words of Invocation, whiles the
Bread of Eucharistia (157) The.157. Untruth, Standinge in false Construction.
(that is to wit, the Blessed Sacrament in form of Bread) and the
consecrated Chalice, is showed in sight? He speaks there of many things that
be of great authority and weight in the Church, which we have by tradition
only, and cannot be auoutched by holy Scripture. Of showing the holy Mysteries
to them that be present in the Sacrifice, the old Doctors make mention not
seldom.

S. Chrysostom declares the manner of it, In Epist. ad Ephesians. Sermo. 3. in
Moral.
saieinge that such as were accounted unworthy and heinous sinners, were put
forth of the Church, whiles the Sacrifice was offered, whiles Christ, and
that Lamb of our Lord was Sacrificed. Which being put out of the Church,
then were the Vailes (of the Altar) taken away, to the intent the holy
Mysteries might be showed in sight, doubtelesse to stir the people to more
devotion, reverence, (158) The.158. Untruth, For the Grecians knevve, neither
this kind of Adoration, nor Real Presence.
and to the Adoration of Christ's Body in them present. And thus for the
Elevation, or holdinge up of the Sacrament, we have said inoughe.

The B. of Sarisburie.
H. Hardinge seems, in part to disclaim this Article, as a matter of small
weight, and none of the Principal Keys of his Religion: wherein I see not, but
I may safely, and easily grant unto him: addinge notwithstanding thus much
withal, That the less it is, the less hurt is in it. Yet notwithstanding, of
late days it was otherwise esteemed, and most severely exacted, as the
thing, wherein stood their Adoration, which was the whole price, and beauty
of their Mass. The priest was wicked, that would not use it: The people was
wicked, that would not allow it: Their greatest Doctors have travailed
painfully to know the cause, and signification of this Mystery, and yet cannot
find it. All this notwithstanding, it is now confessed to be a small matter, of
no great weight, and such, as the Church may well spare without hinderance.
But, as M. Hardinge here says, his Doctrine may sufficiently be maintained,
and stand vprighte without this Ceremony of Elevation: even so may we
truly, and justly say, That the Heavenly and infallible Doctrine of the
Gospel of Christ, may likewise stand upright, and be maintained, not only
without this New Ceremony, but also without their Private Mass, without
their Half Communion, without their Strange Unknowen Prayers, without their
Supremacy of Rome, without their Transubstantiation, and other like Fantasies
by them divised.

Yet are not they al of that side hitherto fully resolved, touching their own
Elevation, neither when, nor where, nor wherefore it first came in use, nor what
it means. Some of them say, Gerardus Lord. chius. li. 3.
The liftinge up of the Sacramental Bread signifies Christ's Incarnation:
Some of them say, Durandus. li. 4.
It signifies Christ hanginge upon the Cross: Some of them, That it
signifies the taking down of his Body from the Cross: De Sexta part
Canonis.
Some, his Resurrection: Some, his Ascension into Heaven: Some, That it
signifies a Sacrifice special, above al Sacrifices: Some others say, Tit
ilmannus*
That the Priest lifts up the Chalice, to signify, That Christ crieing out
with a loud voice, gave up the Sprite. De Officio Missae.
M. Harding says, It is lifted up doubtless to the intent the people may
Adoure. Thus many, and more Mysteries, they have imagined in one thing: and yet
the same, as it is confessed, no Keye of their Religion. Disagreement evermore
argues ignorance. S. Augustine says, Augustine. ad Ianua. epist. 11^.
Si vix, aut omnino nunquam inueniri possint causae, quas in istis rebus
instituendis homines sequuti sunt, vbi facultas tribuitur, sine vlla
dubitatione resecanda existimo. If the causes, which men followed in diuisinge
such things, can hardely, or never be found, I think it best, when
opportunity, and occasion is given, they be abolisshed, and put away without
scruple, or staggeringe.

They have assaied earnestly, to prove this Ceremony by the warrante of Gods
Word, as if God him self had commanded it. Gerardus Lorichius says,
Gerard. Lorichius li. 3.
Hunc ritum David videtur praeuidisse in Spiritu. David seems to have
forseene this order in the Sprite: And to this purpose he allegeth the
Authority of Rabbi Iohai: Rab. Ioha^.
whom I marvel M. Harding had forgotten. Durandus for the same, Durand. li. 4.
allegeth the Words of Christ: De Sexta part Canonis.
Ego, si exaltatus fuero a Terra, omnia traham ad meipsum. If I be once lifted
up from the Earth, I shall draw al things to me self. And to speed the
matter the better forewarde, Linwoode says, Johan. 12.
The Pope has given liberal doale of Pardons: And the more to astonne the
Simple people, Linwood De Celebra Missarum. Altissimus. Alexan. de Hales. 4. q.
53. m. 4. art. 3.
Alexander of Hales says, They have of them selves invented and divised many
strange Miracles. They have earnestly, and sadly disputed, whether the Cup
should be holden up open, or covered. They say, It is a matter of special
meede: and hable to Confound Heresies. They have wrested, and corrupted the
Scriptures, and falsified the Rabines for the same. M Hardinge also would
seem to allege a multitude of Old Doctors, and long continuance, even from
the Apostles time. Durand. li. 4.
To be short, they have holden them for Heretics, and burned them, Gerard.
Lorichius. li. 3.
that durst to speak against it. Yet now in the end M. Hardinge says, It
is but a small matter, and the reast of their Religion may welstande without it.
I wonder, he proceeds not herein with as good courage, as in the reast.

Neither did I s^offe hereat, as a Lucian, as it pleases M. Hardinge in his
Choler to report, but reverently, and soberly spoke the Truethe, even as in
the presence of God. It pitied me to see G^^des people so deceived, and that
even by such, as had taken upon them, to be the Fathers, and Guiders of the
People. But, O merciful God: What Religion may this be, that noman may
touch, or truly report of it, without surmise, or suspicion of Scoffinge?
And, where as M. Hardinge, as a man somewhat ouermuche subject to his
Passions, says further, I may be ashamed to show my face emonge learned
men, If he mean the learned of his own side, verily, it can be no great
glory for me, to behold those faces, that have been so often turned. O M.
Hardinge, We have no cause, to be ashamed of the Gospel of Christ: Roman. 1.
It is the Mighty Power of God unto Salvation. I pray God, that both you, and
I may leave these worldly respects, and faces of men: and so use the gifts,
that God has lent us, and so freely discharge our consciences in this life,
Luc. 9.
that Christ be not ashamed of us before his Father: but we may come to see
God face to face. Touching ye matter it self, M. Harding thinks it best, to
claim his Elevation even from the Apostles time. So ye Romans in old times,
because they knew not, Titus Liuius, li. 1.
from whence their Ancilia came unto them, they thought it not amiss, for the
more credit of ye matter, to say they were sent to them from Heaven.

So Romulus, Plutarchus in Numae.
and Theseus, because they were base borne, and noman knew their Fathers,
therefore were reckened, to be ye Children of the Gods. Dionysius,
Chrysostomus, and Basile, as they are worthy of much credit, for their
Antiquity, so in this case they say nothing, that of our part is denied. The
Question is, Whether the Priest did then hold up the Sacrament over his Head,
or no.

This thing M. Hardinge dissembleth, and passes by: and turns his whole
proof to an other thing, yt neither is doubted of, Dionysi. Eccles. Hierar.
cap. 3.
nor denied. First, where as Dionysius says, In conspectum agit, He brings
the Mysteries into ^ight, This makes very small proof of M. Hardinges side,
except happily he will say, No man can bring a thing to sight, unless he hold
it over his head. But that thou may thoroughly, and fully see both the very
ground, and sense of these words of Dionysius, and also M. Hardinges
perverse, and strange Construction touching the same, it may please thee,
gentle Reader, to understand, that in those days the manner was, that the
Sacrament, being al in one whole loaf, or Cake, undivided, should remain still
upon the Holy Table, covered under a fair clothe, until the time of the
Distribution thereof unto the people. Touching which Ceremony Pachymeres ye
Greek Paraphrast writes thus: Pachymeres in tertium caput Eccles. Hierar.
(...). The Holy gifts being opened after the prayers, or Consecration, and
yet remaining still covered until ye time of the Distribution etc. So likewise
says Maximus in his Scholie upon the same place: And adds further, Maximus:
(...).
Not only the Holy Bread was set forth covered, but also the Holy Cup:
which thing, he says, now is not done.

This order, or Ceremony of the Church then well considered, Dionysius is
plain yenough of him self, without other Co^mentarie. For thus stand his
words: Profert ea, quae laudauit, in conspectum, per Symbola reuerenter
proposita: and dona Sacrificiorum commonstrans, ad Sacram illorum Communionem
and ipse accedit, Dionysi. Eccle. Hierar. ca. 3. (...).
and hortatur alios: The priest brings forth the things, that he has
praised, into sight, by the tokens reverently set before him: and shewinge
forth the Gistes of the Mysteries, both he him self draws near to the Holy
Communion of the same, and also exhorts others. This shewinge, and bringinge
into sight, was nothing else, but the vncoueringe, and laieinge a broad of the
Mysteries.

If M. Hardinge will say, This exposition is wreasted, or violent, let him then
hear Dionysius expound him self: Thus he writes afterward in the
Speculation, or exposition of the same: (...)
In conspectum profert, etc. He brings forth the things, that he has
praised, into sight, etc. It follows, Nam Opertum, and Indiuisum Panem
aperiens, and in multas parts diuidens, and Vnitatem Poculi omnibus
impertie^s, Symbolice implet Vnitatem. For vncoueringe the Bread, that was
covered, and stood whole, and undivided, and cuttinge it into many parts, and
partinge the Unity of the Cup unto all the people, by wa^e of a Sacrament he
fulfilleth Unity. If all this will not content M. Hardinge, yet Dionysius says
again in plainer sort: (...). Munera, quae tecta fuerant, in apertum profert.
He brings forth into open sight, the Gistes, or Sacraments, that before
were covered. This undoubtedly was the meaning of these words: onles perhaps
M. Hardinge will say, Dionysius understood not his own meaning. Pachymeres.
Uerily Pachymeres the Paraphrast expounds it thus: Profert in conspectum,
ostendens, haec esse Christi Symbola. (...).
He brings these things into sight: shewinge, that they be Tokens, and
Signs of Christ. Hitherto there is no manner mention of holdinge the
Sacrament over the Head.

But M. Hardinge replieth, Maximus says, Dionysius meante the holdinge up of
the one part of the Sacrament. This may easily be granted. But the same
Maximus, what so ever he were, or when so ever he lived, says not, The same
one part was holden over the Priests Head: and therefore M. Hardinge is but
weakly reliued by his Authority. And again the same Maximus, as a man not
very certain, what to say, diuiseth two other expositions of Dionysius
words, bisides this.

But let this Exposition of Maximus stand for good. The priest held up from
the Table, and showed forth the Sacrament, to declare, that the holy Communion
was ready, that the people might prepare them selves, and draw near. And
therefore he spoke alowde, Holy things for the Holy. Sancta Sanctis.
Chrysostom. in Epistol. ad Hebraeos homil. 17. Nicolaus Cabasilas.
Which words Chrysostom expounds thus, Quando Sacerdos dicit, Sancta
Sanctis, Hoc dicit, Si quis non est Sanctus, non accedat. When the priest
says, Holy things unto the holy, thus he says, If any man be not holy, let
him not come near. So likewise Nicolaus Cabasilas, a Greek writer of late
days: Sacerdos clamat, Sancta Sanctis, propemodum dicens: Ecce panis vitae:
accurrite participes futuri: sed non omnes: verum, si quis est Sanctus. The
priest speaks alowde, Holy things for the holy: As though he should say,
Behold the bread of life: come near, and take part: how be it not al, but
if any man be holy. And lest he should seem to discourrage any man in
respect of his unworthiness, he says further, Sanctos autem vocat, non virtute
perfectos, sed quicunque ad illam tendunt perfectionem: He calls them holy,
not, that be full perfect in virtue, but that be inclined to perfection. To this
end therefore the minister showed forth the Bread, that the people might
prepare them selves to the Distribution. And therefore it is written thus in
Chrysostomes Liturgy, Sacerdos ostendit Calicem populo, dice^s, Cum timore
Dei, and Fide, and dilectione accedite. The priest shows the Cup unto the
people, saieinge unto them, draw near with the fear of God, and with Faith,
and love. And the people answeareth, Basil. De Spiritu Sancto. ca. 27.
Blissed is he, that comes in the name of the Lord. This same was S. Basiles
meaning in his book, De Spiritu Sancto. The words of Invocation, that there
are spoken of, were of such authority in the Church, and of such weight,
that neither M. Hardinge, nor, I believe, any other of that side, is hable now
to show us, what they were. In the Liturgy, that bears S. Basiles name,
Liturgia Basilij.
it is only noted thus, When the priest says, Sancta Sanctis, the people
answeareth, Vnus Sanctus: vnus Pater: vnus Filius. The very same was
Chrysostomes meaning upon the Epistle to the Ephesians. Chrysostom. in Epist. ad
Ephesios hom. 3.
The Courtaines of the holy Communion Table were drawn, that the Mysteries
prepared for the people, might be seen upon the Table, not, that the Priest
should lift them up over his head. The vain Fable of M. Hardinges
Amphilochius, so often repeted, is not worth the answearinge.

All this notwithstanding, M. Hardinge doubts not to make us believe, That al
these Fathers spoke plainly of the Elevation of the Sacrament over the
Priests head: and that, as he says, according to the custom of the
Occidental Church. And to that end he has pretily falsified the words of
Maximus. For, where as Maximus in the Greek writes thus, (...), M. Hardinge
has translated it in this wise, Quem panem Pontifex in sublime attollit,
Which Bread the Bishop lifts on high. And so it were easy, to deceive the
simple, onles the Fathers had otherwise declared their own meaning.
Pachymeres.
Pachymeres expounds that word thus, (...), He Shows, or Lifts up. He
says not, The Priest lifted the Sacrament above his Head, or On High, as M.
Hardinge has turned it: but he Showed the Sacrament a little up from the Table,
that it might be seen of the people. Chrysostom. in Liturgia. Modicum.
And so says Chrysostom touching the same, Sacerdos modicum tollens
portionem, quae est in sancta patena, dicit, Sancta Sanctis. The Priest a Little
liftinge up the portion, that is in the holy Dishe, says, Holy things for the
holy. And so likewise Claudius du Sain^tes reads it. And in S. Basiles
Liturgy it is thus noted in the Margin, Claudius du Saints. Cassander.
Hic Sacerdos Hostiam fractam in patena iacentem, vna cum Patena subleuat, and
ostendit populo: Here the Priest lifts up the Host, or Sacrament lieinge
broken in the Dishe, and together with the Dishe shows it unto the people.
Yet must al these be brought forth to prove this new manner of Elevation now
vsedin the Church of Rome. So bold is M. Hardinge of the simplicity of the
people.

But one strange thing, emonge others, I note by the way in M. Hardinges
answer, that, being demanded of this late divised Ceremony in the Church
of Rome, he foundeth his whole answer upon the East Church of Grecia, and
shows not one example, nor moves one word of the Church of Rome: and yet
notwithstanding, he knows right well, that this kind of Elevation from the
beginning until this day, was never used in the Church of Grecia.

It seems likely, that as well this usage, as also sundry others, of Apparel,
of Oil, etc. grew first from the imitation of the Ceremonies of the Jews:
emonge whom the Priest in the time of their Sacrifices, ^hruma.
held up the oblation before his breast. So in the primitive Church, what so
ever was offered by any man to the relief of the poor, it was taken by the
Priest, and holden up, and presented in the Church, as a pleasant Sacrificie
before God. So Chrysostom says, The Priest in the time of the holy
Ministration lifted up the Gospel. In Liturgia. Nicolaus Cabasilas in
expositione Liturgiae.
His words be these: Sacerdos in altum tollit Euangelium. And Nicolaus
Cabasilas likewise says, His peractis, Sacerdos stans super altar, in altum
tollit Euangelium, and ostendit. These things being done, the Priest
standinge over the Aultare, lifts the Gospel on high, and shows it.

But, that the holdinge up of the Sacrament should importe Adoration to the
same, as M. Hardinge surmiseth, neither is it thought true by all others of that
side, nor has it any good sauoure, or show of truth. In deed great
pardonnes, and Chartars have benne liberally given of late years for the
better mainteinance thereof. And Durandus says, Therefore Elevation is made,
Durandus. li. 4.
Vt populus intelligat, Christum venisse super Altar: That the people may
understand, that Christ is come down upon the Altar. But the Old learned
Fathers, both Greeks, and Latins, when they held up a little, or showed the
Sacrament, evermore they called the people, to draw near, to receive, to be
partakers of the holy Mysteries, and to lift up their hearts: but in the time
of the same Ceremony, they never spoke one word of Adoration. Pachymeres
says, Sacerdos ostendit, haec esse Christi Symbola. Pachymeres in Eccle.
Hierar.
The Priest shows, that these be Tokens, or Signs of Christ. Cap. 3.
He says not, The Sacraments be Christ him self: but Tokens, and Signs of
Christ. Maximus says, (...): Symbola ista sunt: non autem veritas. These be
Tokens (of the Truth) but not the Truth it self. And perhaps upon this
occasion, Maximus in Scholijs.
Beguinae, and Beguardi held, That noman ought to rise up, or to give
reverence at the Elevation of the Sacrament. Clemen. li. 5. A^ nostrum.


To conclude, Gerardus Lorichius in his book, that he writes in the Defense
of the Private Mass, has these words. Ex hoc ritu Eleuationis inferimus,
Missam neutiquam rite celebrari, nisi in vsum publicum Ecclesiae, Cerard.
Lorichius. li. 3.
hoc est, propter populum, vel Sacramentum Eucharistiae sumentem, vel
Sacrificium laudis votis, and encomijs celebrantem. Siquidem propter eum vsum
hostia ele^atur. Missae igitur priuatae, quae absente populo Catholico fiunt,
Abominatio verius, quam Oblatio, dicendae sunt. By this very usage of
Elevation, we conclude, That no Mass is rightly said, but for the public
use of the Church, that is to say, for the people, either receiuinge the
Sacrament, or else auancinge the Sacrifice of praise with heart, and devotion.
For to this end (and not to be adoured) the Sacrament is holden up. Therefore
Private Masses, which are said without Catholic people being present, may
rather be called an Abomination, then an Oblation. Thus much Gerardus
Lorichius, a Doctoure of M. Hardinges ^^ne side.

FINIS.
THE EIGHTHE ARTICLE, OF ADORATION.
The B. of Sarisburie.
Or that the people did then fall down, and worship the Sacrament with Godly
Honor.

M. Hardinge. The.1. Division.
If the Blessed Sacrament of the Aultare were no other, then M. Iuel, and the
rest of the Sacramentaries think of it: then were it not weldone the people
to bow down to it, and to worship it with Godly Honor. (159) The.159.
untruth, joined with a sclander.
For then were it but Bare Bread and Wine, how honorably so ever they speak
of it, calling it Symbolical, that is tokeninge, and Sacramental Bread and
Wine.

The B. of Sarisburie.
M. Hardinge, as a man over much obedient unto his affections, in the
beginning hereof calls us Sacramentaries: by which Word he understands
Schismatiques, Heretics, and the enemies of God: and so breaks up his way
into this treatise with unsavory, and bitter talk: and as a Cock, that is
well pampered with Garlike before the fight, he seeks to ouermatche his
fellow, rather with rankenes of breathe, then with might of Body.

And, for as much as he strives to make the world think, our Doctrine is
injurious to the Godhead, and Glory of Christ, First we protest, That as we
believe, Johan. 1.
that Christ is the Lamb of God, that has taken away the Sins of the
world: and, that there is none other Name under Heaven, Actor. 4.
whereby we can be saved: and that, as the Prophet Esaie says, Esai. 9.
He is the Mighty God, the Father of the world, that was to come: and that, 2
Timoth. 3.
as S. Paul says, He is God reveled in the Fleashe: even so we yield unto
him the very Honor, that is dew unto God: and that, not only to his Godhead
alone, but also to his Humanity inseparably joined with his Godhead in one
Person, sittinge now at the Right Hand of God. Thus we teach the people,
That God has auanced him into al highth, Philippen. 2.
and has given him a Name above al Names, that at the name of Jesus every knee
shall be bowed, of things in Heaven, in the Earth, and under the Earth: and that
every tongue shall confess, that Jesus Christ is the Lord in the Glory of
God the Father.

Neither do we only Adoure Christ, as very God, but also we woorship, and
reverence the Sacrament, and Holy Mystery of Christ's Body: and, as S.
Augustine teaches us, Augustine. Epist. 146.
Baptismu^ Christi, vbicunque est, veneramur. We worship the Baptism of
Christ, where so ever it be: we worship the Word of God, according to this
Counsel of Anastasius, De Co^se. Did. 1. Apos^olica.
Dominica Verba attente audiant, and fideliter Adorent: Let them diligently
^eare, and faithfully Worship the Words of God. Briefly, we worship al other
like things, in such Religious wise unto Christ belonginge. But these things
we use, and reverence as holy, and appointed, or commanded by Christ: but we
Adoure them not with godly Honor, as Christ him self. S. Ambrose says of
the wise men, Ambros. in Lucam li. 2. ca. 2.
Cognouerunt, hanc stellam esse, quae Homine^, Deumque signaba^: Sed
Adorauerunt Paruulum. They knew, this was the Star, that signified him unto
them, that was both Man, and God: but they Adoured the Little one, (and not the
Star.)

And, where as M. Hardinge, as well herein, as also in the reast, untruly, and
vniu^^ly diffameth us, as making the Sacraments of Christ, nothing else but
Bare Tokens, let him well understand, that we do both think, and speak
soberly, and reverently of Christ's Sacraments, as knowinge them to be the
Testimonies of Gods Promises, and the Instruments of the Holy Ghost. And,
as we make not the Sacrament of Baptism, Sacrament. Sign.
Bare Water, notwithstanding the Nature, and Substance of Water remain still:
De Consecrat.
so we make not the Sacrament of Christ's Body, and Blood, Did. 2. Sacrif.
Pet. Lombard. li. 4. Dis^. Samaritanus.
bare Bread, and Wine. We use the same words, and Definitions, that S.
Augustine, and other Aucient Fathers, and Peter Lumbarde, and Gratian, M.
Hardinges own Doctors, have used before us: Sacramentum est Signum rei
Sacrae: Sacramentum est inuisibilis Gratiae visibilis forma. A Sacrament is a
Token of a Holy thing: A Sacrament is a Form Vi^ible of Grace Invisible.
Neither do we hereof make a Bare, or naked Token, as M. Hardinge imagines:
but we say, as S* Paul says, It is a perfect Seal, and a sufficient
Warrant of Gods Promises, Roman. 4. Signaculum Iustitiae Fidei.
whereby God binds him self unto us, and we likewise stand bounden unto
God, so as God is our God, and we are his people. This, I reckon, is no Bare,
or Naked Token. And touching this word, Signum, what it means, S.
Augustine shows in this sort: Signum est, quod praeter speciem, Augustine. De
Doctrine Christiana. li. 2. ca. 1.
quam ingerit sensibus, aliud quiddam facit ex se in cognitionem venire: A
Sign is a thing, that bisides the form, or sight, that it offreth to our
senses, causes of it self some other thing to come to our knowledge. And
hereof it is called a Mystery, or a Holy Secrecy: De Consecr. did. 2. Signu^.
for that our eye beholds one thing, and our Faith an other. For example,
In Baptism our bodily eye sees Water: but our Faith, which is the eye of
our mind, 1. Johan. 1.
sees the Blood of Christ, which, as S. John says, h^th washed us from al
our sins. Therefore Chrysostom Chrysostom. in. 1. Epist. ad Corinth. Hom. 7.
says, Incredulus, cum Baptismatis lauacrum audit, persuadet sibi, Simpliciter
esse Aquam. Ego vero non simpliciter video* quod video, sed animae per Spiritu^
purgatione^: and Sepulturam, Resurrectionem, Sanctificationem, Iustitiam,
Redemptionem, Adoptionem, Haereditatem, Regnum Coelorum, Spi^itus Sarietatem
considero. Non enim aspectu iudico ea, quae videntur, sed Mentis Oculis. The
Infidel, when he hears of the Water of Baptism, thinks it to be only
plain water: but I, that believe in Christ, do not only, and simply see
Water, but I see the cleansing of ^he Soul by the Spirit of God: I consider
Christ's Burial, his Resurrection, our Sanctifica^^on, our Righteousness, our
Redemption, our Adoption, our Enheritance, the Kingedome of Heaven, and the
fulness of the Sprite. For the things, that I see, I judge not with my bodily
eyes, but with the eyes of my Mind. Now, will M. Hardinge say, that Chrysostom
only for a countenance, speaks thus honorably of the Sacrament of Baptism,
meaning notwithstanding, it is nothing else, but Bare Water? Certainly S.
Augustine says, In Sacramentis videndum est, non, quid sint, sed, quid
Significent. Augustine. contr^ Maximinum. li. 3. ca. 22.
In Sacraments we must consider, not, what they be in deed, but, what they
Signify. If yt every thing, according to M. Hardinges judgment, must needs
be accounted Bare, wherein Christ's Body is not Really Present, then is the
Sacrament of Baptism a Bare Sacrament: and M. Hardinges Book must likewise of
necessity seem a Uery Bare book: unless perhaps he will say, Plato.
Christ's Body is Really enclosed in it. Plato says, It is the greatest
part of Wisdom, to discern, Aliud, and Idem, One, and the same thing, from
an Other thing. Augustine. in Johan. tractat. 26.
For of error herein evermore rises al Confusion. But S. Augustine says,
Aliud est Sacramentum, aliud res Sacramenti: The Sacrament is One thing: and
the Substance of the Sacrament, which is Christ's Body, is an other thing.
And least M. Hardinge should shifte of this matter, and say, as his manner is,
that the Sacrament is nothing else, but the Outward Form, and Appearance, or
show of Bread, and Wine, Rabanus Ma^rus. li. 1. ca. 31.
Rabanus Maurus has prevented him in this wise, Sacramentum in alimentum
Corporis redig^tur: The Sacrament is turned into the nourishment of the Body.
Therefore these two things being diverse, and sundry, the one the Token,
the other the thing tokened: The one Christ's Body, and the other the
Sacrament of the same Body: The one Naturally feedinge the Body, the other
Supernaturally feedinge the Soul: it were great Confusion, either to make them
both one, or else by error to take the one for the other. Augustine. De
Doctrine. Christ. li. 3. ca. 5.
And for that cause S. Augustine says, as it is before alleged, Ea demum est
miserabilis Animae seruitus, Signa pro rebus accipere, That in deed is a
Miserable Servitude of the Soul, to take the Signs in steed of the things,
that be signified.

Now touching the Adoration of the Sacrament, M. Hardinge is not hable to
show, neither any Commandment of Christ, nor any Word, or Example of the
Apostles, or Ancient Fathers concerning the same. It is a thing very lately
divised by Pope Honorius, Extra de Celebra. Missar.
about the year of our Lord. 1226. Afterward increased by the New solemn
Feast of Corpus Christi day, by Pope Urbanus, Anno 2264. Clem. li. 3. ti. 16.
Ca. Si Dominu^.
And last of al Confirmed for ever by multitudes of Pardons in the Council of
Uienna by Pope Clement. 5. An. 1310. The Church of Asia, and Graecia never
received it until this day. The matter is great, and cannot be attempted
without great danger. Apocalyp. 21.
To give the Honor of God to a Creature, that is no God, it is manifest
Idolatry. And al Idolaters, as S. John says, shall have their portion in the
lake burninge with fire, and Brymstoane, which is the second death.

M. Hardinge. The.2. Division.
But now this being that very Bread, which God the Father gave us from
Heaven, Johan. 6.
as Christ says: This Bread being the Fleashe of Christ, which he gave
for the life of the world.

The B. of Sarisburie.
M. Hardinge would seem, to have trained all the Ancient Doctors unto his
side, and to that end has mustred them here in an army al together. How be
it of them al, there is not one, that teaches us one word of the Adoration
of the Sacrament. Wherefore, if he bring them forth only for a Show, they
are to many: but if he bring them, as Witnesses, they are to few: for,
touching the case, they say nothing. Yet M. Harding, as a man much doubtinge
his Readers memory, whatsoever he has shortly alleged here, has else where
repeted, and doubled the same in other places of his Book: so that, if I would
answer al in particulare, I should be over tedious. For auoidinge whereof, it
shall be sufficient, to refer me self over to such places, where as these
Authorities are answered severally more at large.

First, as I have said before, there is not one of al these Fathers, that
wills us to Adoure the Sacrament with godly honor. Which thing
notwithstanding they were hable to have written, if it had been then either
used, or thought convenient: and M. Hardinge was hable to have found it, if it
had been written. The Bread of the Sacrament is not that Bread, Cypri. li. 1.
ep. 6.
of which Christ speaks in the sirth of S. John: but very material Bread in
deed, and, as S. Cyprian says, Ex multorum granorum adunatione congestus,
Molded together of the minglinge of many corues, and a Sacrament of that
Bread, that came from Heaven. But this matter is answered in the fifthe
Article, and in the First, Second, and Third Division.

M. Hardinge. The.3. Division.
This being that Bread, and that Cup, whereof whosoever eats, or drinks
unworthily, shall be guilty of the Body, and Blood of our Lord.

The B. of Sarisburie.
S. Hierome says, Hieronym. in Malachi. ca. 1.
Dum Sacramenta violantur, ipse, cuius Sacramenta sunt, violatur. When the
Sacraments be misvsed, God him self, whose Sacraments they be, is misused.
And the greatest Abuse, and Uilanie, that can happen to any Sacrament, is,
contrary to Christ's Institution, and the nature of a Sacrament, to be honored
in steed of God. Augustine. contra Fulgentium ca. 6.
And S. Augustine says, Qui indigne accipit Baptisma, Iudicium accipi^, non
Salutem. Who so receives Baptism unworthily, receives his Judgment, and
not his Health. Wherefore, if M. Hardinge think this warrant sufficient to
prove Adoration, then must he also Adoure the Water of Baptism.

M. Hardinge. The.4. Division.
(160) The.160. Untruths fine together, in the report of four words.
In this Sacrament being contained the very Real, and Substantial Body, and
Blood of Christ, as him self says expressly, in the three first
Evangelists, and in S. Paul.

The B. of Sarisburie.
It is a bold enterprise, in the report of four plain words to commit
five manifest untruths, and that altogether with one breath. Certainly M.
Hardinge well knows, that neither Christ, nor Paul, nor any of the
Evangelists, I add further, nor any of the Catholic Doctors, in this case
of the Sacrament, ever used any of these Terms, either Carnally Contained, or
Expressly, or Uery, or Real, or Substantial. Only they say, This is my Body:
which words the Ancient Father Tertullian expounds thus, Tertull. contr^
Marcion. li. 4.
This is a Figure of my Body.

M. Hardinge. The.5. Division.
This being that Holy Eucharistia, In Epistola quadam ad Smyrne^ses* vt
citatur a Theodoreto in Polymorph. li. 4^ (...)Haereses. ca. 34.
which Ignatius calls the fleashe of our Savior Jesus Christ, that has
suffered for our Sins, which the Father by his goodness has raised up to
life again: This being, not Common Bread, but the Eucharistia, after
Consecration consistinge of two things, Earthely, and Heavenly, as Irenaeus
says, meaning by the one, (161) The.161. Untruth. For Irenaeus means not
the Forms, or Shows of Bread, but the Substance of very Bread it self.
the outward Forms: by the other, the very Body and Blood of Christ, who
parcely for the Godhead inseperably thereto united, and partly for that they
were conceived of the Holy Ghost in the most Holy Virgin Marie, are
woorthily called Heavenly.

The B. of Sarisburie.
What Theodoretus thought in this behalf, it is plain by his own words.
For thus he writes, Signa Mystica post Sanctificationem non recedunt a Natura
sua: Theodoret. Dialogo. 2.
The Mystical Tokens after the Sanctification, or Consecration go not from
their own Nature: that is to say, remain in Substance, and Nature, as they
were before. By these words we may plainly see Theodoretus judgment. How be
it, in all Sacraments two things must be considered, whereof, as Irenaeus
says, they do consiste. The one is Earthly, the other is Heavenly: The one
we see with our Bodily eyes, the other we see with the eyes of our Faith:
The one is in the Earth, the other is in Heaven. These parts because they are
joined in one Mystery, therefore oftentimes they scorce names, the one
enterchangeably with the other. For as Christ's very Body is called Bread,
although in deed it be no Bread: So the Sacramental Bread is called Christ's
Body, although in deed it be not Christ's Body. Therefore as the Sacrament
is called Christ's Body, even so, according to the saieinge of Ignatius, it
is the Fleashe of Christ, Theodoret. in Polymorpho.
even the same, that has suffered for our Sins, and that the Father has
raised again to life: that is to say, A Sacrament of that Fleashe. In like
sort S. Chrysostom writes of the Sacrament of Baptism: Chrysostom. in
Epist. ad Hebrae. Homil. 16.
Ostendit hoc loco, idem esse Sanguinem, and Aquam. Baptisma enim eius, etiam
Passio eius est. S. Paul shows in this place, that the Blood (of Christ) and
the water (of Baptism) are both one. For Christ's Baptism, is Christ's
Passion. He says, The Water, and the Blood of Christ are both one thing, and
that, he says, was S. Paul's meaning. Yet notwithstanding, neither is the
Water Christ's Blood in deed: neither is Christ's Blood in deed Material
Water. But thus they borowe each of them the others name, because they are
joined together in one Mystery. So is the Blood of Christ called Water,
because it cleanses: so is the Water called Christ's Blood, because it is a
Sacrament of that Blood. And as S. Chrysostom says, The Water of Baptism
is Christ's Blood: even so Ignatius says, The Bread is the Fleashe of
Christ, and none otherwise. These things are plain, and without cauil.
Therefore S. Augustine says, Augustine. Epist. 23.
Sacramenta ex Similitudine plerunque etiam rerum ipsarum nomina accipiunt.
Ergo secundum quendam Modum Sacrame^tum Corporis Christi, Corpus Christi est:
and Sacramentum Sanguinis Christi, Sanguis Christi est. Sacraments because of
a certain likeness, oftentimes receive the names of the things them self
(whereof they be Sacraments). Secu^dum quendam Modum.
And therefore the Sacrament of Christ's Body after a certain manner (of
speech) is the Body of Christ: And the Sacrament of Christ's Blood, is
likewise (after a certain manner) the Blood of Christ.

But here has M. Hardinge taken great pains, to wreast, and to falsify the
plain words of that holy Father Ireneus. Irenaeus li. 4 ca. 34.
For that part of the Mystery, that Ireneus calls, Rem terrenam, an Earthly
thing, that is to say, Bread, the same M. Hardinge, contrary to his Authors
meaning, calls Forms, or Accidents, or Shows of Bread. For this fond,
and Heathenishe kind of speech was not heard of in the Church in that holy
Fathers days: but was brought in welneare a thousand years afterward, to
accompany Transubstantiation. But Ireneus in plain wise calls it a
Creature. Irenaeus eodem loco.
Thus he says, Sa^ctificamus Creatura^: We do sanctify a Creature. Offerimus
e^ ex Creatura eius: We offer up unto him of his Creature. And that he means,
not a miraculous Creature, as is Accidens sine subiecto, the like whereof was
never seen: but he says simply, Ibidem.
Creaturam, quae est secundum nos, Secundum nos. (...).
Such a Creature, as we have in common use: Such as we see: Such as we
feel: Such as we eat: Such as we drink: and, utterly to cut of al M.
Hardinges shifts, Ir^naeus li. 5.
he says, Ex illa augetur, and consisti^ Carnis nostrae Substantia. Of the
same the Substance of our Fleashe is increased, and stands. Therefore it is
certain, and most manifest by Ireneus, that, as Christ's Body is the one
part of the Sacrament, so is Material Bread the other. Likewise in Baptism,
as the one part of that holy Mystery is Christ's Blood, so is the other
part the Material Water. Neither are these parts joined together in place,
but in Mystery: and therefore they be oftentimes severed, and the one is
received without the other. And for that cause S. Augustine says, Augustine. in
libro Sententiarum. senten. 338. Et in Johan. tractatu. 26.
Qui discordat a Christo, nec Panem eius manducat, nec Sanguinem bibit: etiam
si tantae rei Sacramentum ad iudicium suae praesumptionis quotidie
indifferenter accipiat, Who so disagreeth from Christ, neither eats his
Bread, nor drinks his Blood: although he daily receive the Sacrament of so
great a thing without difference to the judgment of his presumption.

If any man think it strange, that the Sacrament is called the Body, and the
Fleashe of Christ, being not so in deed, let him understand, That the
Written Word of God is likewise called Christ's Body, and Christ's Fleashe,
even the same, that was borne of the Uirgin, and that the Father raised again
to life: although in deed it be not so. Hieronym. in Psalm. 147.
So says S. Hierome: Quando dicit, qui non comederit Carnem meam, and biberit
Sanguinem meum etc. Licet in Mysterio possit intelligi, tamen verius Corpus
Christi, and Sanguis eius Sermo Scripturarum est. When Christ says, He that
eats not my Fleashe, and drinks not my Blood, etc. Notwithstanding it
may be taken of the Mystery, Verius.
Yet the Word of God is more truly the Body of Christ, and his Blood.
Here note, good Reader, That by these words of S. Hierome, the Woord^ of God
is the Body, and Blood of Christ, and that more truly, then is the
Sacrament.

M. Hardinge. The.6. Division.
This being that Bread, which of our Lord given to his Disciples, not in
shape, In Ser^^^ de Coena Domini*
but in Nature changed, by the almighty Power of the Word is made Fleashe,
as S. Cyprian terms it.

The B. of Sarisburie.
This authority is answered more at large in the Tenthe Article, and in the
Second Division.

M. Hardinge. The.7. Division.
This being that Holy Mystery, wherein the Invisible Priest turns the
Visible Creatures (of Bread, and Wine) into the Substance of his Body, Homi.
5. De Pascha.
and Blood, by his Word, with secret power, as Eusebius Emissenus reports.

The B. of Sarisburie.
This Authority is answered in the Tenthe Article, and in the Seuenthe
Division.

M. Hardinge. The.8. Division.
So S. Hilane says, Christ dwells in us Naturally by the water of
Baptism. De Trini^a. li. 8.
This Being that Holy Food, by worthy receiuinge whereof Christ dwells
in us Naturally, that is to wit in us by truethe of Nature, and not by
Concord of VVil only, as Hilarious affirms. Lib. 8. De Trinitate.


The B. of Sarisburie.
This Authority is answered before in the Fifthe Article, and the Tenthe
Division.

M. Hardinge. The.9. Division.
Again this being that Table, whereat in our Lords meat we receive the
word truly made Fleashe of the most Holy Virgin Marie, as the same Hilarie
says.

The B. of Sarisburie.
This Authority, as it nothing hinders us, so it nothing furthereth M.
Hardinge. We say, that at that Holy Table our Faith is directed, not unto a
fantasy, but unto the very Body, and Blood of Christ, and tastes it, and
feeds on it: and that as verily, and as effectually, as our Body feeds
upon material food. And we add further, That, who so ever eats not Christ's
Fleashe, Johan. ^.
nor drinks his Blood, shall not have everlasting life. But the thing, that
we receive with our mouth, is not the same thing, that we receive with our
Faith. For, as it is before alleged out of S. Augustine, August^in. Ioh^^
Tractatu. 26.
Aliud est Sacramentum, aliud res Sacramenti. The Sacrament is one thing, and
the Matter, or Substance of the Sacrament, which is Christ's very Body, is an
other thing.

But being granted, that Christ's Body is verily, and really in the
Sacrament: Yet cannot M. Hardinge thereof conclude his purpose. His argument
stands thus: Christ's Body ought to be Adoured with Godly honor: Ergo, The
Sacrament ought to be Adoured with Godly honor.



This argument is made up of four Terms: and therefore in the Schools would
be counted childishe. The error thereof will the better appear by the like.

Christ's Body ought to be Adoured with Godly honor: Ergo, Heaven ought to
be Adoured with Godly honor.

M. Hardinge. The.10. Division.
This being that Bread which neither Earinge, nor Sowinge, nor work of
Tillers has brought forth, but that Earth, which remained untouched, and
was full of the same, that is, the Blissed Virgin Marie, as Gregory Nyssene
describes.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Gregory Nyssene in this whole place speaks not one word, neither of any
Adoration, nor of the Sacrament: but only of Christ's Birthe of the Blissed
Uirgin. These words are alleged, and answered before in the fifthe Article,
and tenth Division. Yet shortly, and by the way, these Words yield us one
good reason against M. Hardinge. For, where as Gregory Nyssene says, The
Bread of Christ's ^odie comes not of the labor of tillers, that is to say,
of Material Corn: and nevertheless S. Cyprian, and S. Augustine say, the
Sacrament is wrought of many Corns. Cyprian. lib. 1. Epist. 6.
Of these Fathers thus considered together, we may conclude, That Christ's
Body, and the Sacrament are sundry things. The argument that M. Hardinge
can geather hereof, Augustine. in Johan. tracta. 26.
stands thus:

Christ was borne of the Blissed Uirgin:

Ergo, We ought to Adoure the Sacrament. For other necessity of sequel out of
these words there is none.

M. Hardinge. The.12. Division.
This being that Supper, Constitut. Apostolicarum. li. 8. ca. v^t.
in the which Christ Sacrificed him self, as Clemens Romanus, and as
Hesychius declares: who furthermore in an other place writes most plainly,
that these Mysteries, meaning the Blessed Sacrament of the Aultare, are Sancta
Sanctorum, the Holiest of al Holy things, because it is the Body of him
self, In Leuir. li. 1. ca. 4.
of whom Gabriel said to the Virgin, The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and
the power of the Highest shall ouershadowe thee: Hesychiu^ speaks these
words, not of the Sacrame^te, but of Christ him self.
therefore that Holy thing, which shall be borne of thee, shall be called the
Son of God: and of whom also Esa^e spoke, Holy is our Lord, and dwells on
high, verily in the bosom of the Father.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Christ, as he had showed his Disciples before, yt he must go up to
Jerusalem, and there be Crucified, so being at that his last mourneful
Supper, he ordained a Sacrament of his Death, and took Bread, and Brake it,
and described, and expressed before their eyes the whole order, and manner of
his Passion: As if he should have said, Thus shall my Body be Broken: thus
shall my Blood be sheadde. This description of Christ's Death so plain, and so
lively, Hesychius calls a Sacrifice, that is to say, an Examplar, or
Resemblance of that Sacrifice, which he had to offer the day folowinge upon
the Cross. And in deed, as the Bread was Christ's Body, so the Breakinge of
the same was Christ's Passion. And in this manner of speech the Ancient
Fathers seem to call Baptism a Sacrifice. Chrysostom says, Baptisma Christi,
Chrysostom. in Episto. ad Hebrae.
Passio Christi est. The Baptism of Christ, is Christ's Passion. So
Tertullian, Tingimur in Passione Domini, We be washte in the Passion of our
Lord. So like wise again Chrysostom says, Homi. 16.
Quod Crux, and Sepulchrum fuit Christo, id nobis Baptismus factus est.
Tertullian. de Baptismo.
That is Baptism unto us, that the Cross, and Grave was unto Christ. In this
sense Hesychius says, Christ offered him self at his last Supper: that is to
say, Chrysostom. in Epist. ad Roma.
by way of a Sacrament, and in a Mystery, but not in deed: to take away the
sins of the World. In like sense the same Hesychius calls the Birth of
Christ a Sacrifice: Homi. 10.
These be his words, Sacrificium Coctum Christi appellat Incarnationem: The
bakte Sacrifice he calls the Incarnation of Christ. Hesychius in Leui. li.
1. ca. 2.


Touching this word, Sancta Sanctorum, it is not the outward Sacrament,
that Hesychius calls by that name, but the very Body of Christ it self:
which, August. in Ioha^. tracta. 26.
as S. Augustine says, is Res Sacramenti, The Substance, and Matter of the
Sacrament. So writes Origin upon Leuiticus, Quae est Hostia, quae pro peccatis
offertur, Origin in Leui. Homi. 7.
and est Sancta Sanctorum, nisi vnigenitus Filius Dei Dominus meus Jesus
Christus? Ipse solus est Hostia pro peccatis, and ipse est Hostia, Sancta
Sanctoru^. What is that Sacrifice, that is offered up for Sin, and is the
Holy of the Holy: but the only begotten Son of God my Lord Jesus Christ?
He only is the Sacrifice for Sin: and he is the Sacrifice, of Holy things
the most Holy. And this he speaks of the Sacrifice, that Christ made upon
the Cross. And therefore he adds thus, Quod vno verbo Apostolus explicauit,
cum dicit, Qui seipsum obtulit Deo. Which thing the Apostle expressed in one
word, saieinge thus, Which has offered up him self unto God.

How be it, not only the Sacrament, but also other things appointed unto
godly use, Inter Decre. Bonifac. 1. Decre. 3.
may be called, Sancta Sanctorum. So it is written, and determined by
Bonifacius the First: Omne, quod Domino Consecratur, sieve fu^rit homo, sieve
animal, sieve ager, vel quicquid fuerit semel consecratum, Sanctum Sanctorum
erit Domino. 12. Quaest. 2. Nulii liceat. Leuiti. 27.
Every thing, that is Consecrate unto the Lord, be it Man, or beast, or
lands, or what so ever, being Consecrate, it is Holy of the Holy unto the
Lord. Neither does he call the holy Mysteries, Sancta Sanctorum, in that
sense, that M. Harding means, for that they are the holiest of al holy
things, but because they are appointed for Holy People. For thus he expounds
it him self, Origin. in Leuiticum hom. 13.
Panis iste, and Calix, Sancta Sanctorum sunt. Vides, quomodo non dixerit,
Sancta, tantummodo, sed Sancta Sanctorum. Ac si dicere^, Panis iste non est
communis Omnium, nec cuiusque indigni, sed Sanctorum est. Quanto magis hoc and
de Verbo Dei dicemus, Hic Sermo non est omnium, nec cuiuscunque, sed Sanctorum
est? This Bread, and this Cup, are the Holy things of the Holy. You see,
That he says not only, They are Holy things: but he adds bi^ides, Of the
Holy. As if he would say, This Bread is not common to al men, nor to every
unworthy: but it is the Bread of the Holy. How much more may we say the same
of Gods word, This Word is not of al men, or of every Body, but of the
Holy? Therefore S. Chrysostom says, The Priest was wont, to show forth the
Bread in the time of the Holy Mysteries, and to say, Sancta Sanctis, Holy
things for the Holy. And this is the meaning of, Sancta Sanctorum.

As for Clemens of Rome, ye Apostles Fellow, as M. Harding euerywhere calls
him, he says not, That Christ offered him self at his Last Supper: but rather
far otherwise. Thus he says, Propter nos Homo factus, and Spirituale
Sacrificium offerens Deo. Christ being made Man for us, and offeringe unto
God a Spiritual Sacrifice.

And in plainer sort, he makes this prayer unto God, touching the same, Li.
8. ca. 13*
Offerimus tibi Regi, and Deo, iux^a Christi institutionem hunc Panem, and hoc
poculum: We offer up unto thee, o King and God, this Bread, and this Cup.
He says not, we offer up Really the Body of thy Son: but this Bread, and
this Cup. Which also he calls Antitypa, that is to say, Signa Corporis, and
Sanguinis Christi: The Tokens, or Pleadges of Christ's Body, and Blood. And so
Theodoretus writes hereof: Theodoret. (...)Psalm. 110.
Ecclesia offert Corporis, and Sanguinis eius Symbola: The Church offers the
Tokens, or Signs of his Body, and Blood.

M. Hardinge. The.12. Division.
On the holy Table, where these Mysteries are celebrated, the Lamb of God
being laid, and Sacrificed of Priests vnbloudely, as that most Ancient, and
worthy Council of Nice reports.

The B. of Sarisburie.
As the Council of Nice says, The Lamb is laid upon the Altar, alludinge
unto the Sacrifices of the Old Law, even so does S. Augustine say unto the
people, Augustine. in Sermon ad Infantes. Citatur a ^eda. 1. Corin. 10.
Vos estis in Mensa: vos estis in Calice. You are upon the Table: you are in
the Cup. As the people is laid upon the Table, so is Christ laid upon the
Table. But this Authority is answered more at large in the fi^te Article, and
the eighth Division.

M. Hardinge. The.13. Division.
Briefly, in this highest Sacrament under visible shape invisible things,
soothely the very true, Real, Lively, Natural, and Substantial Body, and Blood
of our Savior Christ being contained, as (162) The.162. untruth.
Misreportinge the Scriptures, the Councels, and Ancient Fathers.
the Scriptures, Doctors, Councels, yea and the best learned of Martin Luthers
School, do most plainly, and assuredly affirm.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Now soothly, if M. Hardinge could have found any of al these Terms, Real,
Lively, Natural, or Substantial, either in the Scriptures, or in the Doctors,
or in any Council, he would not have spared the allegation. But thus
auouchinge these Terms, and so constantly assu^ring us thereof by these
Authorities, being nevertheless not hable anywhere to find the same, we
must needs think, he misreporteth the Scriptures, Constancy.
the Doctors, and the Councelles, and much abuses the simple credulity of
the people.

M. Hardinge. The.14. Division.
This ( I say in conclusion) being so, as it is undoubtedly so: we that
remain in the Catholic Church, and can by no persecution be removed from the
Catholic Faith, whom it likes M. Iuel, and his fellows to call Papists,
believe verily, that it is our bounden dewtie to Adore the Sacrament, and to
woorship it with all Godly Honor. By which word, Sacrament,
notwithstanding in this respect we mean not the outward Forms, (163)
The.16^. Untruth. For these Speeches were neue^ known, nor heard of in any
time of the Ancient Fathers.
that properly are called the Sacrament, but the thing of the Sacrament, the
Invisible Grace, and Virtue therein contained, even the very Body and Blood
of Christ.

And when we adore, and woorship this Blissed Sacrament, we do not Adore, and
VVoorship the Substance it self of Bread and Wine, (164) The.164. Untruth.
For the Bread, and Wine remain still, as shall appear in the tenthe Article.
because after Consecration none at al remains. Neither do we Adore the
outward Shapes, and Forms of Bread, and Wine, which remain: for they be
but Creatures, that ought not to be Adored: But the Body it self and Blood
of Christ, (165) The.165. Untruth. As may more largely appear by the
Fifthe, and the Sixthe Article.
under those Forms Verily, and Really contained, lowly, and devoutly do we
Adore. And therefore, to speak more properly, and according to skille, least
our Adversaries might take advantage against us through occasion of terms,
where right sense only is meante* we protest, and say, that we do, and
ought to Adore and woorship the Body, and Blood of Christ in the Sacrament.

The B. of Sarisburie.
If M. Hardinge be Persecuted, as he says, verily it seems a delicate kind
of Persecution. They of his side did not so persecute others. But Solomon
says, There be certain that flee, Proverb* 28. Epiphan li. 2. De ^^^^manitis.
when nom^n follows them. Thus did Arius the Heretic sometimes complain of
his Persecutours: (...). Arius that wrongefully suffers Persecution for the
Trueths sake, that conquereth al things.

As for M. Hardinges Constancy, which is here brought in, as in steed of some
proof, I will say nothing. How be it his friends think, So many, so light,
and so sudden changes, can scarcely stand well with the title of Constancy.
Certainly the mainteinance of open, and known error, should rather have some
other name. The Prophet Zachary says, Zachar. 7. Job. 41.
Posuerunt vt Adamantem Cor suum: They have set their heart, as the Adamant
stoane. Job says, Stetit cor eius sicut incus: His heart stood as a steadie.
Yet might not they therefore be called constant. S. Hilarie says, Grauis, and
periculosus est lapsus in multis. Hilarious de Trinitate li. 6. ca. 84.
Etsi enim se intelligant, tamen pudor exurge^di authoritatem sibi praesumit:
vt, quod errant, prudentiam velint existimari: quod cum multis errant,
intelligentiam esse asserant Veritatis. Fallinge from God in many men is
gre^ous, and dangerous. For, albeit they understand them self, yet, for that
they are ashamed to rise again, they therefore take upon them some authority,
and will have their Error counted Wisdom: and, that they are deceived with
many, they call it the understanding of the Truth. Touching the purpose, it
appears, this matter cannot stand without the disordringe, and confoundinge
of the Natural course, and sound of words. Sometimes the Accidents, and
Shows of Bread must be the Sacrament: Sometimes Christ's Body, which, as
M. Hardinge confesses, in deed is not the Sacrament, yet to maintain this
new Adoration, must needs become the Sacrament. And thus now we have two
Sacraments together in one Sacrament. And yet in the Conclusion, we may not
woorship the very Sacrament, but only Christ's Body in the Sacrament. And
this, as M. Hardinge tells us, is a Proper, Plain, Familiar kind of
speech, and according unto skill. Thus he teaches us to lift up our hearts,
and to woorship God in Sprite and Truth. Unless the simple people go to the
Uniuersities, and learn this new skill, what is Accidens absque subiecto:
Corpus sine loco: Locus sine Corpore: Quantitas sine modo quanti, they cannot
skilfully woorship Christ's Body. Or if they woorship without this skill, they
woorship one thing for an other, and become Idolaters.

M. Hardinge. The.15. Division.
And here this much is further to be said, that in the Sacrament of the
Altar the Body of Christ is not Adored by thought of mind sundred from the
word, but being inseparably united to the word. For this is specially to
be considered, that in the most Holy Sacrament, the Body and Blood of
Christ are not present by them selves alone, as being separated from his
Soul, and from the Godhead: but that there is (166) The.166. Vntruethe, Often
avouched, and never proved. These words perteine only to Christ him self:
And nothing at al unto the Sacrament.
here his true and living Fleashe, and Blood joined together with his
Godhead inseparably, and that they be as him self is, perfect, whole, and
inseparable. Which is sufficiently confirmed by sundry his own words in
S. John. I am (says he) the Bread of life. Again, This is Bread coming
down from Heaven, that, if any eat of it, he die not. I am the lively Bread
that came down from Heaven: If any eat of this Bread he shall live
everlastingly. And to show, what Bread he meante, he concludes with these
words: And the Bread, which I shall give, is my Fleashe, which I shall give
for the life of the world. By which words he assures us plainly, that his
Fleashe which he gives us to eat, is full of life, and joined with his
Godhead, which brings to the worthy receivers thereof immortality, as well
of Body, as of Soul. Which thing Fleashe, and Blood of it self could
not perform, as our Lord him self declares plainly, where he says as
there it follows: It is the Spirit that quickens, or gives life, the
fleashe profits nothing. The words which I have spoken to you be Spirit,
and life. As though he had said thus: The Fleashe of it self profits
nothing, but my Fleashe, which is full of Godhead and Spirit* brings and
woorketh immortality and life everlasting to them A vain addition. For S.
Augustine says* The Body of Christ it self is received of al men unto
life, and of no man unto judgment.
that receive it woorthily. Thus we understand in this Blissed Sacrament, not
only the Body and Blood of Christ, but al and whole Christ, God and Man,
to be present in substance, and that for the inseparable unity of the person
of Christ: and for this cause we acknowledge our selves bounden to adore him,
as ver^e true God, and Man.

For a clearer declaration hereof, In Johan. tractat. 27.
I will not let to recite a notable sentence out of S. Augustine, where he
expounds these words of Christ: Then, if ye see the Son of man go up,
where he was before. There had been no question (says he) if he had thus
said: If ye see the Son of God go up, where he was before. But, where as he
said, The Son of man go up, where he was before, what was the Son of man
in heaven, before that he began to be in earth? verily here he said, where
he was before* as though then he were not there, when he spoke these words.
And in an other place he says, Noman has ascended into heaven, but he, that
descended from heaven, the Son of Man, which is in heaven. He said not,
Was, but the Son of Man (says he,) which is in heaven. In Earth he spoke,
and said him self to be in heaven. To what pertains this, but that we
understand Christ to be one person, God, and Man, not two: least our Faith
be not a Trinity, but a qu^ternitie? Wherefore Christ is one, the word,
the soul, and the fleashe, one Christ: the Son of God, and the Son of
Man, one Christ. The Son of God ever, the Son of Man in time: Yet one
Christ, according to the Unity of person was in Heaven, when he spoke in
Earth. So was the Son of Man in Heaven, as the Son of God was in Earth.
The Son of God in Earth in fleashe taken, the Son of Man in heaven in
unity of person. Thus far S. Augustine.

The B. of Sarisburie.
It is true, That Christ's Body, and his Godheade are joined inseparably, and
therefore must be Adoured both together. For we may not divide the Godheade
from the Manheade, and so imagine two sundry Christ's, the one to be honored,
the other to stand without honor, as did the Heretic Nestorius. Cyrillus
in Apolog^tico.
But as the Body, and Soul of Man, being joined both in one, are honored
both together: so must the Humanity, and Divinity of Christ, In Edicto
Imperatoris Iusti. inter Decret^ Johan. 2.
being joined both in one, likewise be honored both together. Otherwise to
say, as the Heretic Nestorius said, Thomas touched him, that was risen
again: and honored him, that raised him up, it were great blasphemy.
Nevertheless, notwithstanding the Body, and Godheade of Christ be joined in
one Person, Council. Chalcedon. Actio. 1.
yet are they distinct, and sundry Natures: The one Finite, the other
Infinite: The one in place, the other incomprehensible without place: The one a
Creature, the other the Creator. Neither is there any Godly honor dew unto
the Body of Christ in respect of it self: but only, for that it is joined
in one Person with the Divinity. Al these things be true, and out of question.

Likewise the words, that Christ spoke in the sixth Chapter of S. John, and
are here alleged by M. Hardinge, are undoubtedly true: how be it not
according to the simple sound and tenoure of the letter: For that, as S.
Augustine says, were, Augustine. De Doctrina Christiana. li. 3. c. 16. Origin.
in Leui. hom. 7.
Flagitium, and facinus, An Heinous wickedness: And, as Origin says, It would
kill the soul. And therefore Christ him self expounds his own meaning
touching the same, It is the Sprite, that gives life: the Fleashe profits
nothing. The words, that I have spoken, be Sprite, and life. Which words
S. Augustine expounds thus: Spiritualiter intelligite, quae locutus sum. No^
hoc Corpus, quod videtis, ma^ducaturi estis. Understand ye Spiritually the
things, Augustine in Psalm. 98.
that I have spoken. Ye shall not eat this Body, that ye see. Likewise
Chrysostom, Secundum Spiritum verba mea audienda sunt: Qui secundum Carnem
audit, Chrysostom. in Johan. hom. 47.
nihil lucratur, nihil vtilitatis accipit. My words must be heard
Spiritually: Who so hears them Carnally, or, according to the Fleashe,
geateth nothing, nor has any profit by them. He says further by way of
objection against him self, Quid ergo est Carnaliter intelligere? Simpliciter,
vt res dicuntur: neque aliud quicqua^ cogitare. And what is meante by these
words, To understand according to the Fleashe? He answeareth, It is to
understand simply, and plainly, even as things be spoken, and to think upon
nothing else. Thus therefore Christ said, to cut of their Carnal
cogitations, The words, that I spoke are sprite, and life. As if he should
say, Neither is my Fleashe meat, nor my Blood drink, to enter into your
mouths, and to feed your bodies. But if your Souls be hungry, I am
Spiritual meat, to feed you: if your Souls be thirsty, I am Spiritual
drink to refreashe you. To this purpose S. Chrysostom says thus: Chrysostom.
ad popul. Antiochen. homi. 21.
Omnia tibi Christus factus est: Mensa, Vestimentu^, Domus, Caput, and Radix
etc. Christ is become ^l things unto thee: Thy Table, thy Apparel, thy House,
thy Head, and thy Root. Galat. 3.
S. Paul says, As many of you, as are Baptized in Christ, ye have put on
Christ: Johan. 6.
Behold, how Christ is made thy Apparel. And will thou learn, how he is
become thy Table? He says, who so eats me, shall live through me: And that
he is thy House, Johan. 15.
he says, Who so eats my Fleashe, dwells in me, and I in him: And that
he is thy Root, again he says, I am the Vine, and you are the Branches. So
says Gregorius Nyssenus, Gregorius Nyssen. in vita Mosis.
Christ unto the strong is strong meat: unto the weaker sort he is
Herbs: and unto infantes he is Milk. So says Origin, Ne mireris: Quia
verbum Dei and Caro dicitur, and Panis, and Lac, and Olera, and pro mensura
credentium, vel possibilitate sumentium diverse nominatur. Origin. in Exo. ca.
15. homi. 7.
Marvel not: For the word of God is called both Fleashe, and Bread, and
Milk, and Herbs: and, according to the measure of the beleuers, and the
possibility of the receivers, is diuersely named. And likewise Gregory
Nazianzene, Nazianzen. in Psalm. 44.
Quemadmodum Dominus noster Jesus Christus appellatur Vita, Via, Panis, Vitis,
Lux vera, and mill alia, sic etiam appellatur Gladius. Like as our Lord Jesus
Christ is called the Life, the Way, the Bread, the Vine, the true Light, and
a thousand things else, so is he also called the Swearde. Now as Christ is
Bread, even so, in like manner of speech he is a Swearde, and none otherwise.
Thus is Christ unto us a Spiritual Table, a Spiritual Apparel, a Spiritual
House, a Spiritual Head, a Spiritual Root, Spiritual Meat, Spiritual Herbs,
Spiritual Milk, Spiritual Fleashe, Life, Way, Bread, Uine, and Light. And to
this end Christ says, My Words be Sprite, and life.

Hitherto the words of Christ, that be here alleged, weigh very little of M.
Hardinges side.

Bysides all this, He says, That whole Christ, both God, and Man, is Really,
Substantially, and Carnally in the Sacrament. This thing, because he is not
hable any way to prove, he presumes of him self by authority, as though it
were already proved. It shall be good, to give him a day, to consider the
matter, and to prove it better. In the mean season the substance of his reason
stands thus:

The Humanity, and Divinity of Christ are joined together in one Person,

Ergo, we must Adoure the Sacrament with Godly Honor.

M. Hardinge. The.16. Division.
Hereupon he expounds these words, It is the spirit that quickneth, or
gives life, the fleashe avails nothing, thus: The fleashe profits
nothing, but the only fleashe. Come the spirit to the fleashe, and it
profits very much. For if the fleashe should profit nothing, the word
should not be made fleashe to dwell among us. For this unity of Person to be
understood in both natures (says the great learned Father Leo) we read
that both the Son of Man came down from heaven, Epist. ad Fla^ianum
Constantinopolitanu^ Episc. C. 5.
when as the Son of God took fleashe of that Virgin, of whom he was borne:
and again, it is said, that the Son of God was Crucified, and buried, where
as he suffered these things not in the Godheade it self, in which the only
begotten is coeuerlastinge, and consubstantial with the Father, but in the
infirmity of human nature. Wherefore we confess al in the Creed also, the
only begotten Son of God Crucified, and buried, according to that saieinge
of the Apostle: For if they had known, 1. Cor. 2.
they would never have Crucified the Lord of Majesty.

According to this doctrine, In Johan. li. 4. Ca. 15.
Cyrillus writing upon S. John says, He that eats the fleashe of Christ,
has life everlasting. For this fleashe has the word of God, which
naturally is life. Therefore he says: I will raise him again in the last day.
For I, said he, that is, my Body, which shall be eaten, will raise him again.
For he is not other, then his fleashe. I say not this because by nature he is
not other, but because after incarnation, he suffers not him self to be
divided into two sons. By which words he reproves the heresy of wicked
Nestorius, that went about to divide Christ, and of Christ to make two
sons, the one the son of God, the other the son of Marie, and so two
persons. For which Nestorius was condemned in the First Ephesine Council, and
also specially for that he said, (167) The.167. Untruth For neither was there
any such error defended by Nestorius, nor any such Canon ever moved in that
Council.
we receive in this Sacrament only the fleashe of Christ in the Bread, and
his Blood only in the Wine, without the Godheade, because Christ said, he
that eats my fleashe, and said not, Vide Ana^hematif. 11.
he that eats or drinks my Godhead, because his Godhead cannot be eaten,
but his fleashe only. Which heretical cauil Cyrillus does thus avoid.
Although (says he) the nature of the Godhead be not eaten, yet we eat the
Body of Christ, which verily may be eaten. But this Body is the words
own proper Body, Item ad Theodosi* de recta fide and li. 2. ad Reginas de
recta ^ide.
which quickneth al things, and in as much as it is the Body of life, it is
quickninge, or lifegeuinge. Now he quickneth us, or gives us life, as God,
the only fonteine of life. Wherefore such speeches uttered in the scriptures
of Christ, whereby that appears to be attributed to the one nature, which
apperteineth to the other, and contrariewise: according to that
incomprehensible, and unspeakable conjunction and union of the divine and
human nature in one person, are to be taken of him inseparably, in as much
as he is both God and Man: and not of this, or that other nature only, as
being severed from the other. For through cause of this inseparable union,
what so ever is apperteininge, or peculiar to either nature, it is rightly
ascribed, yea and it ought to be ascribed to the whole person. And this done,
as the learned divines term it, Per communicationem idiomatum. And thus
Cyrillus teaches, how Christ may be eaten, not according to the divine,
but human nature, which he took of us: and so likewise he is of Christen
people adored in the Sacrament according to his divine nature. And yet not
according to his divine nature only, as though that were separated from his
human nature, but his whole person together God and Man. And his precious
fleashe, and blood are adored for the inseparable conjunction of both natures
into one person, which is Jesus Christ God and man. Whom God has exalted
(as S. Paul says) and has given him a name, Philip. 2.
which is above al names, that in the name of Jesus every knee be bowed, of
the Heavenly and the Earthely things, and of things beneathe, and that every
tongue confess, that our Lord Jesus Christ is in Glory of God the Father,
that is, Hebrae. 10.
of equal glory with the Father. And when God (says S. Paul) brings his
first begotten into the world, he says, And let all the Angels of God
Adore him. S. John writes in his Revelation, Psalm. 96.
that he heard al creatures say, Blissinge, Honor, Glory, and Power, Apoc.
5.
be to him which sits in the Throne, and to the Lamb for ever. And the
four and twenty Elders fell down on their faces, and Adored him that lives
until worlds of worlds.

The B. of Sarisburie.
I marvel, M. Hardinge would bestow so many waste words to so small purpose.
These Authorities be al true, and, sauinge only that of the Council of
Chalcedon, touching Nestorius, al truly alleged. But every thing, that is
true, makes not by and by proof sufficient in every case. Pliny the Second
gives good sad counsel, Plin. Saepe respiciendum est ad Titulum.
that, whosoever will take in hand to write a book, have evermore a good eye
unto his Title, or to the purpose, whereof he writes, least he happen to
wander, and to run at randon. As now, M. Hardinge seems to shoot fair,
although a great way from the Mark. For in all these words there is no
manner mention, neither of the Sacrament, nor of the Adoration thereof, nor of
any other thing thereto belonginge. Unless M. Hardinge upon occasion of these
words will reason thus:

The Son of man came down from Heaven: Ergo, We must Adoure the Sacrament.

The words of Cyrillus be likewise true. Christ's Fleashe is joined with the
Godhead, and therefore it Naturally gives life. Johan. 6.
And, when Christ said, I will raise him up at the last day, He meante, even
as Cyrillus says, that his Fleashe, that we eat, shall raise us up at the last
day. For, what soever favor, or mercy we have from God, we have it only by
the Fleashe of Christ. S. Augustine says, Mortalis factus est Immortalis,
Augustine. in Psalm. 109.
ut, peracta sua Morte, nos faceret Immortales. He that is Immortal, became
Mortal, that through his Death he might make us Immortal. Again he says, Nos
non efficeremur participes Diuinitatis eius, Augustine. in Psalm. 118.
nisi ipse factus fuisset particeps Mortalitatis nostrae. We could not be
partakers of his Godheade, unless he had benne partaker of our Mortality. Al
these words be true, as conteininge nothing else, but the exposition of
these words of Christ, He that eats my Fleashe, and drinks my Blood,
shall live for ever.

But M. Hardinge, to make these words of Cyrillus to serve his turn, has
imagined two great errors: The one is, That Christ's Body cannot be Eaten,
but only in the Sacrament: The other is, That unless we receive Christ's
Body with our mouth, and swallowe it down into our belly, we eat it not: As
though either Christ, or these holy Fathers had meante a Carnal, or Fleashly
Eatinge. This whole Doctrine is horrible, and full of Desperation. For M.
Hardinges position being true, That noman shall be partaker of that blissed
Resurrection, but only such as have eaten Christ's Body in the Sacrament,
what then shall become of Christian Children, that have departed this life,
never having received the Sacrament?

Who shall raise them up again at the last day? Or does M. Hardinge believe,
that such little ones being baptized, and so the Members of Christ, shall
never rise again, but lie damned for ever, only because they have not
received the Sacrament?

Uerily, Christ in these words, as it is witnessed by all the holy Fathers,
speaks not of the Sacrament, but of ye Spiritual Eating with our Faith: and
in this behalf utterly excludes the Corporal office of our Body. Therefore S.
Augustine says, Augusti. in Sex. Caput Ioha^nis.
Creed, and manducasti. Believe, and thou have Eaten. And again, Illud
manducare, refici est: Illud bibere quid est, nisi viuere? That Eatinge,
Spiritual Eatinge.
is to be refreashed: and that drinkinge, what is it else, but to live?
Augustine. De Verbis Apostoli. Sermo. 2.
Likewise S. Basile says, Est Spirituale os Interni Hominis, quo recipitur
Verbum vitae, quod est Panis, qui de Coelo descendit. There is a Spiritual
mouth of the Inner Man, wherewith is received the Word of life, Basil. in
Psalm. 33.
which is that Bread, that came down from Heaven.

And touching our risinge again from the dead, Baesilius in ^xhortatione ad
Sanctum Baptis. Augustine. citatur a Beda.
he says, (...). Our Baptism is a strength, or power to Resurrection. So S.
Augustine, Nemini dubitandum est, etc. No man may doubt, but every man is then
made partaker of the Body, and Blood of Christ, when in Baptism he is made
the member of Christ's Body. Likewise S. Chrysostom, In Baptism we are
Incorporate unto Christ, 1. Corin. 10.
and made Fleashe of his Fleashe, and Boane of his Boanes. Thus by Faith we
Eat the Body of Christ, and that, not by way of Imagination, Chrysostom. in
epis. ad Ephesi. ho. 20.
or Fantasy, but effectually, verily, and in deed: and therefore Christ shall
raise us up again at the last day.

M. Hardinges error, as I have said, rests herein, that he imagines, That
Christ's Body cannot be eaten, but only in the Sacrament, and that by the
mean, and office of our bodily mouth. But, as it is before alleged out of
Rabanus Maurus, Rabanus Maurus, li. 1. ca. 31.
The Sacrament is received outwardely with the mouth of our Body: But the
Body of Christ is received into the Inner Man, and that with the Spiritual
mouth of our Soul. And thus both may the Sacrament be received without
Christ's Body, and also the Body of Christ may be received without the
Sacrament.

Hitherto M. Hardinge has not once touched one word of Adoration.

Concerning Nestorius, M. Hardinge in the drifte of his tale has handesomely
cowched in a great untruth. For where as he says, Nestorius held this
opinion, That in the Sacrament of the Bread, we receive only Christ's Body
without his Blood: M. Harding untruly allegeth the Council of Ephesus.
and in the Cup, the Blood of Christ alone without the Body: neither did
Nestorius, notwithstanding he were an Heretic, ever hold this peeuishe
error, nor is there any such record either in the Council of Ephesus, that
here untruly is alleged, or in any other Old Council, or Ancient Father.

But the right of M. Hardinges cause hangs of such Evidence, as never was
found in any record. If there be any such Canon to be found in that whole
Council, or any mention thereof made in any of all the Ancient Doctors, let M.
Hardinge show it, that we may believe him. If, having alleged it so
constantly, and so often, he be hable utterly to show nothing, let him give
men leave to think, that he abuses the world with Uaine Titles, and
means no truth.

Although he might be bold, freely to divise matter against Nestorius, as
being an Heretic, yet he should not thus report untruth of a General
Council.

But Cyrillus says further, We cannot Eat the Godhead of Christ: It is his
Manhead only, that is Eaten. Hereby M. Hardinge thinks, he is hable to
overthrow our whole Doctrine of Spiritual Eatinge, that is wrought by Faith.
For thus he will Reason,

By your Doctrine, Eatinge of Christ's Body is beleeuinge: Ergo, By your
Doctrine, we cannot believe in God.

Thus he thinks, we are driven, to confess a great inconvenience. This
reason seems to have some show. And therefore I beseech thee, good Reader,
to consider both the parts thereof, and also the answer.

Eatinge in common use of speech, is the receiuinge of food, and susteinance,
and the turninge of the same into the substance of our bodies: and by a
Metaphore, or an extraordinary kind of speech, To eat God.
is often used for the Spiritual eatinge, and turninge of Heavenly Food to the
refreashinge, and nourisshing of our Souls. By neither of these ways it can
rightly be said, That we Eat the Godheade.

For neither can we receive the Majesty of Gods divine Nature, neither
turn the same into the Substance of our Nature. But we may Receive, and Eat,
and Feed upon the Humanity, and Body of Christ, and become Boane of his
Boanes, Ephesi. 5.
and Fleashe of his Fleashe, so as he may dwell in us, and we in him.
Wherefore, notwithstanding Christ be both God, and Man, yet we have not our
feedinge, and life of Christ in respect of his Godhead alone, but first, and
principally in respect of his Humanity, in that he was made Man, and became
partaker of Fleashe, Hebrae. 2.
and Blood, and was Crucified, and sheadde his Blood, and yielded up his Sprite
upon the Cross. This is our Spiritual feedinge: herein stands our whole
life. Therefore S. Paul says, Quod nunc viuo in Carne, in fide viuo Filij
Dei, Galat. 2.
qui dedit semetipsum pro me. That I live now in the Fleashe, I live in the
Faith of the Son of God, Galat. 6.
that has given him self for me. And again, God forbid, that I should
rejoice in any thing, sauinge only in the Cross of Jesus Christ.

Likewise Saint Peter, Actor. 4.
There is none other Name given unto men under Heaven, whereby they may be
saved, but only the Name of Christ Jesus. Thus, as Cyrillus says, We have
our life, and feedinge, not of the Godheadde, but of the Manheadde of Christ.
And therefore it is very well noted upon the Decrees, Christus per hoc est
Factus noster Panis, De Conse. Did. 2. Christus.
and Sustentatio, and Vita, quia assumpsit Carnem nostram. In Margin.
Christ in this is become our Bread, and our Susteinance, and our life,
because he has taken our Fleashe.

But M. Hardinge will say, according to the judgment of Cyrillus, We cannot
eat the Godhead: yet nevertheless we do believe in God: Ergo, Contrary to
your Doctrine, Beleeuinge, and Eatinge are not both one. Uerily, it appears
both by Cyrillus him self, and also by a general consent of other Old
Learned Fathers, that we cannot neither Know God, nor Believe in God, nor Call
upon God, as he is in him self, in his Divine Majesty, but only, as it
pleased him to become like unto us, and to take upon him our Mortal Nature. S.
Chrysostom says, Chryso. Citatur a Cassiodoro in Psalm 17.
Illum, si in nuda Deitate venisset, non Coelum, non Terra, non maria, non vlla
Creatura sustinere potuisset. If God had come in his manifest Divinity,
neither the Heaven, nor the Earth, nor the Sea, nor any Creature could have
borne his Presence.

So S. Hilarie, Hilarious in Psalm. 143.
Cognitus fieri Deus homini, nisi Assumpto Homine non potuit. Quia
incognoscibilem cognoscere, nisi per Naturam nostram, Natura nostra non potuit.

Unless God had taken Man, he could never have been known unto man. For
him, that cannot be known, our Nature, sauinge only by mean of our own
Nature, could never have known. Cyrillus ad Reginas.
Likewise says Cyrillus, Christus non aliter erit Adorabilis, nisi credamus,
quod ipsum Verbum Caro factum sit. Christ is not otherwise to be Adored,
unless we believe, Augustine in Psalm. 33.
that the very Word was made Fleashe. Likewise says S. Augustine, Respice
altitudinem ipsius: In principio erat verbum etc. Behold the highness of him:
Johan. 1.
In the beginning was the Word: and the Word was with God: and God was
yt Word. Behold the Everlasting Meat: but the Angels, and high Powers,
and the Heavenly Sprites feed upon it. But what man can atteyne unto that
Meat? What heart can be meet for it? Therefore it was necessary, that that
Meat should turn into Milk, and so should come unto us little ones. It
follows Quomodo ergo de ipso Pane pauit nos Sapientia Dei? Quia verbum Caro
factum est, and habitauit in nobis. How then did the wisdom of God feed us
with that Bread? He answeareth, Because the Word was made Fleashe, and
dwelled in us. Again he says, Ita Verbum Incarnatum factum est nobis
receptibile: Augustine. in Psalm. 109.
Quod recipere non valeremus, si Filius aequalis Deo non se exinaniret Formam
Serui accipiens, Thus were we hable to receive the Word Incarnate: which we
could not receive, unless the Son being equal unto the Father, had abased
him self, receiuinge the Form of a Seruante. I pass over other allegations
to like purpose. This therefore is the meaning of Cyrillus, We are not hable
neither to Receive, nor to Believe in, nor to Adoure, nor to Eat, nor to Feed
upon the Divine Majesty of God, being pure, and simple in it self: But our
Knowledge, our Faith, our Food, and our Life is in this, That Christ has
taken our Mortal Nature, and joined the same inseparably in one Person to his
Godhead.

M. Hardinge. The.17. Division.
But it shall be more tedious then needeful, to recite places out of the
Scriptures for proof of the Adoration of Christ: there may of them be found
so great plenty. Yet because Luther was either so blind, or rather so
Deuilishe, as to deny the Adoration, where notwithstanding he confessed the
Presence of Christ's True, and Natural Body in the Sacrament: I will here
recite what the Sacramentaries of Zurich have written against him therefore.
What (say they) is the Bread the true, and natural Body of Christ, and is
Christ in the Supper (as the Pope and Luther do teach) present? Wherefore
then ought not the Lord there to be Adored, where ye say him to be present?
why shall we be forbidden to Adore that, which is not only Sacramentally, but
also Corporally the Body of Christ? Thomas touches the true Body of Christ
raised up from the dead, and fallinge down on his knees Adoreth, saiynge: My
God, and my Lord. The Disciples Adore the Lord, as well before, Johan. 9.
as after his Ascension. Matthew. 28. Act. 1. And the Lord in S. John says to
the blind man, Beleuest thou in the Son of God? and he answered him,
saieinge: Lord who is he, that I may believe in him? And Jesus said to him:
Thou haste both seen him, and, who speaks with thee, he it is. Then he
says, Lord I believe: and he Adored him. Now if we were taught, our Lords
Bread to be the Natural Body of Christ, verily we would adore it also
faithfully with the Papists. This much the Zuinglians against Luther.
Whereby they prove sufficiently the Adoration of Christ's Body in the
Sacrament, and so consequently of Christ him self God, and Man, because of
the inseparable Conjunction of his Divine, and Human Nature in Unity of
Person, so as, where his Body is, there is it joined, and united also unto
his Godheade: and so there Christ is present perfitely, Wholy, and
Substantially, very God, and Man.

For the clear understanding whereof the better to be atteined, the
Scholastical Divines have profitably divised the term Concomitantia, plainly,
and truly teachinge, that in this Sacrament after Consecration, under the
Form of Bread is Present the Body of Christ, and under the Form of Wine,
his Blood, Ex vi Sacramenti: and with the Body under Form of Bread, also
the Blood, the Soul, and Godhead of Christ: and likewise with the Blood,
under the Form of Wine, the Body, Soul, and Godheade, Ex Concomitantia, as
they term it, in shorter and plainer wise vtteringe the same Doctrine of
Faith, (168) The.168. Untruth. For there was no such Doctrine moved in the
Council of Ephesus.
which the Holy Fathers did in the Ephesine Council against Nestorius.
Whereby they mean, that where the Body of Christ is present, by necessary
sequel, because of the indivisible Copulation of both Natures in the Unity of
Person (for as much, as the Word made Fleashe, never leafte the Human
Nature) there is also his Blood, his Soul, his Godheade, and so whole, and
perfect Christ, God and Man. And in this respect the term is not to be
misliked of any Godly learned Man, though some New Masters scoff at it, who
fille the measure of their predecessors, that likewise have been offended
with terms for the apter declaration of certain necessary Articles of our
Faith, by Holy, and learned Fathers in General Councelles holesomely divised.
Of which sort been these, Homousion, Humanatio, Incarnatio,
Transubstantiatio, etc. Nowehere is to be noted, how the Zuinglians, whom M.
Iuel follows, Tranesubstatiation was but lately found, in the Council of
Laterane in Rome. an. 12^5.
in the Article of Adoration, confute the Lutheranes: as on the other side, the
Lutherans in the Article of the Presence, confute the Zuinglians. As though it
were by Gods special providence, for the better stay of his Church, so
wrought, that both the truth should be confessed by the enemies of truth, and
also for uttering of untruth, the one should be condemned of the other, that
by the war of Heretics the peace of the Church might be established, and by
their discord the Catholic people might the faster grew together in
concord. Dissension.


Now having sufficiently proved by the Scriptures, and that with the
Zuinglians also, adoration and Godly Honor to be dew unto Christ's Body,
where so ever it please his Divine Majesty to exhibit the same present: let
us see whether we can find the same Doctrine affirmed by the Holy and
Ancient Fathers.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Where as M. Harding thus checketh us with some dissension, that has been
bitweene Doctor Luther, and Doctor Zuinglius touching this matter of
Adoration, I may justly say unto him, as one sometime said unto Philippus the
King of Macedonie, intreatinge a peace bitweene Peloponnesus, and the reast of
Graecia: Go first, Demaratus.
and conclude a peace in thine own house at home. For at the same time his
own wife Olympias, and his own son Alexander were known to live in deadely
dissension: And therefore he seemed no fit instrument, to conclude a peace
bitweene others.

M. Hardinge should have remembered, that the greatest Buttresses, and Pillars
of his Gospel, sithence the first beginning of his New Doctrine, have
evermore lived in Contradiction, and could never yet be reconciled. He should
have remembered, that his own Doctors, and chiefest Doctors, Pope Innocentius
and Scotus, teach contrary Doctrines: That Scotus is against Thomas: Ockam,
against Scotus: Petrus de Alliaco, against Ockam: and the Nominales against the
Reales: and not only thus, but also Scotistes against Scotistes, and
Thomistes against Thomistes, at Civil war within one band: and that
touching the very Words of Consecration, and other like matters both great,
and many: whereof to show the Particulars, it would be tedious. But the matters
hang still in mortal enemitie, and are never like to be reconciled. Having
such Bloody fields at home, M. Hardinge should not be so ready to reproach
others, for some one or other matter of dissension.

It were much to be wished, and God of his Mercy so grant it, if it be his
holy Will, that the Gospel of Christ may pass forth freely, without any
such occasion of offense, or hinderance. How be it, from the beginning it has
been otherwise. For even at the first plantinge of the Gospel, whiles the
Martyrs Blood was yet warm, 1. Cor. 1.
there were some that said, I hold of Paul: some others, that said, I hold
of Peter: Galat. 2.
and thus were they divided emonge them selves. S. Paul withstoode, and gain
said Peter unto his face: August. Epist. 9.
S. Hierome charge S. Augustine with Heresy: S. Augustine wills S. Hierome
to recante: S. Hierome despises S. Ambrose, and finds fault with S. Basile:
S. Cyprian in judgment is contrary to S. Cornelius: Pope Sabinianus would
have burned al S. Gregory's his Predecessors books. Hereby it appears, That
Saints have been against Saints: and Martyrs, against Martyrs, even in
matters, and cases of Religion.

And hereof Heretics, and other wicked, and godless people have evermore
taken occasion to sclaunder the Gospel. Marcion the Heretic thought he had
found Contrarieties bitweene the New Testament, Tertullian. li. 4. contra
Marcion.
and the Old: and therefore said, He was hable to prove falseheade in the
Scriptures. S. Hierome says: Hunc locum nobis obiecit Iulianus Augustus,
Hieronym. in Matthae. li. 1. c. 1.
de dissonantia Euangelistarum. This place of the disagreeinge of the
Evangelists, the Heathen Emperor Iulianus charged us withal.

Again he says, Hieronym. in Prooemio in Epist. ad Galatas.
Sceleratus Porphyrius, in primo libro, quem scripsit aduersus nos, obiecit,
Petrum a Paulo esse reprehensum, quod non recto pede incederet ad Euangeliu^.
That wicked man Porphyrius, in the first Book, that he wrote against us,
laid to our charge, that Peter was rebuked of Paul, for that he walked not
uprightly toward the Gospel. So Socrates, Socrat. li. 1. c. 6.
and Sozomenus Sozom. li. 1. c. 16.
say, That the Christians, because of their Dissensions, Disse^sion
Co^comitantia.
were scorned at of the Infidels in open assemblies, and market places, and
pointed at with their Fingers.

Notwithstanding, such diversity of judgment, as it is an offense unto the
weak, 2. Corin. 11.
and an occasion of il unto the wicked, that seek occasions against God: Even
so unto the Godly, Romans 8.
it is occasion of much good. For unto them, that God has called according
to his purpose, Ni. Lyra in Prologo in Genesim.
al things healpe, and further unto good. Nicolas Lyra says, Expositorum
diuersitas excitat attentionem. The diversity of Expositours sturreth up
attention in the hearers, 1. Corin. 13.
and causes them to consider, that men be men, and see vnperfitely, as in a
Glass, 2. Corin. 10.
as having received Faith only by measure: and therefore to search, and
examine the Scriptures, 1. Corin. 3.
and not to glory in men: that who so will glory, 1. Corin. 10.
may glory in the Lord.

These two worthy members of Gods Church, whom it likes M. Hardinge thus
to control, never differed, or dissented in any Fundation, or Principle of the
Christian Faith: but only of one certain Conclusion, and Phrase of the
Scriptures.

Either of them knew, and confessed, that Christ's Body ought to be Adoured
with godly honor, for that it is joined in one person with the Divinity. But
the one of them says, Notwithstanding Christ's Body be Present in the
Sacrament, yet it is not there, to that use, and purpose, to be honored:
neither have we any warrant of Gods word, so to honor it. So is Christ's
Body in us Naturally, Really, Corporally, Carnally, Substantially, and in
deed. Yet may we not therefore one kneel down to an other, so to Adoure
Christ being there Present with godly honor. Thus the whole disagreement of
these two learned Fathers, stood only in this one point, of the manner of
Christ's Presence. Otherwise their whole hearts were joined and bente together
to the discloasing of Falsehead, and Hypocrisy, and to the auancinge of Gods
Glory.

We wonder not, as M. Hardinge thinks, at his strange term, Concomitantia,
which he has here brought in, as a special stay of his ruinous Doctrine:
notwithstanding S. Paul has charged us, 1. Timoth. 6.
to beware of such New Fangled wicked words: Profanas verboru^ nouitates.
(...).
But we wonder, to see the same term so childishely applied to so vain a
purpose. In deed these terms Homousios, Humanatio, Incarnatio, are not found
expressed in the Scriptures. Yet is the sense, and meaning of the same terms,
as Epiphanius says, easy euerywhere to be found.

Neither was that name first divised in the Council of Nice. Epiphanius contra
Semiarian. lib. 3.
For long before the time of that Council, it was used by Origin, and by other
Ancient learned Bishops: as appears well by Socrates, whose words be
these: Doctos quosdam ex veteribus, (...).
and illustres Episcopos, Homo^sij dictione vsos esse cogno^imus.

We know, that of the Old writers, certain Learned men, and notable
Bishops have used this word, Socrat li. 1. ca. 8.
Homousion. And therefore S. Augustine says not, This name, August. contra
Maximinum. li. 3. Ca. 14.
Homousios, was invented, or divised, but, This name was Confirmed, and
stablisshed in the Council of Nice. Therefore M. Hardinge as well herein, as
also else where, has reported untruth.

As for Transubstantiation, Firmatum est.
it is numbered here emonge these words, Homousios, Humanatio, and Incarnatio,
as Judas is numbered emonge the Apostles.

God wot, a very young name, newly brought at last into ye world, about
twelve hundred years after the Birthe of Christ, at what time King John was
King of England: neither had it any manner face, or Fundation in the Word
of God. Yet was the same name given a long while, before any such Child was
thoroughly borne. For, as it appears by the Council of Florence, the East
Church of Graecia, Council. Floren^. Sessione vltim^.
and Asia received it not, nor never would receive it until this day: neither
be the first Inuenters, and Diuisers of it fully resolved upon the same.

For this word, Transubstantiatio, signifies a passinge, or turninge of one
Substance into an other. But that, they think, were not tolerable to say, That
the Substance of Bread is changed into the Substance of Christ's Body. And
therefore Duns him self utterly refuses, and shunneth it: and thinks it
better, to hold, That the Bread departs, and geateth it self away, and
that then in place of it succeeds Christ's Body. And this is now the Common
Opinion of ye Schools. But this kind of change cannot in any wise be called,
Transubstantiatio: but rather Cessio, Annihilatio, Successio, or Substitutio.
Therefore M. Harding must go, and seek a new name: for Transubstantiation will
not serve so well. Thus after twelve hundred years study, they have found out
a thing: and yet can not hitherto tell, what to make of it. Yet must their
determination herein be compared even with the Council of Nice. Uerily Cardinal
Beno, that was then alive, says, That Pope Gregory. Beno in vita ^ildebrandi.
7. appointed three days Fast, and a Solemn Procession, to the end he might
have some sign from Heaven, for the certainetie hereof: and yet in the end
concluded without any revelation at al.

Now, touching this new Fantasy of Concomitantia, after they had once divised
a new Religion, it was necessary, for aid of the same, to divise also new
words. Where as Christ says, This is my Body: They say, This is my Body,
and my Blood. Where Christ says, This is my Blood, They say, This is my
Blood, and my Body: And in either part, they say, is whole Christ, God, and
Man. If ye demand how they know it, they say, not by the Word of God, but
by this new imagination of Concomitantia. So likewise M. Harding here
confesses, that he cannot prove the Adoration of the Sacrament by any warrant
of the Scriptures, but only, I trow, by his Concomitantia.

M. Hardinge. The.18. Division.
What the Apostles taught in their time concerning this article, we may
judge by that we read in Dionysius, that was S. Paul's scholar, and for that
it is to be believed. He adoreth and worshippeth this holy Mystery, with these
very words. Sedo diuinum penitus Sanctumque Mysterium etc. Ecclesiast.
Hierar. ca. 5.
But O divine and holy Mystery, which vouchesafest to open the cooueringes of
signs laid over thee, utter thy light to us openly, and plainly, and fill our
spiritual eyes with the singular and evident brightness of thy light.

The B. of Sarisburie.
I marvel, M. Harding would ever allege this place, for the Adoration of the
Sacrament. For does he think, that whatsoever thing is so called upon, is
therefore Adoured with godly honor? Or has he forgotten, that in his Church
of Rome they use thus to salute the holy Oil, Aue Sanctum Oleum? Alhaile o
holy Oil? Or has he forgotten that he him self, in his Church, thus saluteth
a Cross of Wood, Aue Rex noster? Alhaile our King? Or that he makes his
prayer, and petition to the same material Wodden Cross in this wise, O Crux,
aue, spes vnica, hoc Passionis tempore: auge pijs iustitiam, reisque dona
veniam, Alhaile O Cross, our only hope, in this time of the Passion: ge^e
thou increase of righteousness unto the godly: and give thou pardon unto
sinners. Or shall we think therefore, either, that he gives godly honor unto
a corruptible creature, or that Christ is there present hidden under the form
of wood? This might suffice, to answer this place of Dionysius. I think M.
Hardinge does remember, Epiphanius in Anchorato. Pachymeres. (...)
that Epiphanius says, The Sacrament is a thing Insensible, that can neither
see us, nor hear our prayer: And he knows that Pachymeres the Greek
Paraphrast in this sense expounds the words of Dionysius. O Diuinum, and
Sacrum Mysterium. Affatur illud, tanquam rem animata^ etc. He speaks unto the
Sacrament, as if it were a thing indewed with sense, and life. And well. For so
Gregory the great Divine says, O magnum, and Sanctum Pascha. O great, and
holy Passover. For our Lord Jesus Christ as he is our Passover, so is he
that holy Mystery. And unto him the Bishop directs his speech. Unto him
being in Heaven, not unto the thing that presently lies before him upon the
Table. And that this was Dionysius very meaning, it appears by that
immediately went before. Ingrediamur ab effectis ad causas: Let us enter from
these outward effects into the causes: that is to say, Let us withdraw our
eyes from the Uisible Sacraments, and spiritually let us behold Christ,
whose Sacraments they be, and who by the same is represented. In like manner
Dionysius speaks of the Consecration of the Oil, Adducamus vela, etc. Let us
remove the veles, and behold that Spiritual Brightness it self, etc. By which
Spiritual Brightness, doubteles he meante Christ. Thus he teaches us, with
our Bodily eyes to see one thing, and with our Spiritual eyes to see an other:
with our Bodily eyes, The things that be present: with our Spiritual eyes,
Abdias in Andrea.
the things that be absent. For the more likelihoode hereof, let us consider,
what words S. Andrew uses to the very Material Wooden Cross of his
Execution. Salve Crux etc. Alhaile thou Cross, that here stand, thus long
lookinge for me. I come merrily unto thee. For I know thy Secrecy: I know thy
Mystery. I see in thee the things, that are promised unto me of my Lord.
Receive thou me, O thou chosen Cross, that am thus humble for my God, and
healpe the poor servant unto his Master. Here are plain words of
Invocation: Here is manifest Adoration. Yet, may the force of these words
make us believe, that S. Andrewe in deed gave Godly Honor to a Cross of tree?

But, because M. Hardinge seems, to make some accoumpte of this place of
Dionysius, let us answer one Mystery, by an other. S. Ambrose speaks thus
to the Water of Baptism: Ambrosius in Lucam. li. 10. ca. 22.
O Aqua, quae humano aspersum sanguine, etc. O thou Water that have washed the
World, stained with man's Blood. O thou Water, that deseruedst to be a
Sacrament of Christ. Thou beginnest, thou fulfillest the perfect Mysteries
etc. Must we needs think, because S. Ambrose thus speaks unto, and
calls upon the Water, that therefore either the Water had ears, and heard
him: or Christ him self was there Corporally present in the Water?

Doubtelesse, both Bread, and Water are Material Elements, and void of
life: Therefore as S. Ambrose spoke unto the one, even so, and none otherwise,
did Dionysius speak unto the other. But for as much as M. Hardinge seems,
for Amphilochius sake, to brook well al News, that come from Uerona, let us
see, with what devotion they teach us there to call upon our Ladies girdle. The
words of the prayer are these: O Veneranda Zona, Fac nos haeredes aeternae,
and Beatae vitae: Et hanc nostram vitam ab interitu conserua. Tuam
Haereditatem, tuum populum o Intemeratae Zona intemerata conserua. Habeamus te
Vires, and Auxilium: Murum, and propugnaculum: portum, and salutare Refugium. O
Blissed Girdle, Make us the Enheretours of Everlasting, and Blissed life: and
keep our present Life from destruction. O unspotted Girdle of the unspotted
Virgin, Save thine Enheritance, o Save thy people. Be thou our Strength, our
Healpe, our VVa^^e, our Forte, our Heaven, our Refuge. This prayer bears the
name of one Euthymus, as it is supposed, an Ancient Learned Greek Father, set
forth this last year by Aloysius Lipomanus the Bishop of Uerona, and
Printed both in Uenice, and in Louaine in two great Huge volumes of like
stuff. And least the matter should seem to want earnest, the good Catholic
Father, and learned Bishop of Uerona Lipomanus has Specially marked the place
in the Margin in this sort, O, quam magna, and mira petit a Veneranda Zona: O
how great, and how marvelous things he desires of this Blissed Girdle. All this notwithstanding, I trow, M. Hardinge will not say, that either Euthymius,
or Lipomanus would have us to woorship our Ladies Girdle with Godly Honor.

M. Hardinge. The.19. Division.
Origin teaches us how to Adoure and worship Christ in the Sacrament, before
we receive it, after this form of words. Quando sanctum cibum, etc. Homi. 5.
in Diuerso^ Euangelij locos.
When thou receiuest the holy Meat, and that incorrupt banquet, when thou
enioiest the Bread, and Cup of life, thou eatest, and drinkest the Body and
Blood of our Lord: then our Lord enters in under they roof. And therefore
thou also humblinge thy self, follow this Centurion or Captain, and say,
Lord I am not worthy that thou enter under my roof. For where he enters in
unworthily, there he enters in to the condemnation of the receiver.

The B. of Sarisburie.
O how easy a matter it is, to deceive the ignorant? Origin in that whole place
speaks not one word, neither of Worshippinge the Sacrament, nor of Christ's
Real, Matthew. 8.
Corporal being therein, nor of his Material entringe into our Bodies. But
taking occasion of the Centurion, Luke. 7.
that thought him self unworthy, to receive Christ into his house, he shows,
by what ways, and means, Christ uses to enter into the Faitheful. And two
special ways he expressly names in that place. The one, When any Godly man
comes to us: The other, When we receive the holy Communion. His words be
these: Quando Sancti, and Deo acceptabiles Ecclesiarum Antistites, etc. When
holy Bishops, acceptable unto God, enter into thy house, then by them the
Lord does enter. And be thou persuaded, that thou receiuest God him self. An
other mean is, when thou receiuest that Incorruptible, and holy Banquet. Thus
by this holy Fathers judgment, as Christ enters into us by a Bishop, or holy
man, even so he enters into us by the receiuinge of the holy Mysteries. And so
likewise he says in the first Homily of the same book: Per Euangelistatu^,
Origin. in diuersos Euangelij locos homi. 1.
and Apostolorum praedicationem, etc. God is with us by the preachinge of the
Evangelists, and Apostles: by the Sacrament of his holy Body, and Blood: and
by the Sign of the glorious Cross. By all these things God comes to us,
Comes to us. Matthew. 28.
and is in us: as he him self says, Behold I am with you al days, until the
Consummation of the world. Thus in the Old Testament, when the Ark of God
was lifted up, Numeri. 10.
it seemed, God him self was lifted up. And therefore in liftinge up thereof
the Priests said, Exurgat Deus: Let the Lord arise: 1. Regum. 4.
and when the Arc was brought into the Camp, they said, God him self was
come: And when the Arc was taken, they said, The Glory of Israel was taken.

Neither may we think, that Origin meante any Corporal, or Real entringe of
Christ into our houses. His own words, Origin. in diuersos Euang. locos.
homi. 5.
and exposition are to the contrary. For thus he writes in the same place.
Tantum dic verbo: Tantum veni verbo: verbum aspectus tuus est, opusque est
consummatum: Ostende Absens Corpore, Absens Corpore. Luke. 14.
quod Praesens spiritu consummare potes. Only (O Lord) speak thou the
Word: Only come by thy Word: thy Word is thy sight, and a perfect work:
being Absent in thy Body, show, that thou art hable to make perfect, being
Present in Sprite. So says Christ, I and my Father will come unto him, and will
make our aboade in him. In which words we may not conceive any Material, or
Corporal coming. Therefore, when so ever Christ enters thus into our house,
whether it be by some Holy Man, or by the Sacrament of his Body, or by the
Sign of the Cross, Augustine. in Johan. tractatu. 50.
or, as S. Augustine says, by Faith, or by the Sacrament of Baptism, Origin
teaches us to humble our hearts, and to say at every such coming, or
Presence, O Lord, I am not worthy that thou sholdest thus enter into my house.
If M. Hardinge will geather hereof, that Origin teaches us, to Adoure the
Sacrament: then must he also say, that Origin likewise teaches us to Adoure
the Bishop, The invisible thing of the Sacrament is the Body, and Blonde of
Christ being in Heaven.
or any other Godly man, and that even as God, and with Godly honor.

M. Hardinge. The.20. Division.
What can be thought of S. Cyprian, but that he adored the invisible thing of
this Sacrament, which is the Body, and Blood of Christ: saying that he
confesses the Godheade to be in the same* no less, then it was in the person
of Christ, which he utters by these words? Panis iste quem Dominus
discipulis porrigebat, etc. In Sermon de Coena Domini.
This bread which our Lord gave to his Disciples, changed not in shape, but
in nature, by the almighty power of God is made Fleashe. And as in the person
of Christ the Manhood was seen, and the Godhead was hidden, even so the
Divine essence has unspeakably infused it self into the visible Sacrament.

The B. of Sarisburie.
This place of S. Cyprian is often alleged by M. Hardinge, as matter invincible:
and to answer it severally in every place it would be tedious. Wherefore I
thought it good to refer thee, gentle reader, to the second Division of the
tenth Article, and to the Fourth Division of the.21. Article, where it shall be
answered more at large. How be it, thus much we may note by the way, that
S. Cyprian in this place speaks not one word of the Adoration of the
Sacrament. As for M. Hardinges gheasses, they importe no proof. By the way, as
S. Cyprian says, The Divine Essence, as M. Hardinge turns it, infuseth it
self into the Uisible Sacrament, so does Paulinus say of the Water of
Baptism, Co^cipit vnda Deu^, The Water conceiueth, or receives God. August.
contra Donatist. li. 3. ca. 10.
And S. Augustine speakinge likewise of Baptism, Sacramento suo Diuina Virtus
assistit. The divine power of God is assistent unto the Sacrament.

M. Hardinge. The.21. Division.
Chrysostom has a notable place for the adoration of Christ's Body in the
Sacrament, In. 10. cap. prioris ad Corinth.
in his Commentaries upon S. Paul, where he affirms also the (169) The.169.
Untruth. For S. Chrysostom affirms no Real praesencet but only auanceth
our minds into Heaven.
Real presence, and the sacrifice. Let us not, let us not (says he) be
willinge impudently to kille our selves. And when thou see that Body set
forth, say with thee self, For cause of this Body, I am no longer earth and
ashes, no longer captive, but free. This Body fastened (on the Cross) and
beaten, was not overcome with Death. After this, he exhorts al to adore and
worship our lords body in the Sacrament. This Body here represented by this
Sacrament.
This Body (says he) the Wise Men worshipped in the stalle, and having
taken a long journey, being both wicked, and aliantes, with very great
fear, and tremblinge adored him. Wherefore let us follow at least those
aliantes, us, I say, that are Citizens of heaven. For they, where as they saw
but that stalle, and Cabben only, and none of all the things thou see now,
came notwithstanding with the greatest reverence, and fear, that was
possible. But thou see it not in a stalle of beasts, but on the altar: not
a woman to hold it in her arms, but a priest present, and the holy Ghost
plentifully spreadde upon the sacrifice. In the presence of the Sacrament: but
not to the Sacrament.
This Father in his Mass makes a prayer in presence of the Blessed Sacrament,
almost with the same words, that S. Basile did. Attend Domine Jesus Christ
Deus noster, etc. Look upon us O Lord Jesus Christ, our God, from thy holy
habitacle, and from the Throne of the Glory of thy Kingdom, and come to
sanctify us: who sit on high with the Father, and art here inuisibly with
us: and make us worthy by thy mighty hand, that we may be partakers of thy
unspotted Body, and pretiouse Blood, and through us, all the people.

In the same Chrysostomes Liturgy, or Mass, a most evident testimony of
Adoration of the Sacrament is thus uttered. Sacerdos adorat, and Diaconus in eo
quo est loco, ter secreto dicentes: Deus propitius esto, etc. The priest
adoreth, and the Deacon likewise in the place he stands in* saieinge three
times secretly: God be merciful to me a sinner. So the people, and likewise al
make their Adoration deuoutely, and reverently.

In the same father is an other prayer, which the Greek priests do use to
this day at their Adoration of Christ's Body in the Sacrament, and it is
expressed in these words, This Prayer is directed unto Christ him self: not
unto the Sacrament, nor to any thing Really contained in the Sacrament.
Domine non sum dignus, etc. Lord I am not worthy, that thou enter under the
filthy roof of my Soul. But as thou tookest in good part to lie in the
den, and stalle of brute beasts, and in the house of Simon the Leprouse,
receiuedst also a harlot, and a sinner like me cominge unto the: Vouchesafe
also to enter into the stalle of my Soul void of reason, By a Mystical manner
of speech Christ enters into our bodies, when we receive the Sacrament of
Christ into our Bodies.
and into my filthy Body being dead and Leprouse. And as thou did not
abhor the foul mouth of a harlot, kissinge thine undefiled feet: So my
Lord God abhor not me though a sinner, but vouchesafe of thy goodness, and
benignity, that I may be made partaker of thy most holy Body and Blood.

The B. of Sarisburie.
The answer, that is already made unto Dionysius, and Origin, may also serve
to that, is here alleged of Chrysostom. Yet for some further declaration of
Chrysostomes meaning, it may please thee, good Christian Reader, to
understand, that Chrysostom in the very same Homily here alleged, Chrysostom.
in. 1. Corin. homi. 24.
writes thus: Quid Significat panis? Corpus Christi. What does the Bread
Signify? The Body of Christ. And in his Homilies upon S. Matthew he writes
thus: Chryso. in Opere Imperfecto homi. 11.
In istis vasis, non est Verum Corpus Christi, sed Mysterium Corporis eius
continetur: In these vessels is not the very Body of Christ, but a Mystery
of his Body is therein contained. And therefore in the same Homily upon the
Epistle to the Corinthians, he withdraws the minds of the people from the
Sensible Elements of the Bread, and the Wine, and lifts them up by
Spiritual cogitations into Heaven. Thus he speaks unto the people: Vbi
Cadauer, Chrysostom. in. 1. Corin. homi. 24.
ibi Aquilae. Cadauer est Domini Corpus, propter Mortem. Aquilas autem
appellat, vt ostendat, ad al^a ^um oportere contendere, qui ad hoc Corpus
accedit. Where as the Carkesse is, there are the Eagles. The Carkesse is the
Lords Body, because of his Death. But Eagles he names, to show, that he
must flee on high, that will comme near to that Body. Afterward he adds
thus, Ascend ergo ad Coeli portas, and diligenter attend: imo non Coeli, sed
Coeli Coelorum: and tunc, quod dicimus, intueberis. Therefore go up unto the
gates of Heaven, and mark diligently: Naie, I say not to the gates of Heaven,
but of the Heaven of Heavens: then shall thou see the things, that I speak of.

Thus therefore that Godly Father Chrysostom deals with his people, as if
they were already in Heaven, and wills them to behold, not the Bread, and
Wine, which are things corruptible, but the very Body, and Blood of
Christ: not the outward Sacrament, but the Substance of the Sacrament: not
the things that lie present before them, but the things, that, touching
Bodily Presence, are away. For in the holy Communion there is none other sight
laid before us, but only the Cross, and Death of Christ, and that Lamb of
God, that takes away the sins of the world. And the very cogitation
hereof, says S. Augustine, so moves our hearts, De Con^. Did. 2. Semel
mortuus.
as if we saw Christ hanginge presently before us upon his Cross.

In this wise therefore, having removed the peoples hearts into Heaven, and
placed them even in the sight of Christ, he says further unto them: For this
Bodies sake thou art no longer dust, and ashes: This Body has made the free:
This Body was broken for thee upon the Cross: This Body must we Adoure, as
the Wise men did: This Body, not now upon the Earth, but at the Right hand
of God in Heaven: This Body, that thou see with thy Sprite, and touchest
with thy Faith, whereof the Sacrament that thou receiuest, is a Mystery. So
says Emissenus, De Cons Did. 2. Quia Corpus.
Sacrum Dei tui Corpus Fide respice, mente continge, Cordis manu suscipe. With
thy Faith behold the holy Body of thy God: touch it with thy mind: receive
it with the hand of thy Heart.

But M. Hardinge will reply, Chrysostom says, As Christ was in the stalle,
so he is now upon the Altar: and, as he was sometimes in the Woman's Arms, so
is he now in the Priests Hands. True it is, Christ was there: and Christ is
here: but not in one, or like sort of Being. For he was in the stalle by
Bodily Presence: upon the Holy Table he is by way of a Sacrament. The woman in
her arms held him Really: the Priest in his hands holds him only in a
Mystery. So says S. Paul, Christ dwells in our hearts: Ephe. 3.
and no doubts, the same Christ, that lay in the stalle. It is one, and the
same Christ: but the difference stands in the manner of his Being there. For
in the stalle he lay by Presence of his Body: in our hearts he lies by
Presence of Faith.

If this Exposition seem to M. Hardinge over exquisite, or curious, then will I
say further: Christ is so upon the Table, Augustine. Citatur a Beda in. 1. Corinthians. 10.
as the Faithful people is upon the Table. S. Augustine speakinge to the people
says thus, Vos estis in Me^sa, vos estis in Calice: You are upon the Table:
you are in the Cup. But the people is not there Grossly, Really, and in
deed, but in a Mystery. Even so is Christ's Body upon the Table, not
Grossly, not Really, or in deed, but in a Mystery. And as Chrysostom says,
The Priestholdeth Christ in his hand, even so S. Gregory says, Abel held
Christ in his hand, and that four thousand years before Christ was borne:
and yet, not a bare sign, or a naked token, but the very same Christ, that
Esaie saw, and that John Baptist pointed with his finger. For thus stand his
words: Quem Johannes in Ostensione, quem Esaias in locutione, Gregori. in
Iobum li. 29. c. 38.
hunc Abel Significando in manibus tenuit. Thus Chrysostom says, the Priest
holds Christ in his hand, as John Baptist held him: as Esaie held him: as
Abel held him.

And, that this was Chrysostomes meaning, it appears by the very form, and
order of his words. For he says, Thou See the holy Ghost: thou See, and
Touchest that princely Body. Thus he speaks of a Spiritual seeinge, and
touching, wherewith we see, and touch things, be they never so far absent
from us. For otherwise, touching bodily sight, M. Hardinge knows, the Holy
Ghost cannot be seen: and by his own Doctrine, the Body of Christ is there
Invisible.

But least M. Hardinge take occasion hereof, to say, This is a Fantastical,
and a Vain kind of seeinge, Let him remember the words that S. Hierome
writes to Paula, and Eustochium, touching their aboade at Bethleem.
Hi^ronym. ad Paulam, and Eustochium.
Magos tria deferentes munera in visione beatis oculis vidisti. Ipsa eadem
munera Fide Deo obtulisti: Cum i^sdem Magis Deum Puerum in Presepio adorasti.
Thou saw with thine happy eyes the Wise men carrieinge their three sorts
of presents: Thou tookest the same presents, and offeredst them unto God by
Faith: with the same Wise men thou Adouredst God being a Child in the Manger.
She saw the Wise men, and yet saw them not: She received their Presents, and
yet received them not: She Adoured the Child in the Manger, and yet the Child
was not there. Thus she did, not verily, or in deed: and yet not vainly, nor
by way of Fantasy notwithstanding: but truly, and effectually, by Presence
of Faith.

Thus did the Wise men see Christ: thus do we now see Christ. Thus did
they worship him: thus do we worship him. They saw him, and worshipped him
being in Earth: we see him and worship him being in Heaven. They had him
Bodily Present: we have him, Bodily Absent, and Present only to our Faith.

And in this behalf S. Ambrose says, Ambros de his, qui initiantur Mysterijs.
Ca. 3.
Magis videtur, quod non videtur: It is best seen, that is not seen. That is
to say, We see more certainly with our Faith, then we can see with the eyes
of our Body. For our Bodily eye may deceive us: But the eye of our Soul,
which is Faith, cannot deceive us.

M. Hardinges reason hereof stands thus: The Priest at the time of the holy
Ministration, said, O God be merciful to me being a sinner: And, Look upon
us, O Lord Jesus Christ our God from thy holy Tabernacle, and from the Throne
of thy Glory: Ergo, he made his prayers, and gave Adoration to the Sacrament.
Of the same premises he might much better conclude the contrary. The Priest
withdrewe his mind from these Sensible, and Corruptible Elements, and Adoured
Christ being in Heaven in his Tabernacle, and in the Throne of his Glory,
Ergo, he did not Adoure the Sacrament.

M. Hardinge. The.22. Division.
S. Ambrose after long search and discussion, De Spiritu Sancto. li. 3. ca.
1^. psalm. 96.
how that saienge of the Prophet might be understood, Adore and woorship ye
his footestoole, Esai. 66.
because it is holy: at length concludes so, as by the footestoole he
understands the Earth, because it is written, Heaven is my seat, and the
Earth is my footestoole: And because the Earth is not to be Adored, for that
it is a creature, by this Earth, he understands that Earth, which our
Lord Jesus took in the Assumption of his Fleashe of the Virgin Marie, and
hereupon he utters those plain words for testimony of the Adoration:
Itaque per Scabellum Terra intelligitur, per Terram autem Caro Christi, quam
hodie quoque in Mysterijs Adoramus, and quam Apostoli in Domino Jesus Adorarunt.
And thus by the Footestoole Earth may be understood, and by Earth, the
Fleashe of Christ, which even now adays also we Adore in the Mysteries, and
the Apostles Adored in our Lord Jesus.

S. Augustines learned handlinge of this place of the Psalm, Adore ye his
Footestoole, because it is Holy, makes so evidently for this purpose, that of
al other authorities which in great number might be brought for proof of
the same, it ought least to be omitted. The place being long, I will recite
it in English only. His words be these: Adore ye his Footestoole: In Psalm.
98.
because it is Holy. See ye Brethern, what that is, he bids us to Adore. In
an other place the Scripture says: Esai. 66.
Heaven is my Seat, and the Earth is my Footestoole. What doothe he then
bid us, Adore, and woorship the Earth, because he said in an other place,
that it is the Footestoole of God? And how shall we Adore the Earth, where as
the Scripture says plainly, Thou shall Adore thy Lord thy God, and here he
says, Adore ye his footestoole? But he expounds to me, Deuteronomy. 6. 10.
what his footestoole is, and says: and the Earth is my footestoole. Matthew. 4.
I am made doubteful, afraied I am to adore the Earth, lest he damn me, that
made Heaven and Earth. Again I am afraied not to adore the footestoole of my
Lord, because the Psalm says to me, adore ye his footestoole. I seek, what
thing is his footestoole, and the Scripture tells me, The Earth is my
footestoole. Being thus waueringe, I turn me to Christ, because him I seek
here, and I find, how without impiety the Earth may be adored. For he took
of Earth, Earth, We eat Christ sittinge in Heaven: And so we Adoure him,
not lieing under Accidents, but sittinge in Heaven.
because Fleashe is of Earth, and of the Fleashe of Marie he took Fleash. And
because he walked here in Fleashe, and that very Fleashe he gave us to eat to
Salvation, and noman eats that Fleash, except first he adore it: it is
found out how such a footestoole of our Lord may be adored, and how we not
only sin not by adoringe, but sin by not adoringe. Does not the Fleashe
quicken, and give life? Our Lord himself said, when he spoke of the
commendation it self of that Earth: Joan. 6.
It is the spirit that quickens, but the Fleashe profits nothing.
Therefore, when thou bowest thee self, and fallest down to every such Earth,
behold it not as Earth, but that holy One, whose footestoole it is, that thou
do adore, for because of him thou do adore. And therefore here he added:
Adore ye his footestoole, because it is Holy. Who is Holy? He for whose love
thou adorest his footestoole. And when thou adorest him, remain not by
cogitation in Fleashe, that thou be not quickened of the Spirit. For the
Spirit, says he, quickens, and the Fleashe profits nothing. And then,
when our Lord commended this unto us, he had spoken of his Fleashe, and had
said: Except a man eat my Fleashe, he shall not have in him life Everlasting.

The B. of Sarisburie.
S. Ambrose, and S. Augustine, as they agree together for the exposition of
the Psalm, so, touching the matter it self, neither do they any wise
disagree from us, nor any wise agree with M. Hardinge. They teach us humbly to
Adoure Christ's Fleashe: but they teach us not to Adoure the Sacrament of
Christ's Fleashe. Thus M. Hardinge has taken a needeles labor, to prove a
matter, that is already proved: but the thing, that he should have proved, he
touches not. This is to bold abusinge of the simple Reader, to bear him in
hand, that these godly Fathers teach us to Adoure the Sacrament, that spoke
not one word of Adouringe the Sacrament.

But M. Hardinge will say, We must Adoure the Fleashe of Christ. We grant:
we believe it: it is our Faith: we teach the people, as the old learned
Fathers did, that noman eats that Fleashe, but first he Adoureth it: and that
he deadly offends God, and is wicked, and gilty of the Lords Body, that
Adoureth it not.

But as we Eat it, so we Adoure it. We eat it sittinge in Heaven at the Right
hand of God: Thither we lift up our hearts, and there we Adoure it. S.
Ambrose says, Ambrosi. in Sermon. 18. De Maria Magda^^na.
Stephanus in terris positus, Christum tangit in Coelo: Steven standinge in the
Earth, touches Christ being in Heaven. Again he says, Non Corporali tactu
Christum, sed Fide tangimus: We touch Christ by Faith, and not by Corporal
touching. And as we touch Christ, Ambrosi. in ^ucam. li 10. Ca. 24.
so we see him: that is, with the Spiritual eyes of our Faith: and not
otherwise. So S. Ambrose says in the place before alleged: Stephanus intra
Coelos Dominum cernit absentem: Ambrosi. in Sermon. 58. De Maria Magdalena.
Steven sees Christ being absente within the Heavens. And for proof hereof,
that all that Glorious ^^ght was mere Spiritual, and not offered to the
Corporal eye of the Body, S. Augustine says, that S. Steven stood then under
a roof before the Judges, August. De cognitione verae vitae. Cap. 42.
and saw the Heavens open, when with his Bodily eyes he was not hable to look
up, and to see the Heavens. There we see Christ's Body: there we Approache
unto it: there we touch it: there we Taste it: there we eat it: there we
Adoure it.

And doothe M. Hardinge think, that the Religion of Christ is so Gross, and
so sensible, that we cannot Eat, or Adoure his Body, unless it lie
Corporally Present before our eyes? Augustine. in Psalm. 39. Coloss. 3.
Uerily S. Augustine says, Si Resurrexistis cum Christo, dicit Fidelibus,
dicit Corpus, and Sanguinem Domini accipientibus, Si Resurrexistis cum Christo,
que sursum su^t sapite, vbi Christus est in Dextra Dei sede^s: Quae sursum sunt
quaerite, non quae super Terram. If ye be risen again with Christ, S. Paul
says unto the faitheful, and unto them, that receive the Body and Blood of
Christ, If ye be risen again with Christ, sauer the things, that be above,
where Christ is sittinge at the right hand of God: Seek the things, that be
above, and not the things that be upon the Earth. And in this very place by
M. Hardinge alleged he says, Augustine. in Psalm. 98.
Spiritualiter intelligite, quod locutus sum. Non hoc Corpus, quod videtis,
manducaturi estis. Understand you Spiritually that I have said unto you. You
shall not Eat (with your bodily Mouths) this Body of mine, that ye see. Thus
S. Augustine in the same place expounds, and opens his own meaning.
Doubtless, as the wicked may dishonor Christ, so may the Godly honor him.
But the wicked, as S. Paul says, do Crucify the Son of God being in
Heaven: Hebrae. 6.
and Christ, being in Heaven says unto Paul being in the Earth benethe,
Actor. 9.
Saul, Saul, Why do thou persecute me? Therefore the Godly being in
Earth, may likewise Adoure, and Honor Christ being in Heaven.

But they will reply, S. Ambrose says, We do Adoure Christ's Fleashe in the
Mysteries. Hereof grows their whole error. For S. Ambrose says not, We do
Adoure the Mysteries, or the Fleashe of Christ Really Present, or Materially
Contained in the Mysteries, as it is supposed by M. Hardinge. Only he says,
We Adoure Christ's Fleashe in the Mysteries: that is to say, In the
Ministration of the Mysteries. And doubtelesse, it is our duty to Adoure the
Body of Christ in the Word of God: in the Sacrament of Baptism: in the
Mysteries of Christ's Body, and Blood: and where so ever we see any step,
or token of it: but specially in the Holy Mysteries, for that there is lively
laid forth before us the whole story of Christ's Conversation in the
Fleash. But this Adoration, as it is said before, neither is directed to the
Sacraments, nor requires any Corporal, or Real Presence. So S. Hierome
says, Hieronym. ad Paulam and Eustochi.
Paula Adoured Christ in the Stalle: And, That he him self Adoured Christ in
the Grave: And S. Chrysostom teaches us, To Adoure Christ's Body in the
Sacrament of Baptism. Yet neither was Christ's Body then Really Present in
the Stalle, Chrysostom. in Marcum Homil. 14.
or Grave: nor is it now present in the Water of Baptism. Thus S. Ambrose
says, We Adoure the Fleashe of Christ in the Mysteries.

M. Hardinge. The.23. Division.
Again, S. Augustine shows the manner, and custom of his time touching the
adoration of Christ in the Sacrament, writing thus ad Honora^um, upon the
verse of the.21. Psalm, Edent, pauperes, Epist. 120. ca. 21.
and saturabuntur, that is, the poor shall eat, and be filled: and upon that
other, Manducauerunt and adorauerunt omnes diuites terrae, all the ritche of the
earth have eaten, and adored. It is not without cause (says he) that the rich
and the poor be so distincted, that of the poor it was said before, the
poor shall eat and be filled: and here (of the ritche) they have eaten, and
adored all that be the ritche of the earth. For they have been brought to the
table of Christ, and do take of his Body and Blood, but they do adore
only, and be not also filled, for as much as they do not follow him.

Likewese in his exposition upon that Psalm: In Psalm. 21.
All the ritche also (says he there) of the earth have eaten the Body of the
humbleness of their Lord, neither have they ben filled as the poor, until
the following. But yet they have adored, and woorshipped (170) The.170.
Untruth, Standinge in untrue interpretation. M. Harding adds (^t) of his
own.
It, that is, by adoration they have acknowleged Christ their Lord there
present.

The B. of Sarisburie.
This place may be passed over with the former answer. S. Augustine here
speaks of the Adoringe of Christ: and not one word of the Adoringe of the
Sacrament. The whole drifte of his talk stands in an Allegory of Hungringe,
Eatinge, Fillinge, and Adouringe. We Hunger Christ: we Eat Christ: we be
Filled with Christ sittinge in Heaven: and likewise we Adoure, and woorship
Christ sittinge in Heaven.

But S. Augustine says, Comedunt Pauperem: They Eat Christ being poor. We
know, that Christ is now no longer in the Dispensation of his Poverty. God
has exalted him, Philippen. 2.
and given him a Name above al Names, Hebrae. 2.
and made al things subject to his feet. Ephesi. 1.
But S. Augustine calls him Poor, for that he so humbled him self, and
became obedient unto the Death, even unto the Death of the Cross. In this
respect of his Cross, of his Death, of his Poverty, we embrace him: we
live by that Body, that was broaken for us: we be refreashed by that Blood,
that was sheadde for us. And thus we Eat Christ, and be relieved, and have
our life by him, only in respect of his Blood sheaddinge, and of his Poverty.

The Poor, that have refused, and forsaken them selves, Eat Christ sittinge
in Heaven, and are Filled with him. But the Ritche Eat him, and Adoure him
likewise sittinge in Heaven: but they are not Filled. They see, that Christ is
the very true Messiah, that was looked for: they see, that al things are
fulfilled, Actor. 13.
that were written of him in the Prophets, and that his name is published unto
the ends of the world: Roman. 10.
they believe, that there is none other name under Heaven, Actor. 4.
whereby they can be saved. Therefore they Profess his Name: they Believe in
him: they Eat him, and Adoure him. But they make some accompt^ of the World:
they forsake not them selves: they follow not Christ: and therefore they are
not filled with him. Thus does S. Augustine expound his own meaning:
Augustine. in Psalm. 22.
Inde erat Piscator etc. Of those Poor was Peter, and John, and James, and
Matthew the Publicane. They did Eat, and wear filled: for they suffered the
same things, that they had Eaten* Christ gave to them his Supper: he gave to
them his Passion: He is filled, that follows the same. Hitherto S. Augustine
speaks not one word of Adoration, either of the Sacrament, or of Christ's
Body, as being Really Present in the Sacrament. Therefore M. Hardinge was
the more blamewoorthy, thus to add words of his own unto S. Augustine, and
so utterly to falsify, and to corrupt his meaning. It is no good Catholic
point, so to use the Old Fathers. Uerily, Augustine. in eundem Psalm.
where as S. Augustine writes thus, Nec sicut Pauperes saturati sunt vsque ad
imitationem: Sed tamen Adorauerunt: Neither were they filled as the Poor, even
unto the folowinge: and yet notwithstanding they Adoured: M. Harding adds
thereto of his own, a pretty little (it) It.
which he found not in S. Augustine: and so makes it up thus, But yet have
they Adoured, and woorshipped it: and, as if it were good text of S. Augustine,
afterward he furnishes it out with this Exposition, or Co^mentarie of his
own: that is, They have acknowleged by Adoration Christ their Lord there
present. His friends will hardely think, there is so much conninge in his
dealinge. He cannot lightly lack Authorities, as long as he can thus shape
the^ of his own. But S. Augustine knows not, neither this Commentary, not
this text: nor ever gave M. Hardinge to understand of this Corporal Presence.
As it is said, and proved before, we see Christ, and worship Christ
sittinge in Heaven.

Certainly S. Augustine, Augustine. Domini. quinta post Trinita. Sermo. 1.
who best knew his own mind, says thus, Habes aurum: sed nondum tenes
Praesentem Christum. Thou have gold: but thou hold not yet Christ Present.
S. Augustine says, Christ is not here present. M. Hardinges Commentary
says, Christ is here present. Now let the Reader consider, whether of these
two he will believe.

M. Hardinge. The.24. Division.
Furthermore writing against Faustus the Heretic of the Manichees sect,
amongst other things he shows, how the Ethnikes thought that Christen people
for the honor they did before the Blissed Sacrament, that is of Bread and
Wine consecrated, did honor Bacchus, and Ceres, which were false Gods
honored of the Gentiles for the invention of Wine and Corn. This Conclusion
is not well considered. For the Heathens never vvoorshipped Bacchus, and Ceres
under the forms of Bread, and Wine.
Whereof may justly be gathered an argument, that in those days faithful
people worshipped the Body, and Blood of Christ in the Sacrament, under the
Forms of Bread, and Wine. For else the Infidels could not have suspected
them, of dooinge Idolatry to Bacchus, and Ceres.

The B. of Sarisburie.
This Gheasse has neither sense, nor savor in it: And therefore I marvel,
that M. Hardinge being learned, and having, as he says, such stoare, and
choice of other, would ever use this for an argument. For the very children in
Grammar Schools can tell him, that the Heathens, that Adoured Bacchus, and
Ceres, as their Gods, yet notwithstanding never gave godly honor to Bread,
and Wine. And Cicero him self, Cicero De Natura Deorum.
being an Heathen, was hable to say, Quis tam stultus est, vt id, quo
vescitur, credat esse Deum? Who is so very a fool, that will believe, the
thing, that he eats, to be his God? And in like sort Iuuenal Iuuenalis.
an Heathen Poet scorneth at this folly: O Sanctas gentes, quibus haec
nascuntur in agris Numina. O happy is that people, that has Gods growinge in
their fields.

The Heathens in their rude Gentilitie thought, that Bacchus, and Ceres had
first found out, and taught them the use of Bread and Wine: where as before
they feadde of Akecornes, and drank water: and therefore in remembrance, and
witness of so great a benefit, they honored the one with Bread, and the
other with Wine. But that they ever honored the Elements of Bread, and Wine,
I think, M. Hardinge is not hable well to show: Therefore he might have formed
his argument in this sort: The Christians were thought to honor their
Sacraments, as the Heathens honored Bread, and Wine: But the Heathens never
honored Bread and Wine, with godly honor:

Ergo, The Christians never honored their Sacraments with godly honor.

M. Hardinge. The.25. Division.
One other most evident place touching this Honor and Adoration, we find in
him rehearsed by Gratian Li. Senten. Prosperi. De Co^se. did. ^. Can. No^
aute^.
We do honor (says he) By this word Form S. Augustine means the
Substance, and Kind of Bread.
in form of Bread, and wine, which we see, things invisible, that is to
say, Fleashe, and Blood. The Accidents of the Bread are after Consecration, as
they were before.
Neither take we likewise these two Forms, as we took them before
Consecration. Since that we do faithfully grant, that before Consecration it
is Bread and Wine, which Nature has shapte: but after Consecration, Fleashe
and ^loud of Christ, which the Blessing (of the Priest) has Consecrated.

The B. of Sarisburie.
First, this Authority here alleged, is not to be found, neither in S.
Augustine, in whose name it is brought, nor in the sentences of Prosper. As for
Gratian, M. Hardinge knows, he is a Common Falsifier of the Doctors, and
therefore his credit in such cases cannot be great. Notwithstanding
touching the matter, we know, that Bread, Wine, and Water, of them self be
nothing else, but corruptible, and simple Creatures. If we conceive none
otherwise of them, then they be of them self, then al our Sacraments be in
vain. Therefore the godly Fathers labor evermore, to draw us from the
outward visible Creatures, to the meaning and substance of the Sacraments.
August. contra Maximinum. li. 3.
And to that end S. Augustine says, In Sacramentis videndum est, non, quid
sint, sed, quid Significent. In Sacraments we must consider, not, what they
be in deed, but, what they Signify. So it is written in the Council of Nice.
Council. Nicen. (...). Chrysostom. ad Caesarium Monachum.
Vides Aquam? Cogita Diuinam Vim quae in Aqua late^. See thou the Water of
Baptism? (it is not that, it was before) consider thou that Heavenly Power,
that lies hidden in the Water. So Chrysostom says, Antequam Sanctificetur
Panis, panem nominamus: Diuina autem Sanctificante illum Gratia, mediante
sacerdote, liberatus est quidem ab appellatione Panis: dignus autem habitus est
Dominici Corporis appellatione: etiamsi Natura Panis in illo rema^serit. The
Bread before it is Sanctified, is called Bread: but being sanctified by the
Heavenly Grace, by mean of the Priest, it is delivered from the name of
Bread, and thought worthy of the name of the Lords Body: notwithstanding
the Nature of Bread remain in it still. Thus, as Chrysostom says, The Bread
remains still Bread, in his former Kind and Substance: without any such
Transsubstantiation, or change of nature, as is now imagined. The words be
plain: M. Hardinge cannot deny them. And yet notwithstanding, it is not the
thing, it was before: because it is also called the Lords Body. So likewise
says S. Augustine, Quicunque in Manna Christum intellexerunt, Augustine. de
Vtilitate Poenitentiae.
eundem, quem nos, 1. Corinthians. 10.
Spiritualem Cibum Manducarunt. As many, Bertramus, De Sacramen. Eucharistiae.
as in Manna understood Christ, they did eat the same Spiritual Meat, that
we Eat (that is, ye very Body of Christ.) And so unto them Manna was
Christ's Body, and not the same thing, it was before. And for better
Declaration hereof, Bertramus says, Christus vt nunc Panem conuertit in
Corpus suum, ita tum Manna de Coelo datum, suum Corpus Inuisibiliter operatus
est. Christ, as he now turns the Bread into his Body, even so then in like
sort the Manna, that fell from Heaven, Inuisibly he made his Body. Thus, as
the Bread is Christ's Body, even so was Manna Christ's Body: and that
Inuisibly, and by the Omnipotent Power of God. Thus are the Elements of Manna,
of the Bread, of the Wine, and of the Water, changed, and are not as they were
before: and therefore in every of the same we Honor the Body of Christ
Invisible, not as Really, and Fleashely Present, but as being in Heaven. This
whole matter, and the causes thereof, S. Augustine seems to open in this wise,
Augustine. De Catechizandis Rudibus. ca. 26.
Signacula quidem rerum Diuinarum esse Visibilia etc. Let the new Christened
man be taught, that Sacraments be Visible Signs of Heavenly things, and that
the things them self, that he seethe not, must be Honored in them, and that
the same Kind, and Element (Bread, Wine, or Water) is not so to be taken, as
it is in daiely use. Let him also be taught, what the Words mean, that he
has heard: and what is hidden (and to be believed) in Christ, whose Image, or
Likeness that thing (that is, that Sacrament) bears. He adds further,
Deinde monendus est ex hac occasion, vt, si quid etiam in Scripturis audiat,
quod Carnaliter sonet, etiamsi non intelligat, credat tamen Spirituale aliquid
Significari: Moreover upon occasion hereof he must be taught, that, if he hear
any thing even in the Scriptures, that sound Carnally, yet ^e think, there
is some Spiritual thing meante by it.

M. Hardinge. The.26. Division.
Leauinge a number of places that might be alleged out of the Ancient Fathers,
for the Confirmation of this matter, to avoid tediousness, I will conclude with
that most plain place of Theodoretus, who speakinge of the outward signs of
the Sacrament, says, that notwithstandi^ge they remain after the Mystical
Blessinge, (171) The.171. Untruth, for Theodoretus says, Manent in priori
Substantia. By M. Hardinges constructio^, the outvvarde Signs are Christ's
Body, and must be vvoorshipped with Godly Honor.
in the propriety of their former Nature, as those that may be seen and
felt, no less then before: yet they are understood, and believed to be the
things, which they are made by virtue of Consecration, and are woorshipped
with Godly Honor. His words be these. Dialo. 2.
Intelligu^tur ea esse, quae facta sunt, and creduntur, and adorantur, vt quae
illa ^^nt, quae creduntur. These Mystical Signs (says he) are understood
to be those things, which they are made, and so they are believed, and are
Adored, as being the things which they are believed to be. With which
words Theodoretus affirms both the Real Presence, and also the Adoration.
The Real Presence, in that he says, these outward Signs, or Tokens after
Consecration to be made things which are not seen, but understood, and
believed, whereby he Signifies the Invisible thing of this Sacrament, the
body and Blood of Christ. Adoration he teaches with express terms, and
that because through power of the Mystical Blissinge, the Signs be in
existence, and in deed the things which they are believed to be, soothely the
Body and Blood of Christ. For otherwise God forbid, that Christen people
should be tought to Adore, and woorship the insensible Creatures, Bread, and
Wine. Of which he says, that they are Adored, not as signs, not so in no
wise, but as being the things, which they are believed to be. Now I report
me to the Christian Reader, whether this Adoration of the Sacrament, whereby we
mean the Godly woorship of Christ's Body in the Sacrament, be a new devise,
or no, brought into the Church but lately, about three hundred years past,
as M. Iuel makes him self suer of it in his Sermon.

The B. of Sarisburie.
By these words of Theodorete, M. Hardinge thinks him self hable, to
prove both Real Presence, and also Adoration of the Sacrament: and I doubt
not, but the discrete Reader shall soon perceive, he has proved as well the
one, as the other. Touching Real Presence Theodoretus speaks nothing, no
not one word. His manner of speech seems rather to incline to
Transubstantiation: whereunto notwithstanding Theodoretus is an enemy, and
thinks it a great folly proceedinge of ignorance, as it shall appear. And,
where as Theodoretus imagines two men to reason together by way of a
Dialogue, a Catholic manne, and an Heretic, M. Hardinge is feign for defense
of his Doctrine, to take part with the Heretic, and to use his arguments,
as if they were Catholic. For thus the Heretic there says, even as M.
Hardinge now says, Symbola Dominici Corporis, Theodoret. Dialogo. 2.
Inconfusus.
and Sanguinis, alia quidem sunt ante Inuocationem Sacerdotis: Sed post
Inuocationem mutantur, and alia ^iunt. The Sacraments, or Signs of Christ's
Body, and Blood, are one thing before the Blissinge of the Priest: But after
the Blissinge they are changed, and made other things: And he speaks of the
change of Substance, even as M. Hardinge doothe. The Catholic man makes
answer: ^igna Mystica po^t Sanctificatione^ non recedunt a Natura sua. Manent
enim in priori Substantia, and Figura, and Forma. Nay mary. The Mystical Signs
after the Blissinge (of the priest) depart not from their own Nature. For
they remain in their former Substance, and Figure, and Form. Vt quae sint
illa* quae creduntur.
He says further, yet the same Bread, and Wine remaininge as they were
before, are understood, and Believed, and Adoured, as the things, that they
are Believed.

Here, Good Christian Reader, note by the way: M. Hardinge says, The Nature,
and Substance of the Bread and Wine, is utterly abolished, and done away:
But the Catholic man says, The same Nature, and Substance remains still,
as it was before. If the Catholic man's saieinge be Catholic, then M.
Hardinges saieinge is not Catholic.

M. Hardinge will reply, Augustine. Epist. 164.
But these Signs are honored. Even so S. Augustine says, Baptisma,
vbicunque est, veneramur: We honor Baptism, where so ever it be. But for
further answer hereto, understand thou good Reader, that Theodorete was a
Greek Bishop, and that the Graecians never used to give godly honor to the
Sacrament until this day. Further understand thou, that S. Ambrose, touching
the Sacrament, writes thus, Ambros. De Sacram^t. li. 4. c. 3.
Venisti ad altar: vidisti Sacramenta posita super Altar: and ipsam quidem
miratus es Creaturam. Tamen Creatura solennis, and nota. Thou came to the
Altar: thou saw the Sacraments laid upon the same: and did marvel at
the very Creature. Yet is it a Creature used, and known. Here S. Ambrose
calls the Sacrament a Creature, and that twice together in one place. I
think, M. Hardinge will not have us believe, that Theodoretus, being so godly
a man, gave godly honor unto a Creature.

But Theodoretus says, They are honored. This is already answered in the
last Objection. Augustine. Contra Maximin. li. 3.
For, as S. Augustine teaches us, In Sacraments we must consider, not, what
they be in deed, but what they Signify. And in this sense they are
Understanded, and Believed, and Adoured, as by Signification being, or
representinge the things, that are Believed. Augustine. contra Faustu^
Manichae. li. 19. c. 15.
S. Augustine says, Sacramenta sunt Verba Visibilia, Sacraments be Visible
Words. But Words are oftentimes put for the things, that are signified
by the Words. So says S. Hilarie: Hilari. De Trini. li. 6.
Verba Dei sunt illa, quae enuntiant. The Words of God be the very things,
that they utter, or Signify. So Christ says, My Words be Sprite, and
Life: because they be Instruments of Sprite, Johan. 6.
and Life. And so Origin says, Hoc, quod modo loquimur, sunt Carnes Christi.
The very Words, that I now speak, are the Fleashe of Christ. Origin in
Nu^er. Homil. 23.
Even in this sort the Sacraments are the Fleashe of Christ: and are so
Understanded, and Believed, and Adoured. But the whole honor rests not in
them, but is passed over from them to the things, that be Signified.

M. Hardinge will say, By this Construction, Adorantur, is as much to say, as,
Non Adorantur: They are Honored, that is, They are not Honored: but only
lead us to those things, that must be honored. Herein is none
inconvenience. For so, it appears, Theodoretus expounds his own meaning.

His words immediately folowinge are these: Confer ergo Imaginem cum
Exemplari, and videbis similitudinem. Oportet enim Figuram esse Veritati
similem. Compare therefore the Image, (that is, the Sacrament) with the pattern
(that is, with Christ's Body). For the Figure must be like unto the Truethe.
Theodoretus calls the Sacrament, an Image, a Resemblance, and a Figure. I
think M. Hardinge will not say, that Images, Resemblances, and Figures be
worthy of Godly Honor. And hereunto very aptely agrees S. Augustines Lesson
touching the same: Qui Adorat vtile Signum diuinitus institutum, cuius Vim,
Significationemque intelligit, non hoc veneratur, quod videtur, and transit:
Augustine. De Doctrina Chri^^^^^. li. 3. ca. 9.
sed illud potius, quo talia cuncta referenda sunt. He that woorshippeth a
profitable Sign oppointed by God, and understands the Power, and
Signification of the same, does not woorship that thing, that is seen with
the eye, and passes away: but rather he woorshippeth that thing, unto which
al such things have Relation. Here S. Augustine thinks it no inconvenience
to say, We woorship the Sign, and yet Woorship it not. And this he speaks,
not only of the Sacrament of Christ's Body, but also of the Sacrament of
Baptism. For so he says further in the same place, Augustine. in eodem Capite.
Sicuti est Baptismi Sacramentum etc. As is the Sacrament of Baptism, and the
Celebration of the Body, and Blood of the Lord. Which Sacraments every
man, when he receives them, being instructed, knows, whereto they belong:
that he may woorship them, not with Carnal bondage, but with the freedom of
the Sprite. To woorship Baptism.
I might add hereto the words of that most fond, and lewd Second Council
of Nice, Venerandas Imagines perfect Adoramus: and eos, qui secus confitentur,
Anathematizamus. We do perfitely Adoure the reverend Images: and do
accurse them, that profess otherwise: And yet afterward they say, Honor
Imagini exhibitus refertur ad Prototypum. The honor given to the Image, (is
not given to the Image, but) redoundeth unto the Pattern. Thus that Council
says, Images are honored, That is to say, They are not honored.

Now let us examine, what Construction M. Harding makes upon these words.

The Bread, and the Wine leave not, or be not Changed from their Former
Nature: That is to say, by this new exposition, They utterly leave their
Former Nature.

They remain still in their Substance: that is to say, (says M. Hardinge)
they remain Further M. Hardinge says,

The Accidents of Bread, and Wine be the Signs of Christ's Body: The

The Uisible Accidents, are made the Invisible Body, and Blood of Christ:

The Signs be made the very self thing, that is Signified, and that in
existence, Fundamentum, and Terminus: which was ever wont to be called a
Monster in Nature. So many Errors are scarcely sufficient to maintain one
Error.

Now, I trust, the Christian Reader will soon consider, how soundely M.
Hardinge has discharged his promise, and proved the Adoration of the
Sacrament. Uerily of al these Doctors, that he has here alleged (Theodoretus
only excepted, in whom he would seem to have sum color of aid, who also
is already clearly answered) there is not one, that any way may be thought
to touch* either the worshippinge of the outward Sacrament it self, or of
Christ, as Present in the Sacrament.

The greatest Doctors of that side say, That, onles Transubstantiation be
concluded, the people cannot freely worship ye Sacrament, without occasion of
Idolatry. Now it is known, that Transubstantiation is a new Fantasy, Anno
Domin^ 1215.
newly divised in the Council of Laterane in Rome. And D. Tonstal says, that
before that time it was free, and lawful for any man to hold the contrary.
Tonst. Lib. 1. D^ Sacramen. Eucharistiae. fo. 46^
Wherefore it is likely, That before that time, there was no such Adoration.
Otherwise, it must needs have benne with great danger of Idolatry. But after
that, as it is said before, Extra De Celebratione Missarum.
Pope Honorius took order, and gave commandment, that the people should
Adoure: Pope Urbanus added thereto a New Solemn Feast of Corpus Christi day:
And Pope Clement confirmed the same with great stoare of Pardonnes. Clemen.
li. 3. ti^. 16. Si Dominu^.
This is the Antiquity, and Petite Degree of this Kind of Adoration.

M. Hardinge. The.27. Division.
And where as, utterly to abolishe this Adoration, he allegeth great danger of
idolatry, in case the Priest do not truly consecrate: thereto may be
answered, that Jacob stood in no danger of conscience, (...)2. 9^
for that by the procurement of Laban, he lay with Lia in steed of Rachel: A
very simpl^ defense of manifest Idolatri^. Even so the Idolaters thought their
Idol of good Faith to be very God.
neither for the same was he to be charged with aduowtrie, because he meante
good Faith, and thought him self to have had the company of his wife Rachel. So
idolatry is not to be imputed unto him, that worshippeth Christ with Godly
honor in the Bread not consecrate, which of good Faith he thinks to be
consecrate. ^^^hi. 60.
Touching this case, S. Augustine has this notable saieinge. We have need
(says he) to put a difference in our judgment, and to know good from euel,
for as much as Satan changinge his shape, shows him self as an Angel of
light, least through deceit he lead us aside to some perniciouse things. For
when he deceives the senses of the Body, and remoueth not the mind from
true, and right meaning, wherein each man leads a faithful life, there is no
peril in religion. Or if, when he faineth him self good, and does or says
those things, that of congruence perteine to good Angels, although he be
thought to be good, this is not a perilouse or sickely error of Christian
Faith.

But when, as by these things he begins to bring us to things quite
contrary, then to know him from the good sprite, and not to go after him, it
stands us much upon, diligently to watch, and take heed. Thus S.
Augustine. This much for the adoration of the Sacrament, or rather of Christ
in the Sacrament, may suffice.

The B. of Sarisburie.
The great danger, and horroure of Idolatry that hereof rises, Doubts
touching Consecration.
M. Hardinge thinks may easily us salued by the example of Rachel, and Lea:
and thus he brings in Gods Mystical Providence for defense of open error:
and thus teaches us in steed of Rachel to take Lea, and to honor a Creature
in steed of God.

Wherein it shall be necessary briefly to touch, how many ways, even by their
own Doctrine, the poor simple people may be deceived, and yield the honor
of God to that thing, that in their own judgment is no God.

Thus therefore they say, Thom. par. 3. q. 83.
If the Priest chance to forgeate to put wine into the Cup, and so pass
over the Consecration without Wine:

Or, if the Bread be made of any other, Johan. De Burgo. Pupilla oculi cap. 3.
then wheaten flower, which may possibly, and easily happen:

Or, if there be so much Water in quantity, that it overcome, and alter the
Nature of the Wine: Idem.


Or, Idem.
if the Wine be changed into Uineger, and therefore cannot serve to
Consecration:

Or, Cerson contra Floretum lib. 4.
if there be.xiij. Cakes upon the Table, and the Priest for his Consecration
determine only upon twelve, in which case they say, Not one of them al is
Consecrate:

Or, Extra. De Celebra. Missar. de Homine.
if the Priest dissemble, or leave out the Words of Consecration: or, if he
forgeate it, or mind it not, or think not of it: In every of these, and other
like defectes, there is nothing Consecrate, and therefore the people in these
cases, honouringe the Sacrament, by their own Doctrine gives the Glory of
God to a Creature: which is undoubted Idolatry.

And that the folly hereof may the better appear, one of them writes thus,
Summa Angelica. Eucharistia. 26.
Quod si Sacerdos, etc. If the Priest having before him sundry Cakes at the
time of Consecration, do mind only, and precisely to Consecrate that only
Cake, that he holds in his hand, some say, the reast be not Consecrate: but
say thou, as Duns says, They be al Consecrate. Yea further he says, If the
Priest do precisely determine to Consecrate only the one half part of the
Cake, and not likewise the other half, that then, the Cake being whole, that
one part only is Consecrate, and not the other.

Pope Gregory says, If the Priest be a known aduouterer, or Fornicatour, and
continewe still in the same, Did. 81. Si qui.
that his Blissinge shall be turned into Cursinge: and that the people knowinge
his life, and nevertheless hearing his Mass, commit Idolatry.

In this case stands the simple people: So many ways, and so easily they
may be deceived. For notwithstanding they may in some part know, the
priests life, and open dealinge, yet how can they be assured of his secret
Words, of his Intention, of his Mind, and of his Will? Or if they cannot,
how can they safely Adoure the Sacrament, without doubt, and danger of
Idolatry?

But they them selves see well, it cannot be: Thom. in lib. 3
and therefore have divised a simple poor healpe of their own. They say,
Senten. Did. 9.
We may not Adoure the Sacrament, but under a Condition, that is to say, If
it be Consecrate. And so says Thomas Salisburiensis, Thomas Salisburien. De
Art praedicandi. Cap. 25.
Nullus quantumcunque sit simplex, vel quantumcunque sit discretus, debet
praecise credere, hoc esse Corpus Domini: Sed cum hac condition, si in
Consecratione rite sint acta omnia. Aliter enim asseret de Creatura, quod ipsa
sit Creator: and ita esset Idololatria. Noman, be he never so simple, or never
so wise, ought precisely to believe, that this is the Body of our Lord, that
the Priest has Consecrate, but only under this condition, If al things
concerning the Consecration be done, as apperteineth. For otherwise he shall
auouche a Creature to be the Creator: which were Idolatry. By this Doctrine
M. Hardinge teaches the people thus to kneel down, and to Adoure the
Sacrament: If thou ^e God in deed, then I woorship the: But, if thou be not
God, then I will not woorship thee. Thus Arnobius says, The Heathens in old
time were woonte to call upon Iuppiter, Sieve tu Deus es, sieve tu Dea es:
Whether thou be a God, or a Goddess, we call upon thee. Thus Gods people is
leadde, to give the honor of God, they cannot tell, unto what: and to honor a
Creature in steed of God.

Yet must all this be excused by the example of Rachel, and Lea. Arnob. li. 3.
Gene. 29.
As if M. Harding would reason thus: Jacob by Gods special Providence, knew
Lea in steed of Rachel:

Ergo, We may safely Adoure a bare Creature with godly honor: and say unto
it: Thou art our God: Thou made Heaven and Earth: we have none other God but
thee: and all this without peril of Idolatry. He would not thus da^ly, if he
knew, what it were to bestow Gods Glory, upon that thing, that is no God.
Johan. 6.
Certainly, this is not the worshipping of God in Sprite, and Truth.

S. Martine was much more circumspecte in this case, as may well appear by
that, is written of him. For when the Devil came unto him, and took upon him
to be Christ, and therefore required him, to boowe down, and to give him
honor: Sulpitius in Vita Martini.
No said S. Martine, I cannot tell whether thou be Christ, or no. Unless I
see Christ in the same shape, and form, that he was Crucified in upon the
Cross, I will not Adoure him in any wise. S. Augustine says, Audistis quia
Messiah Christus est: audistis quia Christus vnctus est. Non sic posuit Jacob
Lapidem vnctum, vt veniret, and Adoraret: alioqui Idololattia est, Augustine. in
Johan. tracta. ^
non Significatio Christi. Ye have heard, that Messiasis Christ: ye have
heard, that Christ is the Anointed. Jacob did not erecte the Anointed
stoane, to the intent to come, and to Adoure it. Otherwise, it is Idolatry,
and not a Signification of Christ. Theophilus being sometime demanded,
Theophilus contra Autolycum. lib. 1.
wherefore he would not Adoure the Emperor, as the manner then was, with
godly honor, made answer thus, Quia non ad hoc institutus est Imperator, vt
Adoretur: Sed vt legitimo honor^ honoretur: Because the Emperor is not
appointed, to the end we should honor him, as God: but that we should give
him that honor, that unto him apperteineth. So, if M. Harding will likewise
demand, wherefore we Adoure not the Sacrament with godly honor, the godly
simple man may make him this answer: Because it was ordained reverently to be
received, and not to be Adoured: as a Sacrament, and not as God. For in all the
Scriptures, and holy Fathers, we have neither Commandment to force us
hereto, nor Example to lead us hereto. We Adoure the Body of Christ, not
only for the turninge of an hand, while the Priest is hable to hold up the
Sacrament, and that with doubt of our selves, whether we do well, or no,
which thing is utterly uncomfortable, and dangerous, and full of terror to
the conscience: But we worship that Blessed, and Glorious Body, as that
Blissed Martyr S. Steeuin did, being in Heaven at the Right Hand of the Power
of God, and therefore without doubt, and danger: and that at al times, and for
ever: and we believe, and confess, that Jesus Christ, even in the Nature, and
Substance of our Fleashe, is the Lord in the Glory of God the Father.

FINIS.
THE NINTHE ARTICLE, OF THE CANOPIE. Reservation.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Or that the Sacrament, was then, or now ought to be hanged up under a Canopie.

M. Hardinge. The.1. Division.
If M. Iuel would in plain terms deny the reservation and kepinge of the
blissed Sacrament, for which purpose the pixe and Canopie served in the
Churches of England, as of the professors of this new gospel it is both in
word, and also in deed denied: it were easy to prove the same by no small
number of auctorities, such as him self cannot but allow for good and
sufficient. But he knowinge that right well, guilefully refraineth from mention
of that principal matter, and the better to make up his heap of articles for
some show against the Sacrament, by denial reproves the hanginge up of it
under the Canopie: thereby shewinge him self like to Momus, who espieinge
nothing reproueable in fatre Venus, found fault with her slipper.

The B. of Sarisburie.
This Article, as it is small of it self, and therefore might the better be
dissembled, and past over, were it not accessorie to Idolatry, so it is
warranted of M. Hardinges side, by very simple, and sclender proufes, as shall
appear. It likes M. Hardinge for his entry, to solace him self, and his
friends withal, to call us New Doctors: him self being not hable hitherto to
allege any one of all the Old Doctors without force, and fraud, plainly, and
directely to serve his purpose. But these New Doctors are, neither so new,
nor so much destitute of Antiquity, as these men would feign have the
world to believe. For, touching the abolishinge of the Reseruatio^ of the
Sacrament, which M. Hardinge has here drawn in, to healpe out y^ matter,
being otherwise not necessarily incident unto this Article, they have the
Authorities, and Examples of good Ancient Old Catholic Fathers for their
Warrant in that behalf. Cyprianus De Coena Domini. Clemens Epist. 2.
For S. Cyprian says, Panis iste recipitur, non includitur. This Bread is
received, and not shut up. Clemens, who, as M. Hardinge says, was the
Apostles Fellow, writes thus, Tanta in Altario Holocausta offerantur, quanta
populo sufficere debeant: quod si remanserint, in crastinum non reseruentur.
Let there be so many Hosts, or so much Bread offered at the Altar, as may
be sufficient for the people. If any thing remain, let it not be keapte until
the morninge. Origin Cyril. in Leui. ho. ^.
Orige^, or Cyrillus says, for one book bears both their names, Dominus
Panem, quem Discipulis suis dabat, non distulit, nec iussit seruari in
crastinum. The Bread, that Our Lord gave to his ^ isciples, he lengred it
not, nor bade it to be keapte until the morninge. His reason is grounded upon
the order of Christ's Institution: Hieronym. 1. Corin. 11.
for that Christ said not, Take, and Keep: but Take, and Eat. S. Hierome
says, Post Communionem, quaecunque de Sacrificijs superfuissent, Augustine. de
Trinitate. lib. 3. cap. 10.
illic in Ecclesia Communem Coenam comedentes pariter consumebant. After the
Communion was done, what so ever portion of the Sacrifices remained, they
spente it there together in the Church eatinge their common Supper. S.
Augustine likewise seems to say the same: Hesychius in Leui. li. 2. ca. 8.
The Bread made to this purpose, is spent in receiuinge the Sacrament.
Hesychius says, That the Remanentes of the Sacrament were burnte immediately in
the fiere. Nicephorus lib. 17. ca. 25.
Nicephorus says, The same Remanentes in some places were given to Children,
that went to School, to be ^aten by them presently in the Church: The like
whereof is also decreed in the Council of Matiscon. Council. Matiscon 2. cap 6.
Gabriel. ^iel. lectione. 26.
So says Gabriel Biel a New Doctoure of M. Hardinges company: Non dedit
Discipulis, vt ipsum honorifice Conseruarent: sed dedit in sui vsum, dicens,
Accipite, and Manducate. Christ gave not (the Sacrament) to his Disciples,
that they should reverently reserve it: but he gave it for their use,
saieinge, Take, and Eat.

Thus many old Doctors, and yet many more we have on our side. Therefore M.
Hardinge was somewhat ouerseene, for following of them, to call us New Doctors.

I know, the Sacrament in old times in some places was reserved, as it may
appear by Tertullian, S. Cyprian, S. Hierome, S. Basile, Eusebius, Cyprian de
lapsis* Sermo. 5.
and others. S. Cyprian says, w^men used to keep it at home in their
Cheastes: Tertullian. ad Vxorem.
Tertullian says, The Faithful used then to have it in their private houses,
and to eat it before other meats: S. Hierome says, that Exuperius the Bishop
of Tolouse used to carry it abroad in a basket: S. Basile says, That in
Egypt, Hieronym. ad Rus^icum.
and specially about Alexandria, every man for the most part had the Sacrament
in his house: Eusebius seems to say, The Priest had it in his Chamber: S.
Ambrose says, Basilius ad Caesariam.
Men used then to carry it about them, not only by Land, but also by Sea
in their Naptkins. Al these were Abuses of the holy Mysteries: Eusebius. li. 6.
c. 44.
and therefore afterward were abolished. Thus was then the Sacrament reserved,
In private Houses, Ambros. de obitu Satyri.
in Cheastes, in Baskettes, and in Naptkins. Now, if M. Hardinge be hable,
truly to show any such like Ancient Authority for his Canopie, then may he
say, he holds by the Old Catolique Fathers. But, for as much, as M.
Hardinge has leisure, to call to mind his Old Fable, of Momus, Uenus, and
such like: In deed they say, Momus was woonte to epsy faults, and to
control all the Gods without exception, even the Great Iuppiter, him self,
that sat in Rome in the Capitol: and therefore his office oftetimes was not so
thankeful, as some others. But one great fault he found with Uulcane, for
the making of man, for that he had not set a grate, or a window at his
breaste, that others might piere in, and epsy some part of his secret
thoughts. If M. Hardinge had such a grate, or window at his breaste, and
men might look in, and see his conscience, I doubt not, but they should
see many more sparks of gods truth, then as now outwardly do appear.

As for his fair Lady Uenus, whereby he means his Church of Rome, the
world sees, and he him self knows, she has been taken in open aduoutrie:
and Phoebus the Son of God, with the heavenly beams of his holy Word has
reueiled it. O, Would to God, we had no cause justly to say with the Prophet
Esaie, Quomodo facta est Meretrix Ciuitas Fidelis? Esai. ^.
O how is that Faithful City become an Harlot? Uerily Momus shall not need
now to reprove her Slipper. He shall rather have cause to say, Esai. 1.
A planta pedis, vsque ad verticem capitis, non est in ea sanitas. From the
Sole of the foot, to the top of the head, there is no whole part in her.

For so S. Bernarde complains of her miserable state in his time. Bernardus
de Conuersione Pauli.


M. Hardinge. The.2. Division.
VVhereto we say, that if he, with the rest of the Sacramentaries, would
agree to the kepinge of the Sacrament, then would we demand, why that manner
of kepinge were not to be liked. And here upon proufes made of defaulte in this
behalf, and a better way showed, in so small a matter, conformity to the better
would soon be persuaded. In other Christen Countries (we grant) it is kept
otherwise, under lock and keie, in some places at the one end, or side of the
Altar, in some places in a Chapel builded for that purpose, in some places in
the vestrie, or in some in ward, and secret room of the Church, In Epist.
ad Innocentium.
as it was in the time of Chrysostom at Constantinople. In Council. Braccaren.
3. Can 5.
In some other places we read, that it was kept in the Bishops Palace,
near to the Church, and in the holy days brought reverently to the Church,
and set upon the Altar, which for abuses committed, was by order of
Councelles abrogated.

Thus in diverse places, diuersely it has been kept, eueriewhere reverently,
and suerly, so as it might be safe from injury, and villainy of miscreantes,
and dispisers of it. The hanging up of it on high* has been the manner of
England, as Lindewode notes upon the Constitutions prouincial: on high, that
wicked dispite might not reach to it: under a Canopie, for show of reverence
and honor.

The. B. of Sarisburie.
Here M. Harding shows, that this Reservation of the Sacrament, in diverse
Countries has been diuersely used: Under lock, and key: At the Aultars end:
In a Chapel: In the Uestrie: In the Bishops Palace. And all this of the usage
of late years: for of Antiquity, sauinge only the Epistle of Chrystome to
Innocentius, which also, as it shall appear, makes much against him, he
touches nothing. But emongst al these diversities of keepinge, he has not
yet found out his Canopie. And touching, that he allegeth of the Reservation
of the Sacrament in the Bishops Palace, it seems very little to further his
purpose. For, where as the Sacrament was reserved only in the Bishops
Custody, it follows necessarily, that there, in ^ther parish churches, and
Chapels, was no such Reservation. Chrysostomes epistle to Innocentius is good
witness, Chrysostom. ad Innocentium.
that the Sacrament was Reserved to be received of the people, at the Communion
the next day, or in very short time after. For it was Reserved in both
Kinds, as it appears plainly by his words. But it is clear, both by the
judgment of Reason, and also by their own Cauteles in that behalf, De Con
Did. 2.
that the Wine in such sort and quantity cannot be keapte any long time
without sowering. Presbyter. In Glosa.
And the manner in Graecia was, during the time of Lent, to Consecrate only
upon the Satursdaies, and Sonnedaies, In sex^a Synodo Constantinop. ca. 52.
(...).
and yet nevertheless to Communicate of the same upon the other week days.
For the end of this Reservation in old times was, not that the Sacrament
should be A^oured, but that it should be received of the people: and specially
that persons Excommunicate, for whose sake it was reserved, being suddenly
called out of this life, upon their repentance might at al times receive ye
Communion, and depart with comfort, as the Members of the Church of God.

But, me thinks, M. Hardinge does herein, as Apelles the Painter sometime
did, in setting out King Antigonus physenomie. For understanding, that
Antigonus was blind of the one side, he thought it best to painte him out
only with half face, and so he conningly shadowed the deformity of the other
eye. Even so M. Hardinge shows us certain variety of keepinge the
Sacrament, and other small matters of like weight: but the danger of Idolatry,
and other like horrible deformities he dissembleth conningly, and turns from
us. Loathe I am, to use the comparison: Hieronym. in vita Malchi.
But S. Hierome says it: Diabolus nunquam se prodit aperta facie. The Devil
never shows him self openly with his whole face.

In the old times, when the Sacrament was keapte in Cheastes, in Naptekins, in
Baskettes, and in Private Houses, there was no danger of Adoration.

But under the Canopie we see, not only, that the effect has fallen out
far otherwise, but also that the very cause thereof was at the first to the
contrary.

For so says Linwoode him self, Guliel. Linwood li. 3 de custodia
Eucharistiae etc.
Citius repraesentatur nostris aspectibus Adoranda: It is the rather offered
unto our sightes to be woorshipped. If there were no cause else, yet is this it
self cause sufficient, to abolishe this new order, of hanging up the Sacrament
under a Canopie. For therefore the King Ezechias took down the Brazen
Serpent, 2. Regum. 18.
and brake it in pieces, notwithstanding God had specially commanded Moses to
erecte it up: because he saw it abused to Idolatry.

Again, they them selves, upon smaller considerations, have utterly abolished
the manner of Reservation, that was used in the Primitive Church. For they will
not now suffer, neither Lay people, nor Women to keep it in their houses: nor
Boys to carry it to the sick, ^^seb. li. 6. ca. 44
as then the Boy did to Serapion: nor Infidels, or men not Christened, Canopie
not commendable.
to were it about them, as then did S. Ambroses brother Satyrus. I leave the
Ruste, the Moulde, the Canker, and the Breedinge of worms: whereby that holy,
and reverend Mystery of Christ's Death is oftentimes made lothesome, and
brought into contempt. Ambros. De Obitu Satyri.
They them selves do testify, that such things, not only may happen, but
also have often happened. It is said, that Alphonsus the King of Arragon, for
the preservation of his honor, and safety, so long keapte the Sacrament
about him, that at last it putrified, and breadde woormes: which, when they
had eaten up, and consumed one an other, in the end there remained only one
great woorme, that was the last, and had eaten al his fellows. In such cases
they command, that the woormes be burnte, and the ashes buried in the
Altar. The Gloss it self upon the Decrees says thus, Gerson contra Floretum.
li. 4.
It is not necessary to keep the wine: And the Reason is this: Quia opus
esset nimia cautela: Council. Aurelian. De Conse. Did. 2 Presbyter. In Glosa.
Because we should need to have to much a do with the keepinge of it.

In the Council of Laterane it is confessed, that the Sacrament so kept has
been abused Ad horribilia, and nefaria facinora, To work horrible, and
wicked deeds. And M. Hardinge him self confesses, Council. Lateranen. sub
Innoce^tio. 3. Can. 20.
that, for certain like abuses, Council. Bracaren. 3. Ca. 5.
the same Reservation was in some part abolished in the Council of Bracara.

To be short, touching the Canopie, Linwoode him self finds fault with
it, as it appears in the Prouincial. For thus he writes: Dicitur, quod in
Ioco Mundo, and singulari debet seruari, It is said, The Sacrament ought to be
keapte in a clean several place sequestered from other. Whereunto he adds
thus: Extra de Celebratio. Missaru^ Sane.
Ex hoc videtur, quod vsus obseruatus in Anglia, vt in Canopaeo pendeat, non
est commendabilis. Hereby it appears, That the order, that is used in
England, of hanginge up the Sacrament in a Canopie, is not commendable.
Guliel. Linwood li 3. de Custodia Eucharistiae.
Here M. Hardinge has causes, both in general, why al manner such
Reservation ought to be Misliked, and also in special, why the Canopie can not
be liked.

M. Hardinge. The.3. Division.
If Princes be honored with cloth of estate, Bishops with solemn thrones in
their churches, and Deanes with Canopies of Tapistrie, Silk, and Arras, (as
we see in sundry Cathedral Churches) and noman find fault with it: why
should M. Iuel mislike the Canopie, that is used for honor of that Blessed
Sacrament (172) The 172. Untruth. For Chrysostom says, In vasis Sanctis, non
Verum Corpus Christi, Sed Mysteriu^ Corporis Christi continetur.
wherein is contained the very Body of Christ, and through the inseparable
ioining together of both Natures in Unity of person, Christ him self, very
God, and very Man? with what face speaks he against the Canopie used to the
honor of Christ in the Sacrament, that sitting in the Bishops seat at
Sarisburie, can abide the sight of a solemn Canopie made of Painted Bourdes
spread over his head? If he had been of Council with Moses, David, and
Solomon, it is like he would have reproved their judgments, for the great
honor they used, and caused to be continued toward the Arc, wherein was
contained nothing but the Tables of the law, Aarons rod, and a pot full of
Manna. King David thought it very vnsittinge, and felt great remorse in
heart, that he dwelte in a house of Cedres, and the Ark of God was put in the
mids of skins, that is, of the Tabernacle, whose outward parts were
covered with beasts skins.

And now there is one found among other Let your modesty be known to al
men. Philip. 4.
Monstrouse and strange forms of Creatures, manners, and Doctrines, who being
but duste and ashes, as Abraham said of him self, promoted to the name of a
Bishop, and not Chosen (I ween) to do high service of a Man according to
Gods own heart, as David was: thinks not him self unworthy to sit in a
Bishops Chair under a gorgeous testure or Canopie of gilted bourdes, and can
not suffer the pretiouse Body of Christ, whereby we are redeemed, to have for
remembrance of Honor done of our part, so much as a little Canopie, a thing
of small price. (173) The.173. Untruth. for Both are Figures, Both Types,
Both Signs. Nazian. saiethe, Figura Figurae. De Paschate.
Yet was the Arc but a shadow, and this the Body: that the figure, this the
truethe: that the Type, or sign, this the very thing it self. As I do not
envy M. Iuel that honor, by what right so ever he enjoys it, so I can not
but blame him for Christ vvil say, In vain ye worship me, etc. Matthae. 15.
bereuinge Christ of his honor in this Blessed Sacrament.

The. B. of Sarisburie.
Princes use to sit under a Cloth of Estate: Bishops, and Deanes under
painted Thrones, or Cloth of Arras: Ergo ( says M. Hardinge) The Sacrament
ought to be hanged up under a Canopie. I trow, It is not lawful for all men, to
use such arguments.

In such sort Durandus reasons: ^^urand. li. 2.
The Arc of the Covenant was carried by the Levites: Ergo, The Pope must be
carried alofte upon the Deacons shoulders. And again, they seem by practice,
further to reason thus, The Pope is carried upon men's shoulders: Ergo, The
Sacrament must be carried before him, whither so ever he go, upon a fair white
Iannet.

And, where as it likes M. Hardinge, thus merrily to sport him self with
Bishops sittinge under Painted Bourdes, Certainly, I reckon it much fitter
for the Church of God, to have Painted Bourdes, then Painted Bishops, such
as he is, that claims to be the Bishop of al Bishops: and yet doothe not in
deed any part of the office of one Bishop. The Bishops Chair, or Stalle,
was appointed at the first, as a place most convenient for him to read, and to
preach in. But what needs more? Such vanity of words should not be
answered.

For the rest, God him self commanded Moses, to make the Tabernacle, and also
showed him in the Mount, in what order, and form it should be made.

Neither durst Moses, or his Workmen, Exodi. 25. and. 27.
to add, or to minishe, or to alter any one thing of their divise: or to do
any thing more, or less, otherwise then God had appointed him. When David of
his Devotion would have builte a Temple unto God, 2. Samuel. 7.
God forbade him by the mouth of his Prophet Nathan, and said, Thou shall
build me no Temple. Afterward Solomon set upon to build the Temple: not,
when he would himself, but only, when God had so willed him. Neither followed
he therein any part of his own fantasy, but only that self same Plat, and
Proportion, that God had given to his Father. For so says David him self: All this pattern was sent to me in writing by the hand of the Lord, 1.
Paralipomen. 28.
which made me understand all the workmanship of the pattern.

Here mark, good Christian Reader: In every of these Examples, God has
bridled our Devotion, and has taught us to worship him, not in such sort, as
may seem good in our eyes, but only as he has commanded us. Yet can M.
Harding, by his conninge, apply every of these same Examples, to prove
thereby, that we may honor God in such sort, as we of our selves can best
divise.

This was evermore the very root of al Superstition. And therefore almighty
God says, My thoughts be not, as your thoughts: nor my ways, as your ways.
Who ever required these things at your hands? Esai. 55.
M. Hardinge would feign, in all, that he takes in hand, be called
Catholic: and yet nevertheless mainteineth a mere Particular Devotion,
only used within this Realm, and that only within these few late years, and
never either used, or known, in any other Christian Country else: and therefore
such, as can in no wise be called Catholic.

But he says, There is now found one among other Monstrous, and strange
forms etc. This, I trow, is not that Sobriety, and Modesty, that was
promised at ye beginning. Such Eloquence would better become some other
person, then a man professinge Learning, and gravity. Herein I will gladly give
place to M. Hardinge. It is rather a testimony of his impatience, and
inordinate Choler, then good proof of the cause.

Certainly, if the Sacrament be both God, and Man, as here, I know not how
godly, it is avouched, then is this but a very simple honor for so great a
Majesty. Undoubtedly, this is a very strange, and monstrous Doctrine, to
tcache ye people, that Christ being both God, and Man, and now Immortal, and
Glorious, may Canker, and Putrefie, and breed woormes. The time was, when, who
so had uttered such words of Blasphemy, had been reckened a Monster emonge
the Faithful. But this is the just judgment of God. Romans 1.
He gives men up into a reprobate mind, to turn Gods Truth into a Lie,
and to worship, and serve a Creature, forsakinge the Creator, which is God
blessed for ever.

I trust, our Doctrine abbridgeth not any part of Christ's Glory. We Adoure
him, as he has commanded us, sittinge in Heaven at the Right hand of the
Power of God. And therefore, O M. Hardinge, ye have burnte your brethren, and
scattered their boanes upon the face of the Earth, and wrought upon them, what
your pleasure was, only because they would not be traitors unto God, and
give his Glory unto a Creature.

Chrysostom expoundinge the complainte of Laban against Jacob, for stealing
away of his Gods, writes thus: Gene. 31. Chrysostom. in Genes. hom. 57.
Quare Deos meos furatus es? O excellentem insipientiam: Tales sunt Dij tui, vt
quis eos furari queat? Non erubescis dicere, Quare furatus es Deos meos?
Wherefore have thou stolen away my Gods? O what a passinge Folly is this? Be
thy Gods such ones, that a man may steal them? And art thou not ashamed to
say, Wherefore have thou stolen away my Gods? This matter needs no farther
application. Uerily the thing, that M. Hardinge calls God, and Man, may
soon be stolen away with Pixe, and Canopie, and al together. If Chrysostom
were now alive, he would say to M. Hardinge, as he said to Laban: Art thou
not ashamed etc. And, touching the honoring of Christ, he says, Chrysostom.
ad Populum Antio^ chenum, hom. 60.
Discamus Christum, prout ipse vult, venerari. Honorato nanque iucundissimus
est honor, quem ipse vult, non quem nos putamus. Nam and Petrus eum honorare
putabat, cum sibi pedes eum lauare prohibebat: Sed non erat honor, quod agebat,
sed contrarium. Let us learn to honor Christ, as he has willed us. For to
him, that is honored, that honor is most pleasant, that he him self would
have, not that we imagine. For Peter thought to honor Christ, when he
forbade him to wash his feet. How be it, that was no honor unto Christ, but
contrary wise, it was dishonor.

To conclude, where as M. Harding, in the impatience of his heat, demands
of us, With what Face we can find fault with the hanginge up of the
Sacrament under a Canopie: We may easily answer him thus: Even with the Same
Face, wherewith Linwoode found fault with the same: and with ye Same Face,
wherewith al Christendom, England only excepted, has evermore refused, to
do the same.

M. Hardinge. The.4. Division.
Now concerning this article it self, if it may be called an article, wherein
M. Iuel thinks to have great advantage against us, as though nothing could
be brought for it Before it vva^ the honouringe of God: Now it is no great Keye
of Religion.
(though it be not one of the greatest Keys, nor of the highest mysteries of
our Religion, as he reports it to be, the more to deface it) of the Canop^e,
what may be found, I leave to others, neither it forces greatly. But of the
hanginge up of the Sacrament over the altar, we find plain mention in S.
Basiles life written by Amphilochius that worthy Bishop of Iconium. Who
tells that S. Basile at his Mass having divided the Sacrament in three
parts, A vain Childish Fable under the name of Amphilochius.
did put the one into the golden Dooue (after which form the Pixe was then
commonly made) hanging over the altar. His words be these, Imposue^unt
Columbae aureae pendenti super altar. And for further evidence, that such
Pyxes made in form of a Dooue in remembrance of the holy Ghost, that appeared
like a Dooue, were hanged up over the altar, we find in the Acts of the
General Council holden at Constantinople, that the Cleregie of Antioche accused
one Seuerus an Here^ike, before John the Patriarch and the Council there, that
he had riffled, and spoiled the holy Aultars, and molted the Consecrated
vessels, and had made away with some of them to his companions, Here be Dooues
in doede: but no mention of any Sacrament*
Praesumpsisset etia^ Columbas aureas, and argenteas in forma^ Spiritus Sancti
super diuina lauachra, and altaria appensas vna cum alijs sibi appropriare,
dicens, non oportere in specie Columbae Spiritum Sanctum nominare. Which is
to say, that he had presumed also to convert to his own use, beside other
things, the golden, and syluern Dooues made to represent the holy Ghost, that
were hanged up over the holy Fontes, and Aultars, saieinge that no man ought to
speak of the holy Ghost in the shape of a Dooue.

Neither has the Sacrament been kept in all places, and in all times, in one
manner of Vessels. So it be reverently kept for the viage provision for the
Sick, no Catholic man will maintain strife, for the manner and order of
keeping. Symmachus a very worthy Bishop of Rome, in the time of Anastasius the
Emperor, Dooue.
as it is written in his life, made two vessels of Silver to reserve the
Sacrament in, and set them on the Aultars of two Churches in Rome, of S.
Syluester, and of S. Androwe.

These vessels they call commonly, Ciboria. We find likewise in the life of S.
Gregory, that he also like Symmachus made such a Vessel, which they call,
Ciborium, for the Sacrament, with four pillours of pure Silver, and set it on
the Aultare at S. Peter's in Rome.

In a work of Gregorius Turonensis, this vessel is called, Turris in qua
Mysterium Dominici Corporis habebatur, A Tower wherein (174) The.174^ untruth,
standing in untrue translation.
our Lords Body was kept. In an old book De Po^nitentia, of Theodorus the
Greek of Tarsus in Cilicia, sometime Archbishop of Cantorburie, before Beda
his time, it is called, Pyxis cum Corpore Domini ad viaticum pro infirmis: The
Pyxe with our Lords Body for the viage provision for the sick. In that
book, in an admonition of a Bishop to his Clergy in a Synod, warninge is
given, that nothing be put upon the Aultare in time of the Sacrifice, but the
Cofer of Relics, the book of the four Evangelists, and the Pyxe with our
Lords Body.

Thus we find, In the Fable of Amphilochius, and no where else.
that the Blessed Sacrament, has always been kept, in some places in a
Pyxe hanged up over the Aultare, in some other places otherwise, every where,
and in all times safely, and reverently, as is declared, to be always in a
readiness for the viage Provision of the sick. Which keepinge of it for that
Godly purpose, and with like due reverence, if M. Iuel and the Sacrament aries
would admit, no man will be either so scrupulous, or so contentious, as, to
strive with them either for the hanginge up of it, or for the Canopie.

The B. of Sarisburie.
It is marvel, that M. Hardinge, in so short a ^ale, cannot avoid manifest
contradiction. He holds, and teaches, that this is the honouringe of
Christ, God, and Man: and yet he says, It is no great Keye of his Religion.
Uerily, what so ever Keye he now make of it, great, or small, he brings in
very small Authorities, and proufes, to make it good.

Concerning the Canopie, wherein all this question stands, he is well
contented, to yield in the whole, as being not hable to find it once
mentioned in any manner Old Writer. But the hanginge up of the Sacrament, and
that even over the Altar, he is certain, may well be proved by that solemn
Fable, that we have so often heard under the name of Amphilochius. Concerning
which Fable, (for a very childishe Fable it is, and no better) I must for
shortenesse refer thee, gentle Reader, to that is written before in the First
Article of this Book, and in the.33. Division, as answer to the same. Yet
thus much shortly, and by the way. First M. Hardinges Amphilochius says,
that S. Basile, after he had said Mass to Christ, and his twelve Apostles,
immediately the same night, put one portion of the Sacrament in the Dooue, that
was then hanging over the Altar: and the next day folowinge sent for a
Goldesmith, and caused the same Dooue to be made: the same Dooue, I say, that
he put the Sacrament in, the night before. And so M. Hardinges Dooue, was a
Dooue, before it was made. But Dreams, and Fables are worthy of Privilege.
Yet, least this tale should pass alone, it is accompanied with a Miracle. For
after that time, when so ever S. Basile was at Mass, and lifted up the Bread,
the same Dooue (so says this Amphilochius) used evermore to rowse her self
over y^ Altar, and moved, and sturred of her self hither, and thither: much
like to the Mathematical Dooue, that Architas Tarentinus made, that was hable
to fly alone. If this Golden Dooue had not been endewed with Sprite, and
Life, this tale had lost half his grace. Again Pekham in his Prouincial
gives a strait commandment to al Priests, that the Bread in the Pyxe, be
changed and renewed every seventh day, for avoidinge of putrefaction, or some
other lothsomnesse, that may happen. But M. Hardinges Golden Dooue had a
special virtue above al others, to keep the Bread seven years together
without corruption, and the same at the last, meet to be given to a sick man
in his death bed.

But there is mention made of Golden, and Siluern Dooues in the Council of
Constantinople. I grant. How be it, there is no mention made there of any
Pyxe, or Reservation of the Sacrament. But if every Dooue there were a Pyxe,
or, as they call it, a Monster, then has M. Hardinge a great advantage. For
seeking out but one Pyxe, he has found twenty, and that al together in one
Church, some about the Altar, some about the holy Font, and some else
where. And yet I could never understand, but evermore in one Church, were it
never so big, one Pyxe was thought sufficient. O what pains M. Hardinge has
taken to furnish a Fable? God grant us to be simple as Dooues, in obeieing of
Gods Truth: M^tthae.10.
and wise as Serpents in discerning, and eschewing lies.

The reast, that is alleged, of Symmachus, Gregorius Romanus, Gregorius
Turonensis, and Theodorus, as it is not denied, so it is no parcel of this
Question. The hanginge of the Sacrament, and the Canopie, wherein the greatest
danger stood, being removed, somewhat may be considered touching
Reservation, when it shall be thought necessary. Wherein to counterpoise the
credit of these four obscure and late Doctors, we have the authority of
eight other doctors counted Learned, and Ancient, Clemens, Cyprian, Origin,
Cyr^^, Hierome, Augustine, Hesychius, and Nicephorus, as it is already proved.

FINIS.
THE TENTH ARTICLE, Transubstantiatio.
OF ACCIDENTS VVITHOVT SVBIECTE.
The B. of Sarisburie.
Or that in the Sacrament after the words of Consecration, there remain
only the Accidents and Shows, without the Substance of Bread and UUine.

M. Hardinge. The.1. Division.
In this Sacrament after Consecration, (175) The.175. untruth. for the
Substance of the Bread and wine remains still, as shall appear.
nothing in Substance remains, that was before, neither Bread, nor Wine,
but only the Accidents of Bread and wine: as their form, and shape, savor,
smell, color, weight, and such the like, which here have their being
miraculousely without their subject: for as much as Untruth, 2^ before.
after Consecration, there is none other substance, then the substance of the
Body and Blood of our Lord, which is not affected with such Accidents, as
the Scholastical Doctors term it. Which Doctrine has always, though not
with these precise terms, (176) The.176. untruth. For this Doctrine was
neither belee^ed, nor taught from the beginning.
been taught, and believed from the beginning, and depends of the Article of
Transubstantiation. For if the substance of Bread and Wine be changed into
the Substance of the Body and Blood of our Lord (177) The.177. untruth. This
Kind of Real, and Material change is not affirmed by any Father.
(which is constantly affirmed by all the learned and Ancient Fathers of the
Church) it follows by a necessary sequel in nature, and by* dri^te of
Reason, that then the Accidents only remain. For witness and proof
whereof, I will not let to recite certain most manifest sayeinges of the old,
and best approved Doctors.

The B. of Sarisburie.
M. Hardinge grants, that this Doctrine has no express Authority by
precise terms, neither in the Scriptures, nor in the Ancient Councelles, nor
in any Old Father, Greek, or Latin: yet the Old Fathers both Greeks, and
Latins, in their kinds were counted Eloquent, and were thought ^able to utter
their Doctrine in express, and precise words, if there had been then any
such Doctrine received in the Church. Wherefore findinge herein such want
of al Antiquity, we may be bold expressly, and in precise terms to say,
This seems to be a very New Doctrine, restinge only upon a False Position,
and a little colored with drifte of Reason: which Reason notwithstanding never
entered into man's head, within a whole thousand years, after that the Gospel
had been preached. By like Position, and by like drifte, the Old Heretics
the Manichees held, that al, that outwardly appeared in Christ, was nothing
else, but Accidents: that is, as M. Hardinge him self expounds it, the
Form, the Shape, the Color, the Weight, and so in deed nothing else, but
the Show, and Appearance, and Fantasy of a Body. From such Doctors, it
appears, these men have received their New Doctrine. For Doctor Tonstal
confesses, It was first determined in the Council of Laterane, Cuthbert.
Tonstallus de Eucharist. li. 1. pa. 45. Gabriel Biel de Canon. lect. 40.
which was holden in Rome in ye year of our Lord a thousand, two hundred,
and fifteen: and that, before that time it was evermore free for any man,
without empeachement of his Faith, to hold the contrary.

Likewise M. Hardinges own Doctor Gabriel Biel says, Quomodo ibi sit Corpus
Christi, an per Conuersionem alicuius in illud: an sine Conuersione incipiat
esse Corpus Christi cum Pane, manentibus Substantia, and Accidentibus Panis,
non inuenitur expressum in Canone Bibliae. In what sort the Body of Christ
is there, whether it be by the turning of any thing into that, or without any
turning (or Transubstantiation) the Body of Christ begin to be there
together with the Bread, both the Substance, and Accidents of the Bread
remaininge, it is not found expressed in the Scriptures. So likewise Duns him
self says, Scotus in* 4. Senten. dis. 11. q. 2.
De Sacramentis tenendum est, sicut tenet Sancta Romana Ecclesia. Nam verba
Scripturae possent Saluari, Secundum intellectum facilem, and Veriore^,
Secundum apparentiam. Touching the Sacraments, This is my Body
we must hold, as the holy Church of Rome holds. For the words of the
Scripture might be saved (without Transubstantiation) by an easy, and truer*
understanding in appearance. Thus it appears by D. Tonstal, that this
Doctrine has no ground of Antiquity: and by Biel, and Scotus, that it has
no certain Authority of Gods word. Upon this fundation, which by their
own Confession is uncertain, M. Hardinge builds up the whole certainty of
this Article.

But he will reply, Christ says, This is my Body. So the Arian Heretics
were hable to allege as many, and as plain words of Christ, Pater mayor me
est, My Father is greater then I. Neither ever was there any Heresy so gross,
but was hable to make some simple show of Gods Word. But Christ says
not, This Bread, is now no Bread: Or, This Bread, is Transubstantiate into
my Body: Or, My Body is Really, and Fleashely contained under the Accidents
of this Bread.

But contrary wise the Evangelists do witness, That Christ took Bread:
and S. Paul after Consecration sundry times calls it Bread: 1. Corin. ^.
and the holy Fathers expressly, and constantly affirm, that the Bread
remains still in Nature, and Substance, as it did before.

Nevertheless, in that sense, and meaning, that Christ spoke in, that Bread
was Christ's Body. For in this case we may not consider, what Bread is in it
self, but what it is by Christ's Institution. As the Body of Christ is his
very Natural Body: So the Bread in it self, is very Natural Bread. And yet
by way of a Sacrament, 1. Corin. 10. Augustine. in Leuitt. quaest. 57.
the Bread both is called, and also is Christ's Body. So S. Paul says, The
Rock was Christ: And S. Augustine says, Non dicit, Petra Significabat
Christum: sed, Petra erat Christus. He says not, The Rock Signified Christ:
but, The Rock was Christ. The Rock naturally, and in deed was a Rock, as
it was before. Yet, Deuteron. 12.
because it gave water, to refreashe the people, by a Sacramental
understanding the Rock was Christ. So it is written, Sanguis est Anima, The
Blood is the Soul: Which words rightly understood are true: and yet to
say, that Naturally, and Really the Blood is the Soul, it were an error.
Unto which words of Moses S. Augustine, by way of Exposition, resembles
these words of Christ, Augustine. contra^ Adimantum. cap. 12.
This is my Body. His words be these: Possum interpre^ari praeceptum illud
in Signo esse positum. Non enim dubitauit Dominus dicere, Hoc est Corpus meum,
cum Signum daret Corporis sui. I may expound that commandment to consist in
a Sign. For Our Lord doubted not to say, This is my Body, when he gave a
Sign of his Body. And to come near to the Institution of Christ's Supper,
Luc. 22. 1. Corin. 11.
S. Luke, and S. Paul say, This Cup is the New Testament. Yet was not the
Substance, and Nature of the Cup changed by any force of these Words:
neither was that Cup in deed, and Really the New Testament. Now, As the
Rock was Christ: The Blood is the Soul: The Cup is the New Testament,
remaininge notwithstanding each of them in their several Nature and
Substance: Even so is the Bread, the Body of Christ: remaininge still
notwithstanding in the Nature, and Substance of very Bread. It is a
Sacrament, that Christ ordained: and therefore must have a Sacramental
understanding. Uerily, as Water remaininge still Water, is the Sacrament of
Christ's Blood: So Bread remaininge still Bread, is the Sacrament of Christ's
Body.

But the contrary hereof was determined in the Council of Laterane in Rome
about the year of our Lord. Council. Lateran. sub Innocentio 3. Anno. 1215.
1215. How be it, the determination of that Council neither was General, nor
was ever Generally received. For the Christians in Asia, Council. Florentinum,
sessione vltima.
and Grecia, and of al other parts of Christendom would never agree unto it,
as it appears by the Council of Florence: but evermore refused it, as an
error. But what special power had that Council of Laterane, to alter the
Faith of the Church: Bread Remains.
and to change the sense of Gods Word: and to make that Catholic, that
before that time was never Catholic: and to make that Heresy, that for the
space of twelve hundred years, and more before was no Heresy? Certainly, the
Old Catholic Fathers of the Primitive Church, and these young Fathers of
the Church of Laterane agree not together. For Gelasius says, Non desinit
esse Substantia, Gelasius contra Eutychem.
vel Natura Panis. and Vini. It cease not to be the Substance, or Nature of
Bread, and Wine. S. Chrysostom says, Natura Panis in Sacramento remanet:
Chrysostom. ad Caesarium Monach. Theodoretus Dialogo primo. Augustine. ad Infa^es.
The Nature of Bread remains in the Sacrament. Theodoretus says, Christus
Naturam (Panis) non mutat, sed Naturae adijcit Gratiam. Christ changes not
the Nature (of the Bread) but unto the same Nature he adds Grace. S.
Augustine says, Quod vide^is, Panis est, and Calix: quod vobis etiam oculi
renuntiant: The thing, that you see, is Bread, and the Cup: which thing
your eyes do testify. Here be the plain testimonies of four Ancient
Catholic Fathers in this behalf. But these New Laterane Fathers contrary
wise say, Citatur ^ ^eda. 1. Cori^. 10.
Here ^easeth the Substance, and Nature of Bread, and Wine: The Nature of
Bread remains not: Christ changes the Nature, and Substance of the Bread:
Believe not the witness of your eyes: The thing, that you see, is no Bread.
Thus these New Fathers, as it may appear, of purpose are contrary to the
Old. Hereof we may reason thus: The Old Catholic Fathers understood not
this New fantasy of Transubstantiation:

Therefore they understood not the remaininge of the Accidents without
Substance.

Yet has M. Hardinge chosen this, as the only fundation of his whole cause.

M. Hardinge. The.2. Division.
S. Cyprian that learned Bishop and holy Martyr says thus, In Sermon de Coena
Domini. Panis iste, quem Dominus Discipulis porrigebat, non effigy, sed natura
mutatus, omnipotentia verbi factus est Caro. This Bread, which our Lord gave
to his Disciples, changed not in shape, but in nature, by the almighty power
of the word (he means Christ's word of Consecration) is made Fleashe. Lo
he confesses the Bread to be changed, not in shape or form, for that
remains, but in Nature, that is to say, in Substance. And to signify the
change of Substance, and not an accidentarie change only, to wit, from the
use of Common bread, to serve for Sacramental bread, as some of our new
Masters do expound that place for a shifte: he adds great weight of
words, whereby he far ouerpeiseth these men's light devise, saieinge that
by the almighty power of our Lords word, it is made fleashe. Verily they
might consider, as they would seem to be of sharp judgment, This is a
Blasphemy. For no Sacram. can be made without the almighty power of God.
With this Example M. Hardinge fights against him self.
that to the performance of so small a matter, as their Sacramental change is,
the almighty power of Gods Word, is not needful. And now if this word,
Factus est may signify an imaginatiue making, then why may not Verbum Caro
factum est, likewise be expounded, to the defense of sundry old hainouse
heresies against the true Manhood of Christ? Thus the nature of the bread in
this Sacrament being changed, and the form remaininge, so as it seem
bread, as before Consecration, and being made our Lords fleashe by virtue of
the word, the substance of bread changed into that most excellent substance
of the fleashe of Christ: Of that which was before, the accidents remain
only, without the substance of bread. The like is to be believed of the wine.

The B. of Sarisburie.
This place of S. Cyprian is often, and much alleged, as if every word
thereof were an argument: as in deed at the sight, and first appearance, it
seems vehement, and sounds much: but being well weighed and considered, it
will appear in substance, as it is. Certainly of Annihilations, of Remoouinge
of Natures, of Remaininge of Accidents without Subject, which thing M.
Hardinge has taken to prove, it speaks nothing. Natura.
For answer, first it is plain by these four Ancient learned Fathers, S.
Augustine, S. Chrysostom, Gelasius, and Theodoretus, that the Bread, and Wine
after the Consecration, remain in their Nature, and Substance, as they were
before. Which thing notwithstanding, it is not the Nature of Bread, that
works the effect, and force of this Sacrament: That is, that Christ may
dwell in us, and we in him: no more, then it is the Nature of Water, in the
Sacrament of Baptism, that works the effect thereof, and makes us Fleashe
of Christ's Fleashe, and Boane of his Boanes. Ephesians. 5. Basilius De Spiritu
Sancto. ca. 15. (...).
And for better evidence hereof, to compare one Sacrament with an other, S.
Basile says, Gratia (Baptismatis) non est ex natura aquae, sed ex praesentia
Spiritus. The Grace of Baptism is not of the Nature of the Water, but of the
Presence of the Sprite. And therefore Cyril says, Quemadmodum viribus ignis,
etc. As water being vehemently heat by the strength of fiere, heateth no
less then if it were fire in deed, so the Water of Baptism by the workinge
of the holy Ghost, is reformed unto a Divine power (or Nature). So Chrysostom
says, Elizaeus potuit vndarum mutare naturam, etc. Cyrill. in Johan. lib. 1.
ca. 42.
Elizeus was hable to change the Nature of the Water, and made it hable to
bear iron. Here Chrysostom says, even as S. Cyprian says, that the Nature
of the Water was changed: Chrysostom. de virtutib. and vitijs, homi. 5.
Yet the very Substance of the Water remained as before.

Likewise S. Ambrose speakinge of Gods marvelous workinge in Baptism,
says, Non agnosco vsum Naturae: Nullus est hic Naturae ordo, vbi est
excelle^tia Gratiae. In this case I have no skill of the use of Nature:
Ambrosius de illis qui initia^tur Mysterijs. cap. 9.
The order of Nature has no rule, where as is the excellency of Gods Grace.
Again he says, Est hoc illud magnum Mysterium, quod oculus non vidit, nec
auris audiuit, ne^ in Cor hominis ascendit? Aquas video, quas videbam quotidie.
Me istae habent mundare, in quas saepe descendi, and nunquam munda^us sum?
Ambros. de illis qui initiantur Myster. ca. 4.
Hinc cognosce, quod Aqua non mundat sine Spiritu. Is this that great
Mystery, that the eye never saw, that the ear never heard, that never
^ntred into the heart of man? I see Water, that I saw every day before. Is
this it, that shall make me clean? I have gonne oftentimes into it, Abros. de
illis qui initiantur Myster. cap. 3.
and was never the cleaner. Therefore understand thou, that Water (of his
own Nature) without the holy Ghost cleanses not. And again, Per
predicationem Dominicae Crucis, Aqua fit dulcis ad Gratiam. By the preachinge
of our Lords Cross, Hilarious de Trinit. lib. 8.
the Water (byside his own Nature) is made sweet unto Grace. And in this
respect S. Hilarie says, Vno Christo per Naturam vnius Baptismi indu^mur. We
put upon us, Gregorius Nyssen. in vita Moseos.
only one Christ, by the Nature of one Baptism. And Gregory Nyssene in like
sort, Natura Aquae praecede^te virga Fidei, etc. vita^ praestat. The Nature of
Water (thus considered) the Rod of Faith goinge before, gives life.
Otherwise he says, Hoc beneficium no^ Aqua largitur, Gregor. Nyss. de Sancto
Baptismate.
etc. sed Dei praeceptum, and Spiritus. Aqua vero subseruit ad oste^denda^
purgatione^. It is not Water (of his own Nature) that gives this benefit:
but the commandment of God, and the Holy Ghost. The Water serves, to show
us the cleansinge of the Soul.

By these examples, I turst, it may appear, what S. Cyprian meante by the
change of Nature. Uerily, Origin that Ancient learned Father, touching the
Bread in the Sacrament of Christ's Body, Origin. in Matthae. cap. 15.
writes thus: Non materia panis. sed super illum dictus Sermo, est qui
prodest, etc. It is not the Matter (or Substance) of Bread, but the Word
spoken over it, that does profit. And therefore S. Ambrose likewise says,
Ambros. de Sacramentis. li. 4. cap. 4.
Quanto magis operatorius est Sermo Dei, vt sint, quae erant, and in aliud
commutentur? How much more effectual is the Word of God, that (the Bread
and Wine) may be (in Substance and Nature) the same, that they were before,
and yet be changed into an other thing?

Notwithstanding this answer unto the discreet Reader may seem
sufficient, yet M. Hardinge forces ye matter further, with this word, Factus
est. If this word, Factus est, says he, may Signify an imaginatiue
making, the^ why may not, Natura. Factus est.
Verbum Caro factum est, be so expounded? O what simple shifts are these? Is
M. Hardinge hable to allege no bar, but that may be pleaded against him
self? Augustine. in Ioha^. tractatu. 21. Leo de passione Sermon 14.
Or does he think, that this Latin Word, Facere, must needs signify,
Transubstantiare? S. Augustine says, Nos Christi Facti sumus: We are made
Christ's. Leo says, Corpus regenerati, Fit Caro Crucifixi. The Body of the
man, that is Regenerate, is made the Fleashe of Christ, that was Crucified.
Beda says, Nos ipsi Corpus Christi facti sumus: We our selves are made the
Body of Christ. Origin says in like manner of speech, ^eda. 1. Cor. 10.
Origin in Canti^^, hom. 2.
Spiritus Sanctus non in turture^ Vertitur, sed Columba Fit. The Holy Ghost is
not ch^nged into a Turtle, but is made a dooue. So S. Ambrose, Victa anima
libidine Car^^s, Fit Caro. The S^ule being overcome with the pleasure of the
fleashe, is made fleashe. Ambr. ^^orin. 5.
And will M. Hardinge upon warrant of this one Word, conclude, that our Bodies
be utterly Transubstantiate, and Substantially, and Really become the Body of
Christ? Or, that the Holy Ghost is verily Transubstantiate into a Dooue? Or
the Soul into Fleashe? Or in these very words, that he has alleged, Verbum
Caro Factum est: The word, that is, the Son of God, was made Fleashe, Does
he think, that the Son of God leafte the Nature of his Godhead, and was
verily Transubstantiate into Fleashe? Doubtless this were a Monstrous Doctrine,
Augustine. ad Quoduuldeum. Epistola Leonis ad ^^onen Augustum.
and in old times it was Cherinthus, and Ebions horrible Heresy. Uerily Leo
says, Quamuis Johannes scribat, Verbum Caro factum est, Verbum ^amen non est
versum in Carnem: Although S. John say, The Word was made Fleashe, yet was
not the Word turned (or Transubstant^ate) into ^leashe. S. Augustine says of
the Heretics called Timotheani, Ad confirmandam huiusmodi impietatem, qua
Deum asserunt ve^sum esse a Natura sua, Augustine ad Quod^^^^deum.
cogunt Euangelistae testimonium dicentis, Et Verbum Caro factu^ est, quod ita
interpre^antur, Diuina Natura in Humanam versa est: These Heretics, to
confirm their wickedness, wh^r^by they hold, that God was changed from his
own Nature, (and made man) rack the witness of the Evangelist S. John
saieinge, The Word was made Fleashe. Which Word they expound thus, The
Nature of God was changed into the Nature of man. Even thus M. Hardinge says,
The Nature of Bread is changed into the Nature of Christ's Body.

Where is then, that great force of this word, Factus est, wherein M.
Hardinge seems to have such trust? He might better say thus, The Word was
made Fleashe, the Nature, and Substance of the Word remaininge still: So the
Bread is made Fleashe, the Nature and Substance of the Bread nevertheless
remaininge still. And in this sort, Tertullian. contra Marcionem. lib 4.
the Old learned Father Tertullian speaks touching the same: Christus
acceptum Panem and distributum Discipulis, Corpus suum illum Fecit, dicendo,
Hoc est Corpus meum, hoc est, Figura Corporis mei. Christ taking the Bread,
and diuidiuge it to his Disciples, made it his Body, sa^einge, This is my
Body: That is to say, says Tertullian, This is a Figure of my Bod^e. Thus
the holy Fathers expound, what they meant by these words, The Bread is made
Christ's Body.

But S. Cyprian further allegeth to this purpose, Omnipotentia Verbi,
The Omnipotent Power of God, which, says M. Hardinge, Far ouerpoiseth al
the^e men's light fantasies. Thus he says, as though that without this light
fantasy of Transubstantiation, God could not be Omnipotent: or, as if there
were such woonderful weight in his Outward Shows, and Empty Accidents. But
God works mightily, and shows his Power Omnipotent, not only herein, but
also in all other his holy Mysteries, as it is before declared in the fifthe
Article, Leo Sermo 4. de (...).
and the.3. Division. Leo says, Christus dedit Aquae, quod dedit Matri. Virtus
enim Al^issimi, and obumbratio Spiritus Sancti, quae fecit, vt Maria pareret
Saluatorem, eadem fecit, vt Regeneraret vnda credentem. Christ g^ue to the
Water, that he g^ue to his Mother. For the power of the Highest, and the
ouer^hadow^nge of the Holy Ghost, that caused Marie to bear the Saueour, the
same Power has caused the Water to Regenerate the beleuer. To like purpose
says Chrysostom* Vt Sara^, non Natura, Omnipotentia.
sed Dei promissio fecit matre^ etc. As the promise of God, and not Nature made
Sara a Mother, Chrysostom. in Epi^tol. ad Galat. Cap. 4.
even so our Regeneration by Nature is nothing. But the Words of God,
which the Faithful know, being pronounced by the Priest in the Bathe of
Water, do form, and Regenerate him, that is Baptized, as it were, in his
mothers woombe. So they were wont to singe at the halowinge of the Font,
Descendat Spiritus Sanctus in hane plenitudinem Aquae, Totam Substantiam.
totamque eius Substantia^ Regenerationis foecunde^ effectu. Let thy Holy Ghost
come down into this fulness of Water, and let it fille the whole Substance
thereof with the effect of Regeneration. Thus Leo, Chrysostom, and other Old
Fathers, acknowledge the Omnipotency of God in the Sacrament of Baptism: yet
did they not think it therefore necessary, to Transubstantiate the Nature, and
Substance of the Water. The same S. Cyprian, (al be it in deed it is not S.
Cyprian, but a far later writer, as by good proufes it does appear)
writing only of the Blissinge of the Holy Oil, allegeth likewise the
omnipotent Power of God above Nature, His words be these, Sanctificatis
Elementis, iam non propria Natura praebet effectum: Cyprianus de unction
Chrismatis.
Sed Virtus Diuina potentius operatur: adest Veritas Signo, and Spiritus
Sacramento. It is not Nature, that gives effect unto the Element of Oil
being sanctified, but the Power of God works more mightily. The Truth is
Present with the Sign, and the Holy Ghost with the Sacrament. Therefore it was
no good Catholic Divines part, so lightly to shake of these New Masters
Sacramental changes, as matters of so small weight. It appears by these
Examples, that God therein shows his Omnipotent Power: and yet without any
Transubstantiation.

Now if neither these words, Panis Natura Mutatus: nor these words, Factus
est: nor these words, Omnipotentia Verbi: nor al these words together, be
hable to prove Transubstantiation, as it is clear by that is said already,
then is M. Hardinges fundation not well laid: and therefore we may the better
doubt of his Conclusion.

And, where as he says, These New Masters think it suiffcient to
acknowledge a Sacramental changinge, and to say, that the Bread is changed
into the Sacrament of Christ's Body, and that only for a shifte, it may
please him to remember, that Beda welneare niene hundred years ago, expounded
the same in like sort: and yet that notwithstanding, was never counted
neither Shifter, nor New Master. His words be plain: Panis, and Vini
Creatura, in Sacramentum Carnis, and Sanguinis Christi, ineffabili Spiritus
Sanctificatione transfertur. Beda in Octaui^ Epiphaniae.
The Creature of Bread and Wine, by the ineffable Sanctification of the
Sprite, is turned into the Sacrament of Christ's Fleashe, and Blood.

M. Hardinge. The.3. Division.
Nothing can be plainer to this purpose, De Conse. Did. 2. Ca. omnia quae
^^^que.
then the saieinges of S. Ambrose. Licet Figura Panis, and Vini videatur, This
place is Countrefeite, and not to be found in all S. Ambrose.
nihil tamen aliud, quam Caro Christi, and Sanguis, post Consecrationem
credendum est. Although, says he, the form of Bread, and Wine be seen, yet
after Consecration we must believe, they are nothing else, but the Fleashe,
and Blood of Christ. After the opinion of this Father, the show and figure
of Bread and Wine are seen, and therefore remain after Consecration. And if
we must believe, that which was Bread, and Wine before, to be none other
thing, but the Fleashe and Blood of Christ, then are they no other thing in
deed. For if they were, we might so believe. For belief is grounded upon
truth, and what so ever is not true, is not to be believed. Hereof it follows,
that after Consecration the accidents, and shows only remain without the
Substance of Bread and Wine. De Sacramentis. lib. 4. cap. 4. De ijs qui
initiantur.
In an other place he says as much. Panis iste, etc. This Bread before the
words of the Sacraments, is Bread: as soon as the Consecration comes, of
Bread is made the Body of Christ. Again in an other place he says most
plainly, That the power of Consecration is greater, then the Power of Nature:
Because Nature is changed by Consecration. By this Father it is evident, that
the Nature (178) Untruth, standinge in false interpretation: as shall appear.
that is to say, the Substance of Bread, and by Consecration being changed
into the Body, Accidents perform the Sacrament. A strange kind of
Divinity.
and Blood of Christ, their natural qualities, which be accidents,
continewinge unchanged for performance of the Sacrament, remain without the
Substance of Bread and Wine.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Ambroses Books be extant, and known. Emonge them al, these words are not
found. Gratian the reporter of them, either of purpose, or for want of
discretion, as a man living in a very barbarous, and corrupt season, allegeth
often one Doctoure for an other: the Greek, for the Latin: the New, for the
Old: as may soon appear to the learned Reader. This writer, whom M.
Hardinge would so feign have to pass by the name of Ambrose, in this very
place, purposely depraueth the Words of Christ, alleginge that for
Scripture, that is not to be found so written in all the Scriptures. Which is
not the manner of S. Amses dealinge.

But for contentation of the Reader, to answer that thing, that seems
worthy of no answer, we must understand, that the Bread, the Wine, and the
Water, of their own Nature, without further Consideration, are nothing else
but usual, and simple creatures. Augusti. contra Maximin. li. 3. Ambrosius de
ijs, qui initiantur Mysterijs. cap. 2.
And therefore S. Augustine gives this general rule touching the same, In
Sacraments we must consider, not what they be of them self, but what they
Signify. So S. Ambrose writes of the Water of Baptism: Quid vidisti? Aquas
vtique: sed no^ solas. Apostolus docuit, non ea co^templanda, quae videntur,
sed quae non videntur. What saw thou (in thy Baptism) Water no doubt:
but not only Water. The Apostle has taught us, to behold, not the things,
that be seen, but the things, that be not seen. Ambrosius de Sacramentis.
li. 4. cap. 4.
Otherwise touching the very Substance of the Bread, and the Wine, he says,
Sunt, quae erant: They be the same things, that they were. And immediately
before, he calls the Sacrament touching the Bread, and the Wine, which are
the material parts thereof, Ambros. de Sacram. li. 4. ca. 3. Creatura Solennis
and nota.
a Common, and a Known Creature.

Yet nevertheless, touching the effect of the Sacrament, we consider not the
corruptible Natures, or outward Elements, but direct our Faith only to the
Body, and Blood of Christ. S. Ambrose him self leads us thus to say, Ante
Benedictionem Verborum Coelestium alia species nominatur: Ambros. de ijs, qui
initiantur Mysterijs. cap. 9.
post Consecratione^ Corpus Christi Significatur. Before the Blissinge of the
Heavenly Words, it is called an other kind: but after the Consecration, the
Body of Christ is Signified.

But M. Hardinge will reply, This Ambrose says, Figura Panis, and Vini
videtur: The Figure of Bread, and Wine is seen: Therefore we must needs
confess, there are Accidents without a Subject. If any Old Writer, Greek,
or Latin: learned, or unlearned, ever used this Word, Figura, in this sense,
to wite, to signify a Show alone without any Substance, then may M. Hardinge
seem to say somewhat. If never any writer used it so, then have we good
cause, to doubt his Conclusion. Uerily, to leave other old writers of al
sorts, S. Ambrose him self says, Christus apparet in Figura Humana. Christ
appears in the Form, or Figure of a Man. Ambros. in Epistol. ad Colossen.
cap. 1.
And S. Paul says to like purpose, Formam Serui accepit: Christ took upon
him the Form of a Servant. I think, M. Hardinge will not warrant us upon the
force of these words, Philippen 2.
that Christ had only the Shape, and Show, and not the very Substance, and
Nature of a Man's Body. For in so saieinge, he should seem openly to
favor the Old condemned Heresy of the Manichees. In saieinge otherwise,
this word, Figura, cannot further his purpose.

But S. Ambrose says, Nihil aliud credendum: We must believe, there is
nothing else. Therefore, says M. Hardinge, There is no Bread. I marvel, he
has no further insight, nor better skill in his own Arguments. For here he
concludes a plain ^ontradictio^ against him self. For if there be nothing
else, but the Body of Christ, and we must also believe the same, then is there
neither Form, nor Figure, nor Weight, nor Sauoure there: which is contrary to
M. Hardinges own first position: and yet by these woo^des we must needs
believe it. The meaning is, as it is before said, that, according to the
Doctrine of S. Augustine, in all Sacraments we sequester our minds utterly
from the Sensible Creatures, and with our Faith behold only the things, that
thereby are represented.

For answer to the other two places of S. Ambrose here alleged, touching the
changinge of Natures, and making of Christ's Body, it may please thee,
gentle Reader, to remember that, yt is answered before in the Second Division
hereof, unto the Words of S. Cyprian. I trow M. Hardinge will not say, that
the Changinge of any thing is straight way the Corruption of the same. Origin
says, Origin. (...), lib. ^. Ca. 6.
Si mutabuntur Coeli, vtique non perit, quod mutatur. Al be it the Heavens shall
be Changed, yet the thing, that is Changed, is not therefore utterly
abolished, and put away. The question between us is not, whether the Bread be
the Body of Christ, or no: but whether in plain, and simple manner of
speech it be Fleashely, and Really the Body of Christ. Augustine. Epist. 23.
S. Augustine says, Secundum Quendam Modum Sacramentum Corporis Christi,
Corpus Christi est. After a Certain Manner (of speech) the Sacrament of
Christ's Body, is the Body of Christ. And S. Ambrose him self herein
seems well, and sufficiently to open his own meaning. For thus he writes,
as is before alleged: Ambros. de ijs qui initiantur Mysterijs ca. 9.
Post Consecrationem Corupus Christi Significatur: post Consecrationem sanguis
Christi Nuncupatur: In Typum Sanguinis Christi, nos Calicem Sanguinis Mysticum
percipimus: Carnem, and Sanguinem, quae pro nobis oblata sunt, Significamus:
Similitudinem pretiosi Sanguinis bibis: Est Figura Corporis, and Sanguinis
Domini: Ambros. 1. Corinthians. 11.
In Similitudinem accipis Sacramentum. After Consecration, the Body of Christ
is Signified: After Consecration, it is Called the Blood of Christ: We
receive the Mystical Cup of Blood, Ambros. de Sacra^. lib. 4. Ca. 4. De
Sacra. li. 4. Ca. 5.
in Example of the Blood of Christ: We Signify the Fleashe, and Blood of
Christ, that were offered for us: Thou drinkest the Likeness of that Pretiouse
Blood: It is a Figure of the Body: and Blood of our Lord: For a Likeness, or
Resemblance (of the Body of Christ) thou receiuest the Sacrament. Thus many
ways it seemed good to S. Ambrose, to qualify the heat, and rigor of his
other words.

Now, if M. Hardinge, as his manner is, will call al these, Naked Signs, and
Bare Figures, let him then remember, he makes sport, and game at S. Ambrose,
his own Doctor* But the Sacraments of Christ, notwithstanding they be
Signs, and Figures, as they be commonly called of all the Old Fathers, yet are
they not therefore Bare, and Naked. For God by them, like as also by his Holy
Word, works mightily, and effectually in the hearts of the Faithful.
Touching the force of Gods word, Ambros. in Lucam li. 5. Ca. 7.
S. Ambrose writes thus: Vidimus, and oculis nostris perspeximus, and in
vestigia Clauoru^ eius digitos nostros inseruimus. Videmur enim nobis vidisse,
quem legimus, spectasse pendentem, and vulnera eius Spiritu Ecclesiae scru^ante
tentasse. We have seen him, and beholden him with our eyes, and have thrust
our fingers into the very holes of his nails. For we seem to have seen him,
whom we have read, and to have beholden him hanginge on the Cross, and with
the feelinge Sprite of the Church, to have searched his Wounds. Cyprian. de
Coena Domini.
So says S. Cyprian, Cruci haeremus, and Sanguinem sugimus, and intra ipsa
Redemptoris nostri vulnera figimus linguam. We cleave to the Cross, and suck
up the Blood, and thrust our tongues even within the Wounds of our Redeemer.
And in this respect S. Ambrose says, Baptismus est Mysterium, quod oculus
non vidit, Ambrosius de ijs qui initiantur Mysterijs. Ca. 4.
nec auris audiuit, nec in Cor hominis ascendit. Baptism is, (not bare Water,
but) a Mystery, that the eye never saw, the ear never heard, nor never
entered into the heart of Man. In respect hereof, the Element of Water seems
nothing. Even so in respect of Christ's Body, and Blood, that are
represented, the Bread, and Wine seem nothing. Thus, S. Ambrose says, in
either Sacrament the power of Consecration is greater, then the power of
Nature: Thus by Consecration Nature is Changed.

M. Hardinge. The.4. Division.
According to the which meaning Theodoretus says, Substance, and Nature not
changed.
Videri and tangi possunt, sicut prius: intelliguntur autem ea esse, quae facta
sunt, and creduntur. Dialog*
The Bread and Wine may be seen and felt, eas before Consecration: but they
are understood to be the things, which they are made, and believed.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Here, good Christian Reader, I beseech the to consider thus much by the way.
In the University of Oxforde, Anno. 1554.
and in the late Solemn Disputation holden there against that godly Father,
and Martyr of blissed Memory D. Cranmere the Archbishop of Canturburie, the
Authority of this Father Theodoretus was utterly refused in open audience, for
that he was a Grecian: and therefore not thought to judge Catholiquely of the
Sacraments, according to the late Determination of the Church of Rome.
Which thing notwithstanding, it appears, M. Hardinge has now reconciled
him, and made him Catholic. How be it, this thing seems very strange, that
one man, in the vtteringe of one Sentence, without any manner alteringe, or
change of Word, should be both an Heretic, and a Catholic, both
together.

Concerning the greatest Substance hereof, this place of Theodoretus is
answered before, in the eighth Article, and in the.28. Division. Here he
says, That the Bread, and the Wine are seen, and touched, as they were
before. Hereof M. Hardinge concludes thus, Ergo, there is neither Bread, nor
Wine remaininge, but only Accidents, and shows without Substance. This
Argument of it self is strange, and woonderful, and the more, for that it
concludes plain contrary, not only to the meaning, but also to the
express, and evident words of Theodoretus. For thus his words lie:
Theodoret. Dialogo. 1. Immutabilis.
Qui se ipsum appellauit vitem, ille Symbola, and Signa, quae videntur,
appellatione Corporis and Sanguinis honorauit: non Naturam mutans, etc. He that
calls him self the Vine, honored the Signs, and Tokens, (whereby he
means the Sacraments) that be seen, with the name of his Body, and Blood:
not changinge the Nature thereof, etc. Theodoretus in Dialogo. 2. Inconfusus.
And again, Signa Mystica post Sanctificationem non recedunt a Natura sua.
Manent enim in priori Substantia. The Mystical Signs after the Consecration
depart not from their own Nature. For they remain in their former Substance.

Now let us compare this text with M. Hardinges Gloss. Theodoretus says, The
Bread, and Wine depart not from their Own Nature: M. Hardinge says, They
depart utterly from their Own Nature. Theodoretus says, The Bread, and
Wine remain in their former Substance: M. Hardinge says, There remain
only the Shows, and Accidents of Bread, and Wine, without any their former
Substance. It is a bold Gloss, that thus dares to overthrow the manifest
meaning of the Text. I trow such dealinge should be rectified by a Write
of Error.

Of these plain words of Theodoretus, we may well conclude thus against M.
Hardinge: The Substance of the Bread, and Wine remains still, as it was
before: Therefore the Accidents, and Shows of Bread and Wine, be not there
without their Substance. For the rest, How these Mystical Signs be
understood, and believed to be the Body, and Blood of Christ, it is
answered before, in the eighth Article, and.28. Division.

M. Hardinge. The.5. Division.
We do not in like sort (says S. Augustine) take these two forms of
Bread, In li. sent. Prosperi. de Co^sec. did. 2. Ca. No^ autem. D^ verbis
Domini secundu^ Luc^ Sermo. 1^.
and Wine after Consecration, as we took them before. Sith that we grant
faithfully, that before Consecration it is Bread and Wine, that Nature has
shapte: but after Consecration, that it is the Fleashe, and Blood of Christ,
that the Blessinge has Consecrated. In an other place he says, that this is
not the Bread which goes into the Body (179) The.179. Untruth. For Rabanus
says, Sacramentum in alimentu^ Corporis redigitur.
(meaning for Bodily sustenance) but that Bread of life, qui animae nostrae
substantiam fulcit. Which susteineth the substance of our Soul.

The B. of Sarisburie.
The former of these two places, may be easily discharged by that, is answered
before to the words of S. Ambrose, in the 3. Division hereof. S. Augustine
speaks of the changinge, and auancinge of the Natures of Bread, and Wine,
unto a Spiritual, and Divine use, and not of the abolishinge of the same. As
for Accidents, and Shows standinge without Subject, and Substance, he says
nothing. True it is, The Bread, before the Consecration, was nothing else but
Bare, and Common Bread: now it is a^anced, and made a Sacrament of Christ's
Body, and Blood: not by Nature, but by Consecration, above Nature.
Chrysostom says, Chrysostom. in Matthew. homi. 83.
Oculis intellectus ista perspiciamus. Nihil enim Sensibile tradidit nobis
Christus etc. Sic and in Baptismo. Let us behold these things with the eyes
of our mind: for Christ has delivered to us nothing, that is Sensible etc.
So likewise in Baptism. I think, M. Hardinge will not deny, but the Water in
Baptism is a thing Sensible: likewise, that the Bread, and Wine in the holy
Mysteries, or, at the least, the Accidents, and Shows thereof, are things
Sensible. But S. Chrysostom withdraws us from the Bread, the Wine, the
Water, and al other like things, that be Sensible, to the consideration of the
Body, and Blood of Christ, that are not Sensible: in comparison whereof, all the rest are consumed, and seem nothing.

Touching the second place, The words be written both in S. Augustine, and
also in a Book, Ambros. de Sacramen. li. 5. c. 4.
that is commonly known by the name of S. Ambrose De Sacramentis: the meaning
whereof nothing toutcheth, neither the Bread, nor the Wine: but only the
Body, and Blood of Christ, which thereby are represented. And therefore
this place so unadvisedly chosen, can little further M. Hardinges fantasy of
empty Accidents, hanginge, I know not how, without Substance.

The words be plain of them self without further Exposition. Non iste
Panis, qui vadit in Corpus: sed ille Panis vitae aeternae, qui animae nostrae
Substantiam fulcit. Not this Bread, that passes into the Body: but that
Bread of everlasting life, that strengthens the Substance of our Soul. M.
Hardinge knows, that the Sacrament is received into our Bodies. Rabanus
says, Sacramentum ore percipitur, Rabanus Maurus lib. 1. Ca. 31. Cyprian. de
Coena Domini.
and in alimentum Corporis redigitur. The Sacrament is received with the
mouth, and is turned to the nourrishement of the Body. But the Body of
Christ, as S. Cyprian says, Est Cibus Me^tis, non Ventris, is meat for the
Mind, not for the Belly. So S. Augustine says, Panis iste interioris Hominis
quaerit esuriem. Augustine. in Johan. tract. 26.
This Bread seeks the hunger of the Inner Man. Intus bibendo foelix sum,
Drinkinge in my heart within, I am made happy.

Tertullian says, Augustine. in Johan. tract. 25.
Ruminandus intellectu, and fide digerendus est. That meat ought to be chewed
with understanding, and to be digested with Faith. Likewise Chrysostom, Magnus
iste Panis, Tertullian. de Resurrectione Carnis.
qui replet Me^tem, non Ventrem: This great Bread, that fills the mind,
and not the belly. Of this Bread S. Ambrose speaks, and not of the
Sacrament, that is received into the Body. Wherefore it appears, M. Hardinge
was not well advised, Chrysostom. ex varijs locis in Matthae. homi. 9.
how little this place would make for his purpose. The Old Father Origin
says, Accidit, vt simpliciores quidam, nescientes distinguere, quae sint,
quae in Scripturis Diuinis Interiori Homini, quae vero Exteriori deputanda
^int, vocabulorum similitudine falsi, Origin. in Prologo in Cantica Canti.
ad ineptas quasdam Fabulas, and figmenta inania se contulerint. It happens,
that simple folk, being not hable to discern, what things they be in the
Holy Scriptures, that are to be applied to the Inner Man, and what to the
Utter, being deceived by the likeness of Words, turn themselves to vain
imaginations, and foolish Pab^es.

M. Hardinge. The. 6. Division.
No man can speak more plainly hereof, then Cyrillus Hierosolymitanus, an
Old Auctour, who wrote in Greek, and is extant, but as yet remaininge in
written hand, and commen to the sight of few learned men: his words be not
much unlike the words of the School Doctors. Praebetur Corpus (...), in
specie, sieve figura Panis. Item, praebetur sanguis (...). Christ's Body
(says he) is given us in form, or figure of Bread. Again, his Blood is
given us in form of Wine. A little after th^se words he says thus, (...),
etc. It is not Bare Bread: Ergo, it is Bread.
Ne men^em adhibeas quasi Pani, and vino nudis: sunt enim haec Corpus, and
sanguis, vt Dominus pronunciauit. Nam tametsi illud tibi sensus suggerit, esse,
scilicet, Panem and Vinum nudum, tamen firme^ te Fides, and ne gustatu rem
di^udices, quin potius pro certo, ac comperto habe, omni dubitatione relicta,
esse tibi impartitum Corpus, and sanguinem Christi. Consider not (says this
Father) these as bare Bread, and Wine. For these are his Body, and Blood,
as our Lord said. For although thy sense report to thee so much, that it is
bare Bread, and Wine, yet let thy Faith stay thee, and judge not thereof by
thy taste, but rather be right well assured, al doubt put aparte, that the
Body and Blood of Christ is given to thee. Again he says thus in the same
place, Haec cum scias, and pro certo and explorato habeas, (180) The.180.
Vntruethe, Standinge in willful corruption of the Authors Words, and
meaning, as shall appear.
qui videtur esse Panis, non esse, sed Corpus Christi, item, quod vide^ur
vinum, non esse, quanquam id velit sensus, sed sanguine^ Christi, ac de eo
Prophetam dixisse, Panis Cor hominis confirmat: firma ipse Cor, sumpto hoc
pane, vtpote Spirituali, Where as thou know this for a very certe^tie, that
that which seems to be Wine, is not Wine, al be it the sense makes that
acco^pte of it, but the Blood of Christ, and that the Prophet thereof said,
Bread strengthens the heart of man: strengthen then thee self thy heart, by
taking this Bread as that which is spiritual. And in the.3. Catechesi this
Father says, Panis Eucharistiae post inuocationem Sancti Spiritus, non amplius
est Panis nudus and simplex, sed Corpus etc. The Bread of the Sacrament after
prayer made to the Holy Ghost, is not bare, and simple Bread, but the Body of
Christ.

No we, sith that by this Doctors plain declaration of the Catholic Faith
in this point, we ought to believe, and to be verily assured, that the Bread
is no more Bread after Consecration, but the very Body of Christ, and the
Wine no more Wine, but his pretiouse Blood, though they seem to the eye
otherwise, though taste, and feelinge judge otherwise, and to be short, though
al senses report the contrary, and all this upon warrant of our Lords word,
who said these to be his Body and Blood: and that (as he teaches) not in
the Bread and Wine: And further sith we are taught by Eusebius Nevvely set
abroad, and justly suspected.
Emissenus, in Homilies of Eas^er to believe terrena commutari, and transire,
the earthly things to be changed, and to pass: again, Creaturas conuerti in
substantiam Corporis Christi, The Creatures of Bread and Wine to be turned
into the substance of our Lords Body and Blood, which is the very
Transubstantiation: and sith Chrysostom In Comparison of Christ's Body, that
is represented, the Bread is no^thinge.
says Panem absumi, that the Bread is consumed away by the Substance of
Christ's Body: Such a supernatural change there is in the water of Baptism,
and in all Sacraments.
And Damascen, Bread and Wine Transmu^ari supernaturaliter, Lib. 4. de
Orthodoxa fide ca. 14. In Mar. 14. In Matthew. 26.
to be changed above the course of nature: and Theophylacte, the Bread Even
so Theophilacte says, Nos transelementamur, in Christum.
transelementari in Carnem Domini, to be quite turned by chaunginge of the
Elements, that is, the matter of Substance it consists of, into the Fleashe
of our Lord: and that in an other place, Ineffabili operatione transformari,
etiamsi Panis nobis videatur, that the Bread is transformed and changed into
an other substantial form, (he means that of our Lords Body) by
unspeakable workinge, though it seem to be Bread: Finally, sith that the
Greek Doctors of late age, affirm the same doctrine, among whom These
four, Samona, Methonensis, Cabasilas, and Marcus Ephesius are late VVriters,
void of credit: yet al enemies to Transubstantiation.
Samona uses for persuasion of it the similitude, which Gregory Nyssene, and
Damascene for declaration of the same used before: which is, that in
Consecration such manner Transubstantiation is made, as is the Conversion of
the Bread in nourishinge, in which it is turned into the Substance of the
nourished: Methonensis, like S. Ambrose, would not men in this matter to look
for the order of nature, saying that Christ was borne of a Virgin biside al
order of nature, and says that our Lords Body in this Sacrament, is
received under the form or shape of an other thing, Cap. 27.
lest blood should cause it to be horrible: Ni^olaus Cabasila says, that
this Bread is no more a Figure of our Lords Body, neither a gift bearinge
an Image of the true gift, nor bearinge any des^^ription of the Passions of
our Savior him self, as it were in a Table, but the true gift it self, Bare
Bread. Bare Oil.
the most holy Body of our Lord it self, which has truly received
reproaches, contumelies, stripes, which was crucified, which was killed:
Marcus Ephesius though otherwise to be rejected, as he that obstinately
resisted the determination of the Council of Florence concerning the
proceedinge of the holy Ghost out of the Son, This Marcus Ephesians. wilfully
depraueth S. Basiles words. Two sorts of Consecration: the one Perfect,
the other Imperfect.
yet a sufficient of the Greek Churches Faith in this point, affirminge the
things offered to be called of S. Basile Antitypa, that is, the samplers, and
Figures of our Lords Body, because they be not yet Perfitely consecrated, but
as yet bearinge the Figure, and Image, refers the Change or
Transubstantiation of them to the holy Ghost, Donec Spiritus Sanctus adueniat,
qui ea mutet, These gifts offered (says he) be of S. Basile called Figures,
until the holy Ghost come upon them, to change them. Whereby he shows the
Faith of the Greek Church, that through the holy Ghost in Consecration, the
Bread and Wine are so changed, as they may no more be called Figures, but
the very Body and Blood of our Lord it self, as into the same changed by
the coming of the holy Ghost. Which change is a change in substance, and
therefore it may rightly be termed Transubstantiation, which is nothing else
but a turninge or chaunginge of one Substance into an other Substance.

The B. of Sarisburie.
This Cyrillus Hierosolymitanus is an Old Author newely set forth. I will
not call his credit into question: notwithstanding many of his considerations
be very much like to M. Hardinges judgment in this Article, that is to say,
like Accidens sine Subiecto, A show of words without Substance. He seems
both in words, and sense fully to agree with Chrysostom, Oecumenius, and
other Greek Fathers, that never understood this M. Hardinges New Religion.
He shuts up the Hearers bodily eyes, wherewith they see the Bread, and
Wine: and boroweth only the Inner eyes of their minds, wherewith they may see
the very Body, and Blood of Christ, which is that Bread, that came from
Heaven. And herein, notwithstanding his words be quick, and violent, the
more to stir, and inflame the hearts of them, unto whom he speaks, yet he
him self in plainest wise opens, and clears his own meaning. For thus he
writes, Ne consideres, tanquam Panem Nudum: Panis Eucharistiae non est amplius
Panis Simplex, and Nudus. Catechesis Mystagogica. 4.
Consider it not, as if it were Bare Bread: The Bread of the Sacrament is no
longer Bare and Simple Bread. Which words are naturally resolved thus: It
is Bread: how be it not only bare Bread: but bread, and some other thing
else biside. So, where they of M. Hardinges side are woonte to say, Papa non
est Purus homo: The Pope is not a Bare man, I trow, their meaning is not,
That the Pope is no man: but only, that he is a man, and yet besides that,
has an other Capacity, above the condition, and state of common men. Of these
words of Cyrillus we may well reason thus by the way: The Sacrament is not
only, or Bare Bread: Therefore it is Bread, al be it not only Bare Bread.
And thus the same Cyrillus, that is brought to testify, that there remains
no Bread in the Sacrament, testifies most plainly to the contrary, that
there is Bread remaininge in the Sacrament.

And although this answer of it self might seem sufficient, yet (good
Christian Reader) for thy better satisfaction, I pray thee further to
understand, that, as this Cyrillus speaks here of the Sacrament of Our
Lords Body, and Blood, even so, and in like phrase, and form of words, he
speaks of the Oil, that they call Holy, of the Water of Baptism, and of
other Ceremonies. Of the Oil he writes thus, and further by the same
expounds his meaning touching the Sacrament: Vide, ne illud putes esse
Vnguentum tantum. Cyrillus in Catechesi Mystagogica tertia.
Quemadmodum enim Panis Eucharistiae, post Sancti Spiritus Inuocationem, non
amplius est Panis Communis, sed Corpus Christi: sic and Sanctum hoc Vnguentum,
non amplius est Vnguentum Nudum, neque Commune, sed est Charisma Christi.
Beware, thou think not, this to be Oil only. For as the Bread of the
Sacrament, after the Invocation of the Holy Ghost is no longer Common Bread,
but the Body of Christ: so this Holy oil is no longer Ba^e, Spiritual.
or Common Oil, but it is the Grace of Christ.

By these words there appears like change in the one, as in the other. As
the Oil is the Grace of Christ, so is the Bread the Body of Christ: and as
the Nature, and Substance of the Oil remains still, although it be not Bare,
or Common Oil, so the Nature, or substance of the Bread remains still,
although it be not Common, or Bare Bread.

In like sort he writes of the Water of Baptism. Cyrillus in Catechesi.
Illuminatorum. 3.
Non tanquam Aquae Simplici studeas huic La^achro: Ne Aquae Simplicita^i mentem
adhibeas. Behold not this Bathe, as Simple Water: Consider not the
Simplicity of the Water. Of these conferences of places, we may well geather
thus: The Water in ye Holy Mystery of Baptism, notwithstanding it be not
Bare, and Common Water, yet nevertheless contineweth still in the Nature, and
Substance of very Water: So likewise the Bread in the Holy Mystery of
Christ's Body, notwithstanding it be not Bare, and Common Bread, yet
nevertheless in Nature, and Substance is Bread still.

But Cyrillus says, It is no Bread, it is no Wine, notwithstanding it
appear so unto the senses: Chrysostom says, The substance of Bread is
consumed: Emissenus says, It is turned into the substance of Christ's Body:
and Damascenus, and Theophylactus, later writers of no great credit, auouche
the same.

It is plain, that both Cyrillus, and al other old learned Fathers labor
evermore with all vehemency, and force of words, to sequester, and pulle
their hearers from the judgment of their senses, to behold that Bread, that
gives life unto the world. And therefore he calls it Spiritual Bread: and
of Christ's Blood he says thus, C^techesis Mystago. 4.
Bibe vinum in cord tuo, Spirituale, scilicet, vinum. Drink that Wine (not
with thy Bodily mouth, but) in they heart: I mean that Spiritual Wine. Again
he shows, wherefore the Jews were offended with Christ, and opens the
very cause of the grossenes of their error. Catechesis Mystago. 4.
Iudaei non audientes Verba Christi secundum Spiritum, Scandaliza^i abierunt
re^ro, eo quod existimarent sefe ad humanaru^ Carnium esum incitari. The Jews,
not hearing Christ's Words according to the Sprite, were offended, and
went from him, for that they thought, they were encourraged to eat Man's
Fleashe. The translatour has turned it, Quod Christus est Dominus: being, as I
judge, deceived ly the likeness of these two ^oordes, (...), and (...).
Again he says, Gustate, and videte, quod suauis est Dominus. Number hoc
Corporeo palato, vt istud dijudicetis, vobis praecipit^? Nequaqua^: sed potius
certa Fide. Taste, and see, that the Lord is delectable. What, are you
commanded to judge this with your Bodily mouth? No, not so: but with
undoubted Faith.

In this sense the Water in Baptism gives place to the Blood of Christ, and
of it self seems nothing: Likewise the Bread in the Sacrament of Christ's
Body gives place to the Body of Christ, and in respect thereof is utterly
nothing. Which thing concerning the Water of Baptism, Paulinus seems to
express thus. Fonsque nouus renouans hominem: quia suscipit, and dat In
Catechesi Mystag. 5. Chrysosto. in Psalm. 22.
sieve magis quod de^init esse per vsum,

Likewise Chrysostom, Non erit Aqua Potationis, sed Sanctificationis: It shall
not be Water to Drink, (as it was before) but Water of S^nctification (as
before it was not) This is the very Substance of the Sacraments: in respect
whereof the corruptible Elements of Bread, Wine, and Water, are consumed, and
taken for nothing.

This thing Chrysostom expresses notably to the eye by this example.
Chrysostom. de Fide, and Lege.
Lanae, cum tinguntur, naturae suae nomen amittunt, and tincturae nomen
accipiunt: and non vltra vocas Lanam, sed, vel Purpura^, vel Coccinu^. vel
Prasinum: etc. Wool, when it is died, loses the name of his own Nature, and
takes the name of the Color. Thou call it no longer wool, but Purple, or
Scarlet, or green, etc. Notwithstanding, the very Substance of Wool remains
still.

And so Pachymeres says, Nothing in comparison.
The Holy Oil is no l^nger called Oil, but it is turned into Christ. His
words be plain, Oleum enim est Christus. For the Cile is Christ. Not
meaning thereby, that the Oil is no Oil, but only, that in respect of
Christ, that thereby is Signified, the Oil is Consumed, The Oil is Christ.
and appears nothing. So Paulus, that Famous learned Lawier says, Res vna
per praeualentia^ trahit aliam. One thing by force of greater weight,
Pachymeres in Diony. de Ecclesias. Hierar. ca. 4 (...).
draws an other with it.

Thus therefore says Cyrillus, The Bread, that we see, is now not Bread,
^ut Christ's Body: and the Wine, that we see, is now not Wine, but Christ's
Blood. As if he should say, These Elements, or Creatures, are not so much the
things, that they be in deed, as the things, that they represent. For so S.
Augustine says generally of al Sacraments, ff. De r^i Vendi^ catione. In rem.
Paulus.
as it has been alleged once, or twice before: In Sacraments we may not
consider, what they be in deed, but what they signify. And to the same end
S. Ambrose says, Magis videtur, quod non videtur. It is better seen, that is
not seen. Augusti. contra Maxim^^. li. 3.
And all this is wrought, both in the Mystery of Baptism, and also in the
Mystery of Christ's Body, not by the work, or force of Nature, but by the
Omnipotent power of the Sprite of God, Ambrose. de ijs qui initiantur
Myst^rijs. ca. 3.
and by the warrant of Christ's Word.

Thus Emissenus, thus Damascene, thus Theophylacte say, the Bread is changed
into the Substance of Christ's Body: I mean, even so, as the same
Theophylacte says, Theophylact. in 6. ca. Johan.
We our selves are Transelemented (and Transubstantiate) into the Body of
Christ. For thus he imagines Christ to say, Miscetur mihi, and
Transelementatur in me. And in like sort Chrysostom speakinge of the
Corruption and Renewinge of the world, Chrysostom. in ^ene hom^ 25. 2. Petri.
1.
says thus, Opus erat quasi Reelementationem quandam fieri. It was needeful,
that the Elements were (Transubstantiate, or) made new. So S. Peter says,
Efficimur consortes Diuinae naturae. We are made partakers of the Divine
Nature.

And a Heathen writer says, Mercurius Trismegistus in Aesculapio.
Homo transit in Naturam Dei: A man is turned into the Nature of God.

Al these, and other like Phrases of speech, must be qualified with a sober,
and a discrete construction: otherwise according to the simple tenor of the
words, they cannot stand. Chrysostom. in Johan. hom. 39.
Therefore S. Chrysostom entreating of the Exposition of the Scriptures, says
thus, Diuina opus est Gratia, ne nudis verbis insistamus. Nam ita Haeretici in
errorem incidunt, neque Sententiam, neque Auditoris habitum inquirentes.

Nisi enim tempora, locos, auditorem, and alia huiusmodi consideremus, multa
sequentur absurda. We have need of Gods Heavenly Grace, that we stand
not upon the Bare Words. For so Heretics fall into error, never
consideringe neither the mind (of the Speaker) nor the disposition of the
Hearer. Unless we weigh the Times, the Places, the Hearers, Bertram. de
Sacramen. Eucha.
and other like Circumstances, many inconveniences must needs follow. Uerily
Bertramus an Ancient writer says, Ipse, qui nunc in Ecclesia etc. He that now
in the Church by his Omnipotent Power Spiritually turns the Bread, and the
Wine into the Fleashe, and Blood of his Body, the same inuisibly made his
Body of the Manna, Manna made Christ's Body.
that came from Heaven: and of the Water, that flowed from the Rock,
inuisibly he made his own Blood. Thus, as the Fathers say, Manna was made
Christ's Body, or the Water in the Wilderness was made his Blood, even so
they say, The Bread, and Wine are likewise made Christ's Body, and Blood.

Now, that it may thoroughly appear, even unto the Simple, what the godly
Fathers meante by such extraordinary use of speech, it shall not be from the
purpose to report certain words of Gregorius Nyssenus touching the same,
and that in such order, Gregor. Nyssen. de Sancto Baptism.
as they are written. Thus therefore he says, Nam and hoc Altar etc. This
Altar, whereat we stand, is by Nature a Common stoane, nothing differinge
from other st^anes, whereof our walls be builte, and our pauementes laid: but
after that, it is once dedicate to the honor of God, and has received
Blessinge, it is a holy Table, and an undefiled Altar, afterward not to be
touched of al men, but only of the Priests, and that with reverence. Greek
Church. Figure.
Likewise the Bread, that first was common, after that the Mystery has
hallowed it, is both called, and is Christ's Body: likewise also the wine
Christ's Blood. And where as before they were things of small valewe, after
the Blissinge, that comes from the Holy Ghost, either of them both works
mightily. The like Power also makes the Priest to be Reverend, and Honorable,
being by mean of a new Benediction divided from the common sort of the
people. Hereby we see, as the Aultare, which in some places, both for
steadines, and continewan^e, was made of stoane, was changed from the former
state, and yet remained stoane still: and as the Priest, or Bishop was changed
from that, he was before, and yet remained in Substance one man still: so by the
judgment of this Ancient Father, the Bread, and Wine are changed into
Christ's Body, and Blood, and yet remain Bread, and Wine in Nature still.

And, for as much as M. Hardinge, to make good, and to maintain this his New
Error, has here alleged together niene Doctors of ye Greek Church, as
subscribinge, and well agreeinge thereto, understand thou, good Christian
Reader, for the better information, and direction of they judgment, that the
Grecians never consented to the same, from the first preachinge of the Gospel
there until this day, Council. Florent. Sessione vltima. Io. Scotus in. 4.
senten. did. 10.
as it is easy to be seen in the last action of the General Council holden at
Florence. And Duns him self, having occasion to entreat hereof, writes thus:
Ad hanc sententiam principaliter videtur mouere, quod de Sacramentis tenendum
est, sicut tenet sancta Romana Ecclesia. Ipsa autem tenet, Panem
Transubstantiari in Corpus, and Vinum in Sanguinem. To this determination this
thing seems specially to lead, that we must hold of the Sacraments, as
the holy Church of Rome holds etc. For Confirmation hereof he allegeth, not
the Greek Church, as knowinge, it had evermore holden the contrary, but only
the Particular Determination of the Church of Rome, concluded first in the
Council of Lateran, Concilium Lateranen. sub Innocen. 3. An. 1215.
in the year of our Lord a Thousand, two hundred, and fifteen, and never
before.

And Isidorus the Bishop of Russia, for that after his return home from the
Council of Florence, Romanus Patritius in historia de Nouo Orb.
he began to practice both for unity herein, and also in all other causes, to
be concluded bytweene his Churches, and the Church of Rome, was therefore
deposed from his office, and utterly forsaken of al his Cleregie. So well they
liked this New divise of Transubstantiation.

M. Hardinge will reply, Cyrillus says, (...), which he expounds, In
specie, vel Figura Panis: In the Form, or Figure of Bread: And this, as he
imagines, is as much, as Accidents without Subject. What manner
consideration leads him hereto, I cannot tell. But it is most certain, that
by this very way, the Old Heretics were leadde into their Errors. Marcion
the Heretic held, that Christ appeared not in the very Natural Body of a
Man, but only in a fantasy, or show of a man's Body. And to prove the
same, he used M. Hardinges reason: Philippen. 2.
For it is written said he, In Similitu dinem hominum factus est, and Figura
inuentus ut homo. He was made after the Likeness of men, and found in Figure
(which M. Hardinge expounds, in Shows, and Accidents) as a man. And S.
Ambrose says, Ambros. li. 7. Epist. 48.
Nec sibi blandiatur virus Apollinare, quia ita legitur, Et Specie inue^tus, vt
homo. Let not that Heretic Apollinaris flatter him self, for that it is thus
written, He was found in Figure, and Form, as a man. Here we see, M. Hardinge
is driven to fight with Old Heretics Weapens: Ambros. ad Colossen. 1.
otherwise his friends would not judge him Catholic. S. Ambrose says,
Christ appeared In Figura humana, In the Figure of a Man. Origin. (...) li. 1.
c. 2.
Origin says, C^^ristus est expressa Imago, and Figura Patris: Christ is the
express Image, and Figure of his Father.

Again S. Ambrose says, Ambrosi. de ijs, qui ^^it^antur Mysterijs. Ca. 3.
Grauior est ferri species, quam Aquarum Natura. The Form of y^on is heavier,
then the Nature of the Water. And Gregory Nyssene says, Gregorius Nyssen de
Sancto Baptismate.
Sacerdos quod ad speciem externam attinet, idem est qui suit: The priest, as
touching his appearance, or outward Form, is the same, that he was before.
And will M. Hardinge geather hereof, that Christ, or a Piece of iron, or a
Priest, is nothing else, but an Accident, or a Show without Substance?

Bysides all this, M. Hardinge is feign to falsify Cyrillus, his own Doctoure,
and to allege his words othe^wise, then he found them. For, where as in the
common Latin Translation it is written thus, Sciens, panem hunc, qui videtur a
nobis, non esse Panem, etiamsi gustus Panem esse sentiat: Knowinge, that this
Bread, that is seen of us, is no Bread, al be it our taste do perceive it
to be Bread: M. Hardinge has chosen rather to turn it thus: Cum scias, qui
videtur esse Panis, non esse, sed Corpus Christi: M. Hardinge of purpose
falsifieth and corrupts the Old Fathers.
Knowinge, that the thing, that seems to be Bread, is no Bread, but the
Bod^e of Christ. Wherein he has both skipte over one whole clause, and also
corrupted the words, and meaning of his Author. For Cyrillus says, With
our outward eyes we see Bread. M. Hardinge says, It appears, or seems
only to be Bread. Cyrillus says, Our taste perceives ( or knows) it to be
Bread: This clause M. Hardinge has leaft out, both in his Latin Translation,
and also in the English.

But speakinge of the Cup he turns it thus, Al be it the sense make that
accoumpte of it. Corrupt Doctrine must needs hold by Corruption. For it is
certain, Cyrillus meante thus, That as we have two sorts of eyes, Corporal of
the Body, and Spiritual of the Mind: so in the Sacraments we have two
sundry things to behold:

With our Bodily Eyes, the Material Bread: With our Spiritual Eyes, the very
Body of Christ. And thus the Words of Cyril agree directly with these
Words of S. Augustine. August. in Sermon ad Infantes.
Quod videtis, Panis est: quod etiam oculi vestri renuntiant. Quod autem Fides
vestra postulat instruenda, Panis est Corpus Christi. The thing that you see,
is Bread: which thing your eyes do testify. But touching that, your Faith
would be instructed of, the Bread is Christ's Body: in such sort, and
sense, as is said before.

Samona, Methonensis, and Cabasilas are very young to be alleged, or allowed
for Doctors. As for Marcus Ephesius, he seems well to brook his name. For
his talk renneth altogether ad Ephesios. For where as S. Basile in his
Liturgy, after ye Words of Consecration, calls the Sacrament (...), that
is to say, a Token, or a Sign of Christ's Body: this Doctor Marcus
imagines of him self, that S. Basile speaks thus of the Bread, before it be
Consecrate. A very Child would not so Childishely have gheassed at his
Authors meaning. Yet M. Hardinge herein seems not much to misselike his
judgment. How be it he knows that the Bread before Consecration, is
neither Sacrament, nor Sign of Christ's Body: no more then any other common
bakers Bread. Otherwise it should be a Sign, and signify nothing: and a
Sacrament, before it were Consecrate, and made a Sacrament.

Yet D. Steven Gardener seems to consider better, and more advisedly of the
matter. Steph. Gardin^r ad Object. 185.
For he thinks it likely, that Basiles Liturgy was disordred, and that set
bihinde, that should have benne before: and that one ignorant Simple Scribe,
corrupted al those books throughout the whole world. M. Hardinge says, S.
Basile calls the Bread (...), a Sign, or Token, before it be Perfitely
Consecrate: As if there were two sorts of Consecration, the one Perfect, the
other Unperfite. And yet he knows, it is commonly holden in the Schools,
that the very beginning, and end of Consecration is wrought, not by degrees,
but in an Instant. Thus Consecration, is no Consecration: No Sacrament, is a
Sacrament: That is a Sign, is no Sign: that is no Sign, is a Sign: Books
be corrupted and disordred: That comes after, that should go before: and
that is before, that should come after. And yet al these shi^tes will scarsely
serve to healpe out a Common Error.

M. Hardinge. The.7. Division.
Sith for this point of our Religion, we have so good authority, (181)
The.181. Untruth. for this Infallible Faith was unknown to the Primitive
Church, and openly refused of the Greek Church in the Council of Florence.
and being assured of the infallible faith of the Church, declared by the
testimonies of these worthy Fathers, of diverse ages, and quarters of the
world: we may well say with the same Church against M. Iuel, that in this
Sacrament after Consecration, there remains nothing of that, which was
before, but only the accidents, and shows, without the substance of Bread
and wine.

The B. of Sarisburie.
The certainty of this Article, rests only upon the most uncertain ground
of Transubstantiation. The Determination whereof, for so much as it is not
much more then three hundred years old, nor necessarily geathered of the
force of Gods Word, as Duns him self confesses, nor ever anywhere
received, sauinge only in the Church of Rome, therefore is neither so
Infallible, as M. Hardinge makes it, nor so Ancient, nor so Catholic.

Time will not suffer me, to say so much, as might be said to the contrary.

S. Paul acknowledges very Bread remaining still in the Sacrament, 1. Corinthians. 11.
and that such Bread, as may be Divided, and Broken: which words cannot
without Blasphemy be spoken of the Body of Christ it self, but only of
very Material Bread. Matthaei. 26.
Christ likewise after Consecration, acknowledges the remaininge of very
Wine, and that such Wine, as is pressed of the grape. For thus he says, Ex
hac generatione vitis.
I will drink no more of this Generation of the Vine.

Chrysostom says, Chrysostom. in Psalm. 22.
In similitudinem Corporis, and Sanguinis, Christus nobis Panem, and Vinum,
secundum ordinem Melchisedech ostendit in Sacramento. Christ showed us (not
Accidents, or Qualities, but) Bread, and Wine in the Sacrament, according
to the order of Melchisedech, as a Likeness, or Figure of his Body and Blood.
Again he says. Christus quando hoc Mysterium tradidit, Chrysostom. in Matthae.
hom. 83.
Vinum tradidit. Non bibam, inquit, ex hac Generatione Vitis: quae certe Vinum
producit, non Aquam. Christ, when he delivered this Mystery, delivered (not
Shows, or Accidents, but) Wine. Christ says (after Consecration) I will no
more drink of this Generation of the Vine. Doubtless the Vine brings
forth Wine, and not Water. Cyrillus says, Christus credentibus Discipulis
Fragmenta Panis dedit. Cyrillus in Johan. li. 4. ca. 14*
Christ gave to his Faithful Disciples, Fragmentes, or Pieces of Bread. I
pass by S. Cyprian, S. Augustine, Gelasius, Theodoretus, and other Ancient and
Holy Fathers: according unto whose most plain Words, and Authorities, if
there be Bread remaininge in the Sacrament, then is there somewhat else bisides
Accidents. What M. Harding may say, that says so much, it is easy to see: but
that Shows, and Accidents, hang empty without the Substance of Bread, and
Wine, none of the Old Fathers ever said.

M. Hardinge. The.8. Division.
And this is a matter to a Christian man not hard to believe. For if it please
God the almighty Creator in the condition, and state of things thus to
ordeine, that substances created bear and sustain accidents, Gods
Omnipotente Power to bear up Accidents.
why may not he by his almighty power conserve and keep also accidents
without Substance, sith that the very Heathen Philosophers repute it for an
Absurdity to say, Primam causam non posse id praestare solam, quod possit cum
secunda, that is to say, that the first cause, (whereby they understand God)
cannot do that alone, which he can do with the second cause, whereby they
mean a Creature?

The B. of Sarisburie.
Cicero says, A simple Po^te, when he cannot tell, how to shifte his matters,
imagines some God suddenly to come in place a little to astonne the people:
and there an end. So M. Hardinge findinge him self much encumbred with his
Accidents, is feign to bring in God with his whole Omnipotent Power, to hold
them up. Children in the Schools are taught to know, that an Accident has no
Being without a Subject. Which rule being otherwise evermore true, has
Exception, as M. Hardinge says, only in this Sacrament, wherein be the
Accidents, and Shows of Bread, and Wine, and yet no Subject. For they are
not in the Bread: because (as he says) that is gonne: nor in the Aier, for
that cannot be seen: nor in Christ's Body, for that is not round etc. So
there is a white thing, yet nothing is white: And a round thing, yet
nothing is round. Therefore, for as much as these Accidents neither are
hable to stand alone, nor have any subject there to reast in, for that cause,
M. Harding says, they be sustained by the Power of God.

One says, Nec Deus intersit, nisi dignus vindice nodus Inciderit. Never
bring forth any God in a Tragedy, to play a part, onles it be upon some
occasion of great matter, meet for a God to take in hand. S. Paul says,
Deus portat omnia verbo virtutis suae: God bears al things by the Word of
his power. Hebrae. 1.
And the heathen Poets imagine, that Atlas holds up the Heavens. But for God
the Creator, and Cause of al Causes, to come from Heaven, to hold up
Accidents, it seems a very simple Service.

M. Hardings reason stands thus: God is Omnipotent: Ergo, Accidents in the
Sacrament stand without Subject.

M. Hardinge. The.9. Division.
And that this being of Accidents without Substance, or Subject in this
Sacrament, under which, the Bread not remaininge, the Body of Christ is
Present, may the rather be believed: it is to be considered, that this thing
took place, at the first Creation of the world, after the Opinion of some
Doctors. (...)hex (...)Hom. 6. (...). li. 2. (...). 7.
Who do affirm, that that first light, which was at the beginning until
the fowrth day (182) The.182. Untruth. For S. Basile plainly says the
contrary.
was not in any Subject, but sustained by the power of God, as him liked. For
that first light, and the same, were as whitenes, and a Body whited, says S.
Basile. Neither then was VViclef yet borne, who might teach them, that the
power of God can not put an Accident without a Subject. For so he says in his
book De Apostasia Ca. 5. as Coclaeus reports. Hereof it appears out of
what root the Gospellers of our Country spring. (...)Genesis ^.
Who smatchinge of the sape of that wicked tree, and hereby shewinge their
kind, appointe bounds, and borders to the power of God, (...)^. Hist. (...).
that is infinite, and incomprehensible. And thus by those Fathers we may
conclude, that if God can sustain and keep Accidents with Substance, he can
so do without Substance.

The B. of Sarisburie.
It is great violence, to force an ancient Father, to bear false witness, and
specially against him self. This report of S. Basiles meaning is as true, as
is that long peeuishe Fable, so often alleged under the name of Amphilochius,
that is to wite, a vain Show without Substance. And because M. Hardinge only
names Damascene, and Paulus Burgensis in his Margin, as being afraid to
touch their words, Damascen. li. 2. cap. 7.
he may remember, that Damascene says, Non aliud est ignis, quam lux, vt
quidam aiunt. The Fire is nothing else, but the light, as some men say. And
Burgensis says, Burgensis in (...)Cap. Gene.
Quidam tradunt lucem fuisse nubem lucidam: Some men write, that the light
was a Bright Cloud. By these expositions it appears, that either the Fiere,
or the Cloud, was a Subject to receive the light. Certainly neither
Burgensis, nor Damascene, nor Basile ever said, that the light stood without
a Subject. Therefore that note in the Margin might well have benne spared. But
it is an easy matter, with show of names to deceive the simple.

S. Basile says, The light was in the world before the Son was made.
Therefore it was, Basilius in Hex^ameron. hom. 6.
and had his Being without the Son. His words stand thus: Aliud quidem
est, etc. The brightness of the light is one thing, and the Body Subject unto
the same (that is the Sun) is an other thing. And say not now unto me: It
is impossible to divide these things a sundre For I say not, that thou, or I
can possibly divide the Body of the Son from the Light. Yet
notwithstanding the things, that we may part a sundre only by Imagination,
the same things God the Creator of Nature, is hable to sunder verily, and in
deed. Hereof M. Hardinge geathereth his reasons thus: The Light was not in the
Son: Ergo, It was in Nothing. Ergo, It was not in the Air. Ergo, It was an
Accident without a Subject.



This error comes of the Equivocation, or double taking of this Word
Being in. For one thing may be in an other, as in an Instrument, as the Light
is in a Candle: which is the similitude, that Basile uses. The same thing
may be in an other, as in a Subject: as Light in the Air. This diversity
considered, now let us weigh M. Hardinges reason.

The Light, says he, was not in the Son, as in an Instrument to carry it
about the world: Ergo, It was not in the Air, as in a Subject.

This argument seems very Light. A man may easily, and sensibly with his
fingers feel the folly of it in the Dark. Verily S. Basiles words to the
contrary shine so clear, that I marvel, M. Hardinge could not, or would not
see them. For thus he writes before in the same Book: Basilius in Hexamer.
homi. 2.
(...). Illustrabatur aer: vel potius lumen sibi totum, and in totum permistum
habuit. The Air was lightened: or rather it had the whole Light wholly Mingled
with it self. (...).
Again he says, The world was invisible, because the Air was without
light. S. Basile says, The Light was in the Air, and that wholly through
the whole, as in a Subject: Yet M. Harding forces S. Basile to say contrary
to him self: The Light was only an Accident without Subject, and was stayed
in nothing. Now judge thou, good Christian Reader, what credit thou may
give to M. Hardinges words in reportinge of the Ancient Doctors.

But he says, Gods power is Infinite, and Incomprehensible. Therefore he is
hable to sustain Accidents. This error springs of misunderstandinge S.
Basiles words. For where as S. Basile writes thus, (...): Dies tum fiebat,
non per motum Solarem, sed diffuso illo primigenio Lumine: The day was made,
not by the moouinge, or passinge of the Son, but by powringe abroad the
first Light: It appears, that in steed of ((...)) which is, (powered
abroad) M. Hardinge by error read ((...)) which is, Borne up, or Sustained.
But he may not well maintain his Accidents by shiftinge of words, or by
misunderstandinge, or corruptinge of his Doctors.

That is here alleged of Wiclife, and of his ofspringe, as it shows much
Choler, so it makes small proof. We know, that God is Omnipotent, and hable,
not only to sustain Accidents, but also to restoare the Dead from the
grave, yea although he be putrified within him self, and fight against the
Sprite of God. But Tertullian says, Tertul. contrae Prax^am.
Non, quia omnia potest facere, ideo credendum est, illum fecisse: sed, an
fecerit, requirendum. We may not believe, that God has done al things,
because he can do them: But rather we must see, whether he have done them,
or no. For Arguments taken of Gods Omnipotent Power, were a ready Buckler
in old times, to serve Praxeas, and Eutyches, and other like Heretics.

FINIS.
THE ELEVENTHE ARTICLE, Breaking.
OF DIVIDINGE THE SACRAMENT.
The B. of Sarisburie.
Or that the Priest then Divided the Sacrament in Three parts, and
afterward received al him self alone.

M. Hardinge. The.1. Division.
Of the Priests receiuinge the Sacrament him self alone, enough has been
said before.

This term, Al, here smatchethe of spite. For if any devout person require to
be partaker with the Priest, being woorthely disposed, and examined, he is
not turned of, but with all gentleness admitted. And in this case, the Priest is
not to be charged with receiuinge al alone. Albeit, respect had to the thing
received, how many soever receive, it is al, of al, and al of every one
received. Concerning the breakinge of the Sacrament, and the diuidinge of it
in three parts, First, This Mystical divinity should be avouched by some
Ancient Doctor.
it is Broken by the Priest, that we may know our Lord In fractione Panis,
In the breakinge of the Bread, as the two Disciples acknowledged him, to whom
Jesus appeared in the day of his Resurrection, (...)24.
as they were going to Emaus. And also that thereby the Passion of Christ
may be represented to our remembrance, at which his Pretiouse Body was for
our sins broken, rent, and torn on the Cross. And this manner was used at
the Sacrifice in the Apostles time, as it is witnessed by Dionysius S. Paul's
Scholar. Opertum Panem Pontifex aperit, (183) The.183. Vntruethe, Standinge in
untrue translation.
in frusta concidens etc. The Bishop (says he) opens the covered Bread,
diuidinge it in pieces etc.

The B. of Sarisburie.
I marvel, M. Hardinge would so sclenderly pass this matter over, for that it
is thought to make much both against his Transubstantiation, and also against
his Private Mass, which are both Keys, and Locks of his whole Religion. For
first of al, the Breaking it self seems to argue, that there is very Bread
there remaininge to be Broken. Senten. 4. Did. 12*
And albeit, as it is reported by Petrus Lombardus, Some held, that there is
in the Sacrament a very Real Breakinge, notwithstanding there be nothing
there to be Broken: Some, that the Body of Christ it self is there Broken,
and that verily, and in deed, without any help or shifte of Figure: and Some,
that there is nothing Broken, but only the Shows, and Accidents: and Some
others, that there is no manner Breaking there at al, notwithstanding unto our
eyes, and senses there appear a Breaking: Yet the Holy Evangelists witness
plainly, Matthae. 26.
That Christ took Bread, and Blissed it, and Brake it: Luke. 22.
and S. Paul says, Mar. 24.
(Not the Accidents of Bread, but) The Bread, that we Break, is the
Participation of Christ's Body. And in the primitive Church, the very Supper
of Christ, 1. Corinthians. 10.
was commonly called the Breakinge (not of Accidents, Actor. 2.
but) of Bread. And Cyrillus calls the Broken Portions of the Sacrament,
Actor. 20.
Fragmenta Panis, Fragmentes, or Pieces of Bread.

Further, by this same Ceremony Gerardus Lorichius, one of M. Hardinges
Doctors, Cyrillus in Johan. li. 4. ca. 14.
proves, that every Mass ought to be Common, and none Private. For thus he
writes: ^erard. Lorichius De Missa publica proroganda. li. 3.
Diuiditur Hostia, vt non solum ipse Sacerdos Missae officium faciens, sed and
Ministri quoque, imo omnis populus astans, participet. The Host is Broken,
that, not only the Priest, that ministers the Mass, but also the Deacons,
yea and all the people standinge by, may Communicate. Likewise says Durandus,
In Primitiua, etc. In the Primitive Church the Priest received one portion,
Durandus. li. 4^
and the Deacons an other: and the third was ministered to all the People that
was present. Dionys. Eccles.
And therefore Dionysius says, as M. Hardinge has alleged him, Hierar ca. 3.
Pontifex opertum Panem aperit, and in frusta conc^dit. The Bishop uncovers
the Bread, yt stood covered, and cutteth it in pieces. Here note also by the
way: Dionysius says not, The Bishop cutteth the Shows, or Accidents, but the
Bread, in pieces. I grant, this Tradition was used in the Apostles time: but
it is utterly broken, and abolished in the Church of Rome at this time: and
therefore it stands M. Hardinge in small steed: unless it be, to show the
world, how boldly he, and his Church have broken the Traditions, and Orders
of the Primitive Church of God. Neither is there any manner mention in
Dionysius, either of the Breakinge in three parts, or of any these Mystical
Significations. Again, the Words of Dionysius be otherwise, then M. Harding
reports them. For he says not, (...).
In frusta conc^dens, Dividing it in pieces (which perhaps M. Hardinge would
have us to understand of three) but, In multa concidens, Cuttinge it in many
pieces. And to that use served a knife, which, as it appears by Chrysostomes
Liturgy, Liturgia Chrysostomi.
or Communion, was called Sacra Lancea. For in such sort the Bread was cut
in Pieces, not that one man might receive the whole, but that it might suffice
the Congregation. And therefore it is decreed in an epistle, that bears the
name of Clement, Clementis Epi. 2.
Let so many Hosts, or Portions be provided, as may be sufficient for all the
people.

This, I say, was the cause of this Ceremony: and not, as M. Harding vainly
Gheasseth, To know our Lord in the Breakinge of Bread.

M. Hardinge. The.2. Division.
Now touching the diuidinge of the Sacrament in three parts, it may appear
to be a Tradition of the Apostles, or otherwise a custom very ancient, for as
much as Sergius the Bishop of Rome, who lived within four ^core years of
the six hundred years after Christ, that M. Iuel refers us unto, The
Mystery of Breaking of Accidents.
wrote of the Mystery of that Breakinge, or Diuidinge the outward Form of
Bread, and declared the Signification of the same.

It is no small argument of the antiquity of this observation, that S. Basile,
as Amphilochius writes of him, divided the Sacrament in three parts at his
Mass, as is above rehearsed. And, where as Sergius says, The Fable of
Amphilochius.
that the portion of the host, De Conse. Did. 2. (...)Triforme.
which is put into the Chalice, betokens the Body of Christ that is now
risen again, and the portion which is received and eaten, shows his Body
yet walking on the earth, and that other portion remaininge on the altar
signifies his Body in the Sepulcher: what, I pray you, is there herein, that
any man should be offended withal? I acknowledge, that the Mystery hereof is
otherwise of some declared, and of al to this end, to put us in mind of the
benefits purchased to us by Christ in his Body.

The B. of Sarisburie.
M. Hardinge, of good policy, to win credit, fathereth al his Mystical
fantasies upon the Apostles. Platina. Vrspergensis.
Of Sergius the first it is written, that he divised the Agnus Dei to be
song, at the Breakinge, and Distribution of the Mysteries: but of the
Breakinge of the same in three parts, notwithstanding it be strongely
avouched by M. Harding, yet of Sergius the first, there is written nothing.
Indeed, Gratian allegeth this Decree in the name of Sergius the Pope: but
without Date, or any manner further addition. De Conse. did. 2. Triforme.
And therefore it may as well be Sergius the Second, that was called, O^ Porci:
Or Sergius the Third, that took Formosus his predecessor, being dead, out
of the grave, and beheaded him, and threw out his Carkesse into the Tiber.
Therefore this matter, for ought that may appear, bears small certainty.

But let us grant, that Gratian meante Sergius the first: yet was he welneare
s^euen hundred years after Christ. Neither were it any great inconvenience,
to say, That, as he was hable to divise these Mystical Significations, so he
was also hable to divise the number of parts, and manner of Breakinge. But
what great Mysteries there may be in this Breakinge of outward Forms, and
Accidents, that M. Hardinge imagines, I leave unto him self to consider.

The Fable of Amphilochius has benne six times alleged by M. Hardinge in this
one book, to sundry purposes: and yet he him self knows, it is but a very
peeuishe Fable. Who so lists to know it further, may find it answered in
the first Article, and in the.33. Division.

But where as this Sergius says, Triforme est Corpus Domini, The Body of our
Lord is of three Forms, What so ever his meaning therein were, his speech
is very strange, or rather monstrouse. For the Body of Christ is not of so
many Forms, but only One, and Uniforme. One of these portions, says Sergius,
signifies Christ after his Resurrection: The Second, Christ walkinge in the
Earth: The Third, Christ lieinge in his Grave. All this, says M. Hardinge, is
holy, and Mystical.

How be it, some there were, that liked not so greatly these imaginations:
and therefore of them selves divised others. Durandus lib. 4. Cap. 53.
Some said, The first part signifies the Saints in Heaven: The Second,
the Faithful, that be alive: The Third, the Souls in Purgatory. Some say,
These three parts signify the three states of Christ, Mortal, Dead, and
Immortal: Some, That they signify the three Substantial parts of Christ, his
Godheade, his Soul, and his Body: Some others, that they signify the three
Persons in the Trinity, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. And I
marvel, there was none, that could say, they signify the three Patriarchs,
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. Thus, having utterly lost the very use of the
Breakinge of the Mysteries, they retain a bare Ceremony thereof: and yet are
so far out of knowledge of the same, that they cannot agree emonge them
selves, what to make of it: I mean, neither what they Break, nor wherefore
they Break it. This Sergius disagreeth from Bonauentura, from Durandus, and al
others: yet he likes M. Hardinge best of al.

And what hurt, says he, is there herein? Or wherefore should any man
herewith be offended? Uerily in the House of God, that thing is hurteful, that
does no good. All the Ceremonies of the Church ought to be clear, 1. Corin.
14.
and lively, and hable to edify. And if this Mystical Ceremony be not
hurteful, why then does M. Hardinge him self break it: and that, not of
ignorance, or oblivion, but witingly, and willingly, and as often as he says
his Mass. For Sergius says, One of ye three Portions ought to be reserved
upon the Altar, until the Mass be done: But M. Hardinge contrary, both to
Sergius, and also to his Mystical Significations, receives all the parts
together, and reserueth none, and that by the Warrant of the Gloss in that
place, De Conse. Did. 2^ Triforme. In Glosa.
which is quite contrary to the Text. Why does he thus dissemble, and so
openly mock the world? If this Ceremony be good, why does he break it? If
it be ill, why would he have us to keep it? The gheasse, that M. Hardinge
uses herein, seems very simple: Pope Sergius divised these Mystical
meaninges, seven hundred years after the Apostles time: Ergo, this order of
Breakinge came from the Apostles.

M. Hardinge. The.3. Division.
Now that this custom, or Mystical Ceremony, was not first ordained by
Sergius, for ought that can be gathered, but of him expounded only touching
the Mystery of it, as used before his time, from the beginning of the
Church, no one Ancient Council, or Author found, upon whom it may be
Fathered, of good reason, sith it has (184) 184. Vntrueth^ For it was never
generally observed.
generally been observed, we may refer the Institution of it to the
Apostles: and that according to the mind of S. Augustine, whose notable
saiynge for that behalf is this. Quod Vniuersa tenet Ecclesia, nec in
Concilijs constitutum, sed semper retentum est, non nisi authoritate Apostolica
traditum, rectissime creditur. What, says he, the Universal Church keeps,
neither has been ordained in Councelles, but has always been observed: of
good right we believe, it has been delivered (to the Church) as a Tradition,
by the authority of the Apostles.

To conclude, if any spark of Godliness remain in our deceived Countriemen,
and brethern, they will not scorn, and despise this Ancient Ceremony of
Diuidinge the Sacrament in three parts at the Blessed Sacrifice of the Mass,
whereof any occasion of evil is not only no ministered, but rather
contrariwise, whereby we are admonished, and stirred to tender our own Soul
health, and to render thanks to God, for the great benefit of our
Redemption.

The B. of Sarisburie.
There is no mention made, neither in Old Father, nor in Ancient Council of
this manner of Breakinge of the Sacrament: Ergo, (says M. Hardinge) It came
first undoubtedly from the Apostles. The contrary hereof were much more
likely. For he might rather have said thus: There is no mention made of it in
any Old Father, or Council: Therefore, it came not from the Apostles.

And, where as he says, It has been euerywhere Universally observed, It is a
great untruth: as, God willinge, it shall appear. And therefore S. Augustines
(...) serves nothing to this purpose.

For first, as M. Hardinge is deceived in the manner of Breaking, so is he also
deceived in the quantity of the Bread, imagininge, it was a little thin
round Cake, such as of late has been used in the Church of Rome: Which
(Durandus says) must be round like a Penny: either because Judas betrayed
Christ for some like kind of Coin: Durandus. li. 4 in Sexta part Canonis.
or, because it is written, Domini est Terra, and plenitudo eius, The Earth is
the Lords, and the fullness thereof. But in deed, it was a great Cake, so
large, and so thick, that all the Congregation might receive of it. Durandus
him self says, In Primitiua Ecclesia offerebant Vnum Magnum Panem, Durand.
li. 4. cap. 53.
and omnibus sufficientem: Liturgia Chrysostomi.
quod adhuc Graeci seruare dicuntur. In the Primitive Church they offered One
Great Cake, that was sufficient for all the people: which thing, they say,
The Greeks do continue still. Gentian. Heruetus in S. Germani. rer. ^ccle.
Theoria.
In Chrysostomes Liturgy, or, Communion, we see both the Form of the
Bread, and also the order of Cutting, or Dividing it with a knife. Gentianus
Heruetus in the Description thereof, says: Est Panis Cra^sus, and Fermentatus,
and Figura propemodum Sphaerica: It is a Thick Cake, and Leauened, and of
Form in manner round. Gregor. Dialog. li. 4.
It appears by S. Gregory, that it was a Great Cake, such as men used
commonly at their Tables: which thing appears also, by that the Heretics
called Artotyritae, August. ad Quoduult Deu^. Epiphanius.
added Cheese unto it: and so Ministered the Communion in Bread, Inter Epist.
Augustini* Epist. 31.
and Cheese. And Paulinus sendinge such a Cake unto S. Augustine, sent also
this greetinge withal: Ignatius ad Philadelphien.
Panem vnum, quem vnanimitatis indicio misimus Charitati tuae, rogamus, vt
accipiendo benedicas: This one loaf, or Cake, which I have sent unto you in
token of unity, I beseech you, receiving the same, to bliss it. And perhaps
Ignatius in respect hereof said: Vnus est Panis pro omnibus Fractus: There is
one loaf, or Cake Broken for all. And S. Basile, Idem est virtute, sieve vnam
partem quis accipiat a Sacerdote, sieve plures parts simul. ^t is al one in
effect, whether a man take one only part of the Priest, or many parts
together. It is likely, he uses these words, Part, and Parts, in respect
of one whole. Durandus says, That in his time, the pr^est in some Churches
Dividing the Sacrament into three portions, Durand. li. 4. cap. 15.
received one him self, and Ministered the other two to the Deacon, and
Subdeacon. Basilius ad Caesariam Patritiam.
The like is recorded by Alexander de Hales, Alexan. de Hales in. 4. q. 37.
and sundry others. All this M. Hardinge dissembleth, and passes by, and sees
nothing, but a Mystical Ceremony.

Now, this Cake being so large, so thick, and so massy, and hable to suffice
so many, we may not well think, that the Priest co^lde c^n^eniently divide it
into three parts, and receive al alone. But rather, as I have already said,
the Breakinge thereof, is an invincible proof of the holy Communion, and a
manifest Condemnation of M. Hardinges Private Mass. For it was not divided
into parts, to the end to Signify these Mystical Fantasies, that M.
Hardinge, and others have imagined: Clemens Alexandrin. stromat. li. 1.
but to be Distributed, and delivered to the people. Clemens Alexandrinus
says, Etiam Eucharisti^, cum quidam, vt mos est, diuiserint, permittunt
vnicuique ex populo, partem eius sumere. After that certain (that is, the
Priests) have Divided the Sacrament, they suffer every of the people to take a
portion of it. So S. Augustine says, Augustine. ad Paulin. Epist. 59.
Ad Distribuendum comminuitur, It is Broken, that it may be Distributed. And
again, Confringunt oblationes in Eucharistiam, They Divide the Oblations into
the Sacrament (that the people may Communicate). August. ad Quoduultdeum De
Ophitis.
So Dionysius, Velatum Panem in multa concidens, and vnitatem Calicis omnibus
impertiens. Diuidinge the Bread, that stood coouered, into many parts, and
delivering the Unity of the Cup unto all the people. Dionysius Eccl. Hierar.
Cap. 3.
In S. Basiles Communion, taken out of the Syrian Tongue, it is written thus:
Sacerdos frangit, and Signat: Diaconus proclamat, Communionem. The Priest
Breaks, and Signeth (the Sacrament): The Deacon cries alowde, Liturgia
Basilij.
The Communion. And what needs the witness of so many? 1. Corin. 10.
S. Paul says, Panis, quem Frangimus, nonne Communicatio Corporis Christi
est? The Bread, that we Break, is it not the Communication of the Body of
Christ? Anselmus in 1. Corin. 10.
Which Words Anselmus expounds thus: Panis, quem nos Sacerdotes Frangimus,
and quem vnu^ in multas parts Diuidimus, ad designandam Charitatem
accipientium. The Bread, that we being Priests do Break, and which Bread,
being one Cake, we Divide into many portions, to express the love (or
unity) of the receivers. Lorichius de Missa pub. prorog. li. 3.
Likewise Lorichius, Panis, quem Frangimus, Participatio Domini est: hoc est,
Fractio Significat, nos esse vnum Corpus. The Bread, that we Break, is the
Participation of the Lord: that is to say, The Bread signifies, that al we
are one Body. It appears hereby, that the Sacrament was thus Divided into
parts, not to the intent we should thereby learn new Mysteries, but that
the people might receive it.

To be short, This Ceremony of three Portions so Broken, and so received,
cannot be found neither in the Scriptures, nor in any of the Old Fathers, or
Councelles: It bears witness both against Transubstantiation, and also
against Private Mass: The best learned of that side cannot yet agree, neither
whence it sprange first, nor what it means: The people neither sees it, nor
knows it: They them selves, that so highly would seem to favor it,
contrary both to Sergius Decree, and also to his Mystical Exposition, in their
Masses daily, and openly are bold to break it. Now have thou, good Christian
Reader, hereof indifferently to judge, whether M. Hardinge, or his Countriemen
be deceived. Uerily S. Augustine says, Augustine. ad Ianuariu^ Epist. 119.
If the Causes, that first moved, and leadde men to divise such Ceremonies,
can hardely, or not at al be known, when so ever opportunity is offered, let
them be cut of, and abolished without staggering.

FINIS.
THE.XII. ARTICLE, OF FIGVRE, SIGN, etc.
The B. of Sarisburie.
Or that, whosoever, had said, The Sacrament is a Figure, a Pledge, a Token, or
a Remembrance of Christ's Body, had therefore been judged for an Heretic.

M. Hardinge. The.1. Division.
In this Article we do agree with M. Iuel in some respect. For we confess,
it cannot be avouched by Scripture, ancient Council, doctoure, or example of
the primitive Church, that who so ever had said the Sacrament is a Figure, a
Pledge, a Token, or a Remembrance of Christ's Body, had therefore ben judged
for an Heretic. (185) The.185. Untruth. M. Hardings own Fellows have both
taught so, and written so: and therefore unlearnedly.
No man of any learning ever wrote so unlearnedly. Much less to impute heresy
to any man for saieinge thus, has been any of the highest mysteries, or
greatest keys of our religion, with which untruth M. Iuel goes about to
deface the truth. Wherefore this Article seems to have been put in either of
malice toward the Church, or of ignorance, or only to fille up the heap,
for lack of better stuff. Perusinge the works of the ancient, and learned
Fathers we find, that oftentimes they call the Sacraments a Figure, a Sign, a
Token, a Mystery, a Samplar. The words of them used to this purpose in their
learned tongues are these, Figura, Signum, Symbolum, Mysterium, Exemplar,
(...), Imago, etc. By which they mean not to diminishe the truth of Christ's
Body in the Sacrament, but to signify the Secret manner of his being in the
same.

The B. of Sarisburie.
It appears, that these men's Doctrine is much mutable, and subject to
change. For notwithstanding they be now grown into some better likinge of
these terms, Figure, Sign, Signification, Token, etc. Yet not long sithence
they seemed, to be otherwise resolved: and thought them selves hable to allege
Theophylactus, Damascenus, Euthymius, and other great matter, to disprove the
same. Cut^bert. Tonst. de Eucharis. li. 1.
D. Tonstal, the more to make the matter odiouse, says thus, If the Sacrament
be a Figure of Christ's Body, then was a Figure Crucified for us, and not
Christ. And what so ever they were, that used this word, Figura, in this
matter of the Sacrament, D. Steuin Gardener scornefully calls them, Marcus
Constantius.
Figuratores, Figurers. And M. John White, late Schoolemaister, and after
Bishop of Winton writes thus, in great scorn against that most Reuere^de
learned Father D. Peter Martyr, touching the same: Audio mill locis Corpus:
non audio (Petre) Signa, Troposque, tuo nec Symbola nata cerebro. I hear
Body, Body, in a thousand places: But of Signs, Figures, Tokens, that came
only out of thy head, I hear nothing. Which words notwithstanding, in all the Ancient learned Fathers, by M. Hardinges own Confession, if he had had
ears to hear, he might have heard. Therefore it was neither Malice, nor
Ignorance, nor Increase of heap, nor Want of other stuff, but the fondnes,
and folly of M. Hardinges side, that added this Article to the rest.

But, for as much as many, either of simplicity, or of the great reverence,
they bear toward that Holy Mystery, have persuaded them selves, that
Christ's words touching the Institution thereof, must of necessity be taken
plainly, and as they sound, that is to say, without Figure: and, for as
much also, as S. Augustine says, Augustine. de Doctrina Christiana. li. 3. ca.
5.
It is a dangerous matter, and a Servitude of the Soul, to take the Sign in
steed of the thing, that is Signified, Therefore to avoid confusion, least
the Simple be deceived, taking one thing for an other, I think it necessary
in few words, and plainly to touch, what the Ancient learned Fathers have
written in this behalf.

And, to pass by, that Christ him self says, Sacramenttum.
Do this in my Remembrance: And, that S. Paul says, 1. Corin. 11.
Ye shall declare the Lords Death until he come: And likewise, to pass by a
great many other Circumstances, whereby the truth hereof may soon appear,
The nature, and meaning of a Sacrament of the Old Fathers is thus defined: De
Con. dis. 2. Sacrificium.
Sacramentum est Sacrum Signum: A Sacrament is a Holy Token: Which Definition
is common, and agrees indifferently to al Sacraments. Therefore S. Augustine
says, Augustine. de Ciuitate Dei. li. 10 ca. 5.
Signa, cum ad res Diuinas pertinent, Sacramenta appellantur. Signs, when they
be applied unto Godly things, are called Sacraments. And the cause, why
Sacraments are ordained, is this: That by mean of such Uisible, and Outward
things, Augustine* ad Marcellinum Epist. 5.
we may be leadde to the consideration of Heavenly things. Therefore
Dionysius says, Non est possibile animo nostro, ad immaterialem illam
ascendere Coelestium Hierarchiarum contemplationem, nisi ea, quae secundum
ipsum est, material^ manuductione vtatur. Dionysius Coelestis Hierarch* cap. 1.
It is not possible, for our mind, to lift up it self to the Spiritual
contemplation of Heavenly things, unless it have the Corporal leading of
such natural things, as be about it. Likewise again: Nos Imaginibus
Sensibilibus, quantum fieri potest, ad Coelestes contemplationes adducimur.
Dionysius Ecclesiast. Hierar. ca. 1. (...).
By Sensible Images we are leadde, as much as may be, to Heavenly
contemplations. And, touching this holy Mystery of Christ's Body, and Blood,
the cause of the Institution thereof was, as Chrysostom says, to keep us
still in Remembrance of Christ's great benefit, and of our Salvation. Which
thing S. Hierome opens in this sort: Ad populum Antioche. ho. 61. Hoc
facite in memoria^ beneficij mei, Salutis Vestrae.
Vltimam nobis memoriam reliquit. Vt si quis peregre proficiscens, aliquod
pignus apud eum, quem diligit, relinquat: vt, quoties illud viderit, possit
eius beneficia, and amicitiam memorari: quod ille, si perfect dilexit, non
potest videre sine ingenti dolor, and sine fletu. He leafte unto us his last
Remembrance. As if a man goinge a far journey, leave a token with his friend,
to the end that he seeinge the same, may Remember his benefits, and his
frendeship: which token that friend, if he love unfeignedly, Hieronym. in 1.
Corin. ca. 11. Basilius de Baptismate.
cannot see without great motion of his mind, and without tears. So says
S. Basile: Quid vtilitatis habent haec Verba? Nempe, vt Edentes, and Bibentes,
perpetuo memores simus eius, qui pro nobis mortuus est, ac Resurrexit. What
profitte have these words? Verily, that we Eatinge, and Drinkinge, may
evermore be mindeful of him, that died for us, Ambrosius in 1. Corin. ca 11.
and rose again. So S. Ambrose, Quia morte Domini liberati sumus, huins rei
memores in Edendo, and Potando, Carnem, and Sanguinem, quae pro nobis oblata
sunt, Significamus. Because we are made free by the Death of our Lord, being
mindeful thereof, in Eatinge, and Drinkinge, we Signify the Fleashe, and
Blood, that Christ offered for us. Origin expoundinge these words of
Christ, Unless ye Eat the Fleashe of the Son of Man, etc. says thus,
Agnoscite, Figuras esse, quae in Diuinis voluminibus scriptae sunt: Origin. in
Leuiticum. hom. 7.
and ideo tanqua^ Spirituales, and non tanquam Carnales examinate, and
intelligite ea, quae dicuntur. Nam, si quasi Carnales ista suscipitis, laedunt
vos, non alunt. Know ye, that these be Figures written in the Holy Scriptures:
and therefore examine, and understand ye the things that be spoken, as men
Spiritual, and not as Carnal. For if ye take these things, as Carnal men, they
hurt you, and feed you not. Tertullian expounds Christ's words in this
wise, Tertullian* contra Marcionem, li. 4.
Hoc est Corpus meum, hoc est, Figura Corporis mei. This is my Body: That is
to say, This is a Figure of my Body. S. Ambrose speaking of the Sacrament of
Christ's Body, uses oftentimes these terms, a Figure, a Similitude,
Ambrosius de Sacra. li. 4. ca. 5.
a Sign, a Token of Christ's Body. S. Augustine, biside infinite other
places, says, Augustine. in Psalm. 3.
Christus adhibuit Iudam ad Conuiuiu^, in quo Corporis sui Figuram Discipulis
^uis commendauit. Christ took Judas unto his Table, whereat he gave unto his
Disciples the Figure of his Body. And writing against the Heretic
Adimantus, he says, Augustinus co^tra Adimantu^. Cap. 12.
Non dubitauit Dominus Dicere, Hoc est Corpus meum, cum daret Signum Corporis
sui. Our Lord doubted not to say, This is my Body, when he gave a Token of
his Body. So Chrysostom, Si mortuus Christus non est, cuius Symbolum, ac
Signu^, hoc Sacramentum est? Chrysostom. in Matthae. hom. ^3 of Hieronym.
aduersus Iouinianum. li. 2.
If Christ died not, whose Sign, and whose Token, is this Sacrament? So S.
Hierome, In Typo Sanguinis sui, non obtulit Aquam, sed Vinum. In token of his
Blood, he offered not Water, but Wine.

I leave other like Authorities welneare infinite. These few may suffice for
a taste. This was the Old Fathers manner of writing: neither was there any
man then, that ever controlled them therefore, or called them Figurers.

M. Hardinge. The.2. Division.
For the Better understanding of such places, where these terms are used in
the matter of the Sacrament, De Con. Did. 2. can. Hoc est quod Dicimu^.
the Doctrine of S. Augustine In Sententijs Prosperi, may serve very well,
which is thus. Hoc est quod dicimus, quod omnibus modis approbare contendimus,
Sacrificium Ecclesiae doubus confici, duobus constare, visibili Elementorum
Specie, and inuisibili Domini nostri Jesus Christi Carne and Sanguine:
Sacramento, (id est, externo Sacro Signo) and re Sacramenti, id est, Corpore
Christi, etc. This is that we say, (says he) which by all means we go
about to prove, that the Sacrifice of the Church is made of two things, and
consists of two things, of the visible shape of the elements (which are
Bread and Wine) and the invisible Fleashe and blood of our Lord Jesus
Christ: Of the Sacrament, (that is the outward Sign) and the thing of the
Sacrament, to wit, of the Body of Christ, etc. By this we understand, that
this word (Sacrament) is of the Fathers two ways taken. First, for the whole
Substance of the Sacrament, as it consists of the outward Forms, and also
withal of the very Body of Christ verily present, as S. Augustine says,
the Sacrifice of the Church to consist (186) The.186. Untruth. For S.
Augustine never said so.
of these two. Secondly, it is taken so, as it is distinct from that hidden,
and divine thing of the Sacrament, that is to say, for the outward Forms
only, which are the Holy Sign of Christ's very Body presen^e under them
contained. Whereof we must gather, that when so ever the Fathers do call this
most excellent Sacrament, a Figure, or a Sign, (187) The.187. Vntruethe. For
none of the learned Fathers ever called the outvvard Form a Sacrament.
Christ's Body it self is a Figure.
they would be understood to mean none otherwise, then of those outward
Forms, and not of Christ's Body it self, which is there present not
Typically, or Figuratively, but Really, and Substantially. Unless perhaps
respect he had, not to the Body it self present, but to the manner of
presence, as sometimes it happens.

So is S. Basile to be understood, in Liturgia, calling the Sacrament,
Antitypon, that is, a Samplar, or a Figure, and that after Consecration, as the
Copies that be now abroad, be found to have. So is Eustathius to be taken,
that great learned Father of the Greek Church, who so constantly defended
the Catholic Faith against the Arians, cited of Epiphanius, in 7. Synodo.
Li. 4. ca. 14. in caput Matthew. 26.
Albeit concerning S. Basile, Damascene, and Euthymius, likewise Epiphanius in
the second Nicene Council, Acti. 6. and Marcus Ephesius, who was present at
the Council of Florence, would have that place so to be taken before
Consecration. (188) The.188. Untruth. For S. Ambrose says, Post
Consecrationem Corpus Christi Significatur.
As S. Ambrose also, calling it a Figure of our Lords Body and Blood, li.
4. De Sacramentis cap. 5.

The B. of Sarisburie.
M. Hardinge, as he is content to yield to these names, Figure, Sign, Token,
etc. so the adds thereto an Exposition of his own, such, as, I believe, he
can hardly find the like in any Ancient Father. Therefore it must be such a
Figure, not as the Old Doctors, and learned Fathers have at any time used,
but such, as M. Hardinge can best imagine: Tertull. contra Marcionem. li. 4.
and therefore now, not the Old Doctors, but M. Hardinges New Figure. In
deed Tertullian says, Haeretici nudas voces coniecturis, quo volunt rapiunt.
Heretics by their Coniectural Gheasses, draw bare words whither they
list. With such conditions, y^ wicked Heretic Nestorius was contented to
grant Christ to be God: but by his lewd Exposition he made him no God. For
thus he said: Cyrilius. li. 5. Ca. 14.
Non inuideo Christo Diuinita^e^ sua^: Hoc and ego fieri possu^, si volo. It
greeueth me not, to confess Christ to be God: I me self can be God too, if
I list. The Pelagian Heretics, Augustine. ad Innocentium. li. 95.
notwithstanding they were the enemies of Gods Grace, yet being forced by
disputation, and conference, were content to yield, and to confess the Grace
of God. But by their fantastical Exposition, in the end they made it no Grace
at al. Variety of Figures.
In like manner M. Hardinge, notwithstanding he be driven by force, to
confess the name of Figure, yet, as he gloaseth it, with his colors, in deed
he makes it no Figure. Sometimes, he says, it is a Figure of Christ's Body
secretly being there: Sometimes, it is a Figure of the life to come:
Sometimes, Common Bread is a Figure: Sometimes, the Accidente, and owtwarde
Form of Bread is a Figure: Sometimes, Christ's Body Invisible, is a Figure
of Christ's Body Uisible: Al hitherto M. Hardinge. Sometimes also, it is a
Figure of the Church: So says Hosius, In Confession^ Petricouiensi. ca. 39.
Sacramenta nostra sunt quodammodo per Figuram, ipsum Corpus Christi, cuius
Sacrame^ta sunt, id est, Ecclesia. Our Sacraments are in a manner, by a
Figure, the very Body of Christ, whereof they be Sacraments: That is to
say, Our Sacraments be the Church. Thus many ways these men have sought,
to make up a new kind of Figure, such as neither Grammaxian, nor
Rhetorician, nor Divine ever understood before. Significat, It signifies, is
as much to say, says M. Hardinge, as, Continet, It contains: It is a
Figure, that is to say, It is the thing it self: It is a Figure, that is in
conclusion, It is no Figure. Yet al these Figures in the end be not sufficient
to expound one Figure. Truth is ever certain, and simple: contrary wise
falsheade is doubteful, and double.

How much better were it, for these men to speak so, as the Old learned
Fathers were content to speak? S. Augustine says, Augustine. (...)doctrina
Christiana li. 2. ca. 1.
De ^ignis di^^erens hoc dico, ne quis in eis attendat, quod sunt, sed potius
quod Signa sunt, hoc est* quod Significant. Reasoninge of Signs, I say thus:
let noman consider in them, that they be, but rather that they be Signs, that
is to say, that they do Signify. Again he says, Cauendum est, ne
Figuratam orationem ad Literam accipias. Augustine. de Doctri. Christiana. lib.
3. Ca. 5.
Ad hoc pertinet, quod Apostolus air, Litera occidit: We must beware, that we
take not a Figurative speech according to the Letter. For thereto it
pertains, that the Apostle says* The Letter kills. Hieronym. in Apologia
co^tr^ Rufinum.
S. Hierome says, Quando dico Tropicam locutionem, doceo, verum non esse,
quod dicitur, sed Allegoriae nubilo Figuratum. When I name a Figurative
speech, I mean, that the thing, that is spoken, is not true, but fashioned
under the Cloud of an Allegory. Likewise Chrysostom, Non alienum oportet
esse Typum a Veritate: Chrysostom. in Dictum Apostoli, Patres nostri omnes etc.
vlt. tomo.
alioqui non esset Typus: Neque omnino adaequari Veritati: alioqui and Veritas
ipsa fo^et. The Figure may not be far of from the Truethe: otherwise it were
no Figure: Neither may it be eauen, and one with the Truethe: otherwise it
would be the Truth it self, and so no Figure.

These things considered, it may soon appear, how faithfully, and how well to
his purpose M. Hardinge allegeth this place of S. Augustine, De Conse. Did. 2.
Hoc est.
Hoc est. quod dicimus etc. This is it, that we say, which we go about by all
means to prove, that the Sacrifice of the Church is made of two things,
and stands of two things: of the Visible Kind (or Nature) of the
Elements, and of the Invisible Fleashe, and Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ:
Of the Sacrament, the outward Holy Sign, and the thing of the Sacrament,
which is the Body of Christ. Hereof M. Hardinge geathereth, that the Body
of Christ lies hidden under the Accidents. S. Augustines words be true:
But M. Harding with his gheasses is much deceived. For of this word, Specie,
he concludes, that the Substance of Bread is gonne, and nothing remaininge,
but only Accidents: and of this word, Inuisibili, he geathereth, that
Christ's Body is there Really incloased. And so he makes a Commentary far
biside his text.

But what would he have said, if he had seen these words of S. Hierome:
Venit Philippus: Oste^dit ei lesum, qui Clausus Latebat in Litera. Philip came:
Hieronym. (...)Paulinum.
and showed him Jesus, that lay hidden in the Letter. Or these words in the
Second Council of Nice, Council. Nicen. 2. Actio. 3.
Christus ipse habitat in ossibus mortuorum. Christ him self dwells in
Dead men's Boanes. Or these of Angelomus, Angelomus in 1. Regum. Ca. 22.
Deus pater Filium suum vnigenitum in Litera Legis, Iudaeis nescientibus,
absconditum habuit: God the ^ather had his only begotten Son Jesus Christ,
hidden in the Letter of the Law, the Jews not knowinge it.

Would he of these words conclude, that Christ is Really Hidden, either in
dead men's Boanes, or in the Prophet Esaie, or in the Letter of the Law?
Certainly S. Augustine speaks not one Word, neither here, nor else where,
neither of Accidents without Subject, nor of any Real Presence. And al be it
his words here be not very dark, yet in other places both often, and
plainly, he expounds him self. August. in Johan. Tractatu. 46.
For thus he says, Mysteria omnia Interioribus Oculis videnda sunt, id est,
Spiritualiter. Al Mysteries must be considered with the Inner Eyes, that is to
say, Spiritually. And again, In Sacramentis aliud videtur, aliud intelligitur.
In Sacraments we see one thing, August. Citatur a Beda. 1. Cor. 10.
Chrysostom. in 1. Corin. hom. 7. Origin. in Epist. ad Roman. li. 4. ca. 4.
and we understand an other thing. So Chrysostom speakinge of the Water of
Baptism, Ego non aspectu iudico ea, quae videntur. The things, that be seen
in Baptism, I consider not with my Bodily eye. So likewise Origin, Been
Circumcisionem Signum appellauit, quia and in ipsa aliud videbatur, aliud
intelligebatur. He called Circumcision rightly a Sign, for that in it one
thing was seen, and an other thing was understood. Thus in Sacraments we
see one thing with our eye, and an other thing with our mind. With our
Bodily eye we see the Bread: with our Faith we see the Body of Christ. Thus
the Sacrament consists of two parts: Of the which the one is before our
eyes, the other in Heaven: and so the one Uisible, August. contra aduersariu^
leg. and Prophet. li. 2. Ca. 5.
and the other Invisible. So says S. Augustine, Non oportet esse contentum
superficie Literae, sed ad intelligentiam peruenire. We may not stand content
with the outward sight of the letter, but must go further unto the meaning.

S. Augustine means not by these words, that the understanding of the
Scriptures lies Really hidden under the Letter. He him self better expounds
his own meaning in this wise, Augustine. De Baptismo. Contra Donatist. li. 1.
ca. 15.
In veteri Testamento occultabatur nouum, quia occult^ Significabatur. The New
Testament was hidden in the Old: because it was secretly (or Inuisibly)
Signified in the Old.

Now let us examine the ground of M. Hardinges gheasses. S. Augustine names
Visibilem Speciem, the visible kind of the Elements: Ergo, says M. Harding,
he means only the Accidents, or outward Forms of Bread, and Wine, and
not the Substance. The weakness of this Conclusion proceeds of the
misvnderstandinge of the Terms. For S. Augustine in this place, uses not this
word (Species) for the outward Show, Ambrosius de ijs qui init^an^^r. Ca. 9.
but for the very Substance of the thing it self. So S. Ambrose says twice
together in one place, Sermo Dei Species mutat elementorum: The Word of God
changes the Kinds of the Elements: And again, Ante benedictionem alia
Species nominatur: Before the Consecration it is called an other Kind. In
these and other like places, M. Hardinge cannot well say, that, Species,
signifies an Accident, or outward Show.

Neither doothe this word, Uisible, importe any such External Form, as is
here imagined: But only excludes the Body of Christ, which is in Heaven,
Invisible to our Bodily eyes, and Uisible only to the eyes of our Faith. And
so the Water in Baptism is called, Forma Visibilis, a Visible Kind, or
Element, according to the general Definition of al Sacraments. So S.
Augustine says, Aliud Iudaei habebant, aliud nos: Augustine. in Johan. tracta.
26.
sed specie Visibili, quod tamen idem Significaret: The Jews had one thing
(for their Sacrament) and we an other: in deed of an other Visible Form, or
Kind, which notwithsta^dinge Signified the same thing, that our Sacrament
doothe Signify. Likewise he says, Augustine. Citatur a Beda. 1.
Quod videtur, Speciem habet Corporalem: quod intelligitur, fructum habet
Spiritualem. The thing, that we see, has a Corporal Show: but the thing,
that we understand, has fruit Spiritual. Corin. 10.
And in this sense Chrysostom says of the Sacrament of Baptism, Christus in
Sensibilibus Intelligibilia nobis tradidit. Christ in Sensible things, has
given us things Spiritual. Chrysostom. in Matthae homi. 83.


By these we see both M. Hardinges gross error, and also, for what cause
the Old godly Fathers call Christ's Body Invisible: That is, for that, being
in Heaven, we see it with our Faith, with our mind, and with the eyes of our
understanding. Neither may M. Hardinge of this word, Invisible, reason
thus, as he seems to do: Christ's Body is Invisible:

Ergo, it lies hidden under Accidents. Ambrosius de Spiritu Sanct^. lib. 3.
For S. Ambrose in like phrase of words, speaks thus of Baptism: Sacri
Fontis vnda nos abluit: Sanguis Domini nos redemit. Alterum igitur Inuisibile,
alterum Visibile testimonium Sacramento consequimur Spirituali. The Water of
the Holy Font has washed us: Christ's Blood has redeemed us. Therefore by a
Spiritual Sacrament we obtain two Testimonies: the one Invisible, the other
Visible. Here S. Ambrose says, Christ's Blood in Baptism is Invisible. Yet
may we not conclude thereof, that Christ's Blood is hidden under the
Accidents, or Shows of Water. So Origin says, Baptismus Iohannis videbatur:
Origin. in Lucam. homi. 24.
Christi Baptismus est Inuisibilis. John's Baptism was seen: But Christ's
Baptism is Invisible.

And, notwithstanding al these things be plain to any man, that has eyes to
see, yet that the weakness, and folly of these shifts may thoroughly appear,
let M. Hardinge show us wherein, and in what respect, his naked Show of
Forms, and Accidents can be the Sacrament of Christ's Body. For thus he
says, and doubleth, and repeteth the same, and makes it the stay, and
ground of this whole Treaty.

The Sign, or Signification of this Sacrament, Cyprian. de Coena Domini.
as S. Cyprian says, stands in Refreashinge, and Feedinge. So says Rabanus
Maurus, Quia Panis Corporis Cor confirmat, Rabanus Maurus. li. 1. cap. 31.
ideo ille congruenter Corpus Christi nuncupatur: Et, quia vinum Sanguinem
operatur in Carne, ideo illud ad Sanguinem Christi refertur. Because Bread
confirms the heart of the Body, therefore it is conveniently called the Body
of Christ: And because wine woorketh Blood in the Fleashe, therefore it has
relation to the Blood of Christ. Likewise because Water washes away the
soil, and filth of the Body, therefore, as Gregory Nyssene says, Gregorius
Nyssenus De Sancto Baptismate.
Christ appointed it to the Sacrament of Baptism, to Signify the Inward
Wasshinge of our Souls.

Now, although M. Hardinge can say many things, yet this thing, I think,
Mar. Antonius Constantius ad object. 66.
he will not say, that our Bodies be feadde with his Shows, and Accidents. Or,
if he so say, as in deed they are driven so to say, then will the very
Natural Philosopher reprove his folly. For the Philosopher says, as in deed
true it is, Ex ijsdem nutrimur, and sumus. We consist of the same things,
wherewith we are nourished. Therefore if M. Hardinge will say, The Substance of
our Body is feadde with Accidents: then must he likewise say, The Substance
of our Body does stand of Accidents.

Hereof we may very well reason thus: The Accidents, or Shows of Bread, and
Wine feed not our Bodies, as Christ's Body feeds our souls:

Ergo, The Accidents, and Shows of Bread, and Wine, are not the Sacraments
of Christ's Body. Cyprian de Coena Domini.
Contrary wise S. Cyprian, Ireneus, Rabanus, and other Ancient Fathers say,
The Substance of the Bread feeds our Body, etc. Ergo, Irenaeus. li. 4. ca.
34.
The Substance of the Bread is the Sacrament of Christ's Body.

And again, M. Hardinge standinge upon this simple ground, Rabanus. lib. ^.
Cap. 31.
cannot possibly avoid many great inconveniences. For if the Shows, and
Accidents be the Sacrament, then, for as much as in one Bread there be many
Accidents, as the Whitenes* the Roundenes, the Breadth, the Taste, etc. and
every such Accident is a Sacrament, he can by no Gloss, or conueiance shifte
him self, but in steed of one Sacrament, he must needs grant a number of
Sacraments: and auoidinge one Figure, he must be driven to confess a great
many Figures.

Touching S. Basile, M. Hardinge seems to confess, that his books are
disordred, and that now set after Consecration, that sometimes was before:
and yet he shows us not, who has wrought this treachery. I trow, they have
corrupted, and falsified their own books.

But Basile calls the Sacrament (...), that is, a Samplar, a Sign, or a
Token of Christ's Body, before the Consecration: and so Damascenus, Euthymius,
and one Epiphanius, and Marcus Ephesius, late writers have expounded it. Here,
mark well, good Reader, the Niceness, and curiosity of this people without
cause. Sooner then they will confess, as the Ancient Catholic Fathers do,
that the Sacrament is a Figure of Christ's Body, they are content to say: It
is a Sacrament, before it be a Sacrament: and so a Figure, before it be a
Figure. For how can the Sacrament be a Sacrament, or what can the bare
Bread Signify before Consecration? Or who appointed, or commanded it so to
Signify?

But to leave these M. Hardinges New Fantastical Doctors with their Mystical
Expositions, Ambrosius de ijs, qui initiantur. Ca. 9.
S. Ambrose in his time thought it no Heresy to write thus: Ante
Consecrationem alia Species nominatur: Post Consecrationem Corpus Christi
Significatur. Before Consecration it is called an other Kind: After
Consecration the Body of Christ is Signified. And again, In Edendo, and
Potando, Corpus and Sanguinem Christi, quae pro nobis oblata sunt, Ambrosius.
1. Corinthians. 11.
Significamus. He says not, Before Consecration, but even in receiuinge the
Holy Communion, which he calls, Eatinge, and Drinkinge, we Signify the
Body, and Blood of Christ, that were offered for us.

Thus the Old Fathers called the Sacrament a Sign, or Figure of Christ's
Body, after it was Consecrate. But before Consecration neither did they ever
call it so, notwithstanding these New Doctors judgments to the contrary,
nor was there any cause, why they should so call it. Yet were they not
therefore counted Sacramentaries, nor mainteiners of false Doctrine.

M. Hardinge. The.3. Division.
And if it appear strange to any man, that S. Basile should call those Holy
Mysteries Antitypa, after Consecration, let him understand that this learned
Father thought good by that word, to note the great secret of that
mystery, and to show a distinct condition of present things, from things
to come. And this consideration the Church seems to have had, which in
public prayer after holy mysteries received, Christ's Body is a Figure of
the life to come: Proved only by the Portu^se.
makes this humble petition, Vt quae nunc in Specie gerimus, Sabba^o. 4*
temporu^ Mensu September.
certa rerum Veritate capiamus: That in the life to come we may take that in
certain truth of things which now we bear in shape, or show. Neither do
these words importe any prejudice against the truth of the Presence of
Christ's Body in the Sacrament: but they signify, and utter the most
principal truth of the same, when as al outward Form, Shape, Show, Figure,
Sampler, and coouer taken away, we shall have the fruition of God him self in
sight face to face, not as it were through a glass, but so as he is in truth
of his Majesty. So this word Antitypon, thus taken in S. Basile, furthereth
nothing at all the Sacramentaries false Doctrine against the truth of the
presence of Christ's Body in the Sacrament.

The B. of Sarisburie.
M. Hardinge for fear of taking, altreth, and shifteth him self into sundry
forms: in like sort, as the Old Poets imagine, that one Proteus, a subtle
fellow, in like case was woonte to do. Emonge other his strange diuises he
says, Christ's Body is a Figure of the life, that is to come: and that he
proves only by his portuise, without any other further Authority. But if a
man would trauerse this New Exposition, how stands M. Hardinge so well
assuered of the same? What Scripture, what Doctoure, what Council, what Warrant
has he, so to say? Uerily, that Christ's Natural Body being now Immortal,
and Glorious, should be a Sign, or a Token of things to come, it were very
strange, and woonderful: but that bare Forms, and Accidents should so
Signify, yet were that a wonder much more woonderful.

The prayer, that is vttred in the Church, is good, and godly, and the meaning
thereof very comfortable: That is, that al Ueles, and Shadows being taken
away, we may at last come to the Throne of Glory, and see God face to face.
For in this life we are full of imperfections: and as S. Paul says, 1. Corin.
13.
We know (ex part) Vnperfitely: we Prophecy vnperfitely. ^ut, when that
thing, that is perfect, shall come, then shall imperfection be abolished. Now we
see as through a seeinge glass in a riddle: but then we shall see face to face.
Therefore S. Augustine says, Augustine. Epis. 120.
Vita est Christus, qui habitat in Cordibus nostris: interim per Fidem: p^st
etiam per Speciem. Christ is our life, that dwells in our hearts: in the
mean while by Faith, and afterward by sight. So S. Ambrose, Vmbra in lege:
Imago in Euangelio: Veritas in coelestibus. Ambrosius in Psalm. 38.
The Shadow was in the Law: the Image is in the Gospel: the Truethe shall be in
the Heavens. So S. Basile, Nunc iustus bibit aquam viuentem: and posthac
abundantius bibet, quando adscribetur in Ciuitatem Dei: Basilius in Psalm. 45.
sed nunc in Speculo, and in aenigmate, per modicam comprehensionem rerum
Coelestium: tunc autem flumen vniuersum recipiet. Even now the just man
drinks the Water of life: and hereafter he shall drink the same more
abundantly, when he shall be received into the City of God. Now he drinks,
as in a seeingeglasse, or a riddle, by a small understanding of Heavenly
things: But then he shall receive the whole stream. This is it, that the
Church prays for, that al imperfection set aparte, our Corruptible Bodies
may be made like unto the glorious Body of Christ.

Hereof M. Hardinge seems to reason in this wise: We shall see God face to
face: Ergo, Christ's Body is Really Present in the Sacrament. Or thus, We
shall see God face to face. Ergo, The Sacrament Signifies not Christ's Body,
but the life, that is to come. By such arguments M. Hardinge confounds all the Sacramentaries false Doctrine.

M. Hardinge. The.4. Division.
And because our adversaries do much abuse the simplicity of the unlearned,
bearing them in hand, that after the judgment, and Doctrine of thauncient
Fathers, the Sacrament is (189) The.189. Untruth, joined with a selau^de^.
The Former part was neue^ our Doctrine: The Second as yet was never proved.
but a Figure, a Sign, a Token, or a Badge, and contains not the very Body
it self of Christ, for proof of the same alleginge certain their saieinges
uttered with the same terms: I think good by recital of some the chief such
places, to show, that they be untruly reported, and that touching the
Verity of the Presence in the Sacrament, they taught in their days the same
Faith, that is taught now in the Catholic Church.

Holy Ephrem in a book, he wrote to those, that will search the Nature of the
Son of God by man's reason, says thus: Ca. 4.
Inspice diligenter, quomodo sumens in manibus Panem, benedicit, ac frangit, in
Figura immaculati Corporis ^ui, Calicemque, in Figura pretiosi Sanguinis sui
Benedicit, and tribuit Discipulis suis: Behold (says he) diligently, how
taking Bread in his hands, he blesses it, and Breaks it, Takes Bread
Blisseth ^t, Breaks It.
in the Figure of his unspotted Body, and blesses the Cup, in the Figure of
his pretiouse Blood, and gives it to his Disciples. (190) The.190. Untruth,
joined with unadvised Corruption of the Author.
By these words he shows the partition, division, or breakinge of the
Sacrament, to be done no otherwise, but in the outward Forms, which be the
Figure of Christ's Body Present, and under them contained. Which Body now
being gloriouse, is no more broken, nor parted, but is indivisible, and
subject no more to any Passion: and after the Sacrament is broken, it
remains whole, and perfect under each portion.

The B. of Sarisburie.
If we abuse the simplicity of the people, vtteringe plainly, and simply the
very words of the Ancient Fathers, then did the Fathers them selves likewise
abuse the simple people: for that they of al others, first uttered, and
published the same words: and specially for that, they never qualified the
same, with any of these M. Hardinges New Constructions.

But if we abuse the people, speakinge in such wise, as the Old Catholic
Fathers spoke so long before us, what then may we think of M. Hardinge, that
comes only with his own words, that wreasteth, and falsifieth the words
of the Holy Fathers, and by his strange Expositions makes them not the Fathers
words? Gelasius says, Gelasius contra Eutychetem. Irenaeus li. 5.
In the Sacrament there remains the Substance of Bread, and Wine: That is to
say, says M. Hardinge, There remain the Accidents of Bread and Wine.
Ireneus, and Justinius Martyr say, Justinius Martyr Apologia. 2.
The Bread of the Sacrament, increases the Substance of our Fleashe: Then
meaning is, says M. Hardinge, that the Accidents of the Bread increase the
Substance of our Fleashe. S. Ambrose says, Ambrosius de ijs qui initiantur.
Cap. 9.
Post consecrationem Corpus Christi Significatur. After Consecration the Body
of Christ is Signified: M. Hardinge says, No, not so: But after Consecration
the life to come is Signified. Now judge thou indifferently, good Reader,
whether of us abuses the simplicity of the people.

Now let us see how he handles this good Old Father Ephrem. In deed here
he makes the darkness light, and the light, darkness. For Ephrems words be
so plain, as nothing can be plainer.

Christ took Bread, and blissed it, and brake it, in Figure, or, as Christ
him self vttreth it, in Remembrance of his Blissed, and Unspotted Body. But M.
Hardinges Exposition upon the same is so perverse, and so wilful, as if it were
free for him, to gloss, and fancy what him lists. Ephrem says. Christ took
and brake Bread: M. Hardinge says, Christ brake Forms, and Accidents, and
brake no Bread. Ephrem says, The Bread is a Figure of Christ's Body: M.
Hardinge says, The Bread is no Figure of Christ's Body. To be short, Ephrem
says, Christ break Bread in Figure, or Remembrance of his Body:

Ergo, says M. Hardinge, Christ's Body is there present, under the Form of
Bread. Such regard has he to the simplicity of the people. Certainly
Ephrem says not, neither that the Forms, or Shows be broken: nor that the
same Forms be Figures of Christ's Body: nor that Christ's Body is presently
in them contained. And therefore M. Hardinge in his guileful construction of
the same has included great Untrueth.

M. Hardinge. The.5. Division.
Again by the same words he signifies, The breakinge of Accidents is a
Figure.
that outward breakinge to be a certain holy Figure, and representation of
the Crucifieinge of Christ, and of his Blood sheddinge. which thing is with
a more clearnes of words set forth by S. Augustine, In sententijs prosperi.
De Con. Did 2. Can. Dum frangitur.
Dum frangitur Hostia, dum Sanguis de Calice in ora Fidelium funditur, quid
aliud quam Dominici Corporis in Cruce immolatio, eiusque Sanguinis de Latere
effusio designatur? VVhiles the Host is broken, whiles the Blood is powered
into the mouths of the faithful, what other thing is thereby showed, and set
forth, then the Sacrificinge of Christ's Body on the Cross, and the
sheddinge of his Blood out of his side? And by so dooinge the commandment of
Christ is fulfilled, Do this in my Remembrance.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Here has M. Hardinge found out a new kind of Figures, far differinge
from all the rest. The Breakinge of the Accidents, says he, is a token of the
Breakinge of Christ's Body: and this he thinks him self well hable to prove
by certain words of S. Augustine. Wherein notwithstanding he find but small
help in the text, (for S. Augustine makes no manner mention, neither of any
Real, or Fleashly Presence, nor of Breakinge of Forms, or Accidents) yet is
he somewhat reliued by the Gloss. De Conse. did. ^. Cum frangitur. in Glosa.
For the words thereof are these, Secundum hoc dices, Ipsa Accidentia frangi,
and dare sonitum: According to this thou shall say, that the very Accidents,
and Shows are Broken, and give a Crack. Thus we see, there is no
inconvenience so great, but these men can well defend it.

But S. Augustine says, Sanguis in ora Fidelium funditur: Ergo, says M.
Hardinge, Christ's Blood is there Present. I marvel much, where M.
Hardinge learned this strange Logique. For S. Hierome says in like sort,
Hieronym. in Psalm. 147.
Quando audimus Sermonem Domini, Caro Christi, and Sanguis eius in auribus
nostris funditur: When we hear the Word of God, the Fleashe of Christ, and
his Blood is powered into our ears. Will M. Hardinge conclude hereof by his
new Logique, yt, when we hear Gods word, Christ's Fleash, and Blood are
Really Present? Here once again, I must do thee, good Reader, to understand,
that a Sacrament, according to the Doctrine of S. Augustine, bears the name
of that thing, whereof it is a Sacrament. And for example he says, Augustine.
Epist* 23.
Sacramentum Sanguinis Christi secundum quenda^ modum Sanguis Christi est. The
Sacrament of Christ's Blood, after a certain manner (of speech) is the
Blood of Christ. Again he says in the same Epistle, Consepulti sumus
Christo per Baptismum: Roman. 6.
Non ait, Sepulturam significamus: Colossen. 3.
sed prorsus ait, Consepul^i sumus. Sacramentum ergo tantae rei, non nisi
eiusdem rei vocabulo nuncupauit. We are buried together with Christ by
Baptism: He says not, We do Signify our Burial: but he says plainly, We
are Buried together. Therefore S. Paul would not call the Sacrament of so
great a thing, but only by the name of the thing it self. Likewise he
says, Augustine. in Leuiticum, quaest. 57.
Solet ^es, quae Significat, eius rei nomine, quam Significat, nuncupari. Non
dixit, Petra Significat Christum, sed, tanquam hoc esset, quod vtique per
Substantiam non erat, sed per Significationem. The thing, that Signifies, is
commonly called by the name of that thing, that it Signifies. S. Paul says
not, The Rock Signified Christ, but, The Rock was Christ, as if the Rock
had been Christ in deed. Yet was it not so in Substance, and in deed, but
by way of Signification. Thus therefore says S. Augustine: Whiles the
Sacrament is broken, and the Sacrament of Christ's Blood, (which is called
Blood) is powered into the mouths of the Faithful, what thing else is thereby
showed, but the offering up of Christ's Body upon the Cross, and the
sheaddinge of his Blood from his side? Therefore S. Augustine says,
Augustine. in Psalm. 20.
Ita facit nos moueri, ta^quam videamus Praesentem Dominum in Cruce: So it
causes us to be moved, even as though we should see our Lord Present on the
Cross. This is S. Augustines undoubted meaning. These things considered, the
weight of M. Hardinges argument will soon appear. For thus he reasons: The
rentinge of Christ's Body, and the sheaddinge of his Blood is expressed in
the Mysteries: Ergo, Christ's Body is there Really present under Shows, and
Accidents.

M. Hardinge. The. 6. Division.
That it may further appear, that these words Figure, Sign, Image, Token,
and such other like sometimes used in aunciente writers, do not exclude the
truth of things exhibited in the Sacrament, but rather show the secret
manner of thexhibitinge: amongst al other, the place of Tertullian in his
fourth book contra Marcionem, is not to be omitted, specially being one of
the chief, and of most appearance, that the Sacramentaries bring for proof
of their Doctrine.

Tertullians words be these: Acceptum Panem, and distributum Discipulis suis,
Corpus suum illum fecit, Hoe est Corpus meum dicendo, id est, Figura Corporis
mei. The Bread, that he took, and gave to his Disciples, he made it his
Body, in saieinge, This is my Body, that is, the Figure of my Body.

The double taking of the word (Sacrament) before mentioned, remembered, and
consideration had, how the Sacraments of the New Testament comprehend two
things, (191)( The.191. Untruth. Four untruths together pak^^ up in one.
) the outward (1) Visible forms that be (2) Figures, Signs, and Tokens, and
also, and that chiefly, a Divine things under them (3) according to Christ's
promise (4) covertly contained, specially this being weyed, that this most
Holy Sacrament consists of these two things, to wit, of the Visible Form
of the outward Elements, and the Invisible Fleashe and Blood of Christ,
that is to say, of the Sacrament, and of the thing of the Sacrament:
Tertullian may seem to speak of these two parts of the Sacrament iointely
in this one sentence. This is Vanitas Vanitatu^.
For first he speaks most plainly of the very Body of Christ in the
Sacrament, and of the meruailouse tourninge of the Bread into the same. The
Bread (says he) that he took, and gave to his Disciples, he made it his
Body. Which is the Divine thing of the Sacrament. Then forthwith he
says, that our Lord did it by saiynge, This is my Body, that is, the Figure
of my Body. By which words he shows the other part, the Sacrament only,
that is to say, Holy outvvarde Accidents.
that Holy outward Sign of the Form of Bread, under which Form Christ's
Body, into the which the Bread by Gods power is turned, is contained:
which outward Form is verily the Figure of Chris^^ Body present, which our
Lord under the same contained delivered to his Disciples, and now is likewise
at that Holy Table to the faitheful people delivered, where the order of the
Catholic Church is not broken.

The B. of Sarisburie.
If this place of Tertullian be the chief, and of greatest appearance for the
Sacramentaries, as M. Hardinge says, I marvel it is so coursely answered.

The words be both very few, and also very plain. But with this copious
Commentary of M. Hardinges glosinge, it will be very hard for the Reader, to
find out any part of Tertullians meaning. I will first open the occasion of
the writing, and then lay forth the Words. That done, I doubt not, but
the sense will stand clear, and easy of it self.

Marcion the Heretic, against whom Tertullian wrote, held, and maintained
this error, That Christ received of the Blissed Uirgin, not the very Nature,
and Substance, but only the outward Forms, and Shows of Man's Body. Out of
whose springes M. Hardinge, and the rest of that side, as it may appear, have
drawn their Doctrine of Accidents standinge without Subject. This fond
Heresy Tertullian reprooueth by this reason:

A Figure of a Body, presupposes a very Natural Body: For of a Show, or a
Fantasy, there can be no Figure.

But Christ gave unto his Disciples a Figure of his Body:

Therefore, it must needs follow, that Christ had a very Natural Body.

As every part of this Argument is true, so the proportion, and form of the
same imports a necessary sequel in reason. The words stand thus, Acceptum
Panem, Tertullian. contra Marcionem. li. 4.
and distributum Discipulis, Corpus suum illum fecit, Dicendo, Hoc est Corpus
meum, id est, Figura Corporis mei. Figura autem non esset, nisi Veritatis esset
Corpus. Coeterum vacua res, quae est Phantasma, Figuram capere non potest.
Christ taking the ^reade, and distributinge it to his Disciples, made it his
Body, sa^einge, This is my Body: That is to say, This is a Figure of my
Body. But a Figure it could not be, unless there were a Body of a truethe,
and in deed. For a void thing, as is a fantasy, can receive no Figure.
These words are plain of them self: and if truethe only might suffice,
would require no long Exposition.

Now, good Reader, mark well M. Hardinges considerations touching the same:
and thou shalt see, the Darkness of Aegypte brought in, to clear the shininge
Sun. First he says, The Accidents, and Shows may well be the Sacrament.
Yet again he says, Christ's Body it self may be the Sacrament. Thirdly he
says, Tertullian ioineth these two senses iointely both together. And so
by his conninge he has found out two Sacraments, in one Sacrament. All this
is M. Hardinges Gloss. For there is not one word thereof in the Text,
neither of Accidents, nor of Christ's Body as being a Sacrament of it self:
nor of this combining^ of two Sacraments both in one. M. Hardinge says,
Tertullian speaks of a marvelous turninge: But Tertullian speaks no such
word, neither of Miracle, nor of turninge. M. Hardinge says, Tertullian
speaks of Holy Outward Forms: But Tertullian not once names any kind of
Forms. By M. Hardinges report, Tertullian says, Under these Holy Forms
Christ's Body is Really Present:

But Tertullian him self speaks nothing of any Presence. Al these petite
Gloses M. Hardinge has divised of his own, as if it were lawful for a
Catholic man, to examine the Old learned Fathers upon the Rack, and to make
them speak, what him lists.

Tertullian only says thus, Christ took Bread, and made it his Body: And
because these words seemed doubteful, and might be diuersely taken, he
opens his own meaning in this wise: This is my Body: That is to say, A
Figure of my Body. And touching this word, Fecit, in what sense it is used
in the Holy Fathers, I have spoken at large before in the Tenthe Article, and
the Second Division. Yet a little more to open M. Hardinges folly in this
behalf, whereas in these two several Propositions, Hoc est Corpus, and, Hoc
est Figura, this pronowne, Hoc, as Tertullian uses it, has relation only to
one thing, as if he would say, This Bread is my Body: and This Bread is a
Figure: M. Hardinge, to make up this New Construction, contrary both to
Tertullians mind, and also to the Natural course of ye words, imagines the
same pronowne, Hoc, in the first place to Signify one thing, and in the
second place to Signify an other thing: As if Tertullian in the former
clause had written thus, Hic Panis, This Bread is my Body: and in the second
thus, Haec Accidentia, These Accidents are a Figure of my Body. And so, where
as these two Propositions should sound both one thing, the one being
only a declaration of the other, by M. Hardinges Exposition, they are made to
sound two diverse things, the one nothing like unto the other. Thus M.
Hardinge uses the Ancient Fathers, in like sort, as they say, Procustes the
cruel Giant was wont in old times to use his Prisoners: If they be longer,
then his measure, he choppeth them shorter: If they be to short, he racketh
them longer.

And where he says, The Sacraments of the New Testamente Contain Covertly
under them the thing it self, that they Signify, and that according to
Christ's promise, Uerily this saieinge Covertly contains a great untruth.
For, as he is not hable to allege any Ancient learned Father, that ever once
mentions this privy, and secret being under such Couerte, so is he not
hable to show, that Christ ever made him any such promise touching the
same. And, notwithstanding Baptism be a Sacrament of the New Testament, yet
contrary to M. Hardinges New Decree, it contains not Covertly, and Really
the thing, that it Signifies. True it is, the New Sacraments of Christ's
Institution are plainer, and clearer, then the Old: as the Gospel is plainer,
and clearer, then the Law. But the things Signified are no more contained in
the one, then in the other. Therefore S. Augustine says, Augustine. in Psalm.
77.
Idem in Mysterio illorum Cibus, and noster. The Spiritual meat, that they had
in the Old Law, and the Spiritual meat that we have in the Gospel, in a
Myster^e is al one.

And again, Augustine Ioha^ tracta. 26.
Spiritualem escam comederunt eandem, quam nos. They did eat the same
Spiritual meat, that we eat. And the whole difference bitweene the
Sacraments of the Old Testament, and the Sacraments of the New, he opens
thus, August. ad Petrum Diaconum. ca. 19.
In illis Sacrificijs, quid nobis esset donandum, Figurate significabatur: In
hoc autem Sacrificio, quid nobis iam donatum sit, euidenter ostenditur. In
illis Sacrificijs praenuntiabatur Filius Dei pro impijs occidendus: in hoc
autem pro impijs annuntiatur occisus. In the Sacrifices of the Old Law, it
was signified under a Figure, what thing should be given unto us: but in this
Sacrifice it is plainly showed, what thing is already given unto us. In the
Sacrifices of the Old Law, it was showed by a Figure, that the Son of God
should be slain for the wicked: But in this Sacrifice it is declared, that he
has been already slain for the wicked. Such differences the Old Fathers
find bitweene these Sacrifices: but of M. Hardinges Containing, or Couerte
they know nothing.

The reason, that M. Hardinge can geather hereof, stands thus: Tertullian
says, The Sacrament is a Figure of Christ's Body: Ergo, Christ's Body is
therein Co^uertly Contained under the Accidents.

M. Hardinge. The.7. Division.
That Tertullian in this place is so to be understood, we are taught by the
great learned Bishop S. Augustine, and by Hilarious, who was Bishop of Rome
next after Leo the first. S. Augustines words be these: A Bastard
Authority in S. Augustines name.
Corpus Christi and veritas, and Figura est. Veritas, dum Corpus Christi and
Sanguis in virtute Spiritus Sancti ex Panis and vini substantia efficitur. De
Conse^ did 2. canon. Vt^^^ sub Figura.
Figura vero est quod exterius sentitur. The Body of Christ is both the
Truth and the Figure. The truethe, whiles the Body of Christ and his Blood,
by the power of the holy Ghost, is made of the Christ's Body of the Substance
of Bread.
Substance of Bread and Wine. And it is the Figure that is with outward
sense perceived.

Where S. Augustine here says the Body and Blood of Christ to be made of
the Substance of Bread and Wine, beware thou unlearned man, thou think them
not thereof to be made, as though they were newly creat^d of the matter of
Bread and Wine, neither that they be made of Bread and Wine, M. Hardinge
shunneth his ^vvne Doctor.
as of a matter: but that where Bread and wine were before, after Consecration
there is the very Body and Blood of Christ borne of the Virgin Marie, and
that in Substance, in sort and (...)to our weak reason incomprehensible.

The B. of Sarisburie.
These words are Bastard, and misbegotten, as nothing resemblinge, neither
the sense, nor the words of S. Augustine, but rather contrary to them both.
They are alleged only by certain late writers, as namely by Gratian, by Peter
Lombarde, and by Algerius, as other things also be without any great choice,
or judgment. Only S. Augustine, upon whom they are fathered, and therefore
should best know them, knows them not. How be it, by what so ever name
we may call this New Doctoure, M. Hardinge finds him so far, and so rank
of his side, that he is feign to check him of to much ri^t, and to call him
back. Beware, thou unlearned Man, says he, if thou take not very good heed,
this New Doctor, whom I call S. Au^ustine, w^l deceive thee. This Augustine
says, Christ's Body is made of the Substance of Bread: But say thou,
Christ's Body is not made of the Substance of Bread. This Augustine says
twice together in one place, Christ's Body is created: but he was not well
advised, what he said: Therefore say thou, Christ's Body is not created:
believe not this Augustines words: he says one thing, and thinks an
other. Thus this Doctor is set to School. But it may well be doubted,
whether we ought to give more credit to this young S. Augustine, that cannot
tell his own tale, or to M. Hardinges Commentary, that goes so far biside
the Te^te.

If these words be false, why does M. Hardinge here allege them? Why are
they not rectified, either by Gratian, or by the Gloss, or at least by some
note in the Margin? And why are they published for a Rule of our Faith? If
they be true, why should we shun them? Or why should we beware, and take
heed of them, specially being vttred without Figure, or Metaphore, or Heat
of Speech?

M. Hardinge. The.8. Division.
The words of Hilarious the Pope utter the same doctrine: Intus. Foris.
Corpus Christi quod sumitur de altari, Figura est, dum Panis and Vinum videtur
extra: Did. ^. Canon. Corpus Christi.
veritas autem, dum Corpus Christi interius creditur. The Body of Christ,
which is received from the Altar, is the Figure, whiles Bread and Wine are
seen outwardly: and it is the truth, whiles the Body and Blood of Christ
are believed inwardly.

The B. of Sarisburie.
These words of Hilarie are partly answered before. His meaning is this:
The Bread, that we see with our senses, is the Figure: but the very Substance
of the Sacrament, that thereby is Signified, is the Body of Christ in Heaven.
The Bread is received with our Bodily mouth: The Body of Christ only with
our Faith.

And thus these two words, Extra, and Interius, which Hilarie uses, have
relation to our Mouth, and to our Faith: Extra Interius.
and so to the Sacrament, that is Present before us, and to the Body of
Christ, that is at the Right Hand of God. And in this sense S. Augustine
says, Aqua exhibet Forinsecus Sacramentum Gratiae: Augustine. Epis^* 23.
and Spiritus operatur Intrinsecus Beneficium Gratiae. The Water outwardely
shows the Sacrament of Grace: and Inwardely the Sprite works the benefit
of Grace. And to come near to the words of Hilarie, S. Augustine again
says, Augustine. Epis^* 50.
Habent Foris Sacramentum Corporis Christi: sed rem ipsam non tenent Intus,
cuius est illud Sacramentum.

Outwardely they have the Sacrament of Christ's Body: but Inwardly they have
not the thing it self, whereof that thing is a Sacrament. Further we may
say, that Christ's Body is in the Sacrament it self, understanding it to be
there as in a Mystery. But to this manner of Being there is required, neither
Circumstance of place, nor any Corporal, or Real Presence. So Chrysostom
says, Chrysostom. in Psa^^ 44.
Oleum Visibile in Signo est: Oleum Inuisibile in Sacramento est. Oleum
Spirituale Intus est: Oleum Visibile Exterius est. The Visible Oil is in a
Token: the oil Invisible is in a Sacrament. Paulinus a^ Cytherium. Augustine.
in Quaesti. super Exodus li. 2.
The Spiritual Oil is within: the Visible Oil is Without. So Paulinus
writes to Cytherius, In suarum literaru^ Corpore, Paulus Magister adfuit:
Paul the Teacher was present in the Body of his Letters. So S. Augustine,
Nouum Testamentum absconditum erat in Lege: The New Testament was hidden in the
Law. So the Ancient Father Origin, In vestimento poderis erat Vniuersus Mundus:
Origin. Per^ Archon. li. 2.
The whole World was in the Priests ^onge gown. So Chrysostom, In
Scripturis insertum est Regnum Dei: The Kingedome of God is enclosed in the
Scriptures. So Paulinus writing unto S. Augustine, In hoc Pane Trinitatis
soliditas continetur: Chrysostom. in Opere imperfecto ca. 23.
In this Cake the perfection of the Holy Trinity is contained. I use purposely
the more examples in this behalf, for that I see, many of simplicity are
deceived, thinkinge, Inter Epist. 35. Augustini, Epist. 35.
that one thing cannot possibly be in an other, unless it be contained in the
same Presently, Really, and in deed. Yet it is written in that fond Council
of Nice the Second, Qui Imaginem Imperatoris videt, in ea Imperatorem ipsum
co^templature: He, that sees the Emperors Image, Council. Nicen.^
in the same sees the Emperor him self. Likewise says Prudentius, Legis in
effigy Scriptus per aenigmata Christus: Action. 6.
Christ written by Figures in the Show of the Law.

Therefore M. Hardinges error herein stands in over gross understanding of
these words, Extra, and Interius. For by the Former he can conceive nothing
else but Accidents: by the later, nothing but Christ's Body under the same
secretly hidden: which was never any part of this Holy Fathers meaning.

M. Hardinge. The.9. Division.
Thus the Fathers call not only the Sacrament, but also the Body and Blood of
Christ it self in the Sacrament, sometimes the truth, sometimes a Figure:
the truth, that is to wit, the very and ^rue Body and Blood of Christ: a
Figure, in respect of the manner of being of the same there present, which
is Really, and Substantially, but Inuisibly under the visible form of the
outward Elements. And so Tertullian means by his, That is the Figure of my
Body, as though Christ had showed by the word ( Hoc) that which was
Visible, A miserable shift. By this exposition how can Christ's Body it self
be a Figure?
which verily is the Figure of the Body, right so as that which is the
Invisible inward thing, is the truth of the Body. Which interpretation of
Tertullian in deed is not according to the right sense of Christ's words,
though his meaning swerve not from the truethe. For where as our Lord said,
This is my Body, he meante not so, as though he had said, the outward form
of the Sacrament, which here I deliver to you, is a Figure of my Body under
the same contained, Tertullian vnderstand^th not Christ's words.
for as much as by these words, Hoc est, he showed not the Visible form of
Bread, but the Substance of his very Body, into which by his Divine power he
turned the Bread. And therefore (192) none of all the Fathers ever so
expounded those words of Christ, but contrariwise, The.192. Untruth,
notorious. For M. Harding knovveth, that all the old Fathers expounded it so.
namely Theophylacte, and Damascene. He said not says Theophylacte, This is
a Figure, but This is my Body. The Bread, nor Wine, In Matth^^ ca. 26. li.
4. ca. 14.
(meaning their outward Forms) says Damascene, Outvvarde Fourmes* and
Accidents are Christ's Body it self.
is not a Figure of the Body and Blood of Christ: Not so, in no wise. But it
is the Body it self of our Lord Deificated, sith our Lord him self
says, This is my Body, not the Figure of my Body, but my Body: and not the
Figure of my Blood, but my Blood, etc.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Here is imagined an other strange kind of Figures. For Christ's Body it
self is now become a Figure. But Hilarious says, Figura est, quod extra
videtur: The Figure is that, is seen outwardly. And S. Augustine says, Signum
est, quod speciem ingerit oculis. De Consecrat. Did. 2. Corpus. Augustine. de
Doctrina Christiana. li. 2. ca. 1. M. Hardinge Contrary to him self.
A Sign is a thing, that offers a sight unto the eyes. Wherefore, by M.
Hardinges judgment, Christ's very Body appears outwardely, and is seen in
the Sacrament with our Corporal eyes. If so, how then is it there secretly, as
he said before, and under couerte? If not, how then can it be called a Figure?
In confessinge the one, he must needs deny the other. If Christ's Body be a
Figure, it is not in Couerte: If it be in couerte, it is not a Figure.

He will say, The Accidents, and shows are Figures of Christ's Body there
hidden. And again, The same Body so Inuisibly hidden, is a Figure of that
Body that died Uisibly upon the Cross. Thus, where as others may not once
name any Figure in these cases, it is lawful for M. Hardinge, to heap Figure
upon Figure: and that not such Figures as have been used by any the Ancient
Fathers, but such as he him self for a shift can best divise.

Tertullian, says M. Harding, supposes, that Christ, when he had ye Bread
in his hand, and said, Hoc, This, showed only the Uisible Accidents, and
Forms of Bread, as if Christ had said, This Whiteness, this Roundenesse,
this Breadth, this Lightness etc. is my Body: By which skilful construction
it must needs follow, that Christ had a Body made of Accidents.

How be it, (says M. Hardinge) this Interpretation of Tertullian in deed is
not according to the right sense of Christ's words. Hereby it appears what
affiance M. Hardinge has in the judgment of this learned Father. After so
many fair words, he begins utterly to mislike him, and concludes in the
end, that he wrote, he knew not what: and took upon him to expound Christ's
words, and yet understood not, what Christ meante: and that, not in any
deep Allegory, or other Spiritual, or secret meaning, but even in the very
Literal Sense, and outward sound of Christ's words. And thus Tertullian is
charged, not only with Ignorance, but also with Presumption.

But if, as M. Hardinge says, Tertullian understood not Christ's meaning,
what if some man would likewise say, M. Hardinge understands not Tertullians
meaning? And what if the simple Reader understand not M. Hardinges meaning?
It were to much to say further, M. Hardinge understands not his own
meaning. Uerily Tertullian not once names any one of al these M. Hardinges
strange Fantasies, neither Form, nor Accident, nor Uisible, nor Invisible, nor
Outward Element, nor Secret Presence, nor Really, nor Substantially, nor I
know not what. He wrote, and meante plainly in these cases, as others the
learned Fathers wrote, and meante.

And touching the words of Christ, This is my Body, he says not, These
Shows, or Accidents of Bread, as M. Hardinge full unadvisedly expounds him,
but, this Bread is my Body. Wherein he has the consent both of the
Scriptures, and also of the Ancient Doctors of the Church. S. Paul says
(Not the outward Form, 1 Corin. 10. Irenaeus li. 4. ca 34.
or Accident, but) The Bread, that we Break, is the Participation of
Christ's Body. Irenaeus says, Panis, in quo Gratiae actae sunt, est Corpus
Domini. The Bread, wherein thanks are given, is the Body of the Lord.
Origin says, Origin. in Mat. Tractatu. 12.
Dominus Panem Discipulis dabat, dicens, Hoc est Corpus meum. Our Lord gave
Bread unto his Disciples, saieinge, This is my Body. So S. Cyprian, Vinum
fuit, quod Sanguinem suum dixit. It was Wine, that he called his Blood.
Cyprian. li. 2. Epist. 3.
So Chrysostom, Christus, cum hoc Mysterium tradidit, Vinum tradidit. Christ,
when he gave this Mystery, he gave wine. Chrysostom in Matthae hom. 83
Cyrillus in Iohannem. li. 4. ca. 14.
Likewise Cyrillus, Christus Fragmenta Panis dedit Discipulis. Christ gave
Fragmentes, or pieces of Bread to his Disciples. Thus Tertullian understood,
and expounded the words of Christ. Wherefore it is great folly, to charge
him with this new imagination of Accidents, and so unadvisedly, and without
cause to reprove him, for speakinge that, he never spoke. By these we may the
better judge of M. Hardinges own Exposition. For thus he says, When Christ
said, Hoc, This, he showed not forth the Visible Accident, or Form of
Bread, but his very Natural Body. It appears, that M. Hardinge, either
little considers, or not much regards his own words. For all the reast of
his side hold for most certain^, that their Transubstantiation is not wrought,
before the uttering of the last Syllable. Which thing notwithstanding, M.
Harding contrary to a^ his fellows (I will not say, contrary to him self)
says, that the Bread is turned into Christ's Body, only at the utterance of
the first Syllable. And so by this New Divinity, Christ's Body is made
Present, and the Sacrament is a Sacrament, before Consecration: and al is
ended, before it be begone: which in M. Hardinges Schools, not long
sithence, was counted an error above al errors: which to shifte, they were
feign to divise, Indiuiduum Vagum.

Again, if this Pronowne, Hoc, have relation to Christ's Body, then must we
of force by M. Hardinges Fantasy, thus expound the words of Christ: This
is my Body: that is to say, My Body, is my Body: Which Exposition of M.
Hardinges, In. 4. Sen. quae. 3.
D. Holcote says, is vain, and peevish, and to no purpose.

And, where as M. Harding says, None of all the Old Fathers ever expounded
these words of Christ by a Figure, I marvel, he can so boldly utter, and
publishe so great untruth without blusshinge. For he knows right well, that
scarcely any one of all the Old Fathers ever expounded it otherwise.

Damascene, and Theophylacte, are very Young Doctors, in comparison of them,
that we may justly call Old: as standinge far without the compass of the
first six hundred years, and otherwise freight with great errors, and
sundry folies. Therefore I think it not amiss, for shortenesse of time, to
pass them by. Yet by the way, let us a little view M. Hardinges Logique. Thus
he teaches us to reason: Tertullian by this Pronowne, Hoc, understood the
outward Accident, or Form of Bread: Ergo, Christ's Body it self is a
Figure.

M. Hardinge. The.10. Division.
And the cause, why Tertullian so expounded these words of Christ, was, that
thereby he ^ight take advantage against Marcion the heretic, as many times
the fathers in heat of disputation do handle some places, not after the
exact signification of the words, but rather follow such way, as serves them
best to confute their adversary. Which manner not reporting any untruth, S.
Basile does excuse in the settinge forth of a disputation, not in
prescribinge of a Doctrine. As he defends Gregorius Neocaesariensis against
the Sabellians, Epist. 64.
for that in a contention he had with Aelianus an Ethnike, to declare the
Mysteries of the Trinity, he used the word, (...), in steed of (...). And
the learned men, that be well seen in the Fathers, know, they must use a
discreation, and a sundry judge between the things they write Agonisti(...),
that is to say, by way of contention or disputation, and the things they
utter, Dogmatic(...), that is, by way of settinge forth a doctrine, or matter
of Faith. Neither in that contention did Tertullian so much regard the exact
use of words, Tertullian regards not the exact use of his words.
as how he might win his purpose, and drive his adversary, denieing that
Christ took the true Body of man, and that he suffered death in deed, to
confess the truth, which he thought to bring to pass, by deducing of an
argument from the Figure of his Body, which consists in that, O folly.
What needed him to prove this by a Figure, if he had thought, that Christ's
Body it self was Really present?
which is visible in the Sacrament, to prove the verity of his Body. And
therefore in framing his reason by way of illation he says, Figura autem non
esset, nisi veritatis esset Corpus. There were not a Figure, unless there were
a Body of truth, or a very Body in deed.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Here M. Hardinge courteously diuiseth a ^auourable excuse for Tertullian, not
thinkinge it best, being so Ancient a Father, and so near to the Apostles
time, utterly to condemn him of Folly. He vttred all this (says he) in heat
of contention, rashly, and unadvisedly, and understood not what he said,
neither had any great regard to the exact use of his words. How be it,
Tertullian not only spoke these words upon the sudden, but also leasurely,
and with study wrot^ them: and yet afterward quietly perusinge, and
consideringe the same, was never hable to epsy this fault.

But, that such cases of heat may sometimes happen, we have over good trial
in M. Hardinge: whom, as it now appears, contention has caused, so many
ways, and so far to ouerreache the truth, and to have so small regard, to
that he writes. S. Ambrose Ambrosi. in. 2. ad Timotheu^.2.
says, Apostolus impudoratos appellat eos, qui contentionibus nituntur:
Necesse est enim, vt contentio extorqueat aliquid, imo multa, quae dicantur
contra conscientiam: vt intus in animo perdat, foris victor abscedat: Non enim
patitur se vinci, licet sciat vera esse, quae audit. The Apostle calls them
impudent, that hold by contention. For it cannot be chosen, but that
contention must force a man to say some thing, or rather many things,
against his Conscience: that he lose in his mind within, to the intent
outwardely he may seem to have the victory. For he will not suffer him self
to be conquered: no, although he know, the things, that he hears, be never
so true. Afterward being thus carried away with contention, Lactan. Videri
volunt, non tantiom cum venia, sed etiam cum ratione peccare.
and more regarding their own Reputation, then the Truth of God, as
Lactantius says, they seek reasons, and shifts, to color their error. So
Seneca writes of the Poet Ouide, Non ignorauit vitia sua, sed amauit: He was
not ignorant of his own faults, but rather had a fancy to them.

Touching Gregorius Neocaesarien^^s, S. Basiles excuse is good. So S.
Augustine writing against the Pelagians, seems sometime, to lean to far
to the contrary, and to become a Manichee: as also writing against the
Manichees, he seems sometimes to be a Pelagian. ^asili. Epist. 41.
The like S. Basile writes of one Dionysius, that contendinge over earnestly
against the Heretic Sabellius, seemed to fall into the contrary Heresy.

Thus the holy Fathers in the sway of Disputation, use oftetimes to enlarge
their talk above the common course of truth: but specially when they entreat
of ye Nature, and effect of the Holy Sacraments: to the end to withdraw the
eyes of the people from the Sensible, and Corruptible Creatures, that they see
before them, to the contemplation of things Spiritual, yt be in Heaven. In
this sort S. Chrysostom says, Chrysostom. in Johan. ^om. 4^.
Figimus dentes in Carne Christi: We fasten our teeth in the Fleashe of
Christ. And again, Chrysostom. de Beato Philogonio.
Videmus Dominum nostrum in Cunis iacentem, and fascijs inuolutum. We see our
Lord lieinge in his Cradel, and swathed in bands. And again, Turba
circumstans rubet Sanguine Christi: Chrysostom. de Sacerdotio. li. 3.
The company standinge about is made red with the Blood of Christ. Likewise
again he says, Hic Sermo Sanguine infectus omnes aspersit: These words
being stained with Blood, have sprinkled al men. Chrysostom. ad Hebraeos hom.
16
So likewise S. Bernarde, Totum Christum desidero videre, and tangere: and non
id solum, sed accedere ad Sacrosanctum eius Lateris vulnus, ost^um Arcae, quod
factum est in Latere, Bernard. De amore Dei. ca. ^.
vt totus intrem vsque ad Cor Jesus. I desire to see whole Christ, and to
touch him: and not only so, but also to come to the Holy Wound of his side,
which is the door, that was made in the side of the Arc: that I may wholly
enter even unto the heart of Jesus. Thus the Holy Fathers have evermore used
upon occasion to force, and auance their words above the tenoure of common
speech.

Now mark, good Christian Reader, how handsomely M. Hardinge applies these
things unto his purpose. Certainly Tertullian in these words, even by M.
Hardinges own judgment, enlarges nothing, nor uses any such contentious,
or fiery speech over, and above the Truth: but rather contrariwise he
a^^teth, and minisheth, as much as he possibly may, of the Truth. For the
thing, that M. Hardinge says, Is Christ's very Natural Body, Tertullian
says, It is a Figure of Christ's Body: Hoc est, Figur^ Corporis met.
The thing, that in deed, and undoubtedly is the Substance of Bread, that
Tertullian, by M. Hardinges Exposition, calls a Show, or Accident of Bread:
To be short, that thing, wherein rests al thing, Tertullian
(...)Conclusion makes nothing. Yet M. Hardinge favorably excuses him, for
that he wrote (...), as did Gregorius Neocaesariensis: and therefore through
heat of Contention seems somewhat to ouerreache the truth. Thus he, that
calls Christ's Body a Figure: Substance, Accidente: and abaseth his talk,
and speaks less, then he should do, by M. Hardinges Divinity, amplifieth,
enlarges, ouerreacheth, and speaks more, then he should do. It is a very
narrow hole, that these men will not seek, to shifte out at.

Origin expoundinge these words, Origin in Leuiti. Homi. 7.
Unless ye eat the Fleashe of the Son of man, etc. says thus, It is a
Figure. S. Cyprian says, Cypri. de Unction Chrisma.
Significa^a, and Significantia ijsdem nominibus censentur. The things that
Signify, and the things, that be Signified, are counted both by one name. S.
Hierome says, Hieronym in Matthae. ca. 26.
Christ represented the Verity of his Body. S. Augustine says, August. in
Psalm. 3.
Christ delivered to his Disciples the Figure of his Body. Gelasius calls
the Sacrament Similitudinem, and Imaginem, A Similitude, and an Image of
Christ's Body. S. Basile calls it (...), A Samplar: Dionysius calls it
Signum, A Token. S. Ambrose uses al these words together, Imago, Figura,
Typus, Similitudo, Significatur. An Image, a Figure, a Token, a Likeness, it is
Signified. Time will not suffer me to reckon up the rest. Celasius contra
Eutychem.
For to this purpose, and with such words they write al, and none otherwise.
And must we needs believe, upon M Hardinges report, that al these Fathers
spoke in such heat, Basil. in Liturgia.
and in such fury of contention, and had no manner regard to the exact use
of their words?

Truly, Dionys. Ecclesi. Hierar. ca. 3.
as it is said before, Tertullian wrote gravely, and soberly, and without any
token of impatient heat, and that not lightly, or sclenderly, touching the
matter with one hoate word, Ambros. de Sacrament. Et de ijs. qui initiantur.
or two, as it is here supposed, but clearly proouinge the same by a
Substantial, and full Conclusion. For, to prove against Marcion the Heretic,
that Christ had the very Substance, and Nature of a man's Body, he uses
this reason: A Figure presupposes the Verity of a thing, whereof it is a
Figure: But Christ at his last Supper gave to his Disciples the Figure of his
Body: Therefore Christ had in deed (not a Fantasy, or a Show) but a
Natural, and a very Body. The force hereof stands upon this ground, that a
Fantasy, or Show can bear no Figure. And in this sort some think S.
Paul said, 1. Cor. 8.
Idolum nihil est, An Idol is nothing. Thus S. Augustine says, Augustine.
Epist. 23.
Unless Sacraments had a certain Likeness of things, whereof they be
Sacraments, then no doubt, they were no Sacraments. Thus Leo, Gelasius, and
other Old Fathers reason against the Heretic Eutyches. Likewise Chrysostom
reprooueth the Old Heretics Ualentinus, Manicheus, and Marcion. Chrysostom. in
Matthae. homi. 83.
Thus he writes, Quoniam isti, eorumque sequaces, negaturi erant hanc
dispensationem (Christi in Carne) ideo nos in Memoriam Passionis semper reducit
per hoc Mysterium: vt nemo, modo ne sit insanus, seduci possit. Because these
Heretics, and others their ^isciples, would deny this dispensation (of
Christ in the Fleashe,) therefore by this Mystery he puts us evermore in
Remembrance of his Passion, that noman, unless he be mad, can be deceived.
And immediately before he uses these words, which I have else where alleged:
Si mortuus Christus non est, cuius Symbolum, ac Signum hoc Sacrificium est? If
Christ died not (as these Heretics say,) then whose Sign, and whose Token
is this Sacrifice? In like manner Tertullian reasons against Marcion, not
ignorantly, or blindely, as M. Hardinge says, but directly, and orderly, and
according to the Words of Christ.

But, if Tertullian had then benne persuaded of this Privy, and Secret
Presence, that here is imagined, and nevertheless would have leafte the same,
and grounded his whole proof upon a Figure, then had he, not only benne
ignorant, and presumptuous, as here M. Hardinge makes him, but also a
traitoure to his own cause. For, if he had granted this New Fantasy, that
the Accidents in the Sacrament stand alone without any Subject, then had he
concluded fully with Marcion the Heretic, and most directely against him
self. For thus would Marcion conclude upon the same: The Bread in the
Sacrament is Fantastical, That is to say, It seems Bread, and is none: Even
so the Body of Christ was Fantastical: For it seemed a Body, and was none.

Thus M. Hardinge, and Marcion the Heretic, build both together upon one
fundation.

M. Hardinge. The.11. Division.
And, where as Tertullian uses this word Figure, in this place, it is not
to be understood* such as the Figures of the Old Testament be, as though it
signified the shewinge of a thing to come, or of a thing absent, which is
wont to be set against the truth, as contrar^e to the same: but it is such a
kind of Figure, as does cover the truth present, and so as it were joined
with the truth, (193) The.193. Untruth. For it is never so taken in the Nevve
Testament.
as it is wont to be taken in the New Testament, where is shows rather the
manner of a thing to be exhibited, then that it takes away the truth of
presence of the thing, which is exhibited. For else concerning the truth
of Christ's Body in the Sacrament, if any man doubt, what opinion he was of,
he shows him self plainly so to judge of it, as ever has been taught in the
Catholic Church. Whereof he gives evidence in many other places: But
specially in his second book to his wife, exhortinge her not to marie again
to an In^idel, if she ouerliued him, least if she did, she should not have
opportunity to observe the Christen Religion, as she would. Speakinge of the
blessed Sacrament, which was then commonly kept of devout men, and women in
their houses, and there in times of persecution received before other meats,
when devotion stirred them, he says thus: Shall not thy hu^bande know, what
thou eatest secretly before other meat? And if he know it, he will believe it
to be bread, (194) The.194. Untruth, standing in manifest, and willful
Corruption.
not him, who it is called. The Latin is recited before. I omit many other
places, which show him to acknowledge Christ's Body in the Sacrament,
because I would not be tediouse, which verily by no wreastinge can be drawn
to the signification of a mere Figure.

The B. of Sarisburie.
One Cloud more M. Hardinge throws in, to dimne, and shadow the Day light.
He casts doubts, least some man would make this Holy Mystery (...) Figure
of the Old Testament. But it is known even unto children, that it is a
Sacrament of Christ's institution in the Gospel, like as also is the Sacrament
of Baptism.

But the difference bitweene the Sacraments of the Old Testament, and of the
New stands not in containing, or coueringe, as it is here surmised, but in
the Order, and Manner, and Evidence of Shewinge. Which difference S. Augustine
Augusti. contra Faustum. lib. 9. cap. 14.
opens in this sort: Sacramenta Legis fuerunt promissiones rerum
complendarum: nostra sunt indicia rerum completarum: The Sacraments of the
Old Law were promises of things to be performed: Our Sacraments are Tokens
of things, that already be performed. August. contra literas Petiliani lib.
2. cap. 37.
Again, Lex, and Prophetae Sacramenta habebant praenuntiantia rem futura^:
Sacramenta nostri temporis venisse testantur, quod illa venturum praedicaba^t:
The Law, and the Prophets had Sacraments shewinge before a thing, that was
to come: But the Sacraments of our time do witness, that the thing is
already come, that by those Sacraments was signified. Augustine. in Johan.
tract 26.
And again, Sacramenta Iudaeorum in Signis diuersa fuerunt a nostris: in rebus
autem Significatis paria: The Sacraments of the Jews, in outward tokens were
diverse from ours: but in the things Signified they were equal, and one with
ours. Likewise again he says, August de F^de ad Petrum ca 19
In illis Carnalibus victimis Figuratio fuit Carnis Christi, quam pro nostris
peccatis fuerat oblaturus: in isto autem Sacrificio est Gratiarum actio, and
Commemoratio Carnis Christi, quam pro nobis obtulit: In those fleashely
Sacrifices there was a Signification of the Fleashe of Christ, which he had
to offer for our sins: But in this Sacrifice there is a Thankesgeuinge, and a
Remembrance of the Fleashe of Christ, which he has already offered for us.

The New Fantasy of Being present Secretly, or under Couerte, is answered
before.

And where as, for further proof of Tertullians mind herein, M. Hardinge has
here alleged certain words of his unto his wife, understand thou, good
Reader, that wilfully he has of purpose corrupted the same, the rather to
misleade thy simplicity. True it is, that the Unfaithful, that knows not
Christ, if he happen to see the Bread of the Holy Mysteries, will judge no
further of it, but that he sees. But what it means, or Signifies, or unto
what end it is appointed, he knows not. But the Bread of the Sacrament, by
Christ's Institution, is Spiritual, and Heavenly Bread, even as the Water of
Baptism is Spiritual, and Heavenly Water. Which thing, as Tertullian says,
the Infidel cannot see. But M. Hardinge, having small regard to his Readers
judgment, has witingely falsified his Translation, changinge this Article,
It, into, Him, Only of his own particular wilfulness, contrary to al others,
Old, or New: yea contrary to his own Fellows. Of whom one Translateth the
same in this wise: And if he know it, he believes it to be Bread, and not
that, which it is said to be. No man may be bold to work such open
Corruption, but M. Hardinge. For, where as Tertullians words be plain, Si
scierit maritus tuus, Panem esse credet, non illum (Panem) qui dicitur: If thy
husband know it (being an Infidel) he will believe it to be (bare) Bread, but
not that (Bread) that it is called, M. Hardinge thought it better to Translate
it thus, He will believe it to be Bread, but not Him, Who it is called: As if
it were the person of a Man. This dealinge, and the whole understanding of
Tertullians mind, is opened more at large in the first Article, and in the
seventeenth Division. Certainly, false Translation makes no sufficient proof.

Now mark thou, good Christian Reader, into how many, and how narrow
straites M. Hardinge has cast him self, to avoid the force of these few
plain words of Tertullian, Hoc est Figura Corporis mei: This is a Figure of
my Body. First, the Outward, and, as he calls it, the Holy Form of Bread
Holy Accidents.
Inuisibly hidden under the Accidents.



It were far better, for a man, that meante truth, to leave these unsavory,
and insensible Gloses, and simply, and plainly to expound the Words of
Christ, as this Ancient Learned Father expounds them, Hoc est Corpus meu^,
Hoc est, Figura Corporis mei. This is my Body, that is to say, This is a
Figure of my Body. De Conse. did. 2. Hoc est. In Glosa.
So shall Tertullian agree both in Sense, and Words, with all the Old
Catholic writers, and Doctors of the Church: So shall he agree with the
Common Gloss noted in the Decrees: Vocatur Corpus Christi: id est, Significat
Corpus Christi: It is called the Body of Christ: Maximus in Ecclesi. hierar.
Cap. 3.
that is to say, It signifies the Body of Christ. So shall he agree with
Maximus the Greek Scholiast upon Dionysius, Signa sunt haec, non autem
Veritas: These be Tokens, but not the Truth it self. To conclude, (...).
Tertullian. contra Marcionem lib. 1.
so shall Tertullian agree with him self: For thus he writes: Christus non
reprobauit Panem, quo ipsum Corpus suum repraesentauit: Christ refused not
Bread, wherewith he Represented his own Body.

M. Hardinge. The.12. Division.
The like answer may be made to the objection brought out of S. Augustine,
Contra Adimantum Manichaeum ca. 13. Non dubitauit Dominus dicere, Hoc est
Corpus meum, cum tamen daret Signum Corporis sui. Our Lord stickt not to say,
This is my Body, when notwithstanding he gave the Sign of his Body. A
miserable shift. S. Augustine has no regard, what he say.
For this is to be considered, that S. Augustine in fightinge against the
Man^chees, oftentimes uses not his own sense, and meaning, but those things
which by some mean, how so ever it were, might seem to give him advantage
against them, so as he might put them to the worste, as he witnesses him self
in his book De bono perseuerantiae, Ca. 11. and.12.

The B. of Sarisburie.
S. Augustine, says M. Hardinge, in the chafe, and rage of Disputation
sometimes forgate him self, and uttered his words unadvisedly: and not only
that, but also afterward publisshed the same his unadvised speech in open
writing unto the world, as a man seekinge only to conquer his Adversary:
but whether by right, or by wrong, by truth, or by falseheade, he had no
care. But, O gentle, and easy Heretics, that upon such proufes would so
lightly yield unto S. Augustine. Easy also be these Catholics, that in so
childishe Gheasses will give credit to M. Hardinge. Certainly, S. Augustine
for his mildness, and sobriety, both in Disputation, and also otherwise,
has the praise above al others. Neither doothe there appear in that whole
book against Adimantus any token to the contrary. Some part of their
variance grew upon occasion of these words, Sanguis est Anima: The Blood is
the Soul. For declaration whereof S. Augustine without any manner Heat of
Contention, that may appear, says thus: Ita Sanguis est Anima, quemadmodum
Petra erat Christus: So is the Blood the Soul, even as the rock was Christ.
And in the same Chapter he joins these three sentences al together. The
Blood is the Soul, The Rock was Christ, And, This is my Body: as being al
both of like meaning, and also of like manner of utterance. S. Augustine never
knew any of these M. Hardinges lately invented Holy Fourmes, or Couertes, or
Secresies. But in most plain wise he says, Augustine. co^tr^ Adimantum ca.
12.
Dabat Signum Corporis sui: Christ g^ue a Token of his Body: agreeinge
therein both with him self, and also with all other Ancient Catholic
Fathers. But if M. Harding, not shewinge us any suspicion, or token of
inordinate Heat in that Reverend Master of the Church of God, Ambrosius De
Noe and Arc^* ca. 25.
may tell us only of him self, that he was thus unadvisedly carried away
with vehemency of Disputation, and tempest of talk, Then may he also easily
dispatche al other the Ancient Learned Fathers, and say, what so ever they
wrote, that likes not him, they wrote in a Rage, and in their Furies. But if
S. Augustine were alive, he would rather say, That M. Hardinge were somewhat
blown away with the winds, and waves of contention, and had much forgotten
him self, and talks in his Heates, he knows not, or cares not, what. S.
Ambrose upon occasion expoundinge these words, says thus, Cum Sanguinem hoc
loco Animam diceret, vtique significauit, aliud esse Animam, aliud Sanguinem:
When Moses in this place called the Blood the Soul, doubtless he meante
thereby, that the Blood is one thing, and the Soul an other,
(notwithstanding he seem by words to make them one.) Even so likewise may
we say, When Christ vttred these words, This Bread is my Body, he meante,
that the Bread is one thing, and his Body an other, notwithstanding the
words seem to sound otherwise.

M. Hardinge. The.13. Division.
Gregory Nazianzene Oratione 4. in Sanctum Pascha, shewinge difference
between the Passover of the Law, which the Jews did eat, and that which
we in the New Testamente do eat in the Mystery of the Sacrament, and that
which Christ shall eat with us in the life to come, in the Kingedome of his
Father, utters such words, as whereby he calls that we reeiue here, a
Figure of that shall be received there. Caeterum iam Paschae fiamus participes,
Figuraliter tamen adhuc, etsi Pascha hoc veteri sit manifestius* Siquidem
Pascha legale, audenter dico, Figurae Figura erat obscurior: at paulo post illo
perfectius and putius fruemur, cum verbum ipsum biberit nobiscum in regno
patris nouum, detegens and docens, quae nun^ mediocriter ostendit. Nouum enim
semper existit id, quod nup^r est cognitum. But now (says he) let us be made
partakers of this passover, and yet but Figuratively as yet, albeit this
passover be more manifest, then that of the old law. For the Passover of
the law ( I speak boldly) was a dark Figure of a Figure: but er it be long,
we shall enjoy it more perfitly, and more purely* when as the word (that is,
the son of God) shall drink the same new with us in the Kingdom of his
Father, opening and teaching the things, that now he shows not in most
clear wise. For that ever is new, which of late is known. Where as this
learned father calls our passover, that we eat, a Figure, whereof the law
Passover was a Figure, terminge it the Figure of a Figure, he asks leave, as
it were, so to say, and confesses him self to speak boldly, alluding, as it
seems, to S. Paul, or at least having fast printed in his mind, Heb. 10.
his Doctrine to the Hebrews: where he calls the things of the life to
come, Res ipsas, the very things them selves: the things of the new
Testament, Ipsa^^ imaginem rerum, the very Image of things: and the old
Testament, Imaginis vmbram, the shadow of the Image. Which doctrine
Naz^anzene applies to the Sacrament of the Altar. And his meaning is this,
that although we be gotten out of those darkness of the law, yet we are not
come to the full light, which we look for in the world to come, where we
shall see and behold the very things them selves clearly, and we shall know
as we are known. To be short, by his report, the Sacraments of the old
Testament be but Figures, and Shadows of things to come, the Sacraments of
the new Testament, not Shadows of things to come (195) The.195. Untruth, For
this was never this Fathers meaning.
but Figures of things present, which are contained and delivered under them
in Mystery, but yet substantially: at the end of al, Figures in Heaven shall
cease and be abolisshed, and there shall we see al those things that here he
hidden, clearly face to face. And where Christ says, that he will drink his
Passover new with us in the kingdom of his Father, Nazianzene so expounds
that word, New as it may be referred to the manner of the exhibitinge, not to
the thing exhibited. Not that in the world to come we shall have an other
Body of our Lord, which now we have not, O folly. Nazian. speaks not of
the Sacrament, but of perfection and imperfection of knowledge.
but that we shall have the self same Body, that now we have in the
Sacrament of the Altar in a Mystery, but yet verily, and substantially, after
an other sort and manner, and in that respect new. For so had without
Mystery, or couerture in clear sight, and most joyful fruition, it is new in
comparison of this present knowledge.

Thus the word Figure reports not always the absence of the truth of a
thing, as we see, but the manner of the thing either promised, or exhibited:
that for as much as it is not fully and clearly seen, it may be called a
Figure. So of Origin it is called Imago rerum, In Psalm. 38. hom. 2.
an Image of the things, as in this place. Si quis vero transire potuerit ab
hac vmbra, veniat ad imaginem re^u^, and videat aduentum Christi in Carne
factum, This place is not ^^el applied: for these words perteine nothing to
the Sacrament.
videat ^um pontificem offerentem quidem and nunc patri hostias, and postmodum
oblaturum, and intelligat haec omnia imagines esse Spiritualium rerum, and
corporalibus officijs Coelestia designari. Imago ergo dicitur hoc, quod
recipitur ad praesens, and intueri potest humana natura. And if any man (says
he) can pass and depart from this shadow, let him come to the image of
things, and see the coming of Christ made in Fleashe, let him see him a
Bishop that boothe now offers Sacrifice unto his Father, and also hereafter
shall offer. And let him understand, that al these things be Images of
spritual things, and that by bodily services heavenly things be resembled,
and set forth. So this, which is at this present received, and may of man's
nature be seen, is called an Image. In this saieinge of Origin this word
Image, does not in signification diminishe the truth of things, so as they be
not the very things in deed, for the things that Christ did in Fleashe,
were true things: but when they are termed the Image of things, thereby is
signified, so far as the condition and nature of man can behold, and see
them.

This is most plainly uttered by Oecumenius a Greek writer, upon these
words of S. Paul to the Hebrews. Hebr. 10.
Non ipsam imaginem rerum, not the Image it self of things, Id est, veritate^
rerum, that is, the truth of things, says he, and adds further: Res
appellat futuram Vitam, imaginem autem rerum, Euangelicam politiam, vmbram vero
vetus testamentum. Imago enim manifestiora ostendit exemplaria: adumbratio
autem imaginis obscurius haec manifestat, nam haec veteris testamenti exprimit
imbecillitatem. The sense of which words may thus be uttered in English. S.
Paul calls the life to come, the things: and the ordinance or disposition
of the things in the Gospel, he calls the Image of things: and the old
Testament, he names the shadow of the image of things. For an Image shows
samplars more manifest: but the adumbration or shadowinge of the Image shows
these things but darkely, for this does express the weakness of the old
Testament. Nothing of the Sacrament.
By this place of Oecumenius we see, that although it be proper to an Image to
exhibit the truth of things, and therefore by interpretation he says,
Imaginem, id est, veritatem, the Image, that is, the truth: yet the proper and
right taking of the word, signifies the way, or manner of a thing to be
exhibited, not the thing it self: that what the Image has less then the
thing it self, it is to be understood in the manner of exhibitinge, not in
the thing it self exhibited.

Hitherto we have brought examples to declare, that the words, figure, and
Image, signify the truth of things exhibited in deed, though in secret,
and privy manner.

The B. of Sarisburie.
These three Fathers Nazianzene, Origin, and Oecumenius, cost M. Harding no
great study. He found them word by word, alleged before in Doctor
Steeuen Gardener. Neither do they any wise further his purpose, touching^
either his outward Forms, and Accidents: or else his Privy, and Secret
Presence. But he knows, that the very names of Old Doctors, although they
say nothing, may suffice to lead the ignorant.

The meaning of these three Fathers was only to show the difference, The
law and the Gospel.
that is bitweene the three states, The Jews under the Law, The Christians in
the Gospel, and the Saints in the life to come. Al which three states are
one ofspringe of Abraham, one People, one Church, one Enheritance: al calling
upon, and glorifieinge the name of God, and of his Son Jesus Christ.
Therefore S. Augustine says, Augustine. ad Asellicu^ Epist. 200.
The people of Israel under the Law were very Christians: and the Christians
in the Gospel are very Israelites. Al be it, he adds, Non oportet illud nomen
in consuetudine Sermonis retinere: In common use of speech we may not
continewe that name. Again he says, Augustine. co^tra 2. Epist. Pelagian. li.
3. ca. 4.
Iudaei nondum nomine, sed re ipsa erant Christiani. The Jews although not in
name, yet in deed were very Christians, Likewise Eusebius says, All the Jews,
from Abraham upward until Adam, were in deed Christian men: al be it they
were not named so. (...).
So likewise Epiphanius says, The Faith of Christ was ever from the
beginning of the world.

The Substance of these three states is one: the difference stands only in
quality, or proportion of more, or less. The Jews saw Christ in the Law:
The Christians see Christ in the Gospel: The Blissed Saints see Christ in
Heaven. The Jews saw Christ darkely, Epiphan. li. 1. c. 1. (...).
as in a shadow: The Christians see Christ, as in an Image lively purtraide:
The holy Saints see Christ in Heaven expressly, and perfitely without
Image or Shadow, face to face. Christ, that is seen, is al one: the
difference is only in the seers: of whom some see in a dark Shadow: some in
a perfect Image: and some in the clear Light. And yet none of them without
the sight of Christ. And as the Jews were in a Shadow, in comparison of that
Brightness of Light, that we see now: even so are we likewise in a Shadow,
in comparison of that Light, that we hope for, and is to come. And thus Origin,
Nazianzene, Oecumen^us, and the rest of the Ancient Fathers meante, and none
otherwise. Therefore M. Hardinge may consider better, how much these
Authorities make for him, to prove his Secret Fleashely Presence in the
Sacrament.

Chrysostom compares the state of the Jews, Chrysostom. in varijs locis in
Mathae. hom. 10.
unto a Candel: and the state of the Christians, to the Brightness of the Sun.
Again, he likeneth the Jews to the first draught, or platte of an Image, set
out only in bare lines: and the Christians unto the same Image lively filled
up with all due proportion, Chrysostom. in dictu^ Apostoli, Patres nostri omnes,
etc.
and resemblance, and furniture of Colors. Irenaeus compares the Jews to the
sowinge of the seed: and the Christians to the harvest, and reapinge of the
Corn. To Conclude, S. Paul compares the Jews to a Child, and the
Christians to a full perfect man. Irenaeus li. 4. ca. 42.


By all these Examples it appears, that the Substance is one, and the
difference stands only in More, and Less. Calat. 4.
The Jews had the same light, although not in like quantity: The same Image,
1. Corinthians. 13.
although not with like furniture: The same Corn, although not grown to like
ripenes: They were the same person, although not in like perfection of age.
Thus much, to open the difference bitweene the Law, and the Gospel: which
was one part of these Fathers meaning.

The like difference we may find bitweene the state of the Gospel, and the
state of the life, that is to come. For although the things be one, yet the
fruition of the same is not one: and in respect of that abundance of Glory,
that we look for, all that we have, and enioie already, is but a Figure. And
therefore S. Augustine says, Augustine. contra Faustum lib. 12. ca. 20.
Cum Christus tradiderit Regnum D^o, and Patri, in illa perspicua
contemplatione incommutabilis Veritatis, nullis Mysterijs Corporalibus
indigebimus. When Christ shall have delivered the Kingedome to God, and the
Father, in that plain contemplation of the unchangeable Truethe, we shall need
no Bodily Mysteries.

Likewise he wrtteth of the Sacrament of Baptism: Vngimur modo in Sacramento:
and Sacramento ipso praefiguratur quiddam, Augustine. in Psalm. 26.
quod futuri sumus: and illud, nescio quid, futurum ineffabile desiderate
debemus, and in Sacramenio gemere: vt in ^a re gaudeamus, quae Sacramento
praemonstratur. We are now anointed in a Sacrament: and in the Sacrament it
self there is a thing foresignified, that we shall be: and the same
unspeakable thing, that is to come, we ought to desire, and to mourn for it
in the Sacrament, that we may rejoice in that thing, that is signified in the
Sacrament.

So S. Basile, Basilius in Psalm. 45.
Etiam nunc iustus bibit Aquam illam viuentem: verum eam posthac largi^s bibet,
vbi cooptatus fuerit in Ciuitatem Dei. Nunc quidem bibit in speculo, and in
aenigmate, (...).
per breuem comprehensionem Obseruationum Diuinarum. Tunc autem flumen
vniuersum recipiet: Even now the just man drinks that Living Water. But
after this, when he shall be received into the City of God, he shall drink it
more abundantly. Now he drinks as in a Seeingeglasse, or in a riddle, by a
small understanding of heavenly things: but then he shall swallow^ ^owne the
whole stream.

In this sense Nazianzene says, Gregori. Nazianzen. in S. Pascha Oration. 4.
The Ecclesiastical policy of the Jews, compared with the Gospel of Christ,
is a Figure of a Figure. In this sense Origin says, Origin. in Psalm. 38.
Homil. 2.
The coming of Christ in the Fleashe, and the offeringe of him self upon
the Cross, (the force of which oblation continues still) and al, that our
Nature can conceive of the same, is but an Image, in comparison of those
Spiritual things, that we look for. And here understand thou, good Reader,
that Origin in this place speaks of Christ's coming, and appearinge in the
Fleashe: and not one word of the Sacrament. For thus he says, Veniat ad
Imaginem rerum, and videat aduentum Christi in Carne factu^: Let him come to
the Image of things, and see Christ's coming in the Fleashe. This Image
Oecumenius very well expounds, Veritatem rerum, that is, The truethe, and
performance of things, Oecumenius ad Hebraeos. ca. 10.
that were promised under a shadow to the Jews. In like sort Chrysostom
expounds the same words: Chrysostom. ad Hebraeos. Ca. 10.
Lex habuit vmbram futurorum bonorum, non ipsam imaginem rerum: hoc est, non
ipsam Veritatem. The Law had a Shadow of good things to come, but not the
Image of the things, that is to say, not the truth it self. He calls the
Gospel the truth it self, not in respect of Christ's Secret Being in the
Sacrament, unto which fantasy M. Harding drives all this long talk, but
only in respect of Christ's Incarnation, as it is plain by that immediately
follows: Donec enim quis velut in pictura circunducat colores, Vmbra quaedam
est: Chrysostom. ad Hebraeos. Ca. 10. Coloss. 2.
cum vero flores ipsos colorum induxerit, and imposuerit, tunc Imago efficitur.
A picture, until the Painter lay on his colors, is but a Shadow: but the
freashe colors being laid on, it is an Image. So S. Paul calls the Law the
Shadow, and Christ the Body. And in this consideration Athanasius says,
Athanasius De Communi essen. P. Fi. and Spir. S. Augustine in Psalm. 73.
Euangelium est Dei Verbi Domini Jesus Christi Praesentia, ad humani generis
salutem Incarnati. The Gospel is the Presence of our Lord Jesus Christ,
which is the Word of God, Incarnate unto the Salvation of Mankind. And
therefore S. Augustine says, Nostra Sacramenta dant Salutem: Iudaeorum
Sacramenta promittebant Saluatore^: Non quod iam acceperimus vitam aeterna^,
sed quod iam venerit Christus, qui per Prophetas pronuntiabatur. Our
Sacraments do give Sauation: The Sacraments of the Jews promised a Saueour.
I speak not this, for that we have already atteined Everlasting life, but for
that Christ is already come, that was pronounced by the Prophets.

Out of these Fathers words M. Hardinge reasons in this wise: The Brightness
of the Gospel is but a Figure, in Comparison of that Brightness, that is to
come: Ergo, Christ's Body is secretly hidden under the outward Forms, and
Accidents of the Sacrament.

How be it, it may soon appear unto the discrete, and indifferent Reader,
that in all these words there is no manner mention, neither of Secrecy, nor
of Presence, nor of Absence, nor of Forms, nor of Elements, nor of
Accidents, nor, in express words, of any Sacrament. Nazianzene,
notwithstanding he mai^ seem to touch the Sacrament of Christ's Body, yet
in deed he speaks only of the Spiritual Food of the knowledge of God, and
not of the Sacrament: as it is plain both by the place it self, and also by
the words, that immediately follow after. The words, that went before, are
these: Christus bibet nobiscum Nouum Vinum in Regno Patris. Christ will drink
with us New Wine in the Kingdom of his Father. The words, (...).
that follow, are these: Quis est hic porus, and quae est haec oblectatio?
Nostra quidem, Discere: illius vero, Docere. Doctrina enim etiam docenti
alimenti instar est. What is this Drink, and what is this Pleasure? Of our
part, it is to Learn: of Christ's part, it is to Teach. For Doctrine even
unto him, that teaches, is a kind of meat.

It is very much for M. Harding, thus to conclude his imaginations of the
Sacrament, by these Fathers, that speak not one word of the Sacrament.
Touching yt, is here alleged of Secret, and Privy Being, the Catholic
Fathers do confess that Christ is in the Sacraments of the New Testament,
as he was in the Sacraments of the Old. Augustine. De vtilitate Poenitentiae.
So S. Augustine says, Quicunque in Manna Christum intellexerunt, eundem, quem
nos, Cibum Spiritualem manducauerunt: As many, as in Manna understood Christ,
fed of the same Spiritual Bread, that we feed of. Again he says,
Augustine. in Johan. tract. 45.
Videte ergo, Fide manente, Signa variata. Ibi Petra Christus: Nobis Christus,
quod in Altari Dei ponitur: Behold, the Faith standinge one, the Signs, or
Sacraments are changed. There the Rock was Christ: Unto us that thing is
Christ, that is laid upon the Altar. As Christ is now here: so was Christ
then there. And as Christ is now in the Bread: so was Christ then in the
Rock: and none otherwise. But what can be so plain, as that Nazianzene him
self writes, whom M. Hardinge has chosen specially for his Author?
Nazianzen. in Oration. Cum postea, quae contra Maximum* etc.
These be his words: Pellent me ab Altaribus. At ego noui aliud Altar, cuius
ea omnia, quae nunc videntur, exemplaria tantum sunt: non manu, aut ascia
elaboratum: Mentis opus est, and Contemplationis ascensus. Ibi astabo, and
acceptabilia offeram, Sacrificium, Oblationem, and Holocausta: quae tanto
praestantiora sunt, quam ea, quae nunc aguntur, quanto Veritas potior est, quam
Vmbra. They will drive me from the Aultars, or Communion Tables. But I know an
other Altar, whereof all the things, that are now seen, are but Samplars:
not wrought by hand, or instrument. It is the work of the mind, and the
Elevation of the heart. There will I stand, and offer up acceptable Sacrifices:
Which so far exceed the Sacrifices, that are made here, as the Truth
exceeds a Shadow.

M. Hardinge. The.14. Division.
Certain fathers use the words, De Con. D^st. 2. can. Vtrum sub Figura.
Signum, and Sacramentum, that is, Sign, and Sacrament, in the same
signification. S. Augustine. In Libro Sententiarum Prosperi, says thus, Caro
eius est, quam forma Panis opertam in Sacramento accipimus: and Sanguis eius,
quem sub vini specie and sapore potamus: Caro videlicet Carnis, and Sanguis est
Sacramentum Sanguinis: Carne and Sanguine, vtroque Inuisibili, Spirituali,
Intelligibili, Signatur visibile Domini nostri Jesus Christi Corpus, and
palpabile, plenum gratia omnium virtutum, and Diuina Maiestate. It is his
Fleashe, that we receive coouered with the Form of Bread in the Sacrament,
and his Blood, that under the shape and sauoure of wine, we drink. Soothly
Fleashe is a Sacrament of Fleashe, and Blood is a Sacrament of Blood: by the
Fleashe, and the Blood both Invisible, Spiritual, intelligible, our Lord
Jesus Christ his visible and palpable Body, full of the grace of al virtues,
and Divine Majesty is Signified, or, as it were, with a Sign noted.

In these words of S. Augustine, we see the fleashe of Christ called a
Sacrament of his fleashe, and the Blood a Sacrament of his Blood, in as
much as they be covered with the Form of Bread and Wine, yet verily, and in
Substance present: And likewise he lets not to call this Verity or Truth
of the things them selves thus covertly exhibited, a Sign of Christ's
Visible, and Palpable Body: so that the naminge of a Sign does not importe a
separation from the Truth, but shows a distinct manner of the Truethe
exhibited: And therefore according to the Truth of the manner of exhibitinge,
it is not the Fleashe of Christ, but the Sacrament of the Fleashe of Christ,
for that the Fleashe does not exhibit it self in his own shape, but in a
Sacrament. Coouered.


The B. of Sarisburie.
In this saieinge of S. Augustine M. Hardinge seems specially to note these
three words, Forma, Operta, and Inuisibilis: which being answered, I hoape
the force of his collection will soon appear. First, if M. Hardinge will say,
that this word, Forma, must needs be taken for the outward Show, and
Appearance of Bread, then must he needs fall into a great inconvenience, and
become either a Patron, or a Scholar of the Old Heretic Marcion, who upon
the very same word erected his Heresy: and of these words of S. Paul,
Forma^ serui suscepit, reasoned then, as M. Hardinge does now, Ergo, Christ
had nothing else, but the outward Form, and Appearance, or Shape of a Man's
Body. But it is known to the Learned, that as well emonge the Philosophers, as
also emonge the Old Catholic learned Fathers, these words, Forma, and
Species, are taken, not only for the outward Appearance, but also for Nature,
and Substance if self. So S. Hierome imagines Christ to say, Hieronym. in
Ose^. li. 3. ca. 11.
Declinaui ad eos deserens Regna Coelorum, vt cum eis vescerer, assumpta Forma
Hominis: I went down unto them, leauinge the Kingedomes of Heaven, that I
might eat with them, having received the Form of Man. I leave S. Augustine,
S. Ambrose, and other like Authorities. This matter is proved more at large in
the tenthe Article, and sixthe Division. By these ^ewe it may appear, that
this word, Forma, imports, not only a Show, but also the very Substance
of the Bread.

In the second word, Operta, which signifies Coouered, M. Hardinge
witingly dissembleth his own learning, and would seem not to know the
manner, and nature of al Sacraments: which is, to offer one thing outwardly
unto our senses, and an other inwardly to our mind. Hereof there is
sufficiently spoken before, in the Second, Chrysostom. in Matthae. hom. 83.
(...)
and Eighthe Division of this Article. Chrysostom says, In Sensibilibus
Intelligibilia nobis tradidit. In Sensible, and Outward things, Christ has
given us things Spiritual. And for Example he adds, Sic and in Baptismo: So
it fares in the Sacrament of Baptism. Thus S. Augustine says, The godly of
the Jews understood Christ in their Mann^. In like sort Origin speaks of
the letter of the Scriptures, Augustine. de vtlitate Poenitentiae: In Manna
Christum intellexerunt.
Corpora Prophetarum colunt posita in Libris, and Literis, quasi in quibusda^
Sepulchris. They honor the Bodies of the Prophets laid in their Books, and
Letters, as if it were in certain Graves. So S. Augustine, Sensus in Litera
manet, and per Literam vindetur: The Sense lies in the Letter, and by the
Letter it is seen. So Nicolaus Cabasilas, Spiritus celatur in Litera: The
Sprite of God is hidden in the Letter. I think, M. Hardinge in these speeches
will not necessarily require any Corporal, or Real Presence. Origin in Matthae.
Tractat. 26.
Thus S. Gregory says, Christus in se ipso immortaliter, and
incorruptibiliter viuens, iterum in hoc Mysterio moritur. Christ living in
him self immortally, and without Corruption, dies again in this Mystery.
Augustine. de Spiritu and anima. ca. 2.
Whereupon the Gloss says, Moritur, id est, Mors eius Repraesentatur: Christ
dies, that is to say, his Death is represented. Now, as Christ dies in the
Sacrament, so is his Body Present in the Sacrament. Nicolaus Cabasilas.
But Christ dies not there Really, and in deed: Therefore Christ's Body is
not there Really, and in deed.

I thought it needeful to use the more Examples in this behalf, De Conse. did.
2. Quid sit Sa^guis.
for that this place of S. Augustine August. de Spiritu and litera. ca. 15.
seems to carry the greatest force of al others. But as S. Augustine says
here, Christ's Body is hidden under the Form, or Kind of Bread, even so he
says, Gratia Dei in Veteri Testamento velata latebat: The Grace of God lay
hidden in the Old Testament. Even so S. Gregory says, Gregori. in prologo in
Cantica.
Vt palea frumentum, sic Litera tegit Spiritum: As the Chafe hides the Corn,
so the Letter hides the Sprite. Inuisibly.
Even so again S. Augustine says, August de Baptismo contra D^ natistas. li.
1. c. 15.
In Veteri Testame^to occultabarur Nouum. The New Testament was hidden in the
Old. But he expounds him self, Occultabatur, id est, occulte Significabatur.
It was hidden, that is to say, it was secretly Signified. And thus by S.
Augustines own Words, and exposition we may likewise say, Caro Christi
Operta, id est, occulte Significata: Christ's Fleashe, is privily hidden, that
is to say, as S. Augustine expounds it, ^t is privily Signified.

Thus the Sacrament of Christ's Fleashe, which, according to the Doctrine of
S. Augustine, bears the name of that thing, that it Signifies, is called
Christ's Fleashe, Invisible, Spiritual, and only to be conceived by
understanding. For the whole work hereof pertains, August. de Con. dis. 2.
Vt quid.
not unto the mouth, or teethe, as S. Augustine says, but only to Faith, and
Sprite. And therefore the same S. Augustine expoundinge these words of
Christ, Who so eats of this Bread, shall not die, says thus: Augustine. in
Johan. tractat. 26.
Quod pertinet ad Virtutem Sacramenti, non quod pertinet ad visibile
Sacramentum. Qui manducat intus, non foris: qui manducat in Cord, non qui
premit dente. That pertains to the Effect, and Virtue of the Sacrament, not
that pertains to the Visible Sacrament. He that eats inwardly, not
outwardly: that eats with his heart, not that presses with his teeth.
Likewise he says of Moses, Aaron, and Phinees, and others the Faithful of that
time: Visibile^ cibum (Manna) Spiritualiter intellexerunt. Spiritualiter
esurieru^t, Spiritualiter gustaueru^t. They understood Manna, that Visible
meat, Spiritually: they hungered it Spiritually: they tasted it Spiritually. By
these words, Intus, Inwardly: In Cord, in the heart: Spiritualiter,
Spiritually, S. Augustine expounds the meaning of this word,
Inuisibiliter, Inuisibly. Therefore Chrysostom says, Chrysostom. 1. Corin.
homi. 7.
Mysterium appellatur, quia aliud videmus, aliud credimus. Nam huiusmodi est
Mysteriorum nostrorum natura. It is called a Mystery, because we see one
thing, and believe an other. For such is the Nature of (Baptism, and our
Lords Supper, which are) our Sacraments, or Mysteries. So says S. Ambrose,
Ambros. de Spiritu Sancto li. 3.
as is alleged before: The Water of the Holy Font has washed us: the Blood
of Christ has redeemed us: Alterum igitur Inuisibile, alterum Visibile
Testimonium, etc. The one Witness is Invisible, the other is Visible. So the
old Father Origin says, Origin. in L^cam homi. 24.
S. John's Baptism was Visible: but Christ's Baptism is Invisible.

As it is the Mystery of Baptism, so is it also in the Mystery of Christ's
Body. As Christ's Blood is Invisible, wherewith we are washed, so is Christ's
Fleashe Invisible, wherewith we are feadde. And as this Invisible washinge in
Christ's Blood, represents unto our minds the Blood of Christ, that was
Uisibly sheadde for us: so the Fleashe of Christ, that is Eaten Inuisibly,
represents unto us that Uery Fleashe of Christ, that was Uisibly, and
Sensibly nailed, and torn upon the Cross. And thus S. Augustines meaning
may well stand upright, without any New Secrecy, or Real, or Fleashely
Presence.

M. Hardinge. The.15. Division.
And therefore in an other place he writes thus, De Con. Did. 2. Hoc est quod
dicimus.
Sicut ergo Coelestis panis, qui Caro Christi est, suo modo vocatur Corpus
Christi, cum re vera sit Sacramentum Corporis Christi, illius, videlicet, quod
Visibile, quod Palpabile, mortale in Cruce positu^ est, vocaturque ipsa
immolatio Carnis, quae Sacerdotis manibus fit, Christi Passio, Mors,
Crucifixio, non rei veritate, sed significante Mysterio: Sic Sacramentum Fidei,
quod Baptismus intelligitur, Fides est. As the heavenly Bread (says S.
Augustine), which is the Fleashe of Christ, in his manner is called the Body
of Christ, when as in verte deed, it is the Sacrament of Christ's Body, even
of that which is visible, which is palpable, and being mortal was put on the
Cross, and the sacrificinge it self of his Fleashe, which is done by the
priests hands, is called the Passion, the Death, the Crucifieinge of Christ,
not in truth of the thing, but in mystery signifieinge: So the Sacrament of
Faith, which is understood to be Baptism, is Faith. By heavenly Bread he
understood not wheaten Bread, Heavenly Bread.
but that heavenly meat, which he says to be the Fleashe of Christ, and
this far he affirms the truth of his Fleashe it self, The.196. Untruth.
For, this Heavenly Bread must needs be taken for the Sacrament, as it shall
appear.
which he says to be called, Suo modo, in his manner, the Body of Christ: as
who should say, whose truth notwithstanding, if ye behold on the behalf of
the manner of exhibitinge, in very deed it is a Sacrament of Christ's Body,
which is in visible shape, so as he speaks of Christ's Body, that has
suffered.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Here M. Hardinge allegeth good matter against him self. For by these words S.
Augustine says, The Bread is so Christ's Body, as the Breakinge of the same
Bread is Christ's Death. But the breaking of ye Bread is not Really, and in
deed the Death of Christ: wherefore it follows that the Bread is not
Really, or in deed the Body of Christ. And where as M. Harding seems to
stay altogether upon these two words, Coelestis Panis, thinkinge that
thereby is meante only the Supernatural Bread of Christ's very Body, it may
like him nevertheless to understand, that, not only Christ's very Body, but
also ye Sacrament it self, may well be called, Coelestis Panis, Heavenly Bread,
for that it is a Sacrament of that Heavenly Bread. Gregor. Nyssen. de Sancto
Baptismate. Ambros. de Sacramen. l^. 2. c. 5. Dionys. Eccle. Hier. cap. 2.
Cyrill. in Johan. lib ca. 10
So Gregorius Nyssenus calls the Water of Baptism (...). The Divine, or
Heavenly Bath. So S. Ambrose calls the words of Baptism, Verba Coelestia,
Heavenly Words. So Dionysius calls the Oil Consecrate, Diuinissimum Oleum,
(...). So Cyrillus calls Manna, Spiritual Bread. Thus he says, Quomodo est
Manna Panis Angelorum Spiritualis? Quia, quod Vmbra Veritatis erat, Veritatis
nomine in Spiritu appellauit. How is Manna called the Spiritual Bread of
Angels? That thing, that was a Shadow of the Truth, in Sprite, or
Spiritually, he uttered by the name of the Truth it self, And albeit only
Christ's very Body it self be in deed that Heavenly Bread, yet in these
words of S. Augustine, it cannot in any wise so be taken, as to the learned,
and discrete Reader it may soon appear. For first S. Augustine says, That
Heavenly Bread, whereof he speaks, is a Sacrament. But the very Body of
Christ cannot in any respect be called a Sacrament, as it is easy to
understand. For a Sacrament by S. Augustines Definition is, Signum Visibile, A
Sign, or a Token, that may be seen. But the Body of Christ, that M.
Hardinge imagines to be Present, cannot be seen: For S. Augustine says, it
is Spiritual, and Invisible. Hereof it necessarily follows, that the very
Body of Christ cannot in any wise be called a Sacrament: And therefore is not
that kind of Heavenly Bread, that is here mentioned by S. Augustine.

Moreover S. Augustine says, The same Heavenly Bread is the Body of Christ:
How be it he adds, not Uerily, and in deed, but, Suo modo, In a Manner, or
Kind of speech. But Christ's very Body, is in deed, and Uerily, in all
respects the Body of Christ, without any such qualifieinge, or limitation.
And it were great fondness, or rather mere madness to say, The Uery Body of
Christ is after a certain manner, or in a sort the Body of Christ.

These things first considered, for further understanding of S. Augustines
mind herein, I remitte ye reader unto the Gloss upon the same, the words
whereof are these, De Con Did. 2. Hoc est. In Glosa.
Coelestis Panis, id est, Coeleste Sacramentum, quod vere repraesentat Carnem
Christi, dicitur Corpus Christi, sed improprie. Vnde dicitur, Suo Modo: sed non
^ei Veritate, sed significante Mysterio: vt sit sensus, vocatur Corpus Christi,
id est, Significat Corpus Christi. The Heavenly Bread, that is to say, the
Heavenly Sacrament, which verily represents the Fleashe of Christ, is
called Christ's Body, but vnaptely, and unfitly. Therefore it is said, In a
peculiar manner belonginge unto it self: Not in Truth of matter, but by a
Signifieinge Mystery: That the sense may be this, It is called the Body of
Christ, that is to say, It signifies the Body of Christ.

But here mark thou, gentle Reader, into what strastes these men be driven. To
maintain the Inconveniences, and Absurdities of their Doctrine, they are feign
to say, That the very Body of Christ, is not, Rei veritate, Uerily, and in
deed, but, Improprie, Unaptly, and Unfitly called the Body of Christ.

M. Hardinge. The.16. Division.
Again, In Psalm. 98. In. 1 cap. Ephel.
S. Augustine says in an other place: Non hoc Corpus, quod videtis, comesturi
estis. Not this Body, which ye see, shall ye eat. This place is ansvvered
before in the fi^the Article, and in the seven the Division.
And S. Hierome says, Diuinam and Spiritualem Carnem manducandam dari, aliam
quidem ab ea quae Crucifixa est, That Divine, and Spiritual Fleashe is given to
be eaten, other beside that, which was Crucified. Wherefore in respect of
the exhibitinge, the Fleashe is divided, that in it self is but one: and the
Fleashe exhibited in mystery, is in very deed a Sacrament of Christ's Body
visible, and palpable, which suffered on the Cross. And thus it follows of
conuenience, where as the Fleashe is not the same according to the qualities
of the exhibitinge, which was Crucified, and which now is sacrificed by the
hands of a Priest: again, where as the Passion, Death, and Resurrection are
said to be done, not in truth of the thing, but in mystery Signifieinge: it
follows ( I say) that the Fleashe is not the same in qualities, so as it was
on the Cross, though it be the same in substance.

Many mo authorities might be alleged for the openinge of this matter, but these
for this present are enough, if they be not to many, as I fear me, they will so
appear to the unlearned Reader, and to such as be not given to earnest
study, and diligent search of the truethe. By these places it is made clear,
and evident, that these Names, Figure, Image, Sign, Token, Sacrament, and
such other the like, of force of their signification do not always exclude
the truth of things: but do only show, and note the manner of presence.
Wherefore, to conclude this maier, that is somewhat obscure to senses little
exercised, the Figure of the Body, or Sign of the Body, the Image of the
Body, does note the coouertnes, and secretenes in the manner of the
exhibitinge, and does not diminishe any whitte the truethe of the presence. So
we do accord with M. Iuel in this Article touching the form of words, but
withal we have thought it necessary, to declare the true meaning of the same,
which is contrary to the doctrine of the Sacramentaries.

The B. of Sarisburie.
M. Hardinge, as in his words he pretends great stoare of authorities, so
in his choice he bewraieth great want. For, to pass by the place of S.
Hierome, which is answered before in the fifthe Article, and.7. Division, the
words of S. Augustine seem utterly to overthrow al these his gross, and
Fleashely Fantasies. For better understanding whereof, it is to be noted,
that, when Christ had opened that Heavenly Doctrine of the Eatinge of his
Body, and Drinkinge of his Blood, the Capernaites hearing his words,
imagined, even as M. Hardinge now does, that he meante a very Fleashly
Eatinge with their Bodily mouths: and therefore began to be offended, and
said, His speech was over hard, and departed from him. Upon occasion hereof,
S. Augustine writes thus, Ipsi erant duri, non sermo. Christus instruxit eos,
qui remanserant, and ait illis: Spiritus est, qui viuificat: Caro autem nihil
prodest. Verba, quae locutus sum vobis, Spiritus sunt, and vita. Spiritualiter
intelligite, quod locutus sum. Non hoc Corpus, quod videtis, manducaturi estis,
nec bibituri illum Sanguinem, quem fusuri sunt, qui me Crucifigent. Sacramentum
aliquod vobis commendaui: Spiritualiter intellectum viuificabit vos. They were
hard: Christ's word was not hard. Christ instructed them, that remained,
and said unto them, it is the Sprite, that gives life, the Fleashe profits
nothing. The words, that I have spoken, are Sprite, and Life. Understand ye
spiritually, that I have spoken. Ye shall not Eat this Body, that ye see:
neither shall ye drink that Blood, that they shall sheadde, that shall Crucify
me. I have recommended unto you a certain Sacrament: Being Spiritually
understood, it will give you life. These words be plain of them self, and
need no long construction.

The difference, that M. Hardinge has divised bytweene Christ's Body in
Substance, and the self same Body in respect of qualities, is a vain Gloss
of his own, without Substance. For S. Augustine says not, as M. Hardinge
would feign have him to say, Ye shall not Eat this Body (with your bodily
mouth) Quale videtis, under such Conditions, and qualities of Mortality, and
Corruption, as you now see it: but, Quod videtis, that is, You shall not eat
the same Body in Nature, and Substance, that now ye see.

Neither was the Body of Christ at that time, when he Ministered the holy
Communion, and spoke these words to his Disciples, endewed with any such
qualities. For it was neither Spiritual, nor Invisible, nor Immortal: but
contrariwise, Earthly, Uisible, and subject to Death.

To be short, S. Augustine speaks not one word, neither of this Carnal
Presence: nor of Secret Being under Couerte: nor says, as M. Hardinge
says, that the very Body of Christ is a Figure of Christ's Body: nor
imagines in Christ two sundry sorts of Natural Bodies: nor knows any one
of al these M. Hardinges strange Collections. Thus only he says, Non hoc
Corpus, quod videtis, manducaturi estis: Touching your Bodily mouth, Ye shall
not Eat this Body of mine, that ye see. Of which words M. Hardinge,
contrary to S. Augustines express, and plain meaning, as his common wont
is, concludes the contrary: Ergo, with your Bodily Mouth, ye shall eat this
self same Body in Substance, that ye see.

Now, for as much as M. Hardinge will say, We divise Figures of our selves
without cause, and that Christ's words are plain, and ought simply to be
taken, as they sound, without any manner Figure, I think it therefore
necessary in few words to show, both what has leadde us, and all the
Ancient Writers, and Old Doctors of the Church, thus to expound the Words
of Christ: and also, how many, and how strange, and monstrous Figures M.
Hardinge with his Brethren are driven to use in the Exposition of the same.
And to pass over all the Old learned Fathers, which in their writings
commonly call the Sacrament Do ye this in Remembrance of me: And also, for that
in the

Moreover, it is not agreeable, neither to the Nature of a Man, Really, and in
Flagitium, and facinus: An horrible wickedness. Augusti. de Doctrina Christiana.
lib. 3. cap. 16.
And again he says, Horribilius est, humanam Carnem manducare, quam
perimere: and Sanguinem humanum bibere, quam fundere: It is a more horrible
thing, to eat man's Fleashe, then it is to kille it: and to drink man's
Blood, then it is to shead it. For this cause he concludes, Augusti. contra
aduers. Legis and Prophetar. lib. 2. cap. 9.
Figura ergo est: Therefore it is a Figure. And in like manner Cyrillus says,
Sacramentum nostrum non asseuerat Hominis manducationem: Our Sacrament
avouches not the Eatinge of a man.

Again, in these words of Christ we find Duo disparata, that is, two
sundry Augusti de Doctrina Christiana. lib 3. cap. 16
and Natures, Panis, and Corpus: which, as the learned know, cannot possibly
be Uerified the one of the other, without a Figure. By sides all this, in every
of these clauses, which so nearely touch Christ's Institution, there is a
Figure: To drink the Cup of the Lord, In steed of To drink Judgment:
Cyril. contra object. Theodoreti.
Judgment is a Spiritual thing, and cannot be dronken with the mouth:
Therefore it is a Figure I am Bread: Christ Really, and in deed, was The
Bread is the Communication of the Lords Body: In steed of these words, It
represents the Communication of the Lords The Cup is the New Testament:
The Cup in deed, and verily is not the New Testament: Therefore it is a
Figure. In every of these Clauses M. Hardinge must needs see, and confess a
Figure: and so it appears, that in the very Institution of Christ's Holy
Mysteries, there are used a great many, and sundry Figures: al
notwithstanding, both consonant to Reason, and also agreeable to Gods Holy
word.

But now, mark well, I beseech thee, good Christian Reader, how many, and
what kinds of Figures, M. Hardinge, and the rest of his company have benne
forced, to imagine in these cases.

Hoc, This, signifies not, This Bread, as all the Old Writers understand it,
but, Indiuiduum Vagu^, which is neither Bread, nor any certain determined
thing else: but only one certain thing at large in generality.

Est, They expound thus, Est, hoc est, Transubstantiatur: Such a Figure, as
never was used of any Old Authoure, either Holy, or Profane: or Heretic,
Take ye: Eat ye: This is my Body, They have found a Figure called Hysteron
Protero^, which is, when the whole speech is out of order, and that set
byhinde, that should go before. For thus they are driven, to shifte it, and
turn it: This is my Body: Take ye: Eat ye.

In these four words lieinge in order al together, He Took, He Blissed, He
Brake, He Gave, They imagine three sundry Figures, and expound the same He
took, the Bread: He Blissed, He transubstantiated, or turned He gave, His
Body. Hoc Do ye this in Remembrance of me, They expound thus, Sacrifice this.

Sacrifice me in Remembrance of me. In this one word, Panis, Bread, They
have found a swarm

Likewise in this one word, Frangimus, or Frangitur, they have a number of
The Bread, that we Break: that The Accidents, that we Break: Sometimes,
The Bread, that we Break: That is to say, The Bread, that we take to be
Broaken: Sometimes, this Frangere, is not, to Break, but only, to make a
Feast. In their Masses Frangitur, id est, Frangebatur. It is Broken, That is
to say, It was Sometimes they say, Frangitur, id est, videtur Frangi: It is
Broken, That is to say, It seems to be Broken. The meaning whereof is this,
Frangitur, It is Broken, That is to say, It is not Broken.

Non bibam amplius de hoc fructu vitis, I will drink no more of this fruit of
the Vine: The Fruit of the Uine, which is a Substance, they expound, The
Accidents. And to leave that miraculous Figure of al Figures, Concomitantia,
whereby one is made two, and two are made one: Consider, good Reader, the
strangenes of the Figures, and the wonderful shifts, that M. Hardinge has
imagined in this little treaty, to defeat, and avoid the manifest words of
the Holy Fathers. Sometimes the Forms, and Accidents are the Notum per
ignotum: Or rather, Verum per Falsum: Sometimes, the Sacrament is a Figure of
Improprie, and After a manner.

Thus M. Hardinge rometh, and wandereth up, and down, as a man that had lost
his way: Such shadows, and colors he can cast: Into so many forms, and
shapes, and figures he can turn him self. So many, and so monstrous Figures
may he forge in the Institution of the Holy Sacrament, only to avoid one
simple, plain, usual, and known Figure. And yet he abuses not the
simplicity of the people. There he forces his Figures, where as is no need
of Figures: And without such vain Figures this vain Doctrine cannot hold.
That one Figure, that we use, is plain, and clear, used by all the Ancient
learned Fathers, and agreeable to the tenoure of Gods Word. But M.
Hardinges Figures, as they be many, so be they unnecessary, and Fantastical,
never used, or once mentioned by any Ancient Doctoure of the Church, and serve
only to breed darkness, and to dim the light.

How much better were it for him, to leave these shifts, and childishe
fables, and plainly, Tertullian contra Marcionem. lib. 4.
and simply to say, as Tertullian says, Hoc est Corpus meum, Hoc est, Figura
Corporis mei. This is my Body, that is to say, This is a Figure of my Body.
Or, as Maximus the Greek Scholiast says, (...). These be Tokens, Maximus
Scholiast in Eccle. Hier. cap. 2.
but not the Truth. Or, as S. Augustine says, Figura est, praecipiens
Passioni Domini communicandum esse, and suauiter, atque vtiliter recondendum in
memoria, quod pro nobis Caro eius Crucifixa, and Vulnerata sit. It is a Figure,
commaundinge us to Communicate with the Passion of Christ, Augustine. De
Doctrina Christiana. li. 3. c. 16.
and comfortably, and profitably to lay up in our Remembrance, that his
Fleashe was Crucified, and wounded for us.

FINIS.
THE THERTEENTH ARTICLE, OF PLVRALITIE OF MASSES.
The B. of Sarisburie.
Or that it was lawful then to have.xxx.xx. xv.x. or v. Masses said in one
Church in one day.

M. Hardinge. The.1. Division.
As M. Iuel here descends by diverse proportions and degrees from xxx. to v.
first by taking away x. the third part of the whole, and then v. from the
rest three times: so it might have pleased him also to have taken away three
from v. the last remane^t, and so to have left but two in all. Two Masses in
one day M. Ha^dinge offers to prove: But no more. A Simple gheasse.
Which if he had done, then should we so have made up that number, as in
this audite he might not otherwise do, in regard of his own free promise,
but allow our account for good and sufficient. For that number we are well
hable to make good. And what reason has moved the ancient Fathers governors
of the Church, to think it a godly, and a necessary thing, to have two
Masses in one Church in one day, the same reason in cases either has, or
might have moved them and their successors after them likewise to allow
three, or four Masses, and in some cases five, or more.

The B. of Sarisburie.
M. Hardinge of his courtesy should give us leave, to lay out our own
reckeninges, as we think best, having him self the advantage of
controlment, if error happen to fall out. Of so great a number of Masses, as
they have this day in their Churches, and say, they have had, and continewed
from the beginning, even from the Apostles time, if I require of him only the
proof of five, I offer him no wrong: But, if he of that whole number, be
hable to show but only two, and if the same two in the end be found no
Masses neither, but only public Communions, such as be now used in
Reformed Churches, then is he a great dissembler, and does no right. Upon
what occasion M. Hardinges Masses grew first to this plenty, and to so great
waste, Cochlaeus one of the chief patrones of that cause declares it thus:
10. Cochlaeus de Sacrif. Missae.
Quod olim tam frequentes non fuerint Missae, neque tot Sacerdotes, quot hodie,
inde accidisse arbitror, quod olim omnes tum Sacerdotes, tum Laici, quicunque
intererant Sacrificio Missae, peracta oblatione, cum Sacrificante
communicabant: sicut ex Canonibus Apostolorum, and ex Libris, atque Epistolis
antiquissimorum Ecclesiae Doctorum perspicue cognoscitur. That in old times
there were not so many Masses, nor so many Priests, as be now, I reckon the
cause thereof to be this: for that in old times, al, that were present at the
Sacrifice of the Mass, as well Priests, as Lay men, did Communicate together
with the Minister, as it is plain to be seen by the Canons of the Apostles,
and by the Books, and Letters of the most Ancient Doctors of the Church. He
adds further, Nunc vero etc. But now, seeinge the order of Communion is no
more observed emongst us, and that through the negligence, and slouthfulnes, as
well of the Lay people, as of the Priests, the Holy Ghost by the often
saieinge of Private Masses, has found out ^ godly remedy for this want.
Here we see, that Negligence, and Slothfulness, and Lack of Devotion, both
in the people, and in the Priest, is a good leare to breed Masses. And that
the Priests, as many as were present, did then Communicate with the Priest,
Canones Apost. can. 9.
that Ministered, it is plain by the Canons of the Apostles, and by sundry
other good Authorities, which now I purposely pass by. And to this purpose it
is written thus, in a little book set abroad under the name of S. Hierome: Non
debet Episcopus repudiare Eucharistiam Presbyteri: De Septem ordinib. Eccle.
gradu. 6.
The Bishop ought not to refuse the Sacrament of a Priest. But M. Hardinges
Priests utterly refuse to Communicate one with an other: and, be they never so
many in one Church together, yet will they say several Masses, at sundry
Aultars. And not only thus, but also, Council. Toletan. 12. Ca. 5.
as it appears by ye Council of Toledo in Spain, one Priest has sometimes
said four, five, or more Masses in one day. Pope Leo said some days.vij. some
days eight Masses, Beatus Rhenanus in annota. in Tertul. De Corona Militis.
and some days more. The excess, and oultrage whereof was so great, that they
have benne forced to provide Laws, and Canons to the contrary. For thus they
have decreed: Presbyter in die non amplius, quam tres Missas celebrare
praesumat. Let not any one Priest presume to say more, then three Masses in
one day. Council. Salesgunstadien. ca. 5. Leonis Epist. 81.
We may well think, that priests then said good stoare of Masses, when it
was thought sufficient, to stinte them at three. The cause that moved Leo, and
other Ancient Fathers, to appoint two Communions to be Ministered in one day,
was, as it shall well appear, that the whole people might Communicate al
together, quietly, and without disturbance. Which thing of it self utterly
overthrows the whole abuse of Private Masses.

But the causes, that have increased the number of M. Hardinges Private Masses,
as they are alleged by Innocentius the De Con. Did. 1. Sufficit.
.3. and others, are these, That there may be one Mass said, Of the Day: and
an other, For the Dead: and, That there may be regard had to honesty, De
Celebratione Missarum, and alijs, etc.
and Profit. For so they say, Causa Honestatis, vel Vtilitatis: vt si dicta
Missa de die, superueniat aliqua magna persona, quae velit audire Missam, As if
any notable personage happen to come to Church, after that Mass is done, and
be disposed to hear Mass. These be very easy causes: Upon the same, the
Priest may say twenty Masses, as well as three.

M. Hardinge. The.2. Division.
Now if that rekeninge could duly be made of our part, M. Iuel perhaps
would then say, as commonly they say, that confess their error in
numbringe, that he had mystolde him self. Al be it, here it is to be marueiled,
that he appoints us to prove a number of Masses in one Church, in one day,
that utterly denies the Mass, and would have no Mass in any Church any
day at al. And standinge in the denial of the whole so peremptorely as he
does, it may seem strange, that he should thus frame this Article. For what
reason is it to challenge us for proof of so great a number, since he takes
away altogether?

The B. of Sarisburie.
I have keapte my rekeninge well yenough, as, I trust, it will well appear. But
if M. Hardinge, of so great a number of his Masses, be hable to prove no more
but two, and ye same two in the end be found Public Communions, and no
Private Masses at al, then may we justly say, That he has both much
misrekened the people, and also shamefully mistolde him self.

As before I utterly denied, that any Private Mass was ever used within six
hundred years after Christ, so in this Article, that the simple, that so
long have benne deceived, might the better understand, both the great
disorder, that M. Hardinge mainteineth, and also, how far the Church of
Rome is grown from the primitive Church of God, I thought it not amiss to
set out the matter by parts, in such plain division. Therefore the marueil,
that M. Hardinge raises hereof, is not so great. The matter considered, his
Reader will rather marueil at his marueil.

M. Hardinge. The.3. Division.
It appears, that being not vnwittinge, how good proufes we have for the
Mass it self, he thinks to blanke us by puttinge us to the proof of his
number of.xxx.xx.xv.x. or.v.

Verily this kind of men fares with the Church much like unto strong
Thieves, who having robbed an honest wealthy man of al his money, say
afterward unto him vncourtuously, ah Carle, how came thou by so much Old
Gold? Or if it like not them to be compared with Thieves, in regard of the
room they have shuffled them selves, into, they may not vnfittely be likened
to a Judge of the Stemerie at L^dforde in Devonshire, who (as I have heard it
commonly reported) hanged a felone among the tinners in the forenoone, and
sat upon him in judgment at afternoon. And thereof to this day, such
wrongeful dealinge in a common Proverb is in that Country called Lydforde
Law. Sith that you, M. Iuel, and your fellows, that now sit on the benche,
require of us the proof of more Masses in one Church in one day, as it were a
verdite of twelve men: of equity and right, ye should have heard our
verdite, er ye had given sentence, and condemned the Mass.

The B. of Sarisburie.
How good cause M. Hardinge has, to make these vauntes of his proufes for his
Private Mass, it may soon appear unto the discrete Reader upon the view.
But here he thought it proof sufficient, for the multitude of his Masses, to
call us Thieves, and wicked Judges, and to charge us with the Law of Lydforde,
and so to solace him self with an old Wives tale, and to make holy day out of
season. How be it, this comparison of his Thieves is not so greatly agreeable
to his purpose. For the coin, that is taken from him, was neither Gold, nor
so Old as he makes it, nor was it touched with Caesar's stamp. We may rather
say unto him: Esai. 1.
Sometime ye had Gold: but how is it now ^ecome Dross? ye had good seed: but
how is it now become Cockle? Mark. 4.
Thou were sometime a Faithful City: how art thou now become an Harlot?
Esai. 1.
Thou were sometime the House of God: how art thou now turned into a Cave of
Thieves? How have ye lost the Holy Communion, that the Apostles had from
Christ, and you from them? How came ye by your Private Masses, that the
Apostles had never? Thus, thus, M. Hardinge, we may appose you. For it were but
lost labor, to trouble you with questions of your Old Gold. Ye are not that
ritche wealthy Carle, that ye would be taken for: but even as it is written in
the Apocalypse of S. John, Apocalyp. ^*
Dicis, dives sum, and ditatus, and nullius egeo: and nescis, quod tu es miser,
and miserabilis, and pauper, and Coecus, and nudus: Thou sa^ste, I am ritche,
and wealthy, and need nothing: And thou know not, that thou art wretched,
and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked.

Neither are they always Thieves, that spoil a Thief. Oftentimes the True
man forces the Thief to lay down, that he has untruly gotten.

Cicero says, Cicero.
Fures earum rerum, quas ceperunt, nomina commutant. Thieves use to change the
names of such things, as they have stolen: even as these Thieves use to do,
that call the Communion, the Mass: and their Mass, the Communion: Private,
Public: Esaie. 5.
and Public, Private: and, as the Prophet Esaie says, Good, Evil: and
Evil, Good: Light, Darkness: and Darkness, Light: and thus by subtle shifte of
words, Johan. 3.
miserably spoil and rob the people. To be short, the Thief flies the
trial of the light, even as you, M. Hardinge, and your fellows flee the trial
of Gods Holy Word.

But how ye came to al, that ye had, and being but Copper, uttered the same
for Old Gold, it is an easy matter to be answered. For you your selves will
not say, ye had it, either from Christ, or from the Apostles, or from any the
Ancient Fathers. It were double robbery, to make any of these the Authors,
and Fathers of your robberies. Your own Doctor Cochlaeus Cochlaeus de Sacrif.
Missae.
confesses, as it is said before, that the Multitude of your Masses sprange,
not from God, but from the Negligence, and Slouthfulnes, and want of Devotion,
yt grew both in Priest, and People. Then ye began, to tell the simple, that
it was sufficient for them to ^itte by: that your Mass was a Propitiatory
Sacrifice for their sins: that it was available unto them Ex opere operato,
although they understood not what it meante: that you had power to apply it
to quick, and dead, and to whom ye listed: and that the very hearing
thereof, of it self was meritorious. Upon this fundation, ye erected up your
Chaunteries, your Monasteries, your Pardons, your Supererogations, and I know
not, what. Thus was the Holy Communion quite forgotten: Thus were your Masses
multiplied above number: Thus ye came by that, ye would have called your Old
Gold. Rob. Holcot. li. 4. quaest. 3.
Then this doubt first grew in question, whether Christ being in one of
your Hosts, might see him self, being at the same time in an other Host.
Then ye began to devour up poor Widows houses. In consideration hereof,
your own Gloss says of your Soul Priests: Malus Presbyter aequiparatur
Coruo, ^. Quaest. 7. Non oes. In Glosa.
in nig^edine vitiorum, in ^aucedine vocis, in voracitate oblationum mortuorum,
in faetore Spiritus, in garrulitate, and in furto. An evil Priest is resembled
unto a Raven, for the Blackenes of his vices, for the hoarsenes of his voice,
for his raueninge of the Oblations of the dead, for the stinche of his
breathe, for his unpleasant voice, and for his theafte. Unto such cheuisance
these words of S. Augustine may be well applied: De verbis Domini in Eua^gel.
Matthaeiserm. 19
Si Presbyter intercessiones vendit, viduarum munera libenter amplectitur,
negotiator magis videri potest, quam Clericus. Nec dicere possumus, Nemo nos
inuasores arguit: violentiae nullus accusat: quasi non interdum maiorem praedam
a viduabus blandimenta illiciant, quam tormenta. Nec interest apud Deum, vtrum
vi, an circumuentione quis res alienas occupet. If a Priest make sale of his
prayers, and gladly receive the rewards of Widows, he ought rather to be
called a Merchant, then a Clerk. Neither may we say, Noman charge us with
extorsion. For of a Wydowe a man may geate a greater pray by flaterie, then by
violence. And before God there is no difference, whether a man withholde an
other man's gooddes by might of hand, or by crafty dealinge. These be the
things, ^uetonius in Iu^^o.
that M. Hardinge complains, are taken from him. Julius Caesar conueighed
three thousand pounds weight of pure Gold out of the Treasury in Rome, and
laid in the like weight of Copper gilted: Plutarchus in Lysandra.
Lysander pikte a great sum of Gold out of the botome of a bag, (for the
mouth was sealed) and sewed it skilfully up again. But Caesar's Copper was
bewraied by the toutche: Lysanders theafte was espied by a billet, that was
still remaininge in the bag. Even so, what so ever they of M. Hardings side,
that so bitterly complain, they are robbed of their robberies, and would so
loathe be called Thieves, either have conueighed into the Church, as into
Gods great Treasury, or else have privily piked thence, the billet does
epsy them, the toutche does bewraye them: it cannot be hidden.

In his Fable of Lydforde, which in all respects is as good, as his other
Fable of Amphilochius, as he compares us to the ouerhastie Judge, so he
compares his Mass unto the felon. Wherein notwithstanding we might easily,
and truly say, we needed no Law, to abolishe such things, as they by force,
and violence had usurped against al Laws, and that their Mass of it self
fell down, and fleadde away before the Holy Communion, even as the darkness
fl^eth before the light, ^. Samuel. 5.
and as the Idol Dagon fell down at the Presence of the Arc of the God of
Israel: Yet M. Hardinge well knows, that in these cases of Religion, there was
nothing at any time done, either hastily, and upon the sudden, or by any
small assembly: but in the open Parliament of the whole R^^^me, with great,
and sober de^^beration, with indifferent, and patient hearing, what might be
said, and answered, and replied of both sides, and at last concluded with
public Authority, and consent of al States, and Orders of this most Noble
Kingedome. I judge him not well advised, nor worthy to reaste in England, that
will compare the state, and Majesty of that most High, and Honorable Court,
to the Law of Lydforde.

But it were long to show in particular, what Laws M. Hardinges friends
^sed, when they sat upon the benche. They caused Dead men, and Women to be
dug out of their graves, and so sat upon them solemnly in Judgment, and
condemned them. Their holy One of Rome, much like that speedy Judge of
Lydforde, Lidforde Law.
burnte that most Reverend Father D. Cranmere at Rome in a mummerie, before he
ever saw him, or heard him speak: and yet that notwithstanding, they
arreigned him in Oxforde, and judged him afterward to be burnte. They first
took, and imprisoned the innocent, that had broken no law, and afterward
divised a law to condemn him. With such courtesy, Cyrillus says, Christ
was entreated of the Jews. Cyrillus in Johan. li. 12. ca. 43.
Primum ligant: deinde causas in eum quaerunt: First they bind him: and
afterward they imagine matter against him. And to pass by many other like
disorders, and horrible extremities of that time, first they scattered, and
forced their Masses through the Realm against the Laws: afterward they
stablished the same by a Law: last of all the next year folowinge they
summoned, and had a solemn Disputation in Oxforde, to try whether their law
were good, or no. Uerily this seems much like the Law of Lydforde. For in
order of Nature, the Disputation should have been first, and the^ the Law,
and last of all the Execution of the same among the people. Tertull. de
R^surrectione Carnis.
But Tertullian says: Haeretici ex conscien^ia infirmitatis suae nihil vnquam
tractant ordinary. Heretics, for fear of their own weakness, never
proceed in dew order.

M. Hardinge. The.4. Division.
Now touching the number, and iteration of the Mass, first we have good and
ancient auctoritee for (197) The.197. Untruth. For these two Masses, were
two Communions.
two Masses in one Church in one day. That eloquent and Holy Father Leo the
first, writes thus to Dioscorus the Bishop of Alexandria. Volumus illud
quoque custodiri, vt cum solennior Festiuitas conuentum populi numerosioris
indixerit, and ad eam ^anta multitudo conuenit, quae recipi Basilica simul vna
non possit, Sacrificij Oblatio indubitanter iteretur: ne ijs tantum admi^sis ad
hanc Deuotionem, qui primi aduenerint, videantur ij, qui postmodum
confluxerint, non recepti. Cum plenum pie^atis atque rationis sit, vt quoties
Basilicam, in qua agitur, praesentia nouae plebis impl^uerit, toti^s
Sacrificium subsequens offeratur. This order we will to be kept, that, when a
number of people comes to Church together at a solemn feast, if the
multitude be so great as may not well be received in one Church at once, that
the Oblation of the Sacrifice hardely be done again, lest if they only
should be admitted to this Devotion, who came first, they that come
afterward may seem not to be received: Church filled*
For as much as it is a thing full of Godliness, and reason, that how
oftentimes the Church, where the service is done, is filled with a new
company of people, so oftentimes the Sacrifice there ef^soones be offered.

By this Father, whom the great (198) The 198. Untruth. For there is no such
Canon in all that Council.
General Council of Chalcedon agnised for Supreme Governor of the Church of
Christ, and honored with the singular title of Universal Bishop, it is
ordained, that if anywhere one Church could not conveniently hold all the
people together at one time: they that came after the first company, should
have their This Devotion was, that the whole people should receive the
Communion: which thing is contrary to Private Mass.
Devotion served by having an other Mass celebrated again. And least perhaps
some might doubt whether that were lawful so to be done or no, or because
then some doubted thereof, as now likewise some seem to doubt of it: to put
the matter out of doubt, he says assuredly, Sacrificij Oblatio indubitanter
iteretur. Let them not stick to iterate, or do again the Oblation of the
Sacrifice, that is to say, Let the Mass be celebrated again, indubitanter,
without castinge peril, without stickinge, staggeringe, or doubtinge. In that
epistle he shows two great causes, why more Masses then one may be done in
one Church in one day. The one is, least the aftercommers should seem
rei^cted, non recepti, not received To the Communion.
: The other is, that the one part of the people be not defrauded of the
benefit of their Devotion: as himself says, Necesse est autem vt quaedam
pars populi sua deuotione priuetur, si, vni^s tantum Missae more se^ua^o,
Sacrificium offe^^e non possint, nisi qui prima diei part conuenerint. It must
needs be, that a part of the people be be^efie of their devotion, The people
offer the Sacrifice
if, the custom of having one Mass only kept, none may offer the
Sacrifice, but such as came to Church together in the morninge, or first
part of the day. Now, the people may neither be rejected, whom God has
chosen: nor sparckled abroad, whom our Lord has gathered together: neither
ought they to be defrauded of their Devotion, by withdrawinge the Mass from
them, but rather to be styrred thereunto by their devout presence, at the
celebration of the same, where the Death, A blind Commentary contrary to the
Text.
and Passion of our Lord is lively represented before their eyes: the very
same Body, that suffered on the Cross, of the^ by the Ministry of the
Priest offered to the Father, in a Mystery, but truly, not to be a new
redemption, but in Co^memoration of the Redemption already performed.

By this testimony we find, that it was lawful within six hundred years
after Christ, (for Leo lived about the year of our Lord 450.) to have two
Masses in one Church in one day, for so much the word, iteretur, doothe
importe at least, and if there were more, the case so requiringe, the word
will bear it well enough.

Now by this Holy Bishops Godly will, the custom of having one Mass only
in one day was abrogated, and this decreed, that in time of two sundry
resortes of people to Church, two sundry Masses should be celebrated, for
the auoidinge of these two inconveniences, least the aftercommers should
seem not received, but rejected like excommunicate persons, and that a part
of the faithful people should not be put beside their Devotion. A guil^ful
Fallax A non Causa, vt Causa.
VVhereupon I make this reason, The causes standinge, the effects follow: But
the danger of the peoples seeminge to be rejected, and the defraudinge of their
Devotion, which are causes of iteratinge the Mass in one day, did in that
age in some Holy days of likelihoode thrice, yea four, or five times happen,
and in our time certainly does commonly so often, or oftener happen:
wherefore the Mass may so many times be said in a day in one Church.

Where great multitude of Christen people is, as in towns, we see some
resort to Church early in the morninge, making their spiritual oblations to
the intent to serve God^ er they serve man in their worldely affairs, al
cannot come so early. Others come at their convenient opportunity, some at
six, some at seven, some at eight, some at nine, or ten of the Clock. If
they, which through lawful lettes cannot come at the first hours, coming
afterward be roundely told by the Priest, come ye at such, or at such
hours, or else ye get no Mass here: shall not they according to Leo his
sayeinge seem to be rejected, and defrauded of their devotion? Al well disposed
people about Powles cannot come to Postels Mass at four, or five of the
Clock in the morninge, neither at high Mass there. Shall al such in a Term
or Parliament time, when great resort is, be denied that spiritual conforte?
And if they be, shall they not seem rejected, and put from their devotion?
Which inconvenience that it might not happen, Leo wills not only two, but
three, four, or more Masses to be done on a day: for his words report no
less. Cum plenum pietatis, atque rationis sit, vt quoties Basilicam, in qua
agitur, praesentia nouae plebis impleuerit, toties Sacrificium subsequens
offeratur: Let there be no stickinge at the iteratinge of the Mass: for as
much as (says he) it is a thing full of godliness, The Church filled.
and reason, that how often the Church, where the service is done, is filled
with a new company of people, so often the Sacrifice there eftsoons be
offered. Here he wills plainly that Mass be done Toties, quoties, at every
new resort of the well disposed people, and that for these weighty causes,
least part of the people should seem not received, and that they be not
defrauded of their devotion.

The B. of Sarisburie.
I marvel, with what honest countenance M. Hardinge could allege this godly
Father so unadvisedly, August. de Verbis Domini secundum Lucam ^ermo. 28.
to prove his Mass. For he knows well, and being learned, cannot choose but
know, that Leo both elsewhere in all other places and also specially in this
same place, bears witness directly against his Mass. But, as Alcumistes
profess a skill, to turn al manner Metalles into Gold: so these men seem to
have learned a skill, Hieronym. in Apologia aduer sus Iouinian.
to transubstantiate, and to turn al things, what so ever, into their Mass.
It is evident by S. Augustine, and S. Hierome, that lived not long before Leo,
that then in Rome, where Leo was Bishop, the whole people received the Holy
Communion every day: August. De Bono Persevere antiae (...). 2. ca. 4.
Which Communion Leo calls Missa, by a Latin word, then newly received in
the Latin Church. In which Church, like as also in the Church of Graecia,
and Asia, there was only one such Mass, or Communion said upon one day:
unless it had otherwise been thought necessary upon occasion of the multitude
of Communicantes, until ye time of Pope Deusdedit, which was in the year of
our Lord six hundred, and fifteen, as it shall appear in the next division
of this Article.

Uerily in these words of Leo there appears no manner token, neither of
Private Mass, nor of Sole Receiuinge, nor of Single Communion, nor of sundry
Aultars, nor of more Pristes, then one in one Church. And, notwithstanding
these words of Leo be plain yenough of them self, yet by conference, and
sight of other places, we may the better be assuered of his meaning. In the
Council holden at Agatha in the time of Coelestinus the first, which was
about the year of our Lord four hundred, and forty, it was decreed thus,
Council. Agath. Ca. 21. anno. 44^.
In Paschate, Natali Domini, Epiphania, Ascensione, Pentecoste, Natali S.
Iohannis Baptistae, and si qui maximi dies in Festiuitatibus habe^tur, non nisi
in Ciuitatibus, aut Parochijs Missas renea^t. Upon Easter day, the day of our
Lords Birthe, the Epiphanie, the Ascension, Witsonneday, the Nativity of S.
John Baptist, and likewise upon other great Solemn Feasts, let the country
people hold their Masses, or Communions no where else, but only either in
great parisshes, or in the Cities. The like Decree was made in the Council of
Aruer^e, Council. Aruern. ca. 14. anno. 557.
That al Country Priests, and al wealthy, and chief Citizens, should upon
solemn Feasts resort to the Cities, and Communicate together with their
Bishops. Upon such Solemn Days the resort oftentimes was so great, that
the Church was not hable to receive the whole company. Therefore order was
taken, and that agreeable to natural courtesy, to the intent no part should
be excluded from the Holy Mysteries, that the whole people should come in
parts, in such wise, as the Church might easily receive them, and that to
that end, it should be lawful for the Priest, to Minister the Communion twice,
or oftener, upon one day. Upon like occasion, to increase the number of M.
Hardinges witnesses, S. Augustine says, Augustine. Epist. 118. ad Ianuariu^.
the Communion in some places was twice said in his time. Thus he writes, In
quibusdam locis, vbi mayor, and frequentior est populus Dei, Quinta Sabbati
Hebdomadae vltimae Quadragesimae bis offertur, and mane, and ad vesperam: alijs
autem in locis ad finem tantum diei mos est offerri. In certain places, where
as the resort of people is greater, upon Shyre thursday the Oblation is twice
made, first in the morninge, and after toward night: but in other places
(where as the people is not so great) the same oblation is made only before
night. And this M. Hardinge cannot deny, S. Augustine speaks of the
Communion, and not of the Mass. Gregorius in Euangelia hom. 8.
To the same end S. Gregory ministered the holy Communion at three sundry
times upon Christmasse day. Thus upon occasion of great resort, the Mass,
or Communion that day was twice, or thrice, or oftener said: not, that the
people should hear Mass, as M. Hardinge witingly mistaketh it, but that the
whole people might Communicate. Which thing of late years, because through
disuse they knew not, De Conse. D^st. ^. Nocte Sancta.
what it meante, they turned it only to a fantastical Mystery, that ye First
Mass signified the time of ignorance before the Law: the Second, the time in
the Law: the Third, the time of Grace.

Thus have thou, good Christian Reader, this learned Fathers undoubted
meaning, confirmed plainly both by the known story, and Circumstance of
that time, as may appear by the two Councelles of Aruerne, and Agatha, and
also by the evident witness of S. Augustine, and S. Gregory.

Now, let us see, what large Commentaries, and Coniectural Gheasses M. Hardinge
has here divised, to transform the Holy Communion into his Private Mass.
First, he says, The great Vntuersal Council of Chalcedon offered the Title
of Universal Bishop unto this Leo, being then the Bishop of Rome. This note is
both impertinent to the cause, and also woorthily suspected of great
untruth. For that great Council is extant whole, and perfect: and yet in the
same no such Canon, or Title to be found. Only Gregory reportet^ it: but
the same Gregory reports further withal, that Leo would never suffer him
self to be called the Uniuersal Bishop, Superbum, Arrogans, Antichristianum.
and says, It was a Proud, and a Glorious Title, and meet for Antichriste.
Where as Leo says, The aftercommers should seem rejected, he means, from
the receiuinge of the Holy Communion, and not, as M. Hardinge imagines, from
the hearing of Mass. And here we have by the way specially to note these
words of Leo: Sacrificium offerre non possunt. By which words Leo teaches
us plainly, that the Sacrifice, whereof M. Hardinge makes so great
accoumpte, is offered no less by the People, then by the Priest.

And, where as M. Hardinge notes further, that this Latin word, Iteretur,
Iteretur.
may stand as well with three, or four, or more Masses, as with two, which
thing is not denied, he might also as well have noted, that the same word
Iteretur, imports likewise one, and the self same Minister, and none other.
For if the Second Communion be Ministered by an other Priest, and not by the
same, it cannot rightly be said, Iteratur. And further, the same word
necessarily signifies, that one Communion was then in such cases ministered
successively, and in order after an other: and not two Masses, or three, or
four, or six, or ten together, al at once, as the manner is now in the
Church of Rome.

Hereof M. Hardinge frames us this formal Syllogismus: The cause, that moved
Leo to take this order, was, that al, and every of the devout people might
hear Mass: But it is likely, the people resorted to the Church at sundry
times, some rather, some later, and not al at once: Ergo, It is likely, that to
satisfy the peoples devotion, there were sundry Masses said in one day.

It is likely, that M. Hardinge never examined the parts, and likelyhoode of
this Argument. For first the Mayor, or Head Proposition is apparent false,
grounded, as it is termed in Logique, A non causa, vt causa, Presuming, that
thing to be the cause, which in deed is no cause. For the cause, that moved
Leo, was not the hearing of Mass, as it is already proved, but the
receiuinge of the Holy Communion.

The Minor, or Second Proposition, notwithstanding in some part it may seem
true, yet it is nothing agreeable to Leoes meaning. For Leo speaks not of
one man, or two, nor of the ordinary course of every day, but only of
great Solemn Feasts, and of such resort of people, as might fill up the
whole Church. His words be plain, Cum solennior Festiuitas conuentum populi
numerosioris indixerit: And, Quoties Basilicam praesentia nouae plebis
impleuerit. Therefore, to bear us thus in hand, that Leo had such a special
care, either for the Term time in London, or for the people about Paul's, or
for hearing the Postels mass, it is a very vain, and a childishe fantasy:
like as this also is, that he adds, The people should be denied that
Spiritual Comfort. For, alas, what Comfort can the people receive, where as
they can neither see, nor hear, nor understand, nor know, nor learn: but
stand only as men amassed, utterly berefte of al their senses? Let M. Hardinge
once lay aparte dissimulation, and tell us, by what ways, or means, the people
at his Mass can possibly receive this Spiritual Comfort. If he would speak
truly, and that he knows, as he seldom does, he should rather call it
Spiritual Blindness.

And, where as he pleads his to^ies, quoties, and thereby would erecte a
whole totquot of Masses, sans number, if he had advisedly considered out the
whole sentence, he should better have espied out his own fol^e, and have had
less occasion, to deceive the people. For Leo says not, as M. Hardinge
would force him to say, As often as any devout people comes to Church, but,
as it is said before, Quoties Basilicam praesentia nouae plebis impleuerit: As
often as the presence of ^ new company shall have filled up the whole Church.
In such cases it was lawful to begin again the whole Communion, and not
otherwise. By these words, M. Hardinges Totquot is much abbridged.

In the end he concludes, not only against Leo his Author, but also against
the very express order of his own Church, That one Priest, (for Leo speaks
only of one, and of no more) may say Mass boldly without stickinge, or
staggeringe, as often as any people resorteth to him. For, now it is thought
sufficient for one Priest, to say one Mass upon one day, and no more. So it is
determined by Pope Alexander, Sufficit Sacerdoti vnam Missam in vno die
celebrare. It is sufficient for a Priest to say one Mass upon a day. De
Conse. did. 1. Sufficit.
Unless it be in case of great necessity, which the Gloss, as it is before
alleged, well expounds, Causa Honestatis, vel vtilitatis, In case of Honesty,
De Celeb. Miss. Consuluisti. In Glosa.
or of Profit: as if some great personage happen upon the sudden to come to
Church. Likewise the Council of Salesgunstadium has straitely charged, that
no Priest presume, to say more then three Masses upon one day, the one,
Council. Salesgunstadien. ca. ^.
in course Of the Day Present: the other, For ye Dead: the third, to pleasure
some noble personage: which also is a great stopple to M. Hardinges Totquot.
In these prouisoes, there is no manner consideration had to the Devotion of the
people: but, contrary to M. Hardinges New Canon, they are utterly leafte
without their Spiritual Comfort. And therefore Pope Clement the seventh caused
one Friar Stuppino in Rome to be whipte naked through the streates, for that he
had said v. or vi. or more Masses in one day, to satisfy the Devotion of the
people.

Thus, good Reader, thou may see, both the parts, and the force of M.
Hardinges Syllogismus: M. Hardinges Syllogismus.
The Mayor is false: The Minor far from Leoes purpose: The Conclusion
contrary to him self.

Certainly, if it had then been thought lawful, to say so many Corner
Masses, as sithence that time have been used in the Church of Rome, it had
been great folly, either for Dioscorus, to move this question: or for Leo, to
take this order.

M. Hardinge. The.5. Division.
Wherefore they that reprove the plurality of Masses in one Church, in one
day, after the judgment of this worthy Father, be reiectours of the Faithful
people, and robbers of their devotion. But they, that have utterly abrogated
the Mass, which is the outward and ever enduringe Sacrifice of the New
Testamente, (199) The.199. Untruth, without any honest shame. For M. Harding
knovveth, there is no such commendation given to his Mass, in the whole
Body of the Scriptures.
by verdite of Scripture, be no less, then the forerenners of Antichriste.

The B. of Sarisburie.
The former part of this Conclusion is already answered. But for the Second
part, If they, that have reformed the horrible Abuses of the Mass, be the
Forerenners of Antichriste, what then may we think of them, that have
wilfully, and of purpose invented, and erected al those Abuses? That have taken
from the people of God, not only the Holy Communion, but also the
understanding, and sweetenes, and comfort of the same? That have spoiled
Gods Children of the Bread of Life, and have feadde them with the Bread of
Confusion, that is, with Ignorance, Superstition, and Idolatry? That have
mangled, and corrupted Christ's Blissed Mysteries, and have wickedly defiled
the Camp of the Lord? And having thus done, yet notwithstanding, have
faces to maintain, and uphold al their wilful doings? What may Gods
people think of them? And before whom do they run? Uerily Gerardus
Lorichius M. Hardinges own Doctor says thus, Gerard. Lorichius de Missa
Pub. Prorogan. li. 3.
Missae priuatae, quae absente populo Catholico fiunt, abominatio verius, quam
Oblatio, dicendae sunt. Private Masses, which are said without presence of
the people, are rather an Abomination, then a Sacrifice. And S. Augustine
says, Si Johannes ita diceret, Augustine. contra Parmenianum, li. 2. ca. 8.
Si quis peccauerit, me habetis Mediarorem apud Patrem, and ego exoro pro
peccatis vestris, Quis eum ferre^ bonorum, and fidelium Christianorum? Quis
sicut Apostolum Christi, and non sicut Antichristum intueretur? If S. John
would say thus, If any man finne, ye have me your Mediator with the Father,
and I obtain pardon for your sins, what good, and Faithful Christian man
could abide him? who would look upon him, as upon the Apostle of Christ,
and not rather as upon Antichriste?

M. Hardinge. The 6. Division.
Here that I may add somewhat more for proof of this Article, Non licet
super vno Altario in vna die d^as Missa^ celebra^e: nec in Alt^^^rio vbi
Episcopus Missas dixerit, presbyter illa die Missas dicar. Council.
An^^siodoren. c. 10. An. D^. 613.
If the Plurality of Masses in one Church in one day had been utterly
unlawful, the Fathers of the Council of Antisiodorum would not have Decreed,
M. Hardinge groundeth his gheasse without his compass. For this Council was
holden Anno. 613.
that it should not be lawful to celebrate two Masses upon one Aultare in one
day: neither, where the Bishop had said Mass, that a Priest might not say
the same day, at the same Altar. For beside that the prohibition
presupposes, the thing prohibited to have been before used, (else
prohibition had been superfluous, and so far forth it appears, that
before the making of that Decree mo Masses were said at one Altar in one
day) the argument of this Decree serves very well for proof, that by force
of this Council it was then lawful to say more Masses in one Church in one
day. For this prohibition of the Council is not general, but especial,
restricted to a particular place of the Church, in vno Altario, at one Altar,
which includes not of any reason a more general, and larger matter, then it
self, as neither at any other Altar in the same Church the same day it
shall be lawful to say Mass: but of consequent this being but one special case
forbidden, infers a permission, and good leave in the reast eiusdem generis,
and subiecti, that be of the same kind, and about the same matter, and not
included by* words of reason in that prohibition. So that we may not argue
by reason in this sort, It is forbidden to say more Masses at one Altar in
one day, Ergo, It is forbidden to say many Masses at al in one Church, in
one day, upon diverse Aultars: but the contrary reason folowethe, Ergo, ye
may say many Masses, upon diverse Aultars in one day. And likewise, ye may
not say Mass that day on the Altar where the Bishop has said, Ergo, ye
may lawfully say at an other Altar: For otherwise the law would have
forbidden generally, ye shall not say Mass in the Church where the Bishop
has said that day: and then ye had been forbidden that Altar, and al
Aultars there at one word. But in forbiddinge the one Altar, the law
grants you the use of the rest there.

And this kind of reasoninge, and arguinge of the law, that forbids one
case specially, to affirm the rest, that is not mentioned in the prohibition,
the Lawiers will defend by their principles against M. Iuel, who, I think, will
not wade far to stand against them in this Match. In genere permisso^u^,
omni^ intellig^^tur permissa, quae specialiter ro^reperiu^t^r prohibita. I.
Iulia. ff^ de ^estibu^* Exceptio confirmat regulam i^ non exceptis*
For they say, An edicte prohibitorie in such things, which are not wholly
in their kind unlawful, forbiddinge special cases, grants the rest, and
does permit all that, which is not specially forbidden. And by that, al may
be witnesses, which are not specially forbidden: al may make their proctours
to answer for them in judgment, which are not forbidden in the special
prohibition: for that the edictes of proctours, and witnesses are prohibitorie.
And because Lex Iulia did forbid a woman condemned for adultery to bear
witness in judgment, thereof the text of the Civil law concludes, that
women may bear witness in judgment.

And they say further, that exception in one case, confirms the general
rule, and makes the rest, that is not excepted, more sure and stable, and to
be in force in contrary sense to the exception.

The B. of Sarisburie.
This long discourse may well be granted without great prejudice. For this
Council was holden at Antisiodorum, as M. Harding has also noted in the
Margin, in the year of our Lord six hundred, and therteene: and therefore
neither furthereth him, nor hinders me: as standinge without the compass of
the first six hundred years. And who so lifts to peruse the Acts of that
Council, shall soon find, that many great disorders, and horrible Abuses,
and, as they are termed there, Incestae Consuetudines, Canon. 1.
wicked, and abominable customs, were by that time grown into the Church of
Rome: Canon. 3.
as Strenae Diabolicae, Diuelishe New years gifts: Heathenishe vows: to pray
in groves, and at the water sides, One Aultare.
as the Heathens had used to pray: To Consecrate, and Minister the Lords
Cup in Metheglen: Canon. 8.
To put the Sacrament into dead men's mouths: and such other like.
Mellitum, vel mu^sum.
And, that emonge these, and other like disorders, the Plurality of Masses
first began at that time, and not before, it may appear by the Pontifical it
self, Canon. 12.
in the life of Pope Deusdedit, where it is written thus: Deusdedit constituit
secundam Missam in Clero. In. 2. Tomo Conciliorum in vita Deusdedit.
And Petrus Urbeuetanus in his Scholies upon the same place writes thus: Quia
t^n^, ^d instar Graecorum, non cantabatur in vna Ecclesia, nisi forsan vna
Missa: quod magis aedificabat, secundum antiquos. For then there was but one
Mass (or Communion) said, Anno. 614.
after the manner of the Greeks: which thing, Petrus Vrbeuetanus.
as the Ancient writers think, was more profitable to the people. Likewise,
Thomas Ualdensis says, Graeci adhuc vnicam ^antum Missam in die celebrant.
The Greeks hitherto say but one Mass, (or Communion) in one day. So likewise
Frauncisce the Friar writes unto his Brethren, Thomas Valdensis li. 6. ca. 34.
Moneo, and exhortor vos in Domino, vt in locis, in quibus mora^tur fratres,
vna ta^tum celebretur Missa in die, secundum formam Sanctae Romanae Ecclesiae.
Franciscus in Epist. ad Fratres
I warn you, and exhort you in the Lord, that in the places where our
Bret^ren dwell, there be only one Mass a day said, according to the order of
the Holy Church of Rome. So S. Ambrose declares the order of the Church of
Millaine in his time: Ambros. 1.
Omni Hebdomada offerendum est: etiam ^inon quotidie peregrinis: Incolis tamen,
vel bis in Hebdomada. Timoth. Ca. 2.
Every week the Oblation must be made: although not every day, for comers,
and strangers, yet at least twice in the week for the Citizens. S. Ambrose
says, The Communion in his time was Ministered once, or twice in the week:
and at the furthest upon great occasion once a day: but not.xx. or.xxx. times
in one day.

And, where as M. Hardinge seems to warrant his multitude of Masses, by that
in this Council of Antisiodorum there is mention made of sundry Aultars, it
may like him to understand, that before the time of that Council, there
appears no such multiplication, or increase of Aultars. One Altar was
thought sufficient for the whole Church, Ignatius ad Philadelphien.
and the same Altar placed in the midst of the Congregation, that all the
people might come round about it. Eusebius li. 10. ca. 4. In Encaenijs.
So says Eusebius: Absoluto Templo, and Altari in medio constituto: The
Church being finished, and the Altar, (or Communion Table) placed in the
midst. S. Augustine likewise says thus: Mensa Domini est illa in medio
constituta: That is the Lords Table, that stands here in the midst. In
like manner, it is written in the Council of Constantinople, Augustinus de
Verbis Domin^
Tempore Diptychorum cucurrit omnis multitudo cum magno silentio circum Altar,
Secundum Ioha^. Ser. 47.
and audiebant: When the Lesson, or Chapter was in reading, all the people drew
together with silence round about the Altar, and gave attendance. If M.
Hardinge will contend, for that hitherto there is no mention made of one Altar
alone, Council. Constantino. 5. Action. 1 Eusebius, li. 10. ca. 4.
and therefore will say, there might be many, he may also remember, that
Eusebius says in the place before alleged, Augustum, and Magnum, and Vnicum
Altar. The Reverend, the Great, and the One Only Altar. So Ignatius, Vnum
est Altar ^o^i Ecclesiae. There is but one Aultare for the whole Church. So
S. Chrysostom, Ignatius ad Philadelphie^ses. Chrysostom. in. 2. Corin. hom. 18.
Baptismus vnus est, and Mensa vna: There is one Baptism, and one Table. So
likewise Gentianus Heruettus describing the manner of the Greek Church, as it
is used at this day, faith thus: In Grae^oru^ templis, vnu^ tantum est Altar,
idque in medio Choro, aut Presbyterio: Gentianus Heruettus.
In the Greek Church there is but one Altar, and the same standinge in the
midst of the Queere. And the Queere also was in the midst of all the people.
By these it may appear, that M. Hardinge is not hable to find his plurality
of Masses before the Council of Anti^^odorum, which was without the listes of
the first six hundred years, and therefore can stand him in little steed.

As for these principles of the law, that are here brought in, as a surcharge
unto the reast, they may be safely received without danger. I grant, the law
that forbids in special case, generally grants al, that is not specially
forbidden.

Thi^, I say, may well be granted. It is commonly called in Schools
Argume^tum a contrario sensu. Notwithstanding this Rule, being so general,
may receiu^ exception, although perhaps not in Law, yet in some cases of
Divinity. For example, God says, Deuteron. 23.
Thou shall not commit Usury to thy Brother: Let there be no Harlot of the
daughters of Israel: Ibidem.
Thou shall not marry thy wives Sister, whiles thy wife lives: Thou shall not
commit Aduouterie: Leuit. 18.
S. Paul says, Be ye not dronken with wine.

Of these special Prohibitions by M. Hardings Rule, Exodus 20.
or Principle, we may reason thus: Ephesians. 5.
These cases are specially forbidden: and what so ever is not excepted in
special prohibition as unlawful, is permitted as lawful: Ergo, ex contrario
sensu, by the contrary sense, It is leafte as lawful, To commit Usury to a
stranger: It is leafte as lawful, To have a Harlot, so that she be not of the
daughters of Israel: It is leafte as lawful, To marry thy wives sister, if thy
wife be dead: It is leafte as lawful, To commit Fornication: For Fornication
in this special prohibition is not forbidden, but only Aduoutrie. It is leafte
as lawful, To be Dronken with Ale, or Beer: for only Wine is excepted. And
why so? for M. Hardinges Principle must needs stand, That a prohibition
forbiddinge special cases, permits all the reaste, and generally leaves all that, as lawful, that is not specially forbidden. I speak not this, to the
intent to reprove the Principle of the Law, that here is alleged: but only
to show, that General Rules must sometimes, and in some cases be taken with
exception.

M. Hardinge. The.7. Division.
But I will not bring M. Iuel out of his professed study to far to seek
Laws. For in deed we need not go to law for these matters, wherein the
Church has given sentence for us, but that our Adversaries refuse the judge
after sentence. Which if they had done, when order permits it, at the
beginning, and had plainly (as I fear me some of them think) denied them
selves to be Christians, or at least of Christ's Court in his Catholic
Church: we should not have striued so long about these matters. We would
have embraced the truth of God in his Church quietly. whiles they sought
another Judge according to their appetites and fantasies, as Turks, and
Infidelles do.

The B. of Sarisburie.
It were more for M. Hardinges purpose, for proof of these matters, to go
rather to Divinity, then to Law. How be it, the state of his case being so
feeble, and so deadly diseased, it were good Counsel for him, to leave both
Professions, and to go to Physic.

But here once again in his impatient heates he utters his inordinate, and
unadvised Choler, and thinks to prove him self a good Catholic man, only
by comparinge others with Turks, and Infidelles. Notwithstanding herein we
shall need no long defense. For, Gods Holy Name be blissed, it is now open
to the hearts, and consciences of al men, that both in life, and Doctrine we
profess the same Gospel of Jesus Christ, that they of M. Hardinges side have
of long time oppressed, and burnte for Heresy.

Neither do we refuse the Judge, either after Sentence, or before. Him only
we refuse, Matthae. 15.
as no competent Judge in these cases, that teaches the Commandments, and
Doctrines of men, Matthae. 23.
and has infected the World with the Lcauen of the Scribes, Matthae. 16.
and Pharisees: and we appeal unto Christ the only Judge of al Judges,
Matthae. 17.
unto whom God the Father straitely bade us to give ear: Ipsum audite, Harken
unto him: Matthae. 23.
Vnus est Magister noster Christus. Christ is our only Master, and only
Judge.

As for the Determinations of the Church, they are sundry, and variable, and
uncertain, and therefore sometimes untrue: and for that cause may not always
stand of necessity, as matter of judgment. The Greek Church never used the
Private Mass, but only the Communion: The Latin Church has utterly
abolished the Holy Communion, sauinge only at one time in the year, when also
she uses it with foul disorder, and, as Gelasius says, with open Sacrilege,
and uses only the Private Mass. The same Latin Church, for the space of
six hundred years, and more from the beginning, unless it had benne upon
great occasion of many Communicantes, used only one Communion, or, as M.
Hardinge rather deliteth to call it, one Mass in one Day: But the Latin
Church, that now is, has in every Corner of the Temple erected Aultars, and
therefore now is full of Corner Masses. In the Old Latin Church it was not
lawful, to say the Second Communion, but only when the Church was full of
people: In M. Hardinges New Latin Church, there be oftentimes more Masses
said together, then there be hearers of the people, to gase upon them. Thus
the judgment of the Latin Church disagreeth from the Greek: and the New
Latin Church likewise disagreeth in judgment from the Old. Touching this
New Latin Church S. Bernarde mourns, and complains thus, D. Bernar. in
Conuersione Pauli.
Nunc ipsi Christum persequuntur, qui ab eo Christiani dicuntur. Amici tui
Deus, and proximi tui aduersus te appropinquauerunt, and stererunt. Coniurasse
videtur contrate vniuersitas populi Christiani, a minimo vsque ad maximum. A
planta pedis vsque ad verticem non est sanitas vlla. Egressa est iniquitas a
senioribus Iudicibus Vicarijs tuis, qui videntur regere populum tuum. Arcem
Sion occupauerunt, apprehenderunt munitiones, and vniuersam deinceps libere,
and potestatiue tradiderunt incendio Ciuitatem. They are now become the
persecutours of Christ, that of his Name are called Christians. O God, thy
friends that are ne^rest about thee, approache near, and stand against the.
The whole Universal Body of Christian people seems to have conspired against
thee, even from the lowest unto the highest. Wickedness proceeds forth from
thy Vicares the elder Judges, that seem to govern thy people. (Like heathens
and Infidelles) they have invaded thy Castle of Sion, (which is thy Holy
Church) and have taken al her holds, and freely, and by authority have
thrown thy whole City into the fire. Again he says, Bernard. in Psalm. Qui
habitat. Sermo. 6.
There remains now nothing, but that Antichrist the Man of sin, the
Child of perdition be reveled.

Seeinge therefore the Resolution of these Judges is oftentimes uncertain, and
doubtful, I will not say, as S. Bernarde seems to say, ungodly, and wicked,
we may the more indifferently, and the better say now to M. Hardinge, as S.
Augustine sometimes said to the Heretic Maximinus: Augusti. aduersus
Maximinum lib. 3.
Nec ego Nicenam Synodum tibi: nec tu mihi Ariminensem debes tanquam
praeiudica^urus obijcere. Nec ego huius authoritate, nec tu illius teneris.
Scripturarum authoritatibus, no^ quorumcunque proprijs, sed quae vtriusque sint
communes, res cum re, causa cum causa, ratio cum ratione decertet. Neither will
I prescribe against thee by the Council of Nice: nor m^ist thou prescribe
against me by the Council of Ariminu^. Neither am I bound to this Council,
nor thou to that. By the authority of the Scriptures, which are neither
thine, nor mine, but indifferent, and common to us both, let us compare matter
with matter, cause with cause, and reason with reason. Again he says in like
sort to the Heretic Cresconius: Augustine. contra Cresconium
Non debet se Ecclesia Christo praeponere etc. Crammattcum* lib. 2. cap. 21.
Cum ille semper veraciter iudicet: Ecclesiastici autem Iudices; sicut homines,
plerunque fallantur. The Church, says S. Augustine, may not set her self
above Christ etc. For Christ evermore judges truly: but the Ecclesiastical
Judges, as being men, are often d^ceiued. Therefore we appeal from the
Church, to Christ: From the party, to the Judge: From the Church defourmed,
to the Church Reformed: From a Church particular, to the Church Catholic:
From the False, to the True: From the New, to the Old: From a doubtful,
variable, uncertain, unadvised sentence, to a Sentence most firm, most
stable, most certain, most constante, that shall stand for ever.

M. Hardinge. The.8. Division.
Now, if M. Iuel be not so precise in his judgment of allowinge the first
six hundred years after Christ, as to condemn the Church that followed in the
next generation: then we may allege unto him the twelfthe Council of Toledo in
Spain, holden in the year of our Lord 680. for proof that many Masses were
celebrated in one Church in one day. For the same appears plainly by this
Decree of the Fathers there. Relatu^ nobis est, quosda^ de Sacerdotibus non tot
vicibus Co^munionis Sanctae gratia^ sumere, quot Sacrificia in vna die videntur
offerre: Can. 5.
sed in vno die, si plurima per se Deo offerant Sacrificia, in omnibus se
Oblationibus a Communione suspendunt, and in sola tantum extrema Sacrificij
Oblatione Communionis Sanctae gratiam sumunt. Quasi non sit ^o^ies illis ve^o
and singulari Sacrificio participandum, quoties Corporis and Sanguinis Domini
nostri Jesus Christi in molatio facta constiterit. 1. Cor. 10.
Nam ecce Apostolus dicit: Nonne qui edunt Hostias, participes sunt Altaris?
Certum est, quod hi qui Sacrificantes non edunt, (...)sunt Dominici Sacramenti.
Quicunque ergo Sacerdotum demceps Diuino Alta^io Sacrificium Oblaturus
accesserit, and se a Communione suspenderit, ab ipsa, qua se indecenter
priuauit, gra^^a Con munionis anno (...)repu^^um ^e nouerit. Nam quale erit
illud Sacrificium, cui nec ipse Sacrificans particeps esse cognoscitur? Ergo
modis omnibus ^st t^nendum, vt quo^^escunque Sacrificans Corpus and Sanguinem
Domini nostri Jesus Christi in Altario i^molat, to^^s perceptionis Corporis and
Sanguinis Christi se participem praebeat. It is showed unto us, that there be
certain Priests, who do not receive the grace of the Holy Communion so many
times, how many Sacrifices they seem to offer in one day. But if they offer
up to God many Sacrifices by them selves in one day, in all those Oblations
they suspende them selves from the Co^^^nion, and receive the grace of the Holy
Communion only at the last Oblation of the Sacrifice, as though they ought not
so oftentimes to be partakers of that true and singular Sacrifice, as the
Sacrifice of the Body and Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ has been done.
For behold the Apostle says, Be not they, which eat Sacrifices, 1. Cor. 10.
partakers of the Altar? It is certain, that they who dooinge Sacrifice do
not eat, be guilty of our Lords Sacrament. Wherefore what Priest so ^uer
hereafter shall come unto the Holy Altar to offer Sacrifice, and suspende him
self from the Communion, be it known unto him, that he is repelled and thrust
away from the grace of the Communion, whereof he has unseemly bereued him
self, (whereby is mean^e, that he stands excommunicate) for the space of one
year. For what a Sacrifice shall that be, whereof neither he him self, that
Sacrifices, is known to be partaker? wherefore by all means this is to be
kept, that how oftentimes so ever the Priest does Sacrifice the Body and
Blood of Jesus Christ our Lord on the Altar, so oftentimes he receive, and
make him self partaker of the Body and Blood of Christ.

Here by the word, Sacrifice, and offeringe of the Sacrifice, the Fathers
understand the daiely Sacrifice of the Church, This word Mis^a is found
sometimes in the Fathers. But it is v^ed euermor^ for the Communion.
(...). For though the word Missa, be of great antiquity, and many times
found in the ^athers, yet they use more commonly the word Sacrifice. Neither
can the enemies of this Sacrifice, expou^de this Canon of the inward
Sacrifices of a man's heart, but of that Sacrifice which the Priest comes
to the Holy Altar to offer, of the Sacrifice of the Body and Blood of
Christ our Lord offered on the Altar, (for so be their words) where he
receives the Grace of the Holy Communion, which is the participation of the
Body and Blood of our Lord. Thus much granted, as by any reasonable
understanding it cannot be drawn, nor by racking can be stretched to any
other sense: we have here good authority for the having of many Masses in one
Church in one day. And, where as the Fathers of that Council allowed many
Masses in one day said by one Priest, there is no reason, why they should
not allow the same said by sundry priests in one day. If our adversaries
say, this ^ig^^ have been done in sundry places, whereby they may seem to
frustrate our purpose touching this Article: we answer, that beside
thapprouinge of the Mass by them so confessed, it were vain and friuolouse to
imagine such gaddinge of the Priests from Church to Church for sai^inge
many Masses in one day. Doubtless the Fathers of that Toletane Council meante
of many Masses said in one place in a day, as ^eo did, for seruinge the
faithful peoples devotion that resorted to Church at sundry hours, as we see
the people do now, that so al might be satisfied* which should not have been,
if one Mass only had been said.

The B. of Sarisburie. Missa.

We condemn not the Church of God in any Generation, be the Abuses thereof
never so great. God resembles it unto a Uine, unto a Cornefilde, and unto a
Flock of Sheep. Notwithstanding the Uine be spoiled, and torn down, Esaie.
1.
yet is it the Uine of the God of Sabbath. Notwithstanding the Filde lie
waste, and be over grown with weeds, yet is it still the Lords Filde.
Notwithstanding the Flock be forsaken of the Shepheardes, and run astraie,
and perish in the wilderness, yet is it still the Flock of Christ. And herein
we have great cause, to Glorify the Name of God, that, when he sees it good
in his sight, sends forth Laborers to rear up, and to dress his Uine: to
labor, and to weed his Ground: to geather in, and to feed his Flock.

This allegation of the Council of Toledo serves M. Hardinge, only to betraie
his want. For if he could have found any other Counsel of antiquity, I trow,
he would not have alleged this. It was holden welneare seven hundred years
after Christ: by which time many great disorders, and deformities were
privily cropen into the Church, as may appear both otherwise, and also by
this same example, that one Priest used then to say many Masses in one day,
and yet him self not to Communicate, contrary both to the Institution of
Christ, and also to the Laws, and Canons of the Church: De Cons. Did. 2.
Relatum est in Glosa.
and therefore the Gloss upon the Decrees calls it a most Naughty Custom:
and this Council it self says, Who so ever so does, is gilty of the Lords
Sacrament. Thus both the computatio^ of the time, and also the disorder, and
abuse of the thing it self considered, this Authority needs no further
answer.

It was impertenent in this place for M. Hardinge, to move matter of the
Sacrifice. How be it for short answer thereto, the Sacrifice, that in the
Old Writers is called, Daily, is that everlasting, and only Sacrifice,
Hebrae. 10.
that Christ once offered upon the Cross, being there a Priest for ever,
according to the order of Melchisedech: and, who so ever thinks not that
Sacrifice sufficient, but imagines some other Sacrifice for sins to be made
by man, is an enemy of the Cross of Christ, and of his Sacrifice, and
treads down the Son of God under his feet, Philippen. 3. Hebrae. 10.
and counts the Blood of the Testament to be unholy. In what sense the
Mystery of the Holy Communion is of the Old Fathers called a Sacrifice, it
shall be showed at large in the seventeenth Article hereof, seruinge wholly to
that purpose.

Touching this word, Missa, neither is the name, nor the meaning thereof of
such Antiquity, as it is here supposed by M. Hardinge. It grew first in use
about four hundred years after Christ, and is very seldom used of the Old
Latin writers: of S. Augustine, S. Hierome, Tertullian, S. Cyprian, Arnobius,
Lactantius, and others of that age, never: unto S. Chrysostom, S. Basile,
Nazianzene, Gregory Nyssene, and al other Greek writers, utterly unknown. It
is found in two sundry places under the name of S. Augustine, August. in
Sermont^. de tempore.
and once under the name of S. Hierome. But it is certain, that these books
were neither S. Augustines, nor S. Hieromes.

How be it, Hieronym. in Proverb.
we make no great accoumpte of the name. The natural sense, and meaning
thereof, contrary to M. Hardinges surmises, necessarily imports a Communion,
and not a private Mass. For this Latin word, Missa, is as much as, Missio,
that is, a commaundinge away, or license to depart. Cyprian. lib. 3.
Epistolar.
So S. Cyprian says, Remissa peccatorum, in steed of Remissio: And the order
of the Church then was this, That Nouices, yt were not yet Christened, and
were called Catechumeni, and others, yt were called Poenitentes, yt for some
offense were enjoined to do penance, notwithstanding they might lawfully hear
the Sermons, and pray together with the reaste, yet might they neither be
present at the Baptism, nor receive the Holy Mysteries. And therefore, after
the Gospel was read, and the Sermon ended, the Deacon said unto them, Ite,
Missa est. Go ye hence: Ye may depart. Likewise in S. Gregory's time the
Deacon used thus to say, Gregorius Dialogor. li. 2. ca. 23.
Qui non communicate, det locum: Who so does not Communicate, let him give
place. Thus al they, that either would not, or might not Communicate with the
rest of their brethren, were willed to depart: whereof it necessarily
follows, that al they, that remained, did Communicate.

Of this departure away, and Proclamation of the Deacon, the action it self,
which was the holy Communion, was called Missa. Afterward, when either
through negligence of the people, or through avarice of the Priests, the whole
order hereof was quite altered, and the thing, that had been Common, was
become Private, yet, as it happens often in other the like things, the
former name remained still. For example, The Uigilles, or Night Watches, were
turned into Fastinges: Aultars, that served for offeringe up of Calves, and
Goats, were turned into the Lords Table: The Sabaothe day was turned into the
Sunday.

Yet, the things being thus altered, the names notwithstanding of Uigilles,
Aultars, and Sabaothe days remain still in use, as they did before. Therefore
M. Hardinge herein, as commonly elsewhere, thought it best, to deceive his
Reader, by the mistakinge, and error of the Name.

Last of al, if the Fathers in the Council of Toledo, and Leo meante al one
thing, as here it is constantly avouched, then is M. Hardinge by the same
Fathers but poorly reliued. For it is most evident, by that is already said,
that Leo meante the Holy Communion, and not M. Hardinges Private Mass.

M. Hardinge. The.9. Division.
If M. Iuel agnise and accept for good the authority of this Council, as the
Church does, then must he allow these many things, which he, and the
Sacramentaries to the uttermost of their power and cunninge, labor to
disprove, and deface. First, the blessed Sacrifice of the Mass, which the
Fathers of this Council call the true and singular Sacrifice, the Sacrifice of
the Body and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, which the Priest offers on
the altar. Next, the truth, and real presence of the Body and Blood of our
Lord in the Sacrifice offered. Then Aultars, which this Council calls
divine or holy, for the divine and holy things on them offered, the Body and
Blood of Christ. Furthermore, the (200) The.200. Untruth. For M. Harding
understands not his own book: as it shall appear.
multitude of Masses in one day. For they speak of many Sacrifices, that is,
many Masses, Plurima Sacrificia. Lastly, Private Masses. For the words, nec
ipse Sacrificans, rightly construed and weighed, importe no less. For where as
no word in this Decree is uttered, whereby it may appear, the people to be
of necessity required to receive, if the Priests had received them selves at
every Mass, no fault had been found. And if the people had received without
the Priests, in this case it had been reason, this Decree should otherwise
have been expressed. And so it is clear, that at that time Private Masses were
said and done.

The B. of Sarisburie.
The authority, and credit of this Council of Toledo is no part of our
question. It was holden almost seven hundred years after Christ, And of
greater Antiquity M. Hardinge is hable to allege none. Which thing, I trust,
the indifferent, and discrete Reader will well remember.

Concerning these five notes, whereof one only touches this purpose, As this
Leo ad Dioscorum epist. 81.
says, Every of the whole Faithful people likewise offers up the same
Sacrifice. I say not any other, but the very self same Sacrifice, and that in
as ample manner, as it is offered by the Priest.

the Clouds. It is only his own fantasy: For there is no such word, or
mention in the Council. The matter of Aultars is already answered. Private
Anno. 68^.
hitherto found in one Church more, then two Masses in one day: all this his
great study, and travail therein taken notwithstanding.

But the words of the Council be plain, Plurima Sacrificia, that is, many
Sacrifices, and therefore, says M. Hardinge, many Masses. Hereby it may
appear, that M. Hardinge either considers not his book, or else has no
great regard to that, he writes. His own books will reprove his oversight,
and show, how much he is deceived. For, Plurima, in this place signifies not,
Many, that is, neither six, nor five, nor four, nor three, but only two.
And for trial hereof, I report me to the Gloss it self upon the Decrees. De
Conse. did. ^. Relatum est. In Glosa.
The words be these, No^a h^c, plurima dici de duobus. Quia plura non licet.
Mark here, that this word, Plurima, is spoken only of two. For, to say more
Masses then ^woo, it is not lawful.

M. Hardinge. The.10. Division.
Now if M. Iuel refuse and reiecte the authority of the Church represented in
that Council, then he gives us a manifest notice, what mark we ought to take
him to be of. Then may we say unto him the words of S. Paul. 1. Corin. 11.
Nos talem consuetudinem non habemus, nec Ecclesia Dei. We have no such
custom, neither the Church of God has not, to condemn the Church. And in
this case he must pardon us, Matthew. 18.
if according to the precepte of Christ, for that he will not hear the
Church, we take him for no better, then a heathen and a Publicane.

The B. of Sarisburie.
To these simple Premises M. Hardinge has laid a large Conclusion. If we
hear not him, and his Church, then are we Heathens, and Publicanes. God
knows, This is a very poor Bravery. In the Schools it is called, Petitio
Principij, and, Fallacia Accidentis: a deceiteful kind of reasoninge, without
either ground, or good order. I need not to open it, it is known unto
Children.

But does M. Hardinge think, that every man is an Heathen, that reprooueth
error, that discloaseth the Man of Sin, and wishes the Reformation of
Gods Church? Christ said unto the Scribes, and Phariseis, Matthae. 21.
You have made the house of God a den of Thieves: Hieremie says, Hierem. 12.
The laborers them selves have trodden down, and torn the Vine of the Lord.
The Prophet Esaie says, Esai. 1.
Your Silver is turned into Dr^sse: S. Bernarde says of the Bishops in his
time, Bernard. in Co^cilio Remensi.
Pro Mercenarijs habemus Diabolos etc. In steed of hirelinges we have Devils:
from the top to the toe, there is no part leafte whole in the Church of
Rome. Nicolaus de Clauengijs says, Bernard. in Co^uersione Pauli.
Calamitosa desolatio est in domo Dei: There is a miserable desolation in the
House of the Lord: Pigghius confesses, there be abuses in the Private Mass:
Nicolaus de Clauengijs.
Latomus confesses, there is an error in the Administration in One Kind. And
will M. Hardinge know al these by his own privy Mark? Albertus Pigghius de
Pri^^ta Missa.
Or must Christ, Hieremie, Esaie, S. Bernarde, Pigghius, and Latomus be taken
for no better, then Heathens and Publicanes? Certainly, touching these
pluralities of Masses, and this shameful profanation, and waste of Gods Holy
Mysteries, both Christ, Latomus contra Bucerum
and his Apostles, and all the Old Catholic Fathers of the Primitive Church
will say, 1. Corin. 11.
Nos huiusmodi consuetudinem non habemus, nec Ecclesia Dei: We have no such
custom, neither the Church of God. And to the wilful mainteiners of the same,
Christ will say, Frustra colitis me, docentes doctrinas, praecepta hominum.
Matthae. 15.
Ye woorship me in vain, Esai. 29.
teachinge the Doctrines, and Commandments of men.

And, where as, M. Harding, ye countenance, and furnishe your errors by the
name of the Church, Remember, S. John says, Make no vauntes, that ye be the
Children of Abraham. Matthae. 3.
For God is hable even of the stoanes to raise up Children unto Abraham. And
the Angel says in the book of Revelations, Apocalyp. 2.
Dicunt, se esse Iudaeos, and no^ sunt: Sed sunt Synagoga Satanae: They name
them selves Jews, that is, the people of God* but they are not: They are the
Synagoge of the Devil.

Now, good Christian Reader, that thou maiste see, how vainly M. Hardinge has
wandered throughout this whole treaty, it may please thee, to remember my first
Negative Proposition touching the same, which in effect is this: They are not
hable to show, that within six hundred years after Christ, there were five
Masses said anywhere, in any one Church, in one day, throughout the world.

In which proposition two points are specially touched: the number of
Masses, and the number of years. To prove the Affirmative hereof, M. Hardinge
has alleged the Council of Antisiodorum, Anno. 614.
and the Council of Toledo, either of them being without the compass of six
hundred years. Anno 680.
He has also alleged Leo an ancient Bishop of Rome, Leo Epis. 81.
speakinge only of the Holy Communion, and not one word of the Private
Mass. De Conse. did. 2.
Al these three Authorities touch only one Priest, and, as it appears by
the Gloss, Relatum est. In ^los^.
only two Ministrations at the vttermoste. Thus has M. Hardinge failed,
both in the computation of the years, and also in the number of his Masses.

Yet must this be defended emonge the rest, be the profanation thereof never
so horrible: and, who so ever dare wish a reformation herein, must be no
better, then a Heathen, and a Publicane. O, how much better had it been for
M. Hardinge, either to have passed the matter over in silence, or plainly, and
simply to have confessed his error?

FINIS.
THE FOVRETEENTH ARTICLE, OF ADORATION OF IMAGES.
The B. of Sarisburie.
Or that Images were set up in the Churches, to the intent the people might
woorship them.

M. Hardinge. The.1. Division.
That Images were set up in Churches, within six hundred years after Christ,
it is certain, but not Specially either then, or since to the intent the
people might woorship them. Not Specially to be vvoorshipped: Ergo, to be
vvoorshipped: although not Specially.
The intent and purpose has been far other, but right Godly, as shall be
declared. Wherefore the imputinge of this intent to the Catholic Church, is
both false, and also sclaunderouse. And because for the use of Images, these
New Masters charge the Church with reproach of a new devise, breach of
Gods ^ommaundement, and Idolatry: I will here show, First, the Antiquity of
Images, and by whom they have been allowed. Secondly, to what intent, and
purpose they serve. Thirdly, how they may be woorshipped without offense.

The B. of Sarisburie.
This Article of Images may be easily passed over, both for that the weight
thereof is not great, and also for that M. Hardinge, as his woonte is, has
purposely dissembled the matter, that was in question, and divised other
fantasies, that were not touched. Wherein, notwithstanding he use large
discourses, and make great show, yet in the end, as it shall appear, he
concludes nothing. I grant, Images were erected in some Churches within six
hundred years after Christ, al be it neither so rathe, as it is pretended,
nor without much repininge of Godly men, and great contention.

But M. Hardinge, of his modesty, once again calls us New Masters: so as
he would call Moses, if he were now alive, or much rather God him self. For
this Doctrine is Gods Doctrine, and not ours. And therefore S. Augustine
says, Huiusmodi Simulachrum Deo nefas est in Christiano Templo collocare:
August. de Fide. and Symbolo. Ca. 7.
In a Christian Church to erecte such an Image unto God, (resemblinge God to
an old Man) it is an Abomination. And Epiphanius the Bishop of Cyprus entringe
into a Church, and findinge there a Uele hanged up, and the Image of Christ
painted in it, Epist. Epiphanij ad Iohannem Episcop. Hierosol.
tare it a sunder, and pulled it down, because it was done, as he writes him
self, Contra authoritatem Scripturarum, contrary to the Commandment of
Gods Word. Again he says, Huiusmodi vela contra Religionem nostram
veniunt: Such veles (so painted) are contrary to our Christian Religion: And
again, Haec scrupulositas indigna est Ecclesia Christi, and populis, qui tibi
crediti sunt. This Superst^tion is unmeet for the Church of Christ, and
unmeet for the people, that is committed unto thee. S. Augustine says, It is
Abomination: Epiphanius says, It is contrary to the Scriptures, and contrary
to Christian Religion: Unmeet for the Church of Christ, and unmeet for the
people of God. How be it, M. Hardinge perhaps will suffer these two, to pass
in the number of his New Masters.

And, al be it by these Fathers judgment, it is plain, that by settinge up of
Images Gods Commandment is broken, yet yt may the better appear by
comparinge Gods Words, and M. Hardinges Words both together. God
says, Thou shall make to thee self no graven Image: M. Hardinge says, Thou
shall make to thee self graven Images. God says, Thou shall not fall down to
them, nor woorship them: M. Hardinge says, Thou shalt fall down to them, and
woorship them. Now judge thou, good Reader, whether this be a breach of Gods
Commandment, or no.

Uerily M. Hardinge in the first entry hereof says thus, The Heathens Fathers
of Images.
Images are not specially set up, to the intent the people may woorship them.
The sense whereof must needs be this: Images are set up to thend to be
woorshipped: although not specially to that end. But an Image is a Creature,
and no God: And to honor a Creature in that sort, is Idolatry: Therefore, by
M. Hardinges own confession, Images are set up to be used to Idolatry:
although not Specially to that end. How be it by this simple Distinction of
General, and Special, Idolatry is easy to be excused.

M. Hardinge. The.2. Division.
Concerning the antiquity, and original of Images, they were not first
invented by man, Antiquity of Images.
but (201) The.201. Untruth, conteininge three great Untruths together in
one.
commanded by God, brought into use by Tradition of the Apostles, allowed by
Authority of the holy Fathers, and al Councelles, and by custom of al ages
since Christ's being in the Earth. When God would the Tabernacle with all
fourniture thereto belonginge to be made, to serve for his honor, and glory,
he commanded Moses among other things to make two Cherubins of Beaten gold,
so as they might cover both sides of the propitiatory, spreadinge abroad
their whinges, Exodus 25.
and beholdinge them selves one an other, their faces turned toward the
Propitiatory, that the Arc was to be covered withal. Of those Cherubins S.
Paul speaks in his Epistle to the Hebr^wes. Cap. 9.
Which Images Beseleel, that excellent workman made at the commandment of
Moses, Exodus 37.
according to the instruction by ^od given. Number. ^^.
Again Moses by the commandment of God made the Brazen Serpent, and set it
up on high for the people, that were hurt of serpents in wilderness, to
behold, and so to be healed. In the Temple also that Solomon builded, were
Images of Cherubins, 3. Reg. 6.
as Scripture shows. Of Cherubins mention is made in sundry places of the
Scriptures, 2. Pa^al. 3.
specially in Ezech^el the Prophet. cap. 41. Josephus writes of the same in
his third, and eight book, Antiquittaum Iudaicarum. The Image of Cherubins
represents Angels, and the word is a word of Angelical Dignity, as it
appears by the third Chapter of Genesis, where we read that God placed
Cherubins before Paradise, after that Adam was cast forth for his disobedience.

The B. of Sarisburie.
M. Hardinge doubts not, to derive the f^rst Invention of his Images from God
him self, even as rightly, and with as good Faith, as he deriueth his Mass
from Christ, and his Apostles: or his Holy Water from the Prophet Elizeus: or
the Cardinals hatte from S. Hierome. Onles perhaps he will reason thus: God
says, Exodi. 20.
^howe shall not make unto thee self any graue^ Image, nor the Likeness of any
thing: And, Deu^eron. 27.
Accursed be the man, that makes ^n Image: And, Confounded be al they, that
woorship Images. Psalm. 96.
Ergo, God commanded Images to be made. If he can auouche his Images by such
warrantes, then doubtless God him self was the f^rst inuentour of Images.

But Learned, and Wise men think, that the invention hereof came first from
the Heathens, and Inf^delles, that knew not God. Thus it is written in the
Book of Wisdom: Sapientia. 14.
Vanitas hominum inuenit arts istas, ad tenationem animae, and decipulam
insipientium. The Vanity of men first found out this Art, to the tentation
of the s^ule, and to the deceiuinge of the unwise. S. Cyprian says, Ad
defunctorum vultus per Imaginem derinendos expressa sunt Simulachra. Cyprian.
de Idolorum vanitate.
Inde posteris facta sunt sacta, quae primitus fuerant assumpta solatia. Images
were first drawn, thereby to keep the countenance of the dead in
Remembrance. Ambros. in Psalm. 118.
Upon occasion thereof things grew at length unto hol^nesse, that at the
first were taken only for solace. Therefore S. Ambrose says, Gentes lignum
adorant, Council. Nicen. 2. Action. 6.
tanqua^ Imaginem Dei. The Heathens woorship Wood, as the Image of God. And
Eregorius the Bishop of Neocesaria, Gentilitas inuentrix, and Caput est
Imaginu^. Eusebius. lib. 7. cap 18.
Heathennesse was the first d^^ser, and Head of Images.

Likewise Eusebius says, speakinge of the Images of Christ, of Peter, and of
Paul, (...).
Hoc mihi videtur ex Gentili consuetudine obseruatum: quod ita illi soleant
honorare, quos honor dignos duxerint. This seems to be the observation of
the Heathenishe custom: for with such Images they used to honor them, whom
they thought worthy of honor. Therefore S. Augustine writing against
Adimantus says thus, Simulant se fauere Simulachris: quod propterea faciunt,
vt miserrimae, Augustine contrae Adimantum. ca 13.
and vesanae suae Sectae etiam Paganorum concilient beneuolentiam. They would
seem to favor Images: which thing they do, to the intent to make the
Heathens to think the better of their most miserable, and lewd Sect. For of
the Heathens Lactantius writes thus: Verentur, ne Religio vana sit, si nihil
videant, quod Adorent. La^^antius lib. 2. Cap. 2.
They are afraid (as they also are of M. Hardinges sid^) their Religion shall be
but vain, if they see nothing, that they may woorship. Therefore Daniel
says, Daniel. 3.
that Nabucodonozor the Heathen King appointed a solemn Dedication day, for
his Golden Image, with all kinds, and sorts of Minstralsie. And the Prophet
Baruch thus opens, Baruch. 6.
and utters the Religion of Babylon, Sacerdotes Barba, Capiteque raso, and
aperto, sedent, and cora^ Dijs suis rugiunt. The Priests being shaven both
Head, and Bearde, and sittinge bare, roar out before their Gods. Thus
Heliogabalus, Adrianus, and Alexander Seuerus, being Infidels, Lampridius.
and Heathen Princes, had in their Chapelles, Julius Capitol. Epiphanius.
and Closettes the Images of Abraham, of Moses, of Christ, and of others. Thus
the Heretics called Gnostici, and Carpocratiani for that they sauoured of the
Heathens, Augustinus ad Quoduul^deu^. Irenaeus lib. 1. ca. 24.
had, and woorshipped the Images of Christ, of Paul, of Pithagoras, and of
Homer. By these few Authorities, and Examples it appears, that the first
erection of Images came, not from God, but from the Heathens, that knew not
God. And therefore Athanasius says, The Invention of Images came not of good,
but of il. Athansius, (...) Dion. lib. 37.
As for the Jews, that had the Law, and the Prophets amongst them, and
therefore should best know Gods meaning in this behalf, they had no
manner Image, neither Painted, nor Graven in their Temples, as Dion says:
and, as Origin says, they could not abide any Painter, or Grauer, to dwell
amongst them.

But M. Hardinge replieth: God commanded Moses, to make the Cherubins, and the
Braesen Serpente. These examples make little against my assertion. For God
commanded not, either the Cherubins, Origin. contra Celsum li. 4.
or the Serpent to be set up to the intent the people should Woorship them:
which is the whole, and only state of this question. The same objection the
Old Idolaters laid sometime against Tertullian. For thus he writes:
Tertullian. De Idololatriae.
Ait quidam: Cur ergo Moses in Eremo Simulachru^ Serpentis exaere fecit? Some
one, or other, that maineteineth Idolatry, will say (as M. Hardinge now says)
And why then did Moses make the Image of the Brazen Serpent in the
Wilderness? Hereby we see, that M. Hardinge is not the first, that divised
this objection. The Old Idolaters found out, and used the same above
fourteen hundred years ago, and M. Harding has learned it at their hands.
But hereto Tertullian makes this answer: Been, quod idem Deus, and Lege
vetuit Similitudinem fieri, and Extraordinario Praecepto Se^petis Similitudinem
He seems to use Interdixit, for Edixit.
Interdixit. Well, and good: One, and the same God, both by his General Law
forebade any Image to be made: and also by his Extraordinary, and Special
Commandment willed an Image of a Serpent to be made. He adds further, Si
^undem Deu^ obseruas, habes Legem eius, Ne feceris Similitudinem. Et, si
Praeceptum factae postea Similitudinis respicis, and in imitare Mosen, Ne
facias aduersus Legem Simulacli^^^ aliquod, nisi and tibi Deus iusserit. If
thou be obedient unto the same God, thou haste his Law, Make thou no Image.
But, if thou have regard to the Image of the Serpente, that was made
afterward by Moses, then do thou, as Moses did: Make not any Image against
the Law, onles God command thee, as he did Moses. For God is free, and
subject to no Law. He commands us, and not him self. He gives this
General Law, Thou shall not kill: Yet he said unto Abraham, Take thy Son
Isaak, and kill him. Genesis. 2^.
Likewise he says, Exodus 11.
Thou shall not Steal: And yet the people of Israel, by his Commandment,
stale away the Egyptians goods, without breach of the Law. The same answer
may also serve for the Images of the Cherubines. How be it, The Barsen
Serpent.
the Cherubines stood not in the Temple, in the sight, and presence of the
people: but within the vele, in the Tabernacle, into which place it was not
lawful for any one of the people to cast his eyes. The Cherubines.
And therefore there was in it no danger of Idolatry. But like as, when the
Brazen Serpent was abused by Idolatry, The Brazen Serpent.
the Godly King Ezechias took it down, 2. Regum. 18.
and brake it in pieces, notwithstanding God had commanded Moses to set it
up: even so, notwithstanding it were sufferable to have images in the Church
of God, without breach of Gods law, yet when they be abused, and made
Idolles, as they are throughout the whole Church of Rome, Concilium
Moguntinen. cap. 42.
it is the dewtie of godly Magistrates to pulle them down, like as also it is
ordered by the Council of Men's.

M. Hardinge. The.3. Division.
It were not much beside our purpose here to rehearse the place of Ezechiel
the Prophet, Ezech. 9. In Commentar. in Ezechiel^.
where God commanded one, that was clothed in linen, and had an inkehorne by
his side, to go through the mids of Jerusalem, and to print the sign of
TAV, that is the sign of the Cross (for that letter had the similitude of the
Cross among the old Hebrewe letters, as S. Hierom witnesses) in the
foreheades of the men, that mourned, and made moan over all the abominations
of that City.

Touching the Sign, The Sign^ of the Cross commended to me^ by ^ods
Providence. Eusebius Ecclesiast. hist. lib. 1. cap. 9.
Image, or Figure of the Cross in the time of the New Testament, God seems
by his Providence, and by special warninges, in sundry revelations, and secret
declarations of his will, to have commended the same to men, that they should
have it in good regard, and remembrance. When Constantine the Emperor had
prepared him self to war against Maxentius the Tyrant, castinge in his mind
the great dangers that might thereof ensue, and calling to God for help, as
he lookte up, beheld (as it were in a vision) the Sign of the Cross
appearinge unto him in Heaven as bright as fire, and, as he was astonished with
that strange sight, he hard a voice speakinge thus unto him, Constantine in
this ouercomme.

After that Julian the Emperor had forsaken the Profession of Christen
Religion, (...).
and had done Sacrifice at the temples of Painyms, moving his subjects to do
the like: as he marched forward with his army on a day, Sozomen^ Tripart.
hist. lib. 5. cap. 50.
the drops of rain, that fell down out of the ^yer in a shewer, formed and
made tokens and signs of the Cross, both in his, and also in the soldiers
garments.

Rufinus having declared the strange, Eccles. hist. li. 10. in (...).
and horrible plagues of God, whereby the Jews were fraied, and let from
their vain attempt of buildinge up again the temple at Jerusalem, leave
thereto of the Emperor Julian in despite of the Christians obtained: in the
end says, that least those earthquakes, and terrible fires, which he
speaks of, raised by God, whereby as well the woorkehouses, and preparations
toward the buildinge, as also great multitudes of the Jews were thrown
down, cast abroad, and destroyed, should be thought to happen by chance:
the night folowinge these plagues, the sign of the Cross appeared in every
one of their garments so evidently, as none, to cloak their infidelity, was
hable by any kind of thing to scowre it out, and put it away. When the
temples of the Painims were destroyed by Christians in Alexandria, Histo.
T^^^part. lib. 9. cap. 29.
about the year of our Lord.390. in the chief temple of al, which was of
the Idol^ Serapis, the holy, and mystical letters called, (...), (...) Actor.
17*
by Gods providence, were found graven in stones, representing the Figure of
the Cross, the Signification whereof after their interpretation was, life to
come.

Which thing espied by the Christians, and by the Painims present at the
spoil, served maruelously to furtheraunce of the Christen Faith, no less then
the inscription of the Altar at Athens, Ignoto Deo, unto the unknown God,
served to the same purpose through S. Paul's preaching.

Which altogether was before wrought by Gods holy Providence, as Socrates, one
of the writers of the Ecclesiastical stories, reports.

Thus it appears plainly, how Gods Providence has commended unto true
beleuers, the Sign of the Cross. For which cause, and for Remembrance of
our Redemption, it has been in old time and always since much frequented
and honored. For beside that we read hereof in Tertullian, who was near the
Apostles time, Cap. 16.
in Apologetico, we find in the writers of the Ecclesiastical stories* that
the Christen people of Alexandria, Eccle. hist. lib. 11. cap. ^9. auctore
Rufino. Histor. tripart. lib. 1. cap. 9.
after they had pulled down, and taken away the arms and monumentes of
Serapis the Idol, The Cross.
every man caused the sign of our Lords Cross in place of them to be painted
and set up in their posts, entries, windows, walls, and pillours: that where
so ever the eye was turned, it should light on the Holy sign of the Cross.
Constantine the Emperor loved, and honored this Sign so much, that he
caused the same to be painted in all his flagges, and banners of war, to be
stricken in his coins, and moneis, to be purtraited in his arms, scutchins,
and targets. Lib. 1. co^tra Symma^hum.
Of this Aurelius Prudentius makes mention.

Christus purpureum gemmanti textus in Auro,

The sense whereof is thus much in English. The chief ba^ner, which was of
purple, had the Image of Christ in it wrought in Gold and stoanes, The
targets were painted al over with Christ, The Cross shined firebright in the
creastes of their Helmettes. Vide histo. tripart. lib. 1. cap. 5.
That the banner commonly borne before the Emperor in war, in Latin called
Labarum, was of this sort, it appears by an Epistle, lib. 5. Epistol. 29.
that S. Ambrose wrote to Theodosius the Emperor. Neither was the Figure of
the Cross then only in Flagges, and Banners, painted, wouen, embrodered, or
otherwise wrought, in Gold or precious stoanes: But also made in whole gold,
and set upon a long staff or pole, and borne before men, (202) The.202.
Untruth. For Prudentius speaks not of processio^ in the Churches, but of
Marchinge in the fields.
(as the manner is now in processions) as it seems plainly by these verses
of Prudentius.

Agnoscas Regina lubens mea signa necesse est:

It houeth you Madame, that gladly you acknowledge mine ensigns, in which the
Figure of the Cross is either glitteringe in stoanes, or of whole Gold is
borne on long slaves before us. This much have I gathered out of the ancient
Fathers writings concerning the Sign of our Lords Cross, the sight whereof
the professors of this New Gospel can not abide, to the entente the
diversity of our time, and of old time may appear, to the manners of which,
for a perfect reformation, these preachers would seem to bring the world
again.

The B. of Sarisburie.
The Sign of the Cross, I grant, emonge the Christians was had in great
regard: and that the more, both for the public reproache, and shame, that
by the common judgment of all the world was conceived against it, and also for
that most worthy price of our Redemption, that was offered upon it. It is
written, Galat. 3.
Accursed be al they, that are hanged upon the Tree. And Chrysostom says,
Deuteron. 21.
The Infidelles used commonly to vpbraide ye Christians with these words, Tu
adoras Crucifixu^? Will thou woorship a man, that was hanged upon a Cross?
Chrysostom. in Epis. ad Roman homil. 2.
They thought great vilanie in that kind of Death: for it was most odious,
and shameful of al others: and also they thought it great folly, to think well
of it. Therefore S. Paul says, Verbu^ Crucis pereuntibus stultitia est: 1.
Corin. 1. Ibidem.
The Word of the Cross unto them, that perish, is but a folly. Again,
Praedicamus Christum Crucifixum, Iudaeis quidem scandalum, Gentibus aute^
Stultitiam: We preach Christ Crucified: a great offense unto the Jews: And
unto the Heathens a great Folly. Likewise S. Augustine calls the Cross,
Ipsam ignominiam, Augustine. in Psalm. 141.
quam Pagani derident: That very shame, that the Heathens laughe to scorn.
Likewise also Chrysostom, Mors Christi apud Iudaeos maledicta, apud Gentiles
abominanda: Chrysostom. de laudib. Pauli. homil. 4.
The Death of Christ emonge the Jews is holden accursed, emonge the Heathens
it is holden abominable.

Therefore the Faithful, that believed in Christ, in all their talks, and in
their whole life, and conversation, used so much the more to extolle, and
magnify the same, in reproach of the enemies of the Cross of Christ, both
Jews, and Gentiles. For that cause S. Paul says, I am not ashamed of the
Gospel of Christ: Roman. 1.
for it is the Power of God unto Salvation. And, God forebidde, that I should
rejoice in any thing, Galat. 6.
but only in the Cross of Jesus Christ: And, I reckon me self to know
nothing, but only Jesus Christ, 1. Corin. 2.
and the same Christ Crucified upon the Cross. Thus S. Paul triumphed of that
thing, that in the world was so deeply despised: As if he would have said,
This is that infirmity, Ephesians. 4. Collossen. 2.
that has conquered the world: This is that vilanie, and reproach, that has
lead captivity away captive, that has spoiled the Principalities, and Powers
of Darkness. Thus, as Theodorete records, Theodoretus li. 3. Cap. 27.
the Christians euerywhere, in their common resortes, and in the open market
places published, and Proclaimed the Uictorie, and Triumph of the Cross:
Which, as Chrysostom says, Chrysostom. in homi. Quod Christus est Deus.
they were not ashamed to set, as a pos^e, to any thing, that they did, and to
any thing, that they possessed. Likewise God, that the world might the more
deeply think of the Death of Christ, wrought oftentimes strange Miracles by
the same, as he did by Paul's Naptkins, Actorum. 19. 4. Regum. 13. Actor. 5.
by Elizeus boanes, and by Peter's shadow. Then the first Christened Emperor
Constantinus, seeinge that thing became so glorious, that before had been so
sclaunderous, to increase the estimation thereof, commanded streitely by a
Law, Cassiodorus lib. 1. cap. 9.
that from thence forth no offender should suffer upon a Cross. These things
had in remembrance, we grant all that M. Hardinge has here alleged: The
Uision of Ezechiel, Ezechiel. 9. Eusebius. li. 9. ca. 9.
and the markinge of the men's foreheades with the Hebrewe letter TAV: The sight
of a Cross offered unto Constantinus in the air: The staininge of Crosses in
the Soldiers Coats, Sozomen. lib. 5. cap. 50.
in the time of the Renegate Emperor Julian: The printinge, or burninge of the
Crosses in the apparel of the Jews at Jerusalem: Rufinus lib. 10.
The findinge of the holy Hieroglyphical letter bearinge the form of the
Cross in the Temple of Serapis in Egypt: Socrates lib. 5. ca. 17.
And, to conclude, we grant, that the people, being newly brought to the
knowledge of the Gospel, after they had pulled down the Scutchins of the Idolle
Serapis, Sozomen. lib. 7. ca. 15.
and other like Monumentes of Idolatry, in the place thereof, straight way set
up the Cross of Christ in token of Conquest, Rufinus lib. 2. cap. 9.
in their entries, in their Walls, in their Windows, in their Posts, in
their Pillars: briefly in their Flagges, Ba^ners, Arms, Scutchins, Targets,
and Coins. Cassiodor. lib. 1. cap. 9.
Al these things, I say, we yield unto M. Hardinge without exception. Even so
Christian Princes this day use the same Cross in their Arms, and Banners,
both in peace, and in war, of diverse forms, and sundry colors, as in
token, Tertullian. in Apologetico.
they fight under the banner of Christ. Labarum emonge the old Romans was
the Emperial standarde of Arms, ritchely wrought in Gold, and beset with
stoane, carried only before the General of the field, and therefore
reverenced of the soldiers above al other. Sozomenus as a Greek writer, and
therefore not hable to gheasse rightly of the Latin tongue, Sozomenus lib. 9
cap. 4.
seems to call it, Laborum. For thus he writes:(...): The one of the
standerdes, which the Romans call Laborum: Aelius Spartianus.
Onles there be an error in the Greek. Notwithstanding it may be thought,
The Emperor Seuerus had some respect unto the same, Gregor. ad German.
Patriarch. in Council. Nicen. 2. Action. 6.
when he gave this Watchewoorde unto his Soldiers, Laboremus, Let us labor.
Likewise S. Gregory writes, Christum belli socium habuisti, cuius Labarum
insigne gestasti, ipsa^ dico viuificatricem Crucem: This standarde the
Christian Emperor Constantinus so blased with ye Cross, as others before him
had done with Minotaurus, Eusebius in vita Constantini. ^ratio. 1.
or with Aquila. And, notwithstanding Eusebius say, Constantinus used this
Cross, as a preservation of his safety, yet doubtelesse his affiance was
only in Christ, and not in the Material Cross. For Nicep^orus says,
Constantinus caused these words to be graven in the Cross, (...).
(...). Jesus Christus vincit, Jesus Christ conquereth, and not the Cross.
Otherwise S. Ambrose writes thus, Helena the Empress, by whose means the
Cross was found out, Inuenit Titulum: Regem Adorauit, non Lignum vtique. Quia
hic Gentilis est error, and Vanitas impiorum: Nicephor. lib. 8. cap. 32.
She found out the Title: but she Woorshipped Christ the King, and not the
Woodde. For that is an heathenishe error, and the vanity of the wicked.

Last of al, Ambrosius in Oratione fune^ri Theodosij.
where as M. Hardinge says, The professors of this New Gospel cannot abide
the Sign of our Lords Cross: let him understand, it is not the Cross of
Christ, nor the Sign thereof, that we find fault with all, but the
Superstitious Abuse of the Cross. God be thanked, it has well appeared unto
the world, that they, whom M. Hardinge thus condemns, have been hable, net
only to abide the Sign of Christ's Cross, but also to take up their Crosses,
and to follow Christ, and to rejoice, and triumph in the same.

Neither is there any such great matter yet showed, wherefore these men should
glory of the Antiquity of their Cause. For notwithstanding all this long
discourse, and great adoo, Yet is it not hitherto any way proved, either
that this Cross was an Image, or that it was set up in any Church, or yt it
was Adoured of the people. Certainly the Letter, that Ezechiel saw in a
U^sion: the Cross that Constantinus saw in the air: the marks that were
either stained with water, or burnte with fiere in the labourets garments: the
secret Mystical letters in the Temple of Serapis: the Cognisances of the
Cross painted, or graven in Flagges, Banners, Targettes, and Coins, were
only bars laid a Cross, and no Images. Again the same Crosses were
abroad in other places, in the Air, in the Field, in the Laborers Coats,
in private houses, and in men's purses: and not set up in any Temple, as it is
plain by that is already spoken. To be short, it appears not by any of these
allegations, that any man was the^ taught to kneel down unto these Crosses,
or to say, Aue Crux spes vnica: Alhaile o Cross our only ^oape, or to yield
them any godly honor. Which thing M. Hardinge not having proved,
notwithstanding his long discourse of words, has proved nothing.

And, where as he would force Prudentius to say, the Cross was then carried
about in Procession upon a pole, as the manner is now in the Church of Rome,
he openly misuseth that godly Father, and does him wrong. For it is plain,
that Prudentius in y^ place speaks not one word, neither of Church, nor of
Priest, nor of Clerk, nor of any goeinge in Procession. Only he speaks of
ye Soldiers marchinge in the field, and folowinge the Cross, as their
Standarde. So Eusebius writes of the Emperor Constantinus, Eusebius De vit^
Constantini, Oratione. 1. (...).
He commanded the Sign of the Cross to be carried before al his Armies. And
the next verse that follows in Prudentius is this: Hoc signo inuictus
transmissis Alpibus vltor etc. Where he describes the dangerous war, that
Constantinus had against Maxentius.

Seeinge therefore none of al these Crosses, that M. Hardinge has here found
out, either had any Image hanginge on it, or was erected in any Church, or
adoured of the people, how can al these words stand him in steed, to serve
his purpose?

M. Hardinge. The.4. Division.
Concerning the Images of Christ and of his Sa^^ctes, Images from the
Apostles time.
that they have been greatly esteemed and used in houses, Prudentius contra
Symmach. lib. 1.
Churches, and places of prayer from the Apostles time forward, it is so
evident, that it can not be denied. Athanasius writes that Nicodeme, who came
to Jesus by night, made an Image of Christ with his own hands, and that,
when he lay in his death^ bed, he delivered it to Gamaliel, who was S.
Paul's Schoolmaster. Gamaliel when he saw he should dye, leaf^e it to James:
The Gen^alogie, and pereg^ination of a Fable.
James left it to Simon and Zachaeus. This Image came from hand to hand by
succession, and continued a long time in Hierusalem^ From Jerusalem it was
carried into Syria, and at length it was brought to the City Berytus, not
far from Tire and Sydon. Where how despitefully it was used of the Jews,
It is a fabulou^ tale, never ^ritten by Athanasius.
and what woonders ensued thereupon, who list to know, he may read it
largely declared in a little book written by Athanasius of that ma^tier.

The B. of Sarisburie.
The Reader, of him self, if he be not over simple, may soon epsy the
simplicity of this Fable. A Christian man remoueth his householde, and having
there an Image of Christ, equal unto him in length, and breadthe, and al
proportion, by forgeatefulnes leaves it there in a secret place behind him.
A Jew after him inhabiteth the same house a long while, and sees it not: An
other strange Jew sittinge there at dinner, immediately e^pieth it standinge
open against a wall. All this M. Hardinges Athanasius. Thus it stands open, and
yet it is hidden: it is hidden, and yet it stands open. Afterward the
Priests, and Rulers of the Jews come together, and abuse it with all vilanie.
They crown it with a Thorn: make it drink Esel, and Gal: and stick it to
the heart with a Spear. Out issues Blood in great quantity: The powers of
Heaven are shaken: the Sun is darkened: The Moon loses her light. And from
thence* says this young Athanasius, we had the Blood of Hailes, and al
other like Blood throughout the world. To be short, the first word of the
Book is, Iraque. M. Hardinge him self is ashamed to report the tale. Yet
must it bear the name of Athanasius: and being never so childishe a fable,
yet it must have the forewarde to prove Adoration of Images. Only he tells
us a long Genealogy of the names of Nicodemus, Gamaliel, James, Simon, and
Zachaeus, to astonne the Reader, and to make him think the better of it. How
be it, all this notwithstanding, this Image was neither Churched, nor Adoured,
or Woorshipped, either of Priest, or people.

M. Hardinge. The.5. Division.
Eusebius Caesariensis in the seuenthe book of his Ecclesiastical story, Cap.
14.
writes of the aunciente Image of Christ made in Brass, and of the woman
that was healed by our Savior of her blouddye flixe in the City of Phoenic^a
called Caesarea Philippi, whereof that woman was a Citizen. Which Image, he
says, he saw, as likewise the Images of Peter and Paul, kept by some of
old time. And there he confesses, that the Images of Peter and Paul, and of
our Savior were in his time made, and painted in ^ables, Lib. 6. (...)part.
ca. (...).
and set forth. After Eusebius death, Julian the renegate took down this
Image of Christ, and set up his own in the same place: which with violente
fire that fell from heaven, was clefte asunder in the breast, the head broken
of with a piece of the neck, and stickte in the ground: The reast of it
soremained long after, as a token of lightninge, and Gods displeasure might be
reserved. That Image of Christ, after that the Painimes had haled, pulled,
broaken, and mangled it villainously, by the Christians was taken up, set
together, and placed in the Church, where it is yet reserved, says Socrates
of his time. Of the miraculouse herb that grew at the foot of this Image,
which after that it had grown so high, that it touched the Images skirtes,
taken, and ministered, was a medicine and present remedy for all diseases, as
Eusebius writes: because it pertains not specially to the matter of Images, I
rehearse nothing.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Eusebius him self shows, that the Phen^cians being Heathens, and hearing,
and seeinge the strange Miracles, that had been wrought by Christ, and by
his Apostles, made these Images in the honor of them, only of their
Heathenishe, Eusebius lib. 7. Cap. 18.
and vain Superstition. His words be these, Nec mirum est, Veteres Ethnicos
beneficio affectos a Seruatore nostro, ista fecisse. Nam and Apostolorum Pauli,
(...).
and Petri, and ipsius Christi Imagines coloribus ductas, and seruatas vidimus.
Et credibile est, priscos illos homines, non dum relicta auita Superstitione,
ad hunc modum consueuisse colere illos Ethnica consue^^dine, ranquam
Seruatores. It is no marvel, that the Heathens, receiuinge such benefits of
our Saueour, did these things. For we have seen the Images of Pau^e, of
Peter, and of Christ, drawn in colors, and preserved. And it may well be
thought, that men in old times, being not yet removed from the Superstition
of their Fathers, used after this sort to woorship them by an Heathenishe
custom, as their Saueours. By these words of Eusebius it is plain, that the
use of Images came, not from Christ, or from the Apostles, as M. Hardinge
says, but from the Superstitious custom of the Heathens. Neither doothe it
appear, that those Images were set up in any Church. ^^sebius li. 7. ^ap.
18.
As for the Image of Christ, it is plain, it stood in the street abroad,
and an Herb of strange operation grew underneath it.

Iulianus that Renegate, that once had professed Christ, and afterward
wilfully renounced him, took down that Image of Christ, not to withdraw the
people from Idolatry, but in malice, and despite of that new Religion: and
erected up his own Image, to the intent the people should woorshippe it,
purposely to deface Christ: even as they do now, that wilfuly break Gods
Commandments, Matthew. 15.
to uphold, and maintain their own Traditions. Of whom S. Basile writes
thus, Basilius Moral. Cap. 14.
Who so forbids us to do, that God commands: or commands us to do,
that God forebiddeth, is accursed unto al them, that love the Lord. Therefore
God stroke Iulians Image from Heaven with lightening, and rent it in pieces,
Sozomen. lib. 5. cap. 8.
in token of his reuengeance. Like as also, when an other Julian President of
the East, had spoiled the Churches of Antioche, and, in like despite of
Christ, sat upon the Holy Communion Cups, God smote him suddenly in the
secret parts with such a disease, as never afterward could be cured.

M. Hardinge. The.6. Division.
It is evident by Chrysostomes Mass, that there was some use of Images in the
Church of Constantinople in his time: for he speaks of the Image of the
Crucifixe. Whosoever is desirous to see testimonies of the Fathers for proof
of Images, let him read the seventh general Council holden in Nicea the City
of Bithynia against Imagebreakers, and there he shall find no small number.

The B. of Sarisburie.
In the Communion book, that bears the name of Chrysostom, there is mention
made of Nicolas Bishop of Rome, who, as I have showed before, lived welneare
five hundred years after Chrysostom, Anno. 855.
and was in order the second Bishop there, after Dame Iohane the woman Pope.
Such is the credit, and Antiquity of M. Hardinges witnesses. This second
Council of Nice was holden welneare eight hundred years after Christ. To open
the whole folly, and fondness thereof, it would require a long treaty. Ir^ne
the Empress a wicked woman, the Kings Daughter of Tartarie, an Heathen borne,
caused that Council to be summoned in despite of the Council of Constantinople,
Abbas Vrspergen. Carrion.
that had decreed against Images. She took her own Son Constantinus, and
pulled out his eyes, only because he would not consent to the idolatrous
having of Images. The Bishops and Doctors in that Council manifestly
corrupted the Scriptures, Nicen. Council. 2. Actio. 4. Nicen. Council. 2. Actio.
2.
and falsified the holy Fathers without shame. They said, Imago melior est,
quam Oration: An Image is better, then a prayer: And again, Who so ever will not
Adoure the Godly Images, accursed be he.

M. Hardinge. The.7. Division.
I will not let here to recite some, which, so far as I remember, be not
found there, one only excepted, which is of S. Basile, every one of right
good, and aucient auctoritee.

Simeon Metaphrastes a Greek writer describinge the life of S. Luke the
Evangelist says, A vain Fabular. He lived about the year. 1350.
that he made the Images of Christ, and of his Mother Mary. Saint Ambrose
witnesses, that in his time the Images of the Apostles were used in pictures.
For where he declares the maruelouse appearinge of the Holy Martyrs Geruasius,
In vita Ger^asij and Protasij.
and Protasius unto him in a vision, he says, that a third person appeared
with them, that told him, where their bodies lay, which seemed like to S.
Paul the Apostle, as he understood his face by view of his Picture.

Gregory Nyssene S Basiles brother, writing the life of Theodorus the Martyr,
bestows much eloquence in the praise of the Church, where his Holy Relikes
were kept, commendinge the shape of living things wrought by the keruer, the
smoothenesse of Marble poolishid like Silver by the Mason, the lively
resemblance of the Martyr him self, and of al his worthy acts, expressed and
excellently set forth to the eye in Imagerie with the Image of Christ by
the painter. In which Images he acknowlegeth the fightes of the Martyr to be
declared no less, then if they were described, and written in a book.

Paulinus the Bishop of Nola in his book, In deci^^ Natali.
that he made inverses of the life of Felix the martyr, praises the Church,
which the Martyrs Body was laid in, for the garnishinge of it with painted
Images in both sides, of both kinds, both men, and women, the one kind on
the one side, and the other kind on the other side. Where he speaks
expressly by name of the Images of scabbed Job, and blind Tobie, of fair
Judith, and great queen Hester: for so he names them.

The B. of Sarisburie.
S. Paul says, Coloss. 4. Lucas Medicus.
Luke the Physician, and not, Luke the Painter. He painted the Blessed Uirgin
with the colors of his speech, wherein he was counted more eloquent, then any
of the rest: but otherwise to painte her, he had no leisure. How be it,
Theodorus Anagnostes says, Theodor. lib. 1.
Eudoxia sent the same Image from Jerusalem to the Empress Pulcheria: upon
what credit, it is not known. But this Simeon Metaphrastes, whom M. Hardinge
here painteth out in his colors, and calls him a Greek Writer, Volaterranus.
was a poor Scholemaister in Constantinople, and wrote Saints lives, which
may well be called, the Legends of Lies, and lived two hundred years ago, and
not above. Of so right good ancient authority be M. Hardinges witnesses.

Touching that is here alleged of S. Ambrose, of Gregorius Nyssenus, and of
Paulinus I grant, as there were Painters, and Grauers at that time, so were
there also Pictures, and Images at the same time, and that not only in Private
houses, and market places, but also in the Congregations, and open Churches.
Eusebius says, Eusebius. li. 7. cap. 18.
that the use thereof was brought first into the Church by the Heathens: And
S. Hierome says, speakinge of the Curiosity of the Heathens in this behalf,
Argento, Hieronymus in Hieremiam. li. 2. cap. 10.
and auro decorauit illud: vt fulgore vtriusque materiae decipiat simplices.
Qui quidem error ad nos vsque transiuit, vt Religionem in diuitijs arbitremur:
He adourneth his Image with Silver, and Gold, that by the shine, and
glitteringe of both these Metalles he may deceive the simple. Which error
doubtless is now cropen in emongst us, (that be Christians) so that now we
think, our Religion stands in riches. S. Hierome would not have complained
hereof, if it had not been used in some places in his time. Neither could
Epiphanius ye Godly Bishop of Cyprus have rent in sunder the Picture of
Christ painted in a cloth, Epiphanius ad Johan. Hierosolymitan.
or call it a Superstition unfit for the Church of God: Nor could Serenus ye
worthy Bishop of Massilia, have broken in pieces Images wrought in timber, and
Stoane, onles such Pictures, and Images had then been used. We deny not,
Gregorius li. 9. Epistol^ 9.
but Images were then in use: but we deny, they were then woorshipped of the
people, or set up to the intent they should be woorshipped.

M. Hardinge. The.8. Division.
Athanasius has one notable place for having the Image of our Savior
Christ, which is not common, where he makes Christ and the Church to talk
together as it were in a Dialogue, In Sermon de Sanctis patribus, and
Prophetis. The Greek may thus be translated. Age (inquit) dic mihi, cur
oppugnaris? Oppugnor (inquit Ecclesia) propter doctrinam Euangelij, quam
diligenter and accurate teneo, and propter verum, and firmum Pascha, quod
agito, and propter religiosam, and puram Imaginem tuam, quam mihi Apostoli
reliquerunt, vt haberem depictam arram humanitatis tuae, in qua Mysterium
Redemptionis operatus es. Hic Christus, Si propter hoc (inquit) te oppugnant,
ne grauiter feras, neue animum despo^deas, cum scias, si quis Pascha neget, aut
Imaginem, me ^um negaturum coram patre meo, and ^lectis Angelis. Rursus vero,
qui compatitur mecum propter Pascha, conglorificaturum. An non audisti, quid
Moysi praeceperim? The Image of Christ.
Facies, inquam, mihi duos Cherubinos in Tabernaculo Testimonij, scilicet, ad
praefigurandam meam Imaginem, etc.

The English of this Latin, or rather of the Greek is this. Come on (quod
Christ to the Church) tell me, wherefore art thou thus invaded, and vexed?
declare me the matter. Forsoothe Lord (quod the Church) I am invaded, and
vexed for the exact obseruinge of the Gospel, and for the keepinge of the
Feast of the true, and firm Easter, and for thy reverent, and pure Image,
which thy holy Apostles have leafte to me by Tradition, to have, and keep for
a representation of thine Incarnation.

Then (quod our Lord) if this be the matter, for which thou art invaded, and
set against, be not dismayed, be of good comfort in heart, and mind, being
assured hereof, that who so denies Easter, or my clean Image, (...).
I shall deny him before my heavenly Father, and his chosen Angels. And he, that
suffers persecution with me for keepinge of Easter, the same shall also be
glorified with me. Have not thou heard, what I commanded Moses the Lawgeuer
to do? Make me (said I) two Cherubins i^ the Tabernacle of the Testimony, to
be a prefiguration, or foretokening of my Image, etc.

The B. of Sarisburie.
I trow, This good Old Monumente of Antiquity has lain long in the dust
at Uerona, with M. Hardinges Amphilochius. The Church piteously bemoaneth her
self unto Christ, that she is soar persecuted, and vexed for his Image.
Christ to comfort her with all, says, Who so denies mine Image, shall be
denied before my Father. In the end he confirms the use of such Images by
the Example of the Cherubines.

Here M. Hardinge, to increase some credit to his new Doctor, should have
showed us, when the Church was thus vexed, for having the Image of Christ,
and whoo vexed her, and what kind of vexation it was, and how long it
continewed, and in what country, and when it ceased. The Church is builte
upon a Mount: her Persequutions cannot be hidden. If she ever were thus vexed,
for having of Images, I mean before the time of Athanasius, it must needs
appear: If never, then was she a very Wanton, thus to complain without cause.

If these threats be true, that who so denies the graven, or painted Image of
Christ, shall be denied before God the Father, then must Epiphanius the Bishop
of Cyprus, and Serenus the Bishop of Massilia, both Godly, and Zealous Bishops,
and a great number of other godly Learned Fathers, that rent, and brake
down, and defaced Christ's Images, be utterly denied before God. To be short,
to say, that God commanded Moses, to make the golden Cherubines, purposely to
be Figures of these Images of Wood, or Stoane, it is a very Fabulous, and a
Childish fantasy, without any ground: how be it, good yenough to maintain,
and color a Childishe Doctrine.

Notwithstanding, if there be any weight either in this hidden Athanasius, or
in his sayeinges, then may we well conjecture, that he uses this Word Image
in this place, not for any such material form painted, or graven by man's
hand, but for the whole Conversation of the Son of God in this mortal life,
which is as much as, Verbum Caro factum est: The word became Fleashe: and
is expressed, and set forth, as an Image before our eyes, in the whole
Doctrine, and Policy of the Church, as the deepest ground, and very
fundation of the Christian Faith. 2 Corin. 4. Johan. 1.
And thus S. Paul says, Christus est Imago patris, Christ is the Image of
the Father. Otherwise God is Invisible. S. John says, Noman ever saw God: But
the Son, that is in the Fathers bosom, he has reveled the Fathers will. In
his conversation in the Fleashe, Apocalyp. 13.
as in an Image, we behold God the Father. So in the book of the Apocalypse,
Imago bestiae, The Image of the Beast, is called, not any material Image
Painted, or Graven, but the Doctrine, the Seduction, the Errors, the Lies, the
Blasphemies, the Idolatry, and the whole Conversation of Antichriste. So S.
Basile says, Christ called his Fleashe, and Blood the whole Mystical Doctrine
of his Gospel, Basilij episto. ad Caesarien.
which he published in his dispensation in the Fleashe. So S. Augustine
seems to say, Eius Passionis Imaginem in Ecclesia Celebrandam dedit: He gave
the Image of his Passion to be frequented in the Church. (...).
And Pachymeres the Greek Paraphrast expounds this word Imago thus, (...):
He calls Pictures, the Images, or inward and deep considerations of our
Mysteries. For this Image of Christ the Church of God was often persecuted.
This Image, as some of the Old Fathers say, was represented, and figured by
the Cherubines: and undoubtedly, who so ever denies this Image, Christ shall
deny him before God his Father. Aug. 80. quaestio. Quaest. 61.
This Exposition is agreeable both to the tenor of Gods Word, and also to
the story of the Time: and therefore we may safely judge, Pachymeres in
tertium caput Eccl. Hierarch. Athanasius Aduersus ^entes.
if this were Athanasius in deed, that this was his very meaning. Otherwise
the common, and known Athanasius, that is extant, and abroad, writes thus:
(...). The inue^tion of Images is of il, and not of good. And the thing, that
has an il beginning, can never be judged good in any thing, as being in all
respects, and altogether il. This is this holy Fathers most clear
judgment, not cast up in corners, and hidden in the dust, but open to the
eyes, and sight of all the World.

M. Hardinge. The.9. Division.
Of all the Fathers none has a plainer testimony, both for the use, and also
for the woorshippinge of Images, then S. Basile, whose authority for
learning, wisdom, and holiness of life, beside antiquity, is so weighty
in the judgment of al men, that al our New Masters laid in balance against
him, shall be found lighter then any feather. Touching this matter, making a
confession of his faith in an Epistle, inueighinge against Julian the
renegate, he says thus: Citatur ab Adria^o Papa in Epist^la Synodica ad
Constantinum and Itenem.
Even as we have received our Christian and pure Faith of God, as it were by
right of heritage: right so I make my confession thereof to him, and therein I
abide. I believe in one god father almighty, God the Father, God the Son,
God the Holy Ghost. One God (in substance) and these three (in persons) I
adore and glorify. I confess also the Sons Incarnation. Then afterward S.
Mary, who according to the Fleashe brought him forth, calling her Deiparam.
I reverence also the holy Apostles, Prophets, and Martyrs, which make
supplication to God for me: that by their mediation our most benign God be
merciful unto me, and grant me freely remission of my sins. Then this
follows: Quam ob causam, and historias imaginum illorum honoro, and palam
adoro: hoc enim nobis traditum a Sanctis Apostolis, non est prohibendum, sed in
omnibus Ecclesijs nostris eorum Historias erigimus. For the which cause I do
both honor the stories of their Images, and openly Ad^^re them. For this
being delivered unto us of the holy Apostles by tradition, is not to be
forbidden. This Basile is not S. Basil.
And therefore we set up in all our Churches their stories. Lo M. Iuel, here you
see a sufficient testimony, that Images were set up in the Churches long
before the end of your six hundred years, and that they were honored and
woorshipped, not only of the simple Christian people, but of Bishop Basile,
who for his excellent learning, and wisdom was renoumed with the name of
Great.

The B. of Sarisburie.
In deed, as S. Basile for his learning, wisdom, and constancy in Gods
truth, was worthily called Great, so was his authority always accoumpted
very weighty. If M. Hardinge had in him some part of that poise, he would not
so lightly be blown away from Christ, and his Gospel, with so weak blastes
of light fantasy. But this Basile, is not Basile: nor are these words, S.
Basiles words. Only Pope Adrian in his Synodical Epistle, emonge other vain
authorities, allegeth these words in the name of Basile. But in S. Basiles
Books, which are extant, and abroad, they are not found.

And, where as this Basile is made to protest, that he will honor, and Adoure
Images, and that openly to the example of others, M. Hardinge knows, this
Doctrine is contrary, not only to common sense; but also to his own
Councelles. For in the Council of Men's it is written thus, Imagines non ad id
proponuntur, Council Mog^nti. De Imagini^.
vt Adoremus, aut Colamus eas. Images are not set up to the intent we should
honor, or woorship them. Neither does Gregory call them Gods to be
honored, but only books to be read: neither books of profounde knowledge,
to instruct S. Basile, or other like learned Bishops: but, Libros Laicorum,
Poor simple books to teach the ignorant.

And, for as much as M. Hardinge would have us, to make so deep accoumpte of
the authority of this Council: for the better satisfaction of the Reader in
this behalf, I think it necessary briefly, and by the way to touch some
part of those weighty reasons, whereby the Bishops, and Fathers there after
long deliberation were forced to erecte, and stablishe the use, and Adoration
of Images, and to condemn the gainesaiers, as Blasphemers, and Heretics.
Their special grounds are these: Moses says, God took claie, and made man
after his own Image, and likeness: Genes. 2.
Esai 19.
Psalm. 95.
I have loved the beauty of thy House: O Lord, ini face has sought for thee:
O Lord, Psalm. 25.
I will seek after thy countenance: O Lord: the light of thy countenance is
sealed over us. Psalm. 26.




Of every of these several clauses, Pope Adrian concludes thus, Ergo, Adriani
Epist^. Synodica. Action. 2.
we must erecte Images in the Church.

An other reasons thus, Sicut audiuimus, ita vidimus, As we have heard, so
have we seen: Ergo, there must be Images, to look upon. An other says,
Psalm. 47.
Mirabilis Deus in Sanctis suis: God is marvelous in his Saints: Ergo,
Theodorut.
the Church must be deckte with Pictures. An other says, Noman lights a
candle, and puts it under a bushel: Ergo, Images must be set upon the
Altar. Of al these, Council. Nicen. ^. Actio. 1. (...).
and other like Authorities Isidorus concludes, Ergo, A Church is nothing
worth, onles it be full freight with Images.

To prove the Adoration, and Woorshippinge of Images, they have these
authorities: David says, Adoure ye the footestoole of his feet: Adoure ye in
his holy hille: O Lord, All the rich of the people shall pray before thy
countenance:

Ergo, say they, Images must be woorshipped. Now, to reckon up the vanities,
Psalm. 98.
and Idolatrous Fables of that Council, it would be tedious: Psalm. 47.
The Devil promises by his honesty, that he will no longer tempte, and trouble
a holy man, Psalm. 44.
if he will leave woorshippinge of the Image of Our Lady. An other sends for
an Image, Council. Nicen. ^. ^ctio. 1.
to featche home water to his cesterne. An other goes on Pilgrimage, and
bids our Lady in his absence to see to her own Candel. She did al things
accordingly, as she was commanded. Until his return the Candel went never
out. Thus much only for a taste.

These proufes be great and weighty: And in comparison hereof, al our New
Masters, as M. Hardinge says, shall be found lighter then a feather.

And, for as much as these men so often charge our Doctrine with novelty,
thereby to bring it out of credit, as if it had never benne known before
these later days, it shall therefore be good to touch some part of the most
Ancient Fathers judgment, and the Old Practice of the Church concerning the
same. Origin. contra Cel^um. lib. 7.


Origin says, Dei, vt Inuisibilis, and Incorporei, Imaginem nullam ^^^igiamus.
We make no Image of God, as knowinge him to be Invisible, and without body.
Again he says, Origin. contra Cel^um. lib. 4.
Celsus obijcit nobis, quod non habeamus Altaria* and Imagines. Celsus the
Heathen charge us, that we have neither Altar, nor Images. Clemens
Alexandrinus, Clemens Alexadrinus in Par^netico.
that lived at the same time, writes thus, Nobis apert^ ve^itum est, Artem
fallacem exerce^e. Non facies enim* inquit Prophe^a, cuiusuis rei
Similitudinem. We are plainly forebidden, to use th^s deceiteful art, (of
Paintinge, or Grauinge). For the Prophet says, Thou shall not make the
likeness of any thing. Arnobius co^tra Gente^. lib. 2.
Arnobius that followed immediately after Cleme^s, and Origin, writes thus unto
the Heathens: Accusatis nos, quod non habeamus Imagines, Page 214. Tertulli. in
Apologetico. Lactantius. li. 2. cap 2.
and Al^aria Ye accuse us, for that we have neither Images, nor Aultars:
La^tatius, sometime Scholar to Arnobius, says, Non est dubium, quin Religio
nulla sit, vbi Simulachrum est. Out of doubt, where so ever is any Image,
there is no Religion. S. Augustine much commends this saieinge of Uarro, Qui
primi Simulachra Deorum populis posuerunt, illi Ciuitatibus suis metum
dempserunt, errorem vero addiderunt. They, Augustine de Ci^itate Dei. li. 4.
cap. 31.
that first erected the Images of the Gods unto the people, took away
fear, and Religion, and increased error unto their Cities. And adds
thereto this reason, Quia Dij facile possunt in Simulachrorum stoliditate
conte^ni. Because the Gods in the folly of Images may soon be despised.
Concilium Eliberinum Can. 36.
The Council holden at Eliberis decrees thus, Placuit, Picturas in Ecclesijs
esse no^ debere, ne, quod colitur, aut Adoratur, in parietibus depinga^ur. We
think it good, there be no Picture in the Churches: least the thing, that is
honored, or Adoured, Constantinopolitan. Council. P. Crinitus li. 9. cap. 9.
be painted on the Walls. The like might be said of the Council holden at
Constantinople. The godly Emperors, Ualens, and Theodos^us gave out this
General Proclamation throwghout al Christendom, Cum sit nobis cura diligens,
in rebus omnibus Superni Numinis Religionem ^ueri, Signum Saluatoris nostri
Christi nemini concedimus, coloribus, lapide, a^a^e materi^ fingere, sculpere,
aut pingere. Sed quocunque reperitur loco, tolli tubemus, grauissima poena eos
mulctando, qui contrarium Decre^s nostris, and Imperio quicquam tentauerint.
For as much, as we have ad ligent care, in all things to maineteine the
Religion of the most high God, therefore we suffer noman to facion, to grave,
or to painte the Image of our Saueoure Christ, either in colors, or in
stoane, or in any other kind of Metal, or matter. But, where so ever any such
Image shall be found, we command it to be taken down, assueringe our
Subjects, that we will most streitely pounishe al such, as shall presume, to
attempt any thing contrary to our Decree, and Commandment. The same Decree
was afterward put in execution, and practiced by Philippicus, Leo,
Constantinus the Father, Constantinus the Soon, Nicephorus, Stauratius,
Michael, Leo Armenius, and other Christian and godly Emperors. These
Authorities, as they be Old, and Ancient, so be they also plain, and evident,
and well acquainted, and known unto the World: and therefore will soon
ouerpo^se al these Fables of the Image of Nicodemus, of Simeon Metaphrastes, of
this young S. Basile, of new Athanasius, and of other like blind Authorities,
that have benne lately sought up out of Corners, and brought to light. Uerily
Amphilochius, under whose cloak M. Hardinge has so often hid him self, may
in no wise be refused. His words be plain, Council. Nicen. 2. ^ctione. 6.
Non est nobis curae, Sanctorum v^l^us corporales in tabulis coloribus
effigiare: quoniam his opus non habemus. We have no care, to draw out the
bodily countenances of Saints in colors, and tables: For we have no need of
them.

M. Hardinge. The.10. Division.
Now, that there has benne enough alleged for the antiquity, original, and
approbation of Images, it remains, it be declared, for what causes they have
benne used in the Church.

We find that the use of Images has benne brought into the Church for three
causes. Three causes why Images have benne used in the Church.
The first is the benefit of knowledge. For the simple, and unlearned people,
which be utterly ignorant of letters, in Picture^ do, as it were, read, and
see no less, then others do in books, the mysteries of Christian Religion,
the acts, and worthy deeds of Christ, and of his Saints. What writing
perfourmeth to the that read, the same does a picture to the simple
beholdinge it, says S. Gregory. For in the same the ^gnorant see, what they
ought to follow: in the same they read, Ad Serenu^ Episcopu^^ Massilien. lib.
9. Epist. 9.
which can no l^tters. Therefore Imagerie serves specially the rude Nations
in steed of writing, says he.

T^ this S. Basile agrees in his Homily upon the forty Martyrs. Both the
writers of stories (says he) and also painters do show, and set forth
noble deeds of arm^s and victories, the one garnishinge the matter with
eloquence, the other drawinge it lively in ^ables, and both have stirred many
to valiant courage. For, what things the utterance of the story expresses
through hearing, (...)loqu^s, Poema ta^^^.
the same does the still Picture set forth through imitation. In the like
^especte in old time the work of excellent Poets was called a speakinge
Picture: and the work of Painters, a stille Poetry. And thus the use, and
profit of writing, and of Pictures is one. For things that be read, when as
they come to our ears, then we conueigh them over to the mind: And the
things, that we behold in pictures with our eyes, the same also do we
embrace in our mind. And so by these two, Readinge, and Paintinge, we
atchiue one like benefit of Knowledge.

The B. of Sarisburie.
The first and chief cause and end of Images is, as it is here pretended,
Gregor. li. 9. Epist. 9.
that the People by the sight thereof may atteine knowledge. And therefore S.
Gregory calls them the Lay men's Books: Council. Senonense.
And the Fathers in a late Council say, We may learn more in a short while
by an Image, then by long study, and travail in the Scriptures. And for the
same cause S. Basile compares an Image painted with a Story written. But the
comparison, that M. Hardinge uses between Imagerie, and Poetry, seems
nearest to express the truth. For Painters, and Poets, for liberty of
lyeinge have of long time been coupled both together. One writes of them
in this sort, Pictoribus, Horatius.
atque Poetis Quidlibet audendi semper fuit aequa potestas: Painters, and
Poets had ever like chartar to adventure al things. And Atheneus, blasinge
abroad the liberty of Poets, writteth of them thus, Athenaeus.
(...): Unto whom only it is lawful to say, and do, what they list. And
therefore Cicero seems to say, Cicero Tuscul. Quaest. 1.
Nihil negotij est haec Poetarum, and Pictorum portenta conuincere: It is no
great maisterie, to reprove these monstrous Miracles of Painters, and Poets.
And therefore, like as Plato commanded, Plato.
al Poets for their lyeinge to be banished out of his Common Wealth: Origin.
contra Celsum. li. 4.
So likewise Almighty God, for like liberty, banished al Painters out of
Israel. For these causes M. Hardinges comparison of Painters, and Poets may
well be allowed.

How be it, this seems to be no very handsome way, to teach the people. Of
their Priests, they have made Images: and of their Images, they have made
Priests. For their Priests, for the more part, have Eyes, and see not: have
Ears, and hear not: Hearts, and understand not: Mouths, and speak not: in all respects even like unto their Images. Their Images have no Eyes, and yet
are made to see: have no Ears, and yet are made to hear: have no Mouths, and
yet are set up to speak: and so in these respects do the Duties, that
perteine to Priests. Thus they bar the People from the hearing of Gods
holy Word: and bid them go, and look upon their Images: to talk with their
Images: to hear their Images: and to learn of their Images.

And, although perhaps the people may happily learn somewhat by these means,
yet is not this the ordinary way, whereby God has appointed the people to
atteine knowledge. S. Paul says, Fides ex auditu: Romans 10.
Faith comes (not by seeing, or gasinge, but) by hearing. There were many
simple, rude, and unlearned lay men emonge the Jews. Yet God never set up any
such Books for them to read: but contrariwise evermore forebade them, and
cried against them, and would not suffer them. If this be so speedy, and so
ready a way to teach the People, how happens it, that where as is greatest
stoare of such Schoolemaisters, there the people is evermore most Ignorant,
most Superstitious, and most subject to Idolatry? But, to conclude, The
Prophets Habacuch, and Hieremie say, Habacuch. 2. Hieremi. 10.
Conflatile est demonstratio mendacij: Lignum est Doctrina Vanitatis. A molton
Idol is a Lesson of Lies: And (M. Hardinges) wooden Image is a doctrine of
Vanity.

M. Hardinge. The.11. Division.
The second cause of the use of Images, is the stirringe of our minds to al
godliness. For where as the affecte and desire of man is heavy, and dull in
Divine and spiritual things, Sapient. 9.
because the Body that is corruptible weighs down the mind: when it is set
forth before our eyes by Images, what Christ has done for us, and what the
Saints have done for Christ: then it is quickened, and moved to the like
will of dooinge, and sufferinge, and to al endeavor of holy and virtuous life.
As when we hear apt and fit words uttered in a Sermon, or an Oration: so
when we behold looks, and gestures lively expressed in Images, we are moved
to pity, to weepinge, to joy, and to other affectes. Wherein verily it has
always been thought, that painters have had no less grace, then either
Orators, or Poets.

Who lists to see examples hereof, he may peruse the second Nicene
Council, Action. 4.
where he shall find among other most notable things concerning this
point, one of S. Euphemia the Martyr, an other of Abraham sacrificinge his
Son Isaac, worthy of everlasting memory, that of Asterius the holy Bishop,
this of Gregory Nyssene, very elegantly described. Virgil makes Aeneas to
weep, to hope for better fortune, to gather courage of mind, to take good
advise, and order for redress, and help of his great calamities, by occasion
of beholdinge a Painters work at Carthago, wherein the battle of Troy was
expressed. Which that wise Poet would not have done, were it not that
Pictures have great force to move men's hearts.

Ouide likewise in the Epistle of Laodamia to Protesilaus her husband being
forth at wars, makes her so to write of his Image, which she had caused to
be made of wax for her comfort in his absence, as it may well appear, that
Images have a meruailouse power to stir vehement affectes, and to represente
things absent, as though in manner they were present, in the minds of the
beholders. Among al other examples for this purpose, that seems to me most
notable, which Appianus writes of C. Julius Caesar li. 2. De bellis
ciuilibus. After that Caesar had been murdered of the Senators in the Council
house, one of his friends, to show the cruelty of the fact to the people,
laid Caesar's bed in the open markette place, and took forth of it his
Image made of wax, which represented three and twenty wounds after a
beastly sort stabde into his face, and all the rest of his body, yet gapinge,
and as it were fresh bleedinge. With which show he stirred the people to
more wrath and rage, then he could have done with any oration or gesture:
which was declared forthwith. For as soon as the people saw it, not hable
to bear their grief, nor stay their fury any longer, they wrought great
and strange cruelties against them, that were found to have committed that
murder.

The third cause, why Images have been set up in Churches, is the keepinge of
things in memory necessary to our salvation. For when we cast our cies on
them, our memory, which otherwise is frail and weak, gathers together,
and imbraceth the benefits, and merits of our Savior Christ, and the
virtuous examples of Saints, which we ought to follow: that if we be such,
as they were, we may by Gods grace through Christ attain the bliss they
be in, and with them enjoy life everlasting. And verily they that have Images
in regard, and reverence, must be so minded, as they behold, not only the
things by them represented, but also perform the same in deed with most
diligent imitation.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Touching the Second commodity of Images, which is the mouinge, and
sturringe of the mind, M. Harding is feign to pray aid of ye Heathenish
Poets, Uergile, and Ouide, not the meetest Authorities for a Doctor of
Divinity: and for proof hereof to bring in their idle fables, with an old
profane story of Appia^. Therefore he seems now to draw very deep, and not
far from the lies. I marvel, In Eunuch^.
he had forgotten the young man in Eunuchus, who, for that he saw Iuppiter
painted in a Table, was streightway thoroughly moved, and emboldened to his
youthful purpose. I grant, Images do oftentimes vehemently move the mind
diversely to sundry affections. And I reckon him a blind man, that will hold
the contrary. Salust says, Quintus Maximus, and Publius Scipio, when so ever
they beheld their Ancesters Images, were by and by inflamed with nobility of
courage, to auance them selves to like adventures. But every thing, that may
delight, or move the mind, is not therefore meet for the Church of God.
Gods house is a house of prayer, and not of gasinge. And, to answer one
profane story by an other, the Old Lacedaemonians would not suffer any
Image, Plutarchus.
or Picture to stand in their Council house: least the Senators minds by
mean thereof, should be drawn from that, they had in hand, to other
fantasies. Certainly the wise man says, Aspectus Imaginis dat insipienti
concupiscentiam: Sapientiae. 15.
The sight of an Image in the unwise sturreth up concupiscence.

The third commodity, touching Remembrance, is like the first: And therefore
is already answered.

M. Hardinge. The.12. Division.
And now we are come to declare, How Images may be vvoorshipped without
offense
how Images may be woorshipped, and honored without any offense. That Godly
woorship which consists in Spirit, and Truth in wardely, and is declared
by signs outwardly in recognizinge the Supreme dominion, Holy Images by M.
Hardinges confession, are vvoorshipped without Spirit, and Truethe.
which properly of the Divines is called Latria, is deferred only to the
Blessed Trinity. As for the Holy Images, to them we do not attribute that
woorship at al, but an inferior reverence or Adoration: for so it is named: A
vain distinction. For the Hebrew word sounds, Non incuruabis teipsum,
Thou shall not boovv down etc.
which is nothing else, but a recognizinge of some virtue or excellency
protested by outward sign, as reverent kissinge, boowinge down, kneelinge,
and such the like honor. Which kind of Adoration or woorship, we find in
the Scriptures oftentimes given to creatures. The whole act whereof is not
withstanding referred, not to the Images The act of Adoration is referred to
the Image: although not principally.
principally, but to the things by them represented, as being the true and
proper obiectes of such woorship. For although the honor of an Image passes
over to the original, Li. ad Amphiloch. ca. 18.
or first samplar, which the learned call Archetypum, as S. Basile teaches:
Yet that high woorship called Latria, belongs only to the blessed Trinity,
and not to the reverent Images, least we should seem to be woorshippers of
creatures, and of matters, as of Gold, Silver, Stoanes, In questionib. ad
Antiochum Principe^^.
VVoodde, and of such other the like things. For we adoure not Images as God,
This Athanasius is forged, and not the true Athanasius.
says Athanasius, neither in them do we put hope of our Salvation, ne to them
do we give Godly service or woorship, for so did the Gentiles: but by such
adoration or reverence, we declare only a certain affection and love, which
we bear toward the originalles. And therefore if it happen their Figure and
shape to be defaced and undone, we let not to burn the stocks, as very
wood, and being of other stuff, to convert the same to any use, it may best
serve for.

S. Gregory praisinge much one Secundinus, li. 7. Epist. 53.
for that he desired the Image of our Savior to be sent unto him, to the
intent by having his Image before his eyes, he might the more be stirred to
love him in his heart: After a few words uttered in this sense, he says
further: We know thou demaundest not the Image of our Savior to the intent
to woorship it, as God: But for the remembrance of the Son of God, that thou
might be enkendled with the love of him, whose Image thou desire to
behold. And verily we fall not down before it, as before God. But we adoure
and woorship him, whom through occasion of the Image, we remember either borne,
or done to death for us, or sittinge in his throne. And whiles we reduce the
Son of God to our memory by the picture, no less then by writing, it
brings either gladness to our mind by reason of his Resurrection, or
comfort by reason of his Passion. Thus far S. Gregory.

And if men pray kneelinge before any Image, or triumphant sign of the Holy
Cross, they woorship not the VVoodde or Stoane Figured, but they honor the
highest God. And whom they can not behold with senses, they reverence and
woorship his Image representinge him, according to ancient ins^itution, not
restinge or staiynge them selves in the Image, but transferring the adoration
and woorship to him, that is represented.

Much might be alleged out of the Fathers concerning the woorshippinge of
Images: but this may suffice. And of all this one sense redoundeth, that what
Reverence, Honor, or VVoorship so ever is applied to Images, it is but for
Remembrance, Love and honor of the primitiues or Originalles. As when we kiss
the Gospel book, by that token we honor not the Parchement, Paper and Incke,
wherein it is written, but the Gospel it self. And as Jacob, Gene. 37.
when he kissed his Son Iosephes coat embrewed with Kiddes blood, holdinge
and imbrasinge it in his arms, and making heavy moan over it, the affection
of his love and sorrow rested not in the Coat, but was directed to Joseph him
self, whose infor^unate Death (as he thought) that blouddy coat represented:
So Christen men shewinge tokens of reverence, love and honor before the Image
of Christ, of an Apostle, or Martyr with their inward recognition and
devotion of their hearts, they stay not their thoughts in the very Images,
but defer the whole to Christ, to the Apostle, and to the Martyr, geuinge to
each one in dew proportion* that which is to be given, puttinge difference
between the Almighty Creator, and the Creatures: finally rendringe al Honor
and Glory to God alone, who is marvelous in his Saints. Such woorshippinge
of Images is neither to be accounted for wicked, nor to be despised: (203)
The.203. Vntruethe. For no Ancient Father either Greek, or Latin, ever taught
us to kiss an Image, or to kneel, or to boovv down unto it.
for the which we have the testimonies of the ancient Fathers, both Greeks
and Latins: unto which, further authority is added by certain Without the
compass of six hundred years.
general Councelles, that have condemned the breakers and impugners of the same.

The B. of Sarisburie.
M. Hardinge has made a very large entry to so small a house. The whole
question stands only in this one point, of Adoration, which is here very
lightly past over in few words. All the rest is used only as a floorishe, to
begin the ga^^e. Neither doothe he any wise directly answer, that was
demanded, that is, whether Images in old times were set up, to be
woorshipped: but only shows his own fantasy, in what sort they may be
woorshipped: Wherein notwithstanding, he seems not to agree thoroughly,
neither with the rest of his company, nor with him self. His final Resolution
is this, The Adoration, that is made in this sort, is not Principally directed
to the Image. The sense of which Words is this, The corruptible creature of
VVood, or Stoane may be woorshipped, although not Principally, or chiefly, as
God him self, which is thereby represented. And thus he takes an indifferent
way bitweene both: as if he would say, An Image may be Woorshipped: and yet
it may not be woorshipped. Again, It may not be woorshipped: and yet it may be
woorshipped. And for Confirmation hereof, he allegeth certain Autorities
forged under the names of S. Basile, and Athanasius: Notwithstanding he know
right well, that neither of these two Fathers ever, either uttered such
words, or had cause to move such matter. Only they are alleged in that
childishe Council of Nice the Second, ^monge a great number of other like
lies, and Fables. Good Christian Reader, if thou be learned, consider, and
weigh that Council. And thou shall say, I have reported much less, then thou
have found. And the same Athanasius, as he is here brought in to prove the
Adoration of Images, so else where in the same Council he is forced to say,
Council. Nicen. 2. Actio. 3.
that Christ dwells in Relics, and Dead men's Boanes.

As for Gregory, Gregorius lib. 7. Epist. 53.
notwithstanding he speak expressly of Images, yet he speaks not one Word
of the Adoration of Images. In Conclusion M. Hardinge being not hable, to
allege, no not so much as one Ancient Father for the woorshippinge of Images,
these manifest forgeries only excepted, yet he blusheth not to say in a
bravery, that he might allege a great number more. By such faces, and
vi^inge of empty stoare, the simple people is often deceived. But what needs
M. Hardinge, either to hold by these counterfeite, and forged deeds: or elsby
these fond diuises of Principal, and not Principal Adoration, thus to simper,
and to season the matter bitweene both? Certainly the Bishops in his Second
Council of Nice, Ex libro Caroli Magni.
think them selves hable to prove, both by Scripture, and also by Ancient
Authority, that Images ought undoubtedly to be honored. For, as it is said
before, they allege these Scriptures, Psalm. 98.
Woorship the footestoole of his feet: Psalm. 47.
Adoure him in his holy hille: All the ritche of the people shall woorship thy
face.

Hereof they conclude thus, Psalm. 44.
Ergo, Images must be woorshipped. And therefore Theodosius the Bishop of Mira
in the same Council allows it well, and specially, for that his Archedeacon
was taught the same by revelation in a Dream.

Therefore one of them says, Venerandas imagines adoro, and id perpetu^
docebo: I Adoure the reverent Images, and will maineteine the same, while I
live. Council. Nicen. 2. Action. 2.
An other says, Historias Imaginum honoro, and palam Adoro: I woorship the
stories of Images, and Adoure them openly. An other says, Imagines perfect
adoro: I give perfect Ador^tion unto Images. An other says, Eos, qui diue^sum
statuunt, auer^or, and anathema^izo. Al such, as hold the contrary, I utterly
forsake, and hold them accursed. Briefly, the whole Council there determines
thus, Eos, qui circa Adora^ionem Imaginum laborant, aut dubitant, nostra
Synodus anathematizat. Al such, as stagger, or stand in doubt, of the
Adoration of Images, are accursed by this Council.

They say, We know, that Images are Creatures Corruptible: and therefore we
neither use them, nor take them as Gods. And thus they think them selves
very wise men, that can know, that Birds, and Children be hable to know.
Even so the Heathens were wont to say of their Idolles. Cicero confesses,
Io^em lapidem non esse Deum, That Iuppiter is a stoane, and no God. Lactantius
hereof writes thus, Non ^psa, inquit, Adoramus, sed eos ad quorum Imagines
facta, and quorum nominibus Consecrata sunt. The Infidel will say, even as M.
Hardinge here says, We woorship not our Images, but our Gods, unto whose
likeness the Images are made, and in whose names they are Consecrate. The like
^ereof we may find in S. Augustine, Augustine. in Psalm 113.
in Athanasius, in Sozomenus, and in others: And this excuse was then, as now,
thought sufficient, Athanasi. contra Gentes.


But S. Augustine says, Very children know, that these Images have eyes, and
s^e not: mouths, and speak not. Wherefore then doothe the holy Ghost so
often teach us, Sozomen. li. 7. ca. 15. de Sophis^^ Olympio.
and admonish us the same thing in the Scriptures, as if we knew it not? He
answeareth, Quia species membrorum in eminenti collocata suggestu, cum
honorari, atque adorari coeperit a multitudine, parit in vnoquoque
sordidissimum erroris affectum: vt, quoniam in illo figmento non inuenit
vitalem motum, credat numen occul^um: Augustine. in Psalm. 113.
et effigiem viuenti Corpori similem, seductus forma, and commotus authoritate,
quasi saplentium i^sti^utor^m, obsequentium turbarum, sine viuo aliquo
habita^ote esse non putet. For that, the very shape, and proportion of a man
set alofte, after it once begins to be Adoured, and honored of the
multitude, it breeds in every man that most vile affection of error, that
although he find there no natural moouinge, or token of life, yet he thinks
some God, or godly thing is within it: And so being deceived, partly by the
form, that he sees* and partly by the Author^tie, and credit of the
Authors, and makers of it, whom they take to be wise, and partly also by the
example, and devotion of the people, whom they see obedient to the same, he
thinks, that the Image, being so like to a living body, cannot be without
some living thing underneath it. Again he says, Cum in his ^edibus
lo^an^ur, honorabili sublimitate, Augustinus (...)epist. 49.
vt a precantibus, atque immolantibus attendantur, ipsa similitudine animatorum
membrorum, atque sensuum, quamuis sensu, and anima careant, afficiunt infirmos
animos, vt viuere, atque spirare videantur. After that Images be once set up in
these places in honorable highthe, that they, that pray, or sacrifice, may
look upon them, although they have neither sense, not soul, yet they so
strike, and amase the weak minds of the people, even with the very proportion
of living members, and senses, that they seem to have life, and to draw
breathe. Augustinus in Psalm. 13.
Again he says, Quis adorat, vel orat intuens Simulachru^, qui non sic
afficitur, vt ab eo se exaudiri putet, ac ab eo sibi praestari, quod desiderat,
speret? Who ever Adou^reth* or makes his prayer beholdinge an Image, but he is
so moved in his mind, that he thinks, the Image hea^eth him, and hoapeth,
it will perform his prayer?

Al these things the Heathens knew, and therefore were well shielded with M.
Hardinges excuse, La^ria, Do^lia.
and yet notwithstanding were Idolaters: and, as the prophet Hieremie
reports, Hieremi. 2^
They said to a Block, Pater meus es tu: Thou art my Father: and to a Stone,
Tu me genuisti, Thou art my Maker, thou haste begotten me. And therefore were
they the children of Gods anger: for that they turned the truth of God into
a Lie, and honored the Creature above the Creatoure, Rom^n. 1.
which is God blissed for ever.

And, the more to encourrage the simple in these errors, they have divised
many fained Miracles. The dead Images have been forced to sweat, to weep, to
laughe, and to shifte them selves from place, to place. And as emonge the
Painimes, and infidels, the Image of Iuppiter was hable to say alowde, Let al
Christians be bannisshed the Country: Eusebius li 8. De Theote^no.
And as the Image of Juno, being demanded, whether she would go to Rome, or
no, was hable to give a courteous beck, and gently to say, Volo, I am
content: Even so emonge Christians, Images have been hable to speak, Council.
Nicen. 2. Actio. 5. Nycolaus Lyra ^n 14. ca. Daniel.
what so ever their keeper, or Sextine listed. The Image of Our Lady was hable
to attend her own Candel: and other Images hable to heal al diseases.
Briefly, Nicolaus Lyra says, In Ecclesia Dei populus saep^ decipitur a
Sacerdotibus fictis Miraculis Iucri causa: In the Church of God the Priests
oftentimes deceive the people with fained Miracles for lukers sake. Thus the
world was borne in hand, that Images were not only bare Images, but had also
some secret divine power hidden within them, and therefore were worthy to be
honored.

Here is imagined a great difference in Adoration between Latria, and Doulia.
Latria is the honor, that belongs only unto God (as M. Hardinge says) in
recognisinge of the supreme Dominion. But of Doulia, which is the other part,
and may be Englished a Service, and, as they say, is dew unto a Creature, he
thought it best, to say nothing. Thus, by M. Hardinges distinction, we must
Honor God, and Serve Images. And therefore this reverence, so given, may not
be called Idololatria, but Idolodulia: That is to say, Not the Honouringe, but
only the seruinge, or obeieinge of Images. N^col. Lyra in Hester. 3. ca.
In like sort Lyra says, One knee we may boow to any noble personage: but
upon both we may kneel only unto God. And by such a simple distinction it
is thought, the whole matter is well salued. But, what if the simple people
understand no Greek, and cannot so learnedly discern Latria, from Doulia,
but take the one Adoration, for the other? Uerily, as it now fares in the
Church of Rome, they use them both universally without difference.

Therefore this distinction, thus applied, seems much like to that, the
Physicians wife sometime said, Peper is cold in woorkinge, and hoate in
operation. For M. Hardinges distinction stands not in difference of matter,
but only in words. Cicero says, Cicero De Finib. 4.
Bonum esse negas: Praepositum dicis. An minuis hoc pacto auaritiam? Thou will
not have worldly wealth called Bonum, but only Praepositum. But do thou
hereby any thing abate avarice? Even so may we say to M. Hardinge: ye will
not have your Adoration of Images called Latria, but only Doulia. But Sir, do
you by this distinction, any thing abate Idolatry?

Certainly, Constantius the Bishop of Constantia, in the Second Nicene
Council says, In libro Caroli Magni.
Ego Imaginibus cultum honoris exhibebo eunde^, qui debetur Viuificae
Trini^ati: Et, si quis nolit idem facere, eum anathema^izo, vt Marcione^, and
Manichaeum. I for my part y^lde unto Images the same Adoration of honor,
that is dew to the Holy Trinity: And, if any man refuse to do the same, I
accurse him, as I do the Heretics Marcion, and Manichee. And in the same
Council it is determined thus, Non sunt D^ae Adorationes, sed vna Adora^io,
Council. Nicen. 2. Actio. 4.
Imaginis, and Primi exemplaris, cuius est Imago. There are not two sorts of
Adoration ( the one called Latria, the other Doul^a, as M. Hardinge divides
them) but one only Adoration, both of the Image, and also of the Samplar,
whereof the Image is.

Likewise Thomas Aquine, after long debatinge of the matter, thus at last
rules over the case: Thomas in. 3. Senten. did. 2^
The Image, and the thing thereby represented, must be woorshipped both with
one kind of Adoration: And, for example ^e says, The Cross, or Image of
Christ must be honored with L^tria, (that is* with godly honor) because
Christ him self is so honored: And the Image of our Lady must be honored
with Doulia, because that honor, (as he says) is Dew unto our Lady. This
determination of Thomas is reproved by Holcot: And his reason is this: Holcot
in libru^ Sapient. lect. 158.
Latria, or Godly honor, is dew only unto God: But the Image of God is not
God: Therefore Latria, or Godly honor is not dew unto an Image. Otherwise
(says he) the Creatoure, and the Creature should both be Adoured with one
honor. And notwithstanding Henricus de Gandauo, Petrus de Aquisa, Johannes
de Guiuerra, Durandus, and other School Doctors agree with Holcot, and their
judgment seem very agreeable unto Reason, Yet he that wrote Fortalitium
Fidel, says, Author For^ali^ij: Licet ho^ rationabiliter dictum videatur,
tamen Communis opinio tenet oppositum. lacobus Payu^^ li. 9. Iacobus Na^cla^tus
in epist. ad Roman. cap. 1.
The Common opinion, and practice of the Church holds the contrary. And one
Iacobus Payua, a great stickler of that side, doubt^th not to write thus: Non
tamen inficiamur, hac nos Latriae Adoratione Christi praecla^issimam Crucem
colere, and venerari: Yet we deny not, but we do woorship, and Adoure the
most noble Cross of Christ, even with this Godly honor, that we call
Latria. And, where as M. Hardinge refers the whole Adoration unto the thing
represented by the Image* One Iacobus Nanclantus, the Bishop of Cl^gium in
Italy tells him, that the Image, and the thing represented by the Image,
must both be worshipped with one kind of Adoration. His words be these,
Ergo non solum fa^endum est, Fideles in Ecclesia Adorare coram Imagine, vt
nonnulli ad cau^elam forte loquuntur, sed and Adorare Imaginem, sine quo
volueris scrupulo, quin and eo illam venerari cultu, quo and prototypon eius.
Propter quod, si illud habet A do^ari Lat^ia, and illa habet Adorari La^^ia:
Therefore we must confess, yt the faith^ul people in the Church does not
only worship before the Image, as some men use to speak for more assurance,
but that they woorship the Image it self, and that without any manner scruple
of conscience, what so ever. Yea, and further they woorship the Image with the
same honor, wherewith they woorship the thing represented. As if the thing
represented by the Image he woorshipped with godly honor, then must the Image
it self likewise be woorshipped with godly honor. If M. Hardinge will say,
these errors be old, and long sithence controlled by his Church of Rome, it
may please him to understand, yt Nanclantus was printed in Uenece, Anno. 1557.
and that Payua was printed in ^oleine, Anno. 1564. both well allowed without
controlment.

The case standinge thus, what then avails M. Hardinges distinction of Latria
and Doulia? Augustine. De Verbis Domi. Secundum Ma^thae. Sermo. 6.
I fear me, we may say of him, and his fellows, as S. Augustine sometime
said of the Heathens: Nemo mihi dica^, Non est Numen: non est Deus. V^inam
ipsi sic norint, quomodo nouimus nos. Sed quid habeant, pro qua re habeant,
quid ibi faciant, Ara testatur. Let noman say unto me, It is no Divine Power:
it is no God. I would to God, they so knewit, as we know it. But what they
have, and in what sort they have it, and what they do about it, the Altar
bears witness.

Marcellina the Heretic is much reproved by S. Augustine, August. ad
Quoduul^deum. Origin. contr^ Celsum li. 4. Polyd Vergil. De Inuentorib. rer.
lib. 6. ca. 13.
for that, emonge other Images, she offered up incense to the Image of Christ.
And Origin says, Fieri non potest, vt quis and Deum, and Simulachrum colat. It
is not possible, that any man may woorship God, and an Image both together.
And Polydorus Uerg^lius a man of late years, uttering the great abuse, that
he saw in the Church in his time, writes thus: Nunc de Simulach^orum cul^u
agamus: quem non modo nostrae Religionis expertes, sed, test Hieronymo, omnes
fere Veteres Sancti Patres damnabant, ob metu^ Idololatriae. Now let us
entreat of the woorshippinge of Images: which not only the Heathens, that
were void of our Religion, but also, as S. Hierome says, all the Old Godly
Fathers condemned, for fear of Idolatry.

And of the abuse, and disorder of the Church herein in his time, he writes
thus: Eo insaniae deuentum est, vt haec pars Pie^atis parum differat ab
Impietate. The world is come to such oultrage, ^bidem.
and mere madness herein, that this part of Holiness differs now very
little from open Wickedness. To this pass the Church of God was brought by M.
Hardinges distinction, of Latria, and Doulia.

The best remedy in this behalf, and most agreeable with Gods Word, is,
utterly to abolishe the cause of the il. So the godly King Ezechias took
down, and brake in pieces the Brazen Serpente, Notwithstanding Moses him
self, by Gods special Commandment had erected it: notwithstanding it were
an express Figure of Christ hanginge upon the Cross: notwithstanding it had
continued so many years: notwithstanding God by it had wrought so many
Miracles. So the godly Bishop Epiphanius rent in sunder the Image of Christ
Painted in a Clothe, ^piphanius ad Iohannem epis. Hierosolymitan. Petrus
Crinitus li. 9. ca. 9.
and said, It was against Gods Commandment, a thing Superstitious, and
unmeet for the Church, and people of God: notwithstanding it were the Image
of Christ. So the godly Emperor Theodosius made his Proclamation over al his
Dominions in this sort, Signum Seruatoris nostri, quocunque loco reperitur,
tolli iubemus. We streitely command, that the Image of our Saueoure be taken
down, in what place so ever it shall be found: notwithstanding it were the
Image of our Saueour. So it is Decreed in the late Council of Men's, that, when
Images happen to be abused by the people, they be either notably altered, or
utterly abolished. Council. Mog^n^inen. De Imag.
Neither does God throughout al his holy Scriptures anywhere condemn Image
breakers: but expressly, and euerywhere he condemns Image woorshippers, and
Imagemakers. God says, They are snares to catch the ignorant: He knows the
inclination of the heart of man. Sapientiae. 14.
And therefore he says, Deuteron. 27.
Accursed be he, that leads the blind out of his way: And, Leuiti. 19.
accursed be he, that lays a stumblinge block to overthrow the blind.

FINIS.
THE XV. ARTICLE, OF READINGE THE SCRIPTVRES.
The B. of Sarisburie.
Or that the Lay People was then forbidden to read the Word of God in
their own tongue.

M. Hardinge. The.1. Division.
That the lay people was thea forbidden to read the Word of God in their
own tongue, I find it not. (204) The.204. Untruth. For M. Hardinge
knovvethe, The people was commanded, to read the Scrip^^res etc.
Neither do I find* that the lay people was then, or at any other time
commanded to read the word of God in their own tongue, being vulgar, and
barbarous. By vulgar, and barbarous tongues, I understand, as before, al
other, beside the three learned, and principal tongues, Hebrew, Greek, and
Latin. Which, as they were once native, and vulgar to those three peoples,
so now to none be they native, and vulgar, but common to be obteigned by
learning, for meditation of the Scriptures, and other knowledge.

The B. of Sarisburie.
M. Hardinge fully discharges this whole matter in one word. I find it not,
says he, that the Lay People was then forbidden to read the Word of God
in their own tongue. How be it, some others of his side thought sometimes,
they had surely found it: and were hable to allege these words, Nolite
sanctum dare Canibus, Give not holy things to Dogs: And thereof necessarily
to conclude, that the Lay People, whom in respect of them selves they called
Dogs, might not once touch the holy Scriptures. But M. Hardinge says
plainly, He finds it not. This short answer, touching the demand, is
sufficient: If he knew, what were sufficient. All the rest is made up only in
words, as shall appear.

He adds further, Neither do I find, that the Lay People was then, or at
any other tim^, commanded to read the word of God in their own tongue,
being vulgar, and Barbarous.

First, this stopple, of Commaundinge, is wholly impertment unto the question.
Secondly, al other tongues, three only excepted, are, without just cause,
Condemned for Barbarous. Thirdly, this exception, of the peoples readinge in
their Uulgare tongue, is only a bare shifte, and a quarrel without sauoure.
For in what tongue can the Uulgare people read, and understand any thing,
sauinge only in their own Common, Cornelius Tac^tus in Tiberi^.
and Uulgare tongue? But as the Emperor Tiberius used sometimes to send
certain of his Nobles into his out Provinces, and far Countries, to rule
there, as Uiceroies, and Lieutenantes under him, and yet, that
notwithstanding, whoulde not suffer them to go thither, or in any wise to
depart from Rome: even in like sort M. Hardinge, notwithstanding he would
seem to license the Lay People to read Gods Word, Yet he limiteth them
either to the Greek, or to the Latin, or to the Hebrewe tongue, wherein he is
well assured, they cannot read it.

But, that the people was in Old times willed, to read the Scriptures, and
that in such tongues, as they were hable to understand, it is evident, and
appears many ways. And of infinite testimonies, and good proufes, only to
touch a few, Deuteron. 6.
God says thus unto his people: Harken O Israel: Let the Words, that I
speak to thee this day, reast in thy ha^te: thou shall show them unto thy
Children: thou shall think of them sittinge in thy house, and walkinge in thy
journey: and when thou go to reast, and when thou riseste: thou shall bind
them, as a mark, unto thy hand: thou shall have them as a token before thine
eyes: thou shall write them on the posts of thy doors, and at the entry of
thy gates.

As it is noted by a Writer of late years, Co^nel. Agrippa de Vani^ate
Scientiarum.
it was decreed in the First Council of Nice, that no Christian man should be
without the Bilble in his house. S. Augustine says unto the people, Nec solum
sufficiat, quod in Ecclesia Diuinas Lectiones auditis: Sed etiam in domibus
vestris, Augustine. in Capite Ieiunij.
aut ipsi legite, aut alios legentes requirite. Think it not sufficient, that
ye hear the Scriptures in the Church: but also in your houses at home,
either read your selves* or geate some other to read unto you. S.
Chrysostom says unto his people, Chrysostom. in Johan. Chrysostom. in Epist.
ad Coloss. homi. 9.
Admoneo, and rogo, vt libros comparetis: I warn you, and beseech you, to
geate books. Again he says, Audite Saeculares omnes: Comparate vobis Biblia*
animae Pharmaca. Si nihil aliud vultis, vel Nouum Testamentum acquirite:
Apostolum, Euangelia, Acta, continuos, and sedulos Doctores. Hear me, ye men
of the World: geate ye the Bible, that most wholesome remedy for the soul: If
ye will nothing else, yet at the least geate the New Testament, S. Paul's
Epistles, and the Acts, that may be your continual, Origin. in Esai. homi. 2.
and earnest Teachers. Origin says, Vtinam omnes faceremus illud, quod
Scriptum est, Scru^amini Scripturas: I would to God, we would al do, as it
is written, Search the Scriptures. S. Hierome speakinge of the Company of
women, that was at Bethleem with Paula, Hieronym. in Epitaphio Pau^^.
says thus, Non licebat cuiquam Sororum, ignorare Psalmos, and non de
Scripturis Sanctis quotidie aliquid discere. It was not lawful for any one of
all the Sisters, to be ignorant of the Psalms: nor to pass over any day,
without learning some part of the Scriptures. In these Examples,
notwithstanding some ^auil perhaps might be made to the contrary, yet very
reason will lead M. Hardinge to think, that these Fathers meante, the people
should read the Scriptures in their own known, Basilius de Spiritu Sancto.
c. 1.
and Uulgare tongues. S. Basile says, Quantum far potest humana natura,
possumus esse Similes Deo: Similitudo autem illa sine cognitione nulla est:
Cognitio autem constat ex Doctrina: Initium autem Doctrinae, Sermo est:
Sermonis autem parts, Syllabae, and Voces. We may become like unto God, as
far forth, as the weak nature of man can bear. But this likeness cannot be
without knowledge: Neither this knowledge without Doctrine. And the beginning
of Doctrine is speech: and the parts of speech be Words, and Syllables.
The Resolution hereof is this: The people without understanding the
particulare Words, and Syllables, cannot know the Speech: not knowinge the
Speech, they cannot attain this Doctrine: and without this Doctrine they
cannot be like unto God.

M. Hardinge. The.2. Division.
They that treat of this Article, Three sundry opinions concerning the
Scriptures to be had in a vulgar tongue.
concerning the having of the Scriptures in a Vulgar tongue This is the
practice of the Church of Rome.
The first opinion is holden of few, and Commonly mysliked. This was the
judgment of Christ, the Apostles, and all the Old Fathers.
The third is maintained by all the sects of our time, the Swenkfeldians
excepted, who would the Scriptures to be in no regard. The second is allowed
best of those that seem to be of most wisdom, and godliness, and to have most
care for the health of the Church, M Hardinge is ^one of these.
who have not severed them selves from the Faith which has continewed from
the beginning. Here that I say nothing of the first opinion* as they of the
third reprove the moderation of the second, so they of the second cannot
allow the generality of the third.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Here are laid out three sundry opinions: The First utterly barreth al, and
every of the Lay people, from every parcel of the Scriptures. The Third
gives al menns leave to read al parts thereof, without exception. Bytweene
these two extremes, the Second opinion is a mean.

The first hereof, says M. Hardinge, is commonly misliked. Yet nevertheless it
^ppeareth by him in the fourteenthe Division of this Article, it is the very
Practice, and opinion of the Church of Rome: which Church, as he says, has
already condemned all the New Translations, and not allowed the Old, neither
in the Gotthian tongue translated by Ulphilas, nor in the Sclauon tongue
translated by S. Hierome: nor has divised any other Translation of her own.
Hereby it is plain, that the Opinion, and Practice of the Church of Rome, is
commonly mysliked, and holden of few.

The Third Opinion, that al men indifferently may read the Scriptures
without restrainte, as M. Hardinge says, is holden only by certain Sects,
and is too general. Notwithstanding this generality seemed good to Christ,
his Apostles, and to all the Old Doctors of the Church, as it shall appear.
Wherefore it follows, that Christ, his Apostles, and all the Old Doctors, by
M. Hardinges judgment, were Sectaries, and Heretics.

The Second Opinion is a mean bytweene both, and is holden by M. Hardinge,
and by certain others, that have not at any time altered thire Faith:
Notwithstanding men say, M. Hardinge has altered more then once, and
therefore may hardly be allowed, to pass in this number. Yet is this opinion
of al others accoumpted the best. How be it, where as al men are
indifferently, and equally enheritours to Gods Word: to bind the same
only unto a ^ewe, and that with such restrainte of times, and places, it must
needs be thought some great partiality. Roman. 1^.
S. Paul says, Quaecunque scripta sunt, ad nostram Doctrinam scripta sunt: vt
per patientiam, and consolationem Scripturarum spem habeam^s. Al, that is
written in the Scriptures, is written for our instruction: that by patience,
and conforte of the Scriptures we may have hope. Basilius in Psalm. 1.
Augustine. Epist. 3. ad Volusian^^
S. Basile says, The Scripture of God is like an Apotheca^es shop, full of
Medicines of sundry sorts, that every man may there choose a convenient
remedy for his disease. S. Augustine says, Deus in Scripturis, quasi amicus
familiaris, sine fuco loquitur ad Cor doctorum, and indoctorum. Almighty God in
the Scriptures speaks, as a familiar friend without dissimulation, unto the
hearts, both of the learned, and also of the unlearned. Wherefore the Word of
God being so Uniuersal, meet for all diseases, for all wits, and for all
capacities: for M. Hardinge to improper the same only unto a few, it is both
far greatter dishonor unto God, and also far greater injury unto Gods
faithful people, then, if he would in like manner improper, and enclose the
Son beams, to comfort the rich, and not the poor: to shine upon some, and
not upon al. This mean way, is no way: It is weighed out, not by the
Scriptures, or holy Fathers, but only by policy, and wordly reason.

M. Hardinge. The.3. Division.
That the scriptures be not to be set forth in the Vulgar tongue to be read
of al sorts of people, every part of them, Five Con^iderations ^hy the
scriptures are not to be set forth for all sorts of people to read them
without limitation.
without any limitation of time, place, and persons, they seem to be moved
with these considerations. First, that it is not necessary: Next, that it is
not convenient: Thirdly, that it is not profitable: Fourthly, that it is
dangerous, and hurtful: And lastly, although it were accorded, the common
people to have liberty, to read the Bible in their own tongue, yet that the
translations of late years made by those, that have divided them selves from
the Catholic Church* be not to be allowed, as worthily suspected, not to be
sownde, and assured.

The B. of Sarisburie.
These deep considerations were never divised, neither by Moses, nor by
Christ, nor by the Apostles, nor by any the Ancient Fathers: but are brought
in only now at last by them, that of longue time have deceived the world by
Ignorance, and yet labor by the same to deceive it still. Christ says, Qui
male agi^, odit lucem: He that does ill, Johan. 3.
fleieth the trial of the light. And M. Hardinges own Amphilochius says,
Amphilochius in vita Vincentij.
Natural^s prouidentia est male errantium, a^ferre de medio Testimonia
Veritatis. Yt is the natural provision of them, that be wilfully deceived, to
conueigh out of sight al proufes, and Testimonies of the Truth. So the
Philistines, the better to keep the Jews thral, and in subjection, 1. Regum.
13.
utterly bereued them of al manner weapon, and artilarie, and leaft them naked:
and, no doubts, bare them then in hand, as M. Hardinge does now the people
of God, that it was neither necessary, nor convenient, nor pro^^table for them,
Chrysostom. in Matthae. homi. 3.
to have armoure. Uerily Chrysostom says, It is more necessary, more
convenient, and more profitable for the Lay People to read Gods Word,
then for Monks, or Priests, or any others. Thus he writes, Hoc est, quod
omnia quast vna quadam peste corrumpit, quod Lectionem Diuinarum Scripturarum
ad solos pu^atis Monachos pertinere: cum multo vobis magis, quam illis, sit
necessaria. Itaque multo est grauius, atque deterius, rem superfluam esse
putare Legem Dei, quam illam omnino non legere. Haec enim verba sunt, quae de
Diabolica prorsus meditatione promuntur: This is it, that, as it were with a
pestilence, infecteth al things, that ye think, The readinge of the
Scriptures pertains only unto Monks: where as it is much more necessary
for you, then for them. It is more wickedness, to think, Gods Law is
superfluous, then if ye should never read it. For these be the words, that
no doubts come from the study of the Devil.

Thus much therefore we learn here by Chrysostom, that these M. Hardinges
profounde considerations comme from the study, De Diabolica prorsus
meditatione promuntur.
and closet of the Devil.

M. Hardinge. The.4. Division.
First, that the Common people of al sorts, and degrees, ought of necessity
to read all the holy Scriptures in their own tongue, they say, they could
never find it hitherto in the same Scriptures. Ireneus writes, Libro. ^^. ad
^ersus haereses. c. ^.
that the Apostles preached to the Aliantes, and ^arbarous people the Faith of
Christ, even to those, that were aliantes, and Barbarous in language, and
says, that having heard the Gospel preached, they believed in Christ: and
kepinge the order of Tradition, which the Apostles delivered unto them, had
their salvation, and Faith written in their heart without printe, pen, or
ink, and utterly without letters. And further he shows, that if the Apostles
had left to us no Scriptures at al, yet we should be saved by the tradition,
which they left to them, whom they committed their Churches unto, as many
nations of aliantes be saved by the same.

Hilarious likewise declaringe, Prologo i^ in expla^atione^ Psalm.
that the mystery of Gods will, and thexpectatio^ of the blessed Kingdom, is
most and ^hiefly preached in the three tongues, in which Pilate wrote on the
Cross, our Lord Jesus Christ to be king of the Jews: confesses
notwithstanding, that many Barbarous nations have atteined, and gotten the
true knowledge of God by the preachinge of the Apostles, and the Faith of the
Churches remaininge amongst them to that day. Whereby he does us to
understand, that the vnlear^^d Barbarous people had their Faith without
letters, or writing, whereof they had no skill, by tradition, and preachinge,
as well as the other nations, who were helped by the benefit of the learned
tongues, Hebrewe, Greek, and Latin.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Touching this first consideration, M. Hardinge imagines shadows of him
self, and fights stowtely against the same. Therefore he may soon attain
the Uictorie. For we say not, that the common people of al sorts, and
degrees, ought of necessity to read all the holy Scriptures. This is only M.
Hardinges fantasy: We say it not. We know, some are blind, and many
unlearned, and cannot read. But thus we say, That in the Primitive Church,
who so ever would, and could read, might lawfully read without controlmente.
Therefore S. Augustine says, as it is before alleged, Augustine in capite (...).
Aut ipsi legite, aut alios legentes requirite. Either read your selves, or
geate some other, to read unto you.

I grant, at the first preachinge, and publishinge of the Gospel, certain
Barbarous Nations, that received the Faith of Christ, had neither Books, nor
Letters. Yet were they not therefore ignorant, or leafte at large, to believe,
they knew not what. Tradition.
They had then certain officers in the Church, which were called
Catechistae: whose duty was, continually, and at al times, to teach the
Principles of the Faith, not by Book, Actorum ca 19.
but by Mouth. Of these mention is made in the Acts of the Apostles, in the
Council of Nice, and else where. Council. Nicem. 1.
This office bare Origin that Ancient learned Father. Can. 14.
This doctrine Dionysius calls (...), Oracles, or Instructions given from
God: And says, Origin. Catechi^ta.
They paste from one, to an other, not by Writing, but by Mouth, (...), from
mind, to mind. Neither did these Traditions contain any secret, or privy
Instructions, Eusebius. li. 6. ca. 20.
or Inventions of Men, as it is imagined by some, but the very self same
Doctrine, Dionysius in Ecclesi. Hierarch.
that was contained written in the Scriptures of God. And in this sort the
Gospel it self, and the whole Religion of Christ was called a Tradition.
Tertullian De Praescription. aduersus Haereticos.
So Tertullian calls the Articles of the Faith, An Old Tradition. So the
Faith of the Holy Trinity in the Council of Constantinople is called a
Tradition: And the Faith of two sundry Natures in Christ in the same
Council is called, Apostolorum viua Traditio: The Lively Tradition of the
Apostles. So it is written in Socrates, Council. Constantinop. 6. Acti. 4.
Credimus in vnum Deum Patrem, secundum Euangelicam, and Apostolicam
Traditione^. We believe in one God the Father, according to the Tradition of
the Gospel, Eadem Action.
and of the Apostles. So S. Basile calls it, a Tradition, To believe in the
Father, the Son, Socrates lib. 2. cap. 10.
and the Holy Ghost. Therefore S. Paul says, Tene^e Traditiones, quas
accepistis, sieve per Sermonem, sieve per Epistolam. Keep the Traditions, that
ye have received, Basilius de Spiritu Sancto.
either by Mouth, or else by Letter. By these words the Doctrine of the
Apostles is called a Tradition. And for this cause S. Cyprian says, Vnde est
ista Traditio? 2. Thessalon. 2.
An de Dominica, and Euangelica Veritate descendens: an de Apostolorum
Ma^datis, Cyprianus ad Pompeium.
atque Literis veniens? From whence is this Tradition? whether comes it from
our Lord, and from his Gospel: or else from the Epistles, and Commandments
of the Apostles?

Thus were the Barbarous Nations instructed by Tradition, and by Mouth, and
were made perfect in every point, and parcel of the Faith, Irenaeus li. 3.
c^. 4. Scriptam habentes Salutem per Spiritum in Cordibus suis.
and, as Irenaeus says, Had their Salvation by the Holy Ghost written in
their Hearts: and were as much bounden unto the same, as unto any writings,
and letters of the Apostles. Of such lively, and clear Doctrine S. Paul
says, Christ was set out, and Crucified before the ^ies of the Galathians.
And thereof he says to the Philippiens, My prayer is, that your Charity may
yet more, and more abound in all knowledge, and in all understanding. And thus,
notwithstanding they were Barbarous, Galatas. 3.
yet were they hable to render an accoumpte of all the Religion, and Faith in
Christ. Philippen. 1.
For thus Irenaeus writes of them. Si quis illis annuntiaret ea, quae ab istis
Haereticis inuenta sunt, 1. Petri. 3.
statim clauderent aures: If any man would show these Barbarous Nations,
Irenaeus li. 3. c. 4
what things these He^etiques have invented, they would stop their ears,
and not abide it. Likewise if a man would show them of the Profanation of
Christ's Holy Mysteries, of Transubstantiation, of Real, and Fleashely
Presence, and of other like horrible disorders, that now are holden, and
defended in the Church of Rome, as Irenaeus says, Irenaeus in eod^ capite.
Fugerent longo longius, ne audire quidem sustinentes blasphemum colloquium.
They would flee away, as far as they were hable, and would not abide the
hearing of such blasphemous talk. Thus were these Nations sufficiently
instructed, notwithstanding they were Barbarous, and wanted Books.

But they of M. Hardinges side, neither will teach the people, as their duty
is, nor suffer them to read the Holy Scriptures, and to teach them selves.
Christ may justly say to them, Mathae. 2^.
as he did sometimes unto others the like, Woe be unto you, ye Scribes, and
Phariseis: Ye shut up the Kingedome of Heaven before men: and neither do ye
enter your selves, nor suffer others, that would enter. Of such Irenaeus
speaks in the next Chapter folowinge: Irenaeus li. 3. cap. 5.
Hoc non est sanantium, nec viuificantium, sed magis grauantium, and augentium
ignorantiam. Et multo verior hic Lex inuenitur, Maledictum dicens omnem, qui in
errorem mittit Coecum in via. This is not the part of them, that would heal,
or g^ue life: but rather of them, that augment the burden, and increase
ignorance. And herein is the Law well verified, Deuteron. 27.
Accursed is he, that leads the blind out of his way.

M. Hardinge. The.5. Division.
That it is not convenient nor seemly, al sorts of persons without exception
to be admitted to the readinge of the Holy Scriptures, I need to say nothing:
Every reasonable man may easily understand the causes by him self. This is
certain, diverse Chapters and stories of the Old Testament, contain such
matter, The Word of God offers occasion of il thoughts.
as occasion of evil thoughts is like to be given, if Women, Maidens, and
Young men be permitted to read them. Lib. 1. The^ ologiae.
Gregory Nazianzene, whom the Greeks called the divine, says, moved with
great considerations, that it is not the part of al persons to reason of God,
and of godly things, Nazianzene speaks of Contention, and Rea^oninge, and
not of Readinge.
neither behooueful the same be done in all times and place, nor that al things
touching God be meddled withal. Which advertisement takes no place, where al
be admitted to the curiouse readinge of the Scriptures in their own vulgar
Tongue.

The B. of Sarisburie.
M. Hardinge says, It is not convenient, nor seemly, that all the people
should read the Holy Scriptures: As if he would say in plainer wise, It is
not meet nor seemly, that God should speak unto every of the poor simple
people without exception. How be it, God him self says not so, but rather
the contrary. S. Augustine says, as it is alleged before, Augustinus ad
Volusianum Epis. 3. Loquitur ad cor and doctoru^, and indoctorum.
God speaks as a familiar friend unto the heart both of the learned, and
also of the unlearned. For he has no acceptance, or choice of persons. If
it be not seemly for the people of God to read, and to know Gods Holy Will,
for whom then is it seemly? The danger of Fantasies, and il thoughts, that
may thereby be moved, is but a fantasy. The Prophet David says, Eloquia
Domini eloquia casta: The Words of God be holy and Chaste Words. Again he
says, Whereby shall a young man amend his life? Actor 10.
He answeareth not, Psalm 11.
by fleeinge, but, by keepinge the holy Words. Psalm. 118.


And may we think, that M. Hardinge means any good Faith, that to the
intent, as he says, to pull young men from evil thoughts, thus withdraws
them from the readinge of Gods Word, which euerywhere reprooueth Sin:
and nevertheless gives them leave to read Ouide, Terence, Propertius, and
such others, which, for the most part, are nothing else but examples, and
Schools of Sin? Uerily, if Gods holy Word be a provocation of il
thoughts, which blasphemous Words, I marvel M. Hardinge can utter without
horror, the world thinks, that many Unmaried Priests in the Church of
Rome, are as much inclined to the same, as any Woman, Maiden, or Young man.
For it is not a Gown, or a Cappe, that mortifieth the affections of the mind.

Nazianzene speaks not of readinge the Scriptures, Nazianzenus Theologiae li.
1. 2. T^moth 2. Cyprian.
but of co^tentious disputinge, and reasoninge of God, or godly things:
which, as S. Paul says, oftentimes woorketh the subversion of the hearers.
And in this sense S. Cyprian seems to say, De Deo etiam vera dicere,
periculosum est: Of God it is d^ungerous to speak, yea although ye speak the
truth. Hereof M. Hardinge makes up a very s^le^der reason, It is not seemly
for every man to contend, and dispute of God: Ergo, it is not seemly for the
Lay People to read the Scriptures. I grant, the Rabines did not amiss, to
restrain the people from readinge certain Chapters of the Old Testament,
until they were grown in years, and judgment. For the Scriptures of God are
not al of one sort. Some parts be easy: Some parts be hard: Some meet for
beginners: some meet for them, that know more: But al meet, and made for the
people of God. Yet were it great folly, and want of discretion, to begin
first with the hardest. In Prooemio pandect.
So Justinian the Emperor appoints an order for the readinge of the what
Books, and Titles he would have read the First year, what the Second, and
so forth. For otherwise, who so would wade without order, should lose his
time.

But where as M. Harding says, It is not seemly, nor convenient, the
Scriptures should be read of al persons without exception, it had benne good
skill, and some credit unto his cause, if he could have told us plainly, out
of all the whole people, what persons he thinks meet, to be excepted. If he
say, Old Men, 2. Timoth. ^.
that were much unseemly. If he say, Children, S. Paul says, Timothee was
brought up from his Childhoode, in the Scriptures: and never thought it
inconvenient. If he say, The Unlearned, Chrysostom answeareth, Nihil opus est
Syllogismis. Rustici, aniculaeque intelligunt. To understand Gods Word,
we need no Syllogismes, or knowledge of Logique: Husband men, and Old
women do understand it. Cyril. contra Julian. lib 6.
If he say, Women, This same was it, that Iulianus the wicked Emperor
charged the Christians withal, for that their women were so skilful in the
Scriptures. But Nazianzenus answeareth for his sister Gorgonia, Nazianzen. in
Funebri Oratione de Gorgonia.
that she was skilful both in the Old Testamente, and also in the New. If he
say, Maidens, S. Hierome answeareth, Hieronym. in Epitaphio Pa^^lae
That all the Maidens about Lady Paula, were forced daily to learn the
Scriptures. If he say, Young Men, or Boys, Cyrillus answeareth, In Sacris
Literis educati, fiunt postea religiosissimi, qua^uis no^ aeque eloque^tes.
Being brought up in the Scriptures, afterward they become most godly* men, al
be it perhaps not so eloquente. If he say, the Poor, S. Paul answeareth, No^
multi genere nobiles, At Corinthe emonge them, Cyrillus contra Iulianum. lib. 7.
that first received the Gospel, 1. Corint. 1.
There were not many of great birth, or much wealth. If he say, Heretics,
S. Augustine being inclined to the Heresy of the Maniches, by readinge the
Scriptures was converted. Confessionu^. li. 8. cap. 12.
If he say, Heathens, S. Luke will say, that Queen Candaces Chamberlain,
being an Heathen, read the Scriptures without controlment.

Now if neither Ol^e men, Actorum. 8.
nor Children, nor the Learned, nor the Unlearned, nor Women, nor Maidens, nor
young men, nor Boys, nor the Poor, nor the Rich, nor Heretics, nor
Heathens be excepted from the readinge of Gods Word, what other sort of
men then is there, that M. Hardinge would have excepted? If it be conueniente
for every of these to read the Scriptures, for whom then is it not
conueniente?

M. Hardinge. The.6. Division.
And the Scripture it self (say they) shows plainly, that of conuenience
the Scriptures ought not be made common to al persons. For Christ affirms
the same with his own words, where he says to his Apostles. (...)8.
Unto you it is given to know the Secrets of the kingedome of God: but to
These others were the Scribes and Phariseis, and others of that generation.
others in Parables, that when they see, they should not see: and when they
hear, they should not understand. (205) They to whom it is given to know
these secrets, be none other then the Apostles, and their Successors, or
Disciples. They to whom this is not given, but must learn Parables, be they,
for whom it were better to be ignorant of the Mysteries, then to know them,
least they abuse them, The 305. Untruth. For Christ says, These Mysteries be
hidden from the wise, and reveled to the little ones. Matthae. 11.
and be the more greeuousely condemned, if they set little by them, which
we see commonly done among the common people.

The B. of Sarisburie.
It were much better for M. Hardinge not to know the Word of God, then thus
wilfully to abuse it. They, unto whom Christ would not open the Secrets of
the Kingdom of Heaven, were not the Common sort of the Lay People, as M.
Hardinge supposes, but the Bishops, the Priests, the Doctors, the Scribes,
and the Phariseies, and other like reprobates, whom God had given over in the
hardenesse of their hearts, as it is plain by the Words, that Christ
allegeth out of the Prophet Esai: Esai. ^
O Lord, harden the heart of this people: stop their ears: blind their
eyes: least happily they be converted, and so be saved. And thus that Ancient
Father Irenaeus immediately after the Apostles time expounded it: Irenaeus lib
4. cap. 48. ^. Corin. 4.
and applies thereto these words of S. Paul, In quibus Deus huius saeculi
excoecauit corda infidelium, vt non fulgeat illis illuminatio Euangelij Gloriae
Dei. In whom God has blinded the hearts of them, that be unfaithful, that the
brightenesse of the Gospel of the Glory of God may not shine unto them: Roman.
1.
And likewise these words, Tradidit illos Deus in reprobum sensum, God has
delivered them over into a reprobate understanding: And in the end he
compares them with Pharao, and Antichriste. So likewise Dionysius the
Carthusian, whose authority, I trow, M. Hardinge will not deny, says of
them: Dionysius Carthusian. in Lucam. ca. 8.
Iusto Dei Iudicio negata est illis praedicatio Euangelij, tanquam indignis
intelligentia Spirituali: The preachinge of the Gospel was denied unto them by
the just judgment of God, as unto men unworthy of any Spiritual
understanding.

Thus M. Hardinge, the better to win his purpose, is contented to say, that
all the people of God, him self only with a few others excepted, are blind,
reprobate, accursed of God, forsaken, and leafte in hardenesse of their hearts,
unworthy of Spiritual understanding, given over into a wicked mind, like to
Pharao, like to Antichriste. So much is the simple Lay People beholden to
him. But Gerson, Gulielm Gerson. Quae veritates de necessitate sal^tis
credendae sint, Corollar. 4.
a Doctor of M. Hardinges own Company, says, Licet Iudicium, and
Conclusiones Fidei authoritatiu^ spectent ad Praelatos and Doctores, tamen ad
alios, quam ad Theologos potest deliberatio pertinere, sicut and cognitio super
his, quae Fidem recipient: ita etiam, vt ad Laicos hoc possit extendi, and
plus aliquando, quam ad multos Clericorum: Al be it the Judgment, and the
Conclusions of Faith pertain by authority unto the Prelates and Doctors,
Yet the Consideration, and weighing of the same may pertain as well unto
others, as also knowledge touching those things, that pertain unto the
Faith: Which knowledge, and judgment may also be extended unto the Lay
people: and that better oftentimes, Abbas Panor^itanus.
then to many Priests. So Panormitane says, Magis crede^dum est Laico
afferenti Scripturas, quam Papae, and Concilio Generali: We ought more to
believe a Lay man, if he bring the authority of the Scriptures, then the
Pope, and a General Council.

By these it is evident, that God has not excluded the Lay People, that
believes in him, from the understanding of his Holy Secrets. Hugo Cardinalis
expo^ndeth these words in this wise: Hugo Cardinalis in Luc. ca. 8. Glosa
Ordinaria.
Vobis datum est, vobis qui libenter auditis, and Fidem habetis: Unto you it is
given: unto you, that are glad to learn, and have Faith. And the very
ordinary Gloss says thus, Vobis qui Fideles estis: Sed Pharisaeis incredulis
Sancta non sunt danda: Unto you, that are Faithful, it is given: But unto the
vnfaitheful Phariseis Holy things may not be given. And, where M. Hardinge
says, The knowledge of these Mysteries partaineth only unto the Apostles of
Christ, and to their Successors, pleases it thee, good Reader, to
understand, that by M. Hardinges own Decree, the Successors of the Apostles
be neither Priests, nor Deacons, nor Monks, nor Freers, nor Cardinals, but
only Bishops. For so it is limited by Anacletus: Episcopi Apostolorum
Domini: Anacleti epis. tertia, Did. 21. In Nono.
Presbyteri vero Septuagintaduorum Discipulorum locum tenent: Bishops are in
the place of the Apostles: and Priests are in the place of the three scoare
and twelve Disciples. Thus M. Hardinge has taken great pains, to shut out
both him self, and the greattest part of his Clergy, and all the whole
people from the Mystery of the Kingedome of Heaven.

M. Hardinge. The.7. Division.
It is reported by sundry (206) The.206. untruth. For S. Hilarie says no
such thing.
ancient VVriters of great Authority, Vide Hilarium in Psalm. ^.
that among the people of Israel, the seventy Elders only could read, and
understand the Mysteries of the Holy Books, that we call the Bible. For, where
as the letters of the Hebrewe tongue have no Vocalles, they only had the skill
to read the Scripture by the Consonantes: And thereby the Vulgar people were
kept from readinge of it (207) The.207. untruth, Misreporting Gods Divine
Providence.
by special Providence of God, as it is thought, that Preciouse stoanes should
not be cast before The people, Swine.
Swine, that is to say, such as be not called thereto, as being for their
vnreuerent curiosity, and impure life, unworthy.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Notwithstanding M. Hardinges allegation were true, To read the He^brevve.
yet S. Hilaries judgment, touching the Hebrewe tongue, Hilarious in Psalm. 2.
were not great. For writing upon ye same Psalm, he much mystaketh this
Hebrewe word, Bereschith, as a man unskillful in that language: Hieronymus ad
Damasum.
and S. Hierome reproves him likewise for mystakinge this Hebrewe word,
Osanna. But M. Hardinge, as otherwise his wont is, much misreporteth his
Authoure. For S. Hilarie says no such thing. Thus only he says, that these
three scoare, and twelve Doctors, or Elders, were men of great knowledge,
and therefore allows well of their judgment.

Touching the first invention, and use of the Pricks, it is thought, the
Rabines them selves do not agree. Some say, they were delivered to Moses in
the Mount: Some say, they were invented by Esdras: Some, by the Tabarites,
which were the Canonistes of the Jews, or Doctors of Traditions. How be it,
what so ever it were, the case is not much Material. But to say, that in all
the whole Country of Iewrie, a few only excepted, noman was hable to read
the Hebrewe tongue, in M. Hardinge, being so well learned in the same, it must
needs be thought, either a great oversight, or else some other greater fault.

For he knows, Deuteron. 11. Deuteron. 24.
that God commanded every of the people to write the Words of the law in
the posts of their doors, and in the Borders of their coats. Likewise God
commanded, that, who so would put away his wife, should first write a bille
of divorce, and so put her from him. If M. Hardinge will say, Some one, or
other, of these learned Elders, or Doctors might write it for them, Yet it is
written thus in ye Book of the Machabees, Machabaeor. 1^. Esther. 9.
Coepit populus Israel Scribere in tabulis. The people of Israel began to Write
in their tables. It is written of Mardocheus, That he wrote all that happened:
Hieremi. 51. Baruch. 1. (...)16.
That Hieremie wrote the plagues, that were coming: and, that Baruch wrote
the words of Hieremie. And in the Gospel, the wicked Steward says unto the
debtor, Take thy bille, sit down, and write. Now, let M. Hardinge consider,
how could al these Write, onles they could Read: and if they could not
Read, to what end should they Write? Uerily it appears not, that any of
these, 2. Regum. 23.
was of the three scoare, and twelve Elders. Likewise King Josias found the
Book of the Law in a wall, and Read it. When Christ Read, and expounded the
Prophet Esai in the Synagoge, Luca^. 4. Actorum. 8.
the people marueiled not at his Readinge, for that was common, but only at
his Exposition. Philip said unto the Chamberlain, Intelligis ea, quae legis?
Understand thou that thowe Read? And when Christ suffered upon ye Cross,
Johan. 19.
S. John says, Hunc titulum multi Iudaeorum legerunt. Many of the Jews Read
that Title. Origin. in Cantica, in prologo.
And wherefore did the Rabines take order, yt none of the Lay People, before
they came to certain years of age should Read, either the first Chapter of
Genesis, or the Book of Canticles, or certain Chapters of the prophet
Ezechiel, if none of all the people understood the Pricks, or Uowelles, nor
^oulde Read any thing at al? If there were nothing else, yet this thing only
is sufficient, to discrie M. Hardinges error. The Rabines say, yt in every
town within the whole country of Israel there was a School: Paulus Phagiu^
In Leuiticum. cap. 23.
and that in Jerusalem there were four hundred Schools. And will M. Hardinge
have us believe, yt in so many Schools there was not one Scholar hable to know
his letters? How be it, he takes it for no inconvenience, what so ever may
healpe to serve his turn.

But in the old times the Pricks, Geraldus Lillius in Histori^ Poetar^^.
or Uowelles were not found: Therefore, says he, the people could not Read.
So likewise in old times the Greek tongue was written without Accentes, as it
is evident until this day by sundry Books, and old* Marble Stoanes, that are
so written. Yet notwithstanding men were then hable to read the Greek tongue
without Accentes. Certainly M. Hardinge knows, that even now, not only the
learned of the Jews, but also the very Children of ten years of age, are
hable to Read without Pricks, or Uowelles.

Yet notwithstanding, says M. Hardinge, This was done by Gods Secret
Provision, least the Lay people should read Gods Words, and so Precious
S^oanes should be thrown before Swine. This doubtless was done by Gods
provision, that it might appear, in what regard M. Hardinge has the people
of God: that is, by his own confession, as vnpure, and unclean beasts, and
filthy Swine, and none otherwise.

M. Hardinge. The.8. Division.
Here I need not to spend time in rehersinge the manifold difficulties of
these holy letters, through Bernard. super Ca^tica.
As the light shines in vain upon blind eyes (says a holy Father) so to no
purpose, Bernarde calls him a vvorldly, and a natural man, that is void of
the Sprite of God. Therefore this place is not well applied.
or profit is the labor of a worldly, and natural man taken for the
atteininge of things, that be of the Spirit. Verily emonges other, this
incommoditie is seen by daily experience hereof to proceed, that of the
people, such as ought of right to take least upon them, be now become censours,
and judges of al, despisers of the more part, and, which is common to al
Heretics, They despise nothing, but that should be despised.
mockers of the whole simplicity of the Church, and of al those things,
which the Church uses as Pappe, or Milk to nourrishe her tender babes
withal, that it were better for the^ not to read, then by readinge so to be
pufte up, and made insolent. Which evil comes not of the Scripture, but of
their own malice, and ^uil disposition.

The B. of Sarisburie.
The Lay people is occupied in worldly affairs: Ergo, says M. Hardinge, they
may not be suffered to read the Scriptures: As if he would say, They are in
the midst of diseases: Therefore they may use no Physician. They are in the
thronge of their enemies, Therefore they must be lea^te naked without weapon.
But the godly learned Fathers have evermore reproved this reason, and thought
it childishe. S. Chrysostom says thus unto the Lay people, Chrysostom. in
Matthae. hom. 3.
Lectio diuinarum Scripturarum vobis magis necessaria est, quam Monachis: The
Readinge of the Scriptures is more necessary for you, then, it is for Monks.
And touching Worldly Cares, the world well sees, ye the Bishop of Rome, and
his Cardinals, and others of that profession, are no less troubled
therewith, then they, that are most deeply drowned in the world. S. Gregory,
being by the Emperor auanced to the Bishoprike of Rome, Gregor. lib. 1.
Epist. 5.
writes thus of him self: Sub color Episcopatus, ad saeculum retractus sum:
in quo tantis terrae curis inseruio, quantis me in vita Laica nequaquam
deseruisse reminiscor: Under the color of my Bishoprike, I am drawn back
into the world: wherein I am so much troubled with worldly cares, as I do not
remember the like, when I lived in the world. Gregor. li. 1. epis. 7. and
epis. 25.
And again he says, Tanta me occupationum onera deprimunt, vt ad superna
animus nullatenus erigatur. So many cares, and business do press me down,
that I can in no wise li^te my mind up to Heaven. Yet Gregory in comparison
of his Successors might undoubtedly seem a Saint. For as now, they have one
foot in the Church, and an other in the world: or rather not one foot in
the Church, but both heart, and body in the world.

Yet notwithstanding, by M. Hardinges Doctrine, these only must have the
Supreme Judgment, Albertus Pigghius li. 6. ca. 13.
and Exposition of Gods Word: and, what so ever they say therein, it ought
to stand in more weight, then the Judgment of a General Council, or the
Determination of the whole world.

He adds further, 1. Corin. 8.
Knowledge blows up the heart, and increases Pride: Thus says M. Harding,
being him self learned, and full of knowledge: I will not use his own
Conclusion, Ergo, full of Pride. But thus he says, even as Epimenides the Poet
said, Ad Titum. ca. 1.
Cretenses semper mendaces, The men of Creta be ever liers, being him self a
man of Creta: and therefore, by his own judgment, a lier, as others were.

This slouthful quarrel against the Knowledge of God, might be maintained by
great Antiquity. For S. Hierome, and S. Augustine say, Scientia inflat.
there were men then in their time of the same judgment herein, Hieronym. in
Epist. ad Titum. ca. 1.
that M. Hardinge is now. S. Hierome says, Inertiae se, and otio, and somno
dantes, putant peccatu^ esse, si Scripturas legerint: and ^os, qui in Lege
Domini meditantur die, ac nocte, quasi garrulos, inutilesque contemnunt.
G^uinge them selves to sleep, and slouthfulnes, they think it Sin to Read
the Scriptures: and such, as both day, and night are studious in the Law of
God, they despise, as prattelers, and vain men. Augustinus in Psalmum. 131.
Likewise S. Augustine, Sunt quida^ homines, qui, cum audierint, quod humiles
esse debent, demittunt se, and nihil volunt discere, putantes, quod, si aliquid
didicerint, Superbi futuri sint: and remanent in solo lacte: quos Scriptura
reprehe^dit: There be certain men, that, when they hear, they must be
humble, abase them selves, and will learn nothing: fearing, that if they
atteine to any knowledge, they shall be proud: and so they remain still only in
Milk: But the Scripture of God reprooueth them.

The Old learned Father Irenaeus expoundinge these words of S. Paul,
Scientia Inflat, Irenaeus lib. 2. cap. 45.
writes thus: Paulus ait, Scientia inflat: Non, quod veram Sc^entiam de Deo
culparet: Alioqui se ipsum primum accusaret. S. Paul says, Knowledge puffs
up the Mind: not, for that he found fault with the true knowledge of God:
Otherwise he should first of al others have reproved him self: For he was
learned. And S. Chrysostom says, Chrysostom. in epi^^. ad ^oloss. h^mi. 9.
Hoc omnium malorum causa est, quod Scripturae ignorantur. This is the cause of
al il, that the Scriptures are not known.

But they, that read the Scriptures, despise such Superstitious orders, and
Idolatrous deformities, as have been used, which M. Hardinge calls the
Milk, and Simpli^itie of the Church. U^rily, and they, that see the light,
despise the darkness: and they, that know the Truethe, Philippen. 3.
^espise Falsheade. S. Paul, after he once understood Christ, despised al,
that he had been trained in before, as Filthe, and Do^nge. And therefore he
says, 1. Corin. 13.
When I was a Child, I spoke as a Child, and had understanding, as a Child:
But, after that I once became a Man, I avoided (and despised) the things, that
perteined to a Child. Who so despises Superstition, and Idolatry, despises
the things, that should be despised: And in consideration of the dangers, he
has escaped, he says, Psalm. 123.
with the Prophet David: Anima nostra sicut passer, erepta est de laqueo
venantium: Our soul is delivered, as a Sparrowe, from the snares of the
Hunters.

Touching that danger, that is here surmised, undoubtedly, the knowledge of
God inflameth not, nor blows up the heart, but rather cools it, and makes
it humble. Deuteron. 17.
And, for that cause God said unto Moses, Let the King Read this Law all the
days of his Life, that he may learn to fear the Lord his God etc. Et ne
eleuetur cor eius in Superbia^. And that his mind be not blovve^ up with
Pride. Psalm. 18. Contra Iulia^ lib. 7.
For the nature, and force of Gods Word is to turn the heart, Lex Domini
Conuertens animas. Therefore Cyrillus says, Young men, that use to Read
Gods Word, Fiunt postea Religiosissimi, Afterward become (not proud, or
disdaineful) but most verteous, and Godly. So Theodoretus says unto the
Emperor Io^inian: The Knowledge of Heavenly things is behooueful for a Godly
Prince. For so shall your heart be (not pufte up with Pride, but) truly, and in
deed in the hand of God. Augustinus D^ tempore Sermon. ^.
Likewise S. Augustine says: Lectio assidua purificat omnia etc. Et qui vult
cum Deo semper esse, semper debet orare, and legere: Continual Readinge
clears, and purges al things. Who so will ever be with God, must evermore
Pray, and Read. Therefore Chrysostom says, Chrysostom in. ^. ad Timoth.
h^mi. 5.
Fieri non potest, vt qui iugiter Coelestis Doctrinae verba excipit, nihil
patiatur. It cannot possibly b^e, but the Man, that continually receives the
Words of the Heavenly Doctrine, must of force be moved, and feel somewhat
in his heart.

M. Hardinge. The.9. Division.
brings, Danger in Readinge.
after the opinion of those, that reprove the same, be great, sundry, and
many. I will here, as it were, but touch a f^we of them, leauinge the whole
matter it self to the judgment of the Church* First, seeinge the poison of
Heretics does most infecte the common people, and al Heretics draw their
ven^me, out of the Bible under pretense of Gods word: it is not thought
good by these men, Curious busy Body of the Vulgar sort.
to let every Curiouse, and busy body of the vulgar sort, to read and
examine the Bible in their common language. A co^tradictio^. For how can the
Sober l^ye man Read the Scriptures, if they be not translated into h^^
Barbarous Vulgar tongue?
Yet they would not the learned, discreate, and sober lay men to be imbarred
of that liberty.

Again if Heresy spring of wrong understanding, De Trinitate. lib. 2.
not of the Scriptures, (as Hilarious says, Her^s^e is of understanding, not
of Scripture, and the sense, not the word, is a crime) who shall sooner fall to
Heresy, then the common people, who cannot understand, that they read?
Verily, it seems a thing hard to bel^eue, that the unlearned people should
understand that, which the best learned men with long study, and great
travail, can scarcely at length attain.

The B. of Sarisburie.
O, what dangerous cases here are imagined, and al, to fraye the people from
Godds Word? If the ignorant read the Scriptures (says M. Hardinge) they will
prove Heretics: For Heretics suck their venime out of the Scriptures. The
Conclusion hereof is this: Every of the people may safely read M. Hardinges
VVo^rde: but Gods Word they may not read. There is no manner danger in
M. Hardinges Book: But Gods Book is full of dangers. The reason hereof it
is hard to gheasse: unless it be, for that Gods Book is fulle of Truth,
and M. Hardinges Book is fulle of error.

That he here calls Heresy, is the Everlasting, and Manifest Truethe of
God: which, when it was first preached, and published by S. Paul, was
likewise even then called Heresy. Actor. 24.
For thus S. Paul answeareth in his own defense, Secundum hanc sectam, quam
vocant Heresim, colo patrium Deum. According to this sect, which they call
Heresy, I woorship the God of my Fathers.

But if the Lay People, whom M. Hardinge for his pleasure calls Curious
Busy Bodies of ye Uulgare sort, may easily be leadde into Heresies by
Readinge ye Scriptures, for that they be unlearned, how then happened it, that
M. Hardinge him self, being a man so deeply trained in all kind of
learning, could so lightly be leadde into the same? I trow, he was then no
Curious Busy Body. Doubtless he was none of the Uulgare sort.

In the primitive Church, and long after the Apostles time, there were
sundry Sects, and sorts of Heresies, as it is plain^ by S. Augustine,
Epiphanius, Theodoretus, and others. Yet, that notwithstanding, the Ancient
Fathers then evermore called upon the people, and exhorted them to Read the
Scriptures, to thintente they might the better avoid Heresies. For Ireneus,
writing against the Heretics called Ualentiniani, Irenaeus. lib. 3. cap. 12.
Matthae. 22.
says thus, Haec omnia contulit eis Scripturarum Dei igno^antia: All this
befelle unto them, because they knew not the Scriptures. As Christ also says
unto the Sadduceis, Erratis nescientes Scripturas: Ye are deceived (not because
ye know, but) bic^use ye know not the Scriptures. So S. Hierome says, Omni
studio leg^dae nobis sunt Scripturae, Hieronym. in Epist. ad Ephe. lib. 3. cap.
4.
vt probati trapezitae sciamus, quis numus probus sit, quis adulter. We must
read the Scriptures with all diligence, that as being good exchangers, we may
know the lawful Coin from the Copper. So Chrysostom, Manichaei, and omnes
Hereses decipiunt simplices. Chrysostom. ad ^ebraeos hom. 8.
Sed si habuerimus sensus animae exercitatos ad discretionem boni, and mali,
poterimus huiusmodi discernere. Quomodo autem fiunt sensus nostri exercitati?
Ex vsu Scripturarum, and frequenti auditione. The Manichees, and al Heresies
deceive the simple. But if we have the senses of our minds practiced to
discern good, and ill, w^ may be hable to discern them. But how may our
senses become practiced? By the use of the Scriptures, Theophylact. De ^^zaro.
and often hearing. Likewise says Theophylacte, Illis, qui scrutantur Diuinas
Scripturas, nihil potest illudere. Illae enim sunt Lucerna, qua fur
deprelienditur, Nothing can deceive them, that search the Holy Scriptures.

For that is the Candel, whereby the thief is espied. Scriptures hard.
This judgment had the Old Catholic Fathers of Readinge the Holy Word of
God. But, that a blind man can better avoid dangers, then he, that sees: or,
that a naked man in the midst of his enemies, can better acquit him self,
then he, that is armed, it seems a very insensible, and an unlikely doctrine.

M. Hardinge. The.10. Division.
Where as Luther would the Scriptures to be translated into every Vulgar
tongue, for that they be light, and easy to understand, he is confuted by the
Scripture it self. For both S. Peter, and also S. Paul acknowlegeth in them
to be great difficulties, by occasion whereof some misconstrue them to their
own damnation, ^. Pet. 3. 1. Tim. 1. ^. Cor. 4.
some understand not what things they speak, nor of what things they
affirm: and to some the Gospel that S. Paul Preached is hidden, even to them,
which peris^e. If the Scriptures were plain, how erred Arius? how Macedonius?
how Eunomius? how Nestorius? how many more, men of great learning? specially
seeinge they al took occasion of their errors of the Scripture not rightly
understood?

Luther says, that S. Hierome was ouerseene in the understanding of the
Scripture, that S. Augustine erred in the same, that S. Ambrose, Cyprian,
Hilary, Basile, and Chrysostom, the best learned Doctors of Christ's Church,
were oftentimes deceived. And yet in the Preface of his Book De Captiuitate
Babylonica, he speaks of them very honorably, and grants, that they have
labored in the Lords Vineyarde woorth^ly, and that they have employed great
diligence in openinge the Scriptures. If these being of so excellent
learning, after long exercise in the holy letters, after long study and
watch, after long and fervent prayer, after mortification of them selves, and
purgation of carnal affections were deceived, as he witnesses: how can he
s^ye, they are clear, plain, and easy to be understood? And if these
worthy Fathers were deceived in one point, or two, is it not likely, the
common people may be deceived in many, specially their diligence, and study not
being comparable (...)theirs, and their lives not being such, as the
cleanness of their inward affectes might lighten their understanding, and
the annointinge of God might teach them?

The B. of Sarisburie.
Certain places in the Scriptures have evermore been judged dark, both^ for
many other causes, Johan. ^^. Romans 11. Johan. 3. Osee. 14. Cyrillus in Johan.
lib. 14.
and also for the matter it self, and for the deep Mysteries therein
contained: which thing D. Luther also has confessed in sundry places. But
unto them, that have eyes, and cannot see, and delight more in darkness, then
in the light, the Son beams may seem dark. The Prophet Osee says, Rectae
viae Domini: Praeuaricatores autem corruent in eis. The ways of the Lord be
straight: but the wicked shall fall in them. Therefore Cyrillus says, Ea,
quae perspicua sunt, difficilia fiunt Haereticis. The things, that of them
self are plain, unto Heretics are made dark.

But in these cases, the Sprite of God is bound, neither to sharpness of
wit, nor to abundance of learning. Oftentimes the Unlearned sees that thing,
that the learned cannot see. Matthae. 11. Epiphanius, li. ^.
Christ says, I thank thee, O Father, the Lord of Heaven and Earth, for
that thou have hidden these things from the wise, and the politic, and have
reveled the same unto the little ones. Therefore Epiphanius says, Solis
Spiritus Sancti Filijs facilis est omnis Scriptura, and dilucida: Only to the
Children of the Holy Ghost, all the Holy Scriptures are plain, and clear.

Hereof M. Harding seems to conclude thus: There be certain dark places in
the Scriptures: Ergo, The Scriptures are full of Darkness. This is a guileful
kind of reasoninge, known unto Children, called Fallacia a secundum quid ad
simpliciter. Albert. P^gghius, in Priuata Missa.
In like form of argument he might have said, Albertus Pigghius grants,
there be certain errors in the Mass: Ergo, The Mass is full of errors.

Or thus, The Cardinals them selves confess, In Concilio Selectorum
Cardinalium.
There be certain Abuses in the Church of Rome: Ergo, The Church of Rome is
full of Abuses. Certainly, notwithstanding a few certain places in the Holy
Scriptures be obscure, yet generally, The Scriptures are a Candel to guide our
feet: generally, Gods commandment is light, and lighteneth the eyes, and
therefore generally the Word of God is full of comfort. Psalm. 118.
Therefore Chrysostom says, Psalm. 18.
Omnia clara, and plana sunt in Scripturis Diuinis: quae cunque necessaria
sunt, manifesta sunt. Chrysostom. in. 2. Thessalonic. ^o. 3. Clemens
Alexandrin. in Oratione adhortatoria ad ^entes. Irenaeus li. 1. ca. 31.
Al things are clear, and plain in the holy Scriptures. What so ever thing
there is necessary for us, is also manifest. So says Clemens Alexan drinus,
Audite, qui estis long^: Audite, qui prop^. Nullis celatum est Verbum. Lux est
Communis: omnibus illucescit hominibus: nullus est in Verbo Cymmerius: Harken
ye, that be far of: harken ye, that be near. The word of God is hid from
noman: It is a light common unto al men: There is no darkness in Gods
Word. So Irenaeus, Scripturae in aperto sunt, and sine ambiguitate: and
similiter ab omnibus audiri possunt. The Scriptures are plain, and without
doubtfulnesse, and may be heard indifferently of al men. So the Old Father
Origin, Origin. in Ex^dum. hom. 9.
Clausum est negligentibus: inuenitur autem a quaerentibus, and pulsantibus: It
is shut from the negligente: but it is opened unto them, that seek, and knock
for it. Hieronym. in Psalm. 86.
So S. Hierome, Dominus per Euangelium suum Ioquutus est, non vt pauci
intelligerent, sed vt omnes. The Lord has spoken by his Gospel: not that a
few should understand him, but that al. Fulgentius in Sermon de Co^fessor^b.
So says Fulgentius, In Scripturis Diuinis abundat, and quod robustus comedat,
and quod paruulus sugat. In the Scriptures of God there is plenty sufficient,
both for the strong to eat, and also for the little one to suck. To be
short, so S. Gregory says, Gregor. in epist. ad Leandrum.
Est flumen, in quo agnus ambulet, and elephas na^et. It is a Floudde, wherein
the little Lamme may wade, and the great Elephant may swim.

Thus, notwithstanding certain clauses, and sentences in the Holy Scriptures
be hard, and dark, yet by these Holy Fathers judgments, the Scriptures
generally are easy, and clear.

But M. Hardinge upon a false position makes up the like Conclusion. For thus
he says, The Scriptures are dark: Therefore the people may not read them.
Uerily, as he would violently take the Scriptures from the simple, because, as
he says, they understand them not: So by the same force he may take the
Scriptures from al ye Old Doctors, and learned Fathers: because, as it
appears by their dissension, and by M. Hardinges own Confession, they
understood them not.

M. Hardinge. The.11. Division.
And, lest all the unlearned lay people should seem hereby utterly rejected
from hope of understanding Gods word without teachinge of others, it may
be granted, that it is not impossible, a man (be he never so unlearned)
exercised in long Prayer, accustomed to fervent contemplation, being brought
by God into his inward cellares, may from thence obtain the true
understanding, Psalm. 7^.
and interpretation of the Holy Scriptures, nolesse then any other always
brought up in learning. Of what sort S. Antonie that Holy, and perfect man
the Eremite of Egypt, Prologo i^ libros de Doctrina Christiana.
was. Who, as S. Augustine writes, without any knowledge of letters, both
canned the Scriptures by heart with hearing, and understood them wisely with
thinkinge. And that holy man, whom S Gregory speaks of, who lieinge Bedread
many years for sickness of Body, through earnest prayer and devout
meditation, obtained health of mind, and understanding of the Scriptures,
never having learned letters, so as he was hable to expound them to those,
that came to visit him: who coming unto him with pretense to bring
conforte, through his heavenly knowledge, received confort. But among the
people, how great number is there of lewd Losels, Gluttons, and Dronkerdes,
whose bealy is their God, who follow their unruly lusts? Is it to be thought,
this sort of persons may without meditation, and exercise of prayer, pearse
the understanding of the Scriptures, and of those holy Mysteries, which God
has hidden (as Christ confesses) from the Learned and wise man, and opened
unto little ones?

The B. of Sarisburie.
M. Hardinge allows these, whom he calls Curious Busy Bodies of the Uulgare
sort, to atteine to the understanding of Gods Word, not by readinge, but
only by Special Revelation, and Miracle, and none otherwise: and that, within
the space of a thousand years, Augustinus in Prologo De Doctrina Christiana.
one, or two only, and no more. For so S. Antonie atteined unto the knowledge
thereof, utterly without any book, or Reading, or any other healpe of
understanding. So that sick man lieinge bedreade, of whom S. Gregory makes
that worthy mention. So that Barbarous, and utterly unlearned sclaue, that
suddenly by Revelation was taught to Read. Augustinus in eodem Prologo.
And so like wise perhaps M. Hardinge him self, being so long a time, and so
earnest a Preacher of the same Gospel, and Truth of God, that he now so
wilfully condemns, without either Book, or Readinge, or other conference,
only upon the Change of the Prince, and none otherwise, understood that
thing, that before he could not understand: and by Miracle, and Revelation,
upon the sudden was wholly altered unto the contrary.

True it is, Fleashe, and Blood is not hable, to understand the holy will of
God, Matthae. 16. Matthaei. 11. Luke. 24.
without special Revelation: Therefore Christ gave thanks unto his Father,
For that he had reveled his secrets unto the little ones: And likewise, opened
the hearts of his Disciples, that they might understand the Scriptures.
Without this special healpe, and promptinge of Gods holy Sprite, the Word
of God is unto the Reader, be he never so wise, or well learned, as the Uision
of a sealed Book. Bu^ ^^^s Revelation is not special unto one, or two, but
general to al them, that (...)members of Christ, and are endewed with the
Sprite of God. Therefore (...)^hrysostome says generally unto all the people,
Chrysostom. in epist. ad Coloss. Hom 9.
Audite, quotquot estis mundani, ^^xoribus praeestis ac liberis, quemadmodum
vobis Apostolus Paulus Praecipiat legere ^cripturas, idque non simpliciter,
neque obiter, sed magna cum diligentia. Harken al ye men of the world, that
have wives, The people commanded by God, to Read the Scriptures.
and Children, how S. Paul the Apostle of Christ commands you to Read the
Scriptures, and that not slightly, or as by the way, but with great
diligence. Again he says, Domi Biblia in manus sumite: Domi vacemus
diuinarum Scripturarum lectioni: Take the Bible into your hands in your houses
at home. At home in our houses let us apply the Readinge of the Holy
Scriptures. Chrysostom in Genesim. ho 28.
So likewise says S. Hierome: Hic ostenditur, verbum Christi, non
sufficienter, sed abundanter etia^ Laicos habere debere, and docere se inuice^,
vel monere. Hieronym. in epist. ad Coloss. cap. 3.
Here we are taught, that the Lay people ought to have the Word of God, not
only sufficiently, but also with abundance, and to teach, and counsel others.

But amongst these Busy Bodies of the Uulgare sort M. Hardinge finds a
great number of Losels, Gluttons, and Dronkardes: whose belly is their God.
Thus he names the part: but he means the whole. Hosius lib. 2. contra
Brentiu^.
For even so writes Hosius one of the Chief of that Company. Non est
Consilium in vulgo, non ratio, non discrimen: In this Vulgar sort there is
neither Counsel, nor reason, nor discretion. And farther he calls the flock
of Christ, Beluam multorum Capitum, A Wild beast of many heads: As M.
Hardinge also a little before calls them Swyne, In the.6. division
and others call them Filthy Dogs. Even so the Phariseis judged, and spoke
of the simple People that followed Christ, Turbauista, quae non nouit Legem,
maledicti sunt: Johan. 7.
These rabbles of rascalles, that (are Unlearned, and) know not the Law, are
accursed. In such regard they have the^, whom S. Paul calls, Ephesians. 2.
Ciues Sanctorum, and domesticos Dei, Citizens with the Saints, and of the
Householde of God.

If looseness of life be a just cause to ba^nishe the people from the Word
of God, it is commonly thought, that the Cardinals, and Priests in Rome live
as loosely as any others. S. Bernarde of the Priests of his time writes thus:
Bernardus in Conuersi. Paul*
Non est iam dicere, vt Populus, sic Sacerdos: quia nec sic Populus, vt
Sacerdos. We may^ not now say, As is the People, so is the Priest. For the
people is not so wicked, as is the Priest. Therefore by M. Hardinges judgment
the Priests ought no less to be banished from Gods Word, then the rest of
the People.

M. Hardinge. The.12. Division.
And where as learned men of our time be divided into contrary sects, The
Gospellers divided in^^ cont^ary sects.
and write bitterly one against an other, each one imputinge to other
mistakinge of the Scriptures: if amongst them, who would seem to be the
leadars of the people, be controversies, and debates about the understanding
of the Scriptures: how may the common people be thought to be in safe case
out of al danger of errors, if by readinge the Bible in their own tongue,
they take the matter in hand?

If any man think, I sclaunder them, for that I say they be divided into
contrary sects, let him understand, their own Countriemenne, I mean them of
Germany, and special setters forth of this new doctrine, report it in
their books, and complain lamentably of it. Namely Nicolaus Amsdorffius in
his book entitled, Publica Confessio purae doctrinae Euangelij, etc. Also
Nicolaus Gallus, in his book of Theses and Hypotyposes: who acknowledges the
strifes, and debates, that be emongst them, to be, not of light matters, but
of high Articles of Christian doctrine. For even so be his words in Latin:
Non sunt leaves inter nos concertationes de rebus leuibus, sed de sublimibus
doctrinae Christianae Articulis, de lege and Eua^gelio, etc. The same man in
the last leaf of his foresaid book, with great vehemency reports,
Haereses permultas esse prae manibus, plerasque etiamnum haerere in calamo,
That very many Heresies be already in hand, and many as yet stick in the
pen, as though he meante, they were ready to be set forth.

Of late there have been put forth in printe two great books, one by the
princes of Saxony, the ^ther by the Earls of Mansfeld, chief mainteiners of
the Lutheranes: in which be recited eleven sects, and the same as detestable
Heresies condemned: they are contained in this cataloge or roll: Anabaptistae,
Seruetiani, Stancariani, Antinomi, Iesuitae, Osiandriani, Melanc^thonici,
Maioristae, Adiaphoristae, Suencfeldiani, Sacramentarij. Albeit the Jesuits
have wrong to be numbered among them. This much is confessed of the sects,
and controversies of our new Gospellers by their own Princes, that stand in
defense of the confession of Auspurge, and by two of the Lutherane
superintendentes.

No man has so exactely declared to the world the number and diuersiti^ of
the sects of our time, Fridericus Staphylus.
which has spronge out of Martin Luther, A Vile Renegate
as Fridericus Staphylus a man of excellent learning, one of the Emperors
Counsel that now is, who might well have knowledge herein, for as much as he
was a diligent student ten years at Wittenberg among the chief doctors of
them, and for that time was of their opinion, and afterward by consideration of
their manifold disagreeinges and contentions within them selves induced to
discredit them, and through the grace of God reduced to a whole mind, and to
the Catholic Fa^the, and now remains a perfect member of the Church. This
learned man in his Apology shows, that out of Luther have sproonge three
diverse Heresies or sects: The (208) The.208. Untruth. For the Anabaptists
sprange not of Luther: but were reproved, and condemned by Luther.
Anabaptists, the Sacramentaries, and the Confessionistes, Protestants.
who made Confession of their Faith in open Diete before the Emperor Charles,
the Princes, and states of Germany at Auspurge, Anno Domini. 1530. and for
Protestation of the same there, are called Protestants. Now he proves
farther by testimony of their own writings, that the Anabaptists be divided
into six sects: (209) The.209. Untruth, inflamed with sclaunder.
the Sacramentaries into eight sects: (209) The.209. Untruth, inflamed with
sclaunder.
the Confessionisies, and they which properly are called Protestants,
Protestants diuide^ into twenty secte^.
into tw^ntie sects, every one having his proper and particular name to be
called and known by. This lamentable division of learned men into so many
sects in the Countries where the Gospel (as they call it) has these forty
years, and is yet most busely handled, may be a warninge to the governors
of Christendom, that they take good aduisemente, how they suffer the rude,
and ras he people to have the Scriptures common in their own tongue.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Here M. Hardinge, by the healpe of one Staphylus, a shameless Renegate, has
made a long discourse of such differences in Doctrine, as he imagines to be
emonge them, that profess the Gospel. And in deed, as the imperfection,
Diffensio^
and want, that is in man, is naturally inclined unto some division, and that
oftentimes in such cases, wherein ought to be greattest unity: Even so the
Heretics, and the enemies of the truth, have evermore used to take hold
thereof, the more to discredit, and to deprave the whole. At the first
preachinge of the Gospel by the Apostles of Christ, and other Holy Fathers,
there grew up immediately with the same, sundry sorts of Sects, to the
number of four scoare, and ten, as they are reckened in particulare by S.
Augustine, Augustine. ad Quoduul^ deum.
al flowinge out of one Spring, al professinge one Gospel, and al known by
the name of Christ.

Yea sometimes the very lights of the world, and the pillars of the Church,
seemed to be divided by some dissension emongst them selves: Galat. 2. Actor.
1^*
S. Peter, from S. Paul: S. Paul, from Barnabas: S. Cyprian, from Cornelius:
S. Augustine, from S. Hierome: S. Chrysostom, from Epiphanius: the East part
of the world, from the Weast: Doctors, from Doctors: Fathers, from Fathers:
Church, from Church: and Saints, from Saints. And hereof the Heretics
in old time, and other sworn enemies of God took occasion, as M. Hardinge
now does, to defa^e the whole profession of the Gospel, calling it a puddel,
and a sink of dissension. For these causes the Heathens laughed at the
Christians, Socrates. lib. 1. cap. 6.
and pointed at them in the market places with their fingers. So the Renegate
Iulianus the Emperor, the better to cloak his own infidelity, said, that
Peter, Socrat. li. 3. c. 23.
and Paul could not agree: Luke and Mathewe dissented in Christ's Genealogy:
and that therefore the whole Gospel of Christ was nothing else but error.

Oftentimes, of malice against God, they fained dissension to be, where as none
was. Tertull. contr^ Marcionem. li. 1. and deinceps.
So Mar^ion the Renegate divised a great Book of Contrarieties bytweene the
New Testamente, and the Old. The false Apostles said, that S. Paul
dissented from all the rest of his Brethren: and oftentimes from him self. Even
so, and with like truth M. Hardinge seems now to charge the Gospel of
Christ with like dissension, folowinge therein both the Example, and Doctrine
of Staphylus the Renegate, that has wilfully forsaken Christ, and is returned
again to his old vomit. 2. Petri. ^*
And being hable so sharply to behold, how some one man has in some case
dissented from an other, yet is he not hable to see, how much he him self
has dissented from him self.

But having this eloquence, and skill so largely to amplify these small
quarelles of so little weight, what would he have benne hable to do, if he had
benne in the primitive Church, and had seen al those hoate, and troublesome
dissensions, that then were hable to shake the world? What clouds, and colors
might he then have cast, to scorn at Christ, and to bring his Gospel out of
credit?

Doubtless, as he says now, al these diversities spring only from Doctor
Luther, so would he then have said, Al these former diversities, and sundry
forms of Heresies sprange only from Christ. And hereof he would have
concluded, as he does now, that the Rude, and Rasshe people should in no wise
be suffered to read the Scriptures.

How be it touching these 34. several Sects, that Staphylus by his
inquisition, and conninge has found out in Germany, it must needs be
confessed, they are marvelous poor, and very simple Sects. For in that whole
Country, where they are supposed to dwell, they have neither name, to be
known by, two, or three only excepted: nor Church, to teach in: nor house,
to dwell in. But Staphy^us may have leave to speak untruth, for that he
has not yet learned to speak otherwise.

Hereof M. Hardinge may conclude thus: The Learned sometimes mistake the
Scriptures, and are deceived: Ergo, the Learned ought to be bannished from
readinge the Scriptures. For all these fantastical imaginations of Opinions, and
Sects, perteine only to the Learned sort, and nothing to the Lay People.

And, that the Learned, either through ignorance, or through affection, may be
misleadde, no less then others, it may easily appear both by all these former
examples, and also by these words of God in the Book of Exodus, Exodus ^3.
Nec in iudicio plurimorum acquiesces sententiae: In judgment thou shall not
harken to the mind of the more. Which words Lyra expounds thus,
Plurimorum, id est, Doctorum: Of the more, that is to say, of the learned sort.

Certainly the Learned Fathers have evermore thought, that in such perilous
times of dissension in judgment, it is most behooueful for the people, to have
recourse unto the Scriptures. Actorum. 17.
When Paul, and Silas preached at Berrhoea, the people there daily searched,
and considered the Scriptures, to know, whether that they preached,
Chrysostom. in Opere imperfecto, homi. 49.
were true, or no. Chrysostom expoundinge these words, When ye shall see the
Abomination of desolation standinge in the Holy place, writes thus, Ideo
ma^dat, vt Christiani volentes firmitatem accipere Fidei verae, ad nullam rem
fugiant, nisi ad Scripturas. Alioqui, si ad alia respexerint, scandalizabuntur,
and peribunt, non intelligentes, quae sit vera Ecclesia: and per hoc incident
in Abominationem desolationis, quae stat in Sanctis Ecclesiae locis. Therefore
he commands, that Christian men, that will be assured of the true Faith,
resort unto nothing else, but only unto the Scriptures. For else, if they have
regard to any other thing, they shall be offended, and shall perish, not
knowinge, which is the true Church: and by mean thereof they shall fall into
the Abomination of desolation, that stands in the Holy places of the Church.
In like sort writes Origin upon the same place: Origin. in Matthae. cap. 24.
Animae imperitae verbi Iustitiae, quia facile Seducuntur, non possunt
inseducibilite^ permanere in conspectu Abominationis desolationis stantis in
loco Sancto: The souls, that be unskillful of the Word of Justice, because
they are easily deceived, cannot stand without error in the sight of the
Abomination of desolation standinge in the Holy place. S. Hierome says,
Hieronym. in Prophetam Nabum. cap. 3.
In aduentu Messiae, populus, qui sub Magistris fuerat consopitus, ibit ad
montes Sc^ipturarum: ibique inuenient montes Mosen, montes Propheras, Montes
Nou^ Testamenti. Et in talium montium lectione versatus, si non inuenerit, qui
doceat, tamen illius studium comprobabitur, quod confugerint ad Montes. At the
coming of Christ, the people, that was laid a sleep under their teache^s,
shall go to the Mountains of the Scriptures: There shall they find these
Mountains, Moses, the Prophets, and the New Testamente. And being occupied
in the readinge of these Mountains, notwithstanding they find noman to
teach them, yet shall their good will be well allowed, for that they have fleadde
unto the Mountains. ^^silius Moralium. 26. ca. 1.
So S. Bastle, Diuinae Scripturae faciunt ad certitudinem bonorum, and ad
confusionem malorum: The Holy Scriptures are hable both to confirm the godly,
and also to confound the ungodly. Chrysos^om. in Matthew. homi. 49.
So Chrysostom: Nec ipsis omnino Ecclesiis credendum est, nisi ea dicant, vel
faciant, quae conuenientia sint Scrip^uris: We may in no wise believe the
Churches them selves, onles they say, and do such things, as be agreeable to
the Scriptures.

M. Hardinge. The.13. Division.
The peril of it is known by sundry examples both of times paste, and also of
this present age. For out of this root has spronge the sect of the
Valdenses, Valdense^.
otherwise called Pauperes de Lugduno. For Valdo a Merchant of Lions their
first Author, of whom they were named Valdenses, being an unlearned Lay man,
procured certain Books of the Scripture to be translated into his own
language, which when he used to Read, and understood not, he fell into many
errors. Of the same welspringe issued the filthy puddles of the Sects called
Adamitae, or Picardi, Bogardi, and Turelupini: and of late years beside the
same sect of Ad^mites newly revived, also the Anabaptists, and
Suenckfe^dians. Wherefore that Edicte, or Proclamation of the worthy Princes
Ferdinando, and Elizabe^th King, and Queen of Spain, is of many much
commended, by which they gave streighte ^^mm^undement, that under great
penalties noman should translate the Bible into the vulgar^ ^p^nishe tongue,
and that noman should be found to have the same translated in any wise. These
and the like be the reasons and considerations, which have moved many men to
think, the settinge forth of the whole Bible, and of every part of the
Scripture in the vulgar tongue, for all sorts of persons to read without
exception or limitation, to be a thing not necessary to Salvation, nor other
wise convenient nor profitable, but contrariwise dangerous and hurteful.

The B. of Sarisburie.
The Story of Ualdo is here brought in upon the report, Alphonsus De
Haeresib. lib. 1. ca. 13.
and credit of Friar Alphonsus. Touching which Ualdo, whether be were
learned, or unlearned, it forces not greatly. Origin says, Vide quam prope
periculis sint hi, qui negligunt exerceri in Diuinis Literis: Ad Roman. li.
(...)* Ca. 16.
ex quibus solis huiusmodi examinationis agnoscenda discretio est: Mark, how
near unto danger they be, that refuse to exercise them selves in the
Scriptures. For thereby only the judgment of this trial must be known. If he
were learned, then is this no true report: if he were unlearned, then was Gods
work so much ye greater: who, as S. Paul says, 1. Corin. 1.
oftentimes chooses the weak things of the world, to condemn ye strong:
and the foolish things of the world, to reprove the wise.

The greatest Heresies, that he maintained, Alphonsus de Haresib.
stood in reproouing the Idolatrous woorshipping of Images: of Extreme
Unction: of Exorcismes, and Coniurations: of Ear Confessions: of unseemly
Singing in ye Church: Bartholomaeus Abramus Creten. in Council. Ferrarien.
of Fained Miracles: of the idl^, and sclaunderous lives of Priests, and
Bishops: of ye lives, and manners of the Church of Rome: of the oultrage, and
Tyranny of ye Pope: of Monks, Freers, Par^ons, Pilgrimages, and Purgatory.
And, notwithstanding ye reproouing hereof were then judged Heresy, yet
sithence yt time infinite numbers of godly men have received it, as Gods
undoubted Truth, and M. Harding in part has yielded unto ye same.

He adds farther, Out of this wel^p^inge of V^ldo issued forth the
Anabaptists, and the Swenkefeldians. I marvel, M. Hardinge can, either speak
so unadvisedly, or so soon forgeate, what he has spoken. For immediately
before he wrote thus: Out of Luther have spronge three diverse Heresies, The
Anabaptists, the Sacramentaries, and the Confessionistes. If the Anabaptists
sprange out of Ualdo, and were so long before Luther, how could they then
afterward spring out of Luther? If they sprange first out of Luther, how were
they then before Luther? By this report, the Father is younger, then the
Child: and ye Child was borne, before the Father. These be mere Monste^s in
speech, and Contradictions in Nature. If the one of these reports be true, ye
other of necessity must needs be false. But M. Harding takes it for no
great inconvenience, what so ever may healpe, to deface the Truth.

The Proclamation of Ferdinandus, and Elizabeth the Kings of Spain, for not*
Trans^atinge the Bible into the Spanish tongue, as it is of very small
Authority, being made within these threescoare, and ten years, that is to
say, welneare fifteen hundred years after Christ: so it is likely, it was
first divised, not against the Christian people of that Country, but only
against ye Renegate Jews there: who by dissimulation, and fear of the law
being become Christians, afterward returned again to their Old Errors,
Furius Bonon^^ de Transferendis S^ripturis. Sozomen li. ^. ca. 18.
and both by their example, and also by misunderstanding of certain places of
the Scriptures, hardened, and confirm^d others in the same. Against whom also
was divised the Spanish Inquisiti^n, and that by the same Princes, and at the
same time. So Iulianus the Renegate Emperor thought it good policy, to suffer
no Christian man's Child to be set to School. So the wicked princes
Antiochus, 1. Machabaeor^^. ca. 1.
and Maximinus for like policy, burnte the Books of God, to the intent the
people should not read them.

But the godly, and first Christened Emperor Constantinus caused the Bible to
be written out, and to be sent abroad into al Kingedomes, Countries, and
Cities of his Dominion. King Adelstane, the King of England, caused the
Bible to be Translated into the English tongue. Alphonsus de Haeresib. li. 1.
c. 13.
S. Hierome Translated the same into the Sclauon Tongue: Ulphilas likewise into
the Gotthian tongue. Whereto Socrates adds also these words, Socrates. li.
4. ca. 33.
Instituit Barbaros, vt discerent sacra eloquia: He gave occasion to the
Barbarous people of that Country, to learn the Scriptures.

M. Hardinge. The.14. Division.
Yet it is not meante by them, that the people be keapte wholly from the
Scripture, so as they read no part of it at al. As the whole in their opinion
is to strong a meat for their weak stomakes: so much of it they may right
holesomely receive and brook, as that which pertains to piety, What
parts of the Scriptures apperteine to the people to know.
and necessary knowledge of a Christian man. Wherein they would the examples
of the Old Holy Fathers to be followed. S. Augustine has gathered together
into one book, all that makes for good life out of the Scriptures, which
book he entitled Speculu^: that is to say, a Myrrour or a lookinge glass, as
Possidonius witnesses in his life. S. Basile has set forth the like argument
almost in his fourescoare moral rules perteininge altogether to good manners.
S. Cyprian also has done the like in his three Books Ad Quirinu^. Such
godly Books they think to be very profitable for the simple people to read.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Here M. Hardinge allows the people, to read the Scriptures: how be it, not
what they list, but with restrainte, and at delivery: that is to say, not
cases of question, or perteining to Knowledge, but only matters belonginge to
manners, and order of life. And so he reserueth Knowledge to him self, and his
Brethren: and leaves Good Life unto the People. Touching the Books of S.
Augustine, S. Basile, and S. Cyprian, it is untrue, that they were written
namely, and purposely for the Unlearned: Or if they were, why are they not
Translated? Why are they not delivered unto the people, for whose sakes they
were written?

Moreover, it is untrue, that in these Books is contained only matter of life,
and manners, and nothing perteining to Religion. For the first words in this
book of S. Augustine called, Speculum, are these: Non facies tibi Sculptile.
Thou shall make to thee self no graven Image: which is now a Special case of
Religion. And the greatest part of S. Cyprians Book, Ad Quirinum, contains
a full disputation of Christ's Incarnation, Nativity, and Passion, and other
like cases of Religion against the Jews. Touching S. Basile, as he wrote this
Book of Moralles concerning Manners: so he had written an other Book before,
concerning Faith: and both these Books for ye people. He makes his entry
into his Moralles with these words, Cum de Sana Fide in Praecede^ribus
sufficienter ad praesens dictu^ esse putemus, etc: For as much as I think, I
have entreated sufficiently in my former books concerning Faith etc. Therefore
this Assertion was untrue, and so no firm ground, for M. Harding to stand
upon. Neither did any of the Old Fathers ever withdraw ye people from the
Uniuersal, and free reading of Gods Word, and restrain them only to such
short Collections. S. Basile says, The Scriptures are like unto a Shop full
of Medicines for the Soul, Basilius in Psalmum Primum. Irenaeus. li. 5.
where as every man may freely take, not only one kind of salve, but also a
special, and a peculiar remedy for every soar. And Irenaeus says, De omni
ligno Paradisi manducate, id est, ab omni Scriptura Diuina manducate: Eat ye
of all the fruit of Paradise: that is to say, Eat ye (not only of matters
concerning ma^ners, but also) of every part of the holy Scriptures. How be it,
by M. Hardings judgment, ye people may learn the.x. Commandments, but may
not meddle with their Creed.

M. Hardinge. The.15. Division.
But how much, and what part of the Scripture the common people may read for
their confort and necessary instruction, and by whom the same may be
Translated; it belongs to the judgment of the Church: Which Church has
already condemned all the vulgar Translations of the Bible of late years,
(210) The.210. untruth, raised ^^nely of despite, and sclaunder.
for that they be found in sundry places erroneous, and partial in favor of
the Heresies, which the Translatours maintain. And it has not only in our
time condemned these late Translations, but also hitherto never allowed those
few of old time. I mean S. Hieromes translation into the Dalmatical tongue,
if ever any such was by him made, as to some it seems a thing not
sufficiently proved: And that, which before S. Hierome Vlphilas an Arian
Bishop made, and commended to the Nation of the Goths: who first invented
letters for them, and proponed the Scriptures to them translated into their
own tongue, and the better to bring his ambassade to the Emperor Valens to
good effect, was persuaded by the Heretics of Constantinople, and of the
Court there, to forsake the Catholic Faith, and to Communicate with the
Arians, making promise also to travail in bringinge the people of his
Country to the same sect, which at length he performed most wickedly.

The B. of Sarisburie.
M. Hardinge allows the people, to read certain parcels of the Scriptures
for their comfort: but yet he allows them no Translation: that is to say, he
allows them to eat the kernel, but in no wise to break the shale. By these
it appears, that of sufferance, and special favor, the simple ignorant
people may Read the Word of God in Latin, Greek, or Hebrew: but none
otherwise.

The Church (says M. Hardinge) for the space welneare of sixteen hundred
years, never yet allowed any manner Translation in the Uulgare tongue. Yet
notwithstanding, it is certain, that the Church not only in the Primitive
time, under the Apostles, and holy Fathers, but also long sithence has both
suffered, and also used the Uulgare Translations in sundry tongues. Whereof
we may well presume, that the Church then allowed them.

And that the Scriptures were not only in these three tongues, Greek, Hebrew,
and Latin, it appears by S. Hierome, that says, Hieronym. in epitaphio
Paulae. Basilius in epist. ad N^ocaesarie^. Sulpitius in Vita Martini li. 1.
The Psalms were Translated, and song in the Syrian Tongue: by S. Basile,
that affirms the same, of the Palestine, Thebane, Phenike, Arabike, and
Libyke tongues: By Sulpitius in the life of S. Martine, that seems to say,
The Lessons, and Chapters were Translated, and readde openly in the Churches of
France in the French Tongue: And by Isidorus, that avouches the like of al
Christian tongues.

M. Hardinge misliketh the Translation of Ulphilas into the Gotthian tongue,
for that the Author was an Arian. Notwithstanding it appears not, Isidorus
de Ecclesiasticis officijs. Ca. 10.
that ever the Church misliked it. But, by this rule, he may as well condemn
all the Greek Translations, what so ever, of Symmachus, of Aquila, of
Theodotion, and of the Septuagintes, and the whole Exaplus of Origin. For there
is not one of al these, but may be challenged in like sort.

Touching S. Hieromes Translation of the Bible into the Sclauon tongue, M.
Hardinge seems to stand in doubt. How be it, Hosius his companion says, In
Dalma^icam Linguam Sacros Libros Hieronymum vertisse, constat. Hosius de Sacro
Vernacule legendo.
It is certain, and out of doubt, that S. Hierome Translated the Bible into
the Sclauon tongue. The like whereof is reported by Alphonsus. Neither can M.
Harding show us any error, or oversight in that whole Translation of S.
Hierome: Alphonsus de Haeresibus li. 1. ca. 13.
And therefore he seems to condemn that godly Father, and yet knows no
cause why.

Allate Translations (says he) have been made in favor of Heresies, and
therefore they may woorthily be mystrusted. But will these men never leave these
childishe colors, and deal plainly? If there be errors, and such errors in
these Late Translations, why do they not discrie them? If there be none, why
do they thus condemn them? But the greatest Heresy, that can be holden, and
that touches them nearest, is the reuelinge of the usurped Authority, and
Tyranny of the Church of Rome. For so it is determined by Pope Nicolas: Did.
2. Omnes.
Qui Romanae Ecclesiae Priuilegium auferre conatur, hic procul dubio in
Haeresim labitur, and est dicendus Haereticus: Who so ever attempteth to
abridge the Authority of the Church of Rome, falls doubtless into an
Heresy, and ought to be called an Heretic.

M. Hardinge. The.16. Division.
As for the Church of this land of Britain, the Faith has continued in it
thirteen hundred years until now of late, (211) The.211. Untruth. For
sundry parts of the Bible were translated into the English tongue* by king
Alured by Cedman, and by Beda, as shall appear.
without having the Bible translated into the Vulgar tongue, to be used of al
in common. Our Lord grant, we yield no worse souls to God now, having
the Scriptures in our own tongue, and talkinge so much of the Gospel, then
our auncesters have done before us. Hist. Eccle. l^. 1.
This Island says Beda (speakinge of the estate the Church was in at his
days) at this present, according to the number of Books that Gods Law was
written in, doothe search and confess one, and the self same knowledge of the
high truethe, and of the true highth, with the tongues of five Nations, of the
English, the Britons, the Scotts, the Pightes, and the Latins. Quae
meditatione Scripturarum caeteris omnibus est facta communis. Which tongue of
the Latins (says he) is for the studi^, and meditation of the Scriptures
made common to all the other. Verily as the Latin tongue was then common to all the Nations of this land* being of distinct languages, for the study of the
Scriptures, as Beda reports: so the same only has always until our time,
been common to all the Countries and Nations of the Occidental or VVeast
Church, for the same purpose, and thereof it has been called the Latin
Church.

Wherefore to conclude, they that show them selves so earnest, and zealous for
the translation of the Scriptures into al vulgar, and barbarous tongues, it
behooves them, after the opinion of wise men, to see, first, that no faults be
found in their Translations, (212) The.212. Untruth, joined with a
s^lau^der. If there were* such faults, M. Harding would open them in
particular.
as hitherto many have been found. And a small fault committed in the handling
of Gods word, is to be taken for a great crime. Next, yt for as much as such
tra^slations perteine to al Christen people, they be referred to the judgment
of the whole Church of every language, and commended to the Laity by the
wisdom and authority of the Clergi^, having charge of their souls.
Furthermore that there be some choice, exception, and limitation of time,
place, and persons, and also of parts of the Scriptures, after the discrete
ordinances of the Jews Amongst whom it was not lauful, that any should
read certain parts of the Bible, before he had fulfilled the time of the
Priestly Ministry, which was the age of thirty years, as S. Hierome
witnesses. Las^ly, Prefation^ in Ezechielem.
that the settinge forth of the Scriptures in the common language be not
commended to the people as a thing utterly necessary to Salvation, least
thereby they condemn so many Churches, that hitherto have lack^ the same, and
so many learned and Godly Fathers, that have not procured it for their flock:
Finally, all that have gone before us, to whom in all virtue, innocence, and
holin^sse of life, we are not to be compared. As for me, in as much as this
matter is not yet determined by the Church, whether the common people ought to
have the Scriptures in their own tongue to read, and to hear, or no, I
define nothing. As I esteem greatly al Godly, and wholesome knowledge, and
wish the people had more of it then they have, with charity and meekness:
so I would, that these hoate talkers of Gods word had less of that
knowledge, which makes a man to swel, and to be proud in his own conceit:
and that they would deeply weigh with them selves, whether they be not
contained within the listes of the saiynge of S. Paul to the Corinthians, If
any man think, that he knows any thing, 1. Corin. ^.
he knows nothing yet, as he ought to know. God grant al our knowledge be
so joined with meekness, humility, and charity, as that be not justly said
of us, which S. Augustine in the like case said very dreadfully to his dear
friend Alypius. Surgunt indocti, and Coelum rapiunt: and nos cum doctrinis
nostris sine Cord, ecce vbi volutamur in Carne* and Sanguine. The unlearned
and simple arise up, Confess. li. 8. Cap. ^.
and catch Heaven away from us: and w^ with all our great learning void of
heart, lo where are we wallowinge in Fleashe, and Blood.

The B. of Sarisburie.
M. Hardinge seems secretly to grant that thing, which without blusshing
no man can deny: that is, that the Scriptures long ^ithence, and in old
times have been Translated into the natural speech of this country. But he
adds withal a poor exception, The Bible in English: and ye^ not for
English people.
that, notwithstanding the Translation were in English, yet it served not for
English people. And yet, for what people else it should serve, it were not easy
to conjecture. Doubtless, if they had meante, as these men do, to bar the
English people from Gods Word, The Scriptures in English.
they would have keapte it still, as it was before in Latin, Greek, or
Hebrew, and would not have suffered any such Translation.

But Beda him self, that wrote the Story of this Island, in these very
words, that M. Harding has here alleged, seems to witness, that the
Scriptures were then Translated into sundry tongues, and that for the better
understanding of the people. For thus he writes, Haec Insula quinque Gentium
linguis scrutatur vnam, eandemque Scientiam Veritatis. This Island searches
out the knowledge of one Truth, with the tongues of five Nations. It is not
likely, he would have written thus of five several Tongues, if ye Scriptures
had been written then only in one tongue. In like manner, and to like purpose
he writes thus, Beda in Histor. Anglorum li. 1. Ca. 1.
Quicunque gentium linguis vnam eandemque veritatis Scientiam Scrutantur: Who
so ever they be, that search the knowledge of one Truethe (not only in the
Latin tongue, as M. Hardinge says, but) gentium Linguis, that is, In the
Natural, and Vulgar Tongues of this country. Doubtless, it were very much
to say, that the mere English man, or Scotte, or Picte, or Britton, yt
understood no Latin, was hable nevertheless to Read, and search the
Scriptures in the Latin Tongue.

But to leave conjectures, Beda Beda in Histor.
says expressly, and in most plain words, that one Cedman an English
Poet, Anglorum. li. 5. ca. 22.
Translated the Creation of the world, and the whole story of the Genesis,
and the Exodus, and sundry other stories of ye Bible into English Rhyme.
Likewise, as it is said before, king Adelstane Adelstane.
about niene hundred years past, caused the whole Bible to be Translated into
English. And Sir John Treuisa Johan Treuisa. li. 5. ca. 24.
says, that Beda him self turned S. John's Gospel into English. And again he
says, Johan. Treuisa. li. 6. ca. 1.
ye King Aluredus caused ye Psalter to be turned into English. And until this
day there be diverse such Translations yet remaininge to be seen, which, for
many causes, bear good proof of great Antiquity. Therefore, that this Island
has continued thirteen hundred years without having ye Scriptures in
English, it can bear no manner appearance, or show of Truth.

But being admitted, and granted for true, If prescription of want may make
good proof, then may we say, This Island stood, and continued four
thousand whole years, not only without the English Bible, but also without
any knowledge of Christ, or God. Likewise we may truly say, The Gospel, and
the Truethe of God stood, and continued in this Island for the space of many
hundred years, without either the Supremacy of Rome, or Transubstantiation,
or Private Masses, or any other like fantasies.

True it is, our Fathers of late years have been leadde in ignorance, and
have been violently forced from the Scriptures. But the examples, and wantes
of our Fathers, are not always sufficient Rules of Faith. The Heretic
Eutyches said, Sic a progenitoribus meis accipiens credidi: In hac Fide
genitus sum, and consecratus Deo: and in ea opto mori. Council. Chalcedonen.
Action. 1.
This Faith have I received from mine Ancesters: In this Faith I was borne,
and Baptized: and in the same I desire to die. And yet the same Faith was an
Error, and no Faith. So said the Arian Heretic Auxentius, Hilarious in
epist. Auxentij.
Quemadmodum ab infantia edoctus sum, ita credidi, and credo: As I have been
taught from my Childehoode, so I have believed, and so I believe still. So
likewise the Idolatrous Jews said unto the Prophet Hieremie, Hieremi. 44.
Sic fecimus nos, and Patres nostri: Reges nostri, and Principes nostri: Et
saturati sumus panibus, and been nobis erat. Thus have we done, and our
Fathers before us: and our Kings, and our Princes. And we had stoare, and
plenty of al things, and a merry world, and did full well. But God says unto
them, In statutis patrum vestrorum nolite ambulare etc. Ezechiel. 20.
Ego Dominus Deus vester. Walk not in the statutes of your Fathers. I am the
Lord your God.

How be it, we sit not in Judgment to condemn our Fathers: God only is
their Judge. S. Paul says, 2. Timoth* 2.
Solidum Dei fundamentum stat, habens hoc signaculum, Nouit Dominus, qui sint
sui. This fundation stands sound, having this seal, The Lord knows, who
be his own. Exodus 3.
God was hable to preserve the Bushe in the midst of the Flame: and Daniel
Daniel. 6.
in the Cave in the midst of the Lions: and the three Children in the midst
of the Furnace of Flaminge Fire: Daniel. 3.
and his people of Israel in the midst of the Red Sea: Exodus 14.
Even so was he hable to preserve his own in the midst of that deadly time
of darkness. S. Cyprian says, Ignosci potuit simpliciter erranti. Post
inspirationem vero, and Reuelationem factam, qui in eo, quod errauerat,
perseuerat, sine venia ignorantiae peccat. Praesumptione enim, atque
obstinatione superatur. He that erreth of simplicity (as our Fathers did) may
be pardoned: But after that God has once inspired the heart, and reveled his
truth, who so continues still in his error, offends without pardon of
ignorance. For he is over borne by presumption, and wilfulness.

Upon these words of Beda M. Hardinge Concludes thus: The Latin tongue for
the study of the Scriptures, was common to all the Nations of this Realm:
Ergo, The Scriptures were not translated into English. A very Child may soon
see the simplicity and the weakness of this reason. For even now,
notwithstanding the whole Bible be Translated into the English tongue,
extante in every Church, and common to all the people, yet the Latin tongue is
nevertheless Common to all the Nations of this Land, for the readinge of Old
Commentaries, and the A^cient Doctors, and so for the meditation, and study
of the Scriptures.



Neither do ye enter your selves, nor will you suffer others, that would
enter. For the highest Principle of their Religion is this: Ignorance is the
Mother of True Religion.

Origin. in prologo in Cantica Canti.
Archangeli nesciunt: Angeli non audiuerunt: Propheta non fensit: Filius ipse
non edidit. The Archangels know it not: the Angels have not heard it: the
Prophet has not fealte it: Nazianz. in Apologetico.
the Son of God him self has reveled to us no such thing. Certainly,
now, the Uele being drawn aside, and our faces being open, to behold the
Glory of God, Hilari. de Vnitate patris and Filij.
S. Paul says, Omnis Scriptura diuinitus inspirata vtilis est etc. Not only
one part of the Scriptures, but, Al, and every part thereof is profitable
etc. And again, Quae cunque Scripta sunt, ad Nostram Doctrinam Scripta sunt:
2. Corin. 3.
Al things, that are written, are written for our instruction. And therefore
Irenaeus says, 2. Timoth. 3.
as it is before alleged, Ex omni Scriptura Diuina manducate. Eat you of every
part of the Holy Scripture. Roman. 15.


Humility, Irenaeus li. 5.
and good life, whereof M. Hardinge would seem to make some great accoumpte,
is sooner learned of Knowledge, then of Ignorance. Ca. Omnes.
Chrysostoms says, Magna aduersus peccatum munitio est Scripturarum Lectio:
Magnum Praecipitium, and profundum barathrum Scripturarum ignoratio:
Chrysostom. De Lazaro Concio. 3.
nihil scire de Diuinis Legibus, magna Salutis perditio. Ea res and haereses
peperit, and vitam corruptam inuexit: hoc sursum deorsum miscuit omnia. The
readinge of the Scriptures is a great fense against sin. And the Ignorance
of the Scriptures is a dangerous downefal, and a great Dungeon. To know
nothing of Gods Laws, is the loss of Salvation. Ignorance has brought in
Heresies, and vicious life: Ignorance has turned al things vpsydowne.

Therefore the Apostles of Christ, and al other godly Fathers have evermore
incourraged the people to read the Scriptures: and evermore thought ye Church
of God to be in best case, when ye people was best instructed. S. Paul says,
Let the Word of God dwell abundantly amongst you. Coloss. 3.
Polycarpus Polycarpu^ ad Philippen.
says to the people, Confido vos been exercitatos esse in Sacris Literis: My
trust is, that ye be well instructed in the Holy Scriptures. Origin Origin. in
Leui* homi. 9.
says unto his people, Give your diligence, not only to hear Gods Word
in the Church, but also to be excercised in the same in your houses at home,
and day and night to be studious in the law of the Lord. S. Augustine
Augustine. in Psalm. 33.
says, Read ye the Holy Scriptures. For to that end God would have them
written, that we might receive comfort by them. S. Hierome Hieronym. in Epist.
ad Coloss. cap. 3.
says, as it is alleged before, Laici, non tantum sufficienter, sed etiam
abundanter Verbum Dei habere debent, and se inuicem docere: The Lay People
ought to have the Word of God, not only sufficiently, but also abundantly,
and to instruct one an other. S. Chrysostom Chrysostom. in Johan. homi. 1.
Theodoretus De natura hominis. lib. 5.
wills the Father with his Child, and the Husband with his Wife, at home in
his house to talk, and reason of the Word of God. Theodoretus writes thus,
Passim videas haec nostratia dogmata, etc. Ye may commonly see, that not only
the Teachers of the People, and Rulers of the Churches, but also Tailers,
Smithes, and Clothe woorkers, and other Artificers do understand the
Principles of our Religion: And further, that not only learned wemenne, if
there be any such, but also such Wemenne as live by their labor, and
Sewsters, and Maid servants, but also Husbandmenne, and Ditchers, and
Heardmenne, and Graffers can reason of the Holy Trinity, and of the Creation
of the world, and of the Nature of mankind, a great deal more skilfully,
then either Plato, or Aristotle was ever hable to do. Therefore Origin Origin.
in Iosue homi. 21.
says unto his hearers of the Lay People, Me dicente, quod sentio, vos
decernite, and examinate, si quid rectum est, aut minus rectum: While I speak,
that I think meet, examine, and judge you, whether it be well, or otherwise.
Thus in old times the Uulgare People, and such as M. Hardinge calls Swine,
and Rude, and Rasshe people, and Curious Busy Bodies, were hable not only to
understand the Scriptures, but also to judge of their preachers. And therefore
the wicked Renegate Emperor Iulianus reproved the Christians (even as M.
Hardinge now does us) for that they suffered their Women, Cyrillus contra
Julian. lib. 6. and lib. 7.
and Children, to read the Scriptures.

But the Enemies of Gods Truth, for fear, and conscience of their weakness
have evermore used violently to take away the Word of God, not only from
women, and Children, but also from all the whole people. Chrysostom says,
Chrysostom. in Opere imperfecto. hom. 44.
Haeretici Sacerdotes^claudunt ianuas Veritatis. Sciunt enim, si manifestata
fuerit Veritas, Ecclesiam suam esse relinquendam, and se de Sacerdotali
dignitate ad humilitatem venturos popularem. Heretic priests shut up the
gates of the Truth. For they know, that if the Truth once appear, they must
needs leave their Church, and from the dignity of their Priesthood come
down to the state of other people. For Tertullian Tertullian. in libro de
Trinitate. Johan. 3. Amos. 6.
says, Scriptura Diuina Haereticoru^ frauds, and furta facile conuincit, and
detegit. The Holy Scripture will easily bewraye, and confound the guiles, and
theaftes of Heretics. Christ says, He that does ill, hates the Light. And
therefore they say, as it is written in the Prophet Amos, Tace, and ne
recorderis nominis Domini. Hold thy peace, and never think upon the name of
the Lord. But miserable is that Religion, that cannot stand without hidinge,
and suppressinge of the Truth of God.

FINIS.
THE XVI. ARTICLE, OF CONSECRATION UNDER SILENCE.
The B. of Sarisburie.
Or that it was then lawful for the Priest, to pronounce the words of
Consecration Closely, and in Silence unto him self.

M. Hardinge. The.1. Division.
The matter of this Article is neither one of the higheste Mysteries, nor one of
the Greatest Keys of our Religion, how so ever M. Iuel pleases him self
with that report, thinkinge thereby to impair the estimation of the Catholic
Church. The diversity of observation in this behalf shows the
indifferency of the thing. For else if one manner of pronouncinge the
words of Consecration had been thought a necessary point of Religion, it
had been euerywhere uniform, and inuariable. That the Bread, and Wine be
Consecrated by the words of our Lord pronounced by the priest, as in the
person of Christ, by virtue of the which, through the grace of the Holy
Ghost, the Bread, and Wine are Changed into our Lords Body, and Blood:
(213) The.213. Untruth. Often avouched, and never proved.
this thing has in all times, and in all places, and with consent of al
inuariably been doonne, and so believed. But the manner of pronouncinge the
words, concerning Silence, or open utterance, according to diversity of
places, has been diverse.

The B. of Sarisburie.
This, says M. Hardinge, is but a small Keye of our Religion. Which thing
may very well appear, both otherwise, and also by the small weight, and
sclendernes of his proufes. How be it, in cases of Religion, and in the Service
of God, nothing ought to be judged small, specially that may deceiu^ the
people. Uerily, how small so ever they will now have this keie to seem, as it
has been heretofore cause of no small Superstition, so it has shut out
Gods people from the sight, and understanding of our greatest Mysteries.

Certain it is, That the Religion of Christ may well stand without this kind
of Mystical Silence, as it may also without Tra^substantiation, or Private
Mass, or any other their like fantasies. But if the matter be so small,
wherefore doothe M. Hardinge take so great pains to prove it, and that by so
great untruths, and so manifest Fables? Wherefore are they not ashamed, to
say, that Christ him self at his Last Supper Consecrated in Silence, Thom.
in 3. par. Summae, quae* 78. ar. 8.
and Secrecy, and that in like order, and form, as they do now? Or how
durst the Bishops in this present Council of Tridente Council. Triden.
Session. 2.
so solemnly to abanne, and accurse al them, that dare to find fault with
the same? So small a matter, as this is now supposed to be, should never need so
great a do.

But whether these words be uttered Secretly, or Alowde, he imagines, that
by the power thereof the substance of the Bread, and Wine is Really, and wholly
changed into the Substance of the Body, and Blood of Christ. The untruth
hereof is manifestly reproved by S. Augustine, S. Chrysostom, Theodoretus,
Gelasius, and by the general consent of all the Old Fathers: and is answered
more at large in the tenthe Article of this Book. Certainly this error
neither was ever confirmed in the Latin Church, D. Tonstal. De Eucharist. li.
1.
before the Council of Laterane in Rome, which was above twelve hundred years
after Christ, nor ever received in the Greek Church, Conc. Lateran. Anno
1215.
from the Birthe of Christ until this day.

M. Hardinge. The.2. Division.
The Greeks in the East Church have thought it good, to pronounce the
words of Consecration Clara voce, as we find in Chrysostomes Mass, and as
Bessarion writes, A^ta voce, that is plainly, out Alowde, or with a loud
voice. Sacerdos Alta voce ^uxta Orientalis Ecclesiae ritum verba illa
pronunciat, Hoc est Corpus meum: The Priest, says Bessarion, after the rite,
or manner of the East Church pronounces with a loud voice these words,
This is my Body. Which manner of Loud pronouncinge was thought good, to be
used in the Greek Church, as it may be gathered by that Bessarion writes
(who being a Greek borne, and brought up in learning amongst the Greeks,
knew right well the order of that Church) to the intent the people might
thereby, for the better maintenance of their Faith, be stirred, and warned to
give token of consent, and of belief thereto. When the Priest, says he,
pronounces those words with a loud voice, the people standinge by, ^ n
vtraque part, that is, first at the Consecration of the Body, and again at
the Consecration of the Blood, answeareth, Amen: as though they said thus,
Truly so it is, as thou say. For, where as, Amen, is an Aduerbe of
Affirminge in Hebrewe, in Greek it signifies so much, as Truly. And
therefore the people answearinge Amen, to those words, Verily, Bessarion, a
young Doctor. He lived Anno. Domini. 1459.
say they, these gifts set forth are the Body, and Blood of Christ. So
we believe, So we confess. This far Bessarion. It is declared by Clement Lib.
8. Constitutionum Apostolicarum, that the people said Amen, when the words
of Consecration had been pronounced. Whereby we understand, that order to
have been taken by the Apostles. The same Custom also may be geathered out of
S. Ambrose, who says thus: Dicit tibi Sacerdos, Corpus Christi: and tu dicis,
Amen, hoc est, verum. Quod confitetur lingua, teneat affectus. De Sacram. li.
4. ca. 5. The Priest says, The Body of Christ: and thou say, Amen, that
is to say, True. Hold with thy heart that, which thou confessest with the
tongue. He says likewise hereof, De ijs, qui initiantur Mysterijs, ca. 9.
Frustra ab illis respondetur, Amen, etc. Amen is answered in vain by them,
who dispute against that, which is received, says Leo. Sermon 6. De Ieiunio
7. Mensis.

The B. of Sarisburie.
It is clearly witnessed by all these doctors, against M. Hardinge, and the
order of the Church of Rome, that the words of Consecration were pronounced
with a Loud Uoice: and that the People, not only heard, but also
understood, and answered the same. Wherefore M. Harding can find but small
relief in these Authorities. Uerily in his Church, which he so often calls
Ancient, and only Catholic, the people neither answeareth, nor
understands, nor hears the words of Consecration. Thus it appears, He
has alleged these five Doctors, in three special points, against him self.

M. Hardinge adds hereto: Amen, is as much as, Verum est, It is true. And
therefore the People answearinge, Amen, confessed thereby, that they believed
the very Real, and Substantial Changinge of the Bread into the Body of
Christ. It was needelesse, and out of season to renew this matter in this
place. But he thought it better skill, to speak from the purpose, then utterly
to hold his peace, and to say nothing.

First, as it is said before, The Latin Church never received this new
Belief, before the Council of Laterane holden in Rome: Anno Domin^. 1215.
the Greek Church never until this day. Therefore by M. Hardinges skille the
people thus answearinge, said, Amen, to that thing, that they believed not:
and so Confirmed the Child eight hundred years, and more, before it was
borne. In deed, The people said, Amen, to that, they heard spoken by the
Priest. But the Priest spoke nothing, neither of Real Presence: nor of
Transubstantiation: nor of Accidents without Subject. Therefore it is not
likely, the Peoples answer had relation to any such matter. Otherwise they
should seem to answer that thing, that was not spoken. The Priest only
uttered these Words of Christ, This is my Body: Whereunto the Greeks make
answer in this sort, as it is recorded in the Council of Florence, Council.
Florenti. Sessione Vltim. Ambrosius De ijs, qui initiantur. cap. 9.
Firmiter credimus, Verbis illis Dominicis Sacramentum fieri. We believe
steadfastly, that by these words of our Lord there is made a S^cramente.

Likewise S. Ambrose, Post Consecrationem, Corpus Christi Significatur: After
the Consecration, the Body of Christ is Signified. Again, Ante
Consecrationem, aliud dicitur: post Consecrationem, Sanguis nuncupatur. Et tu
dicis, Amen, hoc est, Verum est. Before the Consecration, it is called an other
thing: After Consecration, it is named the Blood of Christ. And thou say,
Amen, that is to say, It is True. So Dionysius writes unto Sixtus the Bishop
of Rome, Eusebius lib. 7. cap. 9.
of one that had benne Baptized emougste Heretics, Gratiarum actionem in
Ecclesia audiuit, and ad illam vna cum alijs respondit, Amen. He heard the
Thankesgeuinge in the Church, and to the same together with others he
answered, Amen. (...).
So S. Augustine, Fratres nostri eadem Sacramenta celebrantes, and Vnum Amen,
respondentes. Our Brethren resortinge to one Sacrament, and answearinge al one
Amen. This answearinge, Amen, imported not any sudden Transubstantiation, but
a Thankesgeuinge unto God for our delivery by the Death of Christ.

But Leo says, Augustine. in Psalm. 33.
They answer, Amen, in vain, that dispute against the same thing, Leo De
Ieiunio. 7. Mensis, Sermon. 6.
that they receive. For clear understanding of which words, it behooves
thee, good Reader, to remember, that Leo, as well herein, as also in sundry
other places, bends the whole force of his learning against the Heretic
Eutyches, whoes error was this, much like unto the common error, that is
now defended, that Christ's Body, after his Ascension, was turned wholly into
the Godhead, and so was no longer a Man's Body. Against which error Leo
takes an argument of the holy Mysteries: wherein the Faithful People, as with
their Bodily Mouth they receive the Mystical Bread, and Wine, so with their
Sprite, and Faith they receive the Body, and Blood of Christ, and that
verily, and in Truth: and in witness thereof ye receiver says, Amen. But,
says Leo, he says, Amen, in vain, that denies the same thing, that he
receives: That is to say, That receives the Sacrament of Christ's Body,
and yet nevertheless is persuaded, as the Heretic Eutyches was, that Christ
in deed has no Body. And in this sense S. Augustine seems to say, Beda.
1. Corin. 10.
Mors illi erit, non Vita, qui mendacem putauerit Vitam. The receiuinge of the
Sacrament shall be Death, and not life unto him, that thinks, that Christ,
being the life it self, was a liar, Deliueringe these holy Mysteries, as the
Sacrament, or Pleage of his Body, him self in deed having no Body. So
likewise Prosper Aquitanus, Prosper De promiss. Dei, part 1. cap. 6.
Christum a Populo Iudaico fuisse occisum, nullus ia^ ambigit Christianus:
Cuius Sacrum Sanguine^ omnis nunc terra accipiens, clamat, Amen: Vt neganti
ludaeo, quod occiderit Christum, recte dicatur a Deo, Vox Sanguinis fratris tui
clamat ad me de terra: Whether Christ were slain of the Jews, or no, there
is no Christian man now, that can stand in doubt. For now all the Earth
receives his holy Blood, and cries, Amen. Therefore, if the Jew will deny,
that ever he slew Christ, God may justly say unto him, The voice of the
Blood of thy Brother cries unto me from the Earth. So S. Chrysostom,
Chrysostom. in Matthae. hom. 83.
Haec afferentes Mysteria, ora ipsorum consuimus. Si enim mortuus Christus non
est, cuius Symbolum, ac Signum hoc Sacrificium est? Layeinge forth these
Mysteries, we stop their mouths. For, if Christ dyed not, whoes Sign then,
and whoes Token is this Sacrifice? Thus, by the judgment of these learned
Fathers, Eutyches the Heretic, or any other, that denied, either the Body,
or the Death of Christ, might soon be reproved, even by the receiuinge of
these holy Mysteries. For they receive the Sacrament, and yet deny the thing
it self, yt is represented by ye Sacrament: and so, as Leo says, they
dispute against the thing it self, that they receive. And thus Leo him self
plainly expounds, and opens his own meaning: Leo Epistola. 81. ad
Palaestinos.
Qua^ sibi in huius Sacrame^ti praesidio Spe^ relinquu^t, qui in Saluatoris
nostri corpore nega^t Humanae substantiae veritatem? Dicant, quo Sacrificio
sint reconciliati: Dicant, quo Sanguine sint redempti. What hope do they leave
them selves in the healpe of this Sacrament, that say, There is no Truth of
the Substance of Man in the Body of our Saueour? Let them tell me, by what
Sacrifice they are reconciled: Let them tell me, with what Blood they are
Redeemed.

By these Holy Fathers it is plain, that, who so receives the Holy Mystery
of Christ's Body, and yet thinks, and holds, that Christ in deed has no
Body, as Eutyches the Heretic did, he disputes against that thing it
self, that he receives. For Gelasius says, Gelasius contra Eutychem.
Hoc nobis in ipso Domino Christo sentiendum est, quod in eius Imagine
profitemur. We must think the same of Christ the Lord him self, that we
profess (in the Sacrament, which is) his Image. And therefore in the
Communion Book, that bears the name of S. James, it is written thus: Quoties
cunque comederitis hunc panem, and hunc Calicem biberitis, Liturgia I^ cobi.
Mortem Filij Hominis annuntiatis, donec veniat. Populus respondet, Credimus,
and Confitemur. As often, as ye shall eat this Bread, or Drink this Cup, ye
do publishe the Death of the Son of Man, until he come. Hereto the people
makes answer, We Believe it, and we Confess it. This is it, that S.
Ambrose, S. Chrysostom, Leo, and Clement^cal, Amen. And this is that undoubted
Truth of Christ's Body, not in the Sacrament, as M. Hardinge imagines, but
in the Unity of One Person, that Leo defends against the Heretic
Eutyches. Bessarions Authority in these cases cannot be great: both for that
he was but of very late years, and therefore a very young Doctor to be
alleged: and also for that, being promoted to the Bishoprike of Tusculum, and
made a Cardinal of Rome, An. Dom. 143 ^.
in the late Council of Florence, contrary to the minds, and judgments of
the rest of his Brethren of Graecia, he openly flattered, and yielded him self
unto the Pope.

M. Hardinge. The.3. Division.
And that the people should give their consent, and apply their Faith to
this truth without error, and deceit, and that by saieinge, Amen, they
should then Believe, and Confess, The Bread, and Wine to be made the Body,
and Blood of Christ, (214) The.214. Untruth. For Justinian meante no such
thing. But M. Hardinge is licensed at Louaine, to make commentes, as he
lists.
when it was made in deed, and not else, for so were it a great error, for
this cause Justinian the Emperor made an ordinance, that the Bishops, and
Priests should to this intent pronounce their Service plainly, distinctly,
and so, as it might be understood, that the people might answer, Amen:
(which is to be referred to each part of the Service, but specially to the
Consecration) that they might believe, and Confess, it was the Body, and
Blood of Christ, (215) The.215. Untruth, vain, and Fantas^ical* For
whereunto should the people answer, Amen, hearing no part of the Prayer?
when it was in deed, and not so confess, when it was not: which might
happen, if they heard not the Words of Consecration plainly pronounced.
And hereunto specially that Constitution of Justinian is to be restrained, as
pertaininge only to the Greek Church, wherein he lived (216) The.216.
Untruth. For this Law touched as well the Church of Rome, as the Church of
^recia: as shall appear.
and not to be stretched further to serve for proof of all the service to be
had, and said in the vulgar tongue in the VVeste Church, as to that purpose
of our new teachers it is untruly alleged.

The B. of Sarisburie.
So many Untruethes in so little room, so constantely to be avouched without
blushinge? Where is the Fear of God? Where is the Reverence of the Reader?
Where is shame become? First, neither doothe that godly Emperor Justinian
once mention, or touch this New Fantasy of M. Hardinges Doctrine: nor did
the Greek Church, as it is sufficiently already proved, ever hitherto
consent unto the same. Will M. Hardinge make the world believe, that the
people openly in the Church, gave their consentes unto that thing, that they
never believed, but knew undoubtedly to be an error? Is he hable to allege
not one Council, not one Doctor, not one Father, that ever expounded, Amen, in
this sort? Is the matter so miserable, and so bare, that no honest witness will
speak for it? Or must M. Hardinges bare word, without Scripture, Council,
Doctoure, or Father, be taken for the Doctrine of the Church?

The Emperors words are plain, We command all the holy Bishops, and
Priests, De Ecclesia. Diuer. Caepitulis, Constitutione. 123.
to minister the holy Oblation, and the Sacrament of Baptism, and other
Prayers (not cloasely, or in Silence, as the manner is now in the Church of
Rome, but) with a loud voice, that may be heard of the Faith full people
(not, to testify M. Hardinges Transubstantiation, which then was not known,
but) that the hearts of the hearers may thereby both the more be humbled to
repentance, and also the more be sturred to glorify God. (...).
If the pronouncinge of these two Syllables, Amen, be proof sufficient to
warrant Transubstantiation, then may we easily find the same
Transubstantiation, not only in the Sacrament of Christ's Body, but also in
the Sacrament of Baptism, and in all other Public prayers. For in every
hereof the people was willed, to say, Amen.

Secondely, M. Hardinge says, (and he says it alone: for noman ever said
it before him) that the Bishop, and Priest was thus commanded to speak
alowde, least the people should happen to preuente the time, and to answer,
Amen, out of season, before the Sacrament wers consecrate. And this must be
taken, as a grave, and a deep consideration, and meet for the Emperor of the
world. But, O the vanities of these vain Men. For whereunto should the
people answer, Amen, that heard no part of the Prayer? Or how should they
Confirm, that was said by the Priest, that knew not one word, what he
said? Certainly it appears not, that the Emperor Justinian doubted so
much the over hasty answearinge of the people: but rather thought, that, if
the Priests voice were not heard, the people should be able to answer
nothing. For to that end he allegeth these words of S. Paul, ^ Corin. 14.
How shall the unlearned man a^sweare, Amen, to thy thanks geuinge? For he
knows not, what thou say.

Last of al, he says, This Constitution of the Emperor Justinian touched
only the Greek Church, and perteined nothing to the Church of Rome:
addinge further, That by these New Masters it has been, and is otherwise
untruly alleged. Thus much M. Hardinge only of him self, without any other
further Authority, either Old, or New. Perhaps he would have us think,
according to that Childishe Fable of their forged Donation, Donatio
Constantini in. 1. tomo Council.
that the Emperor Constantinus had given over the whole Empiere of the Weaste
part of the world unto the Pope, and that therefore Justinian the Emperor
had now nothing to do in the Church of Rome. But Justinian him self,
contrary to M. Hardinges Commentary, commands his Laws to be taken as
general, and to be keapte universally throughout the world. For thus he
writes, Visum est, praesentem Legem omni terrarum Orbi ponendam, Cod. De
Iudicijs. Cap. properandum.
nullis locorum, vel temporum angustijs coar^andam: We have thought it good,
that this Law should generally concern the whole world, to be restrained by
no limits of place, or time. And, making an Ordinance for the Church, he
writes thus, Cod. De Episc. and Cleri. Ca. Generaliter.
Et hoc, non solum in Veteri Roma, vel in hac Regia Ciuitate, sed and in omni
terra, vbicunque Christianorum Nomen colitur* obtinere sa^cimus. And this Law
we will to take place, not only in the Old City of Rome, or in this princely
City of Constantinople, but also in all the world, where the name of
Christians is had in Honor. Eusebius in vita Constantin^. Oratione. 4.
Likewise Eusebius writes of Constantinus the Emperors Proclamation for the
keepinge of the Sunnedaie. Upon that day he commanded, not only the Greeks,
but also al other Nations, that were subject to the Empiere of Rome, to reast
from bodily labors. (...).
And concerning such matters, as specially touched the City of
Constantinople, he writes thus in the same Law, that M. Harding has her^
alleged: What so ever things namely concern the Church of this Princely
City of Constantinople, we have comprised the same in a particulare Law
specially seruinge to that purpose. (...).
Yet nevertheless, M. Hardinge thinks it lawful for him to say, The
Emperors mind was not, to extend this Law to the Church of Rome: and we
must believe him upon his bare word, yea although the Emperor him self say
the contrary.

But to what purpose excepteth M. Harding the Latin Church in this behalf?
was not S. Ambrose B. of Millaine: Clemens, and Leo Bishops of Rome? al three
Bishops of the Latin Church? And does not M. Hardinge say, M. Harding
Contrary to him self.
that every of these three pronounced the words of Consecration openly, with
loud voice, and not in Silence? And doothe not M. Hardinge further tell us, It
was the Tradition of the Apostles? Wherefore then doothe he so nicely except
the Church of Rome? Had the Church there any special Privilege to break the
Apostles Traditions, more then others? Certainly, Clemens Alexandrinus says,
The Traditions of the Apostles, as well in the East Church, as in the Weaste,
were al one, even as was their Doctrine. Fuit vna omnium Apostoloru^, ^icut
Doctrina, ita Traditio. Thus has M. Hardinge found by his own Confession,
both the Tradition of the Apostles, and the Ancient Doctors, Ambrose,
Clemens, and Leo, and both the Churches of God, the Greek, and the Latin
against him self.

M. Hardinge. The.4. Division.
Now in this VVeast Church, which is the Latin Church, the people having
been sufficiently instructed, touching the belief of the Body, and Blood
of our Lord in the Sacrame^te, (217) The.217. Vntruethe. For there is no such
thing decreed by the Ancient Fathers.
it has been thought by the Fathers convenient, the Words of Consecration
to be pronounced by the priest closely, and in silence, rather then with open
voice. Wherein they had special regard to the dignity of that high Mystery.
And doubtless for this point they understood, as S. Basile writes, that the
Apostles, and the Fathers, which at the beginning made laws for the order of
Ecclesiastical things, maintained the Mysteries in their due authority, by
keepinge them secret, and in silence. For it is not, These words of S.
Basile perteine nothing to the Sacraments.
says he, any Mystery at al, which is brought forth to the populare, and
vulgar cares, whereof he wrote very truly before: Ei, quod publicatum est,
and per se apprehendi potest, imminere conte^ptum: Ei vero, quod remotum est,
ac rarum, etiam naturaliter quoda^modo esse coniuncta^ admirationem. That, what
is done openly, and made common, and of it self may be atteined, it is like
to come in contempt, and be despised. But what is keapte far of, and is
seldom gotten, that even naturally in manner is never without woonderinge at.
And in such respect Christ gave warninge, that Precious Stoanes be not
strewed before hogs.

The B. of Sarisburie.
It is most certain, and therefore the more lamentable, that, as it now fares
through the whole Church of Rome, the people knows, neither the Substance,
nor the Meaning, nor the Use, nor the Effect, nor the End, or purpose of the
Sacrament, nor the Consecration, nor any Word thereto belonginge. They hear
nothing: They see nothing: They understand nothing: They learn nothing:
The Pope, the Cardinals, the Bishops, the Priests teach them nothing: It
is thought to be the surest fence, and strongest ward for that Religion, that
they should be keapte still in ignorance, and know nothing: M. Hardinge both
in this place, and also before, calls them al Hogs, Articul. 13.
Di^uisione. 6.
and Swine, as insensible, and Brute beasts, and void of reason, and hable to
judge, and conceive nothing. Yet he blussheth not to say, The people of the
Latin Church is sufficiently instructed, touching the Sacraments: And ye
more sufficiently, as it appears, then ever they were instructed in the
Primitive Church, or in ye time of ye Old learned Fathers. Uerily Ignorance
is easily learned: They may soon be taught, to know nothing, But the
Doctrine, that he means, stands in Transubstantiation, and Real Presence,
and other like matters incident unto the same, such as the Godly people in the
Old times never learned. How be it, if the people were thoroughly instructed,
and knew the meaning of al Mysteries, would M. Hardinge thereof conclude,
That therefore they should not hear the Words of Consecration? Is this the
Logique of Louaine? who ever taught him to frame such a Syllogismus? In what
Form, in what Mood may it stand? How may this Antecedente, and this
Consequente join together?

But, where he adds, That in consideration hereof, the Fathers thought it
convenient, yt words of Consecration should be pronounced in Silence, this,
bisides other great wantes, is also a great untruth, to make up his simple
Syllogismus. For what were these Fathers? what names had they? where dwelte
they? In what Council, in what Country met they? This is a very strange
case, that, being Fathers, and such Fathers, hable to alter the Traditions of
the Apostles, and the whole state of the Church, nom^ should know them, but
only M. Hardinge.

As for S. Basile, whose name he much abuses to this purpose, it is plain,
yt he speaks not, neither of ye Sacrament, nor of the words of
Consecration. And here, good Christian Reader, mark, I beseech thee, the
circumspection, and constancy of M. Harding. For proof of his late invented
order of the Latin Church, he shows us examples of the Greek Church: and
to auouche his Consecration in Silence, he allegeth the Authority of S.
Basile, who, by his own Confession evermore pronounced the same alowde with
open voice, and never in Silence. He should neither so unadvisedly auouche the
names of Ancient Fathers, nor have so small regard unto his Reader. Basil. De
Spir. Sanc. Ca. 27. (...).
True it is, as S. Basile says, Familiar use breeds conte^pte. And for yt
cause Pope Innocentius says, The words of Consecration were commanded to be
said in Silence, Ne Sacrosancta verba vil^scerent: L^^st the holy words
should be despised. The like hereof is surmised also by John Billet. Thomas of
Aquine says, That the Oblation, and Consecration belong only to the Priest,
and that therefore the words be spoken in Silence, as nothing perteininge to
the People. But if the people be thus naturally inclined, the less they hear,
or know things, the more to have them in admiration, Innocen. 3. De Sacro
Altaris Myster. li. 3. Ca. 1. (...). Billet, De Di^in. Officijs. Thom par. 3.
que. 183.
then were it good, they should never hear, neither the Words of Baptism,
nor any part of the Gospel, nor the Lords Prayer, nor the Name of God, or
Christ, no nor the Mass it self. And, as now their ears be barred from
hearing the words, that make the Sacrament, so were it good policy, their
eyes were also barred, from seeinge the Sacrament. For naturally contempt
grows as well of Sight, as of Hearing, or rather more. For by M. Hardinges
skill, these were good ways, to breed Reverence in the people, and to increase
Devotion. But this is an vnreuerent reverence, and a disordred honor of God.
The people of God is not made to serve the Sacraments: but the Sacraments are
made to serve the people. But these be the secret works, and policies of
Satan, to make the simple believe, they Reverence the Sacraments, and yet
understand no part, neither of the meaning, nor of the use of the
Sacraments. Lactantius says, Lactant. li. 5. cap. 20.
Hinc fida silentia instituta sunt ab hominibus callidis, vt nesciret populus,
quid colere^: Therefore subtle, and crafty men divised to have their Sacrifices
wrought in Silence, that the people should not know, what thing they
honored for their God.

M. Hardinge. The.5. Division.
If in the Old law Priests were chosen (as S. Ambrose writes) to cover the
Arc of the Testamente, because it is not lawful for all persons to see the
deapth of M^steries: If the Sons of Caath by Gods appointemente did only
bear the Arc, and those other Holy things of the Tabernacle on their
shoulders, when so ever the children of Israel removed, and marched forewarde
in Wilderness, being Clo^ely folded, and lapte within vailes, courteines, and
palles, by the Priests: and might not at no time touch, nor see the same upon
pain of death, which were but Figures of this: how much more is this
high, and worthy Mystery to be honored with Secretenes, Closenes, and
Silence?

The B. of Sarisburie.
Here M. Hardinge seems to reason thus: In the time of the Old Testament it
was not lawful, for every of the people, to behold the Ark of God, and the
things therein contained: Ergo, the Priest ought to pronounce the words of
Consecration in Silence, and secretly to him self. This simple reason holds
from Moses, to Christ: from the Old Testament, to the New: from Seeinge, to
Hearing: and to be short, from somewhat, to nothing: and serves only to
control all the Ancient Fathers of the Church, who, as M. Harding knows, and
has already in part confessed, never pronounced these words in such
secret sort, nor ever used these policies for increase of Reverence.
Notwithstanding M. Hardinge, the better to lead alonge his simple Reader,
has conningly drawn in the names of two Old Fathers, Ambrose, and Origin,
to the intent to make his own Conclusion to seem theires. And thus under his
painted cooueringes, and Ueles of Eloquence, he foldeth up Closely, not the
Ark of God, but, as his woonte is, great Untruethes.

M. Hardinge. The.6. Division.
For this cause, as they report, says Carolus Magnus, that noble, virtuous,
and learned Emperor, writing to his Schoolemaister Alcuinus our Countreiman,
and first teacher of Philosophy in Paris, It is become a Custom in the
Church, that the Canon, and Consecration be said by the Priest Secretly,
that those words so Holy, and perteininge to so great a Mystery, should
not grow in contempt, whiles al in manner through common use bearinge them
away, would singe them in the high ways, in the streets, and in other
places, where it were not thought convenient. Whereof it is told, that before
this Custom was received, Sheapheardes when they sange them in the field,
were by Gods hand strooken. Luther him self in Praeceptorio, is much
against them, that would have the Cano^ of the Mass to be pronounced with a
loud voice for the better understanding.

The B. of Sarisburie.
It appears, M. Harding is much s^anted of good Authorities, when he is thus
driven by Tales, and Fables, to cou^treuaile the Tradition of the Apostles: and
that, by such Fables, as he him self is feign to cut of in the midst, and
cannot truly report without shame. How be it, nothing comes amiss, that
may serve to astonne the simple. Such grounds be sufficient for such
Doctrine. The tale, as it is told by Innocentius, and Durandus emongst other
Fables, is this: Certain Shepeheardes, having by often hearing learned the
words of Consecration, began to practice the same emongst them selves, over
their Bread, in the field, upon a stoane. Suddenly the bread was fleashe:
the poor men were amassed: God was angry: Fiere came from Heaven, and burnte
them up: not one leafte alive to tell these tidinges. Hereupon, says M.
Hardinge, this law was made. For view of the likelihoode hereof, they say,
that the Priest him self, be he never so holy, onless^ he have his Altar, his
Superaltare, his Chalice, his Corporesse, his Lights, his Uestimentes, and al
other appourtenances necessary: Unless he steadfastly eye, and behold the
Bread: unless he pronounce al these five words with one breathe, without
stop: and unless he have a special intent, and mind to work Consecration,
he labors in vain, and can never Consecrate. Yet these poor Shepeheardes,
not being Priests, for ought that we know, nor having either Altar, or
Superaltare, or Uestimentes, or any knowledge of these Cauteles, nor intention,
or mind to work Consecration, yet notwithstanding, had Consecrate
suddenly before they were ware. By these it may be geathered, that
Consecration is easier for a Shepehearde, then for a Priest. But when these
Shepeheardes were al slain in the place, where they stood, and not one leafte
alive to report these doings, M. Hardinge should have told us, by what
Angel, or Archangel, or other secret Revelation, this tale afterward came to
light. His Reader would also long to know, in what Kingedome, or in what
Country, in what Kings, or Popes days these things happened: in what
Chronicle, in what Story they were recorded. Otherwise he will suspecte, M.
Hardinge found it in the Shepeheardes Calendare. And touching this New
Decree for Silence, and Secrecy, M. Hardinge should have taught us, in what
Council, in what Synod, in what Convocation, in what Di^t^, in what Country,
and at what time it was determined: who was Legate at the dooinge, who was
Referendarie, who was Presidente, who was Present. If he have nothing to
say, his tale has lost his grace, and will be thought a Shepeheardes Fable.

But hereof, these two things M. Hardinge might well have learned: First,
that before these strange unknown Shepeheardes gave this attempt, the
Consecration was euerywhere pronounced alowde: And farther, that the same
Consecration was pronounced in the Common Known Mother tongue of every
Country: that the Shepeheardes might learn it, and understand it, Onl^sse M.
Hardinge will happily say, They were Greek, or Latin Shepeheardes.

M. Hardinge. The.7. Division.
The Fathers of the Primitive Church had this Sacrament in such reverence,
and honor, that they excluded some sorts of Faitheful people from being
present at the celebration of it, thinkinge them unworthy not only to hear
the mystical words of Consecration pronounced, but also to see the Forms of
the outward Elements, and to be in the Church, whiles that most holy
Sacrifice was offered. They were these, Catechumeni, Energumeni, and
Poenitentes. The first were learners of our belief, who, as they were daily
instructed, believed in Christ: and as S. Augustine writes, bare Christ's
Cross in their foreheade, and marked them selves with the same. Tracta. in ^o.
11.
The second were such, as, notwithstanding they had been Christened, Yet
for the Inconstancy of their mind were vexed with unclean Sprites. The
third sort were they, who for their sins committed, had not yet made an
end of dooinge their open penance. Al these were judged by the Governors of
the Church at the beginning unworthy to be present at these holy Mysteries.
Now if this great reverence toward the holy things, in them was justly
praised, the admittinge of al sorts of people, not only to be present, and
to behold the same, but also to hear, and understand the Words of
Consecration (218) The.218. Untruth. For the Contrary is known, and euidente.
(that has thus always been honored with silence, and Secretenes) cannot
seem to wise, zealous, and godly men, a thing commendable: specially in
these times, in which the holy Christian Discipline of the Church is loosed,
and utterly shaken of, and no difference nor accoumpte of any diversity made
bitweene the perfect, and godly people, and them, that ought to do open
penance, that be possessed with Devils, and be infamous for heinous and
notorious crimes committed.

The B. of Sarisburie.
The reverence, that M. Hardinge presumes, was given only to this Sacrament,
was given likewise, and in as ample sort to the Sacrament of Baptism. And, as
the Catechument were sequestered from the presence, and sight of the one
Sacrament, so were they also sequestered from the other. In the Council holden
at Arausica Council. Arausican. Ca. 19.
it is written thus: Catechumeni ad Baptisterium nunquam admittendi sunt: The
Catechum^ni may never be admitted to the place of Baptism. S. Chrysostom,
touching the words of Baptism, writes thus: Chrysostom. in epist. ad
Galat. cap. 4.
Verba Dei, quae noru^t Fideles, in Aquae Lauacro per Sacerdotem pronuntiata,
tanquam in vtero quodam, Formant, ac Regenera^t eum, qui Baptizatur: The
words of God, which the Faithful know, being pronounced by the Priest in
the Water of Baptism, do Form, and Regenerate him, that is Baptized, as if
it were in the Mothers woombe. Chrysostom. in Lad Corin. homi. 40.
Likewise again he says, Cupiam sane, verba illa clare proferre etc. Feign
would I in plain sort utter these words (of Baptism) if the presence of
these ungodly men, the Heathens, did not let me. They cause my interpretation
to be the harder: I may not specke plainly, nor publishe our Mysteries because
of them. So says Cyrillus, Cyrill. Contra Julian. li. 7.
Dicerem de Baptismo alia, nisi vererer non initiatorum aures: Touching
Baptism, I would say more, s^uinge that I doubt the ears of these profane
people, that are not Christened. To like purpose S. Augustine August. in Psalm.
104.
says, Opera nostia bona vident etia^ Pagani: Sacramenta vero nostra
occulta^tut illis: The Heathens may see our good works: But our Sacraments
(that is, our Baptism, and our Lords Supper) are hidden from them.

The like may be said both of Public, and Solemn Prayers, and also of the
understanding of the Scriptures. Chrysostom Chrysostom. ad popul Antiochen.
homi. 79.
says, Quid Oratione potentius? Et Catechumenis quidem hoc nondu^ permissum
est, etc. What thing is there more mighty then the Solemn Prayer? (of the
Church) Yet is it not lawful for the Catechumeni to use the same. For they are
not yet come to that boldness. But you (being Christened) are commanded to
pray for the whole world, and for the Church. Thus, like as for reverence of
the Mystery, the Catechumen^ might not be present at the Minis^ration of the
Sacrament of Christ's Body, even so for like reverence, they might not be
Present, neither at the Sacrament of Baptism, nor at the Solemn Common
Prayers. But now let us weigh M. Hardinges reasons. In the old times (says
he) the Catechumeni, which were only Nouices in the Faith, and as yet
unchristened, and other Renegates, Frantike, and ungodly people, might not be
present at the Holy Mysteries: Ergo, Now the godly Faithful people may not
hear the words of Consecration. Noman would use such Logique, but M.
Hardinge. And yet this, he thinks, for Wise, Zealous, and Godly men is
sufficient. As for the rest, in deed M. Hardinge, as a man of travail, that
has been in Rome, and has seen Bishops, and Cardinals men of war:
Children, and Boys set in the highest Degrees, and Dignities of the Church:
Open Stews so dearly rented: so many thousand Cortegianes so well regarded:
Priests so freely allowed to keep their Concubines: The Church of God turned
into a Cave of Thieves: Such corruption in the Cleregie: such corruption in
the People: So little difference bitweene Wife, and Harlot: Honest, and
Unhonest: Godly, and Ungodly: and, as S. Bernarde says of them, the Servants
of Christ, seruinge Antichriste: and all this suffered without Correction, and
well allowed of, and accoumpted Catholic: seeinge, I say, the Church of God
in Rome thus used, he may justly complain of corruption of life, and
looseness of Discipline. How be it, it were hard hereof to conclude, that
therefore noman may hear the Words of Consecration. Uerily it is thought
lawful for Usurers, Thieves, Hoores, Murderers, Traitors, and al other like,
to be present, and to hear Mass, without exception.

M. Hardinge. The.8. Division.
Where as in old times, when by wholesome Discipline the Faithful people were
kept in Godly awe, and obedience, that Prayer also, which was said over the
Oblation before Consecration, (219) The.219. Untruth. For the same Secret
Prayer was pronounced alovvde: as shall appear.
was pronounced Closely, and in Silence: and therefore it was called of the
Latins Secreta, of the Greeks, Mystica oration, meaning thereby, that it ought
not to be uttered openly, and made Common.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Here M. Hardinge, for want of other proufes, presumes of him self, that in
Old times the Prayer before Consecration, was pronounced, as he says,
Closely, and in Silence. And that he gheasseth only by this word, Secreta:
which is a term peculiar only to his Massebooke: and in the Old Catholic
Fathers was never found. And yet doothe not the same importe any such
Silence, or Secrecy, as M. Hardinge supposes. For so Gerardus Gerard.
Lorichius lib. 2.
Lorichius writes of it: Non arbitrandu^ est, Orationem eam dici Secretam,
quasi non liceat Laicis, illam vel nosse, vel audire: Sed quod iuxta atque
Canon, non cantetur voce altiori: We may not think, that the Prayer is
called, Secreta, for that it is not lawful for the Lay people to know it, or
to hear it: but only, for that it is not song out with loud voice, as is
the Canon. Therefore M. Hardinge concludes this matter with two untruths
both together.

Thus, notwithstanding this new du^me Ceremony have been only received in
the Church of Rome, and no where else, and that only for a time, and not from
the beginning, and therefore mere particulare, and no way Uniuersal, and so
not Catholic: Notwithstanding also it be utterly void of any show, either
of the Scriptures, or of the Old Councelles, or Ancient Fathers, or of any
manner Antiquity, Yet M. Hardinge thinks him self well hable, to maintain
it as he does the rest, against S. Ambrose, against S. Augustine, against S.
Chrysostom, against Leo, against his own Clemens, against the whole Primitive
Church, both Greek, and Latin, and against the Decrees, and Traditions of the
Apostles, and against his own knowledge, and, I fear me, also against his
own Conscience.

FINIS.
THE XVII. ARTICLE, OF THE SACRIFICE.
The B. of Sarisburie.
Or that the Priest had then Authority to offer up Christ unto his Father.

M. Hardinge. The.1. Division.
Christ is offered up to his Father after three manners. Threefolde oblation
of Christ.
Figuratively, Truly with Bloudsheddinge, and Sacramentally, or Mystically. In
Figure, or Signification he was offered in the Sacrifices made to God both in
the time of the Law of Nature, and also in the time of the law written. And
therefore S. John calls Christ the Lamb, Agnus occisus est ab origin mundi.
which was killed from the beginning of the world, meaning in Figure. The
Sacrifices of Abel, Noe, and Abraham, and al those of the people of Israel
commanded by the Law of Moses, figured, and Signified Christ. For which
respect chiefly, the law is reported of S. Paul, Apoc. 13.
to have the shadow of the good things to come. S. Augustine writing against
Faustus the Heretic, Heb. 10.
says: Testamenti Veteris Sacrificia omnia multis, and varijs modis vnum
Sacrificium, Lib. 6. ca. 5.
cuius nunc memoriam celebramus, significauerunt: All the Sacrifices of the Old
Testament signified by many, and sundry ways this one Sacrifice, De Fide ad
Petrum Diaconum. cap. 16.
whose memory we do now celebrate. And in an other place he says, M.
Hardinge has purposely maimed this place of S. Augustine, as shall appear.
That in those Fleashely Sacrifices, there was a Signification of Christ's
Fleashe, which he should offer for sins, and of his Blood, which he
should sheadde for the remission of our sins.

Truly, and with Bloudesheadding, Christ was offered on the Cross in his
own person, whereof S. Paul says: Christ gave him self for us, that he
might redeem us from al iniquity. And again, Christ has loved us, and has
delivered him self for us an Oblation, Tit. 2.
and Sacrifice to God, Ephesians. 5.
into a sweet savor.

Sacramentally, or in Mystery, Christ is offered up to his Father in the
daily Sacrifice of the Church under the Form of Bread, Christ offered, not
in respect of the manner of offering.
and Wine, truly and in deed, not in respect of the manner of offeringe,
but in respect of his very Body, and Blood, really (that is in deed)
present, as it has been sufficiently proved here before.

The B. of Sarisburie.
The greatter, and woorthier the work is, that our Adversaries have imagined,
that is, for a Mortal, and a Miserable man to offer up the Immortal Son of
God unto his Father, and that Really, and in deed, the more ought the same,
either by manifest words, or by necessary collection expressly, and plainly
to be proved. Hebrae. 5.
For noman takes honor, and office unto him self, but he that is called, and
appointed thereto by God. But for ought, that may appear by any Clause, or
Sentence, either of the New Testament, or of the Old, God never appointed any
such Sacrifice to be made by any Mortal Creature. And Theophylacte
Theophylact. in Matthae. ca. 21.
says, Jesus eijciendo Boues, and Columbas, praesignauit, non vltra opus esse
animalium Sacrificio, sed Oratione: Jesus throwinge the Oxen, and Dooues out of
the Temple, signified, that they should no longer have need of the Sacrifice
of beasts, but of prayer.

How be it, The Old learned Fathers, as they oftentimes delited them selves
with these words, Sabbatu^, Parasceue, Pascha, Pentecoste, and such other
like Terms of the Old Law, notwithstanding the Observation, and Ceremony
thereof were then abolished, and out of use: Even so likewise they delited them
selves oftetimes with these words, Sacerdos, Altar, Sacrificium, the
Sacrificer, the Aultare, the Sacrifice, notwithstanding the use thereof were
then clearly expired: only for that the ears of the people, as well of the
Jews, as of the Gentiles, had benne long acquainted with the same. Therefore
Pachymeres the Paraphraste Pachymeres. page 401. (...)
writing upon Dionysius, says thus, Presbyterum appellat Sacerdotem, vt
etiam in Coelesti Hierarchia: idque vsus iam obtinuit. Him, that is the Priest,
or Elder, he calls the Sacrificer, as he does also in his Celestial
Hierarchy: (...).
And the same word, Sacrificer, is now obtained by Custom. Roman. 15.
In this sense S. Paul says of him self, Sacrifico Euangeliu^ Dei: I
Sacrifice the Gospel of God. And Origin Origin. in Epist. ad Roman li. 10.
says, Sacrificale opus est, annuntiare Euangelium: It is a work of
Sacrifice, to Preach the Gospel. So the learned Bishop Nazianzenus Nazian. in
Oratione ad Plebem.
says unto his people, Hostiam vos ipsos obtuli: I have offered up you for a
Sacrifice. So says S. Chrysostom, Ipsum mihi Sacerdotium est, Praedicare,
and Euangelizare. Hanc offero Oblationem: My whole priesthood is, to Teach,
and to Preach the Gospel. This is my Oblation: This is my Sacrifice. Chrysos.
in Epist. ad Romans Hom. 29.
Thus the holy Fathers alludinge to the orders, and Ceremonies of Moses Law,
called the preachinge of the Gospel, a Sacrifice: notwithstanding in deed it
were no Sacrifice.

Now, to comme to M. Hardinges words, Three ways, says he, Christ is
offered up unto his Father. In a Figure, as in the Old Law: In Deed, and
Blouddily, as upon the Cross: In a Sacrament, or Mystery, as in the New
Testament. Of which three ways, the Blouddy Oblation of Christ upon the
Cross, is the very, true, and only Propitiatory Sacrifice for the Sins of
the world. The other two, as in respect, and manner of Signifieing, they are
sundry, so in effect, and substance, they are al one. For, like as in the
Sacraments of the Old Law was expressed the Death of Christ, that was to
comme: Even so in the Sacraments of the New Law of the Gospel, is expressed
the same Death of Christ already paste. As we have Mysteries, so had they
Mysteries: As we Sacrifice Christ, so did they Sacrifice Christ: As the Lamb
of God is slain unto us, So was the same Lamb of God slain unto them. S.
Augustine says, August. De vtilitate Poeniten. ca. 1.
Tunc Christus Venturus, modo Christus Venit. Venturus, and Venit, diuersa
verba sunt: Sed idem Christus. The^ was, Christ shall come: Now is, Christ Is
comme. Shall comme, and, Is comme, are sundry words. But Christ is al one.
Again in like comparison bytweene the Law of Moses, and the Gospel of Christ,
he says thus: Videte, Fide manente, Signa variata. In Signis diuersis eadem
Fides. Behold, the Faith remaininge, the (Sacraments, or) August. in John
tracta. 26.
Signs are changed. The Signs, or Sacraments being diverse, the Faith is one.

But here has M. Hardinge done great, and open wrong unto S. Augustine,
wilfully suppressinge, and drowninge his words, and vncourteousely
commanding him to silence in the midst of his tale. Wherein also appears
some suspicion of no simple dealinge. S. Augustines words touching this
whole matter, are these: August. De Fid^ ad Petrum Diacon. ca. 19.
In illis Carnalibus Victimis Figuratio fuit Carnis Christi, quam pro nobis
fuerat oblaturus, and Sanguinis, quem erat effusurus in Remissionem peccatorum:
In isto autem Sacrificio Gratiarum actio est, and Commemoratio Carnis Christi,
quam pro nobis obtulit, and Sanguinis, quem pro nobis idem Deus effudit. In
illis Sacrificijs, quid nobis esset donandum, Figurate significabatur: In hoc
autem Sacrificio, quid nobis iam donatum sit, euidenter ostenditur. In illis
Sacrificijs praenuntiabatur Filius Dei pro impijs occidendus: in hoc autem, pro
impijs annuritiatur occisus. In those Fleashely Sacrifices ( of the Jews)
there was a Figure of the Pleashe of Christ, which he would afterward offer
for us, and of the Blood, which he would afterward shead for the Remission
of Sin: But in this Sacrifice ( of the New Testament) there is a
Thankesgeuinge, and a Remembrance of the Fleashe, which he has already
offered for us, and of the Blood, which he being God, has already shead for
us. In those Sacrifices it was represented unto us under a Figure, what thing
should be given unto us: But in this Sacrifice it is plainly set forth, what
thing is already given us. In those Sacrifices it was declared, that the Son
of God should be slain for the wicked: But in this Sacrifice it is plainly
preached unto us, that the same Son of God has already benne slain for the
wicked.

Likewise again he says: August. Contra Faustum. li. 20. cap. 21.
Huius Sacrificij Caro, and Sanguis ante Aduentu^ Christi per Victimas
Similitudinum promittebatur: in Passione per ipsam Veritatem reddebatur: Post
Ascensum vero Christi per Sacramentum Memoriae celebratur. The Fleashe, and
Blood of this Sacrifice, before the coming of Christ, was promised by
Sacrifices of Resemblance: The same in his Passion (upon the Cross) was given
in Truth, and in deed: But after his Ascension it is solemnized by a
Sacrament of Remembrance.

This is the Difference that S. Augustine notes bitweene the Sacraments of
the Old Law, and the Sacraments of the New. Therefore, the words, that M.
Hardinge has hereunto added, Christ is offered up unto his Father, and that
under the Forms of Bread, and Wine, yea and that truly, and in deed, are
his own only words, confidently, and boldly presumed of him self, never
used, neither by S. Augustine, nor by any other Ancient godly Father.

But, where as he adds further, That Christ is in deed, and verily offered
by the Priest, al be it, as he says, not in respect of the manner of
offeringe, but only in respect of the presence of his Body, Either he
understands not, what him self means: or else with a vain distinction of
clowdie words without sense, he labors to das^e his Readers eyes. For what
a fantasy is this, to say, Christ is offered Uerily, and in deed, and yet
not in Respect of the Manner of offeringe? What Respect? What Manner is this?
Wherefore comme these blind Mysteries abroad without a gloss? Which of all the Old Doctors, or holy Fathers ever taught us thus to speak? Certainly,
as he says, Christ is Really offered, and yet not in Respect of the Manner
of Offeringe: So may he also say, Christ died upon the Cross, and yet not
in Respect of the manner of dieinge. By such Manners, and such Respects he
may make of Christian Religion, what him lists.

If he think, somewhat to shadow the matter with these words of the Council
of Nice, Council. Nicen. (...).
Sine Sacrificio Oblatus, Let him consider a fore hand, it will not healpe him.
For the holy Fathers in that Council neither say, that Christ is Really
Offered by the Priest, nor seem to understand these strange Respects, and
Manners of Offeringe. They agree fully in sense with that is before alleged of
S. Augustine: Contra Faustum lib. 20. cap. 21.
In this Sacrifice the Death of Christ is solemnized by a Sacrament of
Remembrance: And with that S. Chrysostom Chrysosto. in Epist. ad Hebrae. homi.
17.
says, Hoc Sacrificium, Exemplar illius est: This Sacrifice, is an Example of
that Sacrifice. Thus the Death of Christ is renewed before our eyes. Yet
Christ in deed neither is Crucified, nor dies, nor ^headdeth his Blood, nor
is Substantially Present, nor Really Offered by the Priest. In this sort the
Council says, Christ is Offered, (...), without Sacrifice. So S. Augustine
Augustine. De Ciuitate Dei. li. 10. cap. 5.
says, Quod ab omnibus appellatur Sacrificium, Signum est Very Sacrificij:
The thing, that of al men is called a Sacrifice, is a Token, or a Sign of
the True Sacrifice. Likewise again he says, Vocatur ipsa Immolatio, quae
sacerdotis manibus fit, De Conse. Dis. 2. Hoc est.
Christi Passio, Mors, Crucifixio, non rei veritate, sed Significante Mysterio.
The Sacrifice, that is wrought by the hands of the Priest, is called the
Passion, the Death, the Crucifieinge of Christ: not in deed, but by a
Mystery Signifieinge.

And where as M. Hardinge says further, Christ is offered only in respect
of the presence of his Body, Neither would the Real Presence, being
granted, importe the Sacrifice (for Christ was Really Present in his Mothers
Womb, and in the Cribbe, where notwithstanding he was no Sacrifice) nor has
M. Hardinge hitherto any way proved his Real Presence.

M. Hardinge. The.2. Division.
The two first manners of the offeringe of Christ, our adversaries
acknowledge and confess: The third they deny utterly. And so they rob the
Church of the greattest treasure it has or may have, the Body and Blood of
our Savior Christ once offered upon the Cross with paineful sufferinge for
our redemption, and now daiely offered in the blessed Sacrament in
remembrance. For which we have so many proufes, as for no one point of our
Christian religion more. And herein I am more encombred withstoare, then
straighted with lack, and doubt more, what I may leave, then what I may take.
Wherefore thinkinge it shall appear to the wise more skille, to show
discretion in the choice of places, rather then learning in recital of number,
though we are over peartely thereto provoked by M. Iuelles vauntinge and
insolent challenge: I intend herein to be short, verily shorter, then so large
a matter requires: and to bring for proof a few such auctor^ties, ( I
mean a few in respect of the multitude that might be brought) as ought in
every man's judgment to be of great weight, and estimation.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Touching the Oblation of Christ's Body, we believe, and Confess as much,
as the Holy Ghost has opened in the Scriptures. Where as M. Hardinge says,
Christ's Body is offered up by the Priest unto God the Father, in Remembrance
of that Body, that Christ himself offered upon the Cross, He seems not to
consider the inconstancy, and folly of his own tale. For it is well known to
al Creatures, not only Christians, but also Jews, Turks, and Saracenes, that
Christ was Crucified upon the Cross: But that Christ should be Sacrificed by
a Mortal man, Inuisibly, and, as they say, under the Forms of Bread, and
Wine, and that Really, and in deed, it is a thing so far passinge the common
sense of Christian knowledge, that the best learned, and wisest of the Ancient
learned Christian Fathers could never know it.

Therefore this is, not only the proouinge of a thing known, by a thing
unknown: and of a thing most certain, by a thing uncertain: but also the
Confirmation of a manifest Truth, by an open Error.

Neither do we rob the Church of God of that most Heavenly, and most
comfortable Sacrifice of Christ's Body: But rather we open, and disclose the
errors, wherewith certain of late years have wilfully deceived the Church
of God. We know, That Christ's Badie was rent for our Sins, Esai. 53.
and that by his Wounds we are made whole: 1. Petr. 2.
That Christ in his Body carried our Sins upon the Tree: Hebrae. 9.
And by the Oblation thereof, Actor. 4.
once made upon the Cross, has sanctified us for ever, and has purchased for
us everlasting Redemption: And That there is none other Name (or Sacrifice)
under Heaven, whereby we can be saved, but only the Name (and Sacrifice) of
Jesus Christ. I reckon, who so teaches this Doctrine, leaves not the Church
of God without a Sacrifice.

Touching the multitude of Authorities, wherewith M. Hardinge finds him
self so much encombred, the greater his stoare is, the more will wise men
require his discretion, and skill in the choice. His choice will seem unskillful,
if he allege his Authorities biside his purpose. His purpose, and promise is to
prove, that the Priest has good warrant, to offer up Christ the Son of God
unto his Father. Which purpose if he never vouchesaue once to touch, but
range abroad, as his manner is, and roaue idly at matters impertinent, then
must we needs say, He bewraieth his want, and brings his great Stoare
out of credit. So shall the offer, that is gently made him, seem to stand upon
good, and convenient terms, of Truth, and Modesty. So shall his stoareful
Uaunte of al things, performing nothing, unto the wise (to use his own
words) seem pearte, and insolente.

M. Hardinge. The.3. Division.
The Scripture it self ministringe evident proof for the Oblation of Christ
to his Father by the Priests of the New Testamente, in the Institution of
this Holy Sacrament, in the Figure of Melchisedech, and in the Prophecy of
Malachie the Prophet: the auctorities of the Fathers needed not to be
alleged, were not the same Scripture by the ouerthwarte, and false
interpretations of our adversaries wrested, and turned to a contrary sense, to
the horrible seducinge of the unlearned.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Alas, what tool is there so weak, that M. Harding will refuse, to strike
withal? To prove his imagined Kind of Sacrifice, he has brought us forth
out of his great stoare, the example of Melchised^k, and the Prophecy of
Malachie: As if he would reason thus, Psalm. no. Malachi. 1.
God says unto Christ, Thou art a Priest for ever according to the order
of Melchisedek: Or, God says by the Prophet Malachie, A pure Oblation shall be
offered unto me in every place: Ergo, The Priest has Authority, and power,
to offer up the Son of God unto his Father. If he had not had good choice,
and stoare of Authorities, he would never have begone with these.

But he adds further, as matter of gre^uance, This these plain Scriptures, by
the ouerthwarte, and false Interpretations of his Adversaries, are wreasted,
and turned to a contrary sense, and that, (as he says) to the horrible
seducinge of the Unlearned. Doubtless, here is a very horrible accusation. How
be it, if we happily had mistaken these places, and our error therein were
fully proved, yet should not M. Harding in such horrible terms reprove us,
for dooinge that thing once, that he, and his fellows do so often. But by
what words, by what False Interpretation, into what perverse or Heretical
Sense, have we so horribly wreasted these Scriptures? M. Harding is wise, is
eloquente, is watcheful, is circumspecte, is fast addicted unto his cause: he
dissembleth, and leaves nothing, that any way may serve his purpose. If our
Errors be so horrible, he should not have spared them: If there be none, he
should not thus have touched them. If M. Hardinge wink at them, who can see
them? If M. Hardinge know them not, who can know them?

Perhaps he will say, Ye expound the Prophecy of Malachie, sometimes of
Prayer, and sometimes of the Preachinge of the Gospel. This was never the
Prophets meaning: This is an horrible wreastinge of the Scriptures. Thus, no
doubt, M. Hardinge will say: for otherwise he can say nothing. And yet he
knows, and, being learned, cannot choose but know, that this is the Old
learned Catholic Fathers Exposition, touching these words of the Prophet
Malachie, and not ours. He knows, that the Ancient Father Tertullian says
thus, The pure Sacrifice, Tertull. contra Iudaeos.
that Malachias speaks of, that should be offered up in every place, Est
Praedicatio Euangelij vsque ad finem Mundi: Is the Preachinge of the Gospel
until the end of the world: And in an other place, Simplex Oration de
Conscientia pura: The Sacrifice, that Malachie meante, Tertull. contra Marcion.
li. 4. Hieronym. in. 1. Caput Malach.
is a devout Prayer proceedinge from a pure Conscience. He knows, that S.
Hierome expounds the same words in this wise: Dicit, Orationes Sanctorum
Domino offerendas esse, non in vna Orbis Prouincia Iudaea, sed in omni loco:
The Prophet Malachie means hereby, That the Prayers of Holy people should
be offered unto God, Eusebius. De Demonstr. li. 1. (...).
not only in Iewrie, that was but one province of the world, but also in all
places. He knows, that Eusebius calls the same Sacrifice of Malachie, The
Sacrifice, and the Incense of Prayer. Thus the Holy Catholic Fathers
expounded these words of the Prophet Malachie: and yet were they not
therefore judged either ouerthwarte wreasters of the Scriptures, or horrible
deceivers of the people.

Now, of the other side, if it may please M. Hardinge to show forth but one
Ancient Doctor, or Father, that either by the Example of Melchisede^, or by
force of these words of Malachie, will conclude, that the Priest has
Authority, and Power, to offer up Uerily, and in deed, the Son of God unto
his Father, he may happily win some credit.

M. Hardinge. The.4. Division.
For, where as the Holy Evangelists report, that Christ at his last Supper
took Bread, gave thanks, Luc. 2^*
brake it, and said, This is my Body, which is given for you: Again, this is
my Blood, which is sheadde for you in remission of sins: Words of
Oblation, without Terms of Oblation.
By these words, being words of Sacrificinge and offeringe, they show,
and set forth an Oblation in act, and deed, though the term it self of
Oblation, or Sacrifice be not expressed. Albeit to some of excellent knowledge,
Datur, here sounds no less, then offertur, or immolatur, that is to say, is
offered, or Sacrificed, specially the addition, 1. Pet. 2.
Pro vobis, withal considered. For if Christ said truly (as he is truth it
self, and guile was never found in his mouth) then was his Body Presently
given, and for us* given, at the time he spoke the words* that is, at his
Supper. For he said. A great Foli^. For the Old Catholic Fathers expound^
it by, Dabitur, and, Fundetur, in the Futur^ Tense.
datur, is given, not dabitur, shall be given: (221) The.221. Untruth, vvithou^
any sense, or sauou^.
And likewise was his Blood sheadde in remission of sins, at the time of
that Supper* for the text has A great Foli^. For the Old Catholic Fathers
expound^ it by, Dabitur, and, Fundetur, in the Futur^ Tense.
funditur, is sheadde. But the geuinge of his Body for us, and the sheaddinge
of his Blood in remission of sins, is an Oblation of the same: Ergo Christ
offered his Body and Blood at the Supper. And thus datur, signifies here as
much, as offertur.

Now this being tru^, that our Lord offered him self unto his Father at his
last Supper, having given commandment to his Apostles to do the same, that
he there did, whom then he ordained Priests of the New Testament, saieing, Do
this in my remembrance, as Clement does plainly show Lib. 8. Apostol.
Constitut. cap. vltimo: the same charge perteininge no less to the Priests,
that be how the successors of the Apostles in this behalf, then to the
Apostles them selves: it doothe right well appear, how so ever M. Iuel
assures him self of the contrary, and what so ever the Devil has wrought,
and by his Ministers taught against the Sacrifice of the Mass, that Priests
have authority to offer up Christ unto his Father.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Here M. Hardinge begins to scanne his Tenses, to rippe up Syllables, and to
hunte for Letters: And in the end builds up the highest Castle of his
Religion upon a gheasse. I marvel, that so learned a man would either use so
unlearned arguments: or, having such stoare of Authorities, as he
pretends, would ever make so simple choice.

He says, These words, Is Given, Is Shead, be words of Sacrificinge,
though the Term it self of Oblation, and Sacrifice, be not expressed. Here
M. Hardinge, bisides that he has imagined a strange Construction of his own,
that never any learned man knew before, and so straggleth alone, and swarueth
from all the Old Fathers, includes also a Repugnance, and Contradictio^
against him self. For, where as Words, and Terms sound both one thing,
the one being mere English, the other borrowed of the Latin, M. Harding
says, Christ in the Institution of his Supper, used the Words of
Sacrificing, and yet expressed not the Terms of Sacrificinge. Such Privilege
these men have, with shifte of terms to beguile the World. For if Christ
used the Words of Sacrificinge, how can M. Hardinge say, He used not the
Terms of Sacrificinge? And if he used not the Terms (Words, and Terms
being one thing) how can he say, He used the words?

Uerily if this Latin word, Dare, be, Sacrificare: and, Geuinge, be
Sacrificinge, Roman. 1^.
then, Matthew. 26.
where as S. Paul says, Matthae. 25.
If thine enemy be thirsty, Give him drink: And, where as Judas says, What
will ye Give me, and I will deliver him unto you: And, where as the Foolish
Uirgins say, Give us part of your O^le, etc. In every of these, and such
other like places, by this New Divinity, M. Hardinge will be hable to find a
Sacrifice.

Yet, says he, Certain men of excellent knowledge have thus expounded it.
It seems very strange, that these so notable men, of so excellent Knowledge
should have no names. Perhaps he means Tapper of Louaine, or Gropper of
Colaine, of whom he has borrowed the whole substance welneare of all this
Article. How be it, the demand was of the Ancient Doctors of the Church:
not of any of these, or other such petite Fathers.

But Christ says in the Present Tense: This is my Body, That Is Given: not
in the Future Tense, That Shall Be Given. And likewise, This is my Blood,
Christ's Blood Shead at Supper.
That Presently is Shead: not in the Future Tense, That Shall Be Shead. Therefore
Christ Sacrificed his Body, and shead his Blood presently at the Supper.

Here M. Hardinge is driven to control the Old Common Translation of the New
Testamente, not only, that bears the name of S. Hierome, and has benne
evermore generally received in the Church, and is allowed by the Council of
Tridente, but also, yt is still used, and continewed in his own Mass Book. I
grant, In the Greek it is written, Datur, Is Given: not Dabitur, Shall Be
Given. But here the Present Tense, according to the Common Phrase of the
Scriptures, is used for the Future. Chrysostom reads it thus, Chrysostom*
in. 1. Corin.11. Origin. in Matthaeum. tract. 35.
Dabitur, Shall Be Given: not Datur, Is Given. Origin likewise reads, not,
Effunditur, Is Shead: but, Effundetur, Shall Be Shead. And in this sort
Chrysostom also expounds it: Effundetur pro multis. Hoc dicens, ostendit,
quod Passio eius est Mysteriu^ Salutis humanae: per quod etiam Discipulos
consolatur. Shall Be shead for many. Thus saieinge, he shows, that his Passion
is the Mystery of the Salvation of mankind: and by the same he comfort his
Disciples. Chrysostom* in Caten^.
Again he says, De Passione, and Cruce sua loquebatur. Christ (vtteringe
these words of the Sacrament) spoke of his Passion, and of his Cross.

To be short, if it be true, that Christ shead his Blood at his Last Supper,
and that Uerily, Really, and in deed, as M. Hardinge alone strangely
avouches, and noman else, I trow, beside him, then can he no more say, The
same was an Unbloody Sacrifice: And so must he yield up the strongest Tower of
al his Hold. For if the Sacrifice, that Christ made at his Supper, were
Unbloudy, how did Christ there Shead his Blood? If Christ, as M. Hardinge
says, did there Shead his Blood, how can that Sacrifice be called Un^loudy?

But to leave these fantasies, and vain shyftes, Christ gave his Body to be
broken, and his Blood to be shead, not at his Last Supper, but only upon his
Cross, and no where else. ^sai. 53.
There he bare our iniquities: there was he rent for our Sins. And in that
only respect we receive his Body, and embrace it, and have fruit of it. In
this respect S. Paul says, ^alat. 6.
God forebid, I should rejoice in any thing, sauinge only in the Cross of
our Lord Jesus Christ.

Therefore, this new Article of the Faith, of the Real Sacrificinge, and
Sheaddinge of Christ's Blood at the Table, neither being true in it self,
nor hitherto by M. Hardinge any way proved, notwithstanding the great
Stoare, and choice of his Authorities: for as much as Christ never gave,
neither his Apostles, nor any their successors Commission to do more in that
behalf, then he him self had done, To say, that any mortal man has Power,
and Authority, Really, and in deed to Sacrifice the Son of God, it is a
manifest, and wicked blasphemy: the great, and gross errors, wherewith the
Devil, and his Disciples in the time of his Kingedome of darkness have
deceived the world, notwithstanding.

As for Clemens, whom M. Hardinge so often calls the Apostles fellow, as he
is but lately start up, and comme abroad, and therefore has not yet gotten
sufficient credit, and is here brought in dumme, and saieinge nothing, so is
he not worthy of further answer. How be it M. Hardinge does great wrong,
otherwise to report his Authors words, then he finds them. Truly his
Cleme^s, what so ever he were, says not, The Priest has Commission, or Power,
to offer up the Son of God. Clemens Constit. Apostoli. lib. 6. cap. 30.
His words are plain to the contrary: Antitypon Regalis Corporis Christian
offerte: Offer ye up (not the Body of Christ, but) the Sign, or Sacrament
of the Roial Body of Christ. Likewise again he says, Offerimus tibi Regi,
and Deo, iuxta Institutione^ Christi, Hu^c Pane^, and Hoc Poculu^: We offer up
unto thee, our King and God (not the very Body of thy Son Really, Clemens
Constit. Apostol. lib. 8.
and in deed, but) This Bread, and this Cup, according to Christ's
Institution. It is a great Prerogative for M. Hardinge, both to make Doctors
of his own, and also to give them his own Constructions.

Neither did Christ by these words, Do ye this in my Remembrance, erect^
any new Succession of Sacrificers, to offer him up Really unto his Father: nor
ever did any Ancient learned Father so expound it. Christ's meaning is clear
by the words, that follow. For he says not only, Do ye this, but he
adds also, In my Remembrance: Which Dooinge pertains, not only unto the
Apostles, and their successors, as M. Hardinge imagines, but also to the
whole people. And therefore S. Paul says, not only to the Ministers, but
also to the whole Congregation of Corinthe, 1. Corin. 1^*
As often, as ye shall eat this Er^ade, and drink this Cup, Ye shall show
forth, and publishe the Lords Death, until ^e come. Likewise S. Chrysostom
applies the same, not only to the Cleregie, but also to the whole people of
his Church of Antioche. Thus he says, Chrysostom. ad popul. Antiochen. hom.
61.
Hoc facite in memoriam Beneficij mei, Salutis vestrae: Do ye this in
Remembrance of my Benefit, and of your Salvation.

Of these weak positions M. Hardinge without the warrante, or authority of
any learned Father reasons thus: Christ says, This is my Body, that is
given for you: Do this in my Remembrance:

Ergo, The Priest has power to offer up the Son of God unto his Father.

M. Hardinge. The.5. Division.
That Christ offered him self to his Father in his last Supper, and that
Priests by those words, Do this in my remembrance, have not only
authority, but also a special commandment to do the same, and that the
Figure of Melchisedech, and the Prophecy of Malachie pertains to this
Sacrifice, and makes proof of the same: let us see by the testimonies of the
Fathers, what doctrine the Apostles have left to the Church.

Eusebius Caesariensis has these words, De Demo^^^rat. Eua^geli. lib. 1.
^ap. 10.
Horrorem afferentia Mensae Christi Sacrificia Supremo Deo offerre, per
eminentissimum omnium ipsius Pontificem edocti sumus. We are taught (says
he) to offer unto our Supreme ^od the Sacrifices of Christ's Table, which
cause us to tremble, and quake for fear, by his Bishop highest of al. Here
he calls Christ in respect of his Sacrifice, Gods Bishop highest of al
Bishops: the Sacrifices of Christ's Table he callethe, (222) The.222.
Untruth. For Eusebius calls i^ the Sacrifice of Thanke^geuing: And says*
Memoriam offerre dedit pro Sacrificio*
the Body and Blood of Christ, because at the Table in his last Supper be
Sacrificed and offered the same, and for that it is his very Body, and very
Blood, imagination only, I hantasie, and Figure set aparte, he terms these
Sacrifices, as commonly the ancient Fathers do, horrible, causinge tremblinge
and fear. And where as he says, we have been taught to offer these
Sacrifices to God, doubtless he means by these words of Christ: Do this
in my remembrance, This is my Body, which is given for you: This is my
Blood, which is shed for you. Clement in his eight Book often cited,
speakinge of the Sacrifice offered by the Apostles, commonly adds these
words, Secundum ipsius ordinationem, or, ipso ordinante: whereby he
confesses it to be Christ's own ordinance.

The B. of Sarisburie.
To prove, that the Priest offers up the Son of God, M. Hardinge has here
brought in Eusebius an Ancient Father, that never once named any such Oblation
of the Son of God. So much is he oppressed, and encombred with his stoare.

True it is, The Ministration of the Holy Communion is oftentimes of the Old
learned Fathers called a Sacrifice: not for that, they thought, the Priest had
Authority, to Sacrifice the Son of God, but for that therein we offer up
unto God, Thanks, and Praises for that great Sacrifice once made upon the
Cross. So says S. Augustine, August. ad Petru^ Diac. ca. 1^.
In isto Sacrificio est gratiarum actio, and Commemoratio Carnis Christi,
Dreadful Sacrifice.
quam pro nobis obtulit. In this Sacrifice is a Thankesgeu^nge, and a
Remembrance of the Fleashe of Christ, which he has offered for us. Eusebi.
De Demonst. li. 1. ca. 10. Memoriam pro Sacrificio. Nazian. in Apolog. (...).
Likewise Eusebius says, Christ after al other things done, made a
marvelous Oblation, and a passinge Sacrifice unto his Father (upon his Cross)
for the Salvation of us al: geuinge unto us to offer continually unto God a
Remembrance in steed of a Sacrifice. So Nazianzenus calls the Holy
Communion, A Figure of that great Mystery, of the Death of Christ.

This it is, that Eusebius calls, The Sacrifice of the Lords Table: Which
also he calls, Sacrificium Laudis, The Sacrifice of Praise.

But Eusebius says further, This Sacrifice is dreadful, and causes the heart
to quake. M. Hardinge may not well geather by any force of these words, that
the Son of God is Really offered up by the Priest unto his Father. For all
things, what so ever, that put us in remembrance of the Majesty, and
Judgments of God, of the Holy Fathers are called Dreadful. Saint Cyril
says, Cyrill. in Apol. Chrysostom. 1. Cor. hom 40.
Lectio Diuinarum, and Terribilium Scripturarum: The readinge of the Divine,
and Terrible Scriptures. S. Chrysostom calls the words of Baptism, Verba
arcana, and metuenda, and horribiles Canones dogmatum de Coelo transmissorum:
The Secret, and Dreadful words, and Terrible Rules of the Doctrine, that
came from Heaven. And speakinge of the Hand, and Uoice of the Deacon, he says
thus, Manu illa Tremenda, and continua Voce clamans, alios vocat, alios arcet:
With that Terrible Hand, and continual Voice crieinge, sum he calls in,
and sum he puts of.

This Sacrifice makes the Heart to tremble, for that therein is laid forth
the Mystery, that was ^idden from Worlds, and Generations: The horror of
Sin: The Death of the Son of God: That he took our heaviness, and bare
our sorrows, and was wounded for our offenses, and was Rent, and Tormented for
our Wickedness: That he was carried like an innocent Lamb unto the Slaughter:
that he cried unto his Father, O God, O my God, why haste thou thus forsaken
me?

There we call to Remembrance all the Causes, and Circumstances of Christ's
Death: The Shame of the Cross: The Darkeninge of the Air: The Shakinge of
the Earth: The rentinge of the Uele: The cleauinge of the Rocks: The opening
of the Graves: The Descendinge into Hell: and the Conqueringe of the Devil.
Therefore Chrysostom says, Chrysostom in 1. ad Corin. ho. 17.
Quamuis quis lapis effet, illa nocte audita, quomodo cum Discipulis tristis
fuerit, quomodo traditus, quomodo ligatus, quomodo abductus, quomodo iudicatus,
quomodo denique Omnia Passus, cera mollior fiet, and terra^, and omnem terrae
cogitationem abijciet: Any man, hearing of the order of that night, how
Christ was moorneful emonge his Disciples, how he was delivered, how he was
bound, how he was leadde away, how he was arreigned, and how meekely he
suffered al, that was done unto him, were he as hard as a Stoane, yet would
he be as safte as Wax, and would throw both the Earth, and al Earthely
Cogitations away from him.

Thus says Nicolaus Cabasilas, one of Master Hardinges late Greek Doctors:
Hoc facite in meam Commemorationem. Sed quaenam est haec Commemoratio? etc. Do
ye this in Remembrance of me. But what is this Remembrance? How do we
consider Our Lord in the Holy Ministration? What do we conceive him dooinge?
How dealinge? what sufferinge? what think we? what speak we of him? Do
we imagine of him (in that time of the Holy Mysteries) that he healed the
Blind? That he raised the Dead? That he stayed the Winds? Or that with a
few loaves he fead thousands: which are tokens, that he was God Omnipotente?
No, not so. But rather we call to remembrance such things, as declared his
weakness: his Cross, his Passion, his Death. In respect of those things
he said, Do ye this in my Remembrance. The Priest both by his words, and
also by the whole Circumstance of his dooinge, seems to say, Thus Christ
came to his Passion: Thus he was vvounded in the side: Thus he died: Thus
Blood and Water issued, and streamed from his wound. These Considerations,
thus laid before our eyes, are hable to cause any godly heart to quake, and
tremble. As for the Real offeringe up of Christ in Sacrifice, that learned
Father Eusebius says nothing.

Uerily, it is but a simple Sophisme, to say, This Sacrifice is Dreadeful, and
causes us to quake: Ergo, The Priest offers up the Son of God unto his
Father.

M. Hardinge. The.6. Division.
That Christ Sacrificed him self at his Supper, Hesychius affirms with
these words: Quod Dn^s iussit (Leuit. 4.) vt Sacerdos virulum pro peccato
Oblaturus, ponat manu^ super capu^ eius, and iugulet eum coram Domino, Christum
^ignificat, quem nemo obtulit, sed nec immolare poterat, nisi semetipsum ipse
ad patiendum tradidisset. Propter quod non solum dicebat, (...). 10.
Potestatem habeo ponendi animam meam, and potestatem habeo iterum sumendi eam:
sed and praeu^niens semetipsum in Coena Apostolorum immolauit, quod sciunt, qui
Mysteriorum percipiunt virtutem. That our Lord commanded (says he) the
Priest, which should offer a calfe for sin, to put his hand upon his
head, and to stick him before our Lord, it signifies Christ, whom noman
has offered, neither could any man Sacrifice him, except he had delivered
him self to suffer. For the which he said not only, I have power to lay
down my Soul, ^^an. 10. Christ offered him self in a mystery, but not
Really, and in deed.
and I have power to take it again: But also preuentinge it, he offered up him
self in Sacrifice in the Supper of the Apostles: which they know, that
receive the virtue of the Mysteries. By these words of Hesychius we learn,
that Christ offered, and Sacrificed his Body and Blood twice. First in that
Holy Supper vnbloudely, when he took Bread in his hands, and brake it, etc.
Without Division of the Sacrifice, for it is but one and the same Sacrifice.
And afterward on the Cross, with Sheddinge of his Blood, and that is it, he
means by the word, Preuentinge.

The B. of Sarisburie.
We deny not, but it may well be said, Christ at his last Supper offered up
him self unto his Father: Albeit, not Really, and in deed, but, according to
M. Hardinges own Distinction, in a Figure, or in a Mystery: in such sort,
as we say, Christ was offered in the Sacrifices of the Old Law: and as S.
John says, Apocal. 13.
Agnus Occisus ab Origin Mundi: The Lamb was slain from the beginning of
the World. As Christ^ was slain at the Table, so was he Sacrificed at the
Table. But he was not slain at the Table Uerily, and in deed, but only in a
Mysteri^: Therefore he was not Sacrificed at the Table Really, and in deed,
but only in a Mystery.

So says S. Augustine, August. epis. 23.
Nonne semel immolatus est Christus in semetipso? Et ramen in Sacramento, non
tantum per omnes Paschae Solennitates, sed etiam omni die populis immolatur.
Nec vtique mentitur, qui interrogatus, eum responderit immolari. Si enim
Sacramenta quandam Similitudinem earum rerum, quarum Sacramenta sunt, non
haberent, omnino Sacramenta non essent. Was not Christ once offered in him
self? And yet in (or, by way of) a Sacrament, not only at the Solemn Feast
of Easter, but every day ^e is offered unto the people. And ^e says no
untruth, that being demanded, makes answer, that Christ is Sacrificed.
His reason is this: For if Sacraments had not a certain Likeness, or
Resemblance of the things, whereof they be Sacraments, then should they
utterly be no Sacraments.

Notwithstanding, Hesychius expoundinge the Book of Leuiticus, to the intent
he may force the whole Story of the Life, and Death of Christ, to answer
every particulare Ceremony of the Law, is sometimes driven, to streatche,
Hesych in Le^^^. li. 1* cap. 4. L^^. 1. ca. 2. Sacrificium Coctu^.
and strain the Scriptures to his purpose. So he says, Christ is the
Aultare: And, Christ Incarnate in the Virgins Womb, is the Sodden Sacrifice.

Now, as Christ was the Aultare, and as he was Sacrificed in his Mothers
Womb, even so he Sacrificed him self at his Supper: not in proper, or usual
manner of speech, but only in a Mystery Signifieing^.

Otherwise S. Cyprian plainly opens the whole difference of these two
Sacrifices in this sort: Cyprian. de Unction Chrismatis.
Dedit Dominus noster in mensa, in qua Vltimum cum Apostolis participauit
Con^iuium, proprijs manibus Panem, and Vinum: In Cruce vero manibus militum
Corpus tradidit vulnerandum. Our Lord at the Table, whereat he received his
last Supper with his Disciples, with his own hands gave (not his very Body,
and very Blood Really, and in deed, but) Bread, and Wine: But upon the
Cross, he gave his own Body, with the Soldiers hands to be Wounded. This,
says Saint Cyprian, is the difference bitweene the Sacrifice of the Table,
and the Sacrifice of the Cross: At the one, Christ gave Bread, and Wine:
Upon the other, he gave his Body.

Therefore, where as M. Hardinge says, only upon his own warrante, That
Christ Really Sacrificed him self at two sundry times, and that he twice
Really Shead his Blood, First at the Table, and Afterward upon the Cross:
The Untrueth, and folly hereof is easily reproved by these plain words of
S. Paul: Semel Oblatus est, ad multorum exhaurienda peccata: Hebrae. 9.
He was once offered, to take away the sins of many. And again, Hebrae. 10.
With one Sacrifice he has made perfect them for ever, that be Sanctified.
These places are clear, and without question: unless M. Hardinge will say,
that, One, and, Two: and, Once, and Twice, be both one thing.

M. Hardinge. The.7. Division.
And at the same very instant of time, (which is here further to be added, as
a necessary point of Christian doctrine) we must understand (223) The.223.
Untruth, vain, and Fantastical, and without ground.
that Christ offered him self in Heaven inuisibly (as concerning man) in the
sight of his Heavenly Father, and that from that time foreward that Oblation of
Christ in Heaven was never intermitted, but continues always for our
atonement with God, and shall without ceasinge endure until the end of the
world. For as S. Paul says, Hebr. ^.
Jesus has not entered into Temples made with hands, the samplars of the true
Temples, but into Heaven it self, to appear now to the countenance of God
for us. Now as this Oblation and Sacrifice of Christ endures in Heaven
continually, for as much as he is risen from the dead, and ascended into
Heaven with that Body, which he gave to Thomas to feel, bringinge in thither
his Blood, as Hesychius says, and bearinge the marks of his wounds, and
there appears before the face of God with that Thorneprickte, Naileboared,
Spearepearsed, and otherwise wounded, rent, and torn Body for us: (whereby we
understand the virtue of his Oblation on the Cross ever enduringe, not the
Oblation it self with renewinge of pain, and sufferance continued) so we do
perpetually celebrate this Oblation and Sacrifice of Christ's very Body and
Blood in the Mass, in remembrance of him* (224) The.224. Untruth. For
Christ never commanded M. Hardinge, neither to say Mass, nor to O^fer up his
Body in Sacrifice.
commanded so to do, until his coming.

Wherein our Adversaries so foolishely, as wickedly scoff at us, as though we
Sacrificed Christ again, so as he was Sacrificed on the Cross, that is, in
Bloody manner. But we do not so Offer or Sacrifice Christ again: but that
Oblation of him in the Supper, and ours in the Mass, is but one Oblation, the
same Sacrifice, for this cause by his Divine ordinance leafte unto us, that as
the Oblation once made on the Cross continually endures, and appears before
the face of God in Heaven for our behalf, continued not by new sufferinge,
but by perpetual intercession for us: So the memory of it may ever until his
second coming be kept amongst us also in earth, and that thereby we may
apply and bring unto us through Faith the great benefits, which by that one
Oblation of him self on the Cross he has for us procured, and daiely does
procure.

The B. of Sarisburie.
At the same very instant of time, says M. Hardinge, when Christ was
Sacrificed upon the Cross, he offered up him self also in Heaven in the sight
of his heavenly Father. Which thing he enlarges Rhetorically with a Tragical
Description of a Thorneprickte, Naileboared, Spearepearsed, and otherwise
rent, and Torn Body. And this, says he, is a necessary point of Christian
Doctrine: And that he avouches Constantly, albeit without the word, or
witness of any Ancient writer, only upon his own credit.

Whereof also grows some suspicion, that his Stoare of Old Records, is not
so plenteous, as it is supposed.

But where he says, Christ was thus Inuisibly Sacrificed in Heaven, I
marvel, he says not likewise, that Pilate, Annas, Caiphas, the Soldiers,
and the Tourmentours were likewise in Heaven, to make this Sacrifice. For
without this Company Christ's Blood was not Shead: And without Sheaddinge of
Blood, Hebrae. 9.
S. Paul says, There is no Sacrifice for Remission of Sin. This Fable is
so vain, that, I believe, M. Harding him self is not well hable, to expound
his own meaning. Origin says, There were some in his time, that thought,
Origin. in epist. ad Roman. li. 5. ca. 6.
That, as Christ was Crucified in this world for the living, so he should
afterward suffer, and be Crucified In the world to come for the dead. But
that Christ was thus Thorneprickte, Naileboarde, Spearepearsed, and Crucified
in Heaven, I think, noman ever saw, or said, but M. Hardinge. The Apostles,
the Evangelists, Hebrae. 7.
the Old Doctors, and Ancient Fathers never knew it. S. Paul says, Semel
seipsum obtulit: Once he offered up him self: Hebrae. 9.
Semel introiuit in Sancta: Once he entered into the holy place.

And therefore hanginge upon the Cross, and yeldinge up the Ghost, he said,
Consummatum est, It is finished: This Sacrifice is perfitely wrought for ever.
This only Sacrifice of Christ the Son of God the Scriptures acknowledge,
and none other.

How be it, like as the Prayers, that Christ once made, and the Doctrine, that
he once taught, remain still full, and effectual, as at the first: even so the
Sacrifice, that Christ once made upon the Cross, remains still in full force,
effectual, and perfect, and endures for ever. Therefore S. Paul says,
Hebrae. 7
Christ has an everlasting Priesthood, and lives still, that he may still
pray for us. And therefore God the Father says unto him, and to none other,
either Man, or Angel, or Archangel, Tu es Sacerdos in aeternum: Thou art a
Priest for ever. Chrysostom. in epist. ad Hebrae. hom. 17.
And therefore S. Chrysostom compares this Sacrifice to a most sovereign
salve, that being once laid to the wound, heals it clean, and needs no
more laieinge on. Likewise S. Cyprian says, Nec Sacerdotij eius paenituit
Deum: quoniam Sacrificium, Cyprian. De Baptis. Christi.
quod in Cruce obtulit, sic in beneplacito Dei constat acceptabile, and
perpetua virture confistit, vt non minus hodie in conspectu Patris Oblatio illa
sit efficax, quam ea die, qua de saucio latere Sanguis, and Aqua exiuit: and
semper reseruatae in Corpore plagae Salutis Humanae exigant pretium: It never
repented God of Christ's Priesthood: For the Sacrifice, that he offered upon
the Cross, is so acceptable in the good will of God, and so stands in
continual strength and Virtue, that the same Oblation is no less acceptable
this day in the sight of God the Father, then it was that day, when Blould,
and Water ran out of his Wounded side.

The Skarres reserved still in his Body, do weighe the price of the Salvation
of Man.

But M. Hardinge condemns us al for Foolish, and Wicked people. For
Foolish, I know not why. Neither is it thought a wisemannes part, either
greatly to mislike other men's wits, or ouermuche to like his own.

How be it, who so speaks, as never wiseman spoke, and yet him self
understands not, what he speaks, as, in this case, it is thought, M.
Harding does, has no great cause, in this behalf, to charge others with
folly.

Of the other side, what so ever Mortal man presumes to offer up Christ in
Sacrifice, and dares to desire God the Father so favorably to behold his
own only Son, as in old times he beheld the Oblation of Abel, or of
Melchisedek, and is not afraid, therewith to beguile the simple, and to mock
the world, as M. Hardinge doothe daily at his Mass, he can not well excuse him
self of open wickedness.

Notwithstanding this matter is easily answered. For (says he) we Sacrifice
not Christ again: The Oblation, that Christ made upon the Cross, and ours
in the Mass, is al one. And this Sacrifice Christ has commanded us to
continue until his coming. If M. Harding make the self same Sacrifice, that
Christ made upon ye Cross, then is he A Priest after the order of
Melchisedek: And so, The King of Justice: The Prince of Peace: and a Priest
for ever, without Successor. For these titles be incident to the Priesthood
of Melchisedek: which nevertheless, I think, M. Hardinge of his modesty will
not acknowledge. And without the same, he cannot offer up to God the same
Sacrifice, that Christ offered upon the Cross.

And where he says, Christ has commanded him, and his Fellows to make, and
continue this Sacrifice until his coming, If he had meante simply, and
plainly, he would have showed, either when, or where, or by what words
Christ gave him this Commandment. For so large a Commission is worthy the
shewinge: And it were great boldness, to attempt such a matter without
Commission.

M. Hardinge. The.8. Division.
Now for further proof of the offeringe and Sacrificinge of Christ of those
words of our Lord, Do this is my remembrance, to recite some Testimonies
of the Fathers: First, Dionysius S. Paul's Scholar, and Bishop of Athenes
writes thus: Quocirca reuerenter simul, and ex Pontificali officio, post
sacras diuinorum operum lauds, quod hostiam salutarem, quae super ipsum est,
litet, se excusat, ad ipsum primo decenter exclamans, Tu dixisti: Hoc facite in
meam commemorationem. Wherefore the Bishop (says he) reverently, and
according to his Bishoply office, after the holy praises of Gods works, he
excuses him self, that he takes upon him to offer that healthful Sacrifice,
which is above his degree, and worthiness, crieinge out first unto him in
seemly wise, Lord thou have commanded thus, saieinge, Do this in my
remembrance. By these words he confesses, that he could not be so hardy,
(225) The.225. Untruth, joined with great folly. For Dionysius speaks not
one word of Offering up the Son of God unto his Father
as to offer up Christ unto his father, had not Christ him self so
commanded, when he said, Do this in my remembrance. This is the Doctrine,
touching this Article, that Saint Paul taught his Scholars, which M. Iuel
denies.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Here maiste thou, gentle Reader, easily see, that M. Hardinge, either had not
that abundance of Stoare, whereof notwithstanding he has made us so large a
promise, or else had no great regard unto his choice. For Dionysius has no
token, or inkling of any such Sacrificinge of the Son of God unto his
Father. But clearly, and in most plain wise he shows the difference, that
is bitweene the Sacrifice of the Cross, Dionys. Eccle Hierar. ca. 3. (...).
and the Sacrifice of the Holy Communion. These be his words, The Priest
extolleth those things, that Christ wrought in his Fleashe upon the Cross,
for the Salvation of Mankind: and with Spiritual eyes, beholdinge the
Spiritual understanding thereof, draws ne^re to the Figurative Sacrifice of
the same. Here Dionysius calls not the Ministration of the Holy Mysteries,
the Sacrificing^ of Christ unto his Father, as M. Hardinge would force us to
believe, but a Figurative Sacrifice, Pachymer. in 3. cap. Ecclesi. Hierarch.
that is, a Figure, or a Sign of that great Sacrifice. And Pachymeres the
Paraphrast expounds the same words in this wise* (...): He comes to the
Bread, and the Cup.

Then the Priest, says Dionysius, after certain Prayers, and Holy Songs,
excuses him self, as not worthy to make that Sacrifice: and pronounces
these words out with a loud voice, Tu dixisti etc. Thou have said, Do this
in my Remembrance. Hereof M. Hardinge concludes thus:

The Priest excuses him self, Ergo, He Offers up the Son of God unto his
Father. A young Sophister would never so unskillfully frame his arguments.
Otherwise the Respondent might easily say, Nego Consequentiam, and Consequens.
For what order, or sequel is there in this Reason? How may this Antecedente,
and this Consequente agree together?

M. Hardinge knows, there be other sundry causes, wherefore the Priest
should excuse his unworthiness, and not this only, that he imagines. The
Priest in the Liturgy, or Communion, yt bears the name of S. Basile,
Liturgia Basili^
prays thus: Fac nos idoneos, vt tibi Offeramus Sacrificiu^ Laudis: Make us
meet, to offer unto thee (not Christ thine only Son, but) the Sacrifice of
praise. Nazian* in Apologe. (...).
In like manner Nazianzene says, How can they, or dare they offer unto God,
(he says not, The Body of Christ Really, and in deed, but) the Figure of
these great Mysteries? But M. Hardinge, being utterly void of other reasons,
proves his imagined Sacrifice of the Son of God, only by the
unworthiness of the Priest.

This is the Just Judgment of God, that who so endeavors him self to
deceive, and blind others, shall be deceived, and blinded him self. Eccles.
Hierar. ca. 2. (...).
For Dionysius uses the very like words, speakinge of the Sacrament of
Baptism: Sacerdos cogitans negotij magnitudinem, horret, atque haesitat. The
Priest consideringe the weight of the matter, is in an horror, and in an
agony. Likewise S. Basile excuses his own unworthiness of hearing the
Word of God: Quae autis digna est magnitudine earu^ rerum, quae dicuntur?
Cogitemus, quisnam ille sit, qui nos affatur. What ear is worthy to hear the
Majesty of these things? Let us consider, who it is, that speaks to us. S.
Paul speakinge of the Glory, and Puisance of the Gospel, in the end, Basi.
Hexamer 1* (...);
in respect of his own unworthiness, uses this Exclamation, Et ad haec
quis idoneus? And who is meet to publishe, and to speak these things? S.
Cyprian says, We are not worthy to look up into Heaven, and to speak unto
God. O, says he, what merciful favor of our Lord is this, that we may
call God our Father: and even as Christ is Gods Son, 2 Corin. 2. Cyprian.
in Oration. Dominicam.
so may we be called the Children of God? Quod nomen nemo nostrum in Oratione
auderet attingere, nisi ipse nobis sic permisisset orare. Which Name (of
Father) none of us in our Prayers would dare to utter, sauinge that he has
given us leave so to pray. By these, the sclendernes of M. Hardinges reason
may soon appear: The Priest excuses his own vnwoorthines: Ergo, He
offers up the Son of God. It is a Fallax, Ex meris Particularibus, or, A
non distributo ad distributum: and concludes in Secunda Figura Affirmative. An
error known unto Children.

M. Hardinge. The.9. Division.
Irenaeus received the same from S. John the Evangelist, by Polycarpus S. John's
scholar. He declares it with these words: Lib. 4. cap. 32.
Eum, qui ex creatura Panis est, accepit, and gratias egit, dicens, Hoc est
Corpus meum. Ft Calicem similiter, qui est ex creatura quae est secundum nos,
suum Sanguinem confessus est, and Nou^ Testamenti nouam docuit Oblationem, quam
Ecclesia ab Apostolis accipiens, in vniuerso mundo offer^ Deo. De quo in
duodecim Prophetis Malachias sic praesignificauit, Malac. 1.
Non est mihi voluntas in vobis, dicit Dominus exercituu^: and munus non
suscipiam de manu vestra. He took that, which by creation is bread, and gave
thanks, saiynge, This is my Body And likewise the Cup full of that Creature,
which is here with us, and confessed it to be his Blood, and thus taught the
new Oblation of the New Testament, which the Church receiving of the
Apostles, does offer to God through the whole world, whereof Malachie one of
the twelve Prophets did prophecy thus: I have no li^inge in you, says our
Lord almighty, neither will I take Sacrifice of your hands: because from the
risinge of the son, to the goinge down of the same, my name is glorified
among the Nations, and Incense is offered to my name in every place, and pure
Sacrifice, for that my name is great among the Nations. What can be
understood by this new Oblation of the New Testamente other, then the
Oblation of that, which he said to be his Body, and confessed to be his
Blood? And if he had offered Bread and Wine only, or the Figure of his
Body, and Blood in Bread and Wine, it had been no New Oblation, for such
had been made by Melchisedech long before. Neither can the Prophecy of
Malachie be understood of the Oblation of Christ upon the Cross, for as
much as that was done but at one time only, and in one certain place of the
world, in Golgotha, a place without the gates of Jerusalem, near to the
walls of that City. Concerning the Sacrifice of a contrite, and an humbled
heart, and al other Sacrifices of our devotion, that be mere Spiritual, they
can not be called the New Oblation of the New Testament, for as much as they
were done as well in the Old Testamente, as in the New, neither be they
altogether pure. Wherefore this place of Irenaeus, and also the Prophecy of
Malachie, wherewith it is confirmed, must needs be referred to the Sacrifice
and Oblation of the Body and Blood of Christ daiely throughout the whole
world offered to God (226) The.226. Untruth. For Irenaeus neither speaks of
the Mass: nor calls it a Sacrifice: Neither says, either that the Church
received it from the Apostles, or the Apostles from Christ.
in the Mass, which is the external Sacrifice of the Church, and proper to
the New Testament: which, as Irenaeus says, the Church received of the
Apostles, and the Apostles of Christ.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Here at last, M. Hardinge has found out the name of a Sacrifice, that was
not denied him. But the Sacrifice, that he has so long sought for, and has
so assuredly promised to find, hitherto he has not found. For Irenaeus not
once names, neither the Mass, nor this Real Oblation of the Son of God unto
his Father. Thus only he says, God has utterly misliked, and refused the
old Carnal Sacrifices of the Jews: and has taught us to offer up the New
Sacrifice of the New Testamente, according to the Prophecy of Malachie.
Malach. 1.
This Sacrifice, M. Hardinge im^gineth, can be none other, but ye offeringe up
of Christ in ye Mass. These Conclusions be very sudden. The Old learned
Fathers could never understand so much. One of M. Hardinges own Newefounde
Doctors, Martialis, says thus, Oblatio munda, Martial. ad Burdegalenses.
non tantum in Ara Sanctifica^a offertur, sed etiam vbique: The pure Sacrifice,
which Malachie means, is offered, not only upon the Holy Aultare (or
Communion Table) but also euerywhere. M. Hardinge says, It is offered only
upon the Aultare: Martialis says, It is offered euerywhere, and not only
upon the Aultare. Certainly if Malachie meante the Sacrifice, that may be
offered in all places, and without an Aultare, as Martialis says, Tertullian.
contra Iudaeos.
then he meante not the Sacrifice of the Mass. Tertullian says, That the
Prophet Malachie by that Pure Sacrifice, meante the Preachinge of the Gospel:
Tertull. contra Marcio. li. 4.
the offeringe up of a Contrite Heart: and prayer proceedinge from a pure
Conscience. S. Hierome likewise expounds the same of the Sacrifice of Prayer,
and opens it by these Words of the Prophet David: Hieronym. in 1. cap.
Malach. Hieronym. in Zachar. li. 2. c. 8.
Let my Prayer be directed, as incense before thy sight. S. Augustine calls
the same, Sacrificium Laudis, and Gratiarum actionis: The Sacrifice of Praise,
and of Thankesgeuinge.

In like sort Irenaeus also expounds his own meaning, Ecclesia offert Deo
cum Gratiarum action ex Creatura eius. August. contra Aduer. Legis and
Prophet. cap. 20. Contra Liter. Petiliani, li. 2. ca. 86.
Est ergo Altar in Coelo: Illuc Preces, and Oblationes nostrae diriguntur: The
Church offers vpto God, (not his own, and only Son, but) ^ Natural
thing of Gods Creation. Neither is our Aultare here in Earth, but in
Heaven. Thither our Prayers, and Sacrifices be directed. So likewise Eusebius
says, Sacrificamus, and incendimus Memoriam Magni illius Sacrificij, secundum
ea, quae ab ipso tradita sunt, Mysteria celebrantes, and gratias Deo pro salute
nostra agentes: We Sacrifice, Iren^^us lib. 4. cap. ^4. (...)Demo^^tra. li. 1
ca. 10.
and offer up unto God the Remembrance of that Great Sacrifice, vsinge the
Holy Mysteries accordingly, as Christ has delivered them, and geuinge God
Thanks for our Salvation.

And that Ireneus meante not any such Real Sacrifice of the Son of God,
Malachie.
nor may not in any wise so be taken, it is euidente by the plain words,
that follow, touching the same. For thus he says, speakinge of the very same
Sacrifice of the New Testamente, that is mentioned by Malachie: Sacrificia non
Sanctificant hominem: sed conscientia eius, qui offert, existens pura,
sanctificat Sacrificium. The Sacrifice does not Sanctify the Man: but the
Conscience of the offerer, being pure, Sanctifies the Sacrifice. I trow, M.
Hardinge will not say, The Priest is not Sanctified by the Son of God: but
the Son of God is sanctified by the Conscience of the Priest: For that were
Blasphemy. And yet thus must he needs say, if Ireneus meante the Real
Sacrificinge of the Son of God.

But M. Hardinge has divised a great many replies to the contrary. First he
faith, The offeringe up of Prayer, Praises, and Thankesgeuinge cannot be
called a New Sacrifice: for the same was made by Moses, Aaron, the Prophets,
and other holy men in the Old Law. This objection serves well to control
Tertullian, S. Augustine, and S. Hierome, and other learned Fathers, that thus
have taken it: who, by M. Hardinges judgment, wrote unadvisedly, they knew
not what. Hereunto Ireneus him self answeareth thus: Oblationes hic: Irenae.
li. 4. c. 34.
Oblationes illic. Sacrificia in Populo Israe^l: Sacrificia in Ecclesia. Sed
species immutata est tantu^. Quippe cum ia^ non a Seruis, sed a Liberis
offeruntur. There were Sacrifices in the Old Testamente: There be Sacrifices
in the New. There were Sacrifices in the People of Israel: there be Sacrifices
in the Church. Only the manner, or form is changed. For now they be offered,
not by Bond men (as before) but by Free men. In like sense writes
Angelomus: Angelomus Anti^^^m. lib. 3.
Mandatum Nouum scribo vobis, non alterum: sed ipsum, quod dixi Vetus, idem est
No^um. I write unto you a New Commandment: None other, but that I called
the Old, the self same is the New. And it is called a New Sacrifice, says
Chrysostom, Chrysostom. contra Iudaeos lib. 3.
Because it proceeds from a New mind, and is offered, not by fiere, and
smoke, but by Grace, and by the Sprite of God. And in this consideration
Ireneus thinks, David said unto the Children of the Church of Christ,
Irenae. li. 4. c. 21.
O singe unto the Lord a New Song.

M. Hardinge says further, The Words of Malachie may in no wise be taken
for the Oblation of Christ upon the Cross. For that, says he, was done at
one time only, and in one certain place, in Golgotha without the Gates of
Jerusalem, and not in every place. Yet M. Hardinge may easily understand,
that the Remembrance of that Sacrifice, and Thankesgeuinge for the same, may
be made at al times, and in all places. And therefore Eusebius, as it is noted
before, calls our Sacrifice, Eusebius De Demon. li. 1. c. 10. Ecclesia.
Hierar. cap. 3.
Magni illius Sacrificij Memoriam, The Remembrance of that great Sacrifice:
and, the Thankesgeuinge, which we yield unto God for our Salvation. Dionysius
calls it, (...), a Figurative Sacrifice. And S. Augustine says, Cum
credimus in Christu^, ex ipsis reliquijs cogitationis, Christus nobis quotidie
immolatur: Augustine. in Psalm. 75.
When we believe in Christ, even of the very remanentes of our Cogitation (in
what place so ever we be) Christ is Sacrificed unto us every day. Likewise
S. Hierome says, Cum audimus Sermonem Domini, Hieronym. in Psalm. 147.
Caro Christi, and Sanguis eius in auribus nostris funditur. When we hear the
word of the Lord, the Fleashe of Christ and his Blood is powered out into
our ears. And, where as M. Hardinge says further, Esai. 64. Psalm. 50.
Eusebius. De Demon. li. 1. cap. 6. Orationis Sacrificium, quod Mundum dictum est.
that the Spiritual Sacrifices of our devotion cannot altogether be called
pure, and therefore cannot be the Sacrifices of the New Testamente, it must
needs be confessed, that al our righteousness, in respect of many
imperfections, may be compared, as the prophet Esai says, unto a filthy
clowte. Yet in respect of Gods mercy, and in Christ, the prophet David
says, Thowe shall wash me, and I will be whiter, then the snow.

How be it, herein I will remit M. Hardinge to the judgment of them, whoes
Authorities he cannot well deny. Eusebius calls our Prayers, Mundu^
Sacrificium, A Pure Sacrifice. Tertullian says, We make Sacrifice unto our
God, Tertull. ad Scapulam.
for the safety of our Emperors, The Sacrifice is Christ.
Pura prece, with a Pure Prayer. S. Hierome speaking of the Sacrifice of
Christian Prayers, says thus: A pure Sacrifice is Offered unto me in every
place: not in the Oblations of the Old Testamente, Hieronym. in Zachar. li. 2.
c. 8.
but in the holiness of the Purity of the Gospel. To be short, S. Paul says,
Volo viros precari in omni loco, leuantes manus Puras: I would, In sanctitate
Euangelicae Puritatis.
that men should pray in all places, liftinge up Pure hands (unto God.)

Touching the Sacrifice of the Lords Table, Eusebius writes thus: (...): He
gave us a Remembrance in steed of a Sacrifice to offer up continually unto
God. 1. Timoth. 2. Eusebius De Demonstra. li. 1.
And this he calls, Incruentum, and Rationabile Sacrificium: The unbloody,
and Reasonable Sacrifice. This, says Iraeneus, is the Sacrifice of the New
Testament. This Sacrifice the Church received of the Apostles: and the same
the Apostles received of Christ, that made al things New.

M. Hardinge. The.10. Division.
Now let us hear what S. Cyprian has written to this purpose. Because his
works be common, to be shorter, I will rehearse his words in English. If in
the Sacrifice, Even so Chrysostom says, Christ's Baptism is Christ's Blood
Ad Hebrae. homi. 16.
which is Christ, none but Christ is to be followed, soothly it behooves us
to obey, and do that, which Christ did, and commanded to be done. For if
Jesus Christ our Lord and God, very he him self be the high Priest of God
the Father, and him self first offered Sacrifice to God the Father, and
commanded the same to be done in his Remembrance: Verily that Priest does
occupy the office of Christ truly, who does by imitation the same thing,
that Christ did. And then he offers to God the Father in the Church a true,
and a perfect Sacrifice, if he begin to offer right so as he sees Christ
him self to have offered. This far S. Cyprian. How can this Article be
avouched in more plain words? (227) The.227. Untruth. For S. Cyprian says
not, neither that Christ offered him self at the Supper, nor that we are
commanded to offer Christ.
he says that Christ offered him self to his Father in his Supper, and
likewise commanded us to do the same*.

Here we have prouued, that it is lawful, and has always from the beginning
of the New Testament ben lawful for the (228) The.228. Untruth. For none of
al these three Fathers ever spoke these words.
priests to offer up Christ unto his Father, by the testimonies of three holy
Martyrs, two Greeks, and one Latin, most notable in sundry respects, of
antiquity, of the room they bare in Christ's Church, of Learning, of
Constancy, of Faith steadfastly keapte to Death, suffered in places of fame,
and knowledge, at Paris, at Lions, at Carthage.

The B. of Sarisburie.
This place of S. Cyprian, as it not once touches the Real Sacrificinge of
Christ unto his Father, so it utterly condemns the Communion under One Kind:
the Common Prayers in a strange unknown tongue: and briefly the whole
disorder, and abuse of M. Hardinges Mass.

But S. Cyprian says, In Sacrificio, quod Christus est: In the Sacrifice,
that is Christ. If M. Hardinge think to find great advantage in these
words, it may please him to Remember, that S. Augustine says, Illis Petra
erat Christus: Unto the Jews the Rock was Christ. Augustine. in Johan. tract.
26.
Uerily, the Sacrifice after the Order of Melchisedek, which is the
Propitiation for the Sins of the world, is only Jesus Christ, the Son of
God upon the Cross. And the Ministration of the holy Mysteries, in a Phrase,
and manner of speech, is also the same Sacrifice: because it lays forth
the Death, and Blood of Christ so plainly, and so evidently before our eyes.
So says S. Augustine, Augustine. in Psalm. 20. De Con. Dis. 2* Semel.
The Very Remembrance of Christ's Passion sturreth up such motions within us,
as if we saw Christ presently hanginge upon the Cross. Upon which words
the Common Gloss notes thus: Christus immolatur, id est, Christi immolatio
Repraesentatur, and fit Memoria Passionis: Christ is Sacrificed, that is to
say, The Sacrifice of Christ is Represented, and there is made a Remembrance
of his Passion. So S. Cyprian says, Cyprian. lib. 2. Epist. 3.
Vinu^ exprimit Sanguine^: In Aqua populus intelligitur: In Vino Sanguis
ostenditur. Itaque Passionis eius mentionem in Sacrificijs facimus. Passio enim
Domini est Sacrificium, quod offerimus.

The Wine shows the Blood, In the Water we understand the people: The
Blood is expressed in the Wine. And therefore in our Sacrifices we make
mention of Christ's Passion. For the Sacrifice, that we offer, is the Passion
of Christ. As the Ministration of the Holy Communion is the Death, and
Passion of Christ, even so, and in like sort, and sense may the Sacrifice
thereof be called Christ. Therefore S. Gregory says, De Con. Did. ^. Quid
sit.
Christus in seipso immortaliter viuens, iterum in hoc Mysterio moritur. Eius
Caro in populi Salutem patitur: Christ living immortally in him self, Dies
again in this Mystery. His Fleashe suffers (in the Mystery) for the
Salvation of the people. I reckon, M. Hardinge will not say, that Christ Dies
in deed, according to the force, and sound of these words, or that his
Fleashe verily, and in deed is tormented, and suffers in the Sacrament. S.
Gregory better expounds him self in this wise: Hoc Sacramentum Passionem
Vnigeniti Filij imitatur: De Con. Did. 2. Quid sit. In ^losa.
This Sacrament expresses or represents the Passion of the Only begotten
Son. And the very Barbarous Gloss touching the same says, Christus
Moritur, and Patitur, id est, Mors, and Passio Christi Repraesentatur: Christ
Dies, and Suffers, that is to say, Christ's Death, and Passion is
Represented.

So S. Chrysostom says, Chrysostom. in Acta, homi. 21.
In Mysterijs Mors Christi perficitur: The Death of Christ is wrought in the
Mysteries. So says Beda, Exaltatio Serpentis Aenei Passio Redemptoris nostri
est in Cruce: Beda exponens illud, Sicut Moses exaltauit etc. Johan. 3.
The liftinge up of the Brazen Serpent is the Passion of our Redeemer upon the
Cross. So says S. Hierome, Quotidie nobis Christus Crucifigitur: Unto us
Christ is daily Crucified. Hieronym. in Psalm. 97.
So S. Ambrose, Christus quotidie immolatur: Christ is daily Sacrificed.
Ambro. De Virg^nib.
So S. Augustine, Tunc vnicuique Christus occiditur, cum credit occisum: Then
is Christ slain to every man, when he believes, that Christ was slain. To
conclude, so S. Hierome says, Semper Christus credentibus immolatur: Unto the
Faitheful Christ is evermore Sacrificed. Thus may the Sacrifice of the Holy
Communion be called Christ: to wite, even so, as the Ministration of the same
is called the Passion, or the Death of Christ. August. Quaesti. Euangel. li.
2.


And that the weakness of M. Hardinges gheasses may the better appear,
understand thou, Hieronym. ad Damasum.
good Christian Reader, that the Holy Catholic Fathers have used to say, that
Christ is Sacrificed, not only in the Holy Supper, but also in the Sacrament
of Baptism. S. Augustine Augusti. in Expositione inchoata ad Roman.
says, Holocaustum Dominicae Passionis eo tempore pro se quisque offert, quo
eiusdem Passionis Fide dedicatur: The Sacrifice of our Lords Passion every man
then offers for him self, when he is Confirmed in the Faith of his Passion.
And again, Holocaustum Domini tunc pro vnoquoque offertur quodammodo, In eod.
libr^.
cum eius nomine Baptizando signatur: Then is the Sacrifice of our Lord In a
Manner offered for each man, when in Baptism he is marked with the name of
Christ. In eod. libro.
And again, Non relinquitur Sacrificium pro peccatis: id est, non potest denuo
Baptizari: There is leafte no Sacrifice for Sin: that is to say, He can be
no more Baptized. And in this consideration Chrysostom says, Chrysostom. in
epist. ad Hebrae. homi. 16.
Baptisma Christi Sanguis Christi est: Christ's Baptism, is Christ's Blood.
And likewise S. Ambrose, In Baptismo Crucifigimus in nobis Filium Dei: In
Baptism we Crucify in our selves the Son of God. Ambros. De Poeniten. li.
2. ca. 2.


M. Hardinge. The.11. Division.
Our adversaries crake much of the sealing up of their new Doctrine with the
Blood of such and such, who be written in the book of lies, not in the book
of life, whom they will needs to be called Martyrs. Verily if those Mounkes,
and Friars, Apostates, and renegates, wedded to wives, or rather (to use their
own term) yoked to Sisters, be true Martyrs: then must our N^we Gospellers
pull these Holy Fathers, and many Thousands more out of Heaven. (229) The.229.
Untruth. For M. Hardinge well knovveth, that the whole Substance of our
doctrine fully agrees with the Fathers.
For certainly the Faith, in Defense of which either sort died, is utterly
contrary. The woorst that I wish to them is, that God give them eyes to see,
and ears to hear, and that he shut not up their hearts, so as they see not
the light here, Matthew. 25.
until they be thrown away into the outward darkness, where shall be weeping
and grintinge of teeth.

The B. of Sarisburie.
This talk was utterly out of season: sauinge that it liked well M. Hardinge,
to sport him self with the Scriptures of God, and a little to scoff at the
words of S. Paul. Which thing decomminge him so well, may be the better
borne withal, 1. Corin. 9.
when it shall please him likewise to scoff at others. S. Paul calls Wives,
Philippen. 4.
sometimes Sisters, sometimes Yoke fellows: and thinks Matrimony to be
Honorable in all Persons: Hebrae. 13.
and the forebiddinge of the same to be the Doctrine of Devils. Neither doothe
it any way appear, 1. Timoth. 4.
that ever honest godly Matrimony either displeased God, or was thought
uncomely for a Martyr, and witness of Gods Truth.

S. Paul was Married, Ignatius ad Philadelphi.
as it appears by Ignatius, Clemens, Eusebius: and yet nevertheless was a
Martyr. S. Peter, the Chief of the Apostles had a Wife: and yet nevertheless
stood by, Eusebius. li. 3. ca. 30. Clemens Stromat. li. 7.
and gave her comfort, and constancy at her Martyrdom. The twelve Apostles,
says S. Ambrose, only S. John excepted, were al married: and yet
nevertheless, the same S. John only excepted, as it is thought, were al
Martyrs. Eusebius li. 3. ca. 30. Ambros in 2. ad Corin ca. 11.
Spiridion was a Married Bishop: and yet as Sozomenus writes, he was thereby
nothing hindered, neither to discharge his deutie, nor to any other godly
purpose. Tertullian was a Priest, as appears by S. Hierome: and Married,
Sozomen. lib. 1. ca. 11. Ad res Diuinas nihi lo deterior.
as appears by his own Book written to his Wife: and yet notwithstanding,
as some report, was a Martyr. S. Hilarie was a Reverend Father, and Bishop of
Poiters, and yet Married, as may be geathered by his Epistl^ written to his
daughter Abra.

And to leave infinite others, Hieronym. De Ecclesias. Scriptorib.
S. Chrysostom says, Ita pretiofa res est Matrimonium, vt possis cum eo ad
Sanctum Episcopatus Solium subuehi. Vtere moderate nuptijs, and eris primus in
Regno Coelorum. So precious a thing is Matrimony, that with the same thou
maiste be promoted even unto the Bishops Chair. Regino, in Rebus Cermanicis.
Use Marriage with discretion, and thou shall be the Chief in the Kingedome of
Heaven. S. Hierome says, Hodie quoque plurimi Sacerdotes habent Matrimonia:
Hilari. ad Abram Filiam.
Even now a great number of Priests live in Matrimony. Thus the Apostles of
Christ, and many other Learned Fathers, Chrysostom. in Epist. ad Tit. homi. 2.
and godly Bishops were married, and, as M. Hardinge says, in his mirthe,
and pleasance, had their Sisters, and Yoke fellows. But how, and with what
Sisters, or Fellows, a great number of the Wi^elesse sort of M. Hardinges
side be Yokte, Chrysostom. in Epist ad Hebrae. homi. 7.
for very regard of honesty, it may not be uttered.

Epiphanius writes thus of certain of his time, Repudiant nuptias, at non
libidinem. In honor enim apud illos est, non Sanctitas, sed Hypocrisis: They
refuse Marriage, but not filthy lust. Hierony. contra Iouinianum.
For they esteem not Holiness, but Hypocrisy: Who seethe not, that in the
Church of Rome, Priests, Bishops, and Cardinals, notwithstanding they be
utterly forebidden to have Wives, Epiphan. contra Origenian. (...).
yet are easily allowed to have Concubines? They them selves have confessed it
by these words unto the world: Etiam in hac vrbe Romana Meretrices, vt
Matronae incedunt per vrbem, seu mula vehuntur: quas assectantur de Media die
Nobiles familiares Cardinalium, Clericique: Even here in this City of Rome,
harlottes pass through the streets, or ride upon their Mules, like honest
Gentlewe^men: And Gentlemen of the Cardinals bands, and Priests at noone
days wait upon them.

As touching them, whom, it so much greeueth you, M. Hardinge, to be called
Martyrs, you have slain, not only such, and such, whom it likes you, by
your own Name, if ye have not forgotten your own Name, to call Renegates, but
also great numbers of others more, In Concilio Delectorum Cardinalium.
Married, Unmarried, Learned, Unlearned, Old, Young, Boys, Maids, Laiemenne,
Priests, Bishops, Archebishoppes, without mercy. Ye scourged them with
rods: ye set burninge torches to their hands, ye cut of their tongues,
ye hanged them, ye beheadded them, ye burnte them to ashes, ye took the poor
innocent babe fallinge from the mothers womb, and threw it cruelly into the
fire. Briefly, ye did with them, what so ever your pleasure was. The worste
word that proceeded from them, was this, O Lord, forgive them, They know
not, what they do. O Lord Jesus, receive my Sprite. In the mean while, ye
stood by, and delited your eyes with the sight. Ye dug up the poor
carcasses of Gods Saints, that had been buried long before: ye served
them solemnly with process, and ascited them to appear at your Consistories,
and by Public sentence adjudged them to die the second death: and so, to the
perpetual shame of your cruel folly, ye wreakte your anger upon the dead. O M.
Hardinge, your conscience knows, these are no lies: They are written in the
eyes, and hearts of many thousands. These be the marks of your Religion. O
what reckeninge will you yield, when so much innocent Blood shall be required
at your hands? And where you say, We must pulle the Old Martyrs out of
Heaven, to place our own, for that our Doctrine, and theirs (as you bea^e us
in hand) is quite contrary, all this is but a needeles ostentation of idle
words. If vauntes were proufes, then were this matter fully ended. But we
say, that in these cases, yt I have moved, you are not hable to allege one
sufficient Clause, or Sentence of your side out of any of all the Old learned
Fathers. And hitherto your muster appears but very simple, notwithstanding
the great promise of your Stoare.

Certainly the Holy Fathers, and Martyrs of God will say unto you, We know not
your Private Masses: We know not your Half Communion: we know not your
Strange Unknowen Prayers: we know not your Adoration of Corruptible
Creatures: we know not this Sacrificinge of the Son of God: we know not
your New Religion: we know not you. God open the eyes of your Hearts, that
ye may see the miserable state, ye stand in, and recover the place, that ye
have lost, and find your Names written in the Book of Life.

M. Hardinge. The.12. Division.
Leauinge no small number of places, that might be recited out of diverse, other
Doctors, I will bring two of two worthy Bishops, one of Chrysostom, the
other of S. Ambrose, confirminge this Truethe. Chrysostomes Chrysostom. in Epist.
ad Hebr. Homil. 17.
words be these. Pontifex noster ille est, qui hostiam mundantem nos obtulit:
ipsam offerimus and nunc, quae tun^ oblata quidem co^sumi non potest. Ho^
autem, quod nos facimus, in commemorationem sit eius, quod factum est. Hoc ^^im
facite, inquit, in mei commemorationem. He is our Bishop, that has offered up
the Host, which cleanses us. The same do we offer also now, which though
it were then offered, yet can not be consumed. But this, that we do, is done
in Remembrance of that, which is done. For, do ye this, says he, In Psalm.
38.
in my Remembrance. S. Ambrose says thus: Vidimus principem Sacerdotum ad
nos venientem: vidimus, and audiuimus offerentem pro nobis sanguinem suum
sequamur, vt possumus, sacerdotes, vt offeramus pro populo sacrificium, ersi
infirmi merito, tamen honorabiles Sacrificio. Quia etsi Christus non videtur
offerre, tamen ipse offertur in terris, quando Christi Corpus offertur. We
have seen the Prince of Priests come to us: we have seen and heard him
offer for us his Blood: Let us that be Priests follow him, as we may, that we
may offer Sacrifice for the people, being though weak in merit, yet
honorable for the Sacrifice. Because albeit Christ be not seen to offer, yet
he is offered in earth, when the Body of Christ is offered. Of these our
Lords words, which is given for you, and, which is shed for you, and for
many, here S. Ambrose exhorts the Priests to offer the Body and Blood of
Christ for the people: And wills them to be more regarded, then commonly
they be now a days, for this Sacrifice sake, though otherwise they be of
less deserte.

The B. of Sarisburie.
This allegation argues no great abundance of s^oare. For Chrysostom in
these words both opens him self, and shows, in what sense other Ancient
Fathers used this word, Sacrifice, and also utterly overthrows M. Hardinges
whole purpose touching the same. For, as he says, We offer up the same
Sacrifice, that Christ offered, so in most plain wise, and by sundry
words, he remooueth al doubt, and declares, in what sort, and meaning we
offer it. He says not, as M. Hardinge says, We offer up the Son of God
unto his Father, and that verily, and in deed: Chrysostom. in Epist. ad
Hebrae. homi. 17.
but contrariwise thus he says, Offerimus quidem, sed ad Recordationem
facien^es Mortis eius. Hoc Sacrificium Exemplar illius est. Hoc, quod nos
facimus, in Commemorationem ^it eius, quod factum est. Idipsum semper
offerimus: Magis autem Recordationem Sacrificij operamur: We offer in deed:
but in Remembrance of his Death. This Sacrifice is an Example of that
Sacrifice. This, that we do, is done in Remembrance of that, that was done.
We offer up the same, that Christ offered: Or, rather we work the
Remembrance of that Sacrifice. Thus we offer up Christ, That is to say, an
Example, a Commemoration, a Remembrance of the Death of Christ. This kind of
Sacrifice was never denied: but M. Hardinges Real Sacrifice was yet never
proved. De Consecr. did. 2. Cum frangitur.
So says S. Augustine: Cum hostia frangitur, and Sanguis in ora Fideliu^
funditur, quid aliud, quam Dominici Corporis in Cruce Immolatio Significatur?
When the Oblation is broken, and the Blood (that is to say, The Sacrament of
the Blood) is powered into the mouths of the Faitheful, what other thing is
there signified, but the Sacrifice of Our Lords Body upon the Cross?

Even so S. Ambrose says, Ambrosi. in Psalm. 38.
Christ is offered here in the Earth (not Really, and in deed, as M.
Hardinge says) but in like sort, and sense, as S. John says, The Lamme was
sl^ine from the beginning of the world: Apocalyp. 5.
that is, not Substantially, or in Real manner, but in Signification, in a
Mystery, and in a Figure. And thus S. Ambrose expounds his own meaning,
even in the same place, that is here alleged. Ambros. in Psalm. 38.
Primum Vmbra praecessit: Sequuta est Imago: Erit Veritas. Vmbra in Lege: Imago
in Euangelio: Veritas in Coelestibus. Ascend homo in Coelum, and vidibis illa,
quorum hic Vmbra erat, vel Imago: First the Shadow went before: The Image
followed: The Truethe shall be. The Shadow in the Law: The Image in the Gospel:
The truth in the Heavens. O Man, go up into Heaven: and thou shalt see those
things, whereof here was an Image, and a shadow. To like purpose S. Ambrose
writes thus: Ambros. in Lucam li. 5. ca. 7.
Vidimus eum, and oculis nostris perspeximus, and in vestigia clauorum eius
digitos nostros inseruimus. Videmur enim vidisse eum, quem legimus: spectasse
pendentem, and vulnera eius Spiritu Ecclesiae scrutante tentasse: We have
seen him, and lookte upon him with our eyes: and we have thrust our fingers
into the dentes of his nails. The reason hereof is this: For we seem to see
him, that we read of: and to have beholden him hanginge on the Cross: and
with the feelinge Sprite of the Church to have searched his wounds. Hieronym.
in Psalm. 86.
So S. Hierome says, Quod semel natum est ex Maria, quotidi^ in nobis
nascitur: Christ, that was once borne of Marie, is borne in us every day.
Now, as S. Ambrose says, We see Christ even with our eyes hanginge upon
the Cross: and thruste in our fingers, and search his wounds: Even so, do
we see Christ Coming unto us, and Offeringe him self in Sacrifice unto
God. And, as S. Hierome says, Christ is Borne every day, Even so, and none
otherwise, S. Ambrose says, Christ is Sacrificed every day. In like manner
S. Ambrose writes unto certain Uirgins: Ambros. De Virginib. li. 2.
Vestras Mentes confidenter Altaria dixerim, in quibus quotidie pro Redemptione
Corporis Christus offertur: I may boldly say, Your hearts be Aultars, upon
which Hearts Christ is daily offered for the Redemption of the Body.
Hitherto M. Hardinge has found no manner token of that, he sought for.

M. Hardinge. The.13. Division.
Now for proof of the Sacrifice, and Oblation of Christ by the Doctoures
mind upon the figure of Melchisedech: Melchisedek.
First S. Cyprian says thus. Lib. 2. epist. ^.
Qui magis sacerdos Dei summi, quam Dominus noster Jesus Christus, qui
sacrificium Deo patri obtulit, and obtulit hoc idem, quod Melchisedech, id est,
Panem and Vinum, suum, scilicet, Corpus, and Sanguinem. Who is more the
Priest of the highest God, then our Lord Jesus Christ, who offered a
Sacrifice to God the Father, and offered the self same, that Melchisedek did,
that is, Bread and Wine, that is to say, his own Body and Blood? S.
Hierome in an epistle, that he wrote for the virtuous women Paula, and
Eustochium to Marcella, has these words: Recurre ad Genesim, and
Melchisedech Regem Salem. Huius principem inuenies ciuitatis, qui iam in typo
Christi Panem, and Vinum obtulit, and Mysterium Christianum in Saluatoris
sanguine, and corpore dedicauit. Return to the Book of Genesis, and to
Melchisedech the King of Salem. And thou shall find the Prince of that City,
who even at that time in the figure of Christ offered Bread, and Wine, and
dedicated the Mystery of Christians in the Body, and Blood of our Savior.
Here this learned Father makes a plain distinction between the Oblation of
the Figure, which was Bread and Wine, and the Oblation of the Truth, which
is the Mystery of Christen people, the Blood and the Body of Christ our
Savior. Of this S. Augustine speaks largely in his first Sermon upon the
33. Psalm, and in the 17. book De ciuitate Dei, cap. 20.

The B. of Sarisburie.
If M. Hardinge mean plainly, and will have S. Cyprians words taken, as they
lie, without Figure, then must he say, That Melchisedek offered up verily,
and Really Christ him self. For S. Cyprians Cyprian. li. 2. Epist. 3.
words be clear, Christus obtulit hoc idem, quod Melchisedek obtulerat:
Christ offered up the same thing, that Melchisedek had offered.
Notwithstanding it is certain, that the Sacrifice, that Melchisedek made, if
it were granted to be a Sacrifice, yet in plain, and Common manner of
speech, was not Christ the Son of God, but only material Bread, and Wine,
and other like provision of Uictualles prepared for Abraham, and for his men.
And therefore the Old learned Fathers say not, Melchisedek offered the same
in Sacrifice unto God: but, He brought it forth, as a present, as the manner
was, to refreashe them, after the pursuit, and chase of their enemies. And S.
Hierome in his Translation turns it not, Obtulit, He Sacrificed: but,
Protulit, He brought it forth. Joseph. Antiquit. li. 1. ca. 11.
Josephus reports the matter thus: Melchisedek milites Abrahami hospitaliter
habuit, nihil illis ad victum deesse Passus: Simulque ipsum adhibuit Mensae:
Melchisedek feasted Abraham's Soldiers, and suffered them to want nothing,
that was necessary for their provision. And likewise he received Abraham him
self unto his Table. Chrysostom, and Epiphanius say thus, Chrysostom. in Gene.
homi. 35.
He brought forth unto them Bread, and Wine.

Tertullian says, Abrahamo reuerten^i de prae^io obtulit Panem, and Vinum:
Melchisedek offered Bread, Epiphan. Contr^ Melchise. lib. 2.
and Wine (not unto God, but) unto Abraham returninge from the fight. So S.
Ambrose, Occurrit Melchisedek, and obtulit Abra^amo Panem, and Vinum:
Melchisedek came forth to meet, (...).
and offered (not unto God, but) unto Abraham Bread, and Wine.

By these few it may appear, that Melchisedek brought forth Bread, and
Wine, Tertullian. contra Iudaeos.
and other provision, not, as a Sacrifice unto God, but as a Relief, and
Susteinance for Abraham, and for his Company.

S. Paul compares Christ with Melchisedek, Ambros. De Sacramen. li. 4. c. 3.
Hebrae. 7.
In that, like unto Melchisedek, he was the King of Justice: In that, he was
the Prince of peace, as Melchisedek was: And in that, he had neither Father,
nor Mother: For so is it likewise written of Melchisedek. But of the Sacrifice
of Bread, and Wine he speaks nothing. Yet notwithstanding, the Ancient
holy Fathers oftentimes resemble the same present of Melchisedek, unto the
Sacrifice, yt Christ made upon ye Cross. And in that respect S. Cyprian
says, Christ offered the same thing, that Melchisedek offered: That is to
say, as M. Hardinge him self must needs expound it, The same thing in
perfourmance of Truth upon the Cross, that Melchisedek had before offered in
a Figure. So says S. Augustine, Illis Petra Christus: Unto them the Rock was
Christ: And yet not Really, August. in Joan. tractat. 26.
and in deed: but only by way of Signification, because it Signified, and
Represented Christ.

Sometimes they compare it with the Sacrifice of Thankesgeuinge, and with the
Ministration of the holy Communion, and make it equal with the same.

S. Augustine says, Augustine. in quaest. Noui, and Veter. Testamenti. quae.
109.
Melchisedek Abrahae primum, quasi Patri Fidelium, tradidit Eucharistiam
Corporis, and Sanguinis Domini: Melchisedek gave first unto Abraham, as unto
the Father of the Faithful, the Sacrament of the Body, and Blood of Christ.
So S. Hierome says, Melchisedek in typo Christi Panem, and Vinum obtulit, and
Mysterium Christianorum in Saluatoris Corpore, Hierony. ad Marcellam.
and Sanguine dedicauit: Melchisedek in the Figure of Christ offered Bread,
and Wine: and dedicated the Mystery of Christians in the Body, and Blood of
Christ. These Authorities might serve, to make some show, that Melchisedek
said Mass, and Consecrated the Sacrament of the Body, and Blood of Christ,
and offered up Christ in Sacrifice unto his Father: But of M. Hardinge, or any
other such Priest, they touch nothing.

And least any man happen of simplicity to be deceived, thinkinge that S.
Hierome hereby meante M. Hardinges Real Presence, for that he says,
Melchisedek dedicated the Christian Mystery in the Body and Blood of
Christ, It may please him to consider, that both S. Hierome, and also other
Ancient Fathers have often used the same manner of speech in other cases,
wherein M. Harding can have no manner suspicion of Real Presence. S. Hierome
Hieronym. aduersus Iouinian. li. 1.
says, Euangelium Passione, and Sanguine Domini dedicatur: The Gospel is
dedicated in the Passion, and Blood of Christ. S. Augustine says, Augustine.
in Psalm. 80.
Quid est Mare Rubrum? Sanguine Domini Consecratum: What is the Red Sea? He
answeareth, Consecrate in the Blood of Christ. Again he says, Vnde rubet
Baptismus Christi, nisi Christi Sang uine Consecratus? Whereof is Christ's
Baptism read, Augustinus in Johan. tracta. 11.
but that it is Dedicate in the Blood of Christ? Thus Melchisedek Dedicated
the Christian Mystery in the Blood of Christ.

M. Hardinge. The.14. Division.
Of al other, Oecumenius speaks most plainly to this purpose upon this place
of S. Paul alleged out of the Psalm, Tu es Sacerdos in aeternum secundum
ordinem Melchisedek. Psalm. 109.
Thou arie a Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedek. His words be
these, Significat sermo, quod non solum Christus obtulit incruentam hostiam
(siquidem suum ipsius corpus obtulit) verum etiam qui ab ipso fungentur
sacerdotio, quorum Deus Pontifex esse dignatus est, sine sanguinis effusione
offerent. Nam hoc significat (in aeternum). Neque enim de ea, quae semel a Deo
facta est Oblatio, and Hostia, dixisset in aeternum, sed respiciens ad
praesentes Sacrificos, per quos medios Christus Sacrificat, and Sacrificatur,
qui etiam in Mystica Coena modum illis tradidit huiusmodi Sacrificij. The
meaning of this place is (says he) that not only Christ offered an
Vnblouddy sacrifice, for he offered his own Body, but also that they, which
after him shall do the office of a Priest (whose Bishop he vouche saves to
be) shall offer without shedding of Blood. For that signifies the word ( For
ever.) For concerning that Oblation, and Sacrifice, which was once made by
God, he would never say, ( In aeternum) For ever. But (he said so) having
an eye to those priests, that be now, by the mediation of whom Christ
sacrifices, and is sacrificed: who also in his Mystical supper taught them by
tradition the manner of such a Sacrifice. Concerning the Prophecy of
Malachie, for proof of this Oblation, though the place of Irenaeus above
recited may stand in sleede of many auctorities, yet I will not let to rehearse
the saieinges of a Father or two, for confirmation of this Article.

Chrysostom says very plainly, In Psalm. 95.
In omni loco Sacrificium offertur nomini meo, and Sacrificium purum. Vide quam
luculenter, quamque dilucide Mysticam interpretatus est Mensam, quae est
Incruenta hostia. In every place a Sacrifice shall be offered to my name, and
that a pure Sacrifice. See, how plainly, and clearly he interpreted the
Mystical Table, which is the Vnblouddy Sacrifice.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Here might I justly take exception against this Doctor, Sacrificed Daily.
Christ the Priest, and the Oblation.
as findinge him without the compass of the first six hundred years. How be
it, He says not, That the Priest has power, or Authority, to Sacrifice the
Son of God, nor seems any way to sauer M. Hardinges purpose. Therefore we
shall not need to touch his credit.

The whole Contents of his words are these: That there is in the Church an
Vnblouddy Sacrifice, and that Christ him self offers up the same by the
mean, and Ministry of the Priest, and that Christ him self is that
Sacrifice. Which words with dew Construction, and in the sense, and
meaning of the Ancient Fathers, may well be granted. For like as S. Hierome
says, as it is alleged before, Hieronym. in Psalm. 86.
Quod natum est ex Virgin, nobis quotidie nascitur: Christus nobis quotidie
Crucifigitur: Christ, that was Borne of the Virgin, Hieronym. in Psalm. 97.
is Borne unto us every day: Christ unto us is daily Crucified: And, as S.
Augustine says, Tum Christus cuique Occiditur, cum Credit Occisum: Then is
Christ presently slain to every man, Augustine. quaestio. Euang. li. 2.
when he trusts wholly in his Death, and believes, he was slain: And, as
the same S. Augustine says, Tibi Christus quo^idie Resurgit: Christ Rises
again to thee every day: Augustine. De verbis Domini Secun. Luc. Sermon. 38.
And, as Chrysostom says, In the Holy Mysteries is wrought, and perfited the
Death of Christ: Briefly, as Gregory says, Christus iterum in hoc
Mysterio Moritur: Christ is slain in this Mystery, and dies again: Even
so, and in the same sense, and meaning, and none otherwise, Oecumenius says,
Chrysostom. in Acta homi. 21.
Christ is offered in the Holy Supper.

But, as Christ neither is daily Borne of the Uirgin, nor daily Crucified, nor
daily Slain, De Con. did. 2. Quid sit.
nor daily Rises from the dead, nor daily Suffers, nor daily Dies, but
only in a certain manner of Speech, not verily, and in deed: Even so
Christ is daily Sacrificed, only in a certain manner of speech, and in a
Mystery: but Really, verily, and in deed he is not Sacrificed.

The rest, that follows in Oecumenius, only expresses the two several
Natures in Christ, the Godheade, and the Manheade: That, touching his
Manheade, he was Sacrificed: touching his Godheade, he was the Priest, and
made the Sacrifice: And further to M. Hardinges purpose it makes nothing. So
Beda says, although somewhat otherwise: Beda in Epist. ad Ephesians. ca. 2.
Filius Dei, and Orat pro nobis: and Orat in nobis: and Oratur a nobis. Orat
pro nobis, vt Sacerdos: Orat in nobis, vt Caput: Oratur a nobis, vt Deus: The
Son of God both Prays for us: and Prays in us: and is Prayed of us. He
Prays for us, as our Priest: He Prays in us, as our Head: He is prayed of
us, as our God. Epiphanius says, Epiphan. De Melchisedechian. li. 2.
Christus est Victima, Sacerdos, Altar, Deus, Homo, Rex, Pontifex, Ouis,
Agnus, omnia in omnibus pro nobis factus: Christ is our Sacrifice, our
Priest, our Altar, God, Man, King, Bishop, Sheep, Lamme, made for our sakes
al in all. Thus is Christ our Sacrifice: thus is Christ our Sacrificer, not to
be offered by the Priest, as M. Hardinge imagines: but, as the Old Masters,
and Fathers of the Church have taught us, offered by him self upon the
Cross. S. Augustine says, Augustine. De Tempore Sermo. 130.
Ecce istic oblatus est: Ibi seipsum obtulit: Simul and Hostia, and Sacerdos.
Et Altar erat Crux: Behold there was he offered: There he offered him self:
He was both the Priest, and the Sacrifice: And his Cross was the Aultare.

This word, Incruentum, that M. Hardinge has here alleged out of
Chrysostom, is thought to bear great weight: but being well considered, of
that side, it is alleged for, as it shall appear, it weighs nothing. The
Holy learned Fathers apply that word, sometime to Prayer, and other devotion
of the mind: and sometimes to the Ministration of the Holy Communion.

For the better opening hereof, it may please thee, good Christian Reader, to
understand, that in the time of Moses Law, the Priests, and Levites offered
up unto God Oxen, Vnblouddy* Sacrifice.
Calves, Rams, and Goats: and with the Blood thereof sprinkled the Book,
the instruments of the Ministry, the whole Taberna^le, and all the People:
and as S. Paul says, Hebrae. 9.
In the Ceremonies of that Law without Bloudsheaddinge there was no remission
of Sin. Likewise the Heathens killed, and offered up their cattaile unto
their Idolles, sometimes an hundred fat Oxen in one day. Sometime they
proceeded further, and made their Sacrifices of Man's blood. Erichtheus of
Athens, Clemens in Oration. contra Gentes.
and Marius of Rome killed, and offered up their own Daughters in the honor
of Pallas. The Nobles of Carthage in the honor of their Idol Saturnus killed,
and offered up.lxx. of their own male Children in one Sacrifice.

In respect of these gross, and Fleathely, and Blouddy Sacrifices, our
Christian Sacrifices in the Gospel, because they are mere Spiritual, and
proceed wholly from the heart, Eusebi. De Demonstra. li. 1. ^. 6. (...).
are called Unblouddy. Eusebius says, Incendimus Orationis suffitum: and
Sacrificium, quod appellatur Purum, non per Cruores facimus, sed per puras
actiones: We burn the Incense of Prayer: and we offer up the Sacrifice, that
is called Pure, not by sheaddinge of Blood, but by Pure, and godly dooinges.

So Chrosostome, Chrysostom. contra Iudaeos Orat. 3.
Offerimus, non per Fumum, Nidorem, aut Sanguinem, sed per Spiritus Gratiam:
We make our Sacrifices, not by Smoke, Smell, and Blood, but by the Grace of
the Holy Sprite. He adds further, For God is Sprite, and he that adoureth
him, must adoure in Sprite, and Truth.

And this is the Unblouddy Sacrifice. So says Eusebius, Eusebius. De Demon. li.
2. (...).
Offerentilli Rationabiles, and Incruentas Hostias: They shall offer unto him
Reasonable ( or Spiritual) and Vnblouddy Oblations. And the same he expounds,
The Sacrifice of Praise.

In like sort S. Hierome Hierony. in Epistol. ad Gala. c. 4.
seems to say, In sinceritate azyma epulamur: We feast in Pureness without
leaven. In like consideration the Sacrifices, that in old times were made unto
Fides, and Terminus, were called (...), Vnblouddy, because they consisted only
in Suffumigations, and Odours, and were not imbrued with any Blood. And for
the like cause Thucydides calls certain of the Heathen oblations (...), Pure
Sacrifices. Likewise Cyrillus Cyrillus ad Reginas.
calls the Prayers, and Melody of the Angels, and blissed Sprites in Heaven
continually praisinge, and glorifieinge the name of God, Incruenta Sacrificia:
Vnblouddy Sacrifices. Again he says, Cyrillus contra Julian. lib. 10.
Nos, relicto crasso ministerio Iudaeorum, praeceptum habemus, vt tenue, and
Spirituale, and Subtle Sacrificium faciamus. Itaque offerimus Deo in odorem
suauitatis virtutes omne genus, Fidem, Spem, Charita^em: We, having leafte
the gross Ministry of the Jews, have a Commandment, to make a Fine,
Thin, and Spiritual Sacrifice. And therefore we offer unto God al manner
Virtues, Faith, Hope, Charity, as most sweet savors.

For this cause the Sacrifices of our Prayers, and other like devotions, are
called Unblouddy, for that they require no Fleashely Service, or Sheaddinge of
Blood, as did the Sacrifices of the Jews, and Heathens, but are mere Ghostly,
and Spiritual, and stand wholly in the lyftinge up, and elevation of the mind.

In like manner the Ministration of the Holy Communion is sometimes of the
Ancient Fathers called an Vnblouddy Sacrifice: Eusebi. De Demon lib. 1. (...).
not in respect of any Corporal, or Fleashely presence, that is imagined to be
there without Bloudsheaddinge, but for that it represents, and reports unto
our minds that One, and Everlasting Sacrifice, that Christ made in his Body
upon the Cross. Therefore Eusebius says, Excitamus illi Altar Incruentorum,
and Rationabilium Sacrificiorum, secundum Noua Mysteria: We erecte unto God an
Altar of Vnblouddy, and Reasonable, or Spiritual Sacrifices, according to the
New Mysteries. Again, Sacrificium incendimus illi, Memoriam magni illius
Sacrificij: In eodem libro. In eode^: (...).
We burn a Sacrifice unto God, that is, the Remembrance of that great
Sacrifice. Likewise again: Christus obtulit Mirabile Sacrificium pro salute
omnium nostrum iubens nos offerre Memoriam pro Sacrificio: Christ offered up
that Marvelous Sacrifice for our Salvation, commaundinge us to offer a
Remembrance thereof, insteede of a Sacrifice. So likewise says S. Hierome,
Hieronym ad Euagrium.
although not altogether in like respect, Pane, and Vino, Puro, and Simplici
Sacrificio Christi dedicaui^ Sacramentum: He dedicated the Sacrament of
Christ in Bread, and Wine, which is (not a Blouddy, or loathsome, but) a
Pure, and a Simple Sacrifice.

This Remembrance, and Oblation of praises, and Rendringe of thanks unto God
for our Redemption in the Blood of Christ, is called of ye Old Fathers, An
Vnblouddy Sacrifice, and of S. Augustine, The Sacrifice of the New Testament.

Justinius Martyr says, August. de Graetia Noui Test^. ad Honoratum. Justin.
Martyr in Dialogis cum Tryphone.
Esaias non pollicetur Cruentarum Victimarum instaurationem: sed veras, and
Spirituales Oblationes Laudis, and Gratiarum actionis: Esaias promises not the
restoaringe of Blouddy Sacrifices: but the True, and Spiritual Oblations of
Praises, and Thankesgeuinge.

S. Chrysostom says, Chrysostom. in Episto. ad Hebr. hom. 11.
Non iam Sanguinem, aut adipem offerimus etc. We offer not now the fat, or
Blood of Beasts. Al these things are abolished. And in steed thereof there
is brought in a Reasonable, or Spiritual dewtie. But, what is this dewtie that
we call Reasonable, or Spiritual? That it is, that is offered by the Soul, and
Sprite.

This Kind of Sacrifice, because it is mere Spiritual, and grows only from
the Mind, therefore it needs not any material Altar of Stoane, or Timber to
be made upon, as does that Sacrifice, that M. Hardinge imagines in his Mass.

Chrysostom says, Munus Euangelij sine Sanguine, sine Fumo, sine Altari,
coeterisque sursum ascendit: Chrysostom in Psalm. 95.
The Sacrifice of the Gospel ascends up without Blood, without Smoke,
without Aultare, and other the like. In the Second Council of Nice it is
written thus: Nos Christiani propemodum quid sit Ara, and quid sit Victima,
nescimus: What Sacrifice, or Altar means, we being Christian people, in a
manner cannot tell.

S. Hierome says, Vnusquisque Sanctus Altar Domini in se habet, quod est
Fides: Every Holy man has in him self the Altar of God, Hieronym. in Psalm.
26.
which is Faith. To be short, S. Augustine says, Sacrificium Noui
Testamenti est, quando Altaria Cordis nostri munda, and pura in conspectu
Diuinae Maiestatis offerimus: The Sacrifice of the New Testamente is, when we
offer up the Aultars of our hearts pure, August de Tempore Sermo. 125.
and clean in the ^ight of the Divine Majesty. In these respects our
Prayers, our Praises, our Thankesgeuinge unto God for our Salvation in the
Death of Christ, is called an Unblouddy Sacrifice. Hereof the sclendernesse of
M. Hardinges gheasses may soon appear. For thus he would seem to reason:
The Ministration of the Holy Communion, and our humble Remembrance of the Death
of Christ, is called an Vnblouddy Sacrifice: Ergo, The Priest has power to
offer up the Son of God in Sacrifice unto his Father.

M. Hardinge. The.15. Division.
S. Augustine has many evident saieinges touching this matter in his works.
One shall suffice for all, Cap. 9.
which is in a little treatise, he made contra Iudaeos, uttered in these
words. Aperite oculos tandem aliquando, and videte ab Orient sole vsque ad
Occidentem, non in vno loco, vt vobis fuit constitutum, sed in omni loco
offerri Sacrificium Christianorum, non cuilibet Deo, sed ei, qui ista
praedixit. Deo Israel. Open your eyes at last you Jews, and see, that from
the risinge of the Sun to the settinge, not in one place, as it was
appoincted to you, but in every place the Sacrifice of the Christen people is
offered, not to every God, but to him, that prophesied of these things before,
the God of Israel. And even so with that protestation, which S. Augustine made
to the Jews. I end this tedious matter consistinge in manner altogether in
allegations, to M. Iuel. Open you your eyes at last M. Iuel, and see how (230)
The.230. V^truth. For not one of al th^se Fathers here alleged, ever said that
the Priest has either power* or commeundemente, to off^r up the Son of God
unto his Father.
all the holy, and learned Fathers, that have preached the Faith of Christ
from the rysinge of the Sun to the settinge, have taught this Doctrine, by
word, and writing left to the posterity, that they which under Christ
do use the office of a Priest after the Order of Melchisedek, Melchisedek.
have not only Authority, but also express commandment, to offer up
Christ unto his Father.

The proof of which Doctrine, although it depend of the weight of one place,
yet I have thought good to fortify it with some number, that it may the better
appear to be a most undoubted truth, not moved greatly with the blame of
tediousnes, where no thanks are sought, but only defense of the Catholic
Religion is intended.

The B. of Sarisburie.
S. Augustine, as in these words he neither touches, nor signifies this new
manner of Offeringe up Christ unto his Father, so in sundry other places he
opens his own meaning plainly, and fully, touching the same. In his
Treaty against the Jews he writes thus: Augustine. Aduersus Iudaeos. ca. 1.
Sacerdotium Aaron iam nullum est in aliquo templo. At Christi Sacerdotium
aeternum perseuerat in Coelo: The (Blouddy) Priesthood of Aaron is now in no
Tem^l^ to be found: But the pristhoode of Christ continues still ( not upon
any Earthely Altar, but) in Heaven. Contra Aduersar. Legis, and Prophetar.
lib. 1. ca. 1.
Again: The Priest offers up the Sacrifice of Praise, not after the Order of
Aaron, but after the Order of Melchisedek. Eius Sacrificij similitudinem
celebrandam in suae Passionis Memoriam commendauit: and illud, quod Melchisedek
obtulit Deo, iam per totum Orbem terrarum videmus offerri.

Christ has least unto us a likeness, Augustine. in lib. 80. quae. qu. 61. In
eadem quaestione.
or Token of that Sacrifice in Remembrance of his Passion: And the same, that
Melchisedek offered unto God, we see is now offered throughout the whole
World. Holocausti eius Imaginem ad Memoriam Passionis suae in Ecclesia
celebrandam dedit: Christ has given us, to celebrate in his Church, an
Image, or Token of that Sacrifice, August. contra Faust. li. 20. ca. 21.
for the Remembrance of his Passion. Huius Sacrificij Caro, and Sanguis ante
Aduentum Christi per victimas similitudinum promittebatur: In Passione Christi
per ipsam Veritatem reddebatur: Post Ascensionem Christi per Sacramentum
Memoriae celebratur. The ^leashe, and Blood of this Sacrifice before the
Coming of Christ was promised by Sacrifices of Resemblance: The same was
performed in deed in the time of Christ's Passion: But after Christ's
Ascension, it is freque^ted by a Sacrament of Remembrance. Sacrificium hoc
Visibile, Inuisibilis Sacrificij Sacramentum, id est, Sacrum Signum est. This
Visible Sacrifice, De Conse. Dis. 2. Sacrificium. Augusti. De Ciuit. Dei. l.
10. c. 5.
is a Sacrament, that is to say, a Token, or Sign of the Sacrifice
Invisible. Quod Appellamus Sacrificium, Signum est, and Repraesentatio
Sacrificij: The thing, that we call a Sacrifice, is a Sign, and
Representation of a Sacrifice.

Thus many ways S. Augustine him self teaches us, what he meante by this
word Sacrifice: An Oblation of Praise: A Similitude: a Resemblance: a
Likeness: an Image: a Remembrance: a Token: a Sign: a Representation of a
Sacrifice.

So Nazianzene calls it, Nazianzen. in Apologetico. Hieronym. in Psalm. 51.
(...): The Figure, or Token of the Great Mysteries. To conclude, S. Hierome
says thus, Tunc acceptabis Sacrificium, vel cum te pro nobis offers Patri:
vel cum a nobis Lauds, and Gratiarum actiones accipis: Then shall thou receive
Sacrifice, either when thou offerest thee self (upon thy Cross) for us unto
thy Father: or when thou receiuest of us Praises, and Thankesgeuinge.

Neither has God appointed any certain order of owtwarde priesthood to make
this Sacrifice. Every Faitheful Christian man has Authority, to offer up, and
to make the same. How be it, this I mean, not of the Ministration of the holy
Sacraments, which only pertains unto the Minister, but only of the
Oblation, and making of this Spiritual Sacrifice. Thus much I say, least any
man, either of malice take occasion, Cyprian. De unction Chrisma.
or of ignorance be deceived. S. Cyprian says, Omnes, qui a Christi nomine
dicu^tur Christiani, offeru^t Deo Quotidianum Sacrificium, ordinari a Deo
Sanctimoniae Sacerdotes: Al, that of Christ be called Christians, offer up
unto God the da^^y Sacrifice, being ordained of God priests of holiness.
Origin says, Omnes, Origin. in Leuiti. homi. 9. 1. Petri. 2.
quicunque, etc. Al, that are bathed with the holy ointemente, are made
Priests, even as Peter says unto the whole Church, You are the Chosen
Stock, and the Kingely Priesthood. S. Augustine says, Augustine. in Exposi.
inchoata ad Roman.
Holocaustum Dominicae Passionis offer^ quisque pro peccatis suis: Ambros. in.
1.
Every man offers up the Sacrifice of our Lords Passion for his own sins.

S. Ambrose says, Inuicem expectate, vt multorum Oblatio simul celebretur:
Wait ye one for an other, Corin. cap. 11.
that the Sacrifice of many may be offered together. S. Chrysostom says,
In Mysterijs nihil differt Sacerdos a Subdito: In the holy Mysteries ( the
Ministration only excepted) the Priest differs nothing from the People.
Chrysostom. in. 2. Corin. homi. 18.


It appears by these Ancient learned Fathers, that every Christian man is
bound, to offer up the Unblouddy, and Daily Sacrifice of the New Testamente,
and that in as full, and ample sort, as is the Priest. And therefore M.
Hardinge him self says even in the very Canon of his Mass, Memento Domine
famulorum, famularumque tuarum, and omnium Circunstantium, pro quibus tibi
offerimus, vel qui tibi offerunt hoc Sacrificium Laudis: Remember, o Lord, thy
Servants, and al them, that stand about, for whom we offer unto thee, or
else, which do offer unto thee, this Sacrifice of praises.

Out of S. Augustines words M. Hardinge in the end concludes thus: Christ
is a Priest after the order of Melchisedek:

Ergo, The Priest has Authority, to offer up the Son of God in Sacrifice
unto his Father. It were hard to tell us, how this Antecedente, and this
Consequente came together. Noman has Authority thus to mince his Logique,
but M. Hardinge.

Christ only is that Priest for ever, according to the order of Melchisedek:
He has made an endless Sacrifice: He him self has offered up him self unto
God his Father upon the Cross. Hebrae. 7. and 9. Psalm. 110. Hebrae. 9.
Therefore God the Father says unto him: Thowe art that Priest for ever: not
any mortal Creature, or worldly wight, but thou (only) being both God, and
Man, art that Priest for ever. S. Paul says, We are made perfect, and
Sanctified by that one Sacrifice once made upon the Cross.

S. John the Evangelist says: He is the propitiation, and Sacrifice for our
sins. S. Peter says, 1. Johan. 2.
He carried our sins in his Body upon the Tree. S. Paul says, 1. Petr. 2.
God was in Christ reconcilinge the world unto him self. Therefore S. John
the Baptiste says, 2. Corin. 5.
Behold that Lamb of God, that takes away the sins of the world.

If M. Hardinge, Johan. 1.
and his fellows doubt hereof, as they seem to do, let Christ him self
bear witness to the price of his own Blood. Hanginge upon the Cross, and
yeldinge up the Sprite, he sealed up al with these words, Consummatum est:
That is to say, This is the Sacrifice for sin: Hereby my Fathers wrath is
pacified: hereby al things are made perfect.

This Sacrifice is but one: we may look for none other. It is full, and
perfect, we may look for no better.

S. Peter says, 1. Petr. 3.
Christ offers up us unto God his Father. S. Paul says, Through Christ
we have access to the Throne of Glory. Hebrae. 4.
What then means M. Hardinge, thus to tell us, and to bear the world in
hand, that contrary wise, he has Authority, to offer up Christ, and to
present him before the Throne of Glory? Or how dares he, to desire God, to
receive his only begotten Son into favor, and favorably and fatherly to
look upon him at his request? For thus he bids his prayer even in his
Canon, even in the secreteste, and deuouteste part of his Mass. Super quae
propitio, ac sereno vultu, etc. Upon these things (that is to say, says
Gabriel Biel, upon the Body, and Blood of Christ thy Son) O Lord look
down with a Merciful, and a cheereful countenance: and receive the same (the
Body, and Blood of thy Son) as thowe did in old times receive the
Sacrifice of Abel, and of Abraham (which was a weather, or a calfe, or some
other like thing). Thus he, not only takes upon him, to pray for Christ,
but also compares the Sacrifice of the Son of God, with the Sacrifice of
brute Cattaile. If he deny any part hereof, his own Canon, his own
Massebooke will reprove him. If this be not Blasphemy, what thing can be
called Blasphemy?

But God will answer such a Blasphemous, and rash Sacrificer: I know my
Son: In him my heart is pleased. But what art thou? Who bade thee thus to
pray? Who required such Sacrifice at thy hand?

O M. Hardinge, God open the eyes of your heart, that you may see the
miserable nakedness of your side. Deceive not your self. Mock not the World.
Consider better of your Authorities. Of all the holy learned Fathers, of whom,
ye tell us, ye have such stoare, ye are not yet hable to show us one, either
Greek, or Latin: or Heretic, or Catholic: from the risinge of the Son,
to the Son goeinge down, that ever said, as you sai^, A mortal man has
Authority, and power, to offer up in Sacrifice the Son of God.

Talk of your stoare, when ye have tried it better. Thraso will talk of that,
he has not. And somewhat it may serve, to fraie the simple. But the wise will
think it folly.

FINIS.
THE XVIII. ARTICLE, OF RECEIVINGE FOR OTHERS.
The B. of Sarisburie.
Or that the Priest had then authority to Communicate, and to receive the
Sacrament for others, as they do.

M. Hardinge. The.1. Division.
What you would say M. Iuel, The Priest receives ^ot the Sacrament for an
other.
I wot not: what you say, well I wot. Verily we do not communicate, ne
receive the Sacrament for an other. Neither has it ever been taught in the
Catholic Church, that the Priest receive the Sacrament for an other. (231)
The.231. Untruth. For in the Church of Rome, the priest receives for others,
as (...)shall appear^.
We receive not the Sacrament for an other, no more then we receive the
Sacrament of Baptism, or the Sacrament of Penance, or the Sacrament of
Matrimony, one for an other. In deed the Priest says Mass for others, where
he receives that he has offered, and that is it you mean I guess: In which
Mass being the external Sacrifice of the New Testament, according unto
Christ's Institution, the thing that is offered, is such, as makes our
petitions, and requests acceptable to God, as S. Cyprian says, In huius
(corporis) praesentia non supervacue mendicant lachrymae veniam. In sermon de
coena Domini.
In the presence of this body tears crave not forgiveness in vain.

That the Oblation of the Mass is done for others, then for the Priest alone,
which celebrateth, it may sufficiently be proved by an hundred places of the
Fathers: The matters being undoubted, tw^ or three may suffice. In Acta. hom. 21.
First Chrysostom writes thus in an Homily upon the Acts: Quid dicis? in
manibus est hostia, and omnia proposita sunt been ordinata: adsunt angeli,
adsunt archa^geli, adest filius Dei, cum tanto horrore adstant omnes, adstant
illi clamantes, omnibus silentibus, and putas simpliciter haec fieri? Igitur
and alia simpliciter, and quae pro Ecclesia, and quae pro Sacerdotibus
offeruntur, and quae pro plenitudine, ac vbe^^ate? absit. Sed omnia cum fide
fiunt. What say thou hereto? The host is in the Priests hands, and al
things set forth are in due order. The Angels be present, the Archangels be
present, the Son of God is present. Whereas al stand there with so great
fear, whereas al they stand there crieinge out to God, and al other hold
their peace, think thou that these things be done simply, and without
great cause? Why then be those other things done also simply, both the
things which are offered for the Church, for the priests, for plenty, and
abundance? God forbydde: but al things are done with Faith.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Here M. Hardinge of the Printers negligence, has taken good occasion, to
refreashe him self out of season, and to play merrily with these two words,
For an other. Which thing would rather become some other man, then a Doctor
professinge such a countenance of gravity, as do few others. It might have
pleased him, without any great prejudice, or hinderance of his cause, to
allow us some simple ability of speakinge English.

But Gods Judgments be just. He that will scorn, shall be scorned, M. Hardinge,
that is so learned, so circumspecte, so curious, and makes him self so merry
with the error of one poor Syllable committed only by the Printer in my
book, in the self same place, and in the next side folowinge has erred five
Syllables together in his own Book: as it may easily appear by that, his
friend, for shame, Fo. 172. b. (...). 1^.
has restoared, and amended the same with his pen.

How be it, as he so favorably bearinge his own errors, is so witty, to
play with syllables, and so sharp, and ready to carpe others, so in this
whole Article, as poor Apothecaries for want commonly use to do, Presence.
he serves out quid pro quo, and in steed of Receiuinge the Communion, or
Sacrament for others, he shows us Prayers, and Sacrifices, and I know not
what, and so allegeth one thing for an other.

Whether the Priest in the Church of Rome, have used to receive the Sacrament
for others, or no, which thing M. Hardinge now utterly deniethe, and says
it was never used, nor never meante, in the end hereof, God willinge, it shall
appear.

The thing that is offered, says M. Hardinge, makes our Prayers acceptable
unto God. True it is, God accepts, and mercifully beholds both us, and
also al our Prayers, and our whole obedience in Jesus Christ his Son, and
for his only sake: not for that he is now, or can be offered Uerily, and
Really by the Priest, but only for that he was once offered for all upon the
Cross. Hebrae. 4.
S. Paul says, By Christ we have access to the Throne of Grace. Johan. 14.
Christ him self says, Noman comes to my Father, but by me. Irenae. lib.
4. cap. 34.
Ireneus says, Christ (being in Heaven) is our Altar, and upon him we
must offer up, and lay our Prayers, And therefore in the time of the holy
Mysteries the Deacon says thus unto the People, Lift up your hearts.

But S. Cyprian says, Cyprian. De Coena Domini.
In huius Corporis praesentia: In the Presence of this Body. How be it, S.
Cyprian says not, In the Local Presence of this Body. For such Presence M.
Hardinge him self has already refused. He means only the Presence of
Faith, and the Virtue, and power of Christ's Body. And in this sense S.
Augustine says, Augustine. De Trinitate. lib. 3.
Rerum Absentium Praesens est Fides: and rerum, quae foris sunt, intus est
Fides: Of things, that be Absent, Faith is Present: Of things, that be
without, Faith is within. Augusti. aduer. Iudaeos ca. 1.
Again he says, Accedamus ad lesum, non Carne, sed Cord: no^ Corporis
Praesentia, sed Fidei Potentia: Let us approach unto Jesus, not with our
Fleashe, but with our heart: not with Presence of Body, but with power of
Faith.

Likewise again, Augustine. in Johan. Tracta. 51.
Habes Christum in Praesenti, and in Futuro. In Praesenti per Fidem: in
Praesenti per Signum: in Praesenti per Baptismatis Sacramentum: in Praesenti
per Altaris Cibum, and Po^um: Thou have Christ both in the time Present, and
also in the time to comme. In the time Present, by ^aith: in the time
Present, by the Sign ( of the Cross in thy forehead): in the time Present,
by the Sacrament of Baptism: in the time Present, by the Meat, and Drink
of the Altar, ( or Communion Table). S. Hierome writing the Epitaphe of Paula
unto Eustochium, says thus: Hieronym. ad Eusiochium, de Epitaphio Paulae.
Paula ingressa in stabulum, me audiente, iurabat, cernere se oculis Fidei
Infantem pannis inuolu^um, and vagientem in Praesepi Dominum: Paula entringe
into the stable ( at Bethlehem) affirmed with an oath, in my hearing, that
with the eyes of her Faith she saw ( Christ, as) an Infant in his swathing
cloutes, and the Lord crieinge in the Manger like a child. So mighty is the
power of Faith. That Uerteous Lady Paula saw by Faith, that in deed she
saw not. She saw Christ, as an Infant in his Swathinge Cloutes: and yet
then Christ was neither Infant, nor Swathed in Cloutes, nor in Corporal
Presence, in deed, and verily Present there. Therefore S. Augustine says,
Absentia Domini non est absens. Habe Fidem: and recum est, quem non vides: The
Absence of our Lord is not Absent. Have Faith, and he, whom thou see not, is
Present with thee. Likewise S. Ambrose says, Ambros. Sermo. 58. De Magdalena.
S. Steuin standinge in the Earth, touches the Lord being in Heaven.

Thus, says S. Cyprian, Christ's Body is present at the holy Communion, not
by any Corporal, or Real Presence, but by the effectual woorkinge, and force of
Faith. De Con. Dis. 2. Quia Corpus.
In like sort Eusebius Emissenus says, Vt perennis illa Victima viueret in
Memoria, and semper Praesens esse^^ in Gratia: That, that Everlasting
Sacrifice might live in our Remembrance, and evermore be Present in Grace. He
says not, that the Sacrifice of Christ's Body should be Present Locally,
Really, Uerily, or in deed, but in Remembrance, German. in Rer. Ecclesi.
Theoria.
and in Grace. Germanus hereof writes thus, Non amplius super terram sumus:
Sed in Throno Dei, Regi assistimus in Coelis, vbi Christus est: We are no
longer upon the Earth: but we are assistante unto the King in the Throne of
God in Heaven, where Christ is. For that Lambs sake, whom we thus see, and
thus have Present, what so ever we pray, our tears beg not in vain. For
he is our Advocate, 1. Johan. 2.
and Mediator, and evermore makes intercession for us. What so ever we
desire the Father in his name, Roman. 8.
shall be done unto us.

Thus the Angels, Hebrae. 7.
and Archangels, as Chrysostom by way of amplification says, Johan. 16.
liftinge up, and shewinge forth, and presentinge unto God in Heaven that
Body of Christ, Chrysostom. De Incomprehen.
make their Prayers for Mankind, and thus they say: For them we Pray, Dei
Natura. homi. 3.
o Lord, whom thou louedste so tenderly, that for their Salvation it pleased
thee to suffer Death, and to yield thy Soul upon the Cross: For them we
pray, for whom thou have given thy Blood, and offered up this Body.

This certainly is the meaning of Chrysostomes words. And therefore he
says again, Whether we Pray for the Church, or for the Ministers, or for
the increase of the Earth, our Prayers are acceptable unto God only in
Christ, and for his sake.

Touching that he writes further of the Presence, and Assistance of Angels,
and Heavenly Powers, it is the ordinary manner, and course of Chrysostomes
eloquence, and serves him both to bewtifie the matter, and also to stir up,
and inflame the hearers minds: and that not only in the time of the holy
Mysteries, but also at al other holy assemblies, and Public prayers. For thus
he says unto the people: Chrysosto. homi. 15. ad Hebrae.
Angeli sunt vbique, and maxim in domo Dei. Adsunt Regi, and omnia plena sunt
Incorporeis illis Virtutibus: The Angels of God are euerywhere: but Specially
in the House of God. They are assistan^e unto the King: and al places are full
of Spiritual Powers. In like manner of amplification he says: Chrysostom. in
homi. De Ascensione.
The Martyrs are here Present in the Church. If thou will see them, open the
eyes of thy Faith, and thou shall see a great company.

So says S. Basile, The Angels of God are present emongst us, and mark, and
register them, Basili. De Ieiunio, hom. 2.
that keep their fast. So says Tertullian, Let noman be hard to believe,
that the holy Angel of God is Present, and tempereth the Water, to the
Salvation of man.

This is it, Tertull. De Baptismo.
that Chrysostom means, by his vehemente Exornation of the Presence of
Angels.

And where as M. Hardinge says, he has passed over a Hundred Authorities,
and more, yt might be alleged to like purpose, this is one of his accustomed
colors, and an artificial shifte of his Rhetorique. Uerily hitherto he has
not found one Authority, to prove that thing, that is in question.

M. Hardinge. The.2. Division.
S. Ambrose in his funeral Oration of the Death of Valentinian the Emperor,
calling the Sacrament of the Altar the holy, and heavenly Mysteries, and the
Oblation of our Mother (by which term he understands the Church) says,
that he will prosecute the holy Soul of that Emperor with the same. This
Father writing upon the.38. Psalm, exhorts priests to follow Christ, that
as he offered for us his Blood, so Priests offer Sacrifice for the People.
His words be these, Vidimus Principem Sacerdotum, etc. We have seen the
Prince of priests coming unto us, we have seen, and heard him offeringe
for us his Blood. Let us, that be priests follow as we can, so as we offer
Sacrifice for the People, though weak in merit, yet honorable for the
Sacrifice, etc.

The B. of Sarisburie.
This objection is easily answered. S. Ambrose says, that in ye
Congregation, and in the time of the holy Mysteries, he would offer up unto
God praises, and Thankesgeuinge for that Godly Emperor Ualentinian. But he
says not, That he would offer Christ the Son of God unto God his Father,
or receive the Sacrament for the Emperor. Therefore M. Hardinge might well
have past this Authority over emonge the rest.

Neither did S. Ambrose think, that the Emperor Ualentinian was in
Purgatory, whereas, M. Hardinge imagines, he might be relieved: but
contrariwise he presumes, him undoubtedly to be in Heaven. For thus he writes
of him: Quae nam est haec anima, etc. What is this Soul, Ambros. De Obitu
Valentiniani Imperat.
that looks forth as the Day Star, bewtiful as the Moon, Chosen as the
Sun? O blissed Soul, thou look down from abooue upon us, being here
beneath: Thou have escaped the darkness of this World: Thou art bright as the
Moon: Thou shineste as the Sun. Further he says, Cu^ fratre Coniunctus
Aeternae Vitae fruitur Voluptate. Beati ambo. Being now with his Brother, he
enioieth the pleasure of everlasting life. Blissed are they both. Therefore
the Sacrifice, that S. Ambrose made, was not a Propitiatory, or Satisfactorie,
or other like Mass, whereby M. Hardinge thinks him self hable, to bail
souls out of Purgatory, but only a Sacrifice of Thankesgeuinge for that
Godly Emperor, being now in Heaven.

The other place of S. Ambrose, as it nothing touches this question, so it is
already answered fully, and at large, Artic. 6. Diui. 7. And, Artic. 17. Diui:
12.

M. Hardinge. The.3. Division.
That the oblation of the Mass is profitably made for others, S. Gregory
witnesses very plainly, Homilia. 37. expounding the place of S. Luke, cap.
14. Alioqui legationem mittens, ea quae pacis sunt postulat. Else he sends
forth an Ambassade, and sueth for peace. Hereupon he says thus: Mittamus ad
Dominum legationem nostram, flendo, Sacras Hostias offerendo. Singulariter
namque ad absolutionem nostram, obla^a cum lachrimis, and benignitate mentis,
Sacri Altaris Hostia suffragatur: Let us send to our Lord our Ambassade, with
weeping, giving Almose, and offering of holy Hosts. For the Host of the holy
Altar (that is, the Blessed Sacrament) offered with tears, and with the
merciful bounty of our mind, helps us singularely to be assoiled. In that
homily he shows, that the oblation of Christ's Body in this Sacrament
Present, which is done in the Mass, is help, and comfort not only to them
that be Present, but also to them that be Absent, both quick, and dead,
which he proves by examples of his own knowledge.

Who so lists to see antiquity for proof hereof, and that in the Apostles
time Bishops, and Priests in the dreadful Sacrifice offered, and prayed for
others, as for euerystate, and order of men, and also for holesomenesse of the
air, and for fertility of the fruits of the Earth, etc. let him read the
eighth book of the Constitutions of the Apostles set forth by Clement.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Prayer for the Dead is none of those Articles, that M. Hardinge has taken in
hand to prove. And therefore, as his manner is, he shows us one thing, for
an other. This kind of prayer, although it be mere superstitious, and utterly
without warrant of Gods word, yet, I confess, it was many where is received,
and used, both in Gregory's time, and also long time before, and is avouched
of Gregory by a number of vain, and childishe Fables. Touching the Sacrifice
of the holy Communion he says, De Con. Dis. 2. Quid Sit. Iterum in hoc
mysterio mortitur.
In this Mystery Christ suffers again for our sake: In this Mystery
Christ Dies: we offer up the Sacrifice of his Passion: we renew again his
Passion unto our selves. As Christ Suffers, and Dies, and as his Passion,
and Death is renewed in the holy Communion: even so is he offered, and
Sacrificed in the same: that is to say, as Gregory Gregor. in Euan gel. homi.
37.
expounds him self, by Representation, and by Memory, and not Uerily,
Really, or in Deed.

Touching the matter it self, that stands in question, Gregory says not*
neither here, nor else where, either that the Priest receives the Communion
for the rest of his Parish, or that one man's receiuinge is auailable for an
other.

The Sacrifice, that he names, is nomor^ the Sacrifice of the Priest, then
the Sacrifice of any other of all the People. For thus he writes in the sani^
Fable: ^o^ies Mariti vincula soluebantur in Captiuitate, Gregor. in Eua^gel.
homi. 37.
quoties ab eius Coni^ge obla^^e fuisse^ Hostiae pro eius animae* Absolutione:
The Husband being taken prisoner had his (...)loo^ sed from him, as often, as
his wife offered up Sacrifice for his soul.

The words of this supposed Clements, by whom M. Hardinge would seem to
claim a show of great Antiquity, nothing touch the thing, that
(...)^^maunded: For thus only he says, Offerimus tibi Regi, and Deo, etc.
We off^^ (...) unto thee our God, and King, according to Christ's
Institution, This Bread, and This Cup, by him renderinge Thanks unto thee.
And lest M. Hardinge happen to say, This Sacrifice was Propitiatory to
relieve the souls, that were in Purgatory, this Clemens says further,
Offerimus tibi pro ^mnibus, qui a saeculis tibi placuerunt, Sanctis,
Patriarchis, Prophetis, Justice, Apostolis, Martyribus: We offer unto thee for all holy Saints, that have benne from the beginning of the World,
Patriarchs, Pro^hetes, Just men, Apostles, and Martyrs. I trow, M. Hardinge
will not say, Al these were in Purgatory.

And, touching the receiuinge of the Communion, he says thus, Clemens Apost.
Constitu. lib. 8.
Postea recipiat Episcopus, etc. Then let the Bishop receive, and after him the
Priests, the Deacons, the Subdeacons, the Readers, the Singers, the Religious,
the Women Deacons, the Virgins, the Widows, the Children, and the whole
Congregation in order with sobriety, and reverence without confusion. By this
Record of this Clemens it appears, that the whole Congregation received the
holy Communion al together, each man for him self, and not one man for an
other.

Now, where as M. Hardinge utterly den^ethe, that ever any man in his Church
received the Sacrament in steed of others, as somewhat myslikinge the open
folly of the same, for short trial hereof, I remit him both to the very
practice of his Mass, and also to the most Catholic Doctors of al his
School.

In his Requiem he sings thus, Pro quoru^ memoria Corpus Christi sumitur,
etc. For whoes remembrance the Body of Christ is recei^ed. If he can happily
divise some vele, to shadow this, yet his Doctors be both so plain, that
they cannot be shifted: and also of so good credit, that they may not be
refused. Certai^ely they have benne evermore thought, to teach the Catholic
Doctrine of the Church. Gabriel Biel says thus, Biel Lection. 8^.
Sicut os materialis Corporis, etc. As the mo^th of our material Body, not
only eats for it self, but also receives susteinance for the preservation
of al other members, which susteinance is divided throughout the whole Body:
Even so the Priest receives the Sacrament, and the Virtue thereof passes
into all the members of the Church, and Specially into them, that are present
at the Mass. Likewise says Uincentius de Ualentia: In Sermon. 2. D^
Epiphania.
The whole Christianity is one Body, Knitte together by Faith, and
Charity, and having in it sundry members: And the Priest is the mouth of
this Body. Therefore when the Priest receives the Sacrament, all the members
are refreashed. Again he says, Nos Communicamus ore Sacerdotis, audiendo
Missam: We hearing M^sse, do Communicate, or receive the Sacrament, by the
Mouth of the Priest. Likewise Doctor Eckius says, Eckius De Vtraque Spec^e.
Populus bibit Spiritualiter per os Sacerdotis: The People drincketh
Spiritually by the mouth of the Priest. These words be plain, and truly
reported. Which being true, it must needs appear, that M. Hardinges
auouchinge the contrary is Untrue.

So Chrysostom says, The Old Heretics called Marcionitae Chrysostom. in 1
Corin. hom. 40.
used to Baptize some, that were living, in the behalf, and steed of others*
that were dead. And from thence, it seems, they that now would be counted
Catholics, have derived their Doctrine in this point. And that M. Hardinge
may the rather believe, that such folly has been used, let him remember,
that in his Church ye Bishop, when he creates a Reader, gives him evermore
this Commission: Accipe potestatem legendi Euangelium tam pro Viuis, quam pro
Defunctis: Receive thou power to read the Gospel, as well for the Quick, as
for the Dead. Therefore M. Hardinge so earnestly denieinge this, deniethe the
manifest, and known truth, and defaceth the credit of his own Doctors.

To conclude, I may well say, as before, that M. Hardinge having nothing to
allege, touching the matter, that lies bitweene us, and in steed thereof,
fillinge up his papers with matters impertinente, of Prayer, and Sacrifice, has
somewhat abused the patience of his Reader, and showed him one thing for an
other.

FINIS.
THE XIX. ARTICLE, OF APPLICATION.
The B. of Sarisburie.
Or, that the Priest had then authority, to apply the virtue of Christ's
Death, and Passion to any man by mean of the Mass.

M. Hardinge.
The virtue of Christ's Death, and Passion, is grace and remission of sins,
the appeacing of Gods wrath, the reconciliation of us to God, deliverance
from the Devil, Hell and everlasting damnation. Our adversaries imputinge to
us, as though we said, and taught, that the Priest applies this virtue,
effect, and merit of Christ's Death to any man by the mean of the Mass,
either (232) The.232. Untruth. For in the Church of Rome the Priest presumes,
to Apply the merits of Christ by mean of hi^ Mass, as shall appear.
belie us of Ignorance, What applies the Priest unto us in the Mass.
or sclaunder us of malice. Verily we say not so. Neither does the Priest
apply the virtue of Christ's Passion to any man by the mean of the Mass. He
does but apply his prayer, and his intent of Oblation, besechinge almighty
God to apply the merit and virtue of his Sons death (the memory whereof he
celebrateth at the Mass) to them, for whom he prays.

It is God, and none other, that applies to us remission of sin, the Priest
does but pray for it, and by the commemoration of his Sons Death, moves
him to apply. So as all that the Priest does, is but by way of petition and
Prayer, leauinge al power, and authority of applieinge to God, which prayer is
to be believed to be of most force and efficacy, when it is worthily and
devoutly made in the Mass: in the which the Priest bears the person of the
whole Church, and offers his Prayer in the Sacrifice, wherein the Church
offers Christ, and it self through Christ to God.

Which his (233) The.233. Untruth. For the Priest prays, that the Body of
Christ may be carried up by the hands of Angels.
prayer and devout service he besecheth to be offered up by the hands of
Angels unto the high altar of God, in the sight of the divine majesty. Of
what strength prayer made at the Mass is, the holy Bishop and Martyr S.
Cyprian witnesses Sermon de Coena Domini.
(that in all his Books never once named the Mass) where he says, In the
presence of this Sacrament tears crave not in vain, and the Sacrifice of a
contrite heart is never denied his request.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Neither have we of ignorance belied M. Hardinges Doctrine, nor have we of
malice sclaundered it: but plainly, and truly have reported the same, even as
both he, and his late Doctors have taught it, and as the people in the
Church of Rome has euerywhere received it at their hands.

But, like as in Old times God commanded the Philistines, to offer up Golden
Mise, and Golden Hemeroides, to be keapte for ever in Record, 1. Samuel. 6.
and to witness against them, in what sort they had been plagued for their
wickedness, if at any time they should happen afterward to deny it: Even so
has God specially provided, that the Monumentes of our Adversaries old
errors, whereof they seem now to be ashamed, should still remain in sure
Record, even in their own Doctors Books, to witness against them, if they
should happen, as now, upon mislike, utterly to disclaim, and deny the same:
and to force them, to confess, that they are the Children of them, that have
deceived the people.

For, whereas M. Hardinge amongst many other words, wherewith he labors
to shadow, and to darken the case, says, It is God only, and none other,
that applies unto us the Death of Christ, and the Remission of our Sins,
Johannes Scotus, one of his most famous, and most Catholic Doctors, says
plainly the contrary: Non solus Deus distribuit Virtutem Sacrificij,
Qu^dlibet. quaest. 20.
sed Sacerdos quoque: Not only God distributeth, or Applies the Virtue of the
Sacrifice, but the Priest also. And Gabriel Biel, an other of M. Hardinges
Doctors in like sort says, ^iel Lectione. 26
The force, and effect of the Sacrifice is Distributed, and Applied, not only
by God, but also by the Priest. Only, and, Not Only, implie a Contradiction.
If the one be true, the other of necessity must be false. Again, Biel says,
Sacerdotis est determinare Virtutem Sacrificij, vt his, Biel in eadem lectione.
vel illis indigentibus praemium reddendum per huiusmodi Ecclesiae Sacrificia
conferatur. It is the Priests office, to determine, and limit the Virtue of
the Sacrifice, that the meede, that is given by such Sacrifices of the
Church, may be Applied to these, or them, that stand in need. Which thing
^e proves by sufficient example in this wise: As the Pope, by right of his
Supremacy, has power to divide the Treasure of the Church (whereby he
means his Pardons) geuinge unto sum full Remission of al their sins: and
dispen^^nge with sum other for the third part of their pains: and
grauntinge unto some pardon for a certain number of days, or years, as he
sees, it may be most expedient for the devotion of the people: Even so
(says he) may the Priest dispense, and divide the Merits of the Church, and
Apply the same to this man, Vt illi, vel illi possit applicare. Sum. Angelica.
in Missa.
or that man, as he shall think, it may stand him in some steed.

In Summa Angelica, it is written thus, The Mass is available unto them, unto
whom so ever it pleases the Priest to Apply it by his Intention. And again,
Missa respectu Operis Operati etc. The Mass in respect of the work that is
wrought, is nothing else, but the Applieinge of the Merit of Christ's Passion.

So Vincentius de Valentia, a notable Catholic Schooleman of M. Hardinges
side, Vincen. de Valentia in. 1. Sermo. de Corpore Christi.
Virgo Maria solum semel aperuit Coelum etc. The Virgin Marie never but once
opened Heaven: But the Priest opens it every day, and at every Mass. Doctor
Holcote says, Holcot in. 4. Sen. quae. 3.
Quid est celebrare Missam principaliter pro aliquo? R. Est applicare Missam
Iohanni, quod sit quaedam satisfactio apud Deum pro anima Iohannis,
(...)indigeat: What is it, to say Mass principally for any man? He answeareth,
It is the Applieinge of the Mass unto John, to be a certain Satisfaction for
him before God, If John stand in need of it. In eadem (...).
And withal, he moves a great doubt, whether the Priest may Apply One
Mass to Two several men, and nevertheless satisfy for them both.

And Biel says, that certain, ^iel lectione. 26
the better to healpe the Priests memory, taught him to Apply his Mass
throughout all the Cases of Declenson: As for example, Nominatino, A Mass for
him Self: Genitiuo, A Mass for his Father, and Mother: Datiuo, A Mass for
his Founders, or Benefactours: Accusatiuo, A Mass for his Enemies, or
Accusers: Vocatiuo, A Mass for sinners, and Infidelles: Ablatiuo, A Mass for
his Backebiters, and Sclaunderers.

Of these things M. Hardinge seems now to be ashamed: notwithstanding it
were of late the Catholic, and General Doctrine of his Church, Uniuersally
taught, by Holcote, in England: by Uincentius, in Spain: By Biel, in France:
by Angelus, in Italy: Or rather by all these, and al others, through the whole
Church of Rome. Hereof grew such Merchandise, and Sale of Masses, that the
House of God was become a Den of Theeu^^.

Therefore M. Hardinge, having no other defense for all these folies, but only
to cast of al, that can be said of our side, as malicious, and ignorante
surmises, shows him self little to have considered the state of his own
Church, and in the impatience of his heates, to speak against us, what him
likes, and so to spice his error both with ignorance, and with malice.

But for Resolution hereof, and some short satisfaction of the Reader, it
behooves us to understand, That it is not the Priest, but God only it is,
that Applies unto each man the Remission of his Sins in the Blood of
Christ: not by mean of the Mass, but only by the mean of Faith. S. John
says; He that believes in the Son of God, has a witness in him self. 1.
Io^an. 5.
S. Augustine says, Holocaustu^ Domini^ae Passionis eo tempore offert
Vnusquisque pro peccatis suis, August. in Expositione inchoata ad Roman.
quo eiusdem Passionis Fide dedicatur: Then doothe every man offer the
Sacrifice of Christ's Passion for him self, when he is dedicated in the Faith
of Christ's Passion. So says the Old learned Father Origin, Siclo Sancto
comparandus est nobis Christus etc. Origin. in Leuiti. hom. 3.
With the Holy Si^le we must buie Christ, that may put away our Sins. The
Holy Sicle bears the form of our Faith. For if thou bring Faith, as the
Price, thou shall receive the Remission of thy sins. Likewise again he
says, Origin. in epist. ad Roman. li. 3. Ca. 3.
Christus factus est Hostia, and Propitiatio pro peccatis. Quae Propitiatio ad
Vnumquenque venit per viam Fidei. Christ is made the Sacrifice, and
Propitiation for Sin. Which Propitiation comes (or is applied) to each man
(not by the Mass, but) by the way of Faith.

This is the most certain, and undoubted Application of the Merits, and
Death of Christ. S. Paul says, God has set Christ, to be our Reconciler
through Fait^e, by the Mediation of his Blood.

FINIS.
THE XX. ARTICLE, OF OPUS OPERATVM.
The B. of Sarisburie.
Or, that it was then thought a sound Doctrine, to teach the people, that the
Mass, ex Opere Operato, that is, even for that it is said, and done, is
hable to remove any part of our Sins.

M. Hardinge. The.1. Division.
In deed the Doctrine uttered in this Article is false, and derogatorie to the
Glory of our Savior Christ. For thereby the honor of Christ's Sacrifice,
whereby he has once satisfied for the sins of al, should be transferred to
the work of the Priest, which were great wickedness, and detestable
blasphemy. And therefore we will not require M. Iuel, to yield, and subscribe
unto this Article. For we grant, this was never thought a sound doctrine
within six hundred years of Christ's Ascension, nor shall be so thought within
six thousand years after the same of any man of sound belief. (234)
The.234. Untruth. For it has been so taught, and so v^ed, as it shall appear.
Neither has it been at any time taught in the Catholic Church, how so ever
it likes our adversaries, to charge the Scholastical Doctors with the
sclaunderous report of the contrary. For it is Christ only, and none other
thing, that is able to remove our sins: and that has he done by the
Sacrifice of his body once done upon the Cross. Of which Sacrifice once
performed upon the Cross with sheddinge of his Blood, this vnblouddy
Sacrifice of the Altar, which is the daily Sacrifice of the Church, commonly
called the Mass, is a sampler, and a commemoration, (235) The.235. Untruth.
For Chrysostom says, In vasis Sacris, no^ verum Corpus Christi, sed
Mysterium Corporis eius continetur. In Opere Imperfecto, homi. 11.
in the which we have the same Body, that hanged on the Cross. Neither is it
a sampler, or commemoration only, but the self same Sacrifice which was
offered on the Cross: a sampler or commemoration, in respect of the manner,
for that it is done without blood sheddinge: the self same, for that the
thing which is offered, is the same that was offered on the Cross. And where
as we have nothing of our selves, that we may offer up acceptable to God: we
offer this his Sons Body as a most acceptable Sacrifice, beseechinge him to
look, not upon our woorthines, our act, Psalm. 83.
or work: but upon the face of Christ his dear Son, and for his sake to
have mercy upon us.

And in this respect we doubt not this blessed Sacrifice of the Mass to be
vaileable, How the Mass is va^leable (...)Opere operato.
and effectual, ex opere operato, that is, not as M. Iuel interprets, for
that the Mass is said, and done, referringe Opus Operatum to the act of the
Priest, not so: but for the work wrought it self, which God him self
works by the Ministry of the Priest, without respect had to his merit,
or act, which is the Body and Blood of Christ, whose breakinge, and
sheddinge is in this mystical Sacrifice, so far as the holy Ghost has
thought expedient for man's beh^ofe, represented, showed, and recommended to
memory. Which Body and Blood, when it is (236) The.236. Untruth. For
Christ never gave such commandment.
according to his commandment offered up to God, is not in regard of our
work, but of it self, and of the holy Institution of his only begoten
Son* a most acceptable Sacrifice unto him, both for quick and Dead, A folly
joined with a contradiction in it self. For the Dead can make no stop.
where there is no stop nor let to the contrary on the behalf of the
receiver. De octo quaest. D^lcitij, quaest. 2.
The Dead, I mean such only, as through Faith have recommended them selves
to the redemption wrought by Christ, and by this Faith have deserved of God,
that after their departure hence, as S. Augustine says, this Sacrifice might
profit them.

The B. of Sarisburie.
These words, Opus Operatum, Opus Operans, Opus Operantis, as they are
strange, and Barbarous, so are they not found, neither in the Scriptures, nor
in the Old Doctors, nor in any Ancient Council: but have been lately divised
by Certain New Scholastical Doctors of M. Hardinges own side: who
notwithstanding, cannot yet well agree upon their own divise, nor can
certainly tell us, what they have found.

Opus Operantis, some of them call the Work, Biel Lectio. 27. Gerson contra
Floretum. li. 4. Scotus Quod^^. ar. 2.
and worthiness of the Priest. But Innocentius ^* rather calls Opus
Operantis, The Priest him self. Likewise about these Words, Opus Operatum,
they have made much a doo^ and yet are not well resolved of it, what it should
be. Scotus, and Biel say, It is the Consecration, the Oblation, and the
Receiuinge of the Sacrament. Gerson says, It is the Word of the Creator,
and the power of the Holy Ghost. Innocentius. li. 3. ca. 5.
Pigghius says, It is the will of God, that appointed the Sacrament to this
purpose. Gropper of Colaine says, It is the Body of Christ. ^iel. Lectio.
27. Scotus Quod^^. ar. 2.
How be it, it were hard to say, either that Christ's Body is a Work, or
that any Work is Christ's Body.

It were a point of Maisterie, to make al these contrary Resolutions agree in
one. ^erson Contra Flor. li. 4.
Thus it fares evermore, where as men shoot without a mark.

How be it, if neither M. Hardinge, nor any other of his fellows for him, be
hable to find these words, Gropper arti. ^* Ca. 19.
Opus Operatum, in any Ancient Doctor, or Council, then, notwithstanding the
great multitude of his Words, my Assertion stands still true. But if he,
and others of his side, have maineteined this Doctrine, even in such sort, as
I have uttered it, then by his own Confession, they have deceived the world
by wicked, and blasphemous Doctrine, to the great Derogation of the Glory,
and Cross of Christ.

And, for as much as, M. Hardinge seems now, to blushe at his own Terms,
and therefore begins to shun, and to shifte the same by vain, and
frivolous expositions: it shall not be amiss, to open the true meaning
thereof, both by the Old Records of the Ancient Writers, in whose days the
like folly began to grow, and was then reproved: and also by the plain
words of M. Hardinges own allowed Doctors.

S. Augustine says, Augustinus D^ Ciuit^. Dei, li. 2^. ca. 19.
There were some in his time, that thought, and taught the people, that if a
man had been Baptized, and had once received the Communion, notwithstanding
he lived wickedly, and maintained Heresies, and wilful Doctrine, yet he could
not be condemned, only because he was Baptized, and had once received the Holy
Communion: which thing now is called, Opus Operatum.

Chrysostom says, Chrysostom. (...)Popul. Antioche* Homi. 20.
Mulieres, and parui pueri pro magna custodia, ad collum suspe^dunt Euangelia:
VVeemen, and young Children for great safety, hang the Gospel at their
necks. They thought, the Gospel it self, and of it self, could save them
from al missehappes, Chrysostom. in. 1. Corin. Homil. 43.
not because they believed in it, but only because it was hanged or tied
about them: Heronym. in Matthae. lib. 4. ca. 23.
And this is also, Opus Operatum.

So there were certain in Old times, that, of mere superstition, used to
Minister the Communion unto the Dead, and to lay the Sacrament in the mouths
of them, that were departed: as S. Benet also caused the Sacrament to be laid
upon a dead woman's breaste: Council. Carthagin. 3. Can. 6.
thinkinge, Inter Decreta Deus dedit. Ca. 12.
that the very outward Ceremony thereof, without Faith, or inward motion of
the party, might be sufficient to do her good: Which also is called, Opus
Operatum.

Even in S. Paul's time there were certain, that of like superstition, began
to Baptize the Dead: which thing also continued a long while after, as may
appear by the Council of Carthage. Council. Carthagin. 3. Ca. 6.
They thought, the very outward work of Baptism it self, only because it
was done, without any further motion of the mind, was sufficient to remit
their sins.

This Old error our Adversaries of late years have taken up, and made it
Catholic: bearinge the People in hand, yt their Mass it self, ex Opere
Operato, Only of it self, and because it is said, is available for the
Remission of their Sin^es.

Thus they expound their own dream: Biel lection. 27. Scotus Quod* lib. ar.
2.
Ex Opere Operato, id est, ex ipsa Consecratione, and Oblatione, and Sumptione
Venerabilis Eucharistiae. Ex opere Operato, Is as much to say, as for the very
Consecration, and oblation, and Receiuinge of the Reverend Sacrament.

In Manipulus Curatorum, which, not long ^^thence, was thought to be a Book
most necessary for all persons, and Curates, as conteininge al necessary
Doctrine for the Church of God, it is written thus: Manipulus Curatorum.
Opus Operatum, est actus exercitatus circa Sacramentum: sicut Opus operatum in
Baptismo, est Inspersio, vel Immersio Aquae, and prola^io verborum. And
therefore Cardinal. Caietane at Augusta in Germany, requiringe Doctor Luther,
to recante this Article, said thus: Fides non est necessaria accessuro ad
Eucharistiam: In Paralipomenis Vrspergen. An. 1518.
Paithe is not accessory for him, that will receive the Sacrament: Meaning
thereby, that the very Sacrament it self, only because it is ministered, is
sufficient, although the receiver be utterly void: of Faith.

And therefore the Bishops in the late Council of Tridente have determined
thus, Council. Triden. Session. 6. ca. 8.
Si quis dixerit, per Sacramenta No^ae Legis non conferri Gratiam ex Opere
Operato, sed Fidem Solam Diuinae Promissionis sufficere ad Gra^iam
consequendam, anathema sit: If any man say, that Grace is not given by the
Sacraments of the New Testament, even for the work, that is wrought, but
that Faith only of the Heavenly promise is sufficient to atchieue Grace,
accursed be he.

Likewise Gabriel Biel, ^iel lection. 81.
Hoc Sacrificium in illis, pro quibus offertur, non praeexigit vitam
Spiritualem in actu, sed in potentia etc. This Sacrifice in them, for whom it
is offered, requires not a spiritual (or godly) life in act, and in deed,
but only in possibility. Neither is this against the saieinge of S.
Augustine, Who vvil offer the Body of Christ, but only for them, that are
the members of Christ? For thus we understand it, That the Oblation is made
for the Members of Christ, when it is made for any, that may be the Members of
Christ.

And therefore Cardinal Caietan, notwithstanding that he had spoken against
Doctor Luther in open Conference to the contrary, confesses a general error
therein in his time. For thus he writes, Caietan. in Quodlib. Devsu
Spiritualium* quaest. 3.
Vnde in hoc videtur Communis multorum Error, quod putant, hoc Sacrificium ex
solo Opere Operato habere certum meritum, vel certam satisfactionem, quae
applicatur huic, vel illi: Wherefore herein appears the Common Error of
many, that think, that this Sacrifice even of the work, that is wrought,
has a certain Merit, or a certain Satisfaction, that may be applied to this
man, or that man.

This of late years was the Schooledoctours Catholic meaning, touching
these New Terms of their own inuentinge: which now M. Hardinge, and his
Fellows are feign, for shame, to color over with some finer Uetnishe. Hereof,
good Christian Reader, may thou judge, how aptely this Doctrine may stand
with the Glory, and Cross of Christ.

Now, touching these words, Oblation, and Sacrifice, with the show whereof M.
Hardinge thinks it good skill, to das^e, and to abuse the e^es of the simple,
First, where he says, A Mortal man offers up the Son of God in deed, and
verily unto his Father, and that Christ Commanded such a Sacrifice to be
made, He knows him self, it is, both a great untruth, and also a
manifest, and a wilful blasphemy. And further, where he adds, That the same
Sacrifice so offered is available for the Dead unless there be some stop, or
let in the Receiver, This is a very vain, and unadvised folly: For Children
know, that the Dead can neither receive the Sacrament, nor make let, or stop
against the receiuinge of the same. Therefore this addition might, have been
better surueied, ere it came abroad.

In deed S. Augustine, having ^ccasion somewhat to touch the state of the
Faithful departed, says, yt the Prayers of the living, being either ^oined
with Almosededes, or made at the time of the holy Communion, at whi^he time the
Death of Christ is laid open before us, and therefore our mind the more
enflamed to devotion, may us auailable for the Dead. How be it, S. Augustine
herein compares the Sacrifice of the Holy Communion, with the Sacrifice of
almosegeuinge, and in that behalf of relieuinge the Dead, makes either equal
with the other. But for this present, it is needeles hereof to make farther
treaty. For M. Hardinge well knows, this is none of the Articles, we have
now in question.

But certain it is, that S. Augustine, neither here, nor else where, ever
moved one word of Opus Operatum, that now so mightily is defended.

M. Hardinge. The.2. Division.
But to speak of this matter more particularly, and more distinctly, the
term, Mass, may be taken two ways. Either for the thing Mass taken
(...)ways.
it self, which is offered, or for the act of the Priest in offeringe of
it. If it be taken for the thing it self, that is offered, which is the Body
of Christ, and is in this respect of the M. Hardinge should have shevved,
what Scholastical Doctors have taken it thus: Otherwise it may seem untrue.
Scholastical Doctors called Opus Operatum: no man can justly deny, but that
it remooueth, ^ Cor. 6. and 7. Tit. 2. Apoc 14. ^^oan. 2. (...). 3. cap.
(...)Roma^^.
and takes away sin. Al these allegations utterly condemn the work, that
is supposed in the Mass.
For Christ in his Fleashe crucified is our only Sacrifice, our only Price,
our only Redemption, whereby he has merited to us upon the Cross, and with
the Price of his Blood has bought the Remission of our Sins: and S. John
says, he is the propitiation for our sins. Al these allegations utterly
condemn the work, that is supposed in the Mass.
So Oecumenius says, Caro Christi est propitiatorium nostrarum iniquitatum.
The Fleashe of Christ is the propitiation for our iniquities. And this not for
that it is offered of the Priest in the Mass The work of the Priest is
propitiatory, albeit not specially.
specially, but for that he offered it once him self with sheddinge of his
Blood upon the Cross for the redemption of al. Which Oblation done upon the
Cross, is become a perpetual, and continual oblation, not in the same manner
of offeringe, but in the same virtue, and power of the thing offered. Heb. 9.
For since that time the same Body of Christ appearinge always before the
face of God in Heaven, presents and exhibiteth it self for our
reconciliation: And likewise it is exhibited and offered (237) The.237.
Untruth. For God never commanded the Priest, neither to say Mass, as it is
now used, nor to offer up the Body of Christ.
by his own commandment here in earth in the Mass, where he is both
Priest, and Sacrifice, offerer and oblation, verily and in deed, though in
Mystery, and by way of commemoration, that thereby we may be made pertakers of
the reconciliation performed, applyinge the same unto us (so far as in this
behalf man may apply) through Faith, and devotion, no less then if we saw
with our eyes presently his Body hanginge on the Cross before us, and streams
of Blood issuinge forth. And so it is a Sacrifice in very deed
propitiatory, not for our act or work, but for his own work already done
and accepted. To this only we must ascribe remission and remoouinge of our
Sins.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Here M. Hardinge is driven to make woonderful hard shifte, and to leave all the whole company of his Schooledoctours, and to go alone. The Mass, says
he, sometime signifies the Body of Christ. Sometime, say you? And at what
time? I beseech you. And, if at one time, why not at al times? what Ancient
Doctor, or Holy Father ever told us this tale? But let us give M. Hardinge
leave to make somewhat of him self, and to uphold his strange Religion, with
strange phrases, and Forms of speech. For he hops, that, what so ever he
list to say, the ignorant people will believe him.

But wherefore allegeth he not, either the Scriptures, or some Old Council, or
some Ancient Doctor: at the least, some one, or other of his own
Schooledoctours, Innocentius, Thomas, Scotus, Alexander, Henricus de Gandauo,
Robertus de collo torto, or some other like in this behalf? Is there none of
al these, that ever could understand, that the Mass is the Body of Christ?
And must we needs believe M. Hardinge in so strange a matter, without witness?

Uerily if the Mass, according to this new Doctrine, be Christ's Body, and
that verily, and in deed, without shifte, or healpe of Figure, then was the
Mass Borne of the Blissed Uirgin: then was it Crucified: then was it Buried in
the Grave. For all these things happened to the Body of Christ. Then who so
ever denies the Mass, denies Christ's Body: and who so ever believes
Christ's Body, believes the Mass. But what should M. Hardinge do? A
monstrous Doctrine requires a monstrous kind of words.

In deed, S. Johan. 2. Hebrae. 10. Johan. 1. Roman. 8. Hebrae. 7.
Christ's Body Crucified was the Price, and Propitiation for all our Sins.
Christ with one Oblation has made perfect for ever, al, that be Sanctified.
For in his Fleashe he was that Lamb of God, that has taken away the Sins
of the World. And now in the same Fleashe he appears before God, and
evermore entreats for our Sins.

But, M. Hardinge, what is all this to your Mass? Who ever bade you, to
Sacrifice Christ unto his Father? Who ever warranted you, that your Sacrifice,
divised by your selves, should be of the same virtue, and power, as you say,
that was the Sacrifice of Christ him self upon his Cross? who ever told
you, that your Sacrifice should be the Price, and Propitiation for the sins
of the whole world? Or that Christ in your Mass should evermore appear
before God, and entreat for us?

But why add you farther this Special exception of your self, And this, not
for that, it is offered of the Priest in the Mass Specially? What needs you
with this so Special prouiso, so finely to mince this matter? Why should you so
Specially dishable, or discredit the Unblouddy Sacrifice of the Church? If
the Fleashe of Christ be not Specially available, for that, as you say, it
is offered by the Priest, how then, being so offered, can it be
propitiatory for our sins? If it be propitiatory in deed, and if the
Priest offer up Christ unto his Father, and that in all respects of power,
and Virtue, as effectual, and available, as that Christ him self offered
upon the Cross, how then is it not Specially profitable for that, as you
say, it is offered by the Priest? Ye should have brought some Daniel with
you, to expound your dream: or some skilful Surueiour, to part tenures
bitweene Christ, and the Priest, and to limit each part Generally, and
Specially his own right.

O M. Hardinge, what a miserable Doctrine is this? Remove only this vain
show of strange Words, wherewith ye delight to astonne the simple: and the
rest, that remains, is less, then nothing.

M. Hardinge. The.3. Division.
If the term, Mass, be taken for the act of the Priest, in respect of any
his only dooinge, it is not able to remove Sin. For so we should make the
Priest Gods peer, and his act equal with the Passion of Christ, as our
adversaries do unjustly sclaunder us. Yet has the Mass virtue, and effect
in some degree, and is acceptable to God, by reason of the oblation of the
Sacrifice, which in the Mass is done by the offerer, without respect had to
Christ's institution, even for the faithful prayer and devotion of the party,
that offers, which the Schooledoctours term, ex opere operantis. For then
the oblation seems to be most acceptable to God, when it is offered by some
that is acceptable. Now the party that offers, is of two sorts. The one
offers immediately, and personally: the other offers mediatly, or by mean
of an other, and principally. The first is the Priest that consecrateth,
offers, and receives the Sacrament, who so does these things in his own
person, yet by Gods authority, as none other in so offeringe is concurrent
with him. The party, that offers mediatly or by mean of an other, and
principally, is the Church militant, in whose person the Priest offers, and
whose minister he is in offering. For this is the Sacrifice of the whole
Church. The first party that offers, is not always acceptable to God,
neither always pleases him, because oftentimes he is a Sinner. The second
party that offers, is evermore acceptable to God, because the Church is
always Holy, belooued, and the only spouse of Christ. And in this respect
the Mass is an acceptable service to God, Ex opere operantis, and is not
without cause and reason called a Sacrifice Propitiatory, not for that it
deserves mercy at Gods hand of it self, as Christ doothe, who only is
in that principal and special sort a Sacrifice Propitiatory: but for that it
moves God to give mercy, and remission of Sin already deserved by Christ.
In this degree of a Sacrifice propitiatory, we may put Prayer, a contrite
Heart, Almose, forgeuinge of our neighbor, etc. This may easily be proved by
the holy Fathers.

Origens words be very plain: (...)Leuit. Homil. 13.
Si respicias ad illam commemorationem, de qua dicit Dominus, Hoc facite in
meam commemorationem, inuenies, quod ista est commemoratio sola, quae propitium
faciat Deum. If thou look to that commemoration, whereof our Lord says, Do
this in my Remembrance, or in commemoration of me: thou shalt find, that
this is the only commemoration, that makes God merciful. S. Augustine says
thus: Sermon 11. de Sanctis.
Nemo melitis praeter Martyrs meruit ibi requiescere, vbi and hostia Christus
est, and Sacerdos, scilicet, vt Propitiationem de oblatione hostiae
consequantur. No man has deserved better then the Martyrs S. Augustine
speaks not of any Material Altar in Earth, but of the Spiritual Altar in
Heaven.
to rest there, where Christ is both the Host, and the Priest, (238)
The.238. Untruth, sta^dinge in untrue Constructio^. For S. Augustine says,
Vidi sub Ara Dei (non Corpo^a, se^.) ^^mas Sanctoru^.
(he means to be Buried under the Altar) to the intent they might atteine
Propitiation by the Oblation of the Host. But here to avoid prolixitie in a
matter not doubteful, I leave a number of places whereby it may be evidently
proved, that the Mass is a Sacrifice propitiatory in this degree of
propitiation, both for the Quick and the Dead, the same not being specially
denied by purpor^e of this Article. Thus we have declared, as we might
superficially treatinge of this Article, that the Mass is a Sacrifice
Propitiatory both Ex Opere operato, that is, through the merit of Christ's
Body that suffered on the Cross, which is here Opus Operatum, and is by
Christ through the ministry of the Priest in the Mass offered, Truly, but
in Mystery, and also Ex opere operante, that is, through the dooinge of the
Priest, if he have the Grace of God, and so be acceptable, but in a far
lower degree of Propitiation, which is called Opus operans, or Opus operantis.
And this is the doctrine of the Church, touching the valor of the Mass Ex
Opere Operato, whereby no part of Christ's Glory is impaired.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Touching the worthiness of the Priest, which they call Opus Operantis, it
appears, M. Hardinge could partly be contented to make it equal with the
Sacrifice of Christ, were it not, that it should seem too great
presumption. For thus he says, So we should make the Priest Gods piere,
and his act equal with the Passion of Christ. Thom. in. 4. Sen. did. 14.
And therefore they say, A wicked Priests Mass is as good, and as
meritorious in this respect, as a good Priests Mass: for that the
worthiness of the work hangs nothing of the worthiness of the Priest.
Gerson contra Floret. li. 4.


Notwithstanding S. Hierome seems to say far otherwise: Summa Angel. in
Missa.
Impi^ agunt in Legem Christi, putantes Eucharistiam imprecantis verba facere,
non vitam: They do wickedly against the Law of Christ, Hierony. in tertium
caput Zophoniae.
thinkinge, it is not the Life, but the Word of the Minister, that makes the
Sacrament. And likewise Iren^us says, Sacrificia non sanctificant hominem,
sed Conscientia eius, qui offert, sanctificat Sacrificium, pura existens: Ir^n.
c. li. 4. c. 34.
The Sacrifice doothe not sanctify the Man, but the Conscience of the Priest
being upright, and pure, doothe sanctify the Sacrifice. In like manner
Gabriel Biel his own Doctor says, Biel Lection. 26.
Videant, ne, si peccato obnoxij offerant, ^it illorum Oblatio, quasi eius, qui
victimat filium in conspectu Patris, neue rursus Crucifigant Filium Dei: Let
them take heed, least if they Sacrifice, being in Sin, their Oblation be
like unto the Oblation of him, that slaieth the Child in the sight of the
Father: and least they Crucify again the Son of God. Uerily of wicked
Priests God says, Malachi. 2.
Maledicam benedictionibus vestris: That you Bliss, I will Curse.

Touching S. Augustine, and Origin, that here are brought in for a
countenance, if these Ancient Holy Fathers were now alive, they would blushe
to hear their tales thus reported. Origens words, if it might have pleased
M. Hardinge, to have laid them out whole, and at large without clippinge, as
he found them, both would have been clear, and plain in them self, and
also would have soon shaken down all this whole frame of Opus Operatum.

For he neither speaks of the Mass, another promises Remission of Sins for
any thing, that is done in the Mass: but only, and wholly for the Sacrifice
of Christ's Body upon the Cross. His words be these, Si redeas ad illum
Panem, qui de Coelo descendit, and dat huic mundo vitam, illum Panem
propositionis, hoc est, Christum ipsum, quem proposuit Deus propitiationem per
Fidem in Sanguine eius: and si respicias ad illam Commemorationem, de qua dicit
Dominus, Hoc facite ad meam Commemorationem, inuenies, quod ista est
Commemoratio sola, quae propitium faciat hominibus Deum: If thou turn to that
Bread, that came down from Heaven, and gives life to this world, I mean
that Shewebreade, that is, Christ him self, whom God has appointed to be a
Propitiation by Faith in his Blood: and if thou behold that Remembrance,
whereof the Lord says, Do this in Remembrance of me, thou shall find,
that it is this Remembrance only (that is to say, The Body of Christ
Crucified, and the price of his Blood thus Remembered) that makes God merciful
unto men. Now let M. Hardinge indifferently judge, whether these words be
likely to prove his Opus Operatum, or any other thing belonginge unto his
Mass.

The place of S. Augustine is yet much plainer. For, as he touches none of al
these M. Hardinges fantasies, so he speaks only of the Innocents, and
Blissed Martyrs, that were slain only for the Testimony of Christ, Whose
Souls, Augustine. De Sanctis Sermon. 11.
S. John says, lie underneath the Altar of God, not in Earth, as M.
Hardinge fansieth, but in Heaven. For thus he writes, Vidi sub Ara Dei animas
occisorum propter Verbum Dei, and propter Testimonium Jesus, etc. I saw under
the Altar of God (in Heaven) the Souls of them, that were slain for Gods
Word, and for the Testimony of Jesus. Apocalyp. 6.
What thing is there, either more reverend, or more Honorable, then to
reaste under that Altar (in Heaven) in which Sacrifices are made, and
Oblations are offered unto God, and wherein (no mortal man, but) the Lord him
self is the Priest? For so it is written, Thou art a Priest for ever, after
the Order of Melchisedek. It is right, (not that the Bodies, but) that the
Souls of the Just should remain under the Altar: because that upon that
Altar (in Heaven) Christ's Body is offered. And well it is, that Just men
do there require reuengeance of their Blood, where as Christ's Blood for
sinners is poured out.

Immediately after this, he intermedleth somewhat touching Aultars, or
Communion Tables in the Earth. For thus he adds further, Conuenienter
igitur, and quasi pro quodam Consortio ibi Martyribus Sepultura decreta est,
vbi Mors Domini quotidie celebratur etc. Therefore upon good discretion, and in
some token of Fellowship, Martyrs burials are appointed in that place ( here in
Earth) where the Lords Death is daily remembered: As the Lord him self
says, As often, as ye shall do these things, ye shall set forth my Death,
until I come. I mean, that they, that died for the Lords Death, may reaste
under the Mystery of his Sacrament.

After this he returns again to the Souls of the Blissed Martyrs, under the
Altar in Heaven. Legimus plaerosque Iustorum Abrahae sinibus refoueri etc.
We read, says S. Augustine, that many Just men are refreashed in
Abraham's bosom: and that many are in the pleasures of Paradise. Yet noman
deserved better then the Martyrs, to reaste there ( in Heaven) where as Christ
is both the Sacrifice, and the Priest. I mean, that they may enjoy Gods
favor by the offeringe of that Sacrifice, and may receive the Blissinge, and
Ministry of that Priest.

Hereby it is plain, that S. Augustine speaks of Heaven: and not of Earth,
nor of Purgatory: Of the Souls received abooue: and not of the Bodies buried
beneathe. For all these things S. John by Revelation saw in Heaven. And for
proof hereof, S. Augustine adds further: Inter coeteros igitur Martyrs,
quos sub Ara Dei consistere praedicamus, etiam beatas illas Infantum lactentium
pro Christo pri^itias Martyrum laudemus: Therefore amongst the rest of the
Martyrs, whom we say to be under the Altar of God (in Heaven) let us
commend those blissed first fruits of suckinge Infantes, that were Martyrs
for Christ.

This is S. Augustines plain, and undoubted meaning. But M. Hardinge to serve
his turn, is feign, of Souls, to make Bodies: of Joy, to make Pain: and of
Heaven, to make Purgatory. And yet in all this great a do, finds, neither
Opus Operatum, nor his Mass. Thus is it lawful for these men, to carry
about, and to use their Readers.

Touching the substance of this Doctrine, which M. Hardinge now at last
upon better advise seems in some part to mislike, notwithstanding it were
not long sithence generally received, both in schools, and Churches, and
counted Catholic, Origin. in Matthae. ca. 15.
Origin that Ancient learned Father writes thus: Quod sanctificatur per Verbum
Dei, and per Obsecrationem, non s^apte natura sanctificat vtentem. Nam id si
esset, sanctificaret etiam illum, qui comedit indigne Domino: The thing, that
is Sanctified by the Word of God, and by prayer, of his own Nature (or Ex
Opere Operato) Sanctifies not him, that uses it. For otherwise it should
sanctify him, that eats unworthily of the Lord.

Again he says: Origin. in Matthae. tractar. 25.
Assiduitas Communicationis, and alia similia, non ipsae sunt Iustitiae, sed
conditurae habentur Iustitiarum. Res autem Spirituales, quae ex se ipsis
Iustitiae sunt, dicuntur Iudicium, Misericordia, and Fides: The often vsinge of
the Communion, and other like things, be not righteousness it self, ( of it
self, or of the work, that there is wrought) but only the seasoninge, and
settinge forth of righteousness. But the Spiritual things, which be
righteousness it self, are called Judgment, Mercy, and Faith.

So S. Hierome, Hieronym. 1. Corin. 10.
Ne quis confidat in eo solo, quod Baptizatus est: aut in esca Spirituali, vel
potu putet, Deum sibi parcere, si peccauerit: Let noman presume of this thing
only, that he is Baptized: nor let him think, that God for Receiuinge the
Spiritual Meat, or drinkinge the Spiritual Cup ( Ex Opere Operato) will
pardonne him, if he offend.

So S. Augustine, Augustine. in Johan. tracta. 80.
Non ait, Mundi estis propter Baptisma, quo loti estis: sed propter Verbum,
quod locutus sum vobis: Christ says not, Ye are Clean for the Baptismes
sake, wherewith ye are washed: but for the Words sake, that I have spoken
unto you. Augustine. in Johan. tracta. 10.
And again, Foelix Venture, qui te portauit etc. Blissed is that woombe, that
bare thee. But Christ answered, Naie, Blissed be they, that hear the Word
of God, and keep the same: That is to say, My Mother, whom ye call Blissed,
thereof is Blissed, for that she keeps the Word of God.

Likewise again, August. De Sancta Virginitate.
Materna propinquitas nihil Matri profuisset, nisi Foelicius Christum in Cord,
quam in Carne gestasset: The nearenes of Mothers Blood should have profited
Christ's Mother nothing at al, onles she had more blissedly carried Christ in
her Heart, then in her Body.

Uerily to asscribe Felicity, or Remission of Sin, which is the Inward
Work of the Holy Ghost, unto any manner Outward Action what so ever, it is
a Superstitious, a gross, and a Iewishe error.

Origin of the Sacrament of Circumcision writes thus: Origin. in Lucam,
Homil. 5.
Circuncisionis nisi reddatur ratio, nutus tantum est Circuncisio, and opus
mutum: Onles there be a reason yielded of the meaning of Circumcision, it is
but an Outward Show, and a dumme labor, and avails nothing.

And touching the use, and order of the Holy Mysteries, Christ says not,
Do this, for Remission of your Sins: but, Do this in my Remembrance.

The Only, and everlasting Sacrifice for Sin, is the Son of God Crucified
upon the Cross. He sits now in the Nature, and Substance of our Fleash, at
the Right Hand of his Father, and evermore makes intercession for us: and is
the only Sacrifice, and Propitiation for our Sins.

What so ever Doctrine is contrary to this Doctrine, is Wicked, and
Blasphemous, and, as M. Hardinge has confessed, injurious to the Glory, and
Cross of Christ.

FINIS.
THE XXI. ARTICLE, OF LORD, AND GOD.
The B. of Sarisburie.
Or, that then any Christian man called the Sacrament his Lord, and God.

M. Hardinge. The.1. Division.
This word Sacrament (as is declared before) is of the Fathers taken two
ways (239) The.239. Untruth. For the only outvvarde Forms were never
called the Sacrament, or Christ's Body, by any of all the Ancient Fathers.
Either for the only outward forms of Bread, Sacrament two ways taken.
and Wine, which are the holy Sign of the very Body, and Blood of Christ
present, and under them contained: Or for the whole substance of the Sacrament,
as it consists of the outward forms, and also of the very Body, and Blood
of Christ (240) The.240. Untruth, standing in untrue exposition. For this
was not these Fathers meaning.
verily Present, In sentent. Prosper^. De Conse. Did. ^. li. 4. c. 34.
(240) which S. Augustine calls the Invisible grace, and the thing of the
Sacrament. (240) And Ireneus calls it, Rem Coelestem, the Heavenly thing, as
that other, Rem Terrenam, the Earthly thing. Taken the first way, ( As emonge
the learned Fathers it was never, taken) No Christen man ever honored it with
the name of Lord and God. For that were plain Idolatry, to attribute the
name of the Creator, to the Creature. But taken in the second signification,
( As no Ancient Father ever took it) It has always of Christen people, and
of the learned Fathers of the Church, ben called by the name of Lord, and
God. And of right so ought it to be, for else were it impiety, and a denial
of God, not to call Christ the Son of God, by the name of Lord, and God, who
is not only in truth of Fleashe, and Blood in the Sacrament, after which
manner he is there, Ex Vi Sacramenti, but also the inseparable conjunction of
both Natures in unity of person, Ex necessaria concomitantia, Whole Christ,
God and man. That the holy Fathers called the Sacrament taken in this sense,
Lord and God, I might prove it by many places: the rehearsal of a few may
serve for many. In diuersos Euangelij locos, Homil. 5.
Origin in a Homily speaking reverently of this blessed Sacrament, says, that
when a man receives it, our Lord enters under his roof, and exhorts him
that shall receive it, to humble him self, and to say (241) The.241. Untruth.
For Origin says not* Unto it.
unto it: Domine non sum dignus, vt intres sub tectum meum, I Lord am not
worthy that thou enter under my Roof.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Who so ever erreth in this Article, commits Idolatry, and gives Gods
honor to a corruptible creature, that is no God. Therefore it behooued M.
Hardinge, herein to leave his gheasses, and to allege none, but good,
substantial, and weighty reasons: and that, so much the more, for that none of
the Old Catholic Fathers ever, either erected Temples, or Proclaimed Holy
Days in the name of the Sacrament, or ever willed the People to Adoure it, as
the Maker of Heaven, and Earth: or to believe in it, or to call it God.

This notwithstanding, ye reasons, that M. Harding has here found out, are so
sclender, and so simple, and guilefully, and untruly geathered, that his
fre^des of yt side may happili suspecte, he has used some collusio^, to
betraie their cause. But to take away occasion of cauil, first we steadfastly
believe, and plainly confess, that Christ is the Son of God, 1. Johan. ^.
Uery God, of Uery God: That he is the True God, and life everlasting: That he
is God Blissed for ever: and that, Who so ever trusts in him, shall never be
confounded. And we utterly deteste, and accurse the Arians, the Nestorians,
the Photinians, and al other like Heretics, that either have taught, or any
way do teach the contrary. Neither is this question moved of Christ him
self, unto whom, we know, al manner godly Reverence, and honor is be we,
but only of the Mystical Bread, which, by the witness of the Catholic
learned Fathers, is not Christ him self, but only a Sacrament of Christ.
Which Sacrament, Ireneus says, stands of two things, the one Earthly,
the other Heavenly: not, that the one is Really lapped up, or shut within the
other, wherein reasteth M. Hardinges error: Chrysostom. in Matthae. hom. 83.
but, that, as Chrysostom says, The one is Sensible, the other Intelligible:
as it is also in the Sacrament of Baptism: Or, that, as S. Augustine says,
Augustine. contra Ad^mantum cap. 12.
The one part is the Sign, the other the thing Signified: Or, that, as
Tertullian says, The one part is the Figure, the other the thing Figured.

The Sacrament is the Earthely thing: Christ's Body is the Heavenly thing.
Tertullian. contra Marcionem lib. 4.
The Sacrament is Corruptible: Christ's Body is Glorious. The Sacrament is
laid upon the Table: Christ's Body is in Heaven. The Sacrament is received
into our Bodies: Christ's Body is only received into our Souls.

For manifest proof of this difference, S. Augustine writes thus: Huius rei
Sacramentum alicubi quotidi^, alicubi certis interuallis dierum in Dominico
praeparatur, Augustine. in Johan. tracta. 26.
and de Mensa Dominica sumitur, quibusdam ad vitam, quibusdam ad exitium: Res
vero ipsa, cuius est Sacramentum, omni homini ad vitam, nulli ad exitium,
quicunque eius particeps fuerit: The Sacrament of the Body of Christ is
prepared in the Church, in some places every day, in sum places upon
certain days: and is received from the Lords Table, of some unto life, of
some unto Condemnation. But the thing it self, (that is, the Body of
Christ, being in Heaven) whereof it is a Sacrament, is received of eueryman
unto life, and of noman to Condemnation: who so ever be partetaker of it.

Again he says, De Con. Dis. 2. Qui discordat.
Qui non mane^ in Christo, etc. He that abides not in Christ, nor has
Christ abidinge in him, doubtelesse he eats not his Fleashe, not drinks
his Blood, notwithstanding he Eat, and Drink the Sacrament of so great a
thing unto his judgment. By these few examples it is plain, that the
Sacrament of Christ's Body is one thing, and Christ's Body it self is an
other thing: and that in Common, and natural manner of speech neither is
Christ's Body, the Sacrament: nor the Sacrament, Christ's Body.

By these words of Ireneus, M. Hardinge, as he has no manner likelyhoode to
prove, that he seekethe for, so he utterly ouerthrowethe his whole fantasy of
Transubstantiation. For Ireneus calls the Earthely part of the Sacrament,
not the Forms, and Accidents, as M. Hardinge imaginethe, but the very
Substance, and Nature of the Bread, and that such Bread, as increasethe,
and nourrishethe the Substance of our Fleashe. ^^enae. lib. 5.
For so he writes, Ex quibus augetur and consistit Carnis nostra Substantia.

But Origin teachethe us, when we receive the Sacrament, to say, Domme, non
sum dignus, Therefore, says M. Hardinge, the Sacrament was called Lord, and
God. Alas, what a miserable case is this, that cannot possibly stand without
Falsifieinge, and Mayminge of the holy Fathers? Of the Falsi^ieinge,
afterward. But touching the Mayminge, and manglinge of these words of
Origin, if it might have pleased M. Hardinge, to have reported them whole, as
he found them, there had been no manner cause of doubt.

For thus the words lie: Intrat etiam nunc Dominus sub tectum Credentium
duplici Figura, vel more, etc. Even now the Lord entrethe under the roufe of
the Faithful, by two sundry ways. For even now, when the Holy, and Godly
Bishops enter into your house, then throwgh them the Lord enters. And be
thou persuaded, as if thou receiuedst the Lord him self. And when thou
receiuest that Holy Meat, and that incorruptible Banquet, the Lord entret
under thy roufe.

Our Lord (says Origin) enters under our roufe, both when we receive a
Holy man, and also when we receive the Holy Sacrament. And as Christ enters
into us by the one, so doothe he also enter into us by the other. So says the
same learned Father writing upon the Gospel of S. Matthew: Origin. in Mat^hae.
homil. 35.
Qui Discipulos Christi tradit, ipsum Christum tradit: Who so betraieth the
Disciples of Christ, betraieth Christ him self. Now, if M. Hardinge will say
by force of these words, that Christ enters Really, and Substantially into
our mouths, then must he also say, that Christ likewise enters Really, and
Substantially into our material houses.

But for full Resolution hereof, S. Ambrose says, That the Body of Christ it
self enters not into our Bodies. Thus ^e writes: Non iste Panis, De Con
did. 2. Non is^e.
qui vadit in ventrem: sed Panis Vitae aeternae, qui animae nostrae substantiam
fulcit. Christ's Body is not the Bread, that enters into our belly: but the
Bread of everlasting life, that feeds the Substance of our Soul. And
therefore S. Cyprian says, Cyprian. De Coena Domini. Origin. in Diuer. Euang.
locos homil. 5.
The Body of Christ is the meat of our Soul, not the meat of our Body*
For this cause Origin him self in the self same Homily says thus, Domine,
non sum dignus, vt intres sub ^ectum meu^. Sed tantum dic verbo: tantum veni
Verbo. Verbu^ est aspectus tuus* Lord, I am not worthy, that thou should
enter under my roufe. But only speak the word: Only come by thy word:
thy word is thy sight. Again he says, Origin. in Diuer. Euang. loco^ hom.
1.
Per Euangelistarum prae dicationem: per sui Corporis Sacramentum: per
gloriosae Crucis Signaculum nobiscum Deus, and ad nos, and in nobis: God is
with us, and comes to us, and is within us, by the Preachinge of the
Evangelists: by the Sacrament of his Body: and by the Sign of the glorious
Cross. Likewise again, Fideles credunt Aduentum Verbi, Origin. in Diuer.
Euang. loco^ hom. 2.
and libenter recipient Dominum suum: The faithful believe the coming of the
Word, and gladly receive their Lord.

So says S. Augustine, Sancti, qui sunt in Ecclesia, accipiunt Christum in
manu, and in front: The holy men, that be in the Church, receive Christ in
their hand, Augustine. in Apocalyp. Sermon. 11. Tertullian. De Poenitentia.
and in their forehead. So likewise Tertullian, Cum te ad fratrum genua
protendis, Christu^ contrectas: When thou fallest down, to touch thy
bretherns knees, thou touchest Christ.

Thus is Christ Touched: thus is Christ Received: thus is Christ Present:
thus Christ Enters under our roufe. As Christ enters into us by a Godly
Minister, by his Word, by the Sacrament of Baptism, by the Cross, and by
the Poor, even so he enters into us by the Sacrament of his Body, and
Blood: ^uen so, I say, and none other wise. And at every such entringe of
Christ we ought to say: O Lord, I am not worthy, that thou I should
enter under my roufe.

Now, if these words be sufficient to prove, that the Sacrament was called
Lord, and God, then are the likewise sufficient to prove, that the Water of
Baptism, that the Word of God, that a Cross drawn in the forehead, and
that a godly Bishop, or Minister was called Lord, and God.

Here also appears a great untruth in M. Hardinges Translation. For, where
as Origin says, Et tu ergo humilians te^psum etc. And thou therefore humbling
thee self, follow this Centurion, and say, Lord, I am not worthy, that thou
should enter under my roufe, meaning thereby, yt we ought to humble our
selves unto Christ, and to say unto him, Lord, I am not worthy etc. M.
Hardinge thought it better cominge to corrupt y^ place, and to Translate, It,
in steed of, Him. For thus he writes, Origin exhorts him, that shall
receive, It, to humble him self, and to say, unto, It, Lord I am not worthy
etc. And so by open fraud, and by falsifieing his Authors words, without
fear, or blushinge, he teaches Gods people to woorshippe a Creature in steed
of God.

M. Hardinge. The.2. Division.
S. Cyprian in Sermon de Lapsis, tells, how a man, who had denied God in
time of persecution, having notwithstanding (the Sacrifice by the Priest
done) privily with others received the Sacrament, not being able to eat it,
nor to handle it, opening his hands, found that he bare ashes. Where he
adds these words, Documento vnius ostensum est, Dominum recedere cum
negatur. By this example of one man it is showed, that our Lord departs
away, when ^e is denied.

The B. of Sarisburie.
This gheasse hangs not of S. Cyprians words, but of M. Hardinges
Exposition. For S. Cyprian calls the Sacrament, neither Lord, nor God. The
man, that he speaks of, having denied God in time of persequ^tion, and
nevertheless afterward receiuinge the Holy Communion emonge other
Christians, opened his hand, and found the Sacrament turned into ashes. By
this Miracle, says S. Cyprian, We are taught to understand, that God, when
he is denied, departs from us.

I trow, M. Hardinge will not say, That the Sacrament had ever denied God: and
yet by his exposition, God was departed, and gonne from it: nor will he say,
that this man had denied the Sacrament: For he came emongst others, to receive
the Sacrament. But he had dissembled, and forsaken God: and therefore God had
likewise forsaken him: and in token thereof he caused the Sacrament to mulder
into ashes in his hands.

So S. Augustine, August. contra Epist. Parmenia ni^ li. 2. ca. 13.
speakinge of the Sacrament of Baptism, and of the order of Priesthood,
says thus: Si Sancta malos fugiant, vtrunque fugiat: If these Holy things
(Baptism, and Priesthood) flee from il men, let them both flee from them, as
well the one, as the other.

Prosper says, Prosper. Senten. 1^3.
Non locorum interuallis, vel acceditur ad Deum, vel a Deo disceditur:
Similitudo facit proximum, dissimilitudo longinquum: We neither come to God,
nor go from God by distance of places. The Likeness of mind makes us near:
the Unlikeness remooueth us far of.

When one Deuterius an Arian Bishop would have Baptized a man after his
blasphemous sort, Paulus Diacon. li. 15. in histor. De Anastasio. Socrat. li.
7. ca. 17.
suddenly the water was sunken away, and the Font stood dry. The like
story is uttered also by Socrates, and by others. This Miracle was likewise a
token, that God, when he is denied, departs from us.

Yet may not M. Hardinge conclude hereof, that the Water of Baptism was
therefore called Lord, and God.

M. Hardinge. The.3. Division.
The same S. Cyprian in the exposition of the Pater nost^r, declaringe the
fourth petition of it, ^^ue us this day our daily Bread, understands it to
contain a desire of the holy Communion in this Blessed Sacrament, and says,
Ideo Panem nostrum, id est, Christum dari nobis quotidie petimus, vt qui in
Christo manemus, and vi^imus, a sanctificatione, and corpore eius non
recedamus. Therefore we ask our daily Bread, that is to say, Christ, to be
given unto us, that we* which abide and live in Christ depart not from the
state of holiness, and Communion of his Body. (242) The.242. Untruth. For S.
Cyprian calls not the Sacrament Christ: but only says, Christ is the
Bread, or food by whom we live.
Here S. Cyprian calls the Sacrament Christ, as he is in deed there present
really, so as in the place alleged before he calls it Lord. And, I ween,
our adversaries will imbarre the Sacrament of the name of Christ, no less then
of the name of Lord, or God, unless they make less of Christ, then of
Lord, and God.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Here M. Hardinge avouches three sundry untruths with one breath. For S.
Cyprian neither in these words calls the Sacrament Christ, nor in the
words before calls it Lord, nor anywhere ever said, that Christ's Body
is Really present in the Sacrament: Untruethes should not so risely flow
from a good Divine.

It is true, that S. Cyprian says, That Christ is our Bread, even the same
Bread, that came from Heaven, and gives life to the world: which Bread,
who so ever eats, shall live for ever. Basil. in psalm. 44.
So says S. Basile, Christ is called our Life, our Way, our Bread, our
Vine, our Light, our Swearde. Which words must be taken, not grossly, nor
according to that sounds in the Letter, but of a Mystical, and Spiritual
meaning. Therefore as Christ is our Spiritual Swearde, our Spiritual Light,
our Spiritual Uine, our Spiritual way, and our Spiritual Life, so is he also
our Spiritual Bread. Origin says, Ne mireris, quod Verbum Dei Caro dicitur:
Origin. in E^o. homi. 7.
nam and Panis, and Lac, and Olera dicitur: and pro mensura credentium, vel
possibilitate sumentium diverse nominatur. Marvel not, that the Word of God
is called Fleashe: For it is also called Bread, and Milk, and Herbs: and
according to the measure of the Beleuers, or possibility of the Receivers, it
is diversely named.

Uerily, S. Cyprian says not, neither that the Sacrament is Christ, nor
that Christ is the Sacrament. Therefore, where as M. Hardinge would reason
thus, Christ is the Bread of Life: Ergo, The Sacrament is our Lord, and
God: he seems to presume over boldly of his Logique.

M. Hardinge. The.4. Division.
Verily this holy Martyr acknowledges this Sacrament not for Lord, and Christ
only, but (243) The. 243. Untruth. For. S. Cyprian says not, The Sacrament^
is God: but only shows, that God with his power is assistante unto the
Sacrament, as also to the Sacrament of Baptism.
also for God, by these words in his Sermon De Coena Domini: Sicut in persona
Christi Humanitas videbatur, and latebat Diuinitas, ita Sacramento visibili
ineffabiliter Diuina se infudit Essentia. As in the Person of Christ, the
manhood was seen, and the Godhed was hidden, so the Divine Essence (or
Substance of God) has infused it into the visible Sacrament unspeakably.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Here is an other proper kind of proof, even like the rest. O holy Cyprian,
if thy manner of speakinge were not known, the Simple might easily be
deceived. I grant, here is a great Amplification, and Majesty of words,
such as the holy Fathers have much delited to use in their Sermons to the
People, but Specially intreatinge of the Sacraments. S. Ambrose says,
Ambros. De Sacramen. li. 1. c. 3.
Sacerdos precem facit, etc. The Priest makes his Prayer, to sanctify the
Font, and that the Presence of the whole Trinity may be in it.

Tertullian says, The holy Ghost comes down from Heaven, Tertull. De
Baptismo.
and reasteth upon the Water of Baptism, and sanctifies it of him self.

Even thus S. Cyprian says, The Divine Substance infuseth it self
unspeakably into the Visible Sacrament: None otherwise, then as the Holy
Ghost, or the whole Blissed Trinity infuseth it self into the Water of
Baptism.

Paulinus seems to write much agreeably to these words of S. Cyprian:
Sanctus in hunc Coelo descendit Spiritus amnem:



The Holy Ghost into this Water comes down from Heaven: And ioineth the
Heavenly Waters, and these Waters both in one. Then the Font receives God.

What can be spoken with greater Majesty? Then, says he, the Water, or the
Font receives God.

If M. Hardinge out of these words of S. Cyprian, be hable by this simple
gheasse to prove, that the Sacramental Bread was called Lord, and God, then
by the like gheasse, and the like words of Tertullian, S. Ambrose, and
Paulinus, he may also prove, that the Water of Baptism was likewise called
Lord, and God. For the form, and manner of speech is al one.

But these, and other like Phrases be usual, Augustine. De Baptismo contra
Donatistas, lib. 3. cap. 10.
and ordinary emonge the Ancient learned Fathers. S. Augustine writes thus:
Baptismi Sanctitas pollui non potest: and Sacramento suo Diuina Virtus
assistit: The Holiness of Baptism cannot be defiled. The Heavenly power is
assistante unto the Sacrament. And again, Deus adest Sacramentis, and verbis
suis: God is Present with his Words, Augustine. De Baptismo contra Donat. li.
5. c. 19.
and Sacraments.

Likewise S. Cyprian, touching the halowinge of the Oil, writes thus: In
Sacramentis Virtus Diuina potentius operatur. Adest Veritas Signo, and Spiritus
Sacramento: In Sacraments the Heavenly Power woorketh mightily. Cyprian de
Unction Chrismatis.
The Truth is Present with the Sign, and the Holy Ghost is Present with
the Sacrament.

Al these words of the holy Fathers notwithstanding, I think, M. Harding will
not call, neither the Water of Baptism, nor the Oil hallowed, Lord, and God.

M. Hardinge. The.5. Division.
(244) The 244. Untruth. For Chrysostom says not, The Sacrament is God: but
contrariwise says, Quid Significat Panis? And ansvveareth, Corpus Christi.
Chrysostom doubts not to call the Sacrament God in this plain saieinge. In
Priorem ad Corin. hom. 24.
Nolimus obsecro, nolimus impudentes nos ipsos interimere: sed cum honor and
munditia ad Deum accedamus, and quando id propositum videris, dic ^ecum:
Propter hoc corpus non amplius terra, and cinis ego sum: non amplius captiuus,
sed liber. Let us not, let us not for Gods sake, be so shameless, as to kill
our selves (by unworthy receiuinge of the Sacrament) but with reverence, and
cleanesse let us come to God. And when thou see the Sacrament set forth,
say thus with thy self: by reason of this Body, I am not more earth and
ashes, no more captive, but free.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Chrysostom, says M. Hardinge, calls the Sacrament God by plain words.
First, Chrysostom calls not the Sacrament God by any manner, or kind of
words. Therefore we may by plain words, and boldly say, M. Hardinge here
has uttered an other great untruth.

But Chrysostom intreatinge of the Holy Communion, says unto the people,
Accedamus ad Deum, Let us come unto God. Here (says M. Hardinge) the
Sacrament by these words is called God. O, when will these men deal
plainly, and simply with their Readers? M. Hardinge knows full well, that he
much abuses this good Old Father, and reports of him, that he never
thought. He knows, that we come to God, not by traueile of Body, or by
shiftinge of places, but by inclininge, and bendinge our hearts unto God. So S.
Paul says, Let us go with boldness to the Throne of Grace. Hebrae. 4.


S. Augustine speakinge of the Sacrament of Baptism, August. De peccatorum
merit. and Remiss. li. 1. ca. 18.
agrees fully with these words of Chrysostom: Ad Medicum Christum, hoc est,
ad percipiendum Sacramentum Salutis A^ternae portantur: Children are carried
unto Christ the Physician, that is to say, to receive (Baptism, which is)
the Sacrament of Everlasting Salvation. By these plain words of S.
Augustine it appears, that Coming to Baptism, is Coming to Christ. Yet
may not M. Hardinge conclude thereof, that the Water of Baptism was called
Christ.

Our Coming unto Christ, August. Aduersus Iudaeos ca. 1.
is Beleeuinge in Christ. S. Augustine says, Quid est, Accedite, nisi,
Credit? Accedite ad eum, qui in vestris auribus praedicatur.

Accedite ad eum, qui ante oculos vestros glorificatur. Ambulando non
laborabitis. Ibi enim Acceditis, vbi Creditis. What is, Come, but, Believe?
Come unto him, that is preached in your ears. Come unto him, that is glorified
before your eyes. Ye shall have no pain in goeinge. For there ye Come, where
ye Believe.

So Chrysostom, Chrysostom. hom. 12 De Mul^ere Cananaea.
Nunquid long est a te Deus, vt vadas ad locum aliquem? Non includitur loco:
sed semper est in proximo: Is God far away from thee, that thou should
need to remove to some place, to come unto him? God is not contained in any
place: but is evermore at hand.

Likewise says Nazianzene, Nazianzen. De ^oenitentia.
Accede fidens ad Christum: Riga p^des eius: Come boldly unto Christ, and
wasshe his feet. Therefore S. Augustine says, Accedant ad Iesum, Augustine.
contra Faust. li. 33. ca. 1.
non Carne, sed Cord: non Corporis Praesentia, sed Fidei Potentia: Let them
come unto Jesus, not with their Fleashe, but with their Heart: not by Presence
of Body, but by the power of Faith.

Thus we come unto Christ in Baptism, in Gods Word, in the Sermon, and in
the Holy Communion: not by moouinge of the Body, or changinge of places: but
by the Devotion of the heart, and traueile of the mind.

Now, that the Reader him self may see some part of M. Hardinges courteous
dealinge in this behalf, it shall not be amiss, briefly to touch certain
other words of Chrysostom, that immediately went before: by which words
he seems of purpose to teach us, where we ought to seek for Christ, and
by what ways, and means we may comme unto him.

His words be these, Aquilae in hac vita facti ad ipsum Coelum euolemus, and
caet. Being made Eagles in this life, let us flee up into Heaven, or rather
abooue the Heavens. For where as the Carkesse is, there are the Eagles. The
Carkesse is our Lords Body in respect of his Death. But he calls us
Eagles, to show us, that, who so will comme near to that Body, must mount on
high, and have no dealinge with the Earth, nor to bow downewarde, or to
creep beneathe, but ever to soar alofte, and to behold the Son of Justice,
and to have a quick eye in our heart.

Thus S. Chrysostom teaches us, both where Christ reasteth in the Glory of
his Father: and by what means we may comme unto him: and with what eyes we
may behold him. Then having thus auaunced our minds into Heaven, he says,
Propter hoc Corpus, etc. For this Bodies sake, (that I see at the Right hand
of God) I am ^omore a prisoner, I am no longer dust, and ashes. Touching the
Sacrament, by these most plain words he calls it Bread. For thus he
says, even in the same Homily, Quid significat Panis? Corpus Christi: What
doothe the Bread (of the Sacrament) Signify? He answeareth, The Body of
Christ. He says not, The Bread is Christ: But, The Bread Signifies the
Body of Christ.

Yet notwithstanding, M. Hardinge says, that these words, Accedamus ad
Deum, importe as much, as, Let us comme to the Sacrament, And thereof
imagines, that the Sacrament by plain words is called God. But in deed
that Holy Father by these words carries us so far abooue M. Hardinges God,
as the Sprite is abooue the Body, or as Heaven is abooue the Earth. For he
teaches us to comme to Christ's Body, not as lieinge presently before our
eyes, but as being in the Glory of God in Heaven.

M. Hardinge. The.6. Division.
And least this sense taken of Chrysostom should seem over strange, this
place of S. Ambrose, who lived in the same time, and agrees with him
thoroughly in doctrine, may seem to lead us to the same. De ijs qui ^ysterijs
^itiantur, ^^p. 9.
Quid edamus, quid bibamus, alibi tibi per Prophetam Spiritus Sanctus
expressit, dicens: Gustate, and videte, quoniam suauis est Dominus, beatus vir
qui sperat in eo: In illo Sacramento Christus est, quia Corpus est Christi.
What we ought to eat, and what we ought to drink, the Holy Ghost has
expressed by the Prophet in an other place, sayeinge: Taste, and see, Psalm.
33. (...)collecta^eis in. 10. (...). prioris ad Corint.
how that our Lord is sweet, blessed is the man that trusts in him. In that
Sacrament is Christ, because there is the Body of Christ. Here S. Ambrose
(245) The.245. Untruth. For S. Ambrose applies these words unto Christ
him self, and not unto the Sacrament.
referring those words of the Psalm to the Sacrament, calls it Lord, and
that Lord, in whom the man that trusts, is blessed, who is God.

The B. of Sarisburie.
To say, that Christ is either in the Scriptures, or in the Manna, or in the
Sacrament of Baptism, or in ye Sacrament of his Body, it is not new
Phrase, or manner of speech, but commonly used of the Ancient Fathers. S.
Hierome says, Christus clausus latebat in Litera: Christ lay hidden in the
Letter. Hieronym. ad Paulinum.
S. Augustine says, Pij in Manna Christum intellexerunt: The Godly in Manna
understood Christ.

Again he says, Vt Petra erat Christus propter firmitatem: August. De
Vtilitate Poeniten. Augusti. contra Faustu^. li. 12. c. 1.
ita Manna erat Christus, quia descendit de Coelo: As the Rock was Christ in
respect of Constancy, and steaddinesse: even so was the Manna Christ,
because it came down from Heaven.

S. Hierome says, Lapis ille, qui erat ad caput Jacob, Christus erat. Lapis
ille Christus est: The Stoane, that lay under Jacobs head, was Christ.
Hieronym. in Psalm. 133.
That Stoane is Christ.

Origin says, Mare Baptismus est: Nubes Spiritus Sanctus est: Origin. in
Ca^tica homi. 2.
Agnus Saluator est: The Sea is Baptism: The Cloud is the Holy Ghost: The
Lamb is our Saueour.

And, to be short, a Doctor, although not very anciente, yet of M. Hardinges
own side, Fortalitium Fidei. lib. 1.
one, that wrote the Forte of Faith, and therefore in this case may not
justly be refused, writes thus: Christus vendebatur in Iosepho: Suspendebatur
in Botro: Crucifigebatur in Serpente: Christ was sold in Iosephe: Hanged in
the Cluster of grapes: and Crucified in the Serpente.

Al these, and such other like Phrases of speech must be taken, not of any
Real, or Fleashely Being, according to the show of the letter: but only as
in a Sacrament, or in a Mystery.

But M. Hardinge will say, The Sacrament, of S. Ambrose is called Lord. This
is an other untruth, and like the rest of M. Hardinges proufes. Christ
sittinge now at the Right hand of God is the Bread, and food of life:
Thither S. Ambrose calls us: There he bids us, to taste, and see, that the
Lord is sweet, and graceous. And he addethe immediately, Beatus vir, qui
sperat in eo: Blissed is the Man, that trustethe in him. Notwithstanding it
might very well serve his purpose, yet, I think, M. Hardinge will not say, The
man is blissed, that trustethe in the Sacrament.

For so to say, as it shall hereafter appear, it were great blasphemy.

And that S. Ambrose meante this, not of the Sacrament, but of the Body of
Christ it self, that is represented by the Sacrament, it is plain by other
his words both goinge before, and also immediately folowinge after. A little
before in the same Chapter he writes thus: Ambros. De illis qui initiantur
Myster. c. 9.
Ante benedictionem verborum Coelestium alia Species nominatur: post
Consecrationem Corpus Christi Significatur. Before the Blissinge of the
Heavenly words, it is called an other kind: But after Consecration, the
Body of Christ is Signified.

The words next folowinge in the same sentence are these: Non ergo
Corporalis esca, sed Spiritualis est. Therefore Christ's Body is not Corporal
food (to be received into the Body) but Spiritual food, that is to say, to
be received with the Sprite.

Which words M. Hardinge, as his manner is, thought it best skill, to
dissemble. God quicken the inward senses of his understanding, that he may
taste, and see, that the Lord is sweet, and graceous.

M. Hardinge. The.7. Division.
Agreeably to this says S. Augustine, in a sermon de verbis Euangelij, as
Beda recites. Qualem vocem Domini audistis inuitantis nos? Quis vos inuitauit?
Quos inuitauit? Et quis praeparauit? Inuitauit Dominus seruos, and praeparauit
eis cibum seipsum. Quis audeat manducare Dominum suum? Et tamen ait, qui
manducat me, viuet propter me.

What manner a voice is it, that ye have heard of our Lord inuitinge, and
biddinge us to the feast? Who has invited? Whom has he invited? And who
has made preparation? The Lord has invited the servants, and has prepared
These words are spoken, not of the Sacrament but of Christ's Body it self
represented by the Sacrament.
him self to be meat for them. Who dares be so bold as to eat his Lord?
And yet he says, He that eats me, shall live for cause of me.

Cyrillus accompteth (246) The.246. Untruth. For Cyril speaks these words
of Christ's Body it self: and not of the Sacrament of Christ's Body.
the Sacrament for Christ, and God the word, and for God, In Johan. li 4. cap.
15. Johan. 6.
in this saieing. Qui carnem Christi manducat, vitam habet aeternam. Habet enim
haec caro Dei verbum, quod naturaliter vita est. Propterea dicit: Quia ego
resuscitabo eum in nouissimo die. Ego enim dixit, id est, Corpus meum quod
comedetur resuscitabo eum. Non enim alius ipse est, quam Caro sua, etc. He that
eats the fleashe of Christ, has life everlasting. For this fleashe has
the word of God, which naturally is life. Therefore says he, that I will
raise him in the last day. For I, quothe he, that is to say, my Body,
which shall be eaten, shall raise him up again, for he is no other, then his
fleashe, etc.

The B. of Sarisburie.
It is true, that S. Augustine says, that Christ prepared him self, to be
meat for us. For Christ him self says, He that eats me, shall live
through me. Neither was it so needeful, for proof hereof, to borrowe S.
Augustines words out of Beda. He might have found the same meaning, both in
S. Augustine him self, and also in other old Fathers in sundry places. S.
Augustine writes thus, Augustine. de Verl. Domi. Secund. Luc. Sermon. 29.
Panis est, and Panis est, and Panis est, Deus Pater, Deus Filius, and Deus
Spiritus Sa^ctus. Deus, qui tibi dat nihil melius, qua^ tibi dat: It is Bread,
it is Bread, and it is Bread (meaning thereby, not the Sacrament, but ye
Spiritual Bread of life) God the Father, God the Son, and God the holy
Ghost. God, that gives it unto thee, gives thee no better thing, then him
self. So S. Hierome, Sancti vescuntur Coelesti Pane, Hieronym. ad Pamma.
aduer. error. Johan. Hierosolymit. Gregor in Job. li. 7. ca. 4.
and saturantur omni Verbo Dei, eundem habentes Dominu^, quem and Cibum: Holy
men eat the Heavenly Bread, and are filled with every Word of God, having
the same Lord, that is their Meat.

So S. Gregory, Praesepe natus impleuit, qui Cibum Semetipsum mortalium
mentibus praebuit: Being borne he filled the m^nger, that gave him self Meat
to the minds, or Souls of men. In this sense, and none otherwise, Cyrillus
says, I, that is to say, my Body, that shall be eaten, shall raise him up
again. For Christ is none other, then his Fleashe.

Al these saieinges be true, and out of question. Yet notwithstanding, that M.
Hardinge would geather hereof, is not true, that is, that either S. Augustine,
or any of these holy Fathers ever called the Sacrament, either Lord, or God,
or Christ him self.

S. Augustine in diverse places teaches us, that Christ's Body it self,
August. in Iohannem tracta. 26. Qui manducat mente, non qui premit de^te.
August. in Ioha^. tracta. 59.
and the Sacrament thereof are sundry things. And the difference he opens
in this sort, That Christ's Body is received inwardely, with the mind: but
the Sacrament is outwardely pressed, and bruesed with the toothe. And therefore
he calls the Sacrament, Panem Domini, The Bread of the Lord: But Christ
him self he callethe, Panem Dominum, The Bread, that is our Lord. And
expoundinge these words of Christ, Give us this day our daily Bread, He
says thus, Augustine De Sermon Domini in monte li. 2.
This Daily Bread we may understand, either for the Sacrament of Christ's
Body, which we receive every day, (as then the whole people used to do) or
for that Spiritual food (of Christ's Body it self) of which our Lord
says, Work ye the Meat, that perishes not: and again, I am that Bread
of Life, that came down from Heaven. Here we see an other notable difference
bitweene Christ's Body it self, and the Sacrament of his Body.

And, if it had pleased M. Hardinge, to have taken better view of his places,
thus he might have seen S. Augustine him self, even in the same place,
expound him self. For thus he says, Nulli est aliquatenus ambigendum,
Augustine. ad Infantes. Citatur a Beda in 1. Corin. 10.
tunc vnumquenque Fidelium Corporis, and Sanguinis Domini participem fieri,
quando in Baptismate membrum Christi efficitur: nec alienari ab illius Panis,
Calicisque consortio, etiam si, antequam Panem illum Comedat, and Calicem
bibat, de hoc saeculo in vnitate Corporis Christi constitutus abscedat.
Sacramenti enim illius participatione ac beneficio non priuatur, quando ipse
hoc, quod illud Sacramentum Significat, inuenit: Noman may anywyse doubt, but
that every Faithful man is then made partetaker of the Body, and Blood of
Christ, when in Baptism he is made a member of Christ: and, that he is not
put from the fellowship of that Bread, and Cup, although he depart this life
in the Unity of Christ's Body, before he Eat of that Bread, or Drink of
that Cup. For he loses not the partetaking, and benefit of that Sacrament,
so long as he finds the thing (that is, the Body of Christ it self) which
is Signified by that Sacrament. Here S. Augustine teaches us, that a Faithful
man is partetaker of Christ's Body it self, ye although he receive not the
Sacrament of his Body.

And, as S. Augustine in these words here alleged by M. Hardinge says,
Augustine. in Johan. tracta. 7
Christus praeparauit Cibum Seipsum, So writing upon S. John he says thus,
Christus inuitauit nos ad Euangelium suum: and ipse Cibus noster est: quo nihil
dulcius, sed si quis habeat palatum in Cord: Christ has called us unto his
Gospel: and he himself is our Meat: then which meat there is nothing
sweeter: if a man have wherewith to taste it in his heart.

So again he says, Deus Panis intus est Animae meae: August. Confession. li.
1.
God is the inward Bread (not to enter into my Bodily mouth, but) of my
Soul.

Thus we see, The one part of M. Hardinges tale is true, That Christ him
self is our Bread: But the other part^ is vnture, That the Sacrament is that
Bread. And it were a strange form of reasoninge, to say thus, Christ is our
food, we eat him with our Soul, and with our Sprite, and live by him: Ergo,
the Sacrament in S. Augustines time was called Lord, and God. The error, and
falshead of this Argument, bisides sundry other infirmities, stands in the
Equivocation, or double taking of this word, Eating: which has relation,
sometime to the material mouth of our Body: Sometime to Faith, which is the
Spiritual mouth of our Soul. S. John says, Christ has washed us with his
Blood. Apocalyp. 1. Bernard. Super missus est, Sermo. 3.
And S. Bernarde says, Lauemur in Sanguine eius: Let us bathe our selves in
the Blood of Christ. Yet M. Hardinge may not hereof conclude, that the Water
of Baptism in deed, and Uerily is that Blood.

M. Hardinge. The.8. Division.
Noman more expressly calls the Sacrament by the name of God, He lived
eleven hundred years after Christ* in the great Corruption of the Church.
then S. Bernarde in his godly Sermon de coena D^^i ad Petru^ presbyteru^.
Where he says thus, Comedunt Angeli verbum de Deo na^u^, Comedunt homines
verbu^ foenu^ factu^. The Angels eat the word borne of God, men eat the
word made haie, meaning hereby the Sacrament, which he calls the word
made hay, that is to wit, the word incarnate. And in an other place there,
he says. Haec est vere indulgentia coelestis, haec est vere cumulata gratia,
haec est vere superexcelle^s gloria, sacerdotem Deu^ suum tenere, and alijs
dando porrigere. This is verily an heavenly gift, this is verily a bountiful
grace, this is verily a passing excellent glory, the Priest to hold his God,
and in geuinge to reach him forth to others. In the same sermon speaking of
the merueilouse sweetenes that good Bishops and holy religiouse men have
experience of, by receauinge this blessed Sacrament, he says thus. Ideo ad
mensam altaris frequentius accedunt, omni tempore candida facientes vestimenta
sua, id est, corpora, prout possunt, melius, vtpote Deum suum manu and ore
contrectaturi. For this cause they come the oftener unto the bourde of the
Altar, at al times making their garments, that is to say, their Bodies, so
white, as they can possible, as they, who shall handle their God with hand and
mouth. An other place of the same sermon, for that it contains a wholesome
instruction, beside the affirming of our purpose, I can not omit, I remitte
the learned to the Latin, the English of it is this. They are merueilouse
things brethren, that be spoken of this Sacrament, Faith is necessary,
Knowledge of reason is (here) superfluous. This, let Faith believe, let not
understanding require, least that either not being found, it think it
incredible, or being found out, it believe it not to be singular and alone.
And therefore it behooves it to be believed simply, that can not be searched
out profitably. Wherefore search not, search not, how it may be, doubt not
whether it be. Come not unto it irreverently, least it be to you to death,
Deus enim est, and quanquam Panis Mysteria habeat, mutatur tamen in earnem. For
it is God, and though it have mysteries of Bread, yet is it changed into
Fleashe. 1. Corin. 1*
God and man it is that witnesses Bread truly to be made his Fleashe. The
vessel of election it is, that threatens Judgment to him that puts no
difference in iudginge of that so holy Fleash. The self same thing think
thou, O Christen man, of the Wine, give that honor to the Wine. The Creator
of Wine it is, that promoteth the Wine to be the Blood of Christ. This far
holy Bernard.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Bernarde was a Monk, and lived at Clara Uallis about the same time, y^
Thomas Becket lived here in England: Anno Dom. 1117.
at which time, as it appears by his often complaints, the Church of God
was miserably defaced. For thus he writes, namely touching the Cleregie of
Rome: Bernard. in psalm. Qui habitat.
Nihil integri est in Clero etc. In the whole Cleregie (wherein he includes
the Pope, the Cardinals, the Bishops, and all the rest) there is no part
leafte sound. It remains now, that the man of Sin that is, Antichriste, be
reveled. De Conuersione Pauli.
From the top to the toe, there is no health. The Servants of Christ now
serve Antichriste. Therefore Bernarde, living in a time of such corruption,
and being carried away with the tempeste, In Canti. Canticorum.
and violence of the same, must needs in these cases bear the less credit.
How be it, in other places he seems somewhat to rectify his own meaning.
Bernard. in Cantica Canti. Sermon. 28.
For thus he writes, Quasi vero Christus, cum iam ascenderit in Coelum, tangi
a Maria, aut velit, aut possit. Et vtique poterit: sed affectu, non manu: Voto,
non oculo: Fide, non sensibus: As though Christ, after he is Ascended into
Heaven, either can, or will be touched of M^rie. And verily he may be touched:
but with love, not with hand: with desire, not with eye: with Faith, not with
senses.

If M. Hardinge will press us further with that, S. Bernarde says, The Priest
holds God in his hands, it may please him to consider, that the rigor
thereof may be qualified by a convenient exposition. Chrysostom. De Sacerdotio
li. 3.
So S. Chrysostom says, Adest Sacerdos gestans Spiritum Sanctum: The Priest
is present bearinge the holy Ghost.

And S. Gregory says, Gregori. in Job. li. 27. ca. 6.
Paulus praedicando Deum infundebat audientibus: Paul by his Preachinge powered
God into his hearers. And again, Latens in Pauli pectore, quasi sub tentorio
ibat Deus: Hieronym. ad Pammachi. aduersus error.
God went in Paul's heart, as under a tente. S. Hierome says, His, qui
baptizandi sunt, public tradimus Sanctam, and Adorandam Trinitatem: Unto them,
that are to receive Baptism, we openly deliver the Holy Trinity. The
meaning hereof is this, That he receives the Trinity, that receives the
Faith, and Doctrine of the Trinity. Johan. Hierosolymitani.


Now, as S. Chrysostom says, The Priest bears the Holy Ghost: As S.
Gregory says, S. Paul powered God into his hearers: And as S. Hierome
says, We deliver the Holy Trinity: Even so it may seem, Bernarde says,
The Priest holds God in his hand: that is to say, not Really, or in deed,
but in a certain peculiar manner, and form of speech. For by a Rhetorical
amplification of words, he holds God, that holds any thing specially
perteining unto God.

Thus must these, and other like words be salued: namely these of Bernard,
for that they seem expressly to require the same. For thus they stand, far
otherwise, then M. Hardinge has reported them: Deum suum manu, and ore
contrectaturi, and colloquentem ^ibi ipsis audituri: To touch God with their
hand, and with their mouth, and to bear him speakinge unto them. Which later
clause M. Hardinge, as his manner is, has purposely dissembled. As the Priest
hears Christ speak unto him, so he holds Christ in his hand. But the
Priest hears not Christ speak Uerily, and in deed, but by a Figure:
Therefore it seems, it may reasonably be geathered of the same, that he
holds not Christ in his hand Really, and in deed, but only by way of a
Figure.

Thus much touching Bernarde. Notwithstanding it is likely, and thought of
many, that as well herein, as in other cases of Religion, He was leadd^ away
with the errors, and ignorance of his time.

M. Hardinge. The.9. Division.
Here let our adversaries, touching this Article, consider and weigh with them
selves, whether they be Lutherans, Zuinglians, or Geneuians, what English they
can make of these words used by the Fathers, (247) The. 247. Untruth. For not
one of al these words is applied to the Sacrament.
and applied to the Sacrament in the places before alleged: Dominus, Christus,
Diuina essentia, Deus, Seipsum, verbum Dei, Ego, verbum foenum factum, Deum
suum. The number of the like places, that might be alleged to this purpose, be
in manner infinite. Yet M. Iuel promises to give over, and subscribe, if any
one may be found. Now we shall see, what truth is in his word.

The B. of Sarisburie.
I doubt not, but by these few well considered, it may easily appear unto ye
discrete Reader, that none of al these Ancient Fathers, neither Ireneus, nor
Origin, nor Cyprian, nor Chrysostom, nor Ambrose, nor Augustine, nor Cyrillus,
for ought, that may appear by their words, ever called ye Sacrament, either
Lord, or Christ, or Divine substance, or God, or Him Self, or the Word of
God, or their God: notwithstanding M. Hardinge has taken some pains, by
guileful Translations, and unadvised asseuerations, to make some appearance of
the same.

S. Hierome says, Hierony. in Matt. ca. 26.
Falsi testes sunt, qui non eode^ sensu dicta proferunt, quo dicuntur: They
that report words in other sense, The Sacram. inferior to Gods word.
then they were spoken, are false witnesses.

M. Hardinge. The.10. Division.
In the weighing of this doctrine of the Church, little occasion of wicked
scoffs, and blasphemies against this blessed Sacrament shall remain to them,
that be not blinded with that gross, and fond error, M. Hardinge has
imagined this error of him self.
that denies the inseparabilitie of Christ, but affirms in this Mystery to
be present his f^eashe only, without Blood, soul, and godhead. Which is
confuted by plain Scriptures. Christ raised from the dead, now dies no more.
Romans 6. He suffers him self no more to be divided. 1. Cor. 1. Every sprite
that loses Jesus, this is Antichriste. 1. Joan. 4. Hereof it follows, that if
Christ be verily under the form of Bread in the Sacrament, as it is other
where sufficiently proved: then is he there entier, and whole, Fleashe,
Blood, and Soul, whole Christ, God and man, for the inseparable union of
both natures in one person. Which matter is more amply declared in the
Article of the Adoration of the Sacrament.

The B. of Sarisburie.
In the end M. Harding confirms this Doctrine by the Confutation of an
error: which for the novelty, and strangeness of it, may easily seem to be
his own: and therefore ought of right to be called, M. Hardinges error. For,
I believe, it was never, neither defended, nor imagined by any other.

He surmiseth, there be some, that either have said, or else may say, that
Christ's Fleashe is present Really in the Sacrament: how be it dead, and
bloudlesse, and utterly void both of Soul, and Godheade. This is a new
error, never tamed, or touched before this time.

As for us, we do constantly believe, and confess, that Christ the very
natural Son of God received our Fleashe of the Blissed Uirgin, and that,
where so ever that Fleashe is, there is also both the Godheade, and the Soul.

Of this undoubted truth M. Hardinge geathereth an impertinent Conclusion. For
thus he reasons, If Christ be verily under the Form of Bread in the
Sacrament, then is he there intiere, and whole, God, and Man. In deed, the
first being granted, the rest must needs follow. But how is M. Harding so well
assured of the first? What old Doctor, or Ancient Father ever taught him,
that Christ's Body is Really, and fleashly present under these Forms, or
Fantasies of Bread, and Wine? If the learned Fathers say so, it were good, to
show it: If they say not so, it is great shame, to plead it. Uerily, all that
M. Hardinge has yet said, is not hable to prove it.

Now, good Christian Reader, for thy better satisfaction in this case, being
so dangerous, wherein who so erreth, is an Idolater, and knows not God, it may
please thee briefly to consider, both ye Ancient godly Fathers undoubted
judgment touching this Sacrament, and also the ancient order, and usage of the
same.

First, Chrysostom. in Opere Imperfecto. hom. 11.
concerning the judgment of the Fathers, in this behalf, S. Chrysostom
says, In vasis sanctificatis, non verum Corpus Christi, Sed Mysterium
Corporis Christi continetur: In the Holy vessels, not the very, or true Body
of Christ, but the Mystery of Christ's Body is contained.

S. Augustine says, 1. Quaest. 1. Interrogo ^os.
Interrogo vos, Fratres, dicite mihi: quid plus videtur vobis, Corpus Christi,
an Verbum Christi? Si vultis vere respondere, hoc dicere debetis, quod non sit
minus Verbum Dei, quam Corpus Christi: I demand of you this question, my
Brethren, answer me. Whether think you, is greater, the Body of Christ (
meaning thereby the Sacrament) or the Word of Christ? If ye will answer
truly, this must ye say, that the Word of God is no less, then the Body
of Christ. S. Hierome says, Ego Corpus Jesus Euangelium puto* Et quamuis,
Hieronym. in psalm 147.
quod Christus dicit, qui non manducat meam Carne^ etc. possit intelligi de
Mysterio, tame^ verius Corpus Christi, and Sanguis ^ius Sermo Scripturarum est:
I take, the Body of Jesus to be the Gospel. And, al be it these words of
Christ ( He that eats not my Fleashe etc.) Verius.
may be taken of the Sacrament, yet in truer sense the Word of the Scriptures
is the Body, and Blood of Christ.

Likewise says Origin, Quod si circa Corpus Christi seruandum tanta vtimini
tautela, quomodo putatis, minoris esse periculi, Verbu^ Dei neglexisse, quam
Corpus eius? If ye take such heed in ke^pinge ( the Sacrament, The Sacrament
a Creature.
which is called) the Body of Christ, how can you think there is less
danger, Origin. in Exodus hom. 13.
in despisinge the Word of God, then there is in despisinge ( the Sacrament,
that is called) the Body of God?

It the Sacrament were in deed, and Really the Body of Christ, and so our
very Lord, and God, thus to compare it with a Creature, and to make it
inferior unto the same, as S. Augustine, S. Hierome, Origin, and other godly
Fathers do, it were great blasphemy.

S. Augustine says, Augustine. De Vni^o Baptism^ contra Petilianum. ca. 5.
Plus est vnus Deus, quam vnus Baptismus. Neque enim est Baptismus Deus. Sed
ideo magnum aliquid est, quia Sacramentum est Dei: One God is more, then one
Baptism. For Baptism is no God. But yet is Baptism a great thing, because
it is a Sacrament of God.

Origin that great learned Father says, Origin in Matthaeum ca. 15.
Ille Panis, qui sanctificatur per Verbum Dei, and Obsecrationem, iuxta id,
quod habet materiale, in ventrem abit, and in secessum eijcitur: The Bread,
that is sanctified by the Word of God, and by prayer, touching the Material
part of it ( which is the Sacrament) enters into the Belly, and passes
into the draught. These words were horrible to be spoken, if the Sacrament in
deed were Christ, and God.

S. Ambrose expoundinge these words of Christ, Ambrosi. de Benedictionth.
patriarcharum.
Give us this day our daily Bread, says thus, Hodie dat nobis hunc Panem,
quem ipse quotidie Sacerdos Co^secrat suis Verbis. Possumus and ipsum Dominum
accipere, qui ait, Ego sum Panis vitae: Even this day Christ gives us this (
daily) Bread ( that is, the Sacrament) which he him self being the Priest
doothe daily Consecrate with his own words. We may take the same daily
Bread also for our Lord him self, that says, I am the Bread of life.
Hereby it is plain, that Christ him self, and the Sacrament are sundry
things: and that neither the Sacrament is Christ him self, neither Christ
him self is the Sacrament.

S. Chrysostom says, Chrysostom. in Opere Imperfecto. hom. 49.
Habent and Haereses in Sch ismate similiter Ecclesias etc. Heresies in their
Schism have likewise Churches, as well as have the Catholics, likewise the
Holy Scriptures, likewise Bishops, likewise orders of Clerks, likewise
Baptism, likewise the Sacrament ( of the holy Communion) likewise al other
things: and, to be short, Christ him self. Here likewise this holy Father
S. Chrysostom, contrary to M. Hardinges fantas^e, presupposes a great
difference between the Sacrament, and Christ him self. Ambrosi. De Sa^^cram.
li. 4. ca. 3.
But what can be so plain, as these words of S. Ambrose touching the same?
Venisti ad Altar: vidisti Sacramenta posita super Altar: and ipsam quidem
miratus es Creaturam. Tamen Creatura solennis, and nota: Thou came to the
Altar, and saw the Sacrament laid upon the Altar: and thou marueiledst at
the Creature. And yet is it a Creature Common, and known. Here S. Ambrose by
express words calls the Sacrament, not Lord, or God, but a Creature.

Therefore Epiphanius thereof writes thus, Epiphan. in Anchorato.
Hoc est rotundae figurae, and insensibile, quantum ad potentiam etc. Dominum
vero nostrum nouimus totum sensum, totum sensitiuum, totum Deum, totum
mouentem. This thing ( that is, the Sacrament) is of ^ round form, ( for it
was a great thick round Cake) and, touching any power, that is in it,
utterly void of sense. But we know that our Lord is whole sense, whole
sensible, whole God, whole moouinge. In these words, bitweene Christ, and
the Sacrament appears likewise a great difference.

Justinius Martyr says, Justinius Marty^ in Colloquio cum Tryphon^^
Alimento Humido, and Sicco admonemur, quae propter nos Deus Dei filius
perpessus fit: By Dry, and Moist food ( whereby he means the Sacrament)
we are taught, what things God the son of God has suffered for us.

Cyrillus calls the Sacrament, Fragmenta Panis, Fragmentes, or pieces of
Bread. Cyrill in Johan. li. 4. ca. 14.


S. Augustine Augustine. in Johan. tract. 2^.
calls it, Buccellam Dominicam. The Lords morsel.

Certainly, it had been horrible wickedness, to have called the Sacrament
by any of these names, either a Creat^^e: or, a thing Insensible, and void of
Life: or, a Food Dry, and Moist: or, a Morsel: or, a Fragmente, or, a piece
of Bread, If the Holy Fathers had been persuaded, as M. Harding bears us in
hand, that the Sacrament was their Lord, and God.

Chrysostom in the Communion, that commonly bears his name, Liturgia
Chrysostom.
after the Consecration prays thus, We bes^^he thee, O God, to send down
thy Holy Ghost upon these (Sacraments, or) Presents laid before us.

And M. Hardinge him self in his Mass, in like manner after Consecration,
makes his Prayers unto God in this wise: Look, O Lord, upon these
Sacraments with a graceous, and a cheareful countenance, and vouche save to
receive the same, as thou did sometime receive the Oblations of Abel thy
Child, and the Sacrifice of our Patriarch Abraham, and the thing that was
offered unto thee by the high Priest Melchisedek.

It were very much for M. Hardinge to say, that he prays God, that the holy
Ghost may come upon Christ: or, that God at his request, and for his sake,
will favorably, and chearefully behold his own Son: or, so receive him,
being our Lord, and God, as he sometime received a Goat, or a Weather, or
any other like corruptible kind of Sacrifice.

How be it, if he speak plainly, and dissemble not, as some of his friends
are afraid, he does, then is this undoubtedly the very tenoure, and meaning
of his prayer. But if he dissemble, and speak otherwise, then he thinks, and
that at the secreteste, and holiest part of al his Mass, then by his own
Confession, and by the Authority of his own Mass book, the Sacrament is not
Lord, and God.

In the Council holden at Carthage under S. Cyprian, Cypria. in Council. Cartha.
ad Quirinum.
Caecilius a Bilta says thus, Antistes Diaboli audet Eucharistiam facere: A
Priest of the Devil dares to make the Sacrament: Which words by M.
Hardinges exposition, must needs sound thus, A Priest of the Devil dares to
make our Lord, and God. Which saieinge notwithstanding, emonge the Priests
of M. Hardinges side, is not so strange. For thus they dare to say without
fear, or shame, Sacerdos est Creator Creatoris sui: qui Creauit vos, Stella
Clericoru^ Sermon. Discipul. Ser. 111.
dedit vobis Creare se: qui Creauit vos absque vobis, Creatur a vobis
mediantibus vobis: The Priest is the Creator of his own Creator: he that
Created you of naught, has given you power, to Create him self of naught: he
that made you without you, is made of you by mean of you. These words
sometime had been counted blasphemy. But now they must be taken as good, and
Catholic, as uttered by the patriakes of that profession.

Thus much of the judgment of the Old Fathers, touching this question.

Now for the Anciente Order, and Usage of the Sacrament, it may please thee,
good Christian Reader, to understand, that, for the space of six hundred
years after Christ, it cannot appear, that ever any man Adoured, or
Woorshipped the Sacrament with godly honor: which is a great token, it was
not then accoumpted our Lord, and God.

The manner was then in many Churches, Hesychius in Leui. li. 2. ca. 8.
that al such remanentes, and portions of the Sacrament, as were not received
of the people, should be burnte, and consumed into ashes: which thing
undoubtedly had not been sufferable emonge Christian people, if the holy
learned Fathers had thought, the Sacrament had been the very Lord, and God.

Yet Pope Hildebrande, Beno Cardinalis.
that forebade Priests Marriage, took ye Sacrament, and demanded of it
c^rtaine secret questions of things to come: and because it would not, or
could not speak, and make him answer, in his fury he threw it into the
fiier.

They have honored the Pope by the name of God, as it appears by sundry
their Decrees, and Canons. And in their books they have not doubted to write
thus, Extra^^. Johan. 22 Cum inter. In Glosa.
Dominus Deus noster Papa: Our Lord God the Pope. But the Sacrament, which
now, they say, is Lord, and God, they never, neither entitled by the name of
God, Anno. 1226.
nor woorshipped it with godly honor, Anno. 1265.
before the time of Honorius.3. nor allowed it any holy Day, Did. 96. Satis
euidenter.
before the time of Urbanus. 4. If the World had benne well assuered, that the
Sacrament had benne the Lord, and God, it is not likely, it should have
continued so long without either Godly title, De Elect. and Electi potest.
or Godly honor.

In the end Pope Clemente the fifthe granted out large, In pr^oemio Clemen.
Augustinus Steuchus.
and liberal indulgences to al, that would frequente this New holy Day, to
countenance this New Religion? For the first Euensonge, Matins, Mass, and
Later euensonge, Prime, and Hours, for every of these times a hundred days of
pardon, toties, quoties, a poena, and culpa. Clemen. li. 3. ti. 16. Si Dominum
Anno Do 1308.
Thus the people was well alluered, Hieronym. in Psalm. ^1.
and thus this New holy Day, and New Religion gate great credit.

S. Hierome says, Pagani Does suos digito ostendunt: and ob hoc ingerunt mihi
opprobria. Vnde sciant, quod ego mente Deum meum reconditum teneo, and per
in^eriorem hom^^em in ipso habito: The Heathens point their Gods with their
finger: and that they lay to my reproach. But let them know, that I have my
God hidden in my heart, and that by my in ward man I dwell in him.

Certainly, if the Sacrament could speak unto M. Hardinge, thus it would
speak: I am a Creature, as S. Ambrose teaches you: I am a fragme^te, or piece
of Bread, as S. Cyril teaches you: I am a thing insensible, and void of
life, As Epiphanius teaches you: I am a Corporal food, and pass into your
bodies, and increase the Substance of your Fleashe, as other meats do, As
Origenes, and Ireneus have taught you: I moulde, and putrefie, and am subject
to corruption, As your eyes, and senses may easily teach you: I am a
Sacrament of Christ, I am not Christ: I am a Creature of God, I am not God:
ye do wrong unto me, ye do wrong unto God: The woormes of the Earth, and
the birds of the Air will condemn your folly: Give not this honor unto me:
give Godly honor unto God. If the Sacrament could speak unto M. Hardinge,
thus would it speak: and being a dumme, and a liuelesse thing, and not
hable to speak, yet thus it speakethe.

God open the eyes, and hearts of al men, that they may see, and discern
the Almighty, and Euerliuinge God, from a Corruptible Creature, that is no God.
Amen.

FINIS.
THE XXII. ARTICLE, OF R^MAININGE UNDER THE ACCIDENTS.
The B. of Sarisburie.
Or that the People was then taught to believe, that the Body of Christ
remains in the Sacrament, as long, as the Accidents of the Bread remain
there without Corruption.

M. Hardinge. The. 1. Division.
These five Articles here folowinge are school points, the discussion whereof
is more curiouse, then necessary. Whether the faithful people were then, that
is to say, for the space of six hundred years after Christ, taught to
believe concerning this blessed Sacrament precisely according to the purporte
of al these Articles, or no, I know not. Verily I think, they were taught the
truth of this matter simply, and plainly, ye so as nothing was hidden from
them, that in those quiet times, (quiet I mean touching this point of
Faith) was thought necessary for them to know. If since there has been
more taught, or rather if the truth has in some other form of words been
declared for a more evidence and clearenesse in this behalf* to be had, truth
it self always remaininge one: this has proceeded of the diligence, and
earnest care of the Church, to repress the pertinacie of Heretics, who have
within these last six hundred years impugned the truth herein, and to meet
with their perverse and froward objections: as has been thought necessary to
find out such wedges, as might best serve to ryue such knotty blocks.

The B. of Sarisburie.
M. Hardinge passes lightly over these Articles folowinge, as being only, as
he says, certain unnecessary School points, to be debated privately emonge
the learned, and nothing perteininge to the simple capacity of the people.
Which thing may the better appear, by that he is not hable to auouche any of
the same by the Authority of any Ancient learned Father.

It is true, that the Doctrine of the Church touching the Sacrament in the
Old time was delivered simply, and plainly unto the people. But, M. Harding
him self well knows, that Doctrine was nothing like unto this Doctrine.

S. Augustine taught the people thus, Augustine. in Psalm. 3.
Christus in Coena Figuram Corporis sui commendauit: Christ at his Supper gave
a Figure of his Body.

S. Ambrose says unto the people, Ambros. De illis qui initian. Myster. Ca. 9.
Post Consecrationem Corpus Christi Significatur: After Consecration the Body
of Christ is Signified.

S. Chrysostom says unto the people, Si mortuus Christus non est, cuius
Symbolum, ac Signum hoc Sacrificium est? Chrysostom. in Matthae. homi.83.
If Christ died not, whose Sign, and whose token is this Sacrifice? And to
leave infinite other like Authorities to like purpose, S. Augustine thus taught
the people, Non hoc Corpus, quod videtis, manducaturi estis: nec bibituri illum
Sanguinem, quem fusuri funt, qui me Crucifigent: Augustine. in Psalm. 98.
Y^ shall not eat ( with your bodily mouths) this Body, that you see: nor
shall you drink that Blood, which they shall sheade, that shall Crucify me.

And where as Christ says, Onles ye (...)my Fleashe, and D^inke my Blood,
ye shall have no Life in you, The Old learned Father Origin thereupon thus
taught the people: Origin. in Le^tti. homi. 7.
Si secundum Literam accipias haec verba, illa Literaoccidit: If ye take these
words according to the Letter, this Letter kills.

And touching Christ's Body it self, the Holy Bishop, and Martyr Uigilius
taught the people in this sort: Vigilius contra ^^^ychem li. ^.
Caro Christi, cum esset in terra, non erat in Coelo: and nunc, quia est in
Coelo, non est vtique in terra: The Fleashe of Christ, when it was in Earth,
was not in Heaven: And now, because it is in Heaven, doutlesse it is not in
Earth.

S. Augustine said thus unto the People, De Con. Did. 2. Prima.
The Body, wherein Christ rose again, must needs be in one place: Corpus,
in quo Resurrexit, in vno loco esse oportet.

Cyrillus said unto the People, Cyrillus in Johan. lib. 11. ca. 3.
Christus non poterat in Carne versari cum Apostolis, postquam asce^disset ad
Patrem: Christ could not be conuersaute together with his Disciples in his
Fleashe, after he had Ascended unto his Father.

Touching the Eatinge of Christ's Body, Augustine. in Johan. tracta. 26.
S. Augustine taught the people in this wise: Creed, and manducasti. Credere in
Christum, hoc est, manducare Pane^ Viuum: Believe in Christ, and thou have
Eaten Christ. For beleeuinge in Christ, De Con. Did. 2. Vt quid.
is the Eatinge of the Bread of life.

Likewise again, Quomodo in Coelum manum mittam, Augustine. in Johan. tracta.
50.
vt ibi sedentem teneam? Fidem mitte, and tenuisti: Thou will say, How shall I
reach my hand into Heaven, that I may hold Christ sittinge there? I
answer thee, Reach up thy Faith, and so thou hold him.

Thus was the People then taught, simply, and plainly: and that not only in
the Schools, but also openly in the Church: neither only in one place, but
at Hippo, in Africa: At Constantinople, in Thracia: at Alexandria, in Aegipte:
at Millaine, in Italy: and so in all places, and in all Churches throughout the
World: and this was then thought to be the Catholic Doctrine of the
Sacraments.

Transubstantiation, Real Presence, Concomitantia, Accidents without
Subjects, Natural Bodies without Natural places, Quantum sine modo Quanti,
Holy Fourmes, and Holy Shows were not yet known, nor heard of.

At the last, as M. Hardinge says, there sprange up certain strange
Heretics, that said, that like as the Nature, and Substance of Wa^er
remains in the Sacrament of Baptism, even so the Nature, and Substance of
Bread, and Wine remains still in the Sacrament of Christ's Body. But if
this, according to M. Hardinges judgment, be an Heresy, then must all the
Old Fathers, and Doctors of the Church be condemned for Heretics.

For Gelasius says, Gelasius contrae Eutychem.
There remains still in the Sacrament the Nature, or Substance of Bread, and
Wine.

Chrysostom says, Chrysostom. ad Caesarium.
The Nature of Bread remains in the Sacrament, as before.

Theodoretus says, The Bread remains in his former Nature, and Substance:
In priori Natura, and Substantia.

S. Augustine says, Theodoretus Dialogo. 1.
Quod videtis, Panis est: The thing, that ye see, is Bread. He says not, It
seems Bread, but it is no Bread: It is only the Accidente, the Form, and
the Show of Bread: but, In Sermon. ad Infantes. Bed^ in. 1. ad Corin. ^^.
Panis est, It is in deed, and Verily Very Bread.

But, I trow, both these, and al other like Anciente learned Fathers, must,
by M. Hardinges Decree be taken for New Masters, and condemned for Heretics.

This is that knotty great Block, which to riue, and rent up, M. Hardinge
has divised a ioyly substantial strong iron wedge made of Accidents. God
knows, a simple, and a Childishe instrument: and yet much like to ye rest of
his tools. How be it, God be thanked, the Church of God was hable to
confound, and to cleave a sunder al manner Heresies twelve hundred years
together, without any of these wedges.

M. Hardinge. The. 2. Division.
Yet this matter has not so much ben taught in open audience of the people,
as debated privately between learned men in Schools, and so of them set forth
in their private writings, wherein if some perhaps through contention of
wits have been either over curious, or over bold, and have over shot the
mark, or not sufficiently confirmed the point they have taken in hand to
treat of, or through ignorance, or favor of a part, have in some thing
swarued from reason, or that meaning which holy Church holds: it is great
vncourtesie, to lay that to our charge, to abuse their ouersightes to our
discreadite, and to reprove the whole Church for the insufficiency of a few.

The B. of Sarisburie.
For excuse hereof, M. Hardinge says, This Doctrine served only for the
Schools, and had no place emonge the People. But so likewise did the rest of
al their Doctrine. For it was ever their greatest policy, to keep their
learning in the Schools, and to see, that the People should know nothing. S.
Hierome says, Eadem and in Veteri, Hieronym. ad Pammachi. con. error. Iohann.
Hierosolymitani Hilarious contra Auxentium.
and in Noua Haeresi seruatur Fides: vt aliud populi audiant, aliud praedicent
Sacerdotes: They keep one Faith both in the Old Heresy, and in the New.
The People hear one thing, and the Priests teach an other. And certainly,
as their Religion was used, happy was the poor people, that knew least of it.
S. Hilaries words may very aptly be applied unto them, Sanctiores sunt aures
plebis, quam corda Sacerdotum: There is more holiness in the ears of the
People, then in the hearts of the Priests.

How be it, contrary to M. Hardinges evasion, other Doctors of his own form,
Antoninus, Biel lection. 84. Antoninus in 3. par. Summae. titul 13.
Gabriel, and others seem to publishe the same, as a General Doctrine, Common,
not only to the Schools, but also to the whole Church, and no more touching
the Priest, then the simplest of the People.

And verily, if the Sacrament be God in deed, and that, not a God for ever,
but only to last for a season, which is the purporte of M. Hardinges
Doctrine, why should not al ye People understand, when it begins to be
God: how long it contineweth God: when it is God: when it is no God: and, how
long they may Adoure it without danger: and, when they may safely leave of,
and Adoure no more? For duringe the time it is God, who so Adoureth it not is
wicked, and godless: and, who so Adoureth it, when it is no God, commits
Idolatry, and Adoureth a Creature in steed of God. Therefore the certainetie
hereof, notwithstanding M. Hardinges contrary judgment, seems as necessary
for the People, as for the Priest.

But here it appears, M. Hardinge is half ashamed of his own Scholastical
Catholic Doctors. For he confessethe, That either of mere ignorance, or of
affection, and favor of parts, they have sometime swa^ued, both from common
Reason, and also from the sense of the Catholic Church. This may stand well
for a Maxima, as one of the greatest truethes of M. Hardinges whole book.

Notwithstanding, these Doctors vtteringe such points of learning, were
never thought to publishe their own private fantasies, but rather the
Catholic Doctrine of the Uniuersal Roman Church. Neither was there either
Bishop, or Cardinal, or Pope, or Council, that ever condemned them for the same.

M. Hardinge. The.3. Division.
Now concerning this Article, whether we are able to auouche it by such
auctorities, as M. Iuel requires, or no, it shall not greatly force. The
credit of the Catholic Faith depends not of old proufes of a few new
controuersed points, that been of less importance. As for the people, they
were taught the truth plainly, when no Heretic had assaulted their Faith
craftily. (248) The.248 Untruth. For this is a nevve fantasy, and not the
Doctrine of the Anciente Church.
The doctrine of the Church is this: The Body of Christ after due
Consecration remains so long in the Sacrament, as the Sacrament endures.
The Doctrine of the Church*
The Sacrament endures so long, as the forms of Bread, and Wine
continewe. Those forms continewe in their integrity, until the other
accidents be corrupted, and perish. As if the color, weight, savor, taste,
smell, and other qualities of Bread, and Wine be corrupted, and quite altered,
then is the form also of the same annichilated, and undone. And to speak of
this more particularly, since that the substance of Bread and Wine is turned
into the substance of the Body and Blood of Christ, as the (249) The.249.
Untruth. For neither the Scriptures, nor any of the Ancient Doctors etc.
leads us thus to believe.
Scriptures, ancient Doctors, the necessary consequent of truth, and
determination of holy Church leads us to believe: if such change of the
Accidents be made, which should not have suffised to the corruption of
Bread and Wine, in case of their remaindre, for such a change the Body and
Blood of Christ cease not to be in this Sacrament, whether the change be in
quality, as if the color, savor, and smell of Bread and Wine be a little
altered, or in quantity, as if thereof division be made into such portions,
in which the nature of Bread and Wine might be reserved. But if there be
made so great a change, as the nature of Bread and Wine should be corrupted,
if they were present: then the Body and Blood of Christ do not remain in
this Sacrament, as when the color and savor, and other qualities of Bread
and Wine are so far changed, as the nature of Bread and Wine might not
bear it: or on the quantities side, as if the Bread be so small crom^^ed into
duste, and the Wine dispersed into so small portions, as their forms remain
no longer: then remains no more the Body and Blood in this Sacrament. Thus
the Body and Blood of Christ remains in this Sacrament, so long as the
forms of Bread and Wine remain. And when they fail and cease to be any
more, August. ad Bonifaciu^ epist. 23.
then also cease the Body and Blood of Christ to be in the Sacrament. For
there must be a conuenience and resemblaunce between the Sacraments, and the
things whereof they be Sacraments, which done away and lost at the
corruptions of the forms and Accidents, the Sacraments also be undone and
perish, and consequently the inward thing and the heavenly thing in them
contained, leaves to be in them.

The B. of Sarisburie.
I cannot imagine, wherefore M. Hardinge should so often tell us, that the
people in the Primitive Church was taught plainly. For, as now, in his
Church of Rome, al things of purpose are drowned in darkness, and the simple
people suffered to know nothing: no not the meaning of the Sacraments,
which of al other things should be most plain.

For, briefly to open some part of the Mysteries, which every of the simple
unlearned People may not know, mark, I beseech thee, good Christian Reader,
how plainly they have determined the manner of Christ's being in the
Sacrament. Thomas of Aquine yt most famous of all the Schooledoctours writes
thus: In Corpore Christi in Sacramento non est distantia partium ab inuicem,
In. 3. quaest. 7^^ ar. 30.
vt oculi ab oculo, aut Capitis a pedibus: sicut est in alijs Corporibus
organicis. Talis enim dista^tia par^ium est in ipso Corpore Christi vero: sed
non prout est in Sacramento. Quia sic non habet Quantitatem dimensiuam. In the
Body of Christ in the Sacrament there is no distance of parts, one from an
other: as bitweene eye, and eye: or eye, and ear: or head, and feet, as it
is in other natural Bodies: For such a distance there is in the True Body of
Christ: but not as it is in the Sacrament. For so it has no dimension of
Quantities. Out of which words the Reader may geather by the way, that, the
True Body of Christ is not in the Sacrament. O what a Christ have they
divised for them selves? He has neither Quantity, nor Proportion of Body,
nor distance of parts: he is neither long, nor short, nor round, nor
broad, nor thick, nor thin: his eyes, his ears, his head, his feet are
al in one. Yet is this the very Proportion, and stature of Christ's Body, even
as he walkte upon the Earth: and even as he was na^le^ upon the Cross.

And least any man should stagger hereat, and stand in doubt, this matter is
ouerlookte, and considered in the Decrees by the Canonistes, by these words:
Sed secundum hoc videtur, quod vbi pars est, ibi est totum: and secundum hoc
videtur, quod pes, and nasus sunt coniuncti: quod non credo. By this it
appears, De Con. Did. 2. Vbi pars. In Glosa.
that, where as the part is, there is the whole: and that Christ's foot and
his nose are both together. But I cannot ^^leeue that. So clearly, and
plainly these men are woonte to teach the people.

I pass over the rest of their Doctrine. Sometimes their Accidents have
power to nourishe: Sometimes the same Accidents are parts of the Substance:
sometimes Substance must be an Accidente: Sometimes Accidents must be
Substance. To be short, thus of Night they make Day, and of Day they make
Night. They are now ashamed of their own Doctors, that lately were in
highest room, and, as it befelle sometime unto them, that enterprised the
Tower of Babylon, one of them understands not an others language. And
therefore now their buildinge is at a stay.

This is the simplicity, and plainness of M. Hardinges Church. It is an
easier matter, for the simple people to go to Heaven, then for him, and his
fellows to agree well, and thoroughly of the way.

Here M. Hardinge without either Scripture, or Co^ncel, or Doctor, has
in^erlarded a long Fable of his own: which notwithstanding, as he says,
is the Doctrine of the Church. But miserable is that Church, that has
neither Scripture, nor Council, nor Doctor, to approve her Doctrine.

First he imagines, That Christ's Body is Really in the Sacrament, so
long, as the Sacrament is a Sacrament. Again, by the tenoure, and force of
his Doctrine, If Christ's Body once depart away, then is the Sacrament
no more a Sacrament. Thus this Doctrine turns round. If it be a Sacrament,
then is Christ's Body there: if Christ's Body be there, then is it a
Sacrament. So simply, and plainly they teach the people. O happy are they,
that have such Masters.

Further he says, The Substance of the Bread, and Wine is Really changed
into the Body, and Blood of Christ. And this he avouches by Scriptures
without words, and by Doctors without names.

Afterward, he keeps great Mutes about Qualities, and Quantities: How far
the color, or sauoure, or other qualities of the Bread may be altered: and
into how small mites the Bread may be crommed (for these be his own words)
and yet nevertheless Christ's Body continewe in it. No doubt, a very plain,
and comfortable, and a sauery Doctrine for the people. S. Ambrose, S.
Augustine, S. Hierome, S. Chrysostom, and other learned Fathers traueiled far,
and deeply with great study: S. Paul was lifted up into the third Heaven:
yet none of them could understand it.

In the end he says, There must be a conuenience, and a Resemblance bytweene
the Sacrament, and the things, whereof it is a Sacrament. For example, As
Water does wash, and refreashe our Bodies: so by Resemblance we are taught
in the Water of Baptism, that Christ's Blood does wash, and refreashe our
Souls. And, as our bodies be Feadde by material Bread: so in the holy
Communion we are taught by like Resemblance, that our souls are Feadde with
the Body of Christ. Such convenient Likeness there is, bitweene the
Sacrament, and the thing that is Represented by the Sacrament. But what
such Resemblance, or Likeness can M. Hardinge imagine herein, to further his
fantasy? Wherein are his Accidents like unto Christ's Body? Or wherein is
Christ's Body like unto his Accidents* Will he say, that the Accidents of
Bread do nourishe, and increase the Substance of our bodies? Or yt our souls
live so by Christ's Body, as our bodies live by Accidents? If he leave this
Resemblance of Feedinge, and Nourishinge, what other Resemblance can he find?

O, how much better were if, for M. Hardinge simply, and plainly to
confess, that, as well for this Article, as for the rest, he is utterly
destitute, not only of the Scriptures, but also of General Councelles, and
Anciente Fathers: and has nothing to allege, but only certain vain
imaginations of his own?

M. Hardinge. The.4. Division.
Here because many of them, which have cut them selves from the Church, Of
reservation of the Sacrament. Exo ^i. 1^.
condemn the Reservation of the Sacrament, and affirm, that the Body of
Christ remains not in the same, no longer then duringe the time, whiles it
is received, alle^ginge against Reservation the example of the Paschal Lamb in
the old law, wherein nothing ought to have remained until the morninge,
Reservation.
and likewise of Manna: I will rehearse that notable and known place of
Cyrillus Alexandrinus. His words be these: Ad Calo^yrium Arsenoiten.
Episcopum. citat Thomas part. 3. q. 76.
Audio quod dicant mysticam benedictionem, si ex ea remanserint in sequentem
diem reliquiae, ad sanctificationem inutilem esse. Sed insaniunt haec dicentes.
Non enim alius fit Christus, neque sanctum eius corpus immutabitur: Sed virtus
benedictionis, and viuifica gratia manet in illo. It is told me, they say,
that the mystical blessinge (so he calls the blessed Sacrament) in case
portions of it be kept until the next day, is of no virtue to
Sanctification. But they be mad, that thus say. For Christ becomes not an
other, neither his Holy body is changed: but the virtue of the consecration,
and the quickeninge or life geuinge grace, abides still in it. By this saying
of Cyrillus, we see, that he accompteth the error of our adversaries in this
Article, no other then a mere madness. The Body of Christ (says he) which
he terms the Mystical blessinge, because it is a most holy Mystery done by
consecration, once consecrated is not changed, but the virtue of the
consecration, and the grace that gives life, (250) The.250. Untruth,
standinge in untrue, and guileful construction.
whereby he means that Fleashe assumpted of the Word, remains in this
Sacrament, also when it is kept: (250) verily even so long, as the outward
forms continewe not corrupt.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Truth is not afraid of sclaunderous Tragedies. We have not cut of our
selves from the Catholic Church of God. We have foresaken the dangerous
company of them, that have turned the Church of God into a cave of Thieves:
whose compan^e God by special words has willed us to foresake. For thus the
Almighty says unto us, O my people, come out from her, Apocalip. 18.
and be not partetaker of her sins: least ye take part of her plagues.

The matter of Reservation is only pasted on, and utterly impertinente, and
nothing belonginge to this question. How be it, unless M. Hardinge had used
the advantage of this Digression, he had passed over this whole Article without
naminge of any Doctor. I grant, The Sacrament in the Old time in some
certain Churches was Reserved: how be it, not to be woorshipped with godly
honor, but only to be received in the holy Communion of the people. Origin.
in. (...)homil. ^.
And Origin emongst other godly Fathers seems to mislike the same. For thus
he writes, Dominus Panem, quem Discipulis dabat, non distulit, nec seruari
iussit in Crastinum: The Bread, that the Lord gave to his Disciples, he
differred it not, nor willed it to be Reserved until the next day.

But touching the force of this Article, Cyrillus speaks not one Word,
neither of Corporal presence, nor of Fourmes, nor of Accide^tes, nor of
Crommes, nor of Quantities, nor of Qualities, nor of Putrefaction, or
Corruption, nor of the coming of Christ's Body, nor of the Aboade, or
Departure of ye same, nor of any other the like M. Hardinges Mysteries.
Therefore this holy Father neither reprooueth our Doctrine, nor charge us, as
M. Harding imagines, with any madness. But if he were now alive, he would
accoumpte him mad, and twice mad, that would so madly ra^ke his words to
so vain a purpose.

Concerning the Reservation of the Sacrament, that Cyrillus speaks of, the
matter stood thus. Sometimes after that the people had received the Holy
Mysteries, it happened, that there remained some portions untouched. These
portions so remaininge the godly Fathers, that then were, thought it not meet,
to turn to any profane use: but rather Re^erued them until the next day, to
be received of the people in the Holy Communion. For as yet there was no
Private Mass known in the whole Church of God, throughout the world.

The Messalian Monks repined he^eat, and said, The Sacrament could not so
long contin^we Holy. Cyrillus answeareth them, not that the Fleashe, which
Christ received of the Blissed Uirgin, contineweth still, as enclosed in the
Sacrament, as it is untruly reported by M. Hardinge, but that Christ's
Institution, and the Mystical Benediction, which he calls the Quickeninge
Grace, continues still. And his reason is this: for that al Sacraments have
their virtue, and Power, not of them self, but wholly, and only from Christ.
Wherefore, as Christ is one, and continues still without change: even so must
the Grace, that Christ woorketh in us by his Sacraments, be likewise one, and
continewe still. And as there is no virtue in the Water of Baptism, but when it
is used: even so there is no virtue in the Bread of the Holy Communion, but
likewise only when it is used.

As for the Quickeninge Grace, it is as well in the one Sacrament, as in the
other. S. Ambrose says, Aqua Baptismatis habet Gratiam Dei, and Praesentiam
Trinitatis: Ambros. De Sacramen. li. 1. ca. 5.
The Water of Baptism has the Grace of God, and the presence of the Holy
Trinity. (...).
And in the Nicene Council it is written thus: Cogita aquas plenas ignis
Coelestis: Imagine this Water to be full of Heavenly fiere. And this Grace is
not only for one hour, or two, but lasts, and continues still. So S.
Augustine says, Arca Testamenti, quamuis ab hostibus capta, Virtutem tamen
suae Sanctificationis non amisit: The Ark of God, notwithstanding it were
taken, and carried a way by the Enemies, yet it lost not the virtue of the
former holiness, August. contr^ ^audent. li. 3.
that was in it.

Yet may not M. Hardinge upon occasion hereof, either think, or say, that this
Grace is Really, and Substantially enclosed, either in the one Sacrament, or
in the other. B^nauentura says, In. 4. Senten. Did. 1. quae. 3.
Non est aliquo modo dicendum, quod Gratia continetur in Sacramentis
essentialiter, tanquam aqua in vase. Hoc enim dicere, est erroneum. Sed
dicuntur continere Gratiam, quia eam Significant: We may not in any wise
say, That the Grace of God is contained in the Sacraments Substantially, and
in deed, as Water is contained in a Vessel. For, so to say, it were an
error. But Sacraments are said, to con^eine the Grace of God, because they
Signify the Grace of God.

Here the Opinion, that M. Hardinge seems to maintain, is condemned for an
error: And this sentence allowed for true, and Catholic: Sacraments are
said to co^teine the Grace of God, because they Signify the Grace of God. To
conclude, he says, Gratia est in animis, non in Signis Visibilibus: The Grace
is in the Minds, or Souls of the receivers: not in the Visible Signs, or
Sacraments.

FINIS.
THE XXIII. ARTICLE, WHETHER A MOVSE etc.
The B. of Sarisburie.
Or that a Mouse, or any other Woorme, or Beast may eat the Body of Christ:
For so some of our Adversaries have said, and taught.

M. Hardinge. The.1. Division.
Whereas M. Iuel imputes this vile asseueration but to some of the
adversaries of his side, ^uel contrarieth him self.
he seems to acknowledge, that it is not a doctrine universally taught and
received. The like may be said for his next Article. And if it has been
said of some only, and not taught universally of al, as a true doctrine for
Christen people to believe: how agrees he with him self, saying after the
rehearsal of his number of Articles, the same, none excepted, to be the highest
mysteries, and greatest keys of our Religion. For if that were true, as it is
not true for the greatest part, By this rule the greattest points of M.
Hardinges Catholic Religion may well come in question.
then should this Article have been affirmed and taught of al. For the
highest and greatest points of the Catholic Religion be not particular, but
of universal teachinge.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Here it appears, that M. Hardinge somewhat misliketh his Catholic
Masters, and thinks it now an error, to say, That a Mouse may eat the
Body of Christ: and therefore he calls this part of his own Doctrine, A
vile asseueration. But if this Asseueration of M. Hardinges own Doctors, and
greatest Doctors be so Uile, then Uile were they, that first divised it. And
yet I cannot well see, how he may so lightly recante the Doctrine, that he was
borne, and brought up in, and condemn his own fellows of villainy, without
blame.

How be it, One good excuse he seems to have, that this part of his Religion
was never Uniuersally received, nor counted Catholic. And therefore he
says, It is no keie of his Religion. If M. Hardinge will measure all the rest
in this sort, I fear me, very few parts of his whole Religion will prove
Catholic. And yet the first diuisours, and setters forth, and mainteiners
hereof, took this evermore for a principal keie, as without which the rest of
their Doctrine could not stand. Yet were they evermore accoumpted, both as
Uniuersal for their Learning, and as Catholic for their Religion, and as
constante in the same, as M. Hardinge.

But in deed, the Old holy Fathers, S. Ambrose, S. Augustine, S. Hierome, S.
Chrysostom never heard of this strange Doctrine: nor, if they had heard it,
would ever have taken it for lock, or keie of their Religion: but would rather
have thought him worthy to be lockte up, as a mad man, that would either
have taught it, as great numbers have done: or else have doubted of it, as M.
Hardinge doothe. Now let us see, by whom this Doctrine has been maintained.
So, whether it have been holden for Catholic, or no, it will soon appear.

Yet notwithstanding, I must protest before hand, that the speeches, that
they have used in this behalf, are so Blasphemous, and so Uile, that for the
Reverence, I bear to the glorious Body of Christ, I can neither hear them,
nor utter them without horror.

First of al, Thomas of Aquine says thus: Thom. par. 3. De Euchar. quae. 79.
arti. 3.
Quidam dixerunt, quod cum primum Sacramentum sumitur a Mure, vel a Cane,
desinit ibi esse Corpus, and Sanguis Christi: Sed hoc derogat veritati huius
Sacramenti: Some have said, that, as soon as the Sacrament is touched of a
Mouse, or a Dog, the Body, and Blood of Christ streigthway departs from
it. But this is a derogation to the truth of this Sacrament. By these
words, M. Hardinges judgment is utterly condemned, as uttered against the
truth, and in the derogation of this Sacrament.

M. Hardinge may not well call in question, whether this Doctoure were
Catholic, or no. For Christ said unto him by a vision in his dream, Been
scripsisti de me Thoma: O Thomas, thou have written full well of m^e. And
therefore he is called, Doctor Angelicus, an Angelical Doctoure, for that in
learning, and judgment he so far surmounted al other Doctors, and was
accounted most Catholic.

In the Council of Arle it is written thus: Qui non been custodierit
Sacrificium, and Mus, Council. Arelaten. 3. can 6.
vel aliquod animal comederit illud, quadraginta dies poeniteat: Who so keeps
not the Sacrifice well, and duly, and a Mous, or any other beast happen to
eat it, let him be put to penance forty days.

Johannes de Burgo says, Mus comedens Hostiam, suscipit Corpus Christi: The
Mouse eatinge the Sacrament, Johan. De Burgo De Custodia Eucharist. ca. 10.
receives the Body of Christ.

Alexander de Hales says thus, Alexan. par. 4. quaes. 45. m 1.
Quidam dicunt, Vbicunque ponantur species, sieve in mundo loco, sieve in
immundo, sieve in Ventre Muris, ibi est Corpus Christi. Et in hoc non derogatur
Corpori Christi, nec Sacramento: Some say, Where so ever the Fourmes be laid,
whether it be in a fair place, or in a foul, or in the belly of a Mouse,
there is the Very Body of Christ. And this is no hinderance, neither to the
Body of Christ, nor to the Sacrament.

Again he says, Si Canis, vel Porcus deglutiret Hostiam Consecratam
integra^m, non video, quare Corpus Domini non simul ^rai^ceretur in ventrem
Canis, vel Porci: If a Dog, or a Swine should eat the whole Host being
Consecrate, I see no cause, but our Lords Body should enter into the belly
of the Dog, or of the Swine.

Gerson says, ^erson contr^ Floret. lib. 4.
Brutu^ sumit Corpus Christi per Accidens, quia sumit illud, in quo est: A
brute beast receives the Body of Christ, because it receives that thing,
wherein Christ's Body is contained.

Bonauentura likes better the contrary Doctrine, as more agreeinge, as he
says, Bonauen. in. 4. Senten. dis. 13. q. i. e.
both with Civil Honesty, and also with the Judgment of common Reason, Haec
Opinio est honestior, and rationabilior.

Peter Lombarde, the Master of al Catholic Conclusions, one that takes upon
him, to teach al others, when he comes to this point, he stands in a
mammeringe, and is not hable to teach him self. For thus he says, touching
the same: 4. Senten. dis. 13.
Quid igitur sumit Mus, vel quid manducat? What is it then, that the Mouse
receives? Or, what eats it? He answeareth, Deus nouit: God knows: I know
it not.

Notwithstanding his Resolution is this: Sane dici potest, quod Corpus Christi
a brutis animalibus non sumitur: It may very well be said, that a brute beast
receives not the Body of Christ. But this Sentence is reuersed, and not
thought Catholic. For the great Faculty of Parise has given this
judgment upon the same, Hic Magister non tenetur: Herein the Master is not
allowed.

Therefore, notwithstanding M. Hardinges contrary determination, this Doctrine
hitherto appears right good, and Catholic.

Touching such cases, as herein may happen, Antoninus the Archbishop of
Florence writes thus: Antonin. De defectih. Miss. 3. par. Sum. 3.
Si Mus, aut aliud animal, etc. If a Mouse, or any other woorme, or beast
happen to eat the Sacrament throwgh negligence of keepinge, let the keeper,
throwgh whoes negligence it happened, be enioined to penance forty days. And
if it be possible, let the Mouse be taken, and burnte, and let his ashes be
buried in, or about the Aultare. But Peter of Palus says, The Mouses
entralles must be drawn: and the Portion of the Sacrament, that there
remains, if the Priest be squaimishe to receive it, must reuere^tly be said
up in the Tabernacle, until it may naturally be consumed. But the Host so
found in the Mouses entralles may in no wise be thrown out into the poole:
as a certain priest sometime used a flee, that he found in his chalice after
Consecration. But if a man had such a fervent zele (says he) that his stomach
would serve him, to receive the same without horror, there were no way to it,
Specially if the man were fasting. So S. Hugh of Clunice mutche commends
Goderanus a Priest, for receiuinge the like portions cast up again by a
Leper. But he said afterward, S. Laurences gridy^on was nothing so badde.
Hitherto Antoninus.

And, for more likelihoode hereof, this is holden as a Catholic Conclusion of
y^ side, Corpus Christi potest euomi: De Con. did. 2. Si quis. In glosa.
The very Body of Christ may be vomited up again.

I proteste again, as before, the very blasphemy, and lothesomnesse hereof
unto a godly heart is intolerable. Neither would I have used this unpleasant
rehearsal, were it not, that it behooves each man to know, how deeply the
people has been deceived, and to what villainy they have been brought.

This Doctrine has been published, and maintained, in Schools, in Churches,
by the Schooledoctours, by the Canonistes, by Preachers, by Bishops, by
General Councelles, and by him, that wrote the very Castle, and Forte of
Faith. Fortalitium ^idei. li. 3.
Yet M. Hardinge doubts not to say, It is a vile Asseueration, and was never
counted Catholic.

These be the Impes of their Transubstantiation. For like as Ixion, in steed
of Lady Juno, having the company of a Cloud, begat Centauros, yt were
monstrous, and ougle fourmes of half a man, and half a horse joined
together: even so these men, in steed of Gods Holy Mysteries,
companieinge with their^owne light, and clowdy fantasies, have brought forth
these Strange, ougle, deformed Shapes in Religion, Lothesome to remember, and
Monstrous to behold.

M. Hardinge. The.2. Division.
Concerning the matter of this Article, what so ever a Mouse, woorme, or
beast eats, the Body of Christ now being impassible, and immortal,
susteineth no violence, injury, ne villainy. As for that, which is gn^wen,
bitten, or eaten of worm or beast, whether it be the Substance of Bread, as
appears to sense, which is denied, (251) The.251. Untruth. For the Bread
remains still, as it is plain by the old Catholic Fathers.
because it cease through virtue of Consecration: or the outward form only
of the Sacrament, as many hold opinion, (252) The.252. Untruth, As it is
fully proved in the tenthe Article.
which als^ only is broken and chawed of the receiver, the Accidents by
miracle remaininge without Substance: In such cases happeninge contrary to the
intent, and end, the Sacrament is ordained, and kept for, it ought not to
seem unto us incredible, the power of God considered, that God takes away
his Body from those outward forms, and permits The certainti^ of M.
Harding^ Doctrine.
either the nature of Bread to return, as before consecration, The
certainti^ of M. Harding^ Doctrine.
or the Accidents to supply the effects of the Substance of Bread: As he
commanded the nature of the rod, which became a Serpente, to return to
that it was before, when God would have it serve no more to the uses, it was by
him appointed unto.

S. Cyprian speaks, neither of Mise, nor of brute beaste^ etc.
The grave authority of S. Cyprian adds great weight to the balance for
this judgment in weighinge this matter, who in his sermon de Lapsis, by the
report of certain miracles, shows, that our Lords Body made it self away
from some, that being defiled with the Sacrifices of Idols, presumed to come
to the Communion, er they had done their due penance. One (as he tells
there) thinkinge to have that blessed Body, which he had received with others
in his hand, when he opened the same to put it into his mouth, found that he
held Ashes. And thereof S. Cyprian says, Documento vnius ostensum est,
Dominum recedere, cum nega^ur: By the example of one man it was showed, that
our Lord departs away, when he is denied. It is neither wicked, nor a
thing unworthy the Majesty of that holy Mystery, to think our Lords Body
likewise done away, in cases of negligence, villainy, and profanation.

The B. of Sarisburie.
O what shifting here is, to avoid this miserable inconvenience? Innocentius
thinks it not good to say, The Mouse eats Christ's Body in the
Sacrament. Innocen. 3. De Officio Miss. ca. 11.
But rather he says, That Christ, when he sees the Mouse coming, geateth
him self away, and leaves the Sacrament. This Doctors judgment M.
Hardinge allows before others, and thinks it best to stand with reason.

But what then is it, that the Mouse eats? Bread it cannot be. For that is
gonne, as they say, by Consecration. It remains, that the Mouse must needs
eat the Shows, and Accidents. How be it, that were a strange kind of
feedinge. But nothing is strange to M. Hardinge. Yet Shows, and Accidents
cannot nourishe. What is it then, wherewith the Mouse is nourished? M. Hardinge
answeareth, Perhaps Almighty God by a Miracle suffers the Bread to return
again to feed the Mouse. Or else, if this will not serve, he says further,
Perhaps God woorketh an other Miracle, and by his Omnipotent Power, gives the
very Accidents of Bread strength to nourishe, and increase Substance, as if
it were Bread. Thus these men have divised a pretty way, to feed mise with
Miracles.

Thomas of Aquine says, that if a man take over much of the Consecrate Wine,
Thomas in. 1. Corin. 11.
notwithstanding the Substance of the Wine be gonne, Yet he may be ouerseene
by the Accidents, and so may happen to be dronken by a Miracle.

Here we see, M. Harding answeareth only by Perhaps, as being not yet well
advised, what he may say. Whereby it appears, his Doctrine holds no
certainetie. Therefore, what so ever he say, we may give no great credit to
his t^le, nor take it for Catholic.

S. Cyprian, that is here alleged, makes no manner mention, neither of
Fourmes, nor of Accidents: nor teaches us, that the Mouse can e^te Christ's
Body: nor that Christ conueigheth him self away, and leaves the Sacrament:
nor that the Substance of Bread returns again: nor that the Accidents have
power to nourishe: Cyprian. Sermon. 5. De Lapsis.
nor any other like fantasy. Only he says, God gave that wicked man by that
Miracle to understand, that, for his Infidelity, and Idolatry, his Grace was
so departed from his heart, as the Sacrament was departed from his hand.
Therefore this place makes utterly nothing to M. Hardinges purpose.
Notwithstanding h^ thought it good, so in this Article to use the name of S.
Cyprian, as in the Article before he used the name of S. Cyril: least he
should be thought, to pass over any Article without a Doctoure.

The best, that may be geathered of S. Cyprians words, is this, That the
wicked receives not the Body of Christ. Which thing, as it is most true,
so it utterly ^uerthroweth the whole substance of M. Hardinges Doctrine.

Now, good Christian Reader, that thou maiste see, how aptely M. Hardinges
Doctors agree together, notwithstanding so many of them tell us, and hold
it for most certain, That a Mouse may eat the very Body of Christ, and
receiue^ whole Christ, God, and Man into his belly: Yet others of them
contrariwise tell us, and hold it likewise for most certain, That a
Faithful Christian man, be he never so godly, yet cannot receive the Body of
Christ into his Belly. De Con. did. 2. Tribus gradib. In Glosa.
For thus they write, Certum est, quod, quam cito species teruntur dentibus,
tam cito in Coelum rapitur Corpus Christi: It is certain, that, as soon as
the Fourmes of the Bread be touched with the teeth, streigth way the Body of
Christ (is not received into the belly, but) is caught up into Heaven. And he
says not, Perhaps, as M. Hardinge doothe: but, Certum est, It is certain,
and out of question, and therefore Catholic.

And Hugo a great Schooledoctour, such a one, as M. Hardinge may not well
deny, Hugo De Sacram. li. 1. par. 8. Ca. 13.
says thus: Quando in manibus Sacramentum tenes, Corporaliter tecum est
Christus: quando ore suscipis, Corporaliter tecum est. Postquam autem
Corporalis sensus in percipiendo deficit, deinceps Corporalis Praesentia
quaerenda non est: While thou hold the Sacrament in thy hand, Bonauen. in
4. Senten. did. 13. quae. 2.
Christ is Bodily with thee: while thou receiuest the Sacrament with thy
Mouth, Christ is Bodily with thee* But after that (the Sacrament is passed
further, and) thy Bodily sense begins to fail, Durand. li. 4.
thou maiste no longer took for Bodily Presence. Thus they grant, that a
Mouse may^ receive the Body of Christ into his belly: and yet they deny the
same unto a Man. Such is the certainetie, and Constancy of this Doctrine.

But, to conclude, and to give some certain Resolution in this uncertain, and
doubteful Doctrine, it behooves us to understand, that, as S. Augustine
says, there is great difference bitweene Christ's Body, and the Sacrament.
For the Sacrament is Corruptible: Christ's Body is Elorious, and void of al
corruption. The Sacrament is in the Earth: Christ's Body is in Heaven. The
Sacrament is received by our Bodily Mouth: Christ's Body is received only by
Faith, which is the mouth of our Soul. And who so understands not this
difference, understands not the meaning of any Sacrament.

Now, to apply the same to this purpose, The Mouse, or other Woorme may
receive the substance of the Bread, which is the outward corruptible
Elemente of the Sacrament: But the very Body of Christ it self, which is
in Heaven, cannot be received, but by Faith only, and none otherwise.

S. Augustine speaks thus in the person of Christ: August. Confession.
lib. 7. ca. ^^.
Ego sum Cibus grandium: Cresce, and manducabis me: I am the food of great
ones: Grow, and thou shalt eat me. Again he says, Hoc est Manducare illam
escam, and illum potum Bibere, August. in Johan. tracta. 26.
in Christo manner, and Christum manentem in se habere: This is the Eatinge of
that Food, and the Drinkinge of that Drink, for a man to abide in Christ,
and to have Christ abidinge in him.

Chrysostom says, Chrysostom. ex varijs locis in Matthae. hom. ^.
Magnus iste Panis replet Mentem, non Ventrem. Iste Panis, and noster est, and
Angelorum: This great loa^e (meaning thereby the Body of Christ, that is in
Heaven) fills the Mind, and not the Belly. This is our Bread, and the
Bread of Angels. As the Angels receive it, so we receive it.

And to conclude, Hilarious De Trinita. li. 8.
so says S. Hilarie: The Bread, that came down from Heaven, is not
received, but of him, that has our Lord, and is the member of Christ.

By the Old learned Fathers undoubted judgment, this is the only Eating of
the Fleashe of Christ: wherein Mise, and Brute Beasts, and wicked men, that
are worse then brute beasts, have no portion. And if these holy Fathers were
now alive, doubtelesse they would say to M. Hardinge, and to his fellows: O
curui in terras animi, and Coelestium inanes: O you, that lie groouelinge on
the ground, and have no sense of things abooue.

FINIS.
THE XXIIII. ARTICLE, OF INDIVIDVVM VAGVM.
The B. of Sarisburie.
Or, that, when Christ said, Hoc est Corpus meum, this word, Hoc, pointed
not the Bread, but, Indiuiduum Vagum, as some of them say.

M. Hardinge.
What so ever, Hoc, points in this saieinge of Christ after your judgment,
M. Iuel, right meaning and plain Christian people, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
(who through Gods grace have received the love of truth, and not the
efficacy of illusion, to believe lieinge) believe verily, that in this
Sacrament after consecration, i^ the very Body of Christ, and that upon
credit of his own words, Hoc est Corpus meum. They that appointe them
selves to follow your Geneuian doctrine in this point, deceived by that ye
teach them (Hoc) to point the Bread, and by sundry other untruths, in
steed of the very Body of Christ in the Sacrament rightly ministered verily
present, The ben^fite of the Geneu^an Communion.
shall receive nothing at your Communion, but a bare piece of Bread not worth
a^pointe. As for your, some say, who will have, Hoc, to point Indiuiduum Vagum,
First learn you well, what they mean, and if their meaning be naught, who so
ever they be, handle them as you list: therewith shall we be offended never a
deal. How this word, Hoc, in that saieing of Christ is to be taken, and
what it points, M. Hardings good opinion of him self.
we k^^we, who have more learnedly, more certainly, and more truly treated
thereof, then Luther, Zuinglius, Calvin, Cranmer, Peter Martyr, or any their
ofspringe.

The B. of Sarisburie.
In this Article M. Hardinge only utters some part of his choler against
them, whom it pleases him to call Ge^euians: and vaunteth much his own
learning, as learned men, seldom use to do, with reproach, and disdain of
others: and in the end, touching the matter, says utterly nothing. Yet is
there not lightly any doubt, that amaseth, and troubles the best learned of
his side, so much, as this.

For, their fantasy of Transubstantiation presupposed to stand in force, if
they say, That Christ by this Pronowne, Hoc, meante the Bread, that he held
in his hand, Then must it needs follow, that the very Substance of that
Bread, was the very Body of Christ. For by this position, that must needs
be the purporte, and meaning of these words.

If they say, Christ by the same Pronowne meante the Accidents, and Shows
of the Bread, Then must it follow, that the ^aine Accidents, and Shows of
Bread were the Body of Christ. But so should an Accidente be a Substance:
Which error were much worse, and far more insensible, then the former.

If they say, This Pronowne, Hoc, signified the Body of Christ it self,
Then the meaning of these Words, This is my Body, must needs ^e this: My
Body is my Body. Holcote in. 4. Sen. quae. 3.
But this (says Holcote) were vainly spoken, and to no purpose. And by this
exposition, Christ's Body should be there, before the words of Consecration
were pronounced: and so there should be no Virtue, or force in Consecration:
or rather there should be Consecration, before Consecration: and so,
Consecration, without Consecration.

Upon these few words they have builte up their whole Religion. This is the
fundation of al together. The Dissension of Doctors
Therefore M. Hardinge should not so lightly, and so disdainefully have passed
it over without answer. Otherwise, this change being so great, as it is
supposed, we shall not know, neither what thing is changed, nor whereof
Christ's Body is made present.

Neither is there any just cause, wherefore M. Hardinge should be thus angry
with the Geneuians in this behalf. For he knows right well, that this new
fantasy, of Indiuiduum Vagum, is no part of their Doctrine.

But briefly to touch, how pitifully the learned of M. Hardinges side have
entangled them selves in this case, Gerson contr^ Floret li 4.
first of al Gerson says thus, Dicendum est, quod Hoc, demonstrat substantiam
Panis: We must say, that this pronowne, Hoc, signifies the Substance of the
Bread. By this Doctor, the Substance of Bread is Christ's Body.

Occam says, Occam in. 4. Senten. did. 13.
Hoc, refertur ad Corpus Christi: This pronowne, Hoc, has relation to the
Body of Christ. By this Doctor, the Body of Christ is the Body of Christ.

Yet Petrus Alliacensis says, Petrus Alliace^. in 4. Sent. did. 13. quae. 5.
Hoc, demonstrat Corpus Christi: alioqui falsa est propositio: Hoc, points
the Body of Christ: Otherwise, Christ's saieinge is not true.

Thomas of Aquine goes learnedly to work, and expounds it thus: Hoc, id
est, hoc contentum sub istis Speciebus, est Corpus meum: This, that is to say,
Thomas in. 4. Senten. did. 8. arti. 16.
this thing contained under these Fourmes, is my Body.

But al these expositions seem to importe some inconvenience. For hereby it
may be geathered, that the Bread is Transubstantiate, and, as they imagine,
Christ's Body made Present, before the Words of Consecration.

Therefore Johannes de Burgo thought it good, Johan. De Burg^ de Forma Verbor.
requisita etc. ca. 4.
to healpe the matter with a Disjunctive, in this sort, Hoc sub hac specie
praesens, vel (...)propinquo futurum, est Corpus meum: This thing, that either
is present already under these fourmes, or anon will be present, is my Body.

By all these Doctors judgments, the meaning of Christ's Words is none
other, Holcote in. 4.
but this, My Body is, or shall be my Body. Which exposition (as Holcote
says) is Childishe, Senten. quae. 3.
Vain, fantastical, and to no purpose.

And therefore Holcote him self says, Holcote eodem loco.
Hoc, Significat quiddam vttique termino Cummune: and termino, A quo, and
termino, Ad quem. This Pronowne, Hoc, signifies a certain thing, that is
indifferently Common, as well to the Bread, as to Christ's Body. But what
thing, that Indifferente thing should be, it were hard to know.

Doctor Durande seeinge al these inconveniences, Durandus li. ^^
and difficulties, and not knowinge how to geate out, in the end concludes
thus: Super hoc dicunt quidam, quod per pronomen, Hoc, nihil significatur: Sed
illud materialiter ponitur: Here upon some say, that this Pronowne, Hoc,
signifies nothing at al: but is put Materially, and Absolutely, without any
manner signification.

But hereof grows an other doubt greater, then any of all the rest. For if
this Word, Hoc, signify nothing at al, what force then can it have, to
work Consecration?

Innocentius weighinge these things indifferently al together, Innocen. 3. De
Offi. Miss. par 3. ca. 6. and ca. 14.
is driven to say, That Christ Consecrated the Sacrament, not by these
Words, Hoc est Corpus meum, But by his blissinge, that went before.

Likewise is John Duns driven to say, touching the same: Scotus in 4. Sentent.
did. 8. qu. 3.
Illa propositio, Hoc est Corpus meum, non est Consecratiua, nec vt Vera, nec
vt Falsa: sed vt est propositio neutra: This sentence, Hoc est Corpus meum, is
not the Sentence of Consecration, neither as it is True, nor as it is False:
but only as it is a Sentence neuter bitweene both, that is to say, neither
true, nor false.

All this notwithstanding, D. Steven Gardener, not greatly regardinge the
Authority of any of these Doctors, in his first book of the Sacrament,
entitled, The Devils Sophistry, The Devils Sophistry. fol. 24.
writes thus, Christ spoke plainly, This is my Body, making demonstration
of the Bread. Which last exposition being true, if this pronowne, Hoc,
signified the material Bread, that Christ held in his hand, then, by M.
Hardinges Doctrine, that Uery Material Bread was in deed, and Uerily the
Body of Christ.

But if the same pronowne, Hoc, signified not that same Material Bread, that
Christ held in his hand, then was not that same Material Bread changed into
the Substance of Christ's Body.

Thus the best learned of that side are utterly amassed at this matter, and run
each man his own way, and know not, what may please them best.

Yet M. Hardinge thinks it sufficient, thus to conclude with a courrage, How
that word, Hoc, is to be taken, and what it points, we know, who have
more learnedly, more certainly, and more truly treated hereof, then Luther,
Zuinglius, Calvin, Cranmere, Peter Martyr, or any their ofspringe. If M.
Hardinge, and his fellows know so much, as here he seems to take upon him,
he has the greater cause, to give God thanks. What so ever he have, he has
received it. God give him grace, to use it well.

He would seem, not to know, who they be, that would force us to this
fancy of his Indiuiduum Vagum. And therefore he says, If their meaning be
naught, handle them as ye list. How be it, he cannot be so ignorant herein, as
he would seem to be. For although perhaps he be not much acquainted with the
Doctrine, yet he cannot choose, ^. Ste. Gardi^er.
but know the Doctoure. Him I mean, of whom he has borrowed good stoare of
matter, sometimes a whole leaf, and more together, toward the buildinge of
his book.

He, notwithstanding he were once persuaded, that Christ by this pronowne,
Hoc, made demonstration of the Bread, yet afterward thought all that not
worth a point, but utterly changed his whole mind, and thought it better to
say, that Christ by the same pronowne, Mar. Antoni. Constantius.
Hoc, pointed not the Bread, that he held in his hand, but only Indiuiduum
Vagum. And that, for the better understanding of his Reader, he calls,
Indiuiduum in Genere, Indiuiduum Entis, Vnum Substantiae, Vnum Entis,
Indiuiduum Insignitum, Indiuiduu^ Indiuidui. This fancy he so warranteth, and
forces euerywhere, as if Christ's Words could bear none other exposition.

Thus therefore he imagines Christ to say: This thing, that ye see me
hold in my hand, is not two things: It is only one certain thing. But
what one certain thing it is, I cannot tell: but, suere I am, Bread it is not.

Thus are they driven, to wander in Uanities, and too seek up strange, and
monstrous fourmes of speech, such as the Ancient Catholic Doctors never
knew, lest they should seem plainly, and simply to say, as the learned
Father Tertullian says, Tertullian. contra Marcion. lib. 4.
Hoc est Corpus meum, hoc est, Figura Corporis mei: This is my Body, that is
to say, this is a Figure of my Body: Or, as it is written in their own
Decrees: Vocatur Corpus Christi, id est, Significat Corpus Christi: It is
called the Body of Christ, De Con. Did. 2. Hoc est. In Glosa Hieronym. in
Esai. li. 2. ca. 5.
that is to say, It signifies the Body of Christ.

S. Hierome says, Tam diu quaerunt Heretici noua veteribus adiungere, and
eadem recentioribus immutare, donec eos and sensus humanus, and verba
deficiant: The manner of Heretics is, so long to mingle, and blind new
things with the Old, and still to alter new for new, until both their
wits, and their speech begin to fail them.

Here note, good Reader, that in this whole Article M. Hardinge has alleged no
manner Doctor, nor Old, nor New. The reason thereof is this: for that of the
Old Doctors, he had none to allege: and of his New Doctors, he was ashamed.

FINIS.
THE XXV. ARTICLE, WHETHER THE FOVRMES BE THE SACRAMENT.
The B. of Sarisburie.
Or, that the Accidents, or Fourmes, or Shows of Bread, and Wine be the
Sacraments of Christ's Body, and Blood, and not rather that Bread, and Wine
it self.

M. Hardinge. The.1. Division.
For as much, as by the almighty power of Gods word pronounced by the
Priest in the Consecration of this Sacrament, the Body, and Blood of Christ
are made (253) The.253. Untruth, ever presumed, and never proved.
Really Present, the Substance of Bread (253) turned into the Substance of
the Body, and the Substance of Wine into the Substance of the Blood: the
Bread (which is consumed a way by the fire of the Divine Substance, as
Chrysostom says, In homil. Paschali.
and now is become the Bread which was formed by the hand of the Holy Ghost
in the womb of the Virgin, and decocted with the fire of the Passion in the
Altar of the Cross, as S. Ambrose says:) De Co^s. Did. 2. cap. Omni^.
can not be the Sacrament of the Body, nor the Wine of the Blood. Neither
can it be said that the Bread, and Wine which were before, are the
Sacraments, for that the Bread is becomme the Body, and the Wine the
Blood, and so now they are not: and if they be not, then neither be they
Sacraments. Therefore that the outward forms of Bread, and Wine which
remain, be the Sacraments of Christ's Body, and Blood, and not the very
Bread, and Wine it self: it follows by sequel of reason, or consequent of
understanding, deduced out of the first truth, Epist. 65. In Latino ^^dice.
which of S. Basile in an Epistle, ad Sozopolitanos, speakinge against
certain, that went about to raise up again the old Heresy of Valentinus, is
called, (...). Of which sequel of reason in the matter of the Sacrament many
conclusions may be deduced in case of want of express Scriptures. Which
way of reasonninge Basile used against Heretics, as also sundry other
Fathers, where manifest Scripture might not be all^aged.

The B. of Sarisburie.
M. Hardinge presumes, that his new fantasy of Transubstantiation must
needs stand for good. And therefore imagininge, that the Bread, and Wine are
wholly removed, and cannot be the Sacraments, he thinks, he may well
conclude, that the Fourmes, and Shows, yt are leafte behind, must needs be
ye Sacraments. But this error is soon reproved by the consent of all the
Old Catholic Fathers of the Church. S. Augustine says, Augustine. ad
Infantes.
Quod videtis, Panis est: The thing that ye see (speakinge of the Sacrament)
is (not a Form, or an Accidente, but) Very Bread. S. Chrysostom,
Chrysostom. ad Caesarium.
Theodoretus, Gelasius, Gelasius contra E^tychem.
and other learned Fathers confess by manifest, and express words, That
there remains still in the Sacrament the Very Nature, and Substance of
Bread, and Wine. Therefore this Doctrine is builte upon a false ground, and
cannot stand.

But Chrysostom says, The Bread is consumed by the force of the Divine
Presence: And S. Ambrose, says M. Hardinge, reports the same. Theodoret.
Dia logo. 1. and. 2.
It is great frowardness, whatsoever any one, or other of the Fathers happen
to utter in vehemency, and heat of talk, De (...). and Senatuscon. and lon.
Con. Contra.
to dissemble the manner of their speech, and to draw, and force the same
violently to the rigour^ of the letter. Paulus says, In fraudem Legis facit,
qui, saluis verbis Legis, sententiam eius circumuenit: He does wrong to the
Law, that, folowinge only the bare words, defraudeth the meaning of the
Law.

S. Cyprian says, Cyprian. lib. 2. Epist. 3.
Passio Christi est Sacrificium, quod offerimus: The Sacrifice, that we offer,
is the Passion of Christ.

Chrysostom says, Chrysostom. in Epist. ad Hebrae. homi. 16.
Baptisma Christi Sanguis eius est: The Baptism of Christ is Christ's Blood.

And again he says, In Mysterijs Sanguis ex Christi latere hauritur:
Chrysostom. in Encaenijs.
In the time of the holy Communion, the Blood of Christ is drawn out of his
side.

S. Gregory says, Christus iterum in hoc Mysterio moritur: De Conse. Dis. 2.
Quid sit Sanguis.
In this Mystery (of the holy Communion) Christ is put to Death again.

I trow, M. Hardinge will not so straightly force us to believe, only upon the
sight of these bare words, either that the holy Communion is Christ's
Passion: or, that the Water of Baptism is Christ's Blood: or, that Christ is
slain, and put to Death in the time of the Holy Mysteries: Or, that Christ's
Blood at that time is drawn, and powered from his side, and that, without
healpe of Figure, Uerily, Really, and in deed.

By such manner of amplification, and kind of speech S. Chrysostom says,
The Bread is consumed: not for that the^e remains in the Sacrament no
Bread at al, but for that, in comparison of the Death of Christ, that there
is laid forth, and represented before us, the material Bread seems
nothing. For otherwise Chrysostom most plainly confesses, that the Nature
of Bread remains still. These be his words, Chrysostom. ad Caesarium.
In Sacramento manet Natura Panis: In the Sacrament there remains still the
Nature of Bread.

And, as he says, The Bread is Consumed, In Encaenijs.
Even so in the same place he seems to say, The Priest is Consumed. His
words be these: Ne putes, te accipere Diuinum Corpus ab Homine: Chrysostom.
in Matthae. hom. 51.
Think not, that thou receiuest the Divine Body, of a Man.

And to like purpose he speaks of the Sacrament of Baptism: Non Baptizaris
a Sacerdote: Deus ip^e tenet Caput tuum: Thou art not Baptized of the Priest:
It is God him self, that holds thy Head.

Thus the holy Fathers intreatinge of the Sacraments, use to auance our minds
from the Sensible, and corruptible Elements, to the cogitation of the Heavenly
things, that thereby are Represented. And therefore Chrysostom says.
Mysteria omnia interioribus oculis videnda sunt: Chrysostom. in. 1. Corin. cap.
2.
We must behold al Mysteries with our inner eyes: Chrysostom. in Matthae.
hom. 83.
Which inner eyes doubtless have no regard to any corruptible, and outward
thing.

Hereby the feeblenes of M. Hardinges sequel may soon appear.

True it is, that he further says, In case of want of the Scriptures, we may
sometime guide our selves by discourse, and drifte of Reason. Augusti. De
Doctrina Christiana lib. 3. ca. 28.
Notwithstanding S. Augustine says, Haec consuetudo periculosa est: The
custom hereof is very dangerous. But in this case M. Hardinge wants neither
the Scriptures, nor the Authority of Anciente Doctors.

It is plain by the manifest words of S. Paul, of S. Chrysostom, of S.
Augustine, of Theodoretus, of Gelasius, and of other more holy Fathers, both
Greeks, and Latins, that in the Sacrament* after the words of
Consecration, the very Nature, and Substance of the Bread remains still. It
were mutche for M. Hardinge, to forsake al these, and to trust only to a bare
shifte of simple Reason.

M. Hardinge. The.2. Division.
And whereas there must be a likeness between the Sacrament, and the thing
of the Sacrament, (for if the Sacraments had not a likeness of things
whereof they are Sacraments, Augustine. Epist. 22. ad Bonifacium Episc.
properly, and rightly they should not be called Sacraments: as the
Sacrament of Baptism, which is the outward washinge of the fleashe, has a
likeness of the inward washinge of the soul) and no likeness here appears
to be between the fourmes that remain, and the thing of the Sacrament, for
they consiste not, the one of many corns, the other of grapes, for thereof
comes not Accident, but Substance: hereto may be said, it is enough* that
these Sacraments bear the likeness of the Body and Blood of Christ, A
strange Resemblance.
for as much as the one represents the likeness of Bread, the other the
likeness of Wine, De conse. did. 2. cap. Hoc est quod dicimus.
which S. Augustine calls (254) The.254. untruth: For. S Augustine by these
words meante the very Substance of Bread.
Visibilem speciem elementorum, the visible form^ of the Elements.

The B. of Sarisburie.
What means M. Hardinge, thus to encombre him self with these vain, and
miserable folies? S. Augustine says, A Sacrament must have a Resemblance, or
Likeness of that thing, whereof it is a Sacrament. For without this
Resemblance, or Likeness, he says, a Sacrament is no Sacrament. August.
epist. 23. ad Bonifacium.


Therefore M. Hardinge comes in with his Fantasy, and tells us, that his
Fourmes, and Accidents are the Resemblance, and Likeness of the Body of
Christ. But, alas, wherein stands this Comparison of Resemblance, and
Likeness? Or wherein are M. Hardinges Accidents, and Christ's Body like
together? Certainly M. Hardinge him self, notwithstanding he can say many
things, yet he cannot truly say, that Christ's Body is either round, or
plain, or white, or thin, or any way like unto his Accidents.

Yet must there be a certain likeness in effects bitweene the Sacrament, and
the thing it self, whereof it is a Sacrament. Of which effects, the one is
Sensible, and wrought outwardly to the Body: the other is Spiritual, and
wrought inwardly in the mind. As for example, in the Sacrament of
Circumcision, the Outward Uisible Cuttinge in the Fleashe, was a Resemblance
of the Inward Spiritual Cuttinge of the Heart. In the Sacrament of Baptism,
the Outward Washinge of the Body, is a Resemblance of the Inward Spiritual
Washinge of the Soul.

Likewise in the Sacrament of the Holy Communion, as the Bread Outwardly
Feeds our Bodies: so doothe Christ's Body Inwardly, and Spiritually Feed
our Souls. Thus is Feedinge an effect common unto them both. And therein
stands the Resemblance, and Likeness of the Sacrament. Therefore Rabanus
Maurus says, Raban. Maurus li. 1. ca. 31.
Quia Panis Corporis Cor confirmat, ideo ille congruenter Corpus Christi
nominatur: Et, quia Vinum sanguinem ope^atur in Carne, ideo illud refer^ur ad
Sanguinem: Because the Bread confirms the Heart of our Body, therefore is
the same conveniently called the Body of Christ: And because Wine woorketh
Blood in our Fleashe, therefore the Wine has relation unto the Blood of
Christ.

Now, if M. Hardinge, touching this effect of Feedinge, will compare his
Accidents with Christ's Body, then must he say, That we Eat Accidents, and
Drink Accidents, and be Feadde with Accidents, and Live by Accidents: even
as in the Inner man we Eat Christ, and Drink Christ, and be Feadde with
Christ, and Live by Christ. Otherwise he must confess, that, touching the
effect of Feedinge, his Accidents have no Resemblance of Christ's Body: and
therefore can in no wise be called Sacraments.

But, says M. Hardinge, the Accidents Represente the likeness of Bread:
and the Bread, that was, Represents the Body of Christ. Here is an other
subtle drifte of M. Hardinges reason: from Accidents, to Bread: and from
Bread, to Christ's Body. And so we have here fancy upon fancy: and one
Likeness upon an other: but neither Scripture, nor Council, nor Doctor, either
Greek, or Latin: or Old, or New, to auouche the same.

But here appears a marvelous perverse order in Nature. For by M. Hardinges
driftes, neither can the Bread Signify Christ's Body, but only when the
Bread is abolished, and nothing leafte to Signify: nor can these Accide^tes
Signify the Bread, but only, when there is no Bread remaininge there, to be
Signified. And so the effect of M. Hardinges drifte, and of this Resemblance
passes from nothing to nothing, and stands in nothing.

Here it behooued M. Hardinge to have foreseen the inconveniences, that might
have followed. For if the Accidents of the Bread ^e the Sacrament, for as much
as in one piece of Breed there be sundry Accidents, it must needs follow of
these positions, that in one piece of Bread be sundry Sacraments, and so,
sundry Sacraments in one Sacrament. Innocentius him self espied this
inconvenience: and therefore he demands this question: Innocen. De Officio
Miss. ca. 38.
Cum sint mul^ae species, quomodo non sunt multa Sacramenta?

But this Resemblance, or Likeness S. Augustine calls, Visibilem Speciem
Elementoru^, The visible Form of the Elements. By which words (says M.
Hardinge) he meante only the Shows, and Accidents of the Bread. In deed S.
Augustines words be true: but M. Hardinges Exposition is not true. For S.
Augustine by this word, Species, meante not the outward Fourmes, or Shows,
as it is supposed, but the very Kind, and Substance, and Nature of the Bread.

So S. Ambrose says, Ambro. De illis qui initian. Mysterijs. ca. 9.
Ante benedictionem Verborum Coelestium, alia Species nominatur: post
Consecrationem Corpus Christi Significatur. Before the Blissinge of the
Heavenly Words it is called (not an other Form, or an other Show, but) an
other Kind, or Nature: But after the Consecration, Christ's Body is
Signified. Which things may also plainly appear by S. Augustine him self in
the same place. For thus he writes: De Con. did. 2. Hoc est, quod ^^cimus.
Panis, qui Corpus Christi est, suo modo vocatur Corpus Christi, cum ^e vera
sit Sacramentum Corporis Christi etc. Vocaturque ipsa immolatio Carnis Christi,
quae Sacerdotis manibus fit, Christi Passio, Mors, Crucifixio: non rei
Veritate, sed Significante Mysterio. He says (Not the Form, not the Show,
not the Accidente, but) The Bread, that is the Body of Christ (not verily,
or in deed, but) after a manner is called the Body of Christ: where as it is
in deed a Sacrament of the Body of Christ etc. And the Oblation of the
Fleashe of Christ, that is made with the Priests hand, is called the
Passion, the Death, and the Crucifieinge of Christ: not in Truethe of the
matter, but by a Mystery Signifieinge.

M. Hardinge. The.3. Division.
Thus the Forms of Bread and Wine are the Sacraments of the Body and
Blood of Christ, not only in respect of the thing signified, which is the
unity of the Church, but also of the thing contained, which is the very
Fleashe and Blood of Christ, whereof the truth it self said: The Bread that
I shall give, Joan. ^.
is my Fleashe for the life of the world.

The B. of Sarisburie.
In the end M. Harding, not only without any Authority, ^^ther of
Scriptures, or of Councels, or of Doctors, but also without any manner show,
or drift^ of Reason, concludes in this sort: Thus the fourmes of Bread, and
Wine are the Sacraments of the Body, and Blood of Christ. Thus M. Hardinge
brings in his Conclusion without premises. By M. Hardinges judgment, S.
Augustine was not well advised, De Fide ad Petrum, ca. 19.
when he called the Holy Mystery, Sacramentum Panis, and Vini: The Sacrament
of Bread, and Wine. He should rather have called it, by this Construction,
The Sacrament of Fourmes, and Shows. And whereas S. Augustine says, August
in Ioha^. tracta. 80.
Accedat Verbum ad Elementum, and fit Sacramentum: whereby he means, that the
Bread it self is made a Sacrament: M. Hardinge will rather expound it thus:
Let the Word come to the Element, or Creature of Bread: and then the
Accidents thereof are made a Sacrament.

Uerily, Matthae. 26. Cyprian. li. 2. epist. 3.
touching the Wine, Christ him self calls it, not Fourmes, or Accidents,
but the Fruit, or, as Cyprian terms it, the Creature of the Vine, Creaturam
Vitis.

S. Cyprian calls the Bread after Consecration, Cyprian in Oration. Domini.
Panem ex multorum granorum adunatione congestum: Bread made (not of Fourmes,
and Accidents, but) of the (Substance, and) mouldinge of many Comes.

S. Cyrille says, Credentibus Discipulis Fragmenta Panis dedit: Cyril. in
Johan. li. 4. ca. 24.
Christ unto his Disciples beleeuinge in him, gave (not Accidents, or Shows,
but) Fragmentes, or pieces of Bread.

Irenaeus says, Of the same Bread, and Wine after Consecration, Irenae. li.
5.
Augetur, and co^sistit Carnis nostrae Substantia, is increased, and consists
the Substance of our Fleashe.

Here must M. Hardinge needs say, as Marcus Constantius said before him, Ad
Obiectu^. 27.
that Accidents are the Fruit of the Uine: that Corns, and grapes be
likewise Accidents: that Fragmentes, and pieces of Bread be nothing else but
Accidents: that the Substance of our Bodies is nourished, and increased, and
stands by Accidents. Thus are their Accidents F^ga miserorum. They can
prove, and reprove al by Accidents: and without their Accidents they can
do nothing. And thus, as badde Surgians, they make one Salve to serve for all
soars.

S. Gregory says, Gregor. in Io^^m li. 18. ca. 14.
O Timothee, depositum custodi, deuitans profanas vocum nouitates. Quia, cum
laudari Haeretici, tanquam de excellenti ingenio, cupiunt, quasi noua quaedam
proferunt, quae in Antiquorum Patrum libris Ve^eribus non tenentur. Sicque fit,
vt dum videri desiderant sapientes, miseris suis auditoribus stultitiae semina
spargant. O Timothee, keep that, thou haste received: and beware of the wicked
novelties of words. For these Heretics seekinge the commendation of the
excellency of their wit, bring forth new things, that in the Old books
of the Anciente Fathers are not found. And so it happens, that while they
would be taken for wise men, they scatter emongst their poor hearers the
seeds of Folly.

Certainly, M. Hardinge, and his fellows, as of Shows they have made
Sacraments: even so of the Holy Sacraments, and whole Religion of Christ,
they ^aue leafte nothing to the simple people, but a sight of Shows.

FINIS.
THE XXVI. ARTICLE, Forma. Operta.
OF HIDINGE, AND COOVERINGE.
The B. of Sarisburie.
Or, that the Sacrament is a Sign, or Token of the Body of Christ, that
liethe hidden underneath it.

M. Hardinge.
That the outward form of Bread, (255) The.255. Untruth. For the Outvvard
Form was never by any Old Father called the Sacrament.
which is properly the Sacrament, is the Sign of the Body of Christ, we
confess, yea of that Body, which is covertly in, or under the same, which S.
Augustine calls, Carnem Domini forma Panis opertam: In libro Sen^en. Prosperi.
The Fleashe of our Lord coouered with the form of Bread. But what is meant
by this term (Lies) we know not. As through Faith grounded upon Gods
word, we know that Christ's Body is in the Sacrament, so that it lies
there, or underneath it, by which term it may seem a scoff to be uttered, to
bring the Catholic teaching in contempt, or that it sits, or stands, we
deny it. For lieinge, sittinge, and standing, notes situation of a Body in a
place, according to distinction of members, and circunscription of place, so
as it have his parts in a certain order correspondent to the parts of the
place. But after such manner the Body of Christ is not in the Sacrament, but
without circumscription, order, and habitude of his parts to the parts of the
Body, or place enuironninge. Which manner of Being in, is abooue all reach
of human understanding wonderouse, strange, and singular, not defined* and
limited by the laws, or bonds of nature, but by the almighty power of God. To
conclude, the Being of Christ's Body in the Sacrament is to us certain, the
manner of his Being there to us uncertain, and to God only certain.

The B. of Sarisburie.
The entry of this Article, is the Conclusion of y^ last. So artificially M.
Hardinges Untruethes are wouen together. The owtwarde Form of Bread, says
he, is the Sacrament. But withal he should have added, that this Form, and
manner of speech is only his own, peculiare only to him self, and certain
his fellows of that side: never used by any of all the Old Doctors, and
Fathers of the Church, either Greek, or Latin: or Learned, or Unlearned: or
Catholic, or Heretic: or one, or other.

These words of S. Augustine are alleged, In the.12. Article, and.14.
Division.
and answered before. That holy learned Father never said, neither that the
Fourmes, and Accidents be the Sacrament: nor that Christ's Body is Really
hidden under the same: nor in this place speaks any one word at al of any
Accidents.

But the words, wherein M. Hardinge is deceived, are these: Forma Panis.
Which words signi^^e, not the outward Fourmes, and Accidents, as he
untruly expounds them: but the very Kind, and Substance of the Bread. So
S. Paul says, Philippen. 2.
Christus cum in Forma Dei esset, Formam Serui accepit: Christ being in the
Form (or Nature) of God, took upon him the Form (or Nature) of a Seruante.

By which words S. Paul meante, that Christ was very God in Substance, and
that he took upon him the very Substance of a Man. So S. Hierome expounds
the same words, Hieronym in O^ce. lib. 3. cap. 2.
speakinge in the Person of Christ: Declinaui ad eos deserens Regna
Coelorum, vt cum eis vef^erer, assumpta Forma Serui: I went down to them
leauinge the Kingedome of Heaven, that I might eat with them, having taken
the Form of a Seruante. I think, M. Hardinge will not say, Christ took a
Body of Fourmes, and Accidents, that he might be conuersante, and live with
men.

So S. Augustine ^aithe, Augustine. ad Dardan. Epist. ^7.
Secundum hanc Formam, non est putandus vbique diffusus: Christ (not
according to the Shows, or Accidents of his Body, but) according to this
Kind, this Nature, and this Substance of his Body, may not be thought to be
^owred, and spreadde into al places. Thus S. Paul, S. Augustine, S. Hierome,
and other learned Fathers use this word Forma, for Nature, and Substance: and
not for Accidents.

And as touching the other word, Operta, Coouered, S. Augustine means not
thereby, that Christ's Body is Really contained, and coouered under the said
Form, or kind of Bread: but only that it is there, as in a Sacrament, or
in a Mystery. In this sense S. Augustine says, Augustine. De Spiritu and
Litera cap. 15.
Gratia Dei in Veteri Testamento velara la^ebat: The Grace of God lay hidden
coouered in the Old Testamente. And again, In Veteri Testamento occultabatur
Nouum, id est, occulte Significabatur^ The New Testamente was hidden in the
Old, that is to say, It was secretly Signified in the Old.

Here, least M. Hardinge should take these words strictly, and grossly, as
he doothe the rest, and say, The New Testamente in deed, and Really was
coouered in the Old, S. Augustine him self has prevented him, Augustine. De
Baptis. contr^ Donat. li. 1. c. 15.
and opened his own meaning in this wise, as it is said before: Occultabatur,
id est, occulte Significabatur: It was Coouered, that is to say, it was
secretly Signified. By which exposition, being S. Augustines, M. Hardinge
might have learned likewise to expound these words, Caro operta forma Panis,
id est, occulte Significata: The Fleashe coouered in the Form, or Substance
of Bread: that is to say, Privily Signified in the Form, or Substance of
Bread.

But M. Hardinge thought it best, to leave the matter, and to make his quarrel to
the words, This word, Liethe, says he, imports a scoff, wherewith to
bring his Catholic teachinge into contempt. Uerily this must needs be a
marvelous tender, and a miserable Doctrine, that may no ways be touched
without suspicion of a scoff. But why is he more angry with us, for vtteringe
these words, Liethe hidden, then he is with his own Doctors vtteringe the
same?

In his Gloss upon the Decrees it is written thus, Species Panis, De Con. Dis.
2. Hoc est. In Glosa.
sub qua lat^t Corpus: Species Vini, sub qua later Sanguis: The Form of
Bread, under which is hidden the Body: The Form of Wine, under which is
hidden the Blood. These be his own fellows words: they are not ours.

VVillihelmus Hasfliginensis one of M. Hardinges New Doctors says thus,
VVillih. Hasfliginensis in Sermon De Aduen tu. Vixit Anno. 1300.
Quaerite Dominum, dum inueniri potest. In Templo inuenitur Materiali: Ibi
latet sub Specie Panis: Seek the Lord, while he may be found. He is found
in the Material Church of stoane: There he is hidden under the Form of
Bread.

An other like Doctor says thus, Ibi est Corpus Christi in tanta quantitate,
sicut fuit in Cruce. Vnde mirum est, quomodo sub tam modica Specie tantus homo
lateat: Ludulphus in Vita Christi. par 2. ca. 56.
The Body of Christ is there, as great in quantity, as he was upon the
Cross. Therefore it is marvelous, how so great a man can be hid under so
small a Form.

If this word, Hidden, so necessarily importe a scoff, then must M. Hardinge
needs think, that his own Doctors scoff at him, and laugh him to scorn.
Certainly, it is no indifferent dealinge, the words being al one, so
favorably to allow them in his own books, and so bitterly to mislike them
in all others.

Perhaps he will say, It is no Catholic Form of speech, to say, Christ
liethe in the Sacrament. And yet I see no great reason, but it may stand as
well with the Catholic Doctrine, to say, Christ liethe in the Sacrament, as,
Christ sittethe in the Sacrament. Yet Johannes a S. Andrea, a great Doctor,
and a special Patron of that side, is well allowed to write thus, and that
without any manner controlmente, or suspicion of scoff: Id temporis contentio
nulla erat, Johan. ^. S. Andrea in Epistola ante Liturgias.
vtrum Corpus Christi insideret Eucharistiae: At that time there was no strife,
whether Christ's Body were Sittinge in, or upon the Sacrament, or no. Thus
was it lawful for him to write: and his writings are taken for good, and
Catholic.

But M. Hardinge says, Christ's Body is in the Sacrament, without
Circumscription, or Respect of place, Strangely, VVoonderously, and
Singularely, and by the might of Gods Omnipotent power: and the manner of his
Being there is known only unto God. These be fair, and orient, and bewtiful
colors, but altogether without ground: and, to use the terms of M.
Hardinges Religion, they are nothing else, but Accidents, and Shows without a
Subject.

It is a strange, and a marvelous matter, that this presence of Christ in the
Sacrament, being so certain, and so singular, as M. Harding seems to make
it, yet all the Old Learned Catholic Fathers should so lightly pass it over
in silence, without any manner mention, as if it were not woorthe the hearing:
or that M. Hardinge should so assuredly, and so certainly know it, and yet God
him self should not know it: Or, that God should know it, and yet, being a
matter so Singular, and so necessary to be known, should never reuele the
same to any, either of the Learned Fathers, or of the Holy Apostles, or make
them privy to that knowledge.

In deed, it behooves us to humble our hearts unto the miracles, and
marvelous works of God. But every M. Hardinges fantasy is not a Miracle.
The Heretic Praxeas said, even as now M. Hardinge says, Deo nihil est
difficile: Unto God nothing is hard. But Tertullian that learned Father
answered him then, Tertull. contra Praxeam.
even as we now answer M. Hardinge: Si ^am abrupte in praesumptionibus
nostris v^amur hac sententia, quiduis de Deo confingere poterimus: If we so
rashly use this sentence to serve our Presumptions (or fantasies), we may
imagine of God, what we list.

S. Steven saw Christ in Heaven, Actor. 7. Colossen. 3.
Standinge: S. Paul says, Christ is now at the Right hand of God,
Sittinge: which thing also we confess in the Articles of our Faith. But in
the Sacrament, says M. Hardinge, Christ is Present without any manner such
Circumscription, or Circumstance, or order of place: that is to say, as great
in quantity, as he was upon the Cross, and yet neither Standing, nor Sitting,
nor Lieinge, nor Leaninge, nor kneeling, nor Walkinge, nor Reasting, nor
Moouinge, nor having any manner Proportion, or Position of his Body, either
upward, or downewarde: or backewarde, or forewarde: A very Body, and yet not
as a Body: In a place, and yet not as in a place.

This is M. Hardinges Catholic Doctrine, without Scripture, without Council,
without Doctoure, without any likinge, or sense of Reason. Yet must every man
receive the same at M. Hardinges hand, as the Singular, Strange, Woonderful,
Omnipotent Work of God.

To Conclude, Christ's Body is in the Mystical Bread of the Holy Communion,
not Really, or Corporally, or in deed, as M. Hardinge fansieth, but as in a
Sacrament, and in a Mystery: even as the Blood of Christ is in the Water of
Baptism.

FINIS.
THE XXVII. ARTICLE, OF IGNORANCE.
The B. of Sarisburie.
Or, that Ignorance is the Mother, and cause of true Devotion, and Obedience.

M. Hardinge.
Master Iuel had great need of Articles, for some show to be made against
the Catholic Church, when he advised him self to put this in for an Article.
Verily this is none of the highest Mysteries, Fol. 77.
nor none of the greatest keys of our Religion, as he says it is, but
untruly, and knows that for an untruth. For him self imputes it to D.
Cole, in his replies to him as a strange saieing by him uttered in the
Disputation at Westminster, to the wonderinge of the most part of the
honorable, and worshipful of this Realm. If it were one of the highest
mysteries, and greatest keys of the Catholic Religion, I trust the most part
of the honorable, and worshipful of the Realm, would not wonder at it. Johan.
9.
Concerning the matter it self, I leave it to D. Cole. He is of age to
answer for himself. Whether he said it or no, I know not. As he is
learned, wise, and godly, so I doubt not, but, if he said it, therein he had
a good meaning, and can show good reason for the same, (...).
if he may be admitted to declare his saieinge, as wise men would the Laws
to be declared, so as the mind be taken, and the word spoken not always
rigorously exacted.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Here M. Hardinge allegeth no Doctor, but Doctor Cole. And touching the
matter it self, he thinks this error well excused, for that it is not ye
principal keye of his Religion. How be it, he, that in most honorable
Assembly doubted not openly to pronounce these words, I tell you,
Ignorance is the Mother of Devotion, was thought then to esteem the same, as
no small keie of his Religion.

Uerily it appears by the whole practice, and policy of that side, they are
fully persuaded, that without deep Ignorance of the people, it is not possible
for their Church to stand.

Therefore they chase the Simple from the Scriptures, and drown them in
Ignorance, and suffer them utterly to know nothing: neither the Profession,
they made in Baptism: nor the meaning of the holy Mysteries: nor the Price of
Christ's Blood: nor wherein, or by whom they may be saved: nor what they
desire of God, either when they pray together in the Church, or when they
privately pray alone.

They shut up the Kingedome of Heaven before men: Matthae. 23.
and neither will they enter them selves, nor suffer others, that would enter.
And, as it is written by the Prophet Esai, Dicunt videntibus, Nolite videre:
They say unto them, that see, Stop your eyes, Esai. 30.
and see no more. As the people is, Esai. 24.
such is the Priest: and as the Priest is, such is the people. The blind
is set to guide the blind. Matthae. 15.


Thus they walter in darkness, and in the shadow of Death. And yet, as it is
written in the Book of Wisdom, Non satis est illis errasse circa scientiam
Dei: sed in magno viuentes inscitiae bello, Sapien. 14.
tot and tanta mala Pacem appellant: They thought it not sufficient, to be
deceived, and blinded in the Knowledge of God: but living in such a War of
ignorance, al these euilles they call Peace, And make the people believe, it
is Obedience, Catholic Faith, and Devotion: Or rather, as Ireneus writes
against the Ualentinian Heretics, Irenae. li. 2. ca. 19.
Veritatis Ignorantiam, Cognitionem vocant: Ignorance of the Truethe, and
blindness, they call Knowledge.

By these Policies they ouerrule the Church of God, and keep the people in
Obedience: Iudic. 16.
even as the Philistines, after they had once shorn of Samsons hear, and
boared out his eyes, notwithstanding the strength, and sturdinesse of his
Body, Johan. 12.
were hable to lead him whither they listed, at their pleasure. For he that
walks in the dark, knows not, whither to go.

In the Council of Toledo in Spain it is written thus, Council. Toletan. 4.
Can. 24.
Matter omnium errorum Ignorantia: Ignorance is the Mother (not of Devotion,
but) of al errors: Like as S. Augustine also says, Augustine. in Psalm. 33.
concion. 1.
Erat in illis Regnum Ignorantiae, id est, Regnum Erroris: There was in them
the Kingedome of Ignorance, that is to say, the Kingedome (not of Devotion,
but) of Error.

S Hierome says, Distin. 38.
Scripturarum Ignorantia, Christi Ignorantia est: The Ignorance of the
Scriptures is the Ignorance of Christ. Si iuxta.


And S. Gregory says, Gregor. in Pastorali, li. 1. ca. 1.
Qui ea, quae sunt Domini, nesciunt, a Domino nesciuntur: Who so know not the
things, that perteine unto the Lord, be not known of the Lord.

But abooue al others, Origin. in Numer. homi. 27.
these words of the Anciente learned Father Origin are specially worthy to
be noted: Daemonibus est super omnia genera tormentorum, and super omnes
poenas, si quem videant Verbo Dei operam dare, scientiam Diuinae Legis, and
Mysteria Scripturarum intentis studijs perquirentem. In hoc eorum omnis flamma
est: in hoc vruntur incendio. Possident enim omnes, qui versantur in
Ignorantia: Unto the Devils it is a tormente, abooue al kinds of torments,
and a pain abooue al pains, if they see any man readinge the Word of God,
and with feruente study searchinge the Knowledge of Gods Law, and the
Mysteries, and Secrets of the Scriptures. Herein stands all the flame of the
Devils: In this fiere they are tormented. For they are seized, and possessed of
al them, that remain in Ignorance.

To be short, Numer. 11.
Moses wished, that all the whole people might have understanding, and be hable
to prophecy. 1. Thessal. 4. 1. Corin. 14.
S. Paul wished, that the whole people might daily more, and more increase in
the knowledge of God: and says, Who so continevveth in Ignorance, and
knovveth not, shall not be known.

God the God of Light, and Truethe, remove al Ignorance, and darkness from
our hearts: Johan. 5.
that we may flee the Sprite of error, and know the Uoice of the Great
Shephearde: that we grow into a full perfect man in Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 4.
and be not blown away with every blast of vain Doctrine: that we may be
hable to know the Only, the True, and the Living God, and his only begotten
Son Jesus Christ: to whom with the Father, and the Holy Ghost, be al
honor, and glory, for ever, and ever. Amen.

FINIS.
AN ANS^EARE TO M. Hardinges Conclusion.
AS the rest of your Book, M. Hardinge, may in many respects seem very
weak, so is there no part thereof more weak, then your Triumph at the end,
before the Conquest. Ye say, ye have fully answered the Offer, which you call
a Challenge: and have avouched the Negati^es: and have fully proved all that
lay in question, by Scriptures, by Examples of the Primitive Church, by Old
Councelles, and by Ancient Fathers. Whereby it appears, ye have some good
likinge in that, ye have done. It had been more modesty, to have leafte the
Commendation, and judgment thereof unto your Reader: who comparing your
Proufes with the Answeares, and layeinge the one to the other, might be hable
to judge indifferently bitweene both. For it may well be thought, that while ye
ran alone, ye were ever the foremoste: and, that making your own awarde, ^e
would hardly pronounce against your self.

The pro^fes, that ye have showed us, are common, and known, often alleged,
and often answered: and now brought in, as a company of maimed Soldiers, to
make a show. But from you, and from such conference, and healpe of fellows,
your learned friends looked for some freassher matters.

That ye charge me with ambition, and selfelooue, and seeking of praise,
although it be the weakest of al other your shifts, yet it is an affection
incident unto the children of Adam: and some men suspecte, that M. Hardinge is
not fully empty of the same. But, he that made the heart, is only meet to
search, and to judge the heart. As for me, as I am nothin^, so I know
nothing. God forebidde, Galat. ^.
that I should glory in any thing, saving only in the Cross of Jesus
Christ.

But where it pleases you, so horribly to pronounce your Definitive sentence,
that everlasting damnation shall be the end of our game, I might well answer
you with S. Paul, Nolite ante tempus iudicare: 1. Corin. 4.
Iudg^ not before the time. It seems over much for you, so unadvisedly to
take upon you the office, and person of Christ without Commission. For S. John
says, God has given al judgment (not unto M. Harding, but) unto Christ his
Son: who, no doubt, will inquire further of your judgment. Johan. 5.
Your own Gelasius says, Nemin^^ grauare debet iniqua sententia: A
vvrongeful sentence may hurt no man. It behooves us, patiently to wait for
the Iudgementseate of God. 1. Corin. 4.
In that day all the secrets of darkness shall be reveled. The wicked, and
ungodly cried out against the Prophet David: Non est salus ipsi in Deo eius:
Psalm. 3.
He has no health, he has no comfort in his God. But David turned him self
unto God, and said: O Lord, thou receiuest me: thou art my glory: thou
liftest up my head. If damnation be the end of al their traueiles, that seek
only the Glory of God, and the Truth of his Gospel, where then shall they be,
that so wilfully have dishonored the name of God, and have burnte his Gospel
without cause, and have condemned it as open Heresy? ^pocalyp. 21.
Certainly, Renegates, Infidelles, Liers, Blasphemers, and Idolaters shall have
their portion in the Lake, that flameth with fire, and Brim^toane. The Lords
mouth has spoken it. This doubtless shall be the end of their game.

Now, say you, it remains, that I perform my promise. Yea verily: but,
notwithstanding all that ye have hitherto said, much more it remains, that
you begin again, and assay better, to prove your purpose: that is, that ye
leave your Surmises, and Gheasses: and allege one, or other sufficient Clause,
or Sentence, for any of these matters, that, ye say, ye have proved. For that
ye have hitherto showed us, as unto any indifferent Reader it may soon
appear, is over weak, and will not serve.

I grant, ye have alleged Authorities, sundry, and many, such as I knew
long before: With what faith, I doubt not, but by Conference it may soon
appear. Verily, M. Hardinge, I never denied, but you were hable to misreporte
the Anciente Learned Doctors of the Church, and to bring us the names, and
shadows of many Fathers. The Heretics of al ages were likewise hable to do
the same. But what credit may we yield to such Allegatio^s? What Error was
there ever so plain, what Abuse so horrible, but ye have been hable to
maineteine the same by some color of Scriptures, and Fathers? Ye have
defended your Holy Water by the example of Elizaeus, ^. Regum. 4.
and by the words of the Prophet Ezechiel: Your Pardonnes, by the Prophet
Esaie: Esai. 40. Augustine. De Ordine.
the open filthiness, and abomination of your stews, by the name, and
Authority of S. Augustine. Such credit ye deserve to have, when ye come to
us in the name of holy Fathers.

Ye say, ye have shaken down all the holds of our side: and that, who so sees
it not, is stark blind, and sees nothing. So easily, and with so small adoo,
this whole matter is brought to pass. So Julius Caesar sometime, to declare the
marvelous speed, and expedition of his victory, expressed the same briefly
in these three words, Veni: Vidi: Vici. I came to them: I saw them: I
conquered them.

Here in few words to trauers^ the special points, and corners of your whole
Book, and to show, by what force, and inginnes ye have achieved this
enterprise, First ye have proved your Private Mass, by Women, Boys,
Children, Laiemenne, Fables, Dreams, and Visions: your Half Communion, by
Sick folk, Deathbeddes, Infantes, and Mad men. Of Christ's Institution, of
the Scriptures, of the certain practice of the Apostles, of the General, and
known use of the Primitive Church, of the Anciente Councelles, of the Old
Canons, of the Holy Catholic Fathers, saving only your bare Gheasses, you
bring nothing. Of your unfruitful manner of praieinge in a strange unknown
tongue, ye allege, neither Authority, nor Example: Touching the Supremacy of
Rome, which is the keep, and Castle of your whole Religion, ye wander far,
and wide, and many times biside the way: yet have ye not found any Ancient
Father, that ever entitled the Bishop of Rome, either the Universal Bishop of
the whole world, or the Head of the Universal Church. Thus ye proceed with
your Real presence: and so forth with the rest.

You entreat discourteously the Holy Fathers, with such your Translations,
Expositions, and Constructions, not as may best express their meaning, but as
may best serve to further your purpose. Ye rack them: ye alter them: ye put to
them: ye take fro them: ye allege sometime the end without the beginning:
sometime the beginning without the end: Sometime ye take the bare words
against the meaning: sometime ye make a meaning against the words. Ye
imagine Councelles, that were never holden, and Canons of Councelles, that
never were seen. Ye bring forged pamflettes under the names of Athanasius,
Anacletus, and other Godly Fathers: by whom, you well know, and cannot choose
but know, they were never made.

Your greatest grounds be Surmises, Gheasses, Conjectures, and likelyhoodes.
Your Arguments be Fallacies, many times without either Mood, or Figure: the
Antecedente not agreeinge with the Consequente, nor one part joined with an
other. Your Untruths be so notorious, and so many, that it pitieth me, in
your behalf, to remember them. But the places be evident, and cry Corruption,
and may by no shift be denied. And, to forgeate al other your Inconstancy,
touching the former times, even now in this self same Book, which ye wish
us to receive, and so to receive, as the rule, and standarde of our Faith, ye
say, and unsay: ye auouche, and recante: and, either of forgeatfulnesse, or for
that ye mislike your former saieinges, you are often contrary to your self. Ye
have sought up a company of new petite Doctors, Abdias, Amphilochius,
Clemens, Hippolytus, Leontius, and such others, Authors void of Authority,
full of Vanities, and Childishe fables. And no great marvel. For who so
wants wood, is often driven to burn turfes. It had been good, ye had brought
some other Doctors, to prove the credit of these Doctors. Ye make no
difference bitweene Silver, and Dross: bitweene Corn, and Chafe: bitweene
Old, and New: bitween True, and False. Articl. 17. diui. 4. and. 7.
Ye say, Christ sheadde his Blood in deed, and verily at his Last Supper:
and that at the same instante of time, he offered him self in his Body
likewise in Heaven in deed, and verily before God his Father. And these ye
call necessary points of the Christian Faith.

These are the contents of your Book: this is the substance of your proufes.
Thus, I fear me, ye know, ye dally, and deal not plainly: thus, ye know, ye
abuse the patience, and simplicity of your Reader. And did you imagine, M.
Hardinge, that your Book should pass only emonge children, or that it
should never be examined, and come to trial? or, did you think, that only
with the sound hereof, ye should be hable to beat down, and to vanquishe the
truth of God?

As for your Eloquence, and furniture of words, as it serves well, to make
the matter more salehable in the sight of the simple, so it adds but small
weight unto the Truth. Wise men are leadde with choice of matter, not with
noice of words: and try their gold, not only by the sound, which often
deceives, but also by the touch stoane, and by the weight. Although your
Eloquence may work miracles in the ears of the unlearned, that cannot judge,
yet it cannot turn, neither water into Wine: nor Darkness into Light: nor
Error into Truth. There is no Eloquence, there is no color against the
Lord.

Where as it lik^th you, so bitterly, as your manner is, to call us
Heretics, and to say, We sit in the Chair of Pestilence, and that the
people learneth of us dissolution of manners, and liberty of the Fleashe, and
walks utterly without sense, or fear, or care of God, It stands not with
your credit, thus with manifest untruths, and common sclaunders to enuegle
your Reader. Balach, when he saw, he could not prevail against the people of
God by force of arms, Numer. 22. and 23.
he began to rail against them, and to curse them, thinkinge, that by such
means he should prevail.

But it is not always Heresy, that an Heretic calls Heresy. Athalia,
when she understood, 4. Regum. 11.
that Ioas the right Enheritour of the Crown of Judah, was proclaimed King,
flewe in her fury into the Temple, and cried out, Treason, Treason. Yet was it
not King Ioas, but she her self, that had wrought the Treason. The Arian
Heretics called the true Christians, that professed the Faith of the Holy
Trinity, sometime Ambrosians, sometime Iohannites, and sometime Homousians:
allowinge only them selves to be called Catholics. The Valentinian
Heretics condemned al others, as Gross, and Earthly: and them selves only
they called Ghostly. The sheep oftentimes seems to straye without the fold,
whiles the VVoulfe lurketh, and prays within.^ Verily, M. Hardinge, who so
hates the intolerable oultrage of your Abuses, and pitieth the miserable
seducinge, and mocking of the people, and mourns for the Reformation of the
House of God, and desires to tread in the steps of the Ancient Catholic
Godly Fathers, whose Doctrine, and ordinances ye have forsaken, and with all
submission, and humility of mind, refers the whole judgment, and order
hereof unto the undoubted Word of God, he may not rightly be called an
Heretic.

Touching looseness of life, I marvel, ye can so soon forgeate, either
your Church of Rome, where, Bernard. in Co^uersione Pauli.
as S. Bernarde said in his time, From the Head to the Foot, there was no
part whole: Or the Popes Holiness own Palace: De Consideratio. lib. 4.
where, as the same S. Bernard says, Mali proficiunt, boni deficiunt: The
wicked grow forevvarde, the godly go backevvarde.

Verily, In Council. Delectorum Cardinalium.
we have neither Stews, nor Concubines, nor Corteghianes set out, and
deckte as Ladies, nor Priests, nor Prelates to wait upon them, as, by your
own friends Confession, there are in Rome. There is no Virtue, but we auaunce
it: there is no Vice, but we condemn it. To be short, a light wanton
amongst us, if she were in Rome, might seem Penelope.

Ye say, There are non^, but a fevv, light, unstable persons of (...)side.

And therefore of good will, and friendship ye counsel me to return to you
again. But a few, say you? and the same unstable, and light persons?
Surely, M. Hardinge, if you could behold the woonderful works, that God
has wrought in the Kingedomes, of England, France, Denmark, Polonia,
Suecia, Bohaemia, and Scotland: and in the noble states, and Common Weals of
Germany, Heluetia, Prussia, Russia, Lituania, Pomerania, Austria, Rhetia,
Vallis Tellina, etc. ye would not greatly find fault with the number, nor
think, that they, whom it has pleased GOD in all these Kingedomes, and
Countries to call to the knowledge, and feelinge of his holy Gospel, are so
few. And if ye could also consider the extremity, and cruelty of your side,
and the abundance of innocente blood, that so constantly has been yielded for
the testimony of the Truth, ye would not so lightly call them, either
unstable, or light persons. Certainly, they, whom you seem so lightly to
esteem, are Kings, Princes, Magistrates, Councellers, and the grauest, and
greattest learned Fathers of Christendom. If it please God of his mercy to
bliss, and increase, that he has begone, within few years ye shall find
but few, that will so lightly be deceived, and follow you. In all Countries they
flee from you, and forsake you Ye can no longer hold them, but either by
Ignorance, or by force, and Tyranny. The people, whom it likes you to cal^e
Dogs, and Swine, are neither so beastly, nor so insensible, and void of
Reason, but that they are hable now, to epsy them, by whom they so often have
been deceived. They are hable now to discern the Truethe, from Falshead: and
the true Shephearde, from a stranger: and lamente your pitiful case, that are
so suddenly fallen back, and walter so miserably in your error.

Where as you in so earnest sort, and with such protestation of friendship,
counselmee to leave Christ, and to follow you: as your counsel joined with
Truethe, were very wholesome, so standinge with manifest Untruth, it is full of
danger: and the more vehemente, the more dangerous, Certainly, Heretics, and
Infidelles, to increase their factions, have evermore used the like
persuasions. But we may hear no Counsel against the Counsel of GOD. Aristotle
sometime said, Socrates is my friend, and so is Plato: but the friendship of
Truth is best of al. We cannot bear witness against GOD: we can not say,
Good is Il, and Il is Good: Light is Darkness, and Darkness is Light. Roman.
1.
We cannot be ashamed of the Gospel of Christ: it is the mighty power of
God unto Salvation.

And, with whom then would ye have us to join? Examine the weight, and
circumstance of your Council. Whom should we flee? whom should we follow?
Leave affection: leave favor of parts: and judge uprightly. VVoulde ye have
us, to join with them, that have burnte the Word of God: and scornefully
c^lle it a Shippemans hose, and a Nose of Wax? That mainetaine manifest, and
known errors? That call Gods people Dogs, and Swine? That say, Ignorance
is the Mother of true Devotion? That force the people to open Idolatry? That
forebidde Lawful marriage: and license Concubines, and Common Stews? That have
divised unto them selves a strange Religion, without either Scriptures, or
Ancient^ Councels, or Old Doctors, or Example of the Primitive Church? That
have turned their backs to God^ that have deceived the people? That hau^ made
the house of God a Cave of Thieves? Whom so many Kingedomes, and Countries,
and infinite thousands of Godly people have foresaken? From whom the holy
Ghost by express words has commanded us to depart? Apocal. 18.
For so it is written, Come away from her, O my people, that ye be not
par^etakers of her sins: lest ye be also partetakers of her plagues.

VVoulde ye counsel us, M. Hardinge, to forsake the Word of Life, and the
company of al them, that have given their Bodies, and Blood for the testimony
of Christ, and to join with these?

Ye say, We may have the Example, and Company of one Staphylus, and
Balduinus, and VVicelius, that have done the like. Ye might also have added
the Example, and Company of Judas the Traitor: of Iulianus the Renegate: 2.
Petr. ^.
and of others the like, of whom S. Peter says, They are turned back, to
feed upon their vomit, as shameless Dogs: and to vvallovv again in their
mire, as filthy Swine. I will say nothing of you, M. Hardinge.
Notwithstanding ye know, whose examples ye have followed. Tertullian says
thus: Tertullian. De Fug^ in persequutione.
Christus ait, Fugite de Ciuitate in Ciuitatem. Sic enim quidam argumentabatur:
sed and ipse fugitiuus: Christ said, Flee from City to City: So there is
one that used to reason: but he him self was a Fugitive.

I consider well their dooinges, and stand in horror of their ends: Some
such of your side have died in miserable desperation, with terrible witness
against them selves, that they had wrought against their own Conscience: as it
is faithefully testified unto the world. One of these three, as it is
reported, and openly published, by them that know him best, has altered his
whole Faith seven times within the space of seventeen years: and therefore
is well resembled to the Old Apostata Ecebolius. ^ Petr. 2.
S. Peter says, It had been better for them, never to have known the way of
Righteousness, then having once received knowledge, afterward to turn
away from* the holy Commandment. Hebrae. 10.
It is an horrible thing, to fall into the Hands of the Living God. Hebrae.
6.
S. Paul says, Who so has once received the light of God, and has felt
the svveetenesse of the Heavenly gift, and has been partaker of the Holy
Ghost, and has once tasted of the good Word of God, and afterward
falls away, It is not possible for such a one, to be renewed by
repentance. I wish you in GOD, and unfeignedly, M. Hardinge, to be ware hereby.
These words, and Examples are marvelous horrible.

Although these, 2. Timoth. 2.
and such others can deny God, yet God cannot deny him self. Roman. 3.
What, says S. Paul, if certain of them be fallen away? Shall their
infidelity make frustrate the Faith of GOD? God forebidde. For GOD is True:
and al men are liers.

Of your person, as I promised, I will say nothing. Gods works be
woonderful. Roman. 9.
He calls, whom he vvil: and whom he vvil, he makes hard. He called Paul
from his horse: Elizaeus from the Plough: the Apostles from their Nets: and
the Thief on the Cross, upon the Sudden.

But if some simple one, or other, of them, whom you so discourteously have
despised, should say thus unto you: M. Harding, not long sithence ye taught us
the Gospel, even in like sort, and form, in all respects, as it is taught us
now. We remember both your words, and also the manner, and courrage of
your utterance. Ye told us of the Paper walls, and painted Fires of
Purgatory: Ye said, Rome was the sink of Sodom: ye said, your Mass was a
heap of Idolatry, and the Mystery of Iniquity: ye wisshed your voice had
benne equal with the great Belle of Oseney, that ye might ringe, as ye then
said, in the duleares of the deaf Papists. Noman was so vehement, and so
earnest, as you. The whole University, and City of Oxforde, the Cross at
Paul's, and other like places of great concourse can well record it. Ye bade
us then believe you upon your credit: and we believed you. The Prince died:
an other was placed. Suddenly ye had quite forgotten al, that ye had taught
us before: and had as suddenly learned other things, al contrary to the
former: which, ye told us, ye never knew before: and yet, with one face, and
one conscience, ye required us earnestly to believe you still, even as we had
done before. As though your bare word were the rule of our Faith* and, what
so ever you should say, true, or false, we simple people were bound of
necessity to believe you. How be it, we think, if ye tell us truth now,
then ye deceived us before: if ye told us Truth before, then ye deceive us
now. And thus it cannot be denied, but this way, or that way, ye have deceived
us. And how may we know, whether you speak, as you think, or dissemble with
us now, Jacob. 1.
as ye did before? Surely S. James shows us, That a man of double mind is
ever inconstant in all his ways.

We marueiled, how ye could atteine to all this Doctrine, specially in so
short a time: but most of al, in such perfection. For, the Scriptures are
large: and we hear say, the Councelles are sundry: the Doctors Volumes are
long, and many. So suddenly in seven days, to read them al, and so to
read them, it was not possible. You may by your eloquence persuade us many
things. But this one thing ye can never persuade us. You wanted time: it is
not credible: it was not possible. Therefore ye must needs say, ye were taught
these things, even as the Prophets were, by Revelation.

If any of al your old hearers, would thus put you in remembrance, alas what
answer could you make him?

But, it was not you, M. Hardinge: it was the time. If the time had been one,
you had still continued one. But ye were forced to know, that ye knew not: and
to think, that ye thought not: and so, to believe, that ye believed not. How
be it, S Hilarie says, Quae ex necessitate est, Fides no^ est: Forced Faith
is no Faith.

Ye say, Who so ever shall attempt to answer your Book, shall sweat in
vain. His labor shall be, as was the Commendation of Baldenesse, or of
Ignorance, or of Folly: as a floorishe, as a Smoke, as a Smooder, and as, I
know not what. The force of your Eloquence is so invincible: No Truth is hable
to withstand it. Such affiance ye would seem to have in the beauty of your
Cause.

Here, I beseech you, give me leave, once again to put you in remembrance of
the Contents, and Substance of your travails. Think you in soothe, M.
Harding, or would ye have us to think, that your maimed Allegations: your
untrue Translations: your wreasted Expositions: your Councelles never holden:
your Canons never, nor made, nor seen: your Epistles never Written: your
Amphilochius, your Abdias, your Clemens, your Leontius, your Hippolytus, and
other like fabulous pamflettes, and forgeries, so lately found out, so long
lacked, and never missed: your Additions, your Diminutions, your Alterations,
your Corruptions of the Doctors: your Contrarieties, and Contradictions
against your self: your Surmises, your Gheasses, your Dreams, your Visions:
your Elenches, your Fallacies, your seely Syllogismes, without either Mood, or
Figure, or Sequel in Reason: and, to conclude, your Untruths, so plain, so
euidente, so manifest, and so many can never be answered? Is Simple Truth
become so weak? Or, is Error, and Falshead grown so strong?

O M. Hardinge, you know right well the weakness of your side. Noman sees it
better, then your self. If you will dissemble, and say, ye ^e it not, Open your
eyes: behold your own Book: and you shall see it. You have forced the Old
Doctors, and Anciente Fathers, to speak your mind, and not their own. And
therefore they are now your Children: they are no Fathers: they are now your
Scholars: you have set them to School: they are no Doctors. You should
have brought some Truth for proof of your purpose: The World will not now be
leadde with Lies.

These be cases, not of VVitte, but of Faith: not of Eloquence, but of
Truethe: not invented, or divised by us, but from the Apostles, and Holy
Fathers, and Founders of the Church, by long succession brought unto us. We
are not the Diuisers thereof, but only the Keepers: not the Masters, but the
Scholars. Touching the Substance of Religion, we Believe, that the Anciente,
Catholic, Learned Fathers Believed: we do, that they did: we say, that
they said. And marvel not, in what side so ever ye see them, if ye see us
join unto the same. It is our great Comfort, that we see, their Faith, and
our Faith to agree in one. And we pity, and lament your miserable case, that
having of your selves erected a Doctrine, contrary to all the Anciente
Fathers, yet would thus assay to color the same, and to deceive the people
only with the names, and titles of Anciente Fathers.

S. Cyprian Cyprian. li. 1. epist. 3.
says, Lies can never deceive us long. It is Night, vn^il the Day spri^ge.
But, when the day appears, and the Sun is up, both the Darkness of the
Night, and the Theaftes, and Robberies, that in the darkness were committed,
are feign to give place. Now the Son is up: your Smooder is scattered. God
with his Truth will have the victory. The Heavens, and the Earth shall
perish: But the Word of God shall never perish.

O M. Hardinge, O fight no longer against GOD. It is hard to kike against the
spur. To maineteine a fault known, it is a double fault.

Untruth cannot be shielded, but by Untruth. Error cannot be defended, but
by Error. And the mouth, that speaks Untruth, kills the soul.

God direct our Hearts, that we be not ashamed of his Gospel: but that we
may see it, and be seen to see it. God make us the vessels of his mercy: that
we may have pity of Sion, and build up again the broaken walls of his
Jerusalem, to the Honor, and Glory of his Holy Name, Amen.

Vigilius contra Eutychem, li. 1. Haec est Fides, and professio Catholica: quam
Apostoli tradiderunt: Martyrs roborauerunt: and Fideles hucusque custodiunt.

This is the Faith, and Catholic profession: which the Apostles have
delivered: the Martyrs have Confirmed: and the Faithful keep until this day.

FINIS.

