THE ARTICLES WHICH WERE PROpounded to the Jesuits to subscribe them in the
Parliament, on Sunday the 14. of March, etc. 1626. By reason of a hurtful and
detestable Book, which is published under the name of Anthonius Santarellus.

The Sentence which the Court of Parliament has given against the Jesuits of
the College of Clemont on the 17. of March, etc. 1626.

The Censure which the Divines of the University of Paris have made against a
Book, which is instiled, ANTONIj SANTARELLI ex Societate Jesus tractatus de
Haeresi, Schismate, Apostasia, Sollicitatione in Sacramento Poenitentiae, and
de potestate summi Pontificis in his dilictis puniendis. Ad Serenissimum
Principem Mauritium a Sabaudia. Romae, apud haeredem Bartholomaei Zannettj,
1625. Superiorum permissu.

Printed at ROVAN, By Jacques Besonge, dwelling within the Court of the Palace.
M.DC.XXVI.

With License.

The Articles which were propounded to the Jesuits to subscribe them in the
Parliament, on Sunday the 14. of March, anno 1626 By reason of a hurtful and
detestable Book, which is published under the name of Anthonius Santarellus.
1. THat the King holds his State only from God, and his Sword. 2. That the
King acknowledged none in his Kingdom above him, but God only. 4. That the
Pope has no power to Excommunicate or execrate, either the King or his
Kingdom, nor discharge his Subjects from their Oath of aleagiance which they
owe unto him, be it for whatsoever cause, or occasion. 4. That the Pope has no
power over the King, neither direct nor indirect, mediate nor immediate,
compulsiue nor coercitiue, be it for whatsoever cause or occasion.
Here follows a Sentence given by the Court of Parliament of Paris on the 30*
of March, Anno 1626. by which the Book which has been printed at Rome (in
the year 1926. Instiled Anthony Santarelli de societate Jesus tractatus de
Haresi, etc. That is to say, the Treaty of Heresy, etc. written by Antonius
Santarellus of the secietie of Jesus, containing in the 30. and 31. chapter,
many propositions which are preiudicious both to the Sovereign powers of
Kings, which are ordained, and established by God, and to the rest, and
tranquillity of their States) has been condemned to be burned by the hand of
the Hangman before the Palace. It is ordained that the Provincial, three*
Rectors, and three of the ancients of the Jesuits shall be sent for to come
the next day into the Court for to be heard.

On the 17. of March 1625. have the Courts of the Great chamber of Tournelle,
and of the Edicts compelled the Jesuits by a sentence given the same day, to
make the following disadvow.
We of the Company of Jesus, which have subscribed this writing, declare that
we disadvow, and detest the wicked doctrine contained in the Book of
Santarellus, concerning the Persons, Authority, and states of Kings, which we
acknowledge that their Majesty's hold immediately from God, and we are ready
to shed our blood, and venture our lives in all occasions, for the confirmation
of this truth. We are likewise ready to subscribe the censure, which may be
made against pernicious and wicked doctrine, by the Clergy or Sorbonne, and
promise to profess never any opinions or doctrine, which shall be contrary to
the same which shall be held by the aforementioned Clergy, the Universities
of this Kingdom, or the Sorbonne.

Actum in Paris the 16. day of March 1626. Signed by Piere Cotton, Ignoce
Armand, Charles de la Tour, Iean Suffren, Francois Garassus, Francois
Gaudillon, Dionisius Petavius, Iean Fillean, Iean Brossaut, Estlienne Guerry,
Ludovicus Mairat, Iean Sirmond, Piere Royer, stienne Bauny.


The Sentence which the Court of Parliament has given against the Jesuits of
the College of Clemont on the 17. of March, anno 1626.
ON this day has the Procurator (or Kings Solicitor) General shown to the
Court, that the Deputies of the Priests and Scholars of the College of
Clemont, having been heard in the Court, it was found necessary for the good
of the Kings service, and his Royal Authority and Rites of the French Church,
to look to the matter which is taken in deliberation. The Court, the great
Chamber, and that which is called Tournelle, and the said Assembly have
ordained, and ordain, that the Provincial of the aforementioned Priests* and
Scholars of the College of Clermont within the space of three days shall
assemble the said Priests of the Colleges of the three houses which are in
this Town, and shall make them to subscribe the Censure which the Divines of
the Sorbonne have made on the 1. day of December 1625. against a Book which is
Instiled Admonitio ad Regem, that is to say, A warning given to the King, and
that they shall by deed disavow, and detest the Book of Santarellus,
containing many Propositions and Maxims which are scandalous, seditious, and
to draw the subuersions of States, and to draw the subjects of Kings, and
Sovereign Princes from their obeisance, and to induce them to attempt against
their anointed Persons: And that they shall bring thereof act in the Greffie
(or Secretary) within the space of 3. days after their foresaid assembly:
They are likewise to bring the like Acts of all the chief Rectors, and of the
six Ancients of the Colleges of their Company which are in France,
containing the approbation of the aforementioned Censure of the Sorbonne, and
the disprouing of the aforemencioned Book of Santarellus, which they are to
bring into the said Secretary or Greffie, within the space of two months
afterward. They Ordain that the Provincial and Priests of the said College
shall appoint two out of them for to write in the name of their Company within
the space of eight days, and to bring in to the Secretary the same writing
within the afore-mencioned time. For otherwise if they shall fail to do it in
the time, and it shall be expired, there shall be proceeded against them, as
being guilty of Crimen lesae Maiestatis, and perturbators of the common rest,
and tranquillity. And this sentence is to be signified by the aforementioned
Procurator General the King, to the Provincial of this City of Paris, to the
intent that he may carry himself accordingly and give satisfaction.

The 17. of March. 1626.s
The Censure which the Divines of the University of Paris have made against a
Book which is instiled, Antonij Santarelliex Societate Jesus tractatus de
Haeresi, Schismate, Apostatia, Solicitatione in Sacramento Poenitentiae, and de
potestate summi Pontificis in his dilictis puniendis. Ad Serenissimum Principem
Mauritium a Sabaudia. Romae, apud haeredem Bartholomaei Zannetti 1626.
Superiorum permissu.
IF there is any one that doubted that we are not come near to the end of the
world as the Apostle speaks, 1 Corinthians. 10.
let him consider a little these latter times, and compare them with the
former, and he shall easily perceive, that the enemy of mankind has not left
any thing behind which might serve not only to offend, but also to ruin
effectually all Policies, as well Civil as Ecclesiastical. There have bin
found some ungodly persons, which being so bold as to speak blasphemy against
heaven, have employed their Pens and swords against the Church which is the
Bride of Jesus Christ. But some wicked men considering that the Secular powers
are not without reason armed with the Sword, have by an other manner of way set
upon the policy, and have tried to extirpe, and annullate it by the means of
execrable books, executing their wicked designs more covertly by the means
of such embuscados.

The mark which Saint Judas proposes unto us to know such persons is, that
they contemn the sovereign powers, and blaspheme against the Majesty. It
were to be wished, that they rested themselves with their contemning
andspeaking ill; but it is so far from it, that to the contrary these
damnable writers, under the pretext to establish in the Church a certain
temporal power, they teach and affirm, that it is in the power of those which
govern Ecclesiastical matters, to put Kings out of their Thrones, yea, even
for small and ridiculous matters, and to substitute in their places, either
Sovereign or annual, yea, even daily Magistrates, as they shall think fit.
Therefore the Divines of the Vniuersitieof Paris, considering that they intend
by such means to ruin the Civil Policies, and especially the French
Monarchy which is governed by our Most Christian, most Gracious, and most Just
King; they to follow the steps of their predecessors have to show their
affection which they bear to his Majesty and all this Kingdom, and to
satisfy the general desire of all good persons chosen amongst other a Book
which is newly come to light, under the title of Antonij Sanctarelli Iesuitae,
de Haeresi, Schismate Apostasia, etc. in the general congregation which has
extraordinarily been kept on the sixth day of the Month of March which is last
past, appointed some Doctors which they have particularly named to read, and
examine the same Book. But seeing that it treats of many things which
concern not the matter which is now principally questioned, and have resolved
that but two chapters of the same Book should be examined, namely, the 30. and
31. of the treaty of Heresy.

So it is that on the first day of the month of April, in the year 1626.
after the Mass of the Holy Ghost, the assembly being made according to custom
in the Hall of the College of the Sorbonne, there was heard the report of the
Doctors which were appointed by the Divines, and delared that in the two
chapters which were shown unto them, are contained the following Propositions,
namely, That the Pope may punish the Kings and Princes with temporal pains,
and that he has power to Depose and bereave them of their Kingdoms and States
for crime of Heresy, and to discharge their Subjects, of their obeisance: and
that such has always bin the custom of the Church: and that not only for
heresy, but likewise for other causes, viz. for their sins, if it be
fitting: If the Princes be negligent: If they be incapable, and unprofitable:
Moreover, that the Pope has power, both over spiritual and temporal powers:
and that he has such power by Gods law. That man must believe that there is
given power to the Church and her Sovereign Pastor to punish (the Princes)
which offend against the divine and humane laws, with temporal pains: and
that especially if their crime be heresy. They have likewise said, that the
Author of this Book affirms, That the Apostles although they were in effect
subject to the secular Princes, were not by right their Subjects, as likewise
that as soon as the Majesty of the Sovereign Bishop has been established
all Princes have been subject unto him. To be brief, they have reported that
this man explicated these words of Jesus Christ, All that whatsoever you shall
bind upon earth, etc. are not only to be understood of the spiritual power,
but also of the temporal: and that he has corrupted the Text of St. Powell in
cutting off of a denial, and that he makes many Authors to speak such things
which they have never imagined or conceived: And concluding thereupon, that
both these and other things deserved very well the correction and censure of
this faculty of Divinity: The Deane having thereupon taken the matter in
deliberation, and all the opinions of the Doctors being heard, and their voices
gathered, This faculty has reproved and condemned the doctrine which is
contained in these propositions, and conclusions of the said chapters, as being
new, false, erroneous, and contrary to the word of God; alleging that it
makes odious the dignity of the Sovereign Bishop, and opened the way to
Schism; that it tends to the prejudice of the sovereign authority of
Princes, which depends only from God, and that it hinders the conversion
of unfaithful and heretical Princes; that it troubles the public peace, and
hinders the welfare of Kingdoms, States, and Commonwealths; And to be short,
that it draws and distracteth the Subjects from the obeisance which they owe
to their Sovereigns, and provoked them to factions, rebellions, and seditions,
and induces them to attempt against the lives of their Princes.

Done in the Sorbonne on the day and year as above, and viewed over again on
the fourth of April, anno, 1626. By the command of the Deane. and Doctors of
the University of Paris. P H. BOVVOT


