AN EPISTLE IN THE PERSON OF CHRIST TO THE FAITHFVLL soul, written first by
that learned LANSPERGIVS, and after translated into English by one of no small
fame, whose good example of sufferance and living, has and will be a memorial
unto his country and posterity for ever.



Imprinted at An^erpe. ^* 5 9 ^ Cum Priuilegio*

TO THE FAITHFVLL soule-louing Readers.
Do here present to thy charitable regard (most courteous and Christian
reader.) A spiritual Loue-letter, written to the faith^^ll soul, in the person
of Christ himself; ^^ich letter being first penned in Latin by (...) learned
Lanspergius, (who for his ver^es, justly deserved to be called Iustus) was
^^^erwards translated into our vulger tongue ^^some one, as it seems of no
vulger sort; ^^ose style shows him to be of so good mind (...) judgment,
(as his labors might rightly ^^e challenged better grace and fortune,) then
^^e published (as once they baue bin) without ^^face, (but not without blemish
of a multi^^e of the Printers escapes,) and that which is ^^der the^ either of
the other, to be in such sort ^^ressed, as very few and almost none of the ^^le
press came to their designed vewe. ^y ^^nes whereof I can rightly resemble
this more blessed then fortunate Epistle to Abra^ham going from the Caldeans to
Joseph, ^n. 12. 14 ^dem. 36
lea^uing his cloak and flinging away from his ma^sters wife, or to David
barefooted and bare^headed flying from the face of his Son Absa^lon. Reg. 15.
And on the other side, I can no les^^ fitly compare the wanton louewrit toies
(wit^^ which the amorous of this humorous age a^^ so much assotted) to the
Idolatrous Chald^^ans, to Joseph's unchaste and wanton mistr^^ and to the
unruly and wicked Absalon, (...) (notwithstanding all their vanities) follow^^
for a soon vading time, with all worldly f^^uours, having plenty of Patrones
to protec^ Favorites to receive and read them, and t^ many by a great many (God
knows) do m^^ too too much reckoning of them. For cer^^ if it be truly said
that in the sacred scriptu^^ and in all other good and Godly writers, G^^
talks and speaks unto the readers. Th^^ is no doubt but the devil in like
manner sp^^keth or talks with such indiscreete wa^^ timers, as do spend the
precious accompt^^ time, allotted them in this life to win h^^ (...), in
reading profane and pernicious bab^^ments, which do draw (the more is the
^^tie) an infinite company to the bottomless (...) of hell. Take therefore
upon thee I be^^ch thee (friendly Reader) for thine own ^^e, to patronize
this poor pamphlet, being as ^^ere but a handful of good and healthful
^tructions; Read them often and retain the^ ^^aies in thy remembrance, and
(which shall ^for thy greater avail.) Put them duly by all (...) means thou
may in perfect execution: ^^hall vice be loathed, and virtue beloved, (...)
self benefited, the writers and translators ^^uailes well recompensed, God
glorified, and ^our labors most happily employed.

A caveat to the Reader.
HEnce Venus idle ympes, hence, hence in haste,
Here is no place for Cupids fancies blind:
All wanton eyes and ears which are unchaste,
Are here unlike their bace content to find:
For only such as virtue have imbraste:
May here learn how to love, to live, to dye,
And after death to scale the lofty sky.
Another to the same effect.
WHo so in quiet calm of conscience clear,
Have vewde with sound advise worlds wauer^^ ioi^^
And seen the snares, the cares, the sorry cheer,
The hopes, the haps, the fears the great annoyes:
Which daily do to worldly minds befall,
And fortune glad, and sad would daunt withal*
Let them draw nere this Pamphlet to peruse,
And they shall see the laws of perfect love:
How sin to shun, and Godly life to choose,
Which done: If they the weeds of vice remove,
And ^ow the seeds of virtue here in grace,
They may well hope in heaven to have a place.
A DIALOGVE BETWIXT A Chrtstian, and Christ hanging on the Cross.
Written into Latin by Marcus Marulus, and Translated into English.


CHRISTIAN. ^Weet sovereign God, why mortal limbs,
Upon thee did thou take:
and slyding down from top of sky,
^in earth thy dwelling make.

CHRIST. That earthly man, whom error foul,
had fondly led a stray:
By me might learn how be to heaven,
might take the ready way.

CHRISTIAN. What forced thee, who always were,
from every sin so pure:
Such grievous pains, and death with all,
so gladly to endure.

CHRIST. The love I bare to man that him,
whom sin had clogged so:
Our blood (by clearing well) might make,
above the stars to go.

CHRISTIAN. Why be thy arms so spread abroad,
and s^trched out so far?
And what is the cause (sweet Christ) thy feet,
so close conjoined are.

CHRIST. Cause every where from every coast,
I diverse nations call:
And in one faith, with steadfast league,
I do conioyne them all.

CHRISTIAN. But why with bended ne^ke do thou,
so bend thy self likewise:
And so on earth Fast fixed cast,
thy countenance and eyes.

CHRIST. I monish men, that they may shun,
with peuish pride to swell:
And humbled necks, with sacred yoke,
to daunt and govern well.

CHRISTIAN. Why is thy body naked so?
and wherefore is thy hue:
So dry and lean? and all thy limbs
so stiff and starcke to view?

CHRIST. I would that riot of the world,
should hateful seem to thee:
And that thou would feel hunger, thirst,
and pore estate with me.

CHRISTIAN. But whitish veyle thy slender loins,
does compass round about:
Does hidden part admonish ought,
resolve I pray this doubt.

CHRIST. Learn thou hereby that bodies chaste,
do greatly me delight:
And that I loath that lawles love
disclose foul things to sight.

CHRISTIAN. What do thy blows, bespettinges, taunter,
and cruel scourgings tell:
With Crown of thor^es, and (of the Cross)
the other torments fell.

CHRIST. That he must suffer each offense,
and offer no annoy:
Which quiet peace above the stars,
desires to enjoy.
Life is but short, the labor light,
most wished is the pay:
The benifit is infinite,
which never shall decay.
But now if great rewards do not,
at all with some prevail:
Yet let them fear the banishment,
of ever during Gayle.
The quenchlesse ^ire, the ugly dark,
which never shall abate:
The gnawing worm for aye, for aye,
the bitter wretched state.
The griesly groans, the sorrows sharp,
the woeful weal-aday:
The endless plaints, the cursed ill,
which never will away.
For such pains rest, for those whom now,
lewd lust (which lasts small while)
Enjoy, and with false flattering snares,
deceitfully beguile.
To greedy wretches vaunting wealth,
to flouthfull s^uggards case*
And cursed Venus chamber work,
the wanton crew to please.
Sweet wine and dainty cates to such,
as in their panch delight:
Pomp to the proud, and spoils to such,
as hardy are in fight.
The hapless route enticed thus,
with these decaitfull trains:
Mindlesse of saving health do fall,
to utter wrack and pains.
And neither hear my counsel good,
nor seek to follow me:
And to conclude fear not my doom,
how sharp so ere it be.
That dreadful doom, when ere at last,
that dismal day befall:
That day of wrath, that day of wrake,
and hugie storm with all.
When of the shaken firmament,
the hideous clashing sound:
Shall trouble stars with tumblings swift,
and dash their globes on ground.
When as the moon with blood-red lamp,
the people shall affright:
And globe of Sun draw in his beams
depriving men of light.
When all shall dread, and all the world,
at once shall shaken be
So as the quiers Angelical,
men may amazed see.
Fire shall consume the world with noise,
and crackling flash of flame:
And earth and sea, and burning lamp,
of fiery lump shall frame.
Straight ways with dreadful majesty,
with power and virtue great.
Come I, and on a glistering cloud,
will sit in indgment seat:
There many thousand shall of Saint^,
roundly inuiron me:
Yea there of glorious Angels bright,
shall many thousands be.
Forthwith the Trumpet from above,
shall gastlie noise sound out:
Renting the earth, and raising up,
the low infernal rout.
The by and by shall all the dead,
all up together rise:
Whom earth so great, in womb so wide,
did heretofore comprise.
The multitude revived shall,
before my throne be pressed:
Expecting there, with trembling fear,
my dreadful doom and hest.
For nothing shall be vndiscust,
nor hid: nor secret ought:
No not the thing which any have,
committed in their thought.
There shall desert receive reward,
the life which lives for aye:
Or else the death which never more,
shall have a dying day.
Go too then wretches whom as yet,
lewd error fettereth close
Whilst that you may of fettered feet,
the gives and chains unloose.
Watch well that deadly sleep do not,
your waking eyes oppress:
Lest endless day of latest time,
you slumbring do possess.
Behold with how swift course the times,
do slip and slide away:
And how the flying hour admits,
no manner let or stay.
Happy is he who still his life,
does well and Godly spend:
And thinks withal it shall forthwith,
and in a moment end.

Conuertanter qui oderunt Syon.
THE TABLE OF THE Principal titles in this Epistle of our Savior Jesus,
containing the chief and speciallest matters thereof.
1 AN Epistle or exhortation of Jesus Christ to the soul that is devoutly
affected. Folio. 1 2 A rule of spiritual life. fol. 23 3 How we must mortefie
all unlawful desires and wicked inclinations, fol. 28 4 How a man ought to
govern his tongue. fol. 32 5 Of the contemplative life, which is wholly
withdrawn from the cares and affairs of this this present world. fol. 35 6
How we ought to judge no man. fol. 38 7 How we ought to fight against vice.
fol. 43 8 How we must fly the occasion of temptation. fol. 67 9 When the
spiritual temptations are to be conquered. fol. 70 10 How we ought to take
heed of envy. fol. 77 11 How we must fly singularity. fol. ibid. 12 Of the
honor, reverence and worship which we ought to exhibit to the mother of God
fol. 79. 13. Of sencible devotion. fol. 84 14. How we must prepare our selves
when we come to receive the blessed Sacrament. fol. 88. 15 Of discretion. fol.
94. 16 How we ought in all things to conform our selves unto Christ. fol.
100. 17 Of poverty. fol. 102 18 Of humility. fol. 107 19 How humility is to
be obtained. fol. 109 20 How we ought not to care for men's judgments. fol. 121
21 Of obedience. fol. 129 22 How we must mortefie our own will and desire.
fol. 137 23 Of the consideration of God providence. fol. 148 24 How we must
bear adversity. fol. 156 25 Of wanting of consolation. fol. 169 26 Of inward
quietness and meekenes of heart. fol. 172 27 Of the love which we should bear
toward our neighbor. fol. 174 28 Of the purity of the heart. fol. 178 29 How
we ought to refer all the good things we receive, to the goodness of God. fol.
185 30 How divine inspirations ought to be observed, and the grace of God not
neglected. fol. 192, 31 How we must employ the gifts of God which we receive,
to the benefit of others. fol. 199 32 Of poverty in spirit. fol. 204 33 Of the
love of God. fol. 207 34 Of the praise of God. fol. 222 35 Of the exercise of
the love and praise of God. fol. 233 36 Of the transformation of a man. fol.
242 37 The conclusion of the Epistle. fol. 252 1 Two rules of direction for
man's life. fol. 256 2 An instruction or rule for such as be weak and
imperfect, and but new beginners in Gods service. fol. 264 3 An other
instruction or rule for such as with a more fervent zeal and spirit do
earnestlye labor to attain to perfection. fol. 268 4 Verses for helping a
man's memory, wherein are expressed the principal and speciallest points of
those good lessons which are comprehended in these rules fol. 280 ^ A very
short exercise of love to God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy
Ghost, the most blessed Trinity, and one true God. fol. 286 ^ An Hymn of the
life and passion of our Savior Christ, made after the manner of the Alphabet.
fol. 29 7 A Hymn wherein the praise of all crea^ture, are offered up unto the
Creator. fol. 30
FINIS.
AN EPISTLE OR EXhortation of Jesus Christ to the soul, that is devoutly
affected toward him, wherein are only contained certain divine inspirations,
which will teach a man how to know himself, and instruct him in the
perfection of true Piety.
JESUS CHRIST THE Savior of the world, and King of heaven and earth, being
ready to embrace those that earnestly and truly desire his grace, with his
merciful and fatherly arms, wishes to his Spouse, that is, to the soul
which loves him (for whose sake he willingly suffered death that he might
unite her to himself) all perfect and true felicity.
O My dearly beloved Daughter I have spoken to thy heart by secret
inspirations, but thou would never give ear unto my motions, wherefore
since thou did care little to answer me, much less to obey me, I am
enforced by the great love I bear thee, to write unto thee, that at the least
thou may be content to read what thou did neglect to hear, and by
reading both better bear away my exhortation, and more deeply imprint it in
thy mind. For that cha^ity which moved me to offer my self, not only to all
danger, but even to death it self, for thy sake, will not suffer me to leave
any thing undone that may tend to the furtherance of thy salvation: And
although thou do not in any sort requite my love, because thy heart is
inclined to outward vain, and transitory things, and so by that means too
much affected and addicted to my creatures: Yet cannot I withdraw that
charity, wherewith I am always ready to embrace thee, which exceeds the love
of any father or mother toward their children, or of any earthly Parent
whatsoever: For I am not only willing to grant thee my grace and favor, but
desirous to accept thee for my spowse, and will daily enrich thee with greater
and better blessings, than any that this world can yield thee, if thou will
follow my counsel. But for that thou have contemned me when I came to visit
thee, and have not harkened to my inspirations, thou art become by this evil
custom of thine so much distracted in thy soul, and so far beside thy self,
as thou art neither able to conceive what thou have lost, nor yet the misery
wherein thou art. And the less that thou do bewail and lament thine own
misery, the more does thy case deserve to be pitied and lamented. What shall
I say O my daughter? thou should be an example to others, and thy life an
instruction to those that go astray: the sweet savor of thy good
conversation, ought to be a wholesome medicine for the curing of such as are
weakened with infection of sin, and thy words as a consuming fire, to inflame
the hearts of those that hear them: But now thou art thy self so corrupted
with the desire of chidish vanities, so busied with a multitude of unprofitable
matters, and so subject to many hurtful passions, as thou art distracted in
thy soul, and have it so much polluted with filthiness, as it is possessed
with wandering thoughts and vain imaginations; Self love does as yet reign in
thee, and till thou mortefie that, thou can never enter into my bed, or be
partaker of my delights: So as thou which ought to teach others, stand
now in need of being taught thy self. I write not this to the end, that I
mean to reject thee, but because I would let thee know how far thou have
erred, and am desirous that thou should understand thy own loss and danger;
and I do not only allure thee, but I do also prick thee forward to return from
thence, home again unto me.

Wheresoever thou art, whatsoever thou do, or whether so ever thou go, my
eye is never off on thee, looking and searching into all thy acts, all thy
motions, and all the secret intentions of thy heart.

And if at any time I spy in any of these the least unfaithfulness to me, who
am most faithful, I am justly offended and angry; for I did suffer not only
with all patience, but even with all willingness, many despites, reproaches,
griefs, and torments for thy sake, O my most dear daughter, to pass over in
silence all the pains and torments which I did endure, tell me I pray thee,
what man would have suffered so many and so great disgraces for his friend, as
I did for thee? And yet I endured them when thou were mine enemy, when thou
dadst done no good at all, when thou did neither love nor know me, yea
before thou were borne did I love thee, and suffer these grievous and
innumerable torments for thee. Why then will thou turn away thy self from me?
why do thou seek quietness without me? thou art sickly, and yet wilt wander
abroad: If I forsake thee, who will receive thee? who can cure thee? Alas my
daughter how far art thou deceived? whether soever thou turnest thine eyes, or
upon whatsoever thou do fix thy mind; yet shall thou find no peace, no
joy, nor any rest, but in me only. Thy senses deceive thee, and they which
seem to love thee do abuse thee; and thou also do deceive thy self, when
thou refusest a sovereign medecin that would help thee, and receiuest rank
poison, which will kill thee. Alas my daughter, alas my spouse; I know how
often, beautiful and goodly things in show, but vain things in deed, (which
when they profess most love and faith unto thee, are most ready to beguile
thee) do allure thy senses, and draw thy affection, and how often also they
deceive thee with their snares, and lead thee from me with their guiles. O
dear daughter, remember that thou art a spouse, and let not the love of any
other thing but only thy husband enter into thy heart. Desire nothing but his
favor, that thou may be beautiful in his eyes, and please him, and be for
ever beloved of him. I stand desiring thee, and waiting for thee, I with that
thou wou^dest return unto me with all thy heart, and forsaking all these
vanities, apply thy self wholly to devotion, and give thy self daily to
humility, that I might then vouchsafe to talk with thee in more familiar sort
and rejoice thy mind, with far better and purer delights, than those wherein
thou have lain drowned.

I require no multitude of works at thy hands, wherewith to trouble thee, but
a chaste, faithful and pure heart, which may seek to please me, and not delight
it self. I desire a sincere love, and a fervent devotion, that is a ready and
forward will to honor and obey me, and a sincere and pure intention in
performing of all those things that I command. I with that thy heart should be
clear and free from any other love whatsoever, and if thou would present
it to me in this ^orte, I wound indue thee with greater consolations and far
more excellent blessings, than either thou dare presume to desire, or art
able to conceive. I am a husband that is bashful, and therefore will never come
unto thee, when I see thee busied with other matters altogether vain and
unprofitable. When I come I must find thee alone, for I stand knocking at thy
door, being very weak, and quaking for cold, even in the same form that I
carried when I was unloosed from the Pillar, where being bound, I was whipped
and wounded for thy sake, and this I do, that I may make an impression of my
self in thy mind, wounded as I was, and that thou embracing me with the arms
of thy love, I may unite thee unto me, and inflame thee with my wounds, that
do yet boil with the fervent heat of that charity which I carry toward
thee. Oh if thou would acknowledge me for thy husband, and love me as thou
ought to do, would thou not both quickly draw me into thy heart, and also
before I came, with a most desirous will, attend and long for my coming, and
would thou nor then cloth the naked, and give fire to warm him that is a
cold, that thou might be made worthy to receive again the chaste
imbrasings of my love, and to inioye the sweet taste of my spirit?

How much would it please me that thou had a certain and firm trust in
me, and were as willing to be with me, as I am desirous to be with thee,
seeing all my delight consists in being with the Children of men. So should
the fortitude of thy mind, be daily augmented, and the true sweetness of thy
soul continually increased. But this trust in me can never be without a
distrust in thy self, and both these graces, are only obtained by poverty of
spirit, which is a most precious Jewel. But I know well enough what does
withold thee from attaining to this virtue, thy stomach is ouerlaide with
the love of this world, and by that means infected with such an extreme
coldness, as it makes thee to loath and abhor the word of God, which is the
food of thy soul. But if thou desire to increase in virtue, and to strengthen
thy mind with the following of that course, thou must receive the word of God
greedily, digest it perfectly, and still retain the nourishment of that
within thee. The reason therefore that thou can not thirst after my justice,
is because thou art already filled with the cold meat of worldly conversation
and vanity, and that is the cause also why these things do delight thee, which
savor neither of piety nor devotion. Simplicity of heart is loathsome unto
thee, and the exercise of holy meditations, thou accou^test as time lost. Thy
mind being laden with the cares of this world, cannot ascend up unto me.
For although thou raisest it by force for a while: yet it presently falls
down again into her earthly cogitations: so as thy soul being distracted,
thy heart inconstant, thy mind wavering, and thy desires ensnared with the
love of worldly pleasure: thou art troubled when thou art awake, and not quiet
when thou art a sleep.

And when thou lie in this misery, O unwise daughter, then thou complainest
that thou art dry and barren, without my consolation. If this did happen unto
thee, by the means of my providence (as it has to many other of my friends,)
and not by thine own negligence: there were no reason why the wanting of this
sensible grace of mine should molest thy soul. But seeing thy own sloth and
negligence is the cause that thou lie languishing in this barren drienes: If
thou desire my consolation, if thou wish for my coming, if thou do long to
be united unto me, thou must forsake all those vanities, that do please thee
without me, and only study to serve me, indeuouring continually to perform
those things, which agree best with my liking, and are most pleasing unto me,
and making this thy cheifest care, thou must labor with all thy force and
might, to see my will as nere as thou can, in all creatures fulfilled.
Moreover in doing hereof, let thy whole study be to content me, and to rely
only upon me. So shall thou find my presence more often with thee, and by
it, thy spirit shall be as it were made dru^ck with joy, thy conscience shall be
comforted, thy heart quieted, and thou shall then possess the perfect rest of
most sweet contemplation. Oh if thou had once come into that wine Celler, out
of doubt thou would even with a certain thirstinesse, more earnestly desire
to be there, and more often. But no man can enter into it, saving such as
desire me above al things, love me above all things, esteem me above al
things, and make acount of me as all in all. For he that finds no other
consolation but in me, he that thinks himself unworthy to receive any
consolation from me, nay he that desires affliction so much in this world as
he takes himself to be wro^ged, when I send him any consolation at all, and
does as willingly accept it at my hands, when I leave his soul barren without
any comfort, as when I replenish it with my consolation, to whom all joy
without me is a torment, having his mind wholly fixed upon me, and his desire
only bent to serve me. Such me^ as these be, I say are my special friends, at
whose door I do freely knock, and willingly enter: these are the men to whom
I gladly offer my self, and impart my secrets. These men am I wont to visit
in sundry sorts, as seems fittest in my indgment, by stirring the^ up in
such sort as is meet and agreeable for the devotion and love which they bear
me.

Sometime I present my self to the eyes of their souls, wounded, naked, and
tormented in all my members, and that they may find greater comfort in the
love they bear me, I show the^ my wounds, to the end that they may touch them,
bath them, cleanse them, kiss them, and embrace them: and although their
devotion in this behalf may seem to worldly men ridiculous because they know
not what it means, yet is it most acceptable unto me and profitable to them.
For then I begin to forgette all the pains which I have suffered, and also all
the faults which such a spouse of mine has committed against me, and do wholly
bend my self to comfort her with my spirit, and to lighten her with my grace.

And although I stand not in need of any thing, yet I make account I have
gained much, when I find so great fideliue in my spouse, as she loves me
better than either her self, or all the world besides. But unthankfulness
does offend me (...) much as fidelity does content me, and is of all things
most grievous unto me, because by it they seek to renew (as much as lies in
them) the griefs of my Passion, and vexations of my mind, seeing I perceive
that all is lost, which I did of an vnspeake by charity endure for them.
Therefore, whether outward affliction of thy body, or inward affliction of
thy mind happen unto thee, seek not for external comforts, which are nothing
worth, but in all thy distress fly unto me, and make no complaint of thy
grief unto any man but to me only. For what greater help can men yield thee,
than in giving thee fair words? If thou have a Ghostly Father or Confessor, I
forbid thee not to disclose it unto him, but I exhort thee to lay open before
him the secrets of thy heart, and to direct thy self in all respects,
according to his counsel, without yielding any way to satisfy the fury of
thy Passion, or laboring for some eternal comfort, or boasting before others,
of those vexations which thou do suffer. Declare to me in secret, that which
thou would complain of before men, committing thy self and all things to
my providence being quiet without any care or perturbation of thy mind. Thou
shall find (believe me) a happy peace in thy soul, and great consolation by
this course at my hands, although not such peradventure at all times as thou
do imagine or wish for, yet such as may most of all conform thee to my will
and pleasure.

Oh if thou were taught and accustomed by thine own experience in all worldly
things which trouble thee, to have thine eye only fixed upon me, to fly unto
me for refuge, to hope in my mercy with a patient expecting of the same, to
rely upon me, and withal to conceive with how fatherly and loving a mind, I
send thee adversity for thy benifite: there should be no tribulation so great,
that thou would not with all gladness and willingness accept, yea and prefer it
before all joy or consolation whatsoever. For albeit thou should receive no
other commodity by it, yet this were sufficient to comfort and rejoice thy
mind, that it is a fulfilling of my will. If my will be done, it does always
please the faithful soul, more than the receiving of any other benifite,
although in truth my will be never but to do that which may be most for her
commodity.

It will also help thee very much for retaining a quiet mind in all adversity,
to lay before thy eyes the acts and miseries of my life, and evermore to carry
within thee, a lively represe^tation thereof. For if thou do imprint this in
thy mind, it will make thee think all bitter things sweet. Meditate therefore
at all times upon my torments, and desire at my hands continually with sighs
and tears, that I may vouchsafe to make a strong and an effectual impression
in thy heart of my wounds and passion, that thou may see me crucified at
all times, and in all places, with a heart that does even suffer with me, and
let the lively representation hereof, banish from thy soul all other
imaginations whatsoever. If thou return in this sort from all outward to
inward things, and shall dwell within thine own self, if thou behold in thy
heart my grievous torments, and my self crucified, if thou hear me cry when I
was replenished with all sorrow and bitterness, and not relieved with any
consolation from my father: My God, my God, why haste thou forsaken me: thou
shall (being inflamed with the virtue of my passion) have a desire to immitate
me, to suffer for me, and to serve me without any comfort at all, in contempt
and resignation of thy self. They that serve me with this mind, and are
united unto me for mere love only, and continue faithful unto me without
any other respect but to please me, and to have my will wholly fulfilled in
the^, these men I say, are my faithfullest and most special friends. And in
what drines or desolation so ever they may seem to be, and with what
temptations so ever they may seem to be overwhelmed, and as it were cast off
and forsaken of me, yet in truth they are still mine, because they fight
manfully at their own charge, for my cause against the whole army of wicked
temptations, which do continually assault men in the welfare of this present
world, and will not reuoult from my Camp although I sometime strike and punish
them.

But I do not altogether leave the^, for seeing they have conquered all their
passions, and renounced all their own appetites to please me, and for my sake:
yea and have even altogether forsaken themselves, and given themselves only to
me, in being subject wholly to my will: I cannot hold, but I must also power my
self into them, and both fill, nourish and possess their souls with my
comfort, which is a hundred times better, purer and sweeter, then that worldly
pleasure which they have forsaken. They cannot receive this (as I have often
told thee, and will not cease to beat into thy mind) which do seek or
accept of any foreign comfort, that proceeds not from me, or is not in me.
For my consolation is wonderful sweet, and bestowed only upon such as will
admit me no other. It is also most pure and therefore cannot be mixed with
any consolation that is derived from my cretures. But why do I so often repeat
these things unto thee? Truly I do it to make thee more wise, watchful and
circumspect, and to the end that thou should not be snared with these corrupt
and earthly delights, nor yet be brought by them to forget me, seeing I can
never forget thee, although that thy salvation only depends upon my
providence, and not mine upon thee in any sort. I wish also that thou
should be always with me, and by being with me, enjoy all perfect
felicity. But why do not I fulfill this? marry even for thy good, that thou
may increase in virtue, to the great profit of thy soul, and thy greater
glory. For thou may by my grace daily increase in goodness, and be made
every moment more rich in merit. Wherefore seeing this is so, how foolish do
thou think them to be, and how much to be lamented, which do spend the most
precious time of grace that I have allotted unto them, not only, not to my
honor and their own profit, but to the heavier agrauating of their damnation
by wicked life? Oh that thou knew, how much thou might increase in the
virtues of thy soul, and in merit by my grace every hour, and also how dear
a evil time is, and how damnable the loss thereof: For thou would then out
of doubt take care with more diligence that the smallest moment should not pass
thee vainly, nor yet slip away without reaping some benefit to thy soul.
With the Sun rising every day, there shall then arise a new joy into thy
mind, that I had granted thee the commodity of that day, and by it so much
longer space to honor and serve me.

Think therefore, and say every hour unto thy self, our Lord which loves
me has vouchsafed to give me this hour, this moment, and has prolonged the
course of my life hitherto, that I should even now begin to turn unto him, and
endeavor my self to please him.

O my Daughter, ever above all things carry this opinion, that the present
moment wherein thou live is the first time, wherein thou beginnest to do
well, and contemn all that thou haste done before as nothing worth, What
occasion soever, what business soever, what idle time soever, or what other
things soever, either may or shall happen unto thee, use them in such sort as
thou employ them to my glory, and convert them to some benefit of thy own
soul. But this in this behalf, is sufficient. For I have hitherto stirred
thee up, and excited thee to depart from all vanities, with shutting the gates
of thy senses against them, and to return unto me with a recollected and quiet
mind. It remains now that I add unto this, as it were a rule to teach thee
how to live godly, which I have heard thee, by the inspiration of my grace,
desire often at my hands. For there remains as yet bashfulnes in thee (which
I like well) and which makes thee ashamed in the opening of thy infirmities,
faults, errors, and negligences: and also grieved that thou have this long time
heretofore, and do even at this present, so unworthily vsurp the name of my
spouse. But seeing thou desire to return into my grace, there is nothing
that I likewise do more affect or desire. For what other joy have I in being
among you, then to receive every sinner into my favor: how much more then do
I desire or rather long (as may in reason be justly thought) to bring my spouse
home unto me, when she goes astray, amongst the berries and thorns of worldly
vanities. Nay I am so desirous to recall thee, as I will prescribe thee a
plain path, wherein (if thou walk) thou shall be sure to follow my steps,
and never wander again out of thy way.

Come therefore unto me, and by thy return, procure me a new joy, such as
delight in most, and desire ever to possess.

A rule for spiritual life.
Mark well (my daughter) for since I see thee give better ear, and apply thy
mind with more diligence to carry away my speeches: I will proceed in
declaring these things unto thee, which I require at thy hands: continue
therefore attentive, and return now wholly unto me, being ready in all
things to obey me. Put on a new mind, and hear what I expect that thou
should do, and what thou art not able of thy self to do, let prayer assist
thee to fulfill. Seek to obtain by prayer whatsoever is necessary for thee,
saying: Deliver me from my enemies, O Lord, I fly unto thee for succor, teach
me to do thy will, because thou art my God: leave me not O Lord my God, and
depart not from me, neither yet despise me, which art the God of my salvation.

Incline thy self to help me O Lord, the God of my safety. Behold I desire
to return unto thee, draw me after thee, and never suffer me again to be
separated or withdrawn from thee. O my daughter, hearken now to that which I
gave in commandment to one of my servants long ago, and endeavor thou also
to fulfill it. I said unto him.

Use ever silence in thy tongue,
And have compunction in thy mind:
Be humble, courteous, meek and mild,
If thou in me wilt comfort find.
The same words in the same form do I speak unto thee, having made it in the
true measure of a verse (although thou shall have less need of a measure to
direct thee when thou art come to this perfection. But I do not now deliver it
unto thee, as framed in measure to please thine ears, but as a foueraigne
medicine to cure thy soul. I have comprehended al those things, which are
necessary for thee briefly in this verse, that thou may more easily
retain them in thy memory, and more often meditate upon them in thy mind.
For my will is, that thou should altogther apply thy endeavor, to have a
holy compunction for thy sins, and that leaving all other business aside,
thou should only attend to a continual and eternal conversation, and
remaining weaned from all other pleasures, to be recollected into thine own
self, and so to continue always free from any distraction or perturbation
whatsoever. Be silent in thy tongue, and pure from all filthiness in thy heart.
Be humble and meek, and remember to show thy self both courteous and gentle in
all thy behavior toward all sorts of men. First of all, diligently examine
thy self, and look most nearly and narrowly into thy self, that thou
may know what is in thee, which is an impediment to thee, for the receiving
of my grace, that is to say, what is in thee which does displease me, that
thou may correct and amend it. Consider to what things, and by what means
thou art tempted, and where thou see thy self most sharply and oftnest
tempted, there seek to resist them with greatest diligence, and most earnest
endeavor. Where thou find thy self weaker, there appile more forcible
remedies quickly to vanquish them. Where thou perceiuest any occasion which
moves thee to sin, or not to profitte in this spiritual course, there cut off
that scandal and impediment from thee.

Have special care to present unto me, a pure heart: free from all
uncleanness, and never infected with any inordinate love to my creatures, nor
occupied with any unnecessary business in this world, and labor evermore
withal that thou art able, wholly to cleave unto me, and still to rely upon
me. The cause why I do exhort thee, to a continual exercise of compunction,
is that by it thou may keep thy self free from foreign or wandering
thoughts, which thou can never attain unto, except thou be recollected in
thy mind. Neither can thou come to be thus recollected, except thou lead an
internal and solitary life, private to thy self and withdrawn from al
worldly affairs. Wherefore mark with a watchful eye those vices,
concupisences and wicked inclinationes which reign in thee, that thou may
never cease with all thy might to persecute them, and willingly to mortefie in
thy self all inordinate affections.

Many complain that they are unapt for contemplation and spiritual life, but
their own negligence and sloth is the cause: for that they will strain
themselves no whit to conquer their old man, that they may mortefie all lusts
and concupisences, but do nourish, cherish, and favor the^ which they ought
to persecute, and root out of their minds. Therefore they carry always about
them a heavy burden of unquiet thoughts, filled with labor and vexation. but if
thou desire to enjoy me, have no peace at all with any vice.

Banish from thee all unprofitable discourses, cares, and businesses which
yield no benefitte at all to thy soul. And never apply thy mind to the
thinking of any other matter, nor trouble thy self with any other affairs,
but such as tend to my honor, the salvation of thy own soul, or the commodity
of thy neighbor, that thou being thus alone and in this sort retired within
thy self, may be possessed with me, who will never be matched with any
other companion.

How we must mortefie all unlawful desires and wicked inclinations.
VOuchsafe not to hear, much less to read any news, tidings, or pleasant
Histories, which serve not to procure a compunction in thy heart, but to delight
a curious mind, and afterward do leave thy soul corrupted and infected with
sundry imaginations and vain desires. Fly any special familiarity, lyking or
conversation with worldly men, that is to say, with those that love these
earthly pleasures, yea enter not into any league of familiarity, good will,
and special conversation with any such man, whose words and deeds do not
edefie thee in this virtuous course, but avoid his company, and mortefie all
sensual love in thy self, toward any of my creatures. Have such a
commandment over thy belly, as that thou allow it only necessary things,
and that also not for the pleasing of thy taste, but for the susteining of
nature, and for my sake, that by this mean thou may not decay, but increase
in abillitie to serve me. Moreover, never receive any thing to delight thy
taste which is not necessary and profitable for thy body, and especially
when thou may observe this without the breach of brotherly charity. Root
out also from thy mind after this sort, and fail not both to fly and abhor
all pleasant things, all voluptuous things, and all such things as seem
sweet to thy carnal appetite, as (far as discreation will permit thee, which
does quallefie all extremity ever having a respect to charity, to infirmity,
to the necessity of nature, and to every other thing that is convenient) and
evermore take a special care that in this government of thy self, thou do
persecute concupiscence, but not destroy nature. And as touching those things
which are necessary, and yet cannot be received without some delight. It is
sufficient for thee if thou do not seek that delight but in respect of me,
that is to obey me, who have committed the care of thy body to thy self to
refreshe the infirmity of thy nature, so as thou take this delight not as a
thing which thou wishest for, but as a thing that can not be separated from
that which is necessary for man's use, admitting it only for necessity, and
not desiring it for pleasure. Therefore to be short, have such a care and watch
over all thy senses, as they may not move or turn themselves to any vain or
unprofitable things. See nothing, touch nothing, know nothing, but that which
may be profitable for thy soul and my glory.

Wherein soever a man does follow his own appetite, seeking to satisfy it of
a proper and self will, that is to say because he will have it so, or because
he has a desire thereunto, he must needs offend, for he that desires any
thing in this sort, whether it be in meat, drink, or any other thing to
refresh nature, or else in seeking the delight of some spiritual consolation,
it cannot be done without sin, because there is in it a particular care to
please his own fancy, which does divide and separate him clean from me.
Suffer nothing therefore to grow in thee, or to be nourished by thee, which
carries any respect to satisfy thy own liking, or to content thy own will,
although it may seem to have an apparaunce of goodness: But thou must die to
all love of thy self, and all desire of following thy own appetite, that a
naked, a simple and a pure charity without mixture of any other thing
whatsoever, and a chaste intention to please me, may stir, move and procure
thee to all the thoughts thou think, to all the words thou speak, and
to all the works thou do.

How a man ought to govern his tongue.
Have as watchful a care as thou may over thy tongue, and restrain it from
all liberty, suffer it to utter nothing, but that which is necessary, and
well thought of before, and in as few words as it is possible for thee to
comprehend the same, with all modesty and meekenes, and without any great
noise or loud speaking, flying, and cutting off by all the means thou art
able, any thing that may either occasion or procure thee to speak.

Abstain from all words, that be any way hurtful, backbyting, grudging,
unclean or contentious, as from a mortal sin. Having a special regard to
keep thy self from all jesting, lightness, immoderate laughing, and idle
words, and be so careful in this behalf, as neither thou use them thy
self, nor yet hear them of any other, as far as it lies in thy power to
avoid it.

And to the end thou may be free from that great vice of backbiting,
resolve thou in thine own heart, never to speak any thing of those which are
absent, but such things as thou art sure do tend to the edifiyng of men's
souls. Ever have some mean ready at hand to break off that talk (if there
be any speech offered of those that be absent) by bringing aptly in a discourse
of some other matter, before there be any word uttered either in the
backebiting or dispraising of them.

Take a most dilligent and heedfull care that thou speak not thy self, nor
suffer any other, to speak of those which have offended thee, or to ward
whom thou find in thy heart no perfect charity, because men may easily fall
by that mean, into the vice of backbiting, while they speak to please thy
humor by flattering of thee and reproching of those that thou do mislike.
Therefore never hearken to any accusation that is made of them which are thine
enemies, or such as thou do not love.

Endeavor as much as thou can to remain always in silence (I mean not
only the silence of thy tongue, but especially the silence of thy heart) so as
there may not be heard within thy soul, any sound of unlawful concupiscence,
any noise of unquiet passions, or any troublesome stir of wicked affections,
and inordinate inclinations: Neither suffer thou unprofitable discourses to
arise in thine own heart, with any vain fancies, fond imaginations, or the
deceitful forms of such things as thou shall have there represented unto
thee: but even as if thou had forgotten all other things whatsoever, and
were out of this world: in quietness and silence speak to me only, and harken
unto me wholly.

Never strive with any man in words, neither seek stiffly to maintain thy own
mind or opinion, suffer every man to have his saying, if thou can not
dissuade him by gentle words, or do him good by some mild exhortation. And to
conclude, resolve thy self neither to dispute in words, neither yet reason in
thine own thoughts against him, but refer all things unto me, and live thou in
all silence of thy tongue, and in all quietness of thy heart.

Of the contemplative life which is wholly withdrawn from the cares and
affairs of this present world.
FLy the society and ^amiliarity of men, and when thou art not otherwise
enforced by necessity for my honor, or for thy neighbors salvation, be
always alone, for when thou art alone, then will I reveal my self unto thee.
Solitarines, silence, purity and simplicity of heart, do prepare a place for
me to dwell in. Keep thy self therefore withdrawn from all cretures, in
silence and quietness of heart. Neither vouchsafing to consent, nor yet to harken
to the unlawful appetits of thy will, the wandering cogitations of thy mind, or
the vain desires of thy heart. For thy nature (I know) is ever inclined to
delight in consolation, and is always occupied, sometime with out labor in thy
body, and sometime with inward care in thy mind seeking consolation in my
creatures, whereby thou come to be many and sundry ways distracted. Remember
thou therefore to strive with all thy force against all thy sensual and
carnal inclinations, and keep thy self alone, being withdrawn from all
creatures, and remaining ever both in outward solitarines of thy body, and
inward contemplation of thy mind, as far as discreation which must be thy
guide, obedience to thy superiors, and charity to thy neighbors will permit
thee. Take care also as much as conveniently thou may, not to give others by
thy example, any occasion of often meetings, or common familiarity, because it
does very much hinder the spiritual course of life, which is never so free
from any impediment, nor so apt to profit it self, as when it is separated
from all sorts of men, and all kind of business: yet howsoever thou shall
chance to be, either living amongst men, or sequestered from the society of
men, remain with me always alone, recollected within thy own soul, and
withdrawn not only from all other creatures, but even from thine own self,
that is from all liking to procure thine own pleasure, from all care, to seek
thine own commodity, and from all desire to serve thine own appitite.
Persuade thy self that thou art left alone in this world, and haste nothing to
^are for but me, and therefore think of no other matter, and deal with no
other creature, but with me only.

Examine not other men's actions, and trouble not thy self with other men's
affairs, if thou see that which is good embrace it, and let it edify thee:
if thou see that which is evil, leave it, but give no judgment of it.

Beware of observing, marking, examining, or judging of such men's speeches,
actions and manners, as cannot by their holy and good example edify thee: Nay
be so far from doing this, as desire never to hear or understand them, but
rather seek by all means not to know them at all. And if thou shall happen by
any chance to hear them, root them out of thy heart, and endeavor to forget
them as soon as thou can: especially if thou stand in danger by that
means to offend in the breach of charity, or to conceive a wo^se opinion of
those parties.

How we ought to judge no man.
Think ill of no man, and although he seems to thee to be wicked, yet
believe that he has bin suffered to fall by some secret and hidden providence
of mine, for the attayning of greater humility in himself, and procuring of
greater profit to his soul. And thou ought neither to judge, nor yet
despise him, but lament rather thy own ingratitude toward me, because my
grace only does uphold thee, as it were violentlye against thy will, and think
that without it thou should fall into greater, and more heinous sins than
any other, therefore say unto thy self: if this man had received so much grace
as I have done, he would have served God a great deal more devoutly, and been
more thankful unto him, than I have been. Believe also, that as soon as I
look upon him with the eyes of my mercy, he will presently repent and amend;
or else, that he is already reformed and made more holy than those that
despise him. Wherefore ascribe thy ill conceait of him, to thine own fault and
rash judgment, and reprehend thy self sharply, because thou haste thought
amiss of thy neighbor, and done him wrong. Rancor, hatred, bitterness and envy,
do many times hide themselves under the color of zeal, which do make men
think, not only every defect and light fault of their neighbor to be
grievous, but also to judge their virtues to be vices, their sights being
dimmed with the soggie mist of malice and envy.

Take special heed therefore that thou neither reprehende nor accuse any man,
nor yet either speak or hear of any man's faults when thou art angry. Beware
also that thou do not at that time seek to gall him, gainesay him, or grieve
him with any word or show of thine, neither yet by chiding to procure
humility and shamefastnes in him: or to declare that thou have taken him in a
fault worthy reprehension, and meet to be spoken of, and cheefely abstain
from doing of this, as long as displeasure, bitterness, or any troubled and
unquiet passion does remain in thy heart against him, and as long as thou
do desire to make others note him for his faults and offenses, because thou
haste neither zeal of charity, nor a sincere intention in thee at that time.
For if thou had, thou would rather be sorrowful, and lament with him
for his sins, and seek as much as thou could, to excuse and cover before
others thy Brothers or Sisters offense, and if they had made a great fault,
thou would then rebuke them in secret not without grief in thy own soul,
and would pray earnestly unto me for them with a heart that did even suffer
with them for their offenses, and were most lovingly and humbly affected
toward them.

O my daughter be dilligent to know what thou want, and what is fit for my
spouse, and as for other men's faults be deaffe to hear them, dumb to utter
them, and blind to see them. Tell me (my daughter) how great regard would a
bashful Virgin have of her behavior, if she stood in a Kings presence, and
saw his eyes continually fixed upon her? After the same sort think how that
I am in all places present with thee, and that thou stand always in my
sight. Consider how great modesty there ought ever to be in thee, how great
innocence of life, and to be short how great reverence thou ought to
carry toward me, which do always behold, and look with my pearcing eyes
into the depth of al thy acts, thoughts, passions, words, motions, intentions
and even the very secrets of thy heart. Presume not therefore to do any thing
in my sight, which thou dare not offer to do in the sight of one of my
servants, that were a very devout man, and so generally accounted, and of all
men greatly esteemed; for thou ought ever to fear the dreadful presence of
my almighty power, and infinite Majesty, and to have it at all times, both
laid before thy eyes, and imprinted in thy heart, that by it thou may be
stirred up to love and reverence me, and be careful in all things to please
me, since thou art continually in my sight.

Thou should not have the peace of thy soul, which thou do in all places
desire to depend upon men's mouths, that is, to be quiet when no man does
gainesay thee, but to rest upon me and a good conscience.

Moreover, thou ought to mortefie that appetite in thy self, which does
provoke thee with an earnest desire and delight to be beloved, and commended of
men. Suffer men to be men still, and apply thy self only to love me, that
thou may be worthy to stand highly in my favor.

Live uprightly with thy neighbor* and love him for my sake, neither care thou
whether he love thee again or not, but leave it to me, and fly the
familiarity, both of men and women, but especially of those that be not of
thine own sex.

If thou had as great a care, or at the least, no less respect to please
me then thou haste, not to displease men, thou should obtain by it, greater
consolation in thy soul, then if all the world did seek for thy favor.

How we ought to fight against vice.
BE stout and circumspect to vanquish and purge thy soul of any
imperfection, although it be never so little, for the least sin that
offends me, ought not to seem small in thy eyes, if thou do perfectlye
love me.

Call to mind the love that thou did carry toward me heretofore,
which made thee to contemn and forsake for the love of me, thy Parents, thy
Brethren, thy Sisters, thy riches, thy honor, and whatsoever else that seems
delightful in this present world, and to conclude; even thy self, that is:
thy flourishing youth, and pleasantest years; how comes it then now to
pass, that thou art vanquished with a most light temptation, and a vile motion
of concupiscence? Thou know best thy self, how vveake and negligent thou
art for the most part, and how hardly thou art drawn to overcome vice, to
bevvare of those snares which may endanger thy soul, to fly the occasions
and prouocations of sin, to renounce thy own will, and to amend the
imperfections of thy heart. Renew therefore thy constant and former
determination, resolving to persecute all vice in thy self, and not to suffer
any thing to remain within thee, that is contrary to my will, for any
vvorldly gain whatsoever.

Neglect not to do all those things which please me, and follow that
course of life which I require at thy hands, and is fit for thy vocation,
with all care and diligence. Use not to delay: neither leave those things
undone, which is thy duty to perform, and my right to receive, but do them
with courage stoutly, willingly, carefully, faaithfullie, and devoutly.

Whensoever thou find in thy self, the motions of anger, concupiscence,
vvantonnes, pride, and such like motions of vices, bevvare that thou do not
suffer the^ violently to break out of thee, by any word or shevve: but seek
by bridling and resisting them, to suppress and extinguish them. The best and
presentest remedy against all kind of vice, is to cast thy self when thou
art tempted, prostrate at my feet with all humility, to consider how thou
were made of nothing, and art nothing but by my grace; to return unto me
wholy, to repose all thy confidence in me, to call upon me by continual
prayer, and perfectly to know that thou can receive no succor not remedy in
this thy distress, but from me only*

Seek to strengthen thine own infirmity in this sort every hour, and renew
thy good purpose, ever persuading thy self, that the present instant wherein
thou live, is the first time of thy beginning to do well.

When it shall seem loathsome to thy nature, or go against thy sensual
appetite, to take these labors, to enter into these combats and conflictes,
and to do many other things, which may seem contrary and grievous to thy
mind in this exercise of virtue: ever the more that thine own slothful
humor shall repine at them, the more earnestly endeavor thou to overcome and
mortefie these passions.

Be not wearied with so holy a labor, neither cease thou to proceed in so
good a course, lest it move me also to stay from pouring the influence of my
grace into thee. Be afraid lest that if thou yield thy self vanquished, or
seem tired by reason of thy sloth: my grace shall forsake thee, and that I
will leave thee to follow thy own inventions, and with a dangerous kind of
security to satisfy thy own desires; for it is a manifest argument, that I
have then for thy own deserts, both justly and clearly rejected thee; When
thou feel no worm of conscience gnawing within thee, no remorse for thy
sins, nor any fear of my dreadful judgment. Such as be in this state, are
in a most perilous case, for when they think peace nearest unto them, then
comes destruction sudden lie upon them.

Wherefore ^ight thou manfully, and violently repress thine affections. VVish
in this small conflict or affliction, how little so ever it be, to yield me
some recompense, as far as lies in thy power, for those pains and torments,
which both living and dying, I endured for thy sake.

Be never wearied therefore, with fighting against many temptations, give not
place, wax not faint, neither suffer thou thy self to be overcome with
weakness in thy heart, nor desperation in thy mind, but persecute all vice
with a continual and mortal hatred, and as often as thou beginnest to faint,
or to decline from thy former determination, so often rise again, and make a
new resolution.

One thing I must needs vvarne thee of, which hurts thy self, and
offends me, which is, that thou art become sometimes so fainte hearted, with
thy faults and ouersights, as they move thee to waver, in follovving of the
good course that thou have begun, and almost induce thee to despair.

This is the cause that does make thee sit solitary, pyning and consuming for
very grief, and not to return unto me that thou may rise again, but even
with a kind of despair to imagine, that all thou haste done before is
utterly lost and forgotten. And thou show thy self by this kind of
dealing, to be proud, because when thou did seem to stand, thou did
trust too much in thy own force and abillitie, and that makes thee now to be
so greatly troubled and perplexed in thy mind: because thy hope did fail
thee, and it fell out otherwise then thou did expect or look for. My will
is, that thou should not use the help of thy own force and endeavor, but
utterly to distrust both in them and thy self, and to trust in me only, for as
long as thou think otherwise, thou art like every hour to come to ruin,
until thou learnest this lesson, that when thou reliest upon thy self, thine
own strength is no greater help unto thee to make thee stand upright, then if
thou were underpropped with a broken reed. But despair not in me, reposing a
most firm hope, and assured confidence in my mercy. And touching thy self, I
would have thee to despair after this sort: not to refuse thy own counsel,
thy own industry, thy own travail, and other things of such like kind which
proceed from thy self, but I would have thee continually to use them, and yet
not to rely upon them, confidently to trust or delight in them, neither yet
would I have thee attribute any good thou receauest to thy self, or to thine
own diligence for both thy self, and all these abillities which thou haste,
have not power to make thee withstand the smallest sin, except thou be
assisted with my grace and mercy. Neither think thou that I will presently
power into thee, for one earnest prayer, a few tears, or one only conflict
against the temptation of sin, all graces, all virtue, and all good gifts, or
that I will for this, send thee any sudden or extraordinary profitte in thy
spiritual course of life, or that thou shall immediately come to attain to
all piety and holiness.

I require at thy hands daily pains, unfeigned humbling of thy self, and a
continual fidelity toward me, in fighting against vice. I look for, also a
firm hope, and an assured trust in my mercy, and a constancy in thee, that
will neither be overcome with any assault, nor yet wearied with any travail.
And when thou shall find in thy self all these things which I have named,
let there not want a most profound humility, whereby thou may be brought
perfectlye to know thy self, and to confess that as thou were made of nothing
by my mercy, so thou art nothing but by my grace, attributing nothing to thine
own labor and travail, and acknowledging that thou haste deserved nothing,
but ascrybing thy thirst after justice, and all other good things which thou
do to me only.

Except thou know these things thou can not but err, and must of
necessity fall often, until thou come to learn what thou art of thy self,
and what thou art by my grace. I forbid thee not, but exhort thee to labor as
much as thou can, and to strive for virtue as much as thou art able; and when
thou have done all, trust not in any remedy, nor in any industry of thy own,
that is without me, but hope of this, pray for this, and believe this
certainly, that I will never fail to assist thee in all thy diligent and
virtuous labors, not in respect of thine own deserts, but in respect of the
love and charity which I bear thee. For seeing that I have given thee, a
will, a desire, and an inclination to fight, I will also grant thee for thy
labor in fight (if thou perseuerest to the end) a Crown of glory, a triumph
of victory, and a most happy end of thy combat.

Wherefore, whether thou be in war or at peace with thy self, whatsoever
thou do determine, whatsoever thou beginnest, or whatsoever thou do
enterprise, crave without ceasing my assistance by prayer, and wait before the
gates of my mercy. Thy prayers shall never return from me void, and
fruitless, although thou think thou haste received nothing; for it is often
more profitable for thee, to pray humbly and earnestly, then to receive and
obtain benifites. It is often more gainefull for thee to trust in me, and
expect my leisure, then sencibly to feel, or possess my consolation.
Wherefore be thou patient, and long suffering: and increase in all good
exercises, and in the love of all that is good, between falling and rising,
ever expect thou my grace and protection: neither seek to fly or to run away
from the battle, until all the fight be fully ended, and the time be come
for thee to receive a glorious reward for thy painful travail. And because
thou may be the rather encouraged to proceed in this labor, assure thy
self that even in this life, thy enemies shall be daily diminished, and
their force that assault thee continually weaken^d, and thy self by my grace,
and use of sighting, wonderfully strengthened, in so much as that which at the
first thou could scarcely scrape out with a file of iron, thou shall come in
time to drive away with a blast of wind.

Moreover, whenever thou chancest to fall, take this for a general rule,
though thou fallest never so often, and offendest never so greatly, yet
presently without any delay come unto me, lamenting thy fault and bewail it
with me, lying prostrate at my feet, and rise again with me, leaning thy
self upon me, that is, repose thy confidence in my power, resolving firmly
to amend, and never to offend in it again. I know man's weakness in
general, I know also thine in particular, and how apt man is of his of his
own frailty to fall, and how it proceeds from the malice of the devil
for a man to be unwilling to stand, or unwilling to rise again after he is
fallen. Which thing cannot only be by no means excused, but also receaueth
without my mercy, a heavier damnation. I require nothing of thee but a good
will, and nothing is in my eyes more precious then the same.

Wherefore if thou want force, abillitie, or time to do good works, be
not dismaide, for thy good will does fully content me.

Retain ever within thy self a good will, for by it thou may satisfy for
all thy defects, and repair all thy faults, although thou be able to do
nothing besides. When thou think me fardest from thee, then am I nearest
unto thee.

Therefore (my Daughter) as soon as thou shall find that thou haste offended,
condemn thy self, and presently running unto me, confess thy self guilty,
and make complaint against thy self unto me. Thou can not no sooner be
repentant; then I have granted thee my pardon, neither can thou sooner ask
forgiveness, then I have quite remitted and forgiven all.

Wherefore then (O my Spouse) do thou stay from returning unto me? Thy
safety is not procured in flying from me, but in flying unto me.

I whatsoever thou see that thou haste most offended: where thou find that
thou haste oftnest fallen: to conclude, where thou perceauest that thou haste
most declined from virtue: there cry oftnest unto me, there sigh unto me with
more often groans, and desire with all feruencie at my hands, both pardon for
thy sins, and the protection of my grace.

Be not wearied with temptations, but always resist them as much as thou
can, neither yield thy self as vanquished by them, or as a Prisoner unto
them. As long as thou resistest, thou art never overcome. For whatsoever thou
feel, and art enforced to suffer (as long as thou suffer it against thy
will, and resisting it is I told thee before) I will never impute it to thee
as a fault, because I require not an account at thy hands of that thou feel,
but of that to which thou consentest. To feel motions of sin, is ingrafted as
it were in thy flesh, but to consent unto it, rests in thy own choice.
There may be a certain kind of violence offered, to the flesh and senses,
but the will can never be compelled.

There are two things in temptation: one the matter whereunto thou art
tempted, and that is a sin, and imperfections, these thou must never consent
unto, neither yet yield thy self in any sort unto them, but resist them with
all thy might. The other is, that labor and distress which thou do endure
in resisting them: and this thou must patiently abide and yield unto, as long
as it is my pleasure that thou shall be tempted. For thou ought not to
resist me, but to subject thy self wholly unto my will, and to resist those
motions which thou art stirred unto by the mean of temptation: that thou
may continue still in my favor, receive my grace, and be partaker of my
consolation.

But I know what thou will say, for I am not ignorant of those things which
thou do suffer, and wherewith thy heart is afflicted. I will tell thee them
therefore, since thou art ashamed to tell them thy self, that by it thou may
be the better assured to receive remedy, and consolation for them at my hands.
The temptation of thy flesh does assault thee, not only every day, but every
moment. To resist this continually is troublesome and grievous, and to escape
it without fighting, is impossible. To fight long and not to be wounded, is in
thy judgment not only hard, but miraculous He that is thy enemy, is very
familiar with thee, thou carriest him about with thee in every place, thou art
not permitted to destroy him, but thou art enforced to nourish him. His weapons
are many, his manner of fight diverse, and his assaults very violent, as the
fiery heates, the fervent motions, the delightful allurements, the terrible
perturbations, the cruel onsets, the sweet pleasures of all kind of lust and
concupiscence, and many such other which some men do feel raging in their
flesh like certain furies of hell. Now the strong impressions and delectations
of them being in a manner violent and joined with these fancies, are almost
sufficient to vanquish all thy senses.

Moreover the instability, and inconstancy of some men's heart is so great, that
even in the very moment, wherein they prepare themselves to resist these
temptations, they are presently as it were fallen beside themselves, and clean
forgetting that which they had determined, they begin to think of that which
they did refuse to think of before. Now who amongst these dangers (say
thou) can escape safe? who can flee away from sin unwounded? marry a good and
an humble will, for to it there can no violence be offered. For whatsoever thou
think, chastity is not polluted with it, but with the consent of thy mind,
that is, whatsoever thou feel in thy flesh, shall not be imputed to thee
for sin, if thy mind consent not thereunto: for whatsoever is sin must be
voluntary, and as long as it is not voluntary it is not sin. Therefore with
how great temptations soever thou art oppressed, nay though thy flesh do
seem to be overwhelmed with them, and thy senses as prisoners unto them, yet
whatsoever thou feel delightful to thy flesh, keep thy mind free, (that
is, thy reasonable will) and then nothing can hurt thee* Cry out with the
detestation of thy soul against them, and with a voice that does abhor them,
fie, fie, I will not, I will not.

Turn unto me with all the force thou art able, and repeat often this short
sentence. O my God help me; O merciful Jesus I will not yield unto them,
help me.

Moreover, though most loathsome and horrible temptations do creep into thy
mind, yet for all that be not thou dismaide; as they creeped in, so let them
creep out, and by that gate wherein they did enter, let them depart, and let
not them only out themselves, but carry out with them any thing that is
naught, and unclean within thee, that they may leave thy house swept and
cleansed. And this thou may easily do, if thou will enter into a deep
consideration to know thy self, and call upon me only with a firm
confidence, and with a great humility, neither seeking to spare thy self, nor
ceasing to persecute thine enemies. For it is a most present remedy against
all inclinations, to remember as soon as ever thou shall find an evil
inclination in thy mind, how thou art nothing, and have nothing of thy self
but by my grace only, and how impossible it is for thee, with any ability of
thine own, to resist these motions, and therefore presently to fly unto me
with all thy heart, and to seek aid and protection from my wounds which I
suffered for thy sake, and at the sight whereof, the ancient enemy of mankind
does yet quake and tremble. Believe me (my daughter) although thou be haunted
as much as is possible for thee with carnal thoughts, sensual motions,
violent cogitations and imaginations, and although thou feel in this behalf
as much as may be devised, yet as long as reason has the upper hand, and does
gainesay them, and as long as thy reasonable and deliberate will does not make
choice of them, thou have neither lost charity nor my grace. This distress
which thou do sustain, and these streights, whereinto my heart is driven by
the mean of this conflict, may be a plain argument unto thee, that thou haste
not consented unto them, and so consequently a great comfort to thy mind. For
if thou had dest consented unto them, that is, if thou had willingly felt
those things which thou did feel, if thou had willingly retained,
those cogitations which did enter into thy mind, thou should not then have
felt this distress, this combat, and sharp conflict, but rather all peace and
tranquillity in thy soul. Receive a similitude (O my Daughter) at my hands
for thy comfort: If any man in fight hand to hand be overcome, vanquished,
bound, yea and beaten, and although he be so straightly holden, as he has not
abillitie to use his own limbs: yet if he yield not himself as a prisoner,
and vanquished, but resists with as much force as he is able, and consents
not to this his captivity, he can never be said to be conquered or overcome.
In like manner thou shall never be judged of me to be ouercom, whether thou be
tempted of the flesh or the devil, except thou consent with thy mind, and
ceasest to resist them. Thou must feel many things, which thou ought not
to consent unto, that is, which thou ought not to feel with thy good will,
and with a certain delight.

But thou will say, it is very paineful ^o be in continual fight, it is
paineful to ^enounce those things which thou co^etest, it is painful not to
think of those things wherein thou delightest, (...) is painful to persecute
those things which thou love. O my Daughter, ^hou do consist of two parts,
that is, ^f the flesh, and of the spirit, and there^re thy desires be diverse:
and those ^ings which delight the flesh are pain^ull to the spirit. If it seem
painful (...) the flesh to offer violence to it self, it cannot hate it
self; let the spirit ^igne, let the spirit have the royal ^ueraignetie and
imperial authority thee, and she will not think it a^ pain to bring her
enemy, that is, ^e flesh under her yoke and subie^ion.

That which seems at the first ^^auy, and almost intolerable, by ^ntinuall
use of fighting comes to be light, and may well be endured: For the oftener
that thou resistest thy enemy, thou art the stronger, and he the weaker.

For do thou not know that the kingdom of heaven suffers violence, and
that the violent bear it away? Fight therefore manfully the oftener, and the
more stoutly that thou do do it, the more easy shall thou ever find it.
Remember also, that as the temptation shall end, so the fight shall not always
continue, and that an eternal crown of glory which is due to the conqueror
does remain for thee. The sharper thy fight is, the more glorious thy crown
of victory shall be. And therefore if thou ouercommest being tempted, thou
shall have a double reward, whereas if thou had never been tempted, thou
should have received but a single.

Moreover the sharplier that thou are assaulted with the temptation of sin,
the c^e^rer shall thou be purged from thy s^^nes, if thou do not consent unto
it. And although in this conflict, especially when a heavy temptation does
furiously rage in thy flesh, there are many venial sins wont to be
committed, (which are given as light wounds to those that fight) yet
notwithstanding, that pain which is endured by continuing still in fight, and
by resisting of mortal sins, does on the contrary part take away all that
pain which the venial sins do deserve. Beside, that charity wherewith thou
fighting for my sake do avoid mortal wounds, and take great pain in
striving for virtue, does not only heal thy lesser wounds, but also does
turn them to thy greater glory and reward, if thou shall perfectlye overcome
these temptations as the skars of a Soldiers wounds, which he received by
fighting manfully in a most fierce battle, are showed, after the victory
to his great honor, and the sharper the battle was, the greater is his glory.
Fear not therefore my daughter if thou art to fight long, or if thy temptation
do continue forcible, if thou can not prevail so far over thy sensuality,
as to make it in all things subject to thy reason, yet always resist it, never
give it place, never grant it peace nor quietness. Thy battle against it,
the conflict which thou did endure in resisting of it, I will esteem as a
victory and conquest over it: For it is not only good to overcome evil, but
with all thy might to resist evil, yea it is sometime more honorable and
profitable for thee, by continuing in fight to sustain longer the assaults of
thine enemy, and the labor of the conflict, then quickly to have vanquished
him, espeacially when it is done by my providence (which disposes of all, ever
for the best toward those that love me) and not by thy own sloth or
negligence: For I who am a most upright and wise judge, do mark the travail
and force of every one of my Soldiers, and do more esteem in them, their
will, then their abillitie: because to be able to conquer, proceeds of my
gift, but to be willing to conquer resists in their own choice, and yet not
that neither without my grace.

Wherefore although my grace must of necessity assist you in both, yet it
resists more in your own choice to be willing to do well, then to be able
to do well, which I considering (O my Daughter) do better allow in thee a
will to do much, then abillitie to perform much. It is also both meet and
agrees with justice, that the longer thou fightest, and the more pain thou
take, thou should receive the larger reward, and not only a reward in the
life to come, but even here grace for grace, that is, for every good work
which you do by my grace, you shall receive a reward, and some benefit or
other by my gracious favor in this present world.

How we must fly the occasion of temptation.
TAke a special care, that thou be not an occasion of thine own tation, or
destruction, in giving thine enemy by thine own fault, opportunity to
assault thee, and ability to overthrow thee. For avoiding whereof, fly
prouocations of temptation, restrain thy senses from wandering, shun the
familiarity and private friendship both of men and women, whereby sometime the
devil does find an opportunity to tempt thee, under the color of devotion or
spiritual love. For these things for the most part, do leave behind them
grievous temptations, of doubtful suspicions, perturbations, distractions, or
else some scandals of violent love and affection. If thy enemy which sought to
take thy life stood at thy door, would thou suffer him to come in? How
quickly and carefully would thou shut and bar the gates against him? Now
these carnal and vicious imaginations, cogitations, and affections, do seek
by all means to enter into thy heart, and to destroy the life of thy soul,
writ thou then let him come in? Do not suffer them to enter: drive not me
away, but keep them out of thy house by force, and with a horrible detestation
of them. Turn thy heart unto me, and if thou feel any thing in thy flesh,
turn thy heart away from it. Punish thy flesh when it waxes proud, or
wanton, with abstinence: and temperance both in meat and drink. Cut off all
access of persons, all haunting of places, and all taking of any occasions
whereby thou perceauest thy self to be tempted. And beware above all things,
that thou yield not thine own members so far to iniquity, as that the
devil do make them instruments of iniquity, and so by thy negligence take
opportunity to wound thee with thine own weapons. And therefore correct the
pride of thy flesh with such straight discipline, and bridle it with so great
modesty, and bashfulnes, that even for very fervent love of shame fastnes,
and chastity, thou may scarce presume to see or touch any naked part of thy
hands or feet. And for all unclean cogitations, which shall chance to be
still import^nate upon thee, drive them out as it were one nail with an
other, by some Godly meditation, and imprinting in thy mind some holy
impression of my life and passion. For to think of my wounds, and passion,
does ever yield without all doubt, a continual and wonderful increase of
virtue. For if I have infused into herbs, stones, and roots, rare virtues to
expel many diseases of the body, how unspeakable, and how effectual virtue have
I given to my wounds and passion (as thou think) for expelling of spiritual
diseases, and both curing and Sanctif^ing of the soul.

When spiritual temptations are to be conquered.
IF filthy and unclean thoughts as it often happens do at sometime enter
into thy mind against me and my Saints, or else that thou be tempted with
blasphemy, and rebellious cogitations, let it never henceforth trouble thee,
nor yet make thee faint haterd, neither be thou perplexed in thy mind with
thinking how to make thy confession of any such matter, as long as thou do
not with advised and deliberate consent yield unto them. For they carry with
them more grief than delight, and thou rather suffer, than do those
things being for that time altogether in passion and nothing in action.
Wherefore he that carries a pure mind need not either to fear them or
confess them, for although a Godly mind may seem to be by this mean a
little polluted, yet is it not defiled by her own fault and negligence. And
therefore such things as these which procure great heaviness to a devout heart,
and my Spouse (because she is enforced to feel within her self, and to be
turmoyled with such filthy and abominable ^maginations and cogitations
against me, as those which be the greatest sinners do abhor) are rather an
affliction and purgation unto her, then any defiling or pollution of her. For
the Devil whilst he sees thee withdrawn from all other things whatsoever,
and only to thirst after me, does endeavor to trouble this quiet peace of
thine, and to hinder and to keep thee from being united unto me, by these
fancies which seem both odious and horrible. Wherefore the more holy that
the day is, the more earnestly thou do bend thy self to the exercise of
divine actions, the more thou do seek to lift up thy heart, and the more
vehementlye that thou do strive t^^^ite thy self wholly unto me, the more
violently, wickedly and importunately do these imaginations assault thee,
being stirred up either by the Devil, or by some timorous fearefulnes of thy
own, because as soon as thy soul does begin to abhor and fear a thing,
she does presentlye feel and find the same which she fears, or for which
she is afraid. For fear and faint hartednesse does quickliest thrust into a
man's mind that imagination which is feared. And the Devil also does raise
these perturbations and motions within thy soul, that whilst thou art busied
in seeking to resist them, thou may be withheld from feeling the sweet
taste of my charity, or else, being too much dismayed with them, thou may
be afraid, and not presume to approach unto me.

The Devil does this, because he delights to entangle thy mind with
scruples, and perturbations, and by them to hinder the Saboth of thy quiet
rest. But do not regard them, do not fear them, do not answer them, do not
resist them, do not observe them, but go forward in thy Godly devotion, and
Holy exercise, as though thou felt nothing, and as though thy mind were
troubled with nothing, and pass over all these filthy cogitations, as the
barking of a Curre, or the hissing of a Goose, to which a man will disdain to
make an answer, and will not stay either to contend or strive with them, but
only pass by them, and laugh at them. In doing thus, thou shall easily
avoid and quickly forget them. But if thou seek to resist them, to dispute
with them, to fear them, to regard them, to harken unto them, and to remove
them, thou shall still the more deeply imprint them in thy mind, and the more
dangerously entangle thy self with great perturbation. For these temptations
are not vanquished by fighting with them, but by contemning of them.

Take heed also that no temptation on overcome thee by importunity, and by
making thee weary to resist it, for this is an usual practice of the Devil to
vex some with so long and troublesome a temptation that he overcomes those
by tyring them with that wicked devise of his, whom he could neither deceive
by subtlety, nor intise by pleasure. Wherefore thou have need to be long
suffering, constant, and patient, and as thou ought to detest those wicked
cogitations, which are thrown into thy mind by the craft of the Devil
against my honor, and are brought in of purpose to seduce thee; so thou may
in no sort either mislike or seek to shun that affliction which I send unto
thee nor those heavy and troublesome burdens which thou feel by my will and
providence laid upon thee, nor yet that pain which thou take in any
conflict, when thou striuest to resist vice and iniquity, but thou ought
for my sake to bear them patiently, and without any grudging.

Of this also I am to warn thee, that if thou be tempted with any carnal
vices, as gluttony and concupiscence, thou may more easily vanquish the by
flying them, then by fighting with them; but on the contrary part, all
spiritual vices are ever overcome, not by slightly passing over them, but by
staying with good consideration upon them, and doing the contrary of that to
which they allure thee. For the temptation of pride is neither any whitte
diminished nor yet vanquished, by flying all occasions that may any way move
thee to humble thy self, that is, by flying all the means that may procure
humility in thee, in hope by that course to abate the force, and avoid the
motions of that temptation. But if thou will overcome it, stay advisedly upon
it, and enforce thy self to do those things that may humble thee. Thou shall
after the same sort overcome envy, if presently and violently, as it were in
spite of her, thou do those things from which she dissuadeth thee; that
is, if thou speak to thy brother, if thou seek to do him service, if thou
dooest humble thy self unto him. In like manner also, thou shall never conquer
slothfulnes by flying all travail, or by neglecting the divine honoring and
serving of me, and by seeking to withdraw thy self, that thou might not be
commanded to labor and take pains, but by enforcing thy self with all thy
might, and by applying wholly of thy mind to practice and perform devout and
virtuous exercises.

How we ought to take head of Envy.
BEware of envy as much as possibly thou can, that by it thou be not
brought to mislike with any man, to speak in derogation of him, to prefer
thy self before him, to molest and vex him, and to be also thy self vexed,
(if he be preferred before thee) with his virtue, with his honor, with his
commendation, or with his spiritual profit. To overcome his temptation, be
more courteous and lowly unto him (my daughter) then to another, speak nothing
of him thy self, nor hear him spoken of in his absence, neither yet let any
thing proceed from thee in word deed, or show, that may seem to savor of
envy, or to spring from that venomous root.

How we must fly singularity.
Show not in thy conversation with others, any sad or unquiet countenance,
but a courteous kind of behavior, lest thy conversation seem troublesome or
unpleasant unto them.

Beware of being singular, and using any particular fashion by thy self,
different from the rest in any unnecessary ceremony, act, or show of
devotion, when thou art in other men's company, and as for those points which
are profitable for thy soul, which thy calling and christian profession
requires at thy hands, and which are necessary, either for obtaining of
virtue or avoiding of sins. Fear not to be singular in them, conform not
thy self in those to other men's fancies, if they be careless of their own
salvation: but rather resolve for the benefit of thine own soul, the
obtaining of virtue, and the fulfilling of my good pleasure, constantly,
humbly, and patiently, to bear all their derisions, and persecutions for the
same.

Of the honor, reverence, and worship which we ought to exhibit unto the
Mother of God.
SAlute my Mother often and zealously, with thy fervent prayers, and honor her
ever with all reverence, and a principal devotion by seeking dilligentlie to
imitate both her life and her virtue. For I gave her to this world as a perfect
example of sanctetie, innocence, and puretie, as a singular Patroness, and
most safe refuge for all my servant, and as a Sanctuary of so great freedom
to all those which are in misery and tribulation; as no man might have cause
to mislike it, no man might fear to take it, nor yet be in doubt to approach
unto it, and to that end I made her so meek, so virtuous, so merciful, so
gentle, and so gracious as she might despise no man, deny her aid to no man,
but ever lay open her bosom of pity before all men, and not to suffer any man
to depart from her sad, nor without consolation.

I made her also gracious, amiable, worthy to be beloved, and after a
wonderful sort most sweet and delightful, to those which otherwise were
desperate and obstinate sinners, that she might be a meet bait for my hook
to catch all souls, but specially such as could by no other mean be taken,
For those heinous sinners which break out of all other nets, and for whom I
cannot find an apt course by any other way to draw them unto me: I use to
catch by her mean, that is, by the veneration of her, and their devotion
toward her, whom I make (...) taste most sweet in their hearts, and excite
those which are hard hearted toward me, to perform good works unto her, that
is, acts of veneration, devotion, confidence, and invocation, and by this
mean, I make them vessels fitter and worthier to receive my grace, and greater
illumination from me, until they attain to a more reformed, and for the most
part, a most holy course of life. Recommende thy self daily therefore unto
her protection, that by her help thou may rece^ue greater grace and favor at
my hands. For I committed unto her custody the whole treasure of my grace and
mercy, to be distributed and bestowed, when I recommended unto her all my
sons in the person of John as her sons, but specially sinners, for whom I
did at that present suffer. This she knows very well, and therefore is so
careful and dilligent to discharge the office she received from me, as she
suffers none of those (as far as lies in her power) which were committed
unto her, and principally such as call upon her to perish, but prefers
them unto me both with her earnest prayers, and by all the other means she
is able, that they may be reconciled unto me, and ^erciued again into my favor?
do thou think (then my daughter) that I could have chosen any more fit, and
more meet for this business? Could I have found any that had been so apt and
able every way to have discharged this office? Do thou think that such as be
sorrowful, desolate, and overwhelmed with their sins, will desire any other
mediator for them unto me, which may sue more faithfully in their behalf,
and be more graciously inclined to receive them, and more ready to bring them
unto me, then this woman, this most humble, most pitiful, most meek, and
most loving virgin, abounding with all sweetness and mercy, being most mighty
of her self to relieve sinners, and most acceptable unto me because she is
my mother, yea, even his mother whose wrath is to be pacified and appeased
toward them?

Alas, how far do they err? how great a burden of wilful obstinacy,
and perdition do they heap upon their own backs, which do mutter and
murmr against this holy Virgin, which has the custody and bestowing of my
graces, and will not acknowledge her for an advocate unto me as I am to my
father? Do thou think that they can by any means throw themselves more
headlong into the bottomless pit of hell, then by making her their enemy
(for whose sake I have so often spared the world, and so often forborne to
power my wrath upon men) that when there is none to be a mediator for them, or
to withholde my hand which is ready bent to punish them, I may without any
let or impediment strike them as often and as much as I will? But what greater
pain or punishment can I lay upon these men, then not to chasten them
temporally here as children, but to deliver them over as my enemies into a
reprobate sense, that they being blind may not see into what danger they
run, until they find them selves drowned in perpetual darkness, and
overwhelmed with eternal destruction.

I do use these exhortations unto thee, as unto my spouse of mere love and
good will, that being instructed by my spirit, thou may not decline either in
this or in any other matter whatsoever, be it never so small, from the decrees
and resolution of doctrine, which my holy Catholic Church has determined
and resolved upon, nor yet suffer thy self to be deceived by that wicked and
malignant spirit of theirs, which pretend in show to be followers of the
Gospel, and are in truth nothing less.

Of sensible devotion.
IF thou find not sensible devotion, be not therefore grieved nor dejected
in thy soul, but do with a stout and constant mind (although thou feel
it dry and barren) whatsoever thou know to be for my honor, and as much as
thou art able to perform in that behalf. There are many which shedding
tears do seem to have some spiritual devotion, and sweeet taste in their
soul, and yet their life is never a whitte the holier, nor themselves at that
time free from mortal sin, but it proceeds from a certain tenderness of
their heart, as is often seen in women, and also in men, that be by nature
passionate and full of compassion. Have no confidence therefore in that
devotion which does not better and amend thy life* Thou shall see some weep
often, and be sorrowful for the death of a valiant Captain, whose worthy and
famous acts, they have only read, though he were a Gentile or a Pagan. They
will weep also sometime if they read a heau^e parting, or a pitiful death
of two constant lovers. What wonder is it then if they weep at my most holy
and devout service, by seeing many patheticall things done in the worshipping
of me, or by taking compassion of those things which I did suffer for them, or
by rejoicing at that honor which is done unto me, and yet these tears proceed
from a natural passion of their heart, without any virtuous intention or
profitable fruit to their soul, as long as they do not my will, and fulfill
my commandment? If therefore thou find my heart hardened and barren, without
such devotion, endeavor thou to have another kind of devotion, which is a true,
perfect, and ready will, with a determined resolution to do all those things
which may honor and please me.

Moreover, for the want of the other, that is, sensible devotion, seek out the
true cause and reason, lest perhaps thou have lost that sweet taste in thy
soul, by some dissolute motion, by lightness, by inordinate love, or
unmeasurable joy, or lest thou have been too much busied with earthly
cogitations, or else, lest thou have polluted thy soul with the spots of
pride, or have sought to please thine own fancy, or for some such other vice
and offense. In which case thou ought to be rather grieved for the cause of
this barrenness of thy soul, that is, thou ought to be more sorry for
the fault which thou have committed, then for the devotion which thou have lost.

Endeavor to cleave unto me, with a good and pure will, severed from earthly
affections, and with a naked and simple understanding, far from conceauing of
needles or unprofitable matters, and omit to do no good thing, that either
thou were accustomed to use before, or that may tend to my honor, but remain
patient with renouncing of thine own appetite, and expect my pleasure, with
resigning of thy self wholly unto the same.

And although somewhat at sometime do suddenly break out of thy sensual
disposition and outward man, or remain boiling in thy mind, which is not
convenient for thy profession, or else, if there arise any perturbations in
thee, if thou suffer any distress, if thou be oppressed with the
temptations of heaviness in thy soul, resisting or murmuring, take special
care, that at the least thy inward and reasonable man, being subject unto
me, continue settled in all tranquillity, in loving of my commandments, and
in laboring to fulfill them.

How we must prepare our selves when we come to receive the blessed Sacrament.
TO speak somewhat by the way of that preparation, which thou ought to
make, when thou come to receive the blessed Sacrament of my precious body,
I am first to advertise thee, that thou should not be discouraged, although
thou do not sensibly feel devotion in thee, yea, although thou find thy
self troubled with horrible tentations, and assaulted with some tedious
imaginations, which do invade thy mind. For this sensible devotion of thy
soul is not so necessary, but rather that reasonable devotion of thy will,
whereby thou do believe well of my Sacrament, and whereby (notwithstanding
these blasphemous thoughts which do assail, and almost ouerwhelme thee) thou
may be moved to do all honor and reverence to my Sacrament, although it
be against thine appetite, contrary to thy liking, and repugnant to the sense
or opinion of thine own heart: and lastly, that thou may by this enforcing
of thy self, against thy carnal desire, find thy will ready and prepared
with all obedience to honor me, to give me thanks, to resign thy self wholly
unto me, and to subject thy mind so far to my liking, as that it may be
best contented with that which agrees most with my pleasure.

If thou haste this devotion (my Daughter) which thy reasonable will may easily
command and procure in thee, that is, if thou be sorry that thou haste ever
offended me, and determined never to offend me again, but to endeavor as much
as possiblye thou can in all things to obey my will, thou may come boldly
unto this Sacrament, thou may enter securely into my presence, for neither
reasonable; nor sencible devotion, neither virtue, nor yet my grace is obtained
by flying from me, but by approaching nere unto me. Therefore the more sadder,
and the more desolate that thou find thy self (yea, although it be at that
time, when thou art going to confession, or to receive my blessed body, the
more earnestly and vehemently excite and enforce thy self to proceed in thy
good purpose, that thou may be made stronger in grace, more constant in
goodness, and more fervent in love toward me. Provide always that thou
carriest with thee a pure intention, and a good will, as I said before. Neither
let it trouble thee, if even in coming to receive this blessed Sacrament,
there does enter some horror, and terror into thy soul, or if thou be scarce
able presently to take and swallow the blessed host, or if thou find some
gawlish kind of bitterness in thy taste, for these are not certain signs,
that thou camst unworthily to it, but thou haste rather cause to mistrust that
fear, fainthartednes, and continual custom of trembling, have procured this
imagination in thee, which is strongest of all in women, and makes thee to
think that thou feel those things indeed, which either thou dreadest to
feel hereafter, or thou do imagine that thou feel at that present. But if
thou could clean remove this fainthartednes, and fearful imaginations of
thine, thou should with it also clean expel this difficulty and distress
which thou find in thy mind. For albeit I could deliver thee from al these
perturbations, yet do I permit, some such distress as these, to assault
thee, and other of my servants, because I know it is the best mean either
to keep all of you humble, or by humbling of you, to deliver you from the
sin of pride, which is in women most usual. Be therefore stout, and carry
a resolute mind, that shaking off all womanish fear, or fainthattednesse, and
purging it from those filthy cogitations which do enter into thee by
contemning of them and their persuasions, thou may with a quiet mind, and a
pure conscience, wholye dedicated to my service, desire me, seek me, and
receive me in the blessed Sacrament, which am and will always remain unto
thee (if the fault be not in thy felfe) a most gracious lover, a most gentle
protector, a most merciful redeemer, a most loving preserver, and a most
faithful Savior. But because thou may be enflamed with a greater
reverence, love, and desire, toward this blessed Sacrament: I assure thee that
without all doubt, my body is there sacramentally, delivered unto thee, to be
received under the form of bread. Wherefore seeing it is the same body, which
I now carry glorified in heaven, seeing it is no other, nor any like unto it,
but even the very same, and seeing I carry not a body which is dead nor
without blood, it follows of necessity that together in the same body, there
must be also contained my soul, my blood, my graces, and my virtues: to all
which since the world is united, that is one person in Trinity, from the two
other persons cannot be divided, but are inseperably united, it must also
follow, that the whole Trinity is present in this Sacrament, as truly and as
verily as they are in heaven, though in an other kind, that is, under a
sacramental form. The same opinion thou must in like sort have of the
Challice, the new Testament in my blood, consider therefore now with thy self,
with how great willingness and desire, thou ought to come unto this
Sacrament, seeing that thou haste in it true salvation, and that thou have me
really, and perfectly there, which am the author of all thy happiness. And
because I would not have thee drawn from it, with too much timerousnes of thy
conscience, or with too great a fear of the reverence and Majesty thereof; I
have commanded thee to come unto it, and to receive it for a commemoration of
me, assuring thee, that my delight is to be with the Children of men, and that
I do much rejoice when I may do any of you good, and to knock at the gate
of your hearts, that being entered in^, I may sup with you, and both feed and
refresh your hungry spirit within my self. And to what other end do I all
these things, but only to procure you to have a hope and confidence in me,
with a love and desire to come unto me, and not to withdraw your selves from so
profitable and necessary a Sacrament, or to deprive your souls of that
infinite and inestimable fruit, which you shall receive thereby, for fear of
being made unworthy by these temptations which you feel against your will,
and therefore are not by them polluted with any sin.

Of discreation.
AS humillitie must be the guide of ^^all thy exercises, so let discretion
rule and moderate them, least they hurt thee, or make thee unable to do thy
duty, or least the greater benefits and better exercises of thy soul be
hindered by the outward exercises of thy body, which are not so good, nor so
profitable: and to conclude, least by exercising of any virtuous act, thou
do somewhat offend in breach of charity.

Have consideration also of the infirmity of thy body, and take care that
thou consume not thy strength, if thou be weak, and govern all thy intents,
studdies and exercises by the direction of such as fear me, or are thy
superiors, leaving or lessning the^, increasing or moderating them according to
their will and counsel.

Wherefore, if thy superior which has the charge of thy soul, as being my
deputy, and discharging of that office in my steed toward thee, forbid thee
to fast, or any other thing that is not in it self sin, obey him, believing
that he knowing thy abillitie every way, does advise and command thee, to
that which may be fittest and most necessary for thy salvation.

And therefore (my Daughter) if thou be bidden to eat eight times in a day,
thou shall not in obeying it, offend me: Nevertheless, retain still a will
to fast, when thou haste liberty to use thine own discreation, But if for
obedience sake, thou eat, thou shall by eating receive of me a double reward
whereas otherwise by fasting, thou should have had but ^^e he a single. For
thy good will to fast, and the fruit of thy good will is not lost, if thou
eatest to show only thy obedience, but being done for obedience sake, it is
together with obedience crowned, and rewarded in thee. In like sort it is in
all other things, which thou desire of thine own will to do, and art
enforced to omit only to show thy obedience.

Seek daily, desire earnestly, stu^^^e continually to set forth and
advance my glory, as much as thou art able, and wheresoever thou can, and to
fulfill my will, both in thy self and in all other. Neglect to do no good
work that thou have* abillitie to perform, but go forward in goodness e^^rie
day, and strive alwaie to encrese in virtue, but neither glory norre^^oyce in
thy self for all the travail, study, and exercise which thou use in doing
of good works, neither be thou comforted with it, as though thou had any
thing, were any thing, or able to do any thing of thy self, but fix thine
eyes ever upon thine own baseness, and imbecillitie, remembering that thou art
merely nothing, but of my grace, and therefore ascribe all the good thou do
to me only.

There be some which are not contented with that correction of their flesh
which I do lay upon them, but do torment their bodies with indiscreet
abstinence, and immoderate afflictions, and make themselves by that mean not
only unapt, and unable to obey me, to follow my steps, and to endure the
conflicts of this spiritual battle: but also being tired and consumed in
their natural strength by this indiscreet dealing, are enforced to leave those
exercises which they were wont to use before; and to take more care of their
flesh, then is requisite or convenient, for repairing of that which was decayed
by their own follye. Wherefore moderate thou thy exercises and labors
according to the proportion of thy force and abillitie, least thou do
surcharge and overthrow thy self, and fail not by good means to nourish thy
body, it is my will, that thou should comfort nature, and repair from time
to time, thine infirmity, not with an extraordinary care or delight, but for
the refreshing of nature, as I said before. And for the better inhabting of
thy body to do me service, to yield thy self a fit instrument of my grace,
to fulfill my will, to follow my commandment, and to do those works which are
most acceptable in my sight, being always as ready if it be my pleasure, to
suffer poverty, as to enjoy riches, and as willing to be sick as to be
whole. But when thou shall not be compelled by discreation to nourish thy
body for infirmity of nature, take heed least by impatiency or want of
devotion, or of an insatiable desire to please thine own appetite, thou
seek euasions to escape, and deliver thy self from those adversities or
troubles which I send thee. But remember to receive such crosses, as are of my
sending gladly, sustain them patiently, complain of them to no body, bear
them with long suffering, and stay with all meekenes expecting of my pleasure.
Suffer me to deal with thee, as I think fit, that by that tribulation that
falls upon thee, my grace may work some good effect in thee. This is much
better and more profitable for thee, then that which of thine own head thou
layest upon thy self. For I would have thee to be fully persuaded (my
Daughter) that I never permit thee to suffer any tribulation, but that it is
for thy good, and for the purging and repayring of thy soul, which is weakened
or impaired by sin, if thou would believe me, and refer thy self wholly
unto me, by bearing it with silence, and wait my leisure by patient suffering
thereof, for I will come at the last, who am never absent from thee, but am
always ready in all places to assist thee.

Beware therefore that thou do not despise those afflictions which I do
send and lay upon thee, for I will guide thee in them; rely upon me,
trusting in my providence, and love toward thee, and not in thine own will or
abillitie. Be content that I and other men do afflict thee: in the mean
time, do not thou persecute thy flesh, but thy faults, and endure with
patience whatsoever shall happen unto thee.

How we ought in all things to conform our selves unto Christ.
A Faithful spouse ought to be so loving to her husband, as she should desire
with all her heart ever to be with him, never without him, and at no time from
him, she should wish to conform her self in all things unto her husbands
mind, and be glad when she were in any thing like unto him. After the same
manner thou must be have thy self. Consider my life, my actions, and my
virtues, whereby thou may learn what I love, and what does please me in
thee. Now if thou will be a faithful spouse, (O soul) thou ought to
desire nothing so much as to please me, and to frame thy self in all things
agreeable to my will. Wheresoever therefore that I go, desire to accompany
me, whatsoever I do, studdy to imitate me, whatsoever I suffer, be ready to
suffer with me, and if by any occasion thou feel tribulation, rejoice in it,
because by it, thou art made like unto me. Consider and recount with thy self
every one of my virtues, or at the least the principal, whereby thou may
stir up a desire in thy mind to imitate and follow me. It shall be an easier
labor for thee then, to cut off, morte^ie, and raze out all those things,
which are contrary and unlike to my course of life, that is, thy vices, thy
wicked inclinations, and corrupt affections. And as I said before, thou shall
attain to such a habit of well doing in time by a studious will, a watchful
care, and continual travail, that thou may come hereafter to drive away
that, (as it were) with one blaste of wind, which thou can now scarce scrape
away with a file of iron.

Of Poverty.
BEhold therefore first my poverty, who when I was rich made my self poor for
thy sake: how I came to mine own, and mine did not receive me: how I was
very poor, and as a stranger and soiourner in a foreign land: how my mother
being lodged in an Inn as a guest in a strange place, I was borne in a stable
before the mouths of beasts, which by the heat of their breath might defend
me from the bitter cold, being laid upon hay in a manger: how I was
redeemed with the Sacrafice of poor innocents: how being an infant I was
driven into banishment, brought up by the labor of my Mother, and fed by
alms at other folks cost, having neither house nor lodging of mine own: how I
watched often in the mountains: how I was spoiled of all my garments at the
time of my passion, and died naked upon the Cross: being in so great want of
all things, as I could not have a drop of water in my most extreme thirst,
to refresh my dried tongue: Lastly, how after my death I was buried in the
grave that was made for another. Moreover how often do thou think that I
suffered in the whole course of my life, hunger, cold, thirst, and other
vexations of my body? and as for corporal consolation (which most men do
think very necessary) I refused, and utterly rejected is, patiently enduring
penury and poverty in all things. But thou when thou haste every thing
ready at hand, that thou can desire, thou do flatter thy self, and
think that thou live in poverty, and do repyne if thou can not have
every other thing that thou want, although it be merrily superfluous,
and more to please thy curious mind, then to serve thy necessary use.

Look therefore upon my poverty, and leave to be sad, and cease to be
offended, if thou see any man preferred before thee, or endued with greater
abundance than thy self: why art thou not rather grieved like a good
emulatresse? if thou see any man poorer than thy self, as (Saint Francis
was,) if thou perceauest any man (which opinion thou ought to carry of all
men) more agreeable to my life and poverty then thy self: this should be a
good kind of emulatio^, not to be grieved with other men's happiness, or for
that they are better then thou art, but to be heartily sorry because thou art
not good thy self, and that it proceeds of thine own fault and negligence.

Rejoice therefore and receive it, for a special token of thy grace, for an
exceeding benefitte, if I make thee more agreeable to my self, then other men,
by sending thee some grievous sickness, some extreme poverty, misery,
misfortune, or contempt in this world. And if thou want necessary things
rejoice, if they be taken away, be glad, and complain of it to no man, but
embrace with me the cross of poverty, being quiet and contented in thy mind,
using silence and utterly renouncing of thine own self.

What does it profitte thee (my Daughter) if thou haste for my sake forsaken
the world, her riches, her glory, and the comfort of thy friends, and art now
troubled about a thing not worth a straw, or haste not yet abandoned all love
from such vanities as are of no value, but are ready to fight to be vexed, and
to contend either for desire to attain them, or for fear to loose them, and
are not afraid in this be half, to break peace and charity with thy
neighbor? Determine therefore now, and make a firm resolution from the
bottom of thy heart, to contemn all things for the love of me, and be
unwilling to possess any thing, but even such as of necessity thou art
enforced to use, delighting in all poverty, contempt, and penury, that thou
may be worthy to enjoy me, who as I am better and more profitable for thee
then a thousand worlds; so ought I to be more esteemed, and more dearly
beloved of thee, then all earthly things whatsoever, Why stayest thou my
daughter? be encouraged with my example, be enflamed with my love, and seek
earnestly in every thing that appertains to thy self, to live in all want
and poverty. Moreover think other men worthy of my consolation, because they
be my faithful servants, being far better than thy self, and not so
unthankful as thou art. And therefore being moved with charity, and as it
were enforced with compassion, suffer no man to want any thing, that thou may
est supply, but help all men with thy travail, thy service, thy friendship,
and by all the other means that are within the compass of thine abillitie.
Whatsoever thou haste, think it to be other men's, that neither thou may
love it when thou possessest it, nor be grieved when thou loosest it;
Whatsoever thou dooest enioie, think it is given thee for other men's use, and
to serve their necessity.

Of Humility.
DEtest and abhor with all thy heart, the honor, glory, and favor of men,
with all other flatteries, and inticements of this decaitfull world. Think no
otherwise of thy self, but as a proud man, unthankful to me, spightfull
against me, and therefore (if I should reward thee according to thy deserts)
worthy to be hated above all creatures, as one unworthy to be borne by the
earth, to receive breath by the air, or to be nourished and served by any of
my creatures. Wherefore ask always at my hands mercy and grace, not relying
upon any work or merit of thine own, but trusting altogether in that only
work of redemption which I finished for thee, and that unspeakable mercy
which I showed toward thee.

Desire of me with tears, and sighs perfect humility, that by it thou may
delight to lie hidden and unknown, to be contemned and had in estimation.

Endeavor as much as thou can to love those things which are most vile, and
show greatest humility. Choose likewise both to do and to have those things
which are most abject, and which other men do most despise, thinking thy self
more base and less worthy, then those things that are most vile. Seek not
to set forth in thy self any thing that may savor of estimation, or glory,
or that may show as it were any singular gift in thee, except thou be enforced
to it by necessity, or of mere charity for the glory of God. Glory in
nothing, neither yet bost thy self of any thing that is in thee. And if any
man do offend or contemn thee, take heed thou be not angry with him for it,
neither use him with worse countenance in show, nor bear him less good will
in thy heart. But rather marvel that every creature does not persecute thee
to be revenged of the iuiurie thou do to me, that am creator both of thee
and all them, and whom notwithstanding thou art nothing at all afraid to
offend.

How Humility is to be obtained.
TO obtain humility, consider and behold my Majesty, my omnipotency, my
wisdom, and my goodness, who only am immortal, only infinite, passing
all measure, without all limitation, or circumscription, inspeakeable,
incomprehensible, from whom all creatures receive their being, and who am able
with a beck, both to bring all creatures and the whole world unto nothing, and
again presently to restore all things to their former course and order.
Therefore seeing I am every way of so great power, you may easily perceive
that I created you, which are reasonable creatures, according to mine own
Image, not for necessity, or for any need that I had of you, but of my
charity and goodness toward you, as persons upon whom I meant to bestow my
benefits, and with whom I would impart my felicity. From which grace, since
you fell by sin, whereby you made your selves, not only unworthy of
eternal life, but justly deserved eternal fire: I being incarnate for your
sakes, suffered three and thirty years hunger, thirst, cold, heat, miseries,
labors persecutions, contempts, reproaches, stripes, blows, wounds, greefes,
torments, and lastly the Cross, and death it self, that I might deliver you
from eternal death, which you had incurred by your own deserts. I lived (my
Daughter) in the world not as God, not as a mighty person, nor in a glorious
show, but as the poorest, vilest, basest, and most contemptible of all others,
being subject to many torments and sundry reproaches, until at the last I was
slain, with a most shameful and ignominious death, which the world did think I
had justly deserved, for they judged both my life and Doctrine to be
detestable, as they thought it fit to root them, both out of all men's
memory, and to make them end with my death, whereat a great multitude of
people being present, did triumph and rejoice. Yet went I as gladly to suffer
it, as the Heart does to the Fountains of water, nay being made drunk with my
love toward thee, I ran unto it, and was never well until I had endured it.
I spared not my self, neither fled I any labor, grief, pain or torment
whatsoever. I refused to do nothing that might be for thy profitte, thou were
so dear and precious in my sight, that I did even long with a desire to
deliver my self for thy sake, to be wounded in all parts, with sundry kinds
of torments, and for thy sake also at the last to end my life with a shameful
death.

Moreover, because I did vehemently thirst after thy salvation, I desired to
shed all my blood for thee, which I did in such plentiful sort, as I left no
one drop thereof remaining within my body.

But how do thou (O my Daughter) requite me now for all this? what do thou
render again unto me in recompense of so great charity? Is it not even thou
which being unthankful to me so many years, did despise my self, did not
regard my words, did loath my service, and did transgress my
commandments? and yet showing all reproach toward me being most unclean and
vile in my sight, being altogether polluted, with so many filthy
abominations, thou do banish me from thee, thou do reject my inspirations,
thou committest fornication with my creatures, thou abusest my gift. What? why
do thou still contemn and forsake me, notwithstanding that I delivered
thee, out of most heinous sins, and from eternal damnation it self (wherein
thou had justly layen burning many years since, if my mercy had not
prevented thee.) To be short, why will thou despise me, seeing I have so often
preserved thee, from committing of many offenses, and also raised thee out of
the bottomless gulf of sin and wickedness? What? do thou not yet at
length consider, that thou art vile, miserable, and merely nothing, but by my
grace? and how then dare thou lift up thy up thy face, to behold me, whom
thou haste so often offended, so long time despised, so sundry ways
contemned? I speak these things (my Daughter) to the end that thou should
know thy self.

Consider how vile and filthy, thou art in thy body, how much polluted in
thy soul, and how impure in thy heart. And lastly remember, how unclean
thou haste altogether made thy self with wicked works, with filthy
cogitations, with corrupt and vnpure affections, and yet nevertheless how still I
forbear to punish thee, nay notwithstanding all this, how I declare my love
toward thee, with pouring my benifits daily upon thee, but how long must I
do this? till what time must I forbear thee? when will thou come to know thy
self? how long will thou stay to return unto me? why do thou not humble
thy self vn^ my yoke? do thou not see, that I am not longer able to
with-holde my mercies from thee? do thou not perceive how I have called thee?
in what place I have planted thee? where are thy fruits? do thou not know how
I wincke at all thine iniquities, all thine abominations, al thy
unthankfulness? Yet speak I not these things (O my Daughter to vpbraide thee
with those benefittes which I have heaped upon thee, but as it were languishing
with love of thee, and as it were, seeming to stand in need of thee, (though
in deed I stand in need of nothing) yea, being as it were not able to live
without thee, I do inuit thee to love me again, for that unspeakable
goodness and charity which I have showed toward thee, that by loving me,
thou may perfectlye see, what I am, and what thou art: how much I have done
for thee, and how injurious on the contrary part, thou haste showed thy
self unto me for the same.

Moreover consider, how many and innumerable souls are in hell at this day,
and how thou haste been far more wicked then they, and more justly deserved
that room, if thou had not been withheld from it by my grace: imagine
likewise, that if they had received as much grace from me, as thou haste done,
they would have showed themselves much more thankful unto me then thou haste
been, If thou considerest all these things, that is, my Majesty, and thine
own baseness, how proud thou art in thy baseness, and how humble I was in
my Majesty: how far for thy sake I abased my self to all poverty and
contempt, it would not seem so great a matter to thee, to humble thy self. If
I say, thou would rightly ponder with thy self, in how much poverty, in
how abject estate, and in how great contempt, I being so mighty, so rich, of
so high dignity, that is exceeding all measure in majesty, and infinite in
goodness, and incomprehensible in them both: was content to serve thee so
base, and so vile a creature, scarce worthy the name of man; yea, and did it
with so great charity, fidelity, and desire: there would by the impression of
these thoughts be bred in thy heart, so great an obedience toward me, so
great a reverence of me, and so great a desire to serve and adore my majesty,
as can neither be expressed in words, nor conceived in thought. It would
procure moreover in thee, an insatiable desire, and most burning thirst, to
honor me, to worship me, to exalt me, and to contemn, humble, and despise thy
self, and for the love of me, to throw thy self under the feet of all my
creatures, and beside, patiently to endure reproaches, contempt and injury, at
all their hands. For though thou do humble thy self never so far, though
thou bear never so much, yet thou should think that thou had endured
nothing in respect of the thirst and desire thou feel in thine own mind,
to abase thy self, and exalt me, in so much that thou should most love
those which did seek most to oppress and despise thee, because they did serve
in this behalf, to satisfy thine earnest desire, and thy humility, when they
sought so much to humble and abase thee. If thou feel not (my Daughter)
these things as yet in thy self, acknowledge how unthankful thou art, and
how far from true humility, which is a sincere and lowly submission of thy
heart in the sight of my divine majesty. After which follows ever a contempt
of thine own self; and a will likewise not only to be despised of others, but
even by them to be acknowledged most vile.

I exhort thee once again (my Daughter,) to look into my humility, and to
take example by it, how thou should humble thy self. See how the world
despised my life, and doctrine, how they did falsely accuse, and utterly reject
me, how they backbited me in all their speeches, how great reproaches scorn,
contempts, and derisions I suffered, even as a reprobate of most vile persons,
and for most vile and unthankful creatures. Yet being thus mocked, and made
most abject as a scorn of all men, yet I despised no man, neither did I excuse
my self, nor any way sought in speech to resist or reprove them.

Recounte also with thy self (O unthankful creature, which art worthy to be
despised) thine own obstinacy, negligence, sins, ingratitude, inconstancy,
vileness, and lastly, how thou art nothing of thy self, but by my grace
only. Bewail, lament, and excuse thy self of all these before me with
continual tears. Whatsoever shall happen unto thee, turn it to thine own
benefit, and use it as a mean to make thee humble. Take heed that thou take
not pleasure in thy self, but rather wonder how thou can please or delight
any other, if they did rightly know thee. Ever fix the eyes of thy heart upon
the consideration of thine own weakness, and disabilitie in all respects.

Consider how thou art nothing, and what thou ought to be and art not.
Likewise what thou haste not, and how unable thou art to do any good: how many
things thou want; and to be short, how far thou art from true and perfect
charity: and from the perfection of a holy man's life.

Call to mind also how unlike, and how liittle agreeable thou art unto me, and
remember that merely, thou haste no good thing at al of thy self, but
receauest all good things from me only, without any other mean whatsoever.

Moreover make account that thou haste of thy self these things, and no other
at all; that is, an apt inclination to sin, to offend to rebel, to stand in
need of all good things, to be in necessity and misery, and by thine own
fault both to loose and overthrow all those blessings and graces which I
bestowed upon thee. For it is most certain, that if I should leave the nature
of man, to her own liberty, and to do that whereunto she is most inclined:
she would do no good at all, but decline every day from worse to worse, seeing
she runs so vehemently headlong now to commit wickedness:
notwithstanding, that I do so earnestly forbid her, and in a manner
violently withold her. For the nature of man is nothing, and has nothing of
her self, and labors after that which is nothing. If thou did
continually meditate upon this, it would help thee very much for procuring
of humility. There must be a so notwithstanding joined unto this, an other
kind of humiliation, for thy hidden and unknown imperfections, which for the
most part are very grievous, although thou being purblinde do not
perceive them. Fall therefore prostrate for these before the feet of my
mercy, and bewail from thy heart, thy incureable aptnes, and infirmity to
commit sin neither think ever otherwise of thy self, then of one that is
guilty of many faults, blind ^n many things, and most unthankful of all
creatures.

How we ought not to care for men's judgments.
TRouble not thy mind with imagining what men think of thee, nor what censure
they give of thee, neither yet fear their judgment, so long as thou do not
wittinglie (as far as lies in thy power) give them any scandal or occasion
justly to reprehend or backbite thee. For thou art neither the better if they
commend thee, nor the worse if they dispraise thee. But thou art in truth as I
account thee, and as thou show to be in my sight. Therefore let not the
commendation of any other rejoice thee, nor yet their dispraises grieve thee.
For what do thou gain by the commendation of others? nothing truly: But
it does rather many times greatly hurt thee, because it deceaueth thee, and
puffs thee up with pride and vanity: And on the contrary part, what can
the contemptes, reprehension, abasing, backbiting, condemnation, and
persecution of men hurt thee? Truly nothing at all, but rather they prositte
thee much, for they bring thee to know thy self, and help thee not a little,
to obtain humility of life, and amendment of thy manners. For by it thou
shall be made more wary and wise, in thy conversation with men, and not to
trust in them, but to put all thy confidence in me.

The judgment of men therefore is not much to be cared for, whether they speak
good or evil of thee: Let them think what they will, in the mean time lift
thou up thy heart unto me, and if by searching every secret corner of thy heart,
thou find nothing in it that may offend me, fear nothing, but if by this
examination thou find somewhat, wherein thou haste offended me, bewail thy
fault, not because men do despise thee, (for thou ought then justly both to
suffer and desire that) but because thou haste offended me, and also given
other men by thine example occasion to sin. But if any thing be commended or
dispraised in thee, which is not sin, be not otherwise or more moved
therewith, then if some other man were commended or dispraised.

If men praise thee, ascribe it to their error and good will toward thee: if
they reprove thee, or condemn thee, marvel not at it. For what marvel is
it, if men reprove, despise, and condemn thy life, seeing they also reproved
my life, and condemned all my Doctrine, which was most innocent, void of all
spotte, and which could by no means be justly reprehended.

Rejoice rather, that thou art come to walk in those steps, which I had
trode^ before, that is, if being humbled and accounted as a cast away of all
men, and be glad that thou suffer these persecutions of men. Let others
imagine mischief against thee, I will return their mischiefs to thy
benefitte: only endure thou all patiently, and be silent.

Studdie in all things to please me, and not men: and yet if thou chancest to
please men, think that they are deeeiued in their opinion of thee: because
they know thee not as well as I do, but do judge thee thorough their own
simplicity, according to that apparaunce of goodness which they see in thy
outward show. But if thou do displease them, impute it to thine own deserts,
and let it make thee more humble, for if they do despise thee for so little
faults, as they are able to see in thee, what would they do, if they saw as
perfectly as I, all thy sins and offenses? Delight therefore to be accounted
vile and contemptible, and though thou be despised never so much, yet think
that thou deseruest to be a great deal more despised then thou art.

Thou ought to account thy self most miserable, most unworthy, most
unthankful, and most needing my grace and mercy, of all other creatures,
remembering always that of thy self thou art merely nothing, and that all thy
works which are without me, neither savor any thing of virtue, nor yet are
any thing worth. Whosoever is most wicked, think him better, and more worthy
of heaven then thy self. Believe that other men do merit, and think that
thou art tolerated here by my mercy only. Presume not therefore in these
respects, to compare thy self with any man, but imagine that thou have
offended me more then all men, and that thou art more vile and unthankful to
me, then any creature that lives: because whatsoever is of thy self, either
is nothing at all, or else is sin. Wherefore to extol or magnify thy self,
by the mean of those gifts, which thou have wholly received from me is
intolerable, and a point of most arrogant pride, For the preventing whereof,
and for thy greater profit, I do often withdraw from thee my sensible
blessings, because thou know not how to use them, but abuse them, in
turning them only to the magnifiyng of thy self, whereas in truth thou
ought to challenge or ascribe nothing to thy self, but wholly attribute all
unto me. Take heed therefore that in the petitions which thou make unto me,
thou have no respect to thy self, but to me only, lest thou show thy self
unthankful toward me by pride, or detestable in my sight by thine own
negligence. Remember how thou art nothing of thy self, how quick lie thou art
vanquished, when I do not protect thee: and consider how thou art not able to
endure the smallest adversity, or overcome the weakest temptation, when I
fight not for thee. For of thine own ability thou haste no other power in the
world, but only to corrupt and pollute what good thing so ever I bestow upon
thee.

Thou art too apt (my Daughter) to dispraise other men, which is a token
without doubt of great arrogancy, as though thou were worthy to be preferred
before those which, thou so discommendest, because thou perhaps want that
vice, whereof thou accusest them, and yet are subject to many other.

If thou were not blind, thou might perceive that thou deseruest not by this
kind of dealing, in any sort to be preferred before them: but rather thine
own tongue makes thee more detestable then they, because it discovers
openly, thine arrogancy or envy. My friends are wont to reprove, and accuse
themselves of their own vices, and not to find fault with others: for they
suspect both their works, and themselves, neither will they trust themselves
in any thing, because they have bin by that mean so often deceived. For they
^eare always that they seek not me with such sincerity as they ought, Beside
they wonder at, and commend other men's works, for they will not be brought to
suspect any evil of their neighbors.

Therefore do thou always either praise or excuse others, or else say nothing
at all, having ever before thine eyes, only thine own vileness, and
unthankfulness, and wondering that all men do not reprove and detest thee.

Thou can not (my Daughter) obtain humility, except thou love to be
humbled, for it is of necessity that a mind disposed to be humbled, must ever
go before humility. Receive therefore all things which I send unto thee, as
means to humble thee. Delight also to be humbled and contemned of others:
Suffer thy good name to be slandered. Hold thou thy peace, and refer thy
cause unto me. I know better than thou do how to defend thy good name. But
if thou fightest for thy self, thou need not my protection. If thou do
with humility and patience, bear all, and be silent: I will choose a time
wherein I will answer for thee. Do not thou by defending of thy self, prevent
my gracious determination toward thee. I will fight for thee, and will have
thee to be patient and silent.

Of Obedience.
OBedience, is a most excellent virtue, and most acceptable unto me, that work
which in it self is vilest, and least of all others (if it be done merrily for
obedience only) it is better accepted of me, and more profitable and
meritorious unto him that does it: then infinite others, which men do
voluntary, and to please their own appetite. Neither can thou offer unto me
(believe me my Daughter) a more Noble and worthy Sacrifice, then to present
me with an humble heart, obedient and ready, to do all things that I shall
command. For it may so fall out, as a man by obedience only, may cleave, leave,
and forsake him self for my sake, and so profitte more, by denying of his own
will, and be mo^re inwardly united unto me, then if he had bestowed much
time, in other most noble exercises. Wherefore thou ought (my Daughter) to
be always as obedient unto me, as if I were ever present with thee in a
corporal form, and that thou did as continually enjoy my presence, as a
wife does her husband, with whom she dwells.

When any man shall call thee from me, to do some act of obedience, thou
ought to leave me, and obey him. For this is not a forsaking of me, but a
forsaking of thy self: because thou preferrest my honor and my will, before
thine own commodity and consolation, in that thou do according to my
commandment deny thy self, and seek not thine own commodity, but the
benefitte of others. In this sort should thou relinquish thy self, and all
care to please thy self, or to seek thine own commodity. For so should
thou not leave me, but find that which is a hundred times more worthy and
profitable for thee then those things which thou forsakest.

Learn therefore to leave thy self for my sake, that is, by denying of thine
own will, to want that fruit, that consolation, and that profitte which thou
desire to reap, for by doing thy duty in this sort, both thou honor me,
and not only loosest nothing in thy profitte: but also obtainest things
(though it be by an other mean) that are an hundred timies better. Wherefore
esteem nothing so precious, neither account thou any thing so profitable, as
that thou will not be drawn from it willingly, for obedience sake, with a
mind wholly resigned to my pleasure. For whatsoever the thing be that for the
love of it, either thou refusest to perform thine obedience, or come to do
it grudgingly, or unwillingly, it is the Idol of thine own appetite: more
pernicious to thee, than can be expressed. If thou be in a place where thou
haste no superior, or where thy self is superior; make all men thy
superiors, obeying their will, and forsaking thine own. Marry do it not of
slouthfulnes, but wheresoever thou may even of thine own desire, and of
purpose to renounce thy self for my sake.

Love the virtue of obedience from the bottom of thy heart, and leave it not
as long as thou live, not only to thy superiors but also yield, obey, and
subject thy self, (whenever thou art not restrained by my will) in all
things, and to all men for my sake, and that without being grieved with it,
repyning at it, and disputing about it. And because thou may do this the
more franckly, respect not the man, who by my ordinance is thy superior,
whether he be learned or meet for the office; neither seek to mark or
consider, whether he be learned or unlearned, an excellent man, or a base
person. But have regard to this only, that he is by my providence made thy
superior, by whom I will govern thee, and in whom thou ought to hear
me. Ask counsel of me, and obey me. Therefore resist not but yield to this
my providence, seeing if I appoint such a man, I have as much care to rule
thee, and to make thee subject unto me by the mean of so simple a person, as
by him that is learned: Yea, I have the like regard of thy well doing, by any
whomesoeuer it shall be my pleasure to appoint over thee. Wherefore I would
have thee subject thy self unto him, without any servile fear, or scruple of
thy conscience, and despysing thine own counsel, and wisdom. Submit thy
self to be governed by his judgment and opinion. Whatsoever he shall
determine or appoint thee, accept it from his mouth as from mine own. For I
place such superiors over my servant sometime, as have small learning, and
are little practiced in those execises, to the end that they should not regard
man's wisdom, or respect in the man himself: but rather me in the man, that
am their God, and as well able to answer them by a simple man (if they can
have faith and confidence in me) as by a learned. And therefore, whatsoever
they shall be answered, or howsoever they shall be counsayled at his hand,
let them receive it, not as from a man, but as from my self, attributing all
to me and my direction: and ascribing nothing to the man, whether he be wise
or simple.

If thou would not therefore go astray, walk in the path of obedience, and
do nothing at all without the counsel of thy Pastor or Ghostly Father, or
superior.

Live always in simplicity and poverty of spirit, renouncing quite thine
own Judgment, thine own counsel, thine own sense, and thine own opinion,
neither take any occasion at any time to complain or murmr, esteeming that
always best which thy superior, or (if thou haste none) what other shall
think fittest, as long as it is not manifest and apparent sin. And therefore
fully to mortefie and kill in thy self thine own will, thou should not
only be obedient unto men, but also subject thy self unto all my creatures
for my sake.

For thou ought so much to hate thine own will, and thou should so much
desire to extinguish it, that thou should live amongst men wheresoeue thou
be, even as if thou were clean without any will of thine own; that is, as
if thou made no election or choice of any one thing more then an other, but
accepted of all things indifferently, that chanced unto thee, excepting this
only, that an other man's will (if thou know it) must ever please thee
better than thine own, so that it be without sin. and that honesty and
discretion be observed in it.

Yield therefore unto all men in those things which do properly and only
belong unto thy self, in such sort as if thou had professed obedience to
them all.

Nay, whenever thou shall be alone, do not thine own will, but dispose of
thy self so, as thy whole course of life, and all thy exercises may tend to
the renouncing of thy self. For this shall be better and more profitable unto
thee than the joys of Paradise. And whenever that my will shall be made known
unto thee, whether it be by inward inspiration, or by the Scripture, or by thy
superior, or by some other creature of mine, or by any other means what
soever: Whenever also that thou shall be inwardly admonished by me,
straight despise all that thou haste of thy self, as thine own counsel,
thine own judgment, thine own appe^ite, thine own opinion, thine own liking,
or thine own inclination, and follow my will. But thou must have a special
care wisely to learn what my will is, least thou may est think that thou art
governed by my spirit; when in truth thou art directed by thine own, or else
by the spirit of error or deceit. To avoid this therefore, do all things
according to the counsel of thy superior, and submit thy self wholly to his
will and direction.

How we must mortefie our own will and desire.
NOthing can do thee mischief (O Daughter) but thine own will, which if thou
have once mortefied, no other creature can hurt thee, if thou be dead to thy
self, and have mortefied thine own desire. That is, if these words, or rather
the affection of these words, be mortefied in thee, to wit, I, and me, and to
me, and mine, which is as much to say, as if there be no respect in the
world in thee, to please thy self, or to serve thine own appetite: who could
hurt thee when I live in thee, and thou in me, whom no creature can resist, but
is enforced to serve? Marry if thou will follow or retain still within thee
thine own will: all things will resist thee, all things will fight against
thee, and in despite of thy teeth, whether thou will or no, thou must yield in
the end, and can no way escape my providence, although it will be then as a
cross to torment thee, and not as a consolation to rejoice thee.

But if thou renouncest quite thine own will, thou shall taste an inward peace
and joy, which that sensual appetite of thine, neither knows nor is able to
conceive: for nothing troubles the world, but every bodies seeking to please
their own appetite. Therefore I said to my Disciples: in the world, that is,
in those things which are of the world, to wit, your own desires, which the
world seeks to satisfy: you shall have distress, but have confidence, for I
have overcome the world, that both you may overcome in me, and have peace in me
also. Begin therefore thou also and taking out this lesson, both mortefie and
pluck up by the very roots all the desires of the world, and all self love
out of thy heart. Otherwise how can thou overcome the world or the Devil, if
they have their army within thee; that is, if they have vices lodged within
thy soul? Throw out quickly whatsoever is in thee, contrary to my will: and
whatsoever fights against thee: in thy spiritual warfare. For neither the
world nor the Devil can ever come to vanquish thee, or in a manner to resist
thee, but by the help of those things which they possess in thee. Wherefore
they which do persecute thy vices, which do oppress thee, which show unto
thee, and lay before thine eyes, thine own weakness: to be short, which
offend thee, that is, which offend thine own will in thee, and consequently
thy self, because thine own will and self love reigns in thee. (For
otherwise they could not offend thee, for that these things, to wit, thy
self will, and thy self love, are only hurt and offended:) they therefore
(as I said) which do thus offend thine own will in thee, which show thee
how thou haste not mortified thine own appetite, are thy special friends and
benefactors. These thou ought to love, and with all to be glad, because
they do persecute thine own appetitie, which is thy worst adversary, and
only dangerous enemy. Therefore if thou will wisely use, and take the
benefit of this occasion, the more stronger thou shall grow, and the greater
force thou shall have.

The less rule that thine own appetite has over thee, the more interest have
I still in thee, and the further that it is banished from thee, the more fully
do I possess thee, because following of thine own will, if it do thee no
other hurt, yet it does ever certainly bring this mischief upon thee, that
it suffers not me to have operation and possession in thee. Wherefore it
depriueth thee of me which am infinite goodness it self. For though thou
labourneuer so much, and devise never so many means, thou shall never find
any other way to come unto me then this, which I have taught my Disciples,
saying: He that will come after me, let him deny himself, that is, let him
leave, mortefie, and quite forsake his own will, take up his cross and follow
me. Begin therefore with this, for this of necessity thou must do, whatsoever
thou forsakest, if thou forsakest not thy self, thou have forsaken nothing.
And contrariwise, if thou possessest not thy self, but leauest thy self to
be possessed by me, thou have forsaken all things for my sake, although thou
live in all abundance of wealth and honor. The more that thou go out of
thy self, the farther do I enter into thee, and as much as thou do die unto
thy self, so much do I live in thee. If thou displeasest thy self, I will be
the sweeter unto thee.

Forsake therefore all things, that thou may find all things, that is,
forsake thy self, that thou may find me. How long will thou stay (my
Daughter) how long will thou stand still amazed? All thy distress proceeds
only of that extreme self love which possesses thy heart, and of the small
confidence which thou have in me. Forsake therefore thy self, and believe me,
do thou think that I can deceive thee? why do thou not commit thy self to
me? Why do thou not trust in my goodness? What art thou able to profit thy
self, or what can thou do to thy self? What art thou without me? art thou
in any danger? if committing thy self to in^e, thou renouncest thine own
will? See to whom thou committest thy self? To me verily, without whom thou
should have no being at all, or be any ways able to stand, much less then
to be safe and well. Will thou then commit thy self unto me, with whom
thou can never be ill? Will thou then commit thy self unto me, who cannot
reject thee, who cannot forsake thee, who cannot deceive thee, who cannot but
love thee? Throw thy self into my arms I pray thee, and rely thy self
wholly upon me, with confidence, and without delay I will receive thee, I will
preserve thee. without me thou art, as though thou were not at all, therefore
if thou love thy self, reject thy self and embrace me, that I may also
embrace thee, and unite thee so close unto me, as no man shall be able to
hurt or touch thee, but that he must first of necessity, hurt and touch me.
Wherefore leave thy self with a glad and willing mind, that thou may
neither seek, wish or choose this or that, of any respect, love or
inclination which thou carriest to thy self, but let all things be
indifferent to thee, only thou should for my sake, esteem that dearest,
and desire that most, which thou know is most acceptable unto me. For thou
ought to meditate of that prayer always in thy heart, which I offered unto
my Father in the Garden, when I was going to my passion, saying.

O Lord thy will be done: Likewise: not mine, but thy will be done. And this
also. Teach me to do thy will, because thou art my God. Or else this: Let it be
done unto me according to thy good pleasure.

But will thou know how much thou haste forsaken thy self, or how much thou
have mortefied thine own will? see, when loss of any thing, when reproaches,
when injuries do happen unto thee, whether thou be troubled with them, and
whether thou be more troubled when they happen to thee, then when they
happen to other men. By this thou shall find the love which thou bear to
creatures: yea, thou shall perceive the affection which thou carriest to thy
self. For thou do therefore love temporal goods, thou do therefore love
honor, thou do therefore love quiet, and thou do therefore love such
miserable, and transitory things, because thou love thy self. For thou
wishest to enjoy these things, whereas if thou did love me, thou should
rather bannish all these things quite from thy heart for my sake, and take all
adversity as willingly as thou would possess happiness; to be short, thou
should not be more, but rather much less troubled when adversity
happens to thy self, then when it happens to others. For thou should
never be grieved with any accedent in this world, but only when thou
shewedst thy self vnreuerent or contemptuous toward me.

Therefore, he that will forsake himself (my Daughter) his only labor,
exercise, and the whole scope of his desire, must tend not partly, but
altogether to mortefie his own appetite, to renounce his own will, to be
transformed into a new shape, and to be in all sorts free, and delivered from
any impediment whatsoever, which lies in the way, and makes a division
betwxit him and me. The least impediments are cogitations and forms of
creatures which men frame in their mind; the greatest is a man's own will,
which the stronger it is, and the more large place that it occupies and
possesses in a man: the less a^ I present there, and so consequently the
less do I possess in his soul. As long therefore as thou find an
inclination or natural desire, to one thing more than another, thou art not
yet perfectly mortefied, but thou haste somewhat remaining in thee, which thou
must mortefie and extinguish.

What motion soever thou feel in thy self, that proceeds not from me,
what thing soever goes about to busy, alter, or possess thy mind, what
likeness soever of any thing, does labor to imprint it self within thy
heart, whatsoever seeks to draw thy liking to it, or to grieve or ouerwhelme
thee: Endeavor thou with a recollected mind, close shut within it self, and
lifted up to me, lightly to pass over and carelessly to despise all hope and
fear, gain and loss, quiet and labor, joy and grief, mirth and sadness,
and all such things as may seek to possess thy heart with all affection
that thou may carry toward them. For if thou fix thy mind upon me,
thou shall easily tread all these things under thy feet. But if thou love
thy self, if thou haste not wholly renounced thine own self, thou shall
always feel by following of thine own appetite, joy and grief, anger and
fear, care and infinite other passions. Wherefore thou can never be quiet,
except thou haste clean mortefied thy self and forgotten thine own self
wholly. Thou must quite abandon thy self, that thou may live in me only,
and bend thy self to be wise in me only, and be sencible to feel nothing but
me only. Thou shall want nothing if thou be content in this sort to want
thy self. Thou shall want nothing as long as thou art with me, I will have
care of thee, I will protect thee, thou can loose nothing in loosing of thy
self after this sort, for thou shall find in me, that which is a hundred
times better, then the things which thou haste lost for my sake. Cast
therefore all thy care, all thy trouble, all thy fear, and even thy self also
upon me and commit thy self to me. Hope and trust in me, thy hope cannot
deceive thee, neither can it possibly be to great, if thou lead est a good and
penitent life: whatsoever thou co^plainest of to a man that is thy friend,
reveal the same unto me. I will take care of thee, I will mainetaine thee, I
will defend thee. Wherefore see that thou regard me only, being quite
banished from thy self within thee: that thou may mortefie and extinguish
thy self, that is by rooting out thy desires, thy self love, thy sensual
appetites, and by renouncing all those delights of thine, which thou did
desire before, and for which unlawful desires I was not thy GOD, nor thou my
servant. (O my Daughter) thou ought to labor with all thy force, that thou
may attain to this obedience, this forsaking of thine own will for my sake,
and thou ought to resign thy self so wholly unto me, and so far to subject
thy self to my will, as thou should have no other will at all in thy self,
but only that which is my will and pleasure.

Of the considerations of Gods providence.
AS long as there remains any choice, election, or inclination in thee, that
moves thee to take more pleasure, to be better contented, and to receive
greater consolation by one thing then by an other: there resists some thing
of thine own in thee, and thou haste not yet fully renounced thy self. For
thou ought to take all things indifferently, and equally, without either
more joy, or more grief, at one time then an other and only to depend and
rely upon my providence. For this course would procure thee greatest
liberty, the greatest peace, and the greatest quietness to thy soul. Stand
not therefore upon thy self, believe not thine own wit or thine own force,
trust not in thine own ability, promise thy self nothing upon thine own
warrant, build nothing upon thine own imagination, and do nothing of thine
own head, neither have confidence in thine own profiting, or in thine own
will, although it be indeed good: but forsaking in all sorts thine own self:
go out of thy self, and renouncing quite all the property which thou have in
thy self, rest and repose thy self in me only, trust in my goodness, rely
upon my grace, and upon my providence, be ready at all times without any
choice, without any difference and without any murmuring in thy heart, to
receive for the fulfilling of my pleasure, adversity, as willinglye as
prosperity, both temporallye, and eternally, desiring always this only
thing, that thou may ever be in all respects according to my will.

And therefore regard not how much or how little thou profitest, how near or
how far thou art from me, how great or how small gifts thou haste of me,
nor whether thou shall be in Purgatory or no, how long or when thou shall
suffer those pains, but refer thy self wholly to my providence, and desire
nothing, but that thou may ever be found best contented with that which
agrees most with my pleasure, and wish not for any greater good, neither
think that greater can possibly happen unto thee, then that my first, last,
and most laudable will be fulfilled in thee. Wherefore seek to please me in all
such sort as is most agreeable to my will, let my will be both thy perfection,
and the measure of thy perfection* Trouble not thy heart with any question or
immagination of future things, take no care for those things that be
uncertain, and may happen, but leave all these things to me which governs
all, for it may so fall out, as that evil which is expected or feared, may not
happen: of if it do happen, when it is present, sufficient for the day is the
evil thereof. For howsoever, and whatsoever does by my permission chance unto
thee, my providence ought to please thee above all things, and thou ought
to praise me for it, and to hold this as an undoubted truth, that, that is
ever best for thee, which does so happen unto thee, and that it was foreseen,
and appointed by my gracious hand, to fall upon thee for thy commodity: as
thou do with a full confidence wholly depend upon my goodness. To conceive
well of me, to trust firmly in me, to commit themselves altogether unto me,
these things I say, be as it were trumpets, whereby men do sound out my
goodness. And therefore when I find these things in any man, they please me so
much, as I can never forsake him, nor suffer any evil or dangerous thing to
happen unto him, which has thus settled his hope in me. The greater hope and
trust therefore that thou have in me, the more fully and perfectly thou shall
obtain thy desire. And whatsoever shall happen unto thee, if thou beleeuest
that I am so good and gracious as I will turn all thy adversities, and all
things that persecute thee, or are thine enemies to thy good, that is, to thy
befit, I will not deceive thee, but do it indeed. And if at the least thou
can but frame thy self to accept all things in this sort, it shall so come
to pass out of all doubt as I have said. Yet my devout friends are wont to
pray, that I may deliver them from Purgatory, and it is no ill petition. But
when thou art come to perfection, and praiest, lying prostrate at the feet of
my Majesty, thou shall desire to satisfy my justice with that small abillitie
which rests in thee, and shall offer thy self for my glory unto Purgatory,
and to suffer for the fulfilling of my will, whatsoever it shall be my will to
lay upon thee and the fulfilling of my will shall please thee more than the
escaping of Purgatory. Therefore if thou shall overcome by my grace, that
inordinate love and zeal which thou carriest toward thy self, and for thy
self, to please thy senses and thine own will, and perfectly with a full
confidence would commit thy self unto me, and rely upon me only: thou
should find that my grace would work woonders in thee. Studdy therefore to
please me, (my Daughter) and with thinking of me, clean forget thy self, and
I will so continually think of thee, and be always such an assistant unto
thee, as I will never forsake thee.

Once again I say unto thee, accept all things which happen unto thee, as sent
purely, simply, and immediately from my hand, and not from any creature,
admiring, praising, and accepting in all things of my providence, with joy and
gladness, and with love and thanksgiving to me for my goodness. For in all
those things which happen unto thee, I do intend and work thy salvation,
and with a singular affection being mindful of thee, I send and appoint these
things for thee, to the end that thou maiiest either do or suffer such
things as may move me to have mercy upon thee. Endeavor thou therefore to
draw out of things which thou see and feel, and out of all things which
do happen unto thee, an occasion to praise and honor me, that thou may be
worthy to understand the true cause why I permitted them, that is, with how
great charity I sent them unto thee, and how thou ought to refer all
these things unto my pleasure, to trust in me, and withal to offer thy self
for my glory, even unto the fountain from whence they flowed, that is, unto
my goodness. If thou were perfectly acquainted with this exercise, whereby thou
should as willingly accept sorrow, as comfort at my hand, and should also
know how to find me in every one of my creatures: nothing could then seem so
contrary and overthwart unto thee, that thou would not contemn and
despise: yea, nothing could be so contrary unto my nature and Majesty, but
that it would put thee in mind to offer sacrifice unto me, for I am in every
creature, and without me, no creature can have any being. Wherefore no creature
is so near to himself, as I who am most near, and inward with themall.
Wherefore thou ought to be so poor in spirit, as there should be nothing,
that thou did either love or mislike, seek or fly, ^eare or desire for
any respect to thy self: bnt only for the fulfilling of my will, which at all
times and in all places thou shall come woonderfully to understand, by those
things which I ordain, and permit, if thou seek me with a pure mind and
have regard to consider of my providence.

How we must bear adversity.
Receive all adversity and tribulation as a messenger and token of my grace,
which approaches toward thee, and therefore whenever thou find thy self
oppressed with any trouble or adversity, rejoice, knowing that thou haste
deserved it, and impute not that which thou suffer to any body, but to thine
own sins, and withal give me thanks, that looking upon thee with the eyes of
my mercy, I have vouchsafed to bestow so much favor on thee, as to visit,
reprove, and correct thee here with a rod like my child, and have not utterly
rejected thee, as thou did deserve. For as long as I chasten thee, as long as
I scourge thee, it is a sign that I desire thou should amend. But if I
withdraw my correction, leaving thee wholly to thy self, thou shall seem
then to have rest and be quiet, but thou art most unhappy, when I have
withdrawn from thee that care and regard which I had of thee, and that thou
art no long ^in my custody. Whatsoever therefore that thou suffer, say unto
thy self, I have deserved more grievous punishment, but although thou had
deserved none, yet thou should bear all those adversities which I lay upon
thee, for the love of me, and for my sake (least that otherwise my good
pleasure should not be fulfilled) even gladly with a most patient and loving
mind toward me, considering that I suffered so many grievous torments for thy
salvation. And yet although I had suffered nothing do not I deserve that thou
should suffer somewhat for my sake, in respect of those infinite benefits
which I daily power upon thee, seeing all that thou haste, thou receiuest
from me only? lastly, suppose that there were none of these reasons to move
thee, yet ought thou to remember, that thou art mine, created and made by
me, and no less in my power to be framed every way accorto my will, then
earth is, when it is in the hand of the Porter. And that it is therefore in my
power, and a part of my justice to do with thee whatsoever I will, and it is
no more lawful for thee to gainesay me, then for the earth to gainesay the
Potter. For what have thou to say against me, who am thy creator, whether I
send thee comfort or sorrow? But knowing thou have committed so much
wickedness as thou have done, why do thou not rather desire that that
contempt, wherewith thou have despised my goodness should be punished in
thee, and thy proud and arrogant mind humbled? But there is yet another
reason to move thee the rather hereunto, that is, because I am one, which do
love thee most faithfully, and do provide all things that are best and most
wholesome for thee.

And seeing it was my will before I created thee, that thou should suffer at
this hour, and at this moment those same things which thou do suffer: thou
ought to desire above all things, that this my most loving will, being
full of all fidelity and charity toward thee, may be fulfilled in thee, so
as thou should endure al those things which thou do suffer, with gladness,
with a sweet kind of patience, with thanksgiving, with meeknes, and with
devotion in thy heart, having no chollerick, nor bitter thought against those
which seek to lay those adversities and vexations upon thee: but rather thou
should take them as my ministers in this behalf, appointed and commanded
by me to this purpose, and thou should consider having thine eyes fixed
upon me only, with how loving, how kind, and how faithful a heart toward
thee, I have sent thee these troubles for thy benefit.

Receive therefore all affliction whatsoever falls upon thee, as sent from
my hand only without any other mean, and take it as sent by me of love
toward thee for thy commodity, accept it as gladlye as I do send it
louinglye. And when thou suffrest no adversity, think that my good will is
alienated from thee, and that I am offended with thee, because I withdraw
afflictions and tribulations from thee, which is the notablest gift and
ornament wherewith I am wont to honor and beautify my friends.

Recount with thy self how great vexations, how great pesecutions, how great
contradictions, how great torments, how great and wearisome toiles I suffered:
how great my most dear mother endured: and to be short, how great all my
friends walking in my steps have stained. Remember also that no man attaineth
to eternal glory, but by the Cross, and Cup of affliction and that there is
no other way but this high way to the heavenly country, which way of
necessity thou must pass thorough, if thou desire to enjoy our company in
eternal happiness. Lastly consider that there is nothing so small or so little
worth, which either thou do or suffer for my sake, but that thou shall
receive a very great and glorious reward of me for it. And yet notwithstanding
I will not have thee to serve me, or to suffer these things in hope of reward,
but only of mere love toward me. I know what reward I will give thee, I say
I will, because I do not owe it thee in any other sort, then for that it is my
will to bestow it upon thee. For all my gifts are of free grace. Think not
thou therefore of any reward, be not so base minded, but think of me, with a
more noble, loving, and faithful heart, and submit thy self unto me, even of
mere love for mine own sake, to endure whatsoever my will is to lay upon
thee. If thou knew (my Daughter) how great fruit is reaped by tribulations,
thou would esteem it as a great happiness to glory in crosses and
afflictions. The greater adversities therefore that do happen unto thee, and
the more contrary that they are to thy desires, yea, although they repugne such
desires of thine as are to please me) the more earnestly thou should
endeavor patiently to suffer them, and the more wholly thou should resign
thy self unto me. For it is done by my will and providence, that thy will
sometime be hindered: yea, even when it is good, that by this mean for one
virtue thou may obtain two, and withal may receive the reward of a
good work for thy good will (although thou be not permitted to put it in
execution) and for the adversity which did hinder thy will, thou shall receive
a crown of patience. Thou may add to all these, for thy farther
encouragement this one reason also, that the more thy good will is tempted by
adversity, and the faithfuller it is found, and the more patient it is in
bearing of crosses, and such things as resist it: the more glorious the crown
is which I have laid up to reward it. Therefore because I love thee, I will
have thee to be wholly and purely a faithful Spouse unto me. I will have thee
to serve me with renouncing all interest in thy self, and to go, not whether
thou will, but whether I send or lead thee. Neither must thou seek withal
to serve thine own appetite, when thou laborest in these things to please
me: but rather as a faithful, devout, and obedient handmaid, which has no
will to do any thing, but that which is agreeable to the will of her Mistress.
Thou must seek in nothing to please thy self, but me only, with all
sincerity and purity in thy intention, and that must be always most
acceptable unto thee which I lay upon thee to suffer, whether it be by the
hands of men, or any other mean whatsoever.

Respect not therefore men, neither impute it to men, if thou sustainest any
adversity. What blame does the rod deserve, if the father seeking to correct
his son does use it? why then art thou angry with men, which being my
instruments serve as a scourge to correct thee? Seek not therefore to resist
them, or to argue against them, but have a special care that thine own
impaciencie do not hurt thy self, and lest thou lose that benefit by
repining, which thou should have gained by patient suffering.

Be therefore courteous and gentle toward all men, in taking patiently
whatsoever shall happen. Carry a mild countenance, and use an humble
behavior, that no choler, nor exclaiming, no deiection of thy mind, nor
sorrow appear in thee, nor yet that any thing be found in thee, which may make
men to think, that thou endurest some affliction, or art oppressed with some
trouble.

If any man reprove or reproach thee, show him a mild and gentle countenance
holding thy peace, and smile with a certain kind of bashfulnes and modesty,
in token of thy charity which accepts it in good part, and which takes all
things well, without either thinking of revenge, or remembering of an injury.
Beware that thou speak not at that time above two or three words, and that
with great temperance. And by this mean thou shall show thy self so humble
and meek, as every man may presume to reprove thee, and no man be afraid to
displease thee, or to use any reproach toward thee. Learn in all adversity
whenever any man does chide thee, reproach thee, or injury thee, to use
silence, to bear it patiently, and to be quiet, and thou shall assuredly find
my grace, which thou can never attain unto by any other mean, then by being
quiet, and suffering patiently whatsoever I shall lay upon thee, being as
willing if it stand with my pleasure, to receive adversity, as to enjoy
prosperity.

Thou have (my Daughter and Spouse also) my life as perfect example of patience
and meekenes, neither did I speak it without great reason, when I said: Learn
of me because I am meek and humble of heart, seeing that my life was a lively
pattern of patience, humillitie, and meekenes. For in the middle of all my
pains and torments, of all the derisions and blasphemies, which mine enemies
used toward me, of all their cruel threatenings, of their most wicked and
despightfull countenances against me, what complaint or show of repining at
this dealing of theirs proceeded from me? which of mine enemies did I curse?
to which of them did I speak sharply? which of them did I answer? to which
of them did I wish any harm? Nay rather, was I not sorry for them, when I did
pray for them all? Follow thou therefore my example, and have patience still
joined with quietness and tranquillity of thy soul, and be meek without
murmuring or complaining. Fight not for thy self, defend not, neither yet
excuse thou thy self, hold thou thy peace, and commit both thy self and thy
cause to my protection: I will fight for thee. Cleave therefore in the mean
time whole unto me, in all quietness without any perturbation, or motion in thy
soul, being ready with all gladness, rather to suffer any confusion for my sake,
then either inwardly in thy mind, or outwardly in thy show to use the least
murmuring in the world against me. As long as thou think that thou art
wronged: as long as thou beleeuest my (Daughter) that thou suffer unjustly;
or have not deserved those things which thou suffer: thou art neither come
to true patience, nor yet to a perfect knowledge of thy self. Wherefore I
would wish thee to be always ready with a joyful and devout heart to run
and meet any adversity, that shall light upon thee: and offer thy self unto
me, as one that is willing to suffer tribulations, to want all things that
thou desire, and both to take any travail, and to bear any misery in what
sort soever it shall be my pleasure to appoint. Think that day lost wherein
thou have not received some notable cross. If thou knew what great
commodity is reaped by patience, thou would do great honor, and show
great thankefulnes to those that afflict thee. Consider how I, as an innocent
Lamb, did carry a most meek and quiet mind, void of all bitterness
toward those which did spette upon me, scourge me, and crucify me, and
how I excused them, and prayed for them,

In like sort must thou do, and not account any thing injury that is done
unto thee, nor yet believe that injuries can be offered thee, but regard me
only, respect me wholly, and thou shall come to learn that I, and no other
have done al these things merely of love toward thee. By doing thus (my
Daughter) there is nothing in any creature which will not be a mean and
occasion, for thee to obtain my grace more abundantly, because thou shall
find me in every one of them, so that thou do contemplate upon the
creature, not as a creature, but upon me in the creature, as thou ought to
do. And if thou do in this behalf as thou ought, thou shall receive me,
thou shall hear me, thou shall feel me in every one of my creatures. F^^ I
do speak unto thee in them all: hearken therefore unto me, and learn by
every thing that happens unto thee, what I would have thee do, and when
thou know my will, be ever most ready to perform it.

If thou did give ear unto me after this manner, the world and all
things contained therein, should be a book of instructions for thee to direct
thee in that course, whith agrees most with my pleasure.

Of wanting of consolation.
THE high way, and also that most excellent way, wherein all my perfect friends
have walked, and wherein thou must also walk: is, to want all kind of
consolation, when thou art compassed in on every side with adversity and
distress, and to be so pore as there may be nothing left, to which thou may
turn thy self for succor, to which thou may fly unto for refuge, or in
which thou may trust: nor yet, that there be any man whom thou may seek
counsel of, or in whom thou may have confidence but in me only, that by
this mean thou may have no other thing to remain for thee to do, but only
that all thy care and cogitations may tend to devise how thou may profit and
set forth my glory, in sustaining of these afflictions both inwardly in thy
mind, by having a desire to offer thy self unto them, and outwardly in thy
behavior by serving of all creatures, and subiecting thy self unto them all,
in such sort as if it were lawful for the^ without committing any offense, or
doing thee any injury to afflict thee, and tread thee under their feet: yea,
as if they did in this no more than I charged and commanded them. In doing
thus, thou should be free, from all complaining, from all disputing, from
all grudging, and from all malice against thy neighbor. And by this account
thou should love those best which did oppress thee most. Because they did
open the way unto thee, whereby thou may come to renounce thy self, and
gave thee an opportunity both to please me, and show thy self thankful
toward me.

Moreover thou should rejoice, that they offered thee a good occasion to
exercise virtue, and to try thy love toward me, and thou would desire
this above all things, if thou did indeed perfectly love me.

There is yet an other perfection greater then this, and in a higher degree,
that is, to be destitute both of all earthly and heavenly consolation, being
laden with tentations, distresses, vexations, doubts, fears, perplexities,
and adversities, and to be as it were utterly rejected from me and quite
forgotten by me, and yet notwithstanding all this, not to fly from me, and
go to my creatures, not to depart from me, and seek worldly help, nor yet to
desire, that consolations and revelations should be imparted unto them. But
still to trust in me, to expect patiently my pleasure, to cleave unto me with
a pure faith, and perfect charity, and to be ready to continue in this
state, as long as it shall be my will to permit it. Nay which is more, to
refer themselves wholly unto me, and to offer themselves to suffer these, and
any thing whatsoever, for the fulfilling of my and setting forth of my glory,
and to praise me in all these distresses, in such sort as they are able,
although it be but with a dry and barren heart.

Of inward peace and meekenes of heart.
THou have understood sufficiently (my Spouse) how thou ought to be
patient, and in patience meek, that is, how thou ought to bear all things
with so indifferent, peaceable and quiet a mind (for meekenes is no other
thing, then perfect tranquillity in true patience) as nothing should be able
to make thee sad, or to vex or trouble thee, whatsoever did happen unto thee,
that proceeded not from me in my wrath and displeasure, whether it were for a
time or for eternity, excepting this only, which thou must always carry for
a firm resolution, that thou will never be excluded from my grace and
charity, nor yet in thine own will be withdrawn or divided from me: For
this thou must not neglect, but take care of above all things that thou may
always be united unto me in perfect charity: Thou must also remember, in
what place soever thou be, what pain or consolation soever thou feel (if
the same be for the setting forth of my glory, and by my special pleasure)
that thou rejoice in it, because by it thou obaiest my will being ready in
every sort to be according as it shall best agree with my will, either
comforted or afflicted. And when thou art settled in this resolution no loss of
any external thing that happens unto thee, in this world can grieve thee:
For nothing can chance that is contrary to thy liking, as long as my will is
always thy will, and that thou have no other will in thee, but that which is my
pleasure: Therefore then (as I said) let my will be always fulfilled in all
things. And it should be the greatest joy that thou could have, when my will
is performed in thee. For thou art then fully settled in thine inward man, in
all peace and tranquillity, although thou find in thine own outward man,
distress and desolation, which notwithstanding thou do patiently take
without any perturbation, because thy will is in all things agreeable to mine.
Be quiet in this manner (my Daughter) providing so, as all fury, and all kind
of repining be altogether extinguished in thee, and that thine irascible power
or faculty be even so fully mortefied in thee, as it be immovable, and not
to be stirred by any accident. Let thy concupiscible power also be so
established in virtue, as it may be wholly lifted up unto me, And let thy
reasonable power taking part of their joys, accord with them, so as thy
conscience inioying peace and quietness within it self, thy whole soul may
be in perfect tranquillity.

Of the love which we should bear toward our neighbor.
LEt thy heart toward thy neighbor (my Daughter) be full of compassion, and a
chaste kind of love. I call that a chaste love which defiles not the heart
with carnal concupiscence, nor does busy it with too much familiarity, nor
too often keeping of company, nor does stain it with any inordinate
affection, nor does disquiet it with thoughts that procure distraction in thy
soul, nor does trouble it with importunity of vain desires, nor does
occupy thy imagination with multitude of fancies, or impressions of diverse
things: but without choice of persons, or regard of sex does embrace all
sorts of men and women for my sake, with abundance of charity, and for it
only without any other respect at all. Therefore being full of a devout kind
of good will and pure charity, rejoice with every one in all the benefits and
commodities which they receive, whether it be touching their soul or body,
and even flowing with a kind of compassion, which can never cease running.
Lament with every one in their necessities and tribulations, pouring out the
streams of thy courtesy, affabillitie, mercy and pity to all men.

And see that thou be inflamed with a ready desire and willing mind to
comfort them, to serve them to succor them, and to help them, to bear the
burden of their troubles, esteeming their corporal or spiritual afflictions
thine own, and carrying the unspeakable affection of a most tender Mother
toward all men whatsoever. Endeavor therefore to excuse every man, and to do
them good by thy prayers, benefits, and all the pleasures that lies in thy
power. And upon such as thou can bestow no other benefitte, seek to
mittigate their sorrow, with thy courteous behavior, thy sweet speech, or any
other means that thou art able.

Take special heed that thou neither iudgest, nor despisest any man, because
it both harmeth thy soul and besides displeases me wonderfully. And
therefore exclude by all the means thou may suspicions, and ill conceits of
other men, from thee: Excuse also all those which fall and offend. When thou
see one to sin, say within thy self: that he was permitted to fall for his
greater amendment, that he had a good intention, and was deceived either by
ignorance or error, that his infirmity being too strongly assaulted with
tentation, was enforced to yield. Say and speak it unfeignedly from thy heart,
that thou had fallen much more heinously then he did if this tentation had
assaulted thee. Thou ought not with one and the self same, but with a
diverse eye to look upon thine own and thy neighbors acts. For thou should
judge of thine own with a severe eye, agrauating thine imperfections, and not
esteeming or seeking to lessen thy virtues. And on the contrary part, thou
should make reckoning of thy neighbors imperfections as very small and of
this virtues as very great.

Wherefore take care always neither to speak nor hear ill of others. Never
reprove thy neighbor in anger though he deserve to be blamed. For what does
it profit thee if thou curest him, and woundest thy self? Or what does the
medicine avail, if by it thou go about to heal one wound, and in the mean
time make ten others? Expecte thou a time wherein thou may have fit
opportunity to reprove him, and then reprove him with the spirit of lenity
and sweetness, rather by entreating him, and exhorting him, then by handling him
sharply or roughly, making thy hearty prayers unto me, with sorrowful
groans, that this reproouing of thine may be effectual and work his
salvation. Take heed that thou be not the cause of breeding dissension,
discord, or hatred amongst men, but let all thy speech in all places tend to
peace, being mindful that I said: Blessed are the peace makers, for they
shall be called the children of God.

If any man offend thee, if any man persecute thee with malice, requite his
wrongs with benefits, his hard and sower countenance, with a sweet and meek
behavior, his sharp and reproachful words, with mild and gentle answers, and
by this mean thou shall more easily bring him to the knowledge of his own
fault.

Let all the labors, miseries, poverty, contempt and sorrows, which thou
see men endure, put thee in mind of those labors, afflictions, contempts,
pains and many other sharp and grievous miseries, which I suffered for thy
sake, that thou may by this mean behold me, find me, perceive me,
perfectly love me, daily suffer with me, and continually be transformed into
me, by every thing which thou see in every man.

Of the purity of the heart.
Endeavor to have such purity in thy heart, as being withdrawn from all
earthly cogitations, thou may not addict thy self to any delight, nay that
thou may seek no delight, or take delight in any thing, or content thy
self with the desire of any delight whatsoever: cut off also not only
unlawful thoughts, but all such as be idle, and unprofitable, suffering none
of them wittingly to enter into thee. Let thy firm resolution be to think
nothing but either of me, or for my sake. Receive not into thy heart as near
as thou can, the similitude and forms of earthly things, but thrust out all
such impressions and fancies, as soon as ever they begin to appear. Cast
all thy cares and troubles upon me, be not disquieted with any thing
whatsoever shall happen. Keep ever a watchful guard over thy heart, that no
inordinate affection to man, woman, or any other creature, no sensual desire,
no vicious passion, no concupiscence, no ill inclination, or wicked intention
may rest in thee.

Never give thy consent that any separation, although it be never so little,
remain between me and thee, and see that thou do in nothing either seek
or respect thy self, but me only, purely, simply, and wholly.

Lift up thy heart in every place unto me, and keep it still raised from all
earthly cogitations, that whatsoever thou haste to speak, to deal in, or to
think of, thou do first deal with me in it by prayer, and by the internal
discourse of thy spirit. Let every action and external business, give thee
matter and occasion to pray, yea, let the very occupation and business of thy
heart be no other thing but a continual and daily prayer. See nothing though
it be never so far from the nature of prayer, so deformed or so contrary to
all goodness, but draw thou presently out of it, some occasion to pray unto
me, and to praise my name. Let all things be means for thee to lift up thy
heart, and to raise thy affection unto me.

What fair thing soever thou see, what pleasant or delightful thing soever
thou feel, acknowledge it to proceed from me, and let it put thee in mind
of my beauty and glory, that I only may be thy whole delight and
consolation. Let all things edefie thee, and whatsoever happens unto thee,
take opportunity by it, to meditate upon some thing that may be profitable
for the soul.

How we ought to refer all the good things we receive to the goodness of God.
CHallenge nothing to thy self by any of my works, or by the mean of those
gifts which I bestow upon thee. Thou ought to acknowledge my gifts to my
honor, and to wonder at my liberality and charity bestowed upon thee,
without any desert of thine own, and my most gracious bounty. And withal
thou must ever have presented before thine eyes thine own baseness, and how
thou art of thy self merely nothing, that by this consideration thou may
not ascribe or challenge any thing to thy self out of those gifts which I
bestowed upon thee, neither yet be rejoiced or delighted with any thing that
thou receiuest from me, or for that I have wrought any good thing in thee. Thou
ought not I say for any of these to rejoice in thy self, or be glad for
thine own sake, that is, because thou haste attained to some goodness, for that
should be a rejoicing altogether in thy self, But thou should rejoice in
me, and for my gracious bounty that I have been so good, so liberal, so
gentle, and so merciful to a most unworthy and unthankful creature. Which
goodness of mine, the viler that thou art, does the more manifestly appear
in thee.

Rejoice therefore in my gifts, not attributing any praise thereby to thy
self, but ascribing thy whole glory unto me. And behave thy self so
discretly in receiving any of my gifts (excepting thankfulness, and humility,
which must ever increase in thee) as if nothing had been given thee, nothing
had been wrought in thee, and that thou did feel no good at all, directing
thine eyes to thine own unworthiness, which art of thy self merely nothing, and
to thine own disability. which art able to do nothing, and to thine own
imperfection, which cannot attain to the smallest goodness without any grace,
that by this means thou may not be extolled in thine own conceit, or
rejoice in thine own abillitie, or flatter thy self with thine own power,
but all unto me only.

If thou feel therefore any sweet inspiration, or any lightning of my grace
within thee, or that by my mercy, thou be enabled to do an other man a
benefitte, or good turn, thou may rejoice in the good, which I did by thee
as my instrument, but in no sort to rejoice in thy self, that is, not to
flatter or please thine own appetite (for in it lies hidden self love) nor to
think that it was done by thine own power, but rather turn away thy heart,
from that which was done, and from thy self also, that thou may never join
together these two cogitations, which is thy self, and my benefit, except it
be (as I said) when thou comparest my infinite goodness with thy unspeakable
baseness.

Suffer it to pass over for that time, as though it had not been done at al,
and as though thou understood no such matter: and fix all thy cogitations in
the mean season upon me, and not upon the gift which thou haste received from
me. Look never therefore into the gift it self, neither settle thy mind in
that consideration, nor rejoice in it, nor yet be contented to rest there,
neither stay, if thou feel any motion in examining and serching curiously,
within thy self, what thou feel, or what thou do, or whether the motion
proceed from me, or from some other cause, (for this does ever make a division
between thee and me, and does stay thee longer from coming unto me) but
rather pass quickly through all these cogitations, and remove them clean
from thee, and endeavor to unite thy self more neerelie and firmly unto me.
Choose rather not to know the things which after this sort do busy the mind,
then with a curious seach to hinder my grace, and to procure thereby danger to
thy self, either of being puffed up with pride, or of pleasing thy self, or
of rejoicing by the provocation of self love in thine own abillitie, or for
thine own glory. But refer these as all other things unto me, only hold
this with a resolute and assured mind, for an infallible principle, that if I
do grant thee any good gift, it is given merely without desert, to an
unthankful and unworthy creature.

This kind of humillitie does woonderfully please me, that thou should be
afraid and troubled in respect of thine own baseness, unworthiness and
unthankfulness, and be timorous with the consideration of these things, and
feel a shamefastnes and disquiet thereby, and rather think that thou feel
no good thing at all, or that the motion proceeds not from me, than to stay
upon the consideration thereof, and rejoice therein. Remember also that I
forbad my Apostles to rejoice in those miracles which they wrought, or to take
any glory because unclean spirits did submit themselves unto them, and obayed
them, although they were not ignorant, but did assuredly known that this gift
proceeded from me.

In like sort therefore (my Daughter) glory not thou in thy self, neither
rejoice without me, for any consolation or gift which thou receiuest, that is,
rejoice no otherwise in it then may tend to the magnifying of my name, neither
stay in consideration of the thing it self (for therein does ever some
selfeloue lie lurking, which does easily beguile those that be not heedefull)
but rejoice in me only, thatis, rejoice, because I have showed my glory, and
fulfilled my will in thee. Seek no glory to thy self by my gifts, neither
cover to usurp or challenge to thy self any praise thereby, neither yet
ascribe any thing to thine own abillitie.

Ascribe nothing at all I say to thy self, or thine own power, neither suffer
any other man to attribute any thing to thine own worthiness, nor rejoice in it,
as if it were thine own act, but refer all unto me, and keep thy self from
all manner of propriety in thy self, from attributing any thing to thine
own worthiness, from desiring any thing for thine own pleasure, or rejoicing
in any thing for thine own delight. Live without following thine own counsel,
thine own judgment, thine own opinion.

If thou desire (my Daughter) to be my spouse, keep thy heart chaste and
pure, free and quite alienated from any other love but mine only, and from
being possessed by any of my creatures, that it may be left whole for me to
dwell in, which am thy ceator. As often as thou find any sensual or
natural love in thy mind to man, woman, or any other creature whatsoever: so
often remember with sorrowful groans to lift up thy soul unto me, earnestly
desiering my grace, and my favor only, which is a most safe refuge, a most
happy haven for thee, and that not for a time, but endless and eternal.

Whatsoever therefore does busy thy senses with any cogitations toward any
of my creatures, is, neither pure, nor without danger in thy soul. Whenever
all thy natural appetite receaueth any recreation, comfort or delight, (if
thou seek to attain to a perfect purity) thou must of necessity renounce
that pleasure whether it be in words or any other earthly thing. Thou must
pass over all things with a free mind, in no sort subject or in bondage unto
them, nor adhering to any but me only. Take this also with thee for a certain
rule, that nothing makes a man so free from the love of himself or any other
creature and so far from being entangled with any earthly cogitation, as to
despise himself and all creatures, and to account of me in his heart, as his
only precious Jewel, esteeming all other things (as they are indeed) as
filthy dung.

Make a dilligent search in all thy actions, studies, and desires, what moves
thee unto them, and whether thou speak or hold thy peace, whether thou
do somewhat, or be at rest, look narrowly into the innermost corners of
thy soul, that is into the very marrow of thy cogitations and intentions, and
thou shall often find that the original root and seed whereof this grows,
and from whence this does spring, which thou think divine, is merely
humayne, impure, and a lewd seeking to please thine own appetite.

Take heed therefore that no vicious thought enter into thee, nor any
inordinate lust remain in thee. Oh if thou had thy heart clearly
delivered from the love of every creature. Oh if being wholly converted unto
me, thou did desire me only, I would with as great a desire run to meet
thee, and enter of mine own accord with as great affection into thy heart, as if
I could not live without thee, or that without being with thee I could not
enjoy perfect happiness and contentation.

This course I know will seem grievous unto thee at the beginning, and it
cannot be without some troble thus straightly to note and observe in all
things what thou seek, what thoughts possess thy heart, and whenever thou
find any cogitation that is not of me, or for my sake, presently to root it
out of thy mind. This I say, will procure thee great labor, and affliction of
thy spirit. For thou shall find both thy self, and thine own appetite lie
lurking in many things wherein thou must of necessity forsake both, and
presently mortefie any desire that is unlawful, and inordinate in thee. For if
thou seek to overcome thine own nature, it follows of necessity that
thou must do it by violence and forcible means. And therefore thou shall
find as many crosses, as thou have wicked or impure inclinations, which must
be mortefied in thee. But by this mean (my Daughter) thou shall first come to
know thy self, for by seeing thine own disabillitie and weakness in that
thou can not overcome thy self, thou shall be humbled.

And whereas before thou thoughtest thy self to be somewhat, thou shall then
plainlye find that thou art nothing: And if thou persistest in this course
with continual and incessant labor, that which at the first was painful,
thou shall quickly find to be very easy. For this dilligent and daily
looking into thy self, and examining of all thy thoughts, does work many
things in thee, very profitable for thy salvation. It will show thee thine
infirmity, and imperfections, it will breed in thee sorrow, for those sins
which thou find in thy self, and an earnest desire to be delivered of them.
It will also make thee very careful to beware of many offenses, and to avoid
many dangers, into which otherwise thou would have fallen. To conclude, the
labor and distress which thou sustainest, and the toil which thou take to
be clearly rid of these imperfectious, and the tears which thou sheddest
(because thou can not overcome thy self, and clean be without those things
which thou would altogether forsake (shall be a baptism unto thee for the
purging of thy soul, and for the expiation of thine offenses. Faint not
therefore in thy courage, for thou shall overcome all things by settling thy
whole trust in my mercy. Have confidence in me, and thou shall find that I
will make these crosses light for thee, and help thee my self to bear part of
the burden.

How divine inspiratitions ought to be observed, and the grace of God not
neglected.
Have care (my Daughter) to abound always with virtuous customs, and to
spend thy time in good exercises, that thou may use the same as a mean to
lift up thy heart unto me when, thou feel no other great or sensible motions
of my grace within thee. But thou should never addict thy self so much to
thy exercises, as to prefer thine own conceits before my inspirations. For
whensouer thou haste learned to know my will (whether it be by the
manifestation of the will of thy superior, or by my providence, by which of
doubtful events, I do sometime fet down a certain judgment) follow that
straight way, and forsake thine own appetite. Whenever also thou find a
sencible and plain motion of me within thee, presently leave thy self and
obey me, by following of mine inspirations. For I hold not my self satisfied
though thou do serve me, seek me, and bend thy self to please me; but I
will have thee to serve me in such sort, as my will is to be served, that is, I
will have thee clean to forsake thine own will, yea, although it be in a
thing which is virtuous and commendable, to follow my will in an other thing,
which is not half so good, but seems to be vile and of no value. For the
same thing in respect of my will, that is, because it is my pleasure, my
ordinance, and my appointment to have it so, is not only not vile, and of no
valu, but very good, yea and much better also then the other. Thou must
therefore often omit and alter thine exercises in this sort, not of negligence,
not of sloth, not of any inconstancy of thy heart, but of a pure, and mere
renouncing of thy self, that thou may not in any place, or in any thing
stand upon thy self, but rely wholly upon me, with a firm and full
confidence in me. Oh if thou knew what great danger, and what great loss of
spiritual profit is incurred by not receiving of mine inspirations when I send
the^, and how damnable it is to resist my divine motions, thy heart would even
consume for grief, and very fear of my justice. Wherefore (my Daughter)
stand always in fear of thine own actions, and suspect thy self ever of
unthankfulness toward me. Be ever in doubt that it may so happen unto thee
for thy deserts as it has happened to many other, that thou may for thy pride
and ingratitude be justly forsaken of me, and deservedly fall from my grace.

Be humble therefore always having no confidence in thy self but in me. Pray
continually for my grace, and observe my inspirations with great heed, that
thou may know what I require of thee, and it is not only sufficient for thee
to know my will, but to do it whenever thou shall come to know it, and
despising all other things whatsoever, to prefer it before any delight or
contentation of thine own. And whereas I warned thee, that thou should be
afraid for loosing of my grace, and for being forsaken of me by thine own
negligence and ingratitude; thou must have a special care that this fear
proceed not of desperation or of a weak faith, but of humility, which is ever
a fear, full of hope and confidence in me.

If thou be not able to imitate the exercises of other men, be not
therefore discouraged, or dejected in thine own mind. For thou should not
so much respect other men's exercises, as their virtues, seeing that I do
distribute my gifts to every man according to his constitution by nature, and
that particular vocation whereunto I call him, and agreeable to that scope, and
certain end whereunto I appoint him. I furnish him also with diverse exercises,
fit for him, which are unfit for many other, and not meet for every body,
because the nature or vocation of particular men. (to the which my grace for
the most part, is accommodated, and made agreeable) is different, and many
times very contrary. If therefore thou can not follow other men's exercises
of virtue, yet thou may immitate their virtues, for they be not different,
but one and the same in all. As for example, thou may be humble, thou may
be merciful, thou may be patient, and thou may resemble other men, in the
very same virtues, though thou can not immitate them in the very same
exercises. For there is but one way to please me, which has bin to all my holy
servants ever one uniform and the same. This is the way of charity which has
many and sundry exercise, of my holy servant, directed to one end, and
which thou must walk, by whatsoever means I shall appoint unto thee. If thou
walk in this way of charity, that is, if thou follow me, by receiving of
all things as from me, by committing of allthinges unto me, by humbling thy
self under my mighty hand, by yielding thy self unto me, by respecting me
only, and seeking my glory in all things, that either thou do or
speak; I will not suffer thee to go astray, though thou walk in never so
great darkness or ignorance, though thou be vexed with never so great
temptation or distress, and though thou think thy self never so quite
forsaken or rejected by me. Have thou therefore consideration always of thy
vocation or calling, and use exercises agreeable to the same, being ever
ready to leave them, change them, discontinue them, and resume them, according
as thou shall be directed by my inspirations, providence, and good pleasure.
For thou should not measure thy perfection by this or that man's account, nor
by thine own estimation: but thou ought to measure it by my good pleasure,
resigning thy self wholly thereunto, that thou may not seek to attain to
this or that man's affection, or to such as thou desire thy self, but to such
as my will is to appoint thee. Let that perfection therefore which thou
desire consist, either in abundance, or scarcity, according to my will and
good pleasure.

Wish and pray that thou may be such a one in my sight, as my special will
is to have thee. Observe diligently, and learn both to know and follow the
inspiration of my grace. If thou neither seek to please thy natural
inclinations, nor in thy spiritual exercises, but respect me only with a
pure intention, thou shall quickfinde the way wherein I would have thee to
walk, and the course which my desire is thou should always hold.

How we must employ the gifts of God which we receive to the benefit of others.
I Will not have thee (my daughter) to neglect those graces, and gifts which I
bestow upon thee. But take heed also that thou do not seek thine own
commendations in these graces, of mine, that thou do not by them ascribe any
thing to thine own worthiness, that thou be no puffed up with pride, that
thou do not boast of them, glory in them, or desire to please thine own
self by them, but employ them al wholly to my glory: remembering ever
specially above all things, that of thy self thou art nothing, haste nothing,
and art able to do nothing. And that whatsoever thou haste, thou haste
received from me only. And that I love not to have my gifts return unto me
fruitles, and without doing of any good, but with gain and usury, as I
forewarned all men in the parable of tallences which I spoke of in the Gospel.
For as thine eye in thy body is not an eye only for it self, nor is placed
there only for the use and benefit of it self but to the end that it may help
all the rest of the members to see: so what talents or gifts soever I have
bestowed upon thee, I have not given them for thine own self only, that
thou should reap the whole fruit and benefitte of them, to thine own use,
but I have placed these gifts or good things in thee, for the benefit of
other members of my mystical body, that by them thou may serve others,
help others, and both gain and draw thy neghbours to the knowledge of my will,
and the doing of my commandementes. For peradventure I gave not them those
things which I gave thee, because in thee I provided, both for them and thy
self also, as on the contrary part, I have to the same end withheld many
graces from thee, which I bestowed upon them. For in these things which I
bestowed upon others, I had respect upon others, I had respect unto thee, and
gave them not for themselves only, but for thee in the^, because I bestowed
those graces upon them for thy benefit. I require therefore at thy hands,
that thou employest my gifts to other men's commodity, and he pest other men
most willingly by them as much as lies in thy power. If thou can do
somewhat, which they cannot, that so by this mean one kind of charity
remaining in you all, may make of many of you one body: and whatsoever this
body has in one member, let him employ it to the benefit of the rest. For
every member ought to make one another partaker of the gifts which every one of
them receives by reason of the union of the body and communion of charity
which is amongst them.

Let this consideration of my will make thee (my Daughter) cheerful to serve
thy neighbors, glad to bear their burdens, meek to suffer with them, gentle
to comfort them, ready to succor them, and willing to rejoice with them, that
no envy at all, no contention, no emulation, no seeking to please thine own
appetite, be found in thee, nor yet that any of these things may appear in
thy fellows, but that there may remain between you perfect charity, and the
communicating of my gifts one with another, as between the members of one
body: For thou have nothing that is thine own. For what have thou that thou
have not received? Wherefore thou have nothing, as I said, that is not mine,
thou have nothing that is given to thy self alone, that is, thou have nothing
that is given thee for thy self only, but all things whatsoever thou have
received, are committed to thy custody to be altogether employed for the
benefit of the whole body of my Church, and look unto it, for I will require
an account at thy hands, how thou have bestowed the same. Take heed therefore
that thou be never carried away with so profou^d a conte^plation, or think thy
self so well and so perfectly contented in being with me, but that (if
neither the corporal, or spiritual necessity of thy neighbor do call thee
away from it) thou be ready to forsake thine own consolation, the commodity
of thine own devotion, yea, and the sweet exercise or matter wherewith the
consolation it self is nourished, and neglecting wholly to please thy self,
be willing to run in have to help thy neighbor for my sake. For this is
perfect charity, not to seek thine own, but thy neighbors benefit. And
this charity is more acceptable unto me, and more profitable for thy self,
then all the contemplation or devotion that thou can use of thine own.
Moreover, remember always that in all thy actions, in all thy affections, and
in all those things which either thou do or make choice of, or suffer
or seek to avoid, I may be thy beginning, thy middle, and thy end, that
whatsoever thou do, or leauest undone, may be for my sake, and that in the
following of this course, thou seek no other thing, but only my glory, and
the fulfilling of my pleasure. For the deed is not so acceptable to me, in
respect of it self, when thou do succor, or take compassion upon thy
neighbor: but thou art in doing hereof most acceptable in my sight, because
thou dooest for my sake, leave thy self, that is, because thou forsakest thine
own commodity, and seek to relieve thy neighbors necessity. For if thou
do any thing for any other respect, whether it be for favor, friendship, or
any special bond of kindred or familliaritie, or for any commodity, or
recompense which thou look to receive. I accept not of it, but reject it,
although it be never so great and worthy an act. For I accept of no sacrifice
that is offered unto me, if it be not offered for my sake, only and wholly.

Of poverty in spirit.
DO with all zeal and earnestnes, as many good works as thou art able,
hungring, and thirsting after justice. And let no man seem unto thee more
weak and imperfect, more void of all virtues, and more unworthy of my grace
then thy self. Fix thine eyes always upon thine own defects, bewailing and
lamenting that thou have so many imperfections, and want so many virtues.
But remember withal that it is not thy duty, to think, and look into other
men's manners, what virtues they have, what ways they walk, and how they
behave themselves toward me.

I know what I have given every body, I know also what account is fit for
me to require at every bodies hands. Imagine thy self in thine own eyes
the basest, vilest, and wickeddest of all men, and as it were merely nothing.
Be ashamed in my presence, if thou hear any man praise thee, or show a
good conceit of thee, and be sorry for it, because by it they do me injury,
in that they think well of thee which art so vile a soul, so unclean, so
unthankful, and so full of offenses against me. Think thy self so vile, as
that every man may lawfully and with just cause contemn and despise thee,
and that thou may not think thy self injured, or else wronged at any time
whenever any seek to lay reproaches or afflictions upon thee. For thou
ought to receive commendations or reproaches with an equal contentment in
thy mind, and without any difference, but only in accou^ting thy self
altogether unworthy of commendation, and most worthy of reproach. For as
long as thou think thy self to be wronged, as long as thou complainest, and
do believe that thou haste received any injury, thou art not clearelie
purged of self love. For thou should not in truth, take any thing for an
injury, but that wrong which is done unto me. Submit thy self therefore so
wholly to my will and pleasure, as thou may be as well content with evil
as with good, with grief as with joy, which by any external accident does
happen unto thee in this world, remaining always poor internally in thy
spirit, hungring and thirsting (as I said) after justice, and having a heart
free from all earthly cogitations, and ready withal zeal and earnestnes ever
to do those things which agree best with my good pleasure.

Of the love of God.
O (My Daughter) even as the Heart desires to come unto the Fountains of
water, so let thy soul have a desire to come unto me, and thy mind be
enflamed with the love and desire of me. He that is oppressed with a vehement
thirst, can think of nothing but of drink only, for whatsoever he does, his
burning thirst never forsakes him, but still prouokes him with earnest
cogitations and continual desires to have some drink. In like sort if thou
did love me perfectly, if thou did long for me vehemently, thou
could think of nothing else, but how thou might come unto me, how thou
might be united unto me, there would always remain in thee such a hunger
and thirst after justice, that thou would never be satisfied or contented
with that which thou haste done to mine honor, how great soever it were, but
ever grieved and perplexed in thy mind, with thinking that the same which thou
haste done already for my honor was nothing at all. Thou would always
endeavor thy self to do better, thou would always thirste to be more
perfect, thy heart would ever burn with desire to be more nearly united unto
me, to honor me more, and more fully to fulfill my will and good pleasure. They
which are inflamed with an exceeding and an unmeasurable love toward any man
or woman, do loath meat, drink, and all other things, which seem either for
delights to please them, or for necessary use to sustain their body, and
pine away, and grow sickly, if they can not enjoy their desire, or if they
find and perceive that they are not loved again. For they languish with mere
love, and that makes them, that they can neither take any joy, nor receive any
comfort, nor find any rest, except they may obtain that which they love. (O
my Daughter) thou ought to love me in this sort, that thou might find
in me only joy and consolation, and without me in all places nothing but
sorrow and affliction. If thou did rightly love me as thou should do,
thou could not be in rest until thou did possess me. For there would a
continual thirste, hunger and desire burn within thy soul, not permitting
thee to enjoy any quiet at all.

O that thou did languish with such a kind of love toward me, or that
hating all other things thou did desire me only. O that thou did
present thy heart unto me quite weaned, and clearly delivered from all other
love whatsoever, that I may still draw it after me, and both pearce it thorough
and wound it to the bottom with my love. Oh how happy should thou be, if
being made quite besides thy self, and drunk with extreamitie of love
toward me, thou did despise all things else, thou did loath all my
creatures, and did run only after me, crying unto me, I am wounded with
thy charity. Thou ought my Daughter to be enflamed with so fervent an
affection toward me, as whosoever did come near unto thee might perceive no
other thing else, but only the heat of thine affection toward me, breathing
out of thee, and whosoever did talk with thee might depart edefied from thee,
and warmed with the flames of that affection toward me, which he found
kindled in thy soul, If therefore thou desire to love me, thou must love me
with thy whole heart. I will not allow that thou should love me, and jointly
with me any thing else besides me, that is, that thou should not love any
thing for any other respect but for my sake only. I look to be loved
purely, and that thou can never do but when thou love me, for my own
self, that I only and no other respect, whatsoever be the cause why thou
love me. I will also be beloved with an infinite love, and with an
unmeasurable desire, for thou should never find in thy soul any end or
measure in loving me, but although thou did love me never so much, thou
should always desire to love me more. For my love is not restrained within
any limits* but it is infinite and without any bounds. It never thinks it
self satisfied, it can never be filled or contented with any quantity, though
it be never so exceeding great, it will every day grow and increase to be
more. For charity does always increase, and what is charity but a good will.
As therefore a good will cannot be restrained within any limite, and as it is
without all end, so is charity likewise. I know that thou haste a will to
love me with all thy heart, and that thou desire to love me as much (...)
thy self alone, as all my holy servants do, joining all their love together.
This desire is good, if it proceed not from an appetite of desiring, in respect
that thou would be more excellent then they, and singular above them all, as
though thou only could love me as much as all they, when all their love
were put together. It is a good desire I say, if it springs from pure and
perfect charity only, and that thou do for mine own sake, without any
other respect, desire me, love me, and wish still to increase in the love of
me, and seek to love me as much alone, as it is possible for all other being
joined together. Have care therefore that this desire of thine proceed not of
any appetite to be preferred before others, but only because charity can
never be satisfied or filled, and that the greatness thereof makes thee think
that how much soever thou love me, is much inferior in thine eyes to that
affection which thou do desire to carry toward me, and in no sort either
answerable, or agreeable to thy desire.

My love is no idle love, but it works great things where it is indeed. And
where there is no desire but an unaptness and unwillingness to do good
works, there is no love without all doubt. And yet notwithstanding this, if
thou want ability to do good works, be not therefore discouraged (my
Daughter) or dejected in thy mind, for thy good will pleases me as much as
if the work were done, and is as acceptable in my sight. I will not require an
account of thee for that I have not bestowed upon thee. For it is not the
multitude of works, but the greatness of love which delights me. Many good
works, if they be presented unto me without charity, do pacify me no
whitte at all. For what is chafe to me without wheat? to whomesoeuer thou
do offer wheat, which is love, offer him also chafe which is works. For
although I regard not works without love, yet I will have good regard of thy
love without works, so as thou be hindered by disabilitie, necessity,
obedience, or any other lawful impediment, in such sort as thou art not able
to do good works. For then (as I have said) I accept of thy good will: But
where power wa^teth not, if love remain it does extend it self, and exercise
it self toward me, and for my sake toward her neighbor. For I have placed
him as a companion with thee in my steed, that whatsoever thou would bestow
upon me, and cannot, thou may bestow upon him. And that thou may do
it the more willingly, I have promised that I will accept as well at thy
hands, and reward as largely any thing that thou do toward thy neighbor,
as if thou had done it to my felfe. For if thou haste charity, it works
so in thee, as thou love him for my sake, thou beholdest me in him, thou
seruest me in him, thou dooest me benefits in him, thou do bear with me in
him, thou do suffer me in him, and if he offend thee, thou do forgive me in
him.

And for this cause I gave him unto thee in my steed, that thou may bestow
these good turns upon him, as time and place serves, and as thou haste
opportunity offered by me to do the same. For thou must not forget that which
I repeated before, how charity is not to be measured or esteemed by the
multitude of works, but by the greatness and sincerity of thy affection, that
is, by the inward devotion of thy mind, joined with a pure, chaste, and
internal disposition, inclination, and intention of thy will, which the more
ready, prompt, fervent, and desirous it is, to obey me, honor me, and please
me, and the more that she renounceth her own self, in seeking to please me
purelie, without any other respect, and to prefer me before all other
creatures, the more she is drawn to love me, and the brighter she does
openly shine in all good works.

O if the children of men did know how much it pleases me to dwell in such a
soul, how gladly I do offer my self unto her, which desires me only,
how bountiful I do power my self into such a heart as does seek me only,
with a pure intention being withdrawn and free both from the love of her
self, and of any other creature beside, desiring me fervently, respecting me
wholly, staying for me patiently, and refusing to be comforted with any other
thing but with me only. Nay, such a heart as I speak of, will not desire to
be comforted by me, because she thinks her self unworthy to receive any
consolation from me, but desires only to be satisfied with having my good
will and pleasure fulfilled in her. For she only desires to do, to suffer,
and to be in no other sort then agrees with my pleasure, and then although
such a heart neither desires comfort, nor any thing else, which is without me,
yet I do reward and enrich her with all blessings and benefits. For there can
be nothing wanting in any creature, neither can there be any thing forsaken
for the love of me, that is so good, but that there shall be found in me
things in steed of them, a hundred times better, purer, sweeter, pleasanter
and more delightful than they were. For whether it be beauty, sweetness,
pleasantness, delight, love, truth, consolation, the continual enjoying of
such things as men do like, riches, glory, power, and innumerable other
things of the same sort, which either may bring delights to them, or procure
desire to them: all these things, are after an infinite manner more excellent,
and more perfect in me, than in any creature whatsoever.

O my Daughter, the smallest consolation which thou feel by the presence of
my goodness in thy soul, does surmount all the delights of the world, and the
pleasure that can be taken in any creature whatsoever. Yea all other delights
being compared with it, does seem bitter and unpleasant. Wherefore, if
things were measured by a true and just account, it could not be, but that men
would love me better then themselves, or any other creature. But now (it is
a lamentable thing to be spoken) men do leave me which am their greatest
good, they despise my goodness, nay which is more, they forsake their own
true and only happiness, and fall to love themselves, to delight in the
world, from whence all disquietnes of mind, and all other mischiefs do
proceed. Alas, why are miserable men so far deceived? If thou delight in
love, why love they not me? whose love is chaste, pure, holy, and simple, which
am an object always offered to their eyes of infinite amiablenes being
essentially good in my self, being a pure good, unmixed, being the chiefest
and sovereign good, where the reward of love also is unspeakable delight, and
most blessed eternity, whereas the love of the world on the contrary part,
does breed nothing in thy soul but unquietness, bitterness, destruction,
repentance and heuines. Leave thou therefore and contemn al worldly things and
desire me only, being united unto me with all thy soul, with all thy heart, and
with all thy will. For as long as thou do addict thy self to the love of
creatures, thou shall find that which is in creatures, that is, thou shall be
defiled and disquieted, with corrupt and unclean delights, and yet besides
that be never satisfied or contented. And thou shall also be polluted with
vnpure imaginations, and be distracted with sundry cogitations, that be lewd
and wicked. But I do collect that heart which seeks to be joined with me,
and I unite it fast unto me, procuring in it by my means all peace, quietness,
and all tranquillity of conscience.

Thou ought continually to entreat me, and without ceasing to pray unto me,
that thou may after this sort forsake the world, renounce the love of all
my creatures, and be wholly converted unto me, and inwardly dedicated in thy
soul to my service. For no man can bestow this grace on thee, neither can
thou obtain it by any other mean but by me only. Wherefore thou must
always with great regard observe the internal inspirations of my grace, thou
must follow my counsel, obey my exhortations, and commit thy self altogether
to my providence. My inspirations do never disagree from the holy Scripture,
nor from the obedience which thou must carry to thy superiors. Therefore if
thou submitest thy self unto them, and reliest in no respect upon thine own
self: thou art sure to walk in all simplicity and purity of heart.

Love is an incomprable treasure, and therefore I should be the storehouse of
the same, and it should never be laid up, but in me only. O (my daughter)
where thy treasure is there is thy heart also. If then thou will know what thou
love, mark what thou do oftnest think upon, what thou do with greatest
delight, and willingness harken unto, what thou do most fervently desire, what
thou do inwardly in thine own appetite most seek, and bend thy self unto:
for that is, without all doubt thy treasure, and therein thou find sweetest
rest, most quiet, and greatest contentation. And both of them is thy treasure,
both the thing which thou love, and the love wherewith thou love the same.
But see into how great misery, how great unthankfulness, and how great
infelicitie men do fall by this means, for they do purchase to themselves
hell fire, with the expense of incomparable treasure which is love. For if men
contemning me, fall to love corrupt, unclean, and frail things, such as will
quickly perish: they do with the same love, which they bestow upon them
procure unto themselves eternal torment. Let all my friends therefore bewail
and lament, this strange and unnatural kind of dealing, that I am clean
thrust out of the heart of man, for whom I offered up my self in sacrifice,
and whose salvation I did buy with my precious blood, and that an other which
is mine enemy does possess it only to this end, that he may draw them with
him into eternal destruction, into endless misery, and into unquenchable fire.

Of the praise of God.
BE always inflamed (my Daughter) with a desire to praise me, to love me, to
honor me, and to please me from the bottom of thy heart altogether, and by all
the means that thou art able, and in such most perfect sort as I require at
thy hands, Carry always in thy heart so great a reverence, so great a fear,
so great a care, so great a love, and affection toward me, and for me, as
thou may never do any thing to displease or offend me. And although it
ought to be thy greatest care, thy chiefest fear, and thy speciallest labor,
not to do any thing thy self, or to give any occasion by thine own
negligence, that any thing should be done to offend me: Yet nevertheless,
thou ought also to take as much care as lies in thee for others, that I be
not by them dishonored, or offended, or that they do break my will and
commandment. And thou ought to do this with a pure intention of mere
charity for mine own sake without any other respect. For there should ever
abou^d in thy heart, a most faithful, fervent and devout love of me, which
should continually flow with forcible streams every day nearer and nearer
toward me, and it should carry thee with so great violence, and run over
in such exceeding abundance, as it should make thee most ready and desirous
to do all things, that may be for my glory, and for the fulfilling of my
pleasure, and it should possess thee in such sort, as thou should desire
nothing so much, as to be clearly delivered, quite discharged, and altogether
weaned from all love, respect, desire, or inclination toward thy self, or
any of my creatures, and to keep thy self in the same state, pure, clean,
chaste, and unspotted to me only, desiring me with a pure intention, and no
other thing but by this mean I may have my will, without any impediment
freely, and wholly fulfilled in thee, and by thee, and that I only may
possess thee, and that there may be no space or division between thee and
me, but that thou may be close united unto me, having renounced, and
forsaken all love, both of thy self or any other creature. Desire likewise
that my will may be done in all things, and with all men, and that all men may
know me, love me, honor me, worship me and serve. Thou would rather choose
to suffer ten deaths (if thou were a faithful spouse unto me) then once to
consent to any sin, although it were but vernall. For albeit it is not like
that thou can long stand in perfection without venial sin, yet thou must not
in any wise willingly or of set purpose yield to any venial sin, but thou
must ever be fully resolved in thine own will never to sin again. And thou
must fix and settle this will of thine, in the hope of my grace, and not upon
my confidence in thine own abillitie.

I do ever please and delight him that loves me, and all my works and
judgments seem sweet and pleasant to to him, and he never cease to praise me
for them. He that loves me need not study to find somewhat, for which he
might praise me, for the love which he bareth me will show unto him what may
or ought to be praised in me. And to praise me is no other thing but by loving
me, to think upon me, and by thinking upon me, to honor me, and by honoring
of me, to wonder at my works, and by wondering at my works, to desire that all
men should extol, magnify, and love me. My praise does lighten his heart
which loves me with a pure affection, it does rejoice his spirit, it drives
away all heaviness from him, and withal it is a safe protection for him, both
in prosperity and adversity. Whosoever spends his time in praising of me,
it makes him with all fortitude of mind to contemn all the mischief that
the subtlety of man or the devil can practice against him.

O how delightful a thing is it to my Angels, to hear the sweet songs of
them which do continually praise me (although it be much more delightful
unto them to assist their pure hearts, and to help them in setting forth of my
praise) for they see men upon earth do imitate by this mean the order of the
celestial companies in heaven, as though they had received here the earnest
penny, or else some sensible feeling of eternal happiness, which is only a
continual praising and magnifiing of my name. For there is nothing that does
so lively resemble the state of the blessed happiness in the world to come, as
the cheareful and delightful voice of those which do praise my name. And
touching my self, I am of so great Majesty and omnipotency, as I stand in
need of no praise, and no praise can make me more glorious then I am already,
neither is any creature able to praise and magnify me as I do deserve.
Wherefore thou ought to think thy self most unworthy to praise me,
nevertheless, desire yet to praise me, that thou may know, and it may
appear manifest unto thee, how that all humane praise is nothing in respect of
my worthiness, and how I am far greater then all the praise that can be given
me, and how all creatures when they have praised me as much as they are able,
have done it much inferior to that I am worthy of, and therefore must yield
that they are altogether insufficient to praise me. And although that I
declare unto thee, how that every creature must give this praise to me, yet I
would have thee especially to imprint this lesson in thy mind, that although
thou do endeavor never so much to praise me, (which thou ought at all
times to do with all thy force) yet thou should think that thou had
done nothing at all.

I will tell thee (my daughter) what kind of praise does please me: vocal
praise, (although I would have thee always to use it, and with thy voice to
perform it, whenever thou art commanded by the precept of my Church to say
or sing any thing) yet I must needs tell thee, that it does please me so
much as that internal praise which consists in the spirit. A profound
contemplation and perfect knowledge of thine own baseness, a consideration of
thine own weakness, how thou art of thy self merely nothing, and a modest
shame procured by the mean of thy unworthiness before my Majesty: It is a
most sweet smelling sacrifice, and a most delightful praise unto me, because
thou shall be brought by it with a shamefast kind of modesty, continually to
look into, and to despise in my glorious presence, thine own vileness,
deformednes, unthankfulness, wretchedness and misery, and be also moved to
acknowledge how thou art of thy self merely nothing, and therefore be
desirous to humble and subject thy self before me, and every one of my
creatures, and to be willing, or rather to wish to be in respect of thine own
baseness, contemned, and trodden under of them all. Such a contrite and humbled
heart I can never despise, yea the sorrowful groan of such a heart, is as
much sweeter and worthier sacrifice unto me, than a huge heap of many
words, and a tedious multitude of vocal prayers only. Moreover, thou do
then likewise truly and righty praise me, when I am as acceptable unto thee,
for sending adversity as prosperity, and when thou give me as many thanks,
and remainest as devoutly, and zelously affected toward me in thine own will
for the one as for the other. It is not also the least praise that thou may
yield me to beware of sin, to take great pains in seeking after virtue, to
thirst for the honoring and extolling of thy name, and to seek only for the
fulfilling of my pleasure, and the setting forth of my glory. Besides this,
it is a much purer kind of praise, and more acceptable unto me than any vocal
praise, to keep thy heart undefiled, pure, and free from all vicious
affections, from al slothful humors, from all heaviness, unwillingness, and
frowardnes in thy soul, and to cleave unto me only in all peace, tranquillity,
and silence of thy spirit. What motion soever thou feel within thee (my
Daughter) what outward accident soever do happen unto thee, presently repair
unto me with thy heart wholly converted and submitted unto my will, and wish
that it may be turned by my grace to my greatest glory, and highest praise. by
doing after this sort all things that happen unto thee shall be for the
furtherance of thy salvation, and even nature it self by this virtuous custom
shall be changed into grace. Wherefore if thou find within thy self any
mischievous, attempts of the devil, any filthy temptations or horrible
blasphemies, or do senciblie perceive in thy soul, the motion of any odious
temptation whatsoever: endeavor thou to win some profit or benifit to thy
soul by the same mean, whereby thine enemy seeks to do thee a mischief,
and account it a benefit for thy soul, if it may bring thee to praise, and
glorify me. As soon therefore as thou feel any of these temptations, come
presently unto me, and say;

O Lord my God, as often as I feel this temptation, as often as it comes
into my mind, so often do I glorify thee, with the praises of the whole
court of heaven, and so often do I adore thee, to the confusion of this wicked
spirit which assaulteth me, and to the honor and glory of thy name. And in
this place I offer unto thee infinite praises which he is not able to do. If
it be a grievous temptation which thou feel, say: O most merciful God,
although it be very troublesome which I suffer, yet I will willingly endure it
for the love of thee only, and for thy honor, and if it may be to thy great
honor that I should suffer greater and more grievous temptations than this
is, behold I offer my self ready with all my heart to do it. Let nothing O
merciful God, seem so troublesome unto me, but that I may desire above all
things, to sustain any thing that may be for the glory of thy name. If thou
feel any cogitatio^ in thy soul of beautiful, delightful, or precious
things, say: O most sweet God, that proceeds from thee which art most
goodly, most beautiful, most sweet, most to be desired, and most worthy to be
embraced, because thou art the greatest good, if it be thy pleasure. I will
willingly want all thy creatures* I will willingly forsake all consolation,
that thou only may remain in my heart, and may wholly possess me: which
art most beautiful, and far more beautiful than all the fairest things
beside thee, which art most sweet, and far more sweet than all the best and
sweetest things besides thee, which art most to be desired, and above all to
be beloved, because thou art far more amiable, and precious, than all the
preciousest and amiablest things besides thee. Likewise if either thou hear
or see any number assembled together, or as often as thou beholdest any
exceeding beautiful thing or great multitude of people, say so often in the
day to thy self. O most good and most amiable Lord, O Almighty and eternal
God, let thousand thousands of the Armies of celestial spirits praise thee
out of me, and let ten thousand hundred thousand of those that stand before
thee, extol and magnify thy name out of me and for me, and let all the worthy
supplicatio^s of thy blessed Saints make intercession unto thee for me, and
let the beauty of every one of thy creatures, and the sweet harmony of them
altogether glorify thee out of me for ever, and world without end.

Of the exercise of the love and praise of God.
IF thou do desire to love and praise me with all thy heart, with all thy
soul, with all thy force, and with all the ability that does rest in thee,
and desire to persevere in the loving of me, to the end, thou must of
necessity have some exercises of love, whereby thou may nourish it, kindle
it, increase, and maintain it. And for this cause keeps thy mind free,
withdrawn, weaned, and clearly delivered from the love of my creatures, and
from all internal occupation of thy mind, or business about them, and from all
care and trouble of this present world, by lifting it up unto me with
continual vehement, and scalding sighs, and enflamed prayers, burning with
all zeal, and by aspyring, incessantly with most fervent desire to come unto
me, that is to say: by desiring to love me most ardently, most perfectly, most
vehemently, most faithfully, and withal continually, yea, and thirsting also
to please me, in all respects, to praise me with all zeal, with all fidelity,
and withal the sufficiency that is in thy power, and to fulfill my will
absolutely and perfectly in all things. To conclude, thou must always have a
desire to see me which am most beautiful, to possess me, who am most blessed,
and to be with me who am only able to grant thee happiness, being the
fountain from whom all felicity does proceed, in whom all sweetness does
consist, and by whom all goodness must be granted. For I am of all things
the sweetest, the best and the happiest, yea true happiness it self. Cleave
therefore always unto me, and be never separated from me. Have ever somewhat
in thy mind which thou may meditate upon, and which may inflame thee with
the love of me, whereby thou may think of my sweetness and goodness, and by
wondering at it, magnify and praise thy name. Or else on the contrary part,
meditate upon somewhat, which may move thee to bewail, lament accuse, and
reprehend thy self for thy vileness, baseness, weakness, infirmity,
inconstancy, or unthankfulness, or else that may procure the suffering even with
sorrow in thy soul from the bottom of thy heart with those that be afflicted
and dead, to make supplications unto me for them, and for my universal
Chnrch. Moreover whatsoever thou art to do, or what thing soever thou haste to
think or consider of, think of them first with me, receive counsel,
touching them first from me, and discourse of them first with me, that thou
may be brought by this custom always, and at all times, (whether thou
be alone, or in the company of others) to talk with me, and to keep thy
heart still lifted up unto me, either by prayer, or else by praising of my name.

Do whatsoever belongs to my honor, whatsoever thou know will content
me, or is my will that thou should perform, with an unspeakable thirst to
please me, and with an insatiable desire to honor me, and labor this by all
the means thou may, and endeavor with thy help, with thy counsel, with
thy travail, and by all the other means that do lie in thy power to advance
my glory, that my name may be praised both by thy self and others, and that my
will may be fullfiled in all my creatures. But in the mean time not
withstanding, while thy outward man is thus occupied abroad, let thy inward man
remain quietly with me, for thou must in no wise give thy self so much to
external businesses, as that thy mind should be distracted, and rnnne wandering
after sundry cogitations, and that thou should draw by this mean into thy
soul, many fond imaginations, and vain fancies. But rather whilst thy outward
man is busied, be thou recollected in thy spirit, and gathered close together
in thy soul, that it being united unto me, thou may ever eternally
remain with me. And when thou haste learned this lesson, when thou have
accustomed thy self to this course, no external business shall hinder thee,
no external act shall hurt or withholde thee, (especially if it be a good and
modest one) from the me^tall exercise of the love of me. But thou shall speak
unto me, or rather be in thy soul peaceablye united unto me, as well at that
time, as at any other, so long as thou do n^ (as I have said) entangle thy
mind with thinking of vain and transitory things, nor remaynest drowned in
the cogitations of those external businesses which thou practisest in this
world. For as long as thou have a will to keep thy heart free from the love of
al creatures, there is no creature can win or withdraw thee from me,
(although in thy outward man thou be troubled with never so many businesses,
nor occupied with never so many actions) if thou imprintest not the forms,
the representations, the love or delight of these things internally in thy
mind. Wherefore never complain that external good works are an impediment
unto thee in thy loving of me, or in the exercise of thy love toward me. For
these things do not hinder thee (as thou do imagine, and conceive in thy
mind) but thy inordinate affection, thy want of discretion, thy infirmity,
and thy evil inclination, are those things which do hinder thee, because
thou haste not as yet fully mortefied the^ al, for these do make thee not
only, outwardly but also inwardly busied and occupied with thinking of my
creatures.

Moreover, thy mind being more and more distracted, divided, and made more
wandering, by the multitude of these conceits: is far from being able to
cleave unto me, nay it can not continue constant or quiet within it self. But
be notwithstanding no whi^ discouraged, if in respect of brotherly charity,
or of showing thine obedience, thou be enforced sometime to be occupied, and
disquieted in thyrie inward man for my sake. For I cannot quickly amend wherein
soever thou baste saulted for my sake, and repair it again with such
advantage and gain unto thee, that thou shall be afterward so much the nerer
and with greater delight united unto me, as thou did think thy self
before farther estranged from me. But if thou find thy mind so much
distracted and alienated from me, as thou can neither recollect it again,
not yet return and lift it up unto me, think not that it wandered thus in
respect of that charity, which thou did show merely for my sake: but that
thine own wicked inclination has poluted thee, and that there was somewhat
hidden within thee, which moved thee to this, whereof I was neither the
Author, nor occasion, neither yet was it any way procured by my mean. Thou
were not belike circumspect and watchful enough, and therefore thou did
suffer some humane infirmity. But remain not long estranged or alienated from
me, for I am always ready to receive thee again into my favor. Let thy mind
therefore be ever occupied in holy desires, that no moment may pass thee,
wherein thou do not wound me, and seek to pearce my heart, with the fiery
darts of thy inflamed desires. Be assured (my Daughter) that thou can desire
nothing at my hands in vain: For if thou do desire me, thou shall find
me, but if I do withdraw and hide my self from thee for a time, I do it
for thy sake and thy benefit. For I cannot choose, but grant my presence to
those that call upon me and desire me: I do stir up these desires in thee,
I inspire thy heart with these motions, and therefore be sure that I will also
harken to thy petitions and hear thy prayers. For although it should so fall
out by the mean of my providence, as thou should remain unheard of me to
the hour of thy death, yet it is impossible that I should not at all hear a
devout prayer, but I will even at that instant render thee an hundred fold for
thy long forbearing. Thou shall then perceive that I will give thee for one
petition a thousand: Thou shall then find that thou art heard at my hands,
when thou can never again loose the benefit thereof. But in all thy
prayers, let this be thy chiefest petition, to desire at my hands, that thou
may possess me: For what is more holy? what is more for my glory, than to
desire me above all things, and before all things? Pray therefore always for
a naked, and only a pure, a most chaste a most perfect, a most earnest, a most
watchful, and a most faithful charity toward me, whereby both thy self
and all other reasonable creatures may cleave unto me with a resolute mind and
with such a firm intention, as no accident whatsoever shall be ever able to
withdraw you from me.

Of the transformation of a man.
IF thou will obtain me wholly (O soul) thou must of necessity altogether
forsake thy self, and altogether cast off thy self; thou must submit, and
resign over thy self to extreme poverty, and the want of all temporal
commodities and consolations, for obtaining of me, who am the chiefest and
greatest good. Comfort thy self therefore, and be not dismayed though thou be
deprived of all human consolation, and though thou want all human
friendship, favor and succor whatsoever. Consider how a stout Soldier, not
regarding his friends, his Country, his wife, his children, his quiet rest,
and his commodity at home, does forsake them all, and being a stranger in a
foreign land, does there daily offer his life to dangerous labors, to
painful iourneyes, to continual watching, and to sundry miseries and
perrils, that he may obtain riches, and win honor. In this sort must thou
forsaking all things, be spoiled and made poor, and deprived of all comfort,
and of all my creatures whatsoever, that nothing may remain in thee, wherein
thou may find any quiet, or that thou may possess but me only.
Moreover, thou must exclude and bannish from thy self the forms, impressions,
and memory of all things, and thou must cleanse and purge thy mind of them
all, and carry about with thee, the image of me only imprinted in thy heart,
wheresoever thou becommest, and how so ever thou art, either alone by thy
self, or in company of others: Thou must also whether thou eatest or
drinkest, sleep or wakest, speak or be silent, always look into me, as
a pure glass and most perfect pattern for thee to imitate, that thou may
direct thy course of life and transform thy self according to the virtues and
manner of my life: If thou eatest, dippe every morsel in my wounds: If thou
drinkest, take the warm blood out of my wounds, which will breath charity
into thee: If thou speak, look upon me which hears thy words, and
beware that thou speak nothing that is uncomely or may displease me: If
thou hold thy peace, harken unto me which do speak to thee, and search out
with all diligence and care what is my perfect will and good pleasure: If thou
sleep, lean and repose thy self upon my heart, applying thy mouth to the
gaping wound of my sacred heart, and suck my grace thereby into thy spirit,
and breath again into me, by sending a sweet smelling sacrifice out of it,
the marrow and precious treasure of thy heart: To be short, wheresoever thou
be, govern and direct thy self according to that most notable, most worthy,
and most perfect pattern, which thou beholdest in the course of my life. Look
into and desire earnestly, with all zeal and affection to imitate my most
modest, and most lowly humility, my most courteous affability, my most sweet
meekenes my most stout patience, my most pure chastity, my most abou^dant
piety, my most faithful providence, my most merciful compassion, and my most
seruent burning, exceeding and incomprehensible charity. Imprint the lively
Image of these things in thy soul, fill thy mind wholly with it, and by the
means thereof, bannish altogether from thy mind all the forms and
imaginations of all other things whatsoever: I will not have thee to be
without the impression or the representation of some thing in thy heart, neither
yet will I have thee seek before thy time to fly higher than this. Wherefore
rest thou quietly in the mean space, in beholding the Image of my humanity
and Passion, until I do raise thee up to a higher dignity, where thou shall
not feel these motions, but be wholly and clearly delivered from any
impression or imagination, and be free from all exercise and action, and
remain in all peace and quietness, having clean forsaken thy self, and thine
own appetite: In the mean time therefore meditate how I am always present
with thee, and how I do look and pearce into the close corners of thy soul,
and into the deepest secrets of thy heart, and do not only meditate upon it,
but learn also to have a sensible feeling of my presence, whereby I do
always behold thee, always mark thee, always look into thee, and always
both fully know thee, and perfectly understand thy greatest secrets. Learn
to conceive how I am without all limitation, not possible to be circumscribed
within any bounds, how I am an unchangeable an eternal, an unspeakable, and
an incomprehensible light, how I am best worthy to be beloved, how I only
deserve to be desired, and how I am wholly pure and sinsere, not stained with
the least evil, or smallest imperfection: Likewise, how I am wholly good, in
whom there is nothing but it is to be beloved, and able to delight all that
seek me, how I am wholly most faithful, wholly most merciful, and
always ready most abundantly to communicate my self with the children of
men. To conclude, learn to know how I am a most constant and faithful lover,
a most sweet comforter, a most mighty Protector, and a most rich and
bountiful rewarder of all those that bear me good will, of all those that
love me, and of all those that hope in me, and how I am able to bring more
delight unto their soul, then all other things that can be desired. For I
never procure lothso^nes in them, but I satisfy all their desire^ and by
satisfiyng them I daily more and more increase their desires in them. Let this
perfect Image of me, wholly possess thy mind, and imprint it so deeply
therein, that thou may not consent in thy will, to the meditation of any
other fancies, but presently banish them from thee as soon as they begin to
enter into thee. Take heed that thou do not receive them within thy soul, but
being free from them remain united to me only, in all internal quietness,
and in all internal peace and tranquillity, waiting for me continually most
desirously, and without ceasing, that thou may repose thy self in all
things upon me, that thou may follow me, and that thou may submit thy
self unto any thing whatsoever, that I will have thee either to do or suffer,
yea unto whatsoever I will have done in thee, or with thee. Thou ought so
clearly to renounce thy self, that is, all love of thy self, and all proper
inclination to follow thine own will, as that nothing may be able to move thy
reasonable and intellectual soul, being now as it were) quite alienated and
separated from thy body, and that it may seem all one unto her, whether her
external and sensible man be praised or discommended, be afflicted or
comforted, and that she may look upon him (as it were) a far off, being
clean divided from him, and wholly united and joined unto me.

To obtain this separation of thy self from the following of thine own
appetite, and the love of any creature, thou must of necessity (as I warned
thee before) have great watch over thy self, and straightly observe by what
mean thou may soonest find out and discern what lies hidden in thy secret
thoughts, what moves thee, what draws thee, what entiseth thee, what
possesses thee, what reigns in thee, to conclude what thou love, or
inclinest thy self unto, whether it be thy self, or any other creature, or
me. And thou must thrust presently out of thy mind whatsoever thou find
there, if it be not my self, or any thing whereof I am not the cause: for thou
art then become subject to the thing which possesses thee, when it has gotten
a full interest and propriety in thee. And I for mine own part will never
consent to be beloved with a companion, but I look for my whole love, and I
desire to remain alone peaceably in thee. Therefore except thou seek me
only, thou shall never perfectly find me, and if thou will enjoy me, banish al
cretures from thee, suffer no division, no impediment, no separation to ramaine
between thee and me. Let all creatnres be banished from thee, but only such as
are for thy mere and necessary use, let them have no interest or place in
thee, let them not possess thy heart, that thou may keep thy self free and
pure unto me from them all, and may wholly submit thy self unto me, and be
ready to be disposed in all such sorts as it shall be my pleasure. Whatsoever
shall happen it is enough for thee that thou know it, and find that it
has happened. Trouble thy self no farther with thinking of it, neither suffer
it to stay within thee, or to leave any memory or impression thereof in thy
soul: But rely upon me, and commit all thy cares unto me, pass and fly over
the multitude, the variety, and the mutabilitie of these cogitations, and never
fix or settle thy heart but in me only. Seek therefore me only, and no more
but me in all things, which am one in all and all in all, and wait patiently
with long suffering till thou find me, yea, be content to stay and wait for
me again, and again, and never be weary of waiting till thou find me,
reposing thy self upon my goodness, and upon my most wise providence, full of
all love toward thee with a strong faith, and an assured trust therein. When I
stay my coming, expect me patiently, for I will come at the last without
doubt. Be free and altogether weaned in this sort (O soul) from all thine
own desire, be separated wholly from all love and delights in creatures, be
alienated from all fancies and imaginations, and cleave wholly unto me, in
simplicity and nakedness of heart. Offer thy self to be possessed by me, and
forsake clean thine own will, that thou may rejoice with me in all
eternity, where there are neither things past, nor things to come, but all
things present. Aspire always, and earnestly desire to obtain this even now,
and forsake both thy self and all other things, that is thy body, and
sensuality, and have thine eye so fixed upon eternity in this present world,
as if thou were quite separated from it, and clearly delivered out of it,
beholding all the things in this world a far off, as those things which thou
have wholly forsaken, and from which thou have clearly weaned thy self. Think
that thou art alone with me, and that I am with thee, and as if there were no
other creature present with thee.

Whatsoever thou feel besides me, make no account of it, because it is in
truth nothing worth being without me, and no creature shall hurt thee as long
as thou receive not within thy heart the fancies and imaginations of any thing,
nor yet feel any cares or affections within thy soul.

The Conclusion.
I Deliver these exhortations unto thee, as to my Daughter and spouse (O soul)
and as a rule to instruct thee how thou should put off the old man, and
walk hereafter in newnes of spirit, and how thou should daily bend and
endeavor thy self with all thy force to grow to more perfection. Therefore as
often as by reading over these things, thou find that thou haste not
observed all in such sort as I have commanded thee, or that thou haste
faulted in some little part thereof, so often still renew thy good intention,
by stirting up a new ^eruor of zeal in thee. And although I give thee these
to read: yet I desire notwithstanding that the ears of my my heart should
always be open to my inspirations, whereby thou may not only outwardly
read them, but inwardly hear these ^essons from me.

And the reason why I would have these inspirations laid before thine eyes, is
because thou art for the most p^rte delighted with vain letters and messages
from thy friends, which d^o procure in thy heart nothing but distraction, an
unsavory kind of disquiet, and a perilous kind of darkness. Therefore when
thou have contemned these vanities and forsaken them quite, I have given thee
these wholesome instructions, that thou might have some good thing for me to
read, and to occupy thy mind withal. And that thou might by the
consideration of the^, and for the love of me despise al other things which
seek to pollute thy heart. And the more that I who am thy spouse, and gave thee
these lessons (O soul) ought to be beloved, the more acceptable ought this
instruction to be unto thee, which proceeded from me, that am not only worthy
to be beloved, but most worthy of all things to be beloved, and deserve
above all things most to be desired, yea and ought before all things most to
please and delight thee. I would have thee also the more faithfully to observe
these precepts, seeing all these things which I have delivered unto thee, are
not to delight a carnal and worldly heart, but a spiritual, and such a one as
is devout toward me, and seeing they do not please the ears with picked
phrases, and trifling words, but they feed the loving soul with truth and
wholesome counsel: It remains only now to warn thee, that thou be
watchful and diligent.

For I stand at the door of thy heart and knock.

Open thy heart therefore unto me (O my sister, O my spouse) give me thy heart,
and desire me only, seeing I do so much desire thee, but assure thy self of
this one thing, thou can never receive me as long as thou love any thing
besides me: Thou can never have me, as long as thou have any thing of thy
self without me, thou can never enjoy me, as long as thou possessest thy
self: Go therefore out of thy self, and forsake thy self, that I only may
possess thee, and that thou only may possess me. This is a short time
which is present, but that which follows, is without all limi^^ion of time,
and eternal without end.

Be watchful therefore (my Daughter) I do once again exhort thee, receive me
for thy husband, O soul, O daughter, O spouse, and show thy self in all
purity without all hypocrisy, or dissimulation, a spouse worthy of me* Love
me which am thy Lord and redeemer, think of me, take heed to thy self, have
consideration of thine own estate: Cleave unto me, and persevere with me to the
end. Live happily henceforth in me, and so I bid thee heartily farewell.

THE INSTRVCTIONS that follow are very fit and profitabie for all men: they
are divided into two rules, and may either be called rules of direction for
man's life, or else the fraternity of the Disciples of Christ, that is to say,
of such as desire to imitate the life of Christ, and seek to live after the
rule of the Gospel, and do study with all their endeavor to attain to the
perfection of charity.
JESUS CHRIST which was made man for your sakes, did preach unto the world in
times past, and did deliver them one rule of life by my Gospel, for the
salvation of them all, he that believes it can never err, and he that
observes it, can never perish. For it only is sufficient alone for the
salvation of man's soul, being well observed, and it instructs a man fully
in all virtue and perfection. Wherefore if men did live after that rule, there
were no need of the rules of Monks, there were no need of any fratermities,
or associations, and companies of men, that live under one rule and order,
there were no need of any Cannons whatsoever, seeing that they which did live
purely, and sincerely, after the rules of my Gospel, needed no other thing to
instruct them in all perfection. But after men forsook the rule of my Gospel,
and every man did only think upon his own proper commodity according to
the nature of men, it came then to pass not without my counsel and the
direction of my spirit, that many of my Saints did devise sundry means
whereby they might root out of men's minds the love of the world, and of
themseues, which made them quite forsake me, and grow cold in the zeal of my
Gospel, and my honor, and beside that they might restore unto the world a
perfect course of life how to observe my Gospel and commandments. Therefore
many of them have set down certain rules, how to keep under and cut off
those Passions whereby any occasion is taken to break the law of my Gospel,
and have commanded that those things should be straightly observed, which
do stir up, purify, and strengthen the spirit in all virtue and goodness.
For they knew that the spirit could never be strong, and have the upper hand
of the flesh, but by punishing it, and by flying all occasions of evil.

For when the spirit is strengthened, there will always be in you a chaster, a
feruenter, and a more constant love or devotion to keep my commandments.

And it is evident that these holy servants of mine, for this cause had a will
to appoint all things in such sort as might be for the furtherance of men in
following the course of my Gospel, and would not permit the smallest tittle
that might be against the rule thereof. It appears manifestly also that some
which lived after them added new constitutions and many ceremonies to these
rules, and do more severely and sharply punish men for their transgressions
of these ceremonies then of my Gospel, which is a very preposterous course,
and contrary to all good order: For a man is reprehended and punished if he
speak out of time, if he sing out of tune, or if he offend in any of these
ceremonies: But I had rather (although I allow of these) that there should not
be smaller but much greater care had of evangelical precepts, then of these
ceremonies, and that there should be a sharper censure against those that
break my commandment, then against such as offend in these ceremonies. As for
example, I would not have them go unpunished which swear by my name, which
backebite any body, which hate their neighbors, or do any such thing as my
Gospel does forbid: For there must needs be appointed sharper discipline,
and there must always be seuerer laws ordained and appointed to punish those
which do break my commandments, and for the observation whereof, the
ancient Fathers in times heretofore did prescribe sundry rules. But what
shall I say? I see that you in these days do neither observe my Gospel, nor
yet the rules of the ancient fathers: You boast of my words in your mouth, and
of my Gospel in your common talk, but it appears manifestly, how far I am
out of your heart, seeing you do not love me, nor my commandments. Return you
therefore now (although it be late, which have walked so long in crooked
paths with your hearts unto me, do penance, and believe in my Gospel, and do
not only believe whatsoever my Gospel teaches, but by believing it, and
loving it, do whatsoever it commands. If you will be Christians, if you will
be my Disciples, imitate me, learn of me, because I am meek and humble of
heart, walk ye, as I have walked. Moreover, if you will be Monckes, if you
will be Priests, or if you will be religious men, do those things which are
of the spirit, and mortefie by the spirit the works of the flesh. If you be
(as you say) Euangicall and followers of my Gospel, do those things which my
Gospel does command you, how long will you say unto me Lord, Lord, and will
not do those things which I say? Do those things which I command you, and
show your selves to be my friends, not in words only, but in deed and in
truth, for he that hears my words, he that has my commandments and does
them, this is he that loves me. And for stirring up again of that fervent
zeal which has bin heretofore in men's minds, and for renewing the observation
of my gospel, which is almost worn out of use: I deliver now unto those
which are my friends, and devoutly affected toward me, two very short rules:
whereof of the one is very fit for such as be less perfect, and but new
beginners in following of my service, and the other for such as are more
perfect, and desire with all earnestnes to attain to a most chaste love of me.
Wherein there is taught no heap of ceremonies, or multitude of prayers, but a
reformation of the conscience and inward man, and a devotion of the mind.
There is nothing entreated of touching the color or fashion of garments, but
the desires and endeavors of men are stirred up to the honoring and following
of Evangelical obedience. And there is one kind of fraternity made and set
down in this place, whereby the minds of many may be united in one, and the
intents of all such agree in one, and do love and serve me. No man is here of
necessity bound to vow the observations of those things, (although that a vow
does very much adorn, strengthen and enrich a good will) neither yet does it
make a man, if men offend therein farther guilty of a fault, then the
transgression of my law does pronounce him.

But I do give a Law, to all those that desire to serve me, agreeable to
every man's abillitie, and I do temper it in such sort, as every man being
assisted by my grace, may keep and fulfill it. For my will is, that all men
should be saved, and I have furthered them by my help unto it, so far as it
was my good will and pleasure: And in this respect I do often forbear sinners,
and wincke at their infirmities that are weak, least I should break asunder a
broken reed, or should extinguish, or altogether put out smoking wood: And
therefore being desirous to gather together unto me, all those that serve me,
I have divided them into two kinds: In the first I place those that be weak
and new beginners: and in the second those that be more perfect, and long
practiced in my service, and I have set down such precepts for them both as I
have chosen out of my Gospel, and are most agreeable to their state and
vocation,

An instruction or rule for such as be weak and imperfect, and but new
beginners in my service.
Whosoever will vow himself to be one of my soldiers, and to fight in my
warfare, and give me his promise in that behalf; if he cannot at the beginning
beware of all sins, yet let him specially beware of mortal sins. If thou
therefore desire to be accounted in the number of my faithful servants,
beware of sin, and cut off and fly all occasions of sinning. Eschew evil,
and do good for I will never enter into a wicked and malicious soul, neither
will I dwell in a body subject to sin: Never spare thy life or temporal
goods, if it may either deliver or preserve thy neighbors soul from mortal
sin; for thou ought to esteem more any soul whatsoever, (for the
salvation whereof I gave my life) then thy body or temporal goods, and I
ought to be more precious in thine eyes, for whose honor thou do it, then
thy corporal or temporal life. Never give thy consent therefore to any sin,
but specially to a mortal sin, whether it be in thy self or an other.
Whatsoever thou would not have done unto thy self, do not to an other. Use
no fraud, practice no deceit, do no injury: And if these things be offered
thee, bear them with silence for my sake, or at the least complain no
otherwise of them but justly, and after a just and rightful manner. For I have
commanded my servants to prosecute that justly which is just.

Never requite evil with evil, nor reproach with reproach, never repay wrong
with wrong, but suffer all for the love of me, who when I was rayled on, did
not rail again, when I suffered, did not threaten mine enemies, but did
willingly submit my self to an unjust sentence. Do thou therefore in like sort,
if thine enemy hunger, feed him, if he thirste give him drink. Thou ought
to love thine enemy, and to do good to those that hate thee, that thou may
be the son of the father that is in heaven, which does not good only to
those that are good, but to the evil also. Be merciful as thy Father in heaven
is merciful, give alms to thy neighbor, if thou haste ability, or bestow
daily at the least one benefit or other upon him, or some good turn, or some
service, or some work of mercy, or some deed of charity. And thou ought
faithfully to exercise thy self in this exercise, in taking of compassion, or
succouring of thy neighbor. For whosoever is merciful toward another, shall
obtain mercy at my hands, and whosoever shall do any thing to the least of
my servant whether it be good or evil, I will account it as done unto my
self. If thou live according to the flesh, thou shall die, but if thou do
mortefie the works of the flesh with the spirit thou shall live. Mortefie
therefore thy desires, thy senses, and thy members hereupon earth, that thou
may not do whatsoever thy carnal appetite does provoke thee unto.

Thou should every day at the least no less then once withdraw, restrain,
and deny thy consent for my sake, to something which thou desire or wherein
thou delightest: And if there happen nothing that day wherein thou may bridle
thine affection in this sort, yet do it for the love of me as occasion is
offered, in barring thy self from having, feeling, seeing, or hearing somewhat
which thou much desire, or to which thy concupiscence, and the curiosity of
thy nature does move thee. And although there is no other fruit to be reaped
by it, yet deny thine own will in this point and kill this desire in thee,
for the love of me. Thou must never swear, but being enforced by lawful
authority for a matter of truth before a Judge, thou must never speak of my
name in vain, or unprofitably, or make a lie at any time.

Either read, or hear Mass every day if thy state or office will permit
thee, and do it in the memory and honor of my charity, and of all my
benefits which I have hertofore most abundantly and willingly powered upon
men, and do daily from time to time bestow upon them: But if thou can not
hear Mass, say with the same intention the prayer which I taught my
Disciples, and the salutation of the Angel to my blessed Mother, and offer me
up to my father in thy heart, and with me all those good works, which I and my
servant either do or have done for thee, and the universal Church.

Thou ought every month once at the least sacramentally to confess thy
sins, and to receive the Sacrament of my blessed body, at the feast of my
nativity, and resurrection, at Pentecost also, and at the Assumption of my
Mother, and at the feast of all Saints, except living under some vow, or in
some Monastery thou be restrained there, by the rule of thy life to do the
same.

Thou ought to adore me every day early in the morning, being one God in
Trinity of persons, and to recommend thy se^fe to my protection, and to pray
that I would defend thee, and all the world from sin. He that is so simple as
he can not perform this, ler him read with a devout intention, a Pater
noster, and an Aue Maria.

When thou haste no better mental exercises by internal meditation, and by
somewhat that may kindle a more fervent zeal in thee, say every day in the
honor of my passion and my wounds, five Pater nosters, and so many Aue Mary's,

Moreover, say every week in the veneration and honor of my mother, a hundred
and fifty Aue Mary's, that is, three Rosaries, every Rosarie containing in it
self fifty.

Make also every day in the veneration and honor of the Sacrament of my
blessed body, two low cursies, reuerences or adorations. One to give me thanks
for that charity and benefits which I showed toward thee in my incarnation,
death and passion, and in the institution of this blessed Sacrament. An other
to give me as much honor as lies in thee, in recompense of that reproach
which I suffered at their hands that receive my precious body unworthily, and
do handle it impurely. Thou must every day make two other adorations or
courtesies, one to obtain the fruit which I dying procured for all men by my
passion, and by the efusion of my blood, and loss of my life, and which I have
a will that all men should be pertakers of. Thou must in this also pray that I
may power my grace so into the heart of every man, as they may receive the same
virtue, efficacy, and fruit of my Passion, which being upon the Cross and
suffering there, I wrought for them, and in such abundant sort, as I by my
death did offer it unto them.

Thou must make an other kind of courtesy, or some kind of humiliation of thy
self in my presence, to praise me and give me thanks for the efusion of my
blood, and for all my mercies which I have at any time powered out both upon the
good and bad, and thou must pray for their conversion, which are in damnable
sins, and for the reformation of the Church; they that cannot conceive thus
much, let them say with a devout intention, two Pater nosters, and two Aue
Mary's.

Thou must fast every Friday, if infirmity, weakness, labor, necessity,
travail, age, or some other reasonable occasion do not let or hinder thee, or
if it like thee better, thou may eat ^wise that day, so that it be
temperatelie, and very sparingly, and that thou use no sodden meat at
supper, whereby thou may punish thy flesh at the least a little, and bring
thy self to bewail the bitterness of my death and Passion.

Learn dilligently to know the commandments of my Gospel, and the precepts
of my Church, and when thou have learned them do not break them, for the love
of any earthly thing whatsoever.

An other Instruction or Rule, for such as with a more fervent zeal and spirit
do earnestly labor to attain to perfection.
I Have placed those in this second division, which forgetting clean all
things that are past, desire ever to come to a better and more perfect course,
and therefore this rule shall be for such as seeking to attain to true
perfection, do covet with a longing mind to be made one with me, and wholly
united unto me.

Wherefore whosoever thou be, that desire to serve me with thy whole heart,
and to please me in all things, thou must not, with thy certain knowledge
and deliberate judgment offend in any sin, although it be but venial, and
thou must desire instantly at my hands, with most humble and devout prayers,
that I may keep and preserve thee from all kind of sin: Thou must be holy,
as I am holy; thou must be perfect as I am perfect, thou must be holy I say
in my sight, and when thou art so, thou must remember that it is not of thy
self, but it proceeds from me. Thou must not think otherwise of thy self,
then of a most wicked sinner, that had infinite times deserved eternal
damnation, if my most beneuolent and ever most ready mercy had not been
always at hand to preserve and deliver thee from it.

Walk in that vocation whereunto thou art called, and live according to the
state and rule of thy vocation. Observe diligently, and perform faithfully
whatsoever my holy Scripture commands thee, and whatsoever thou promisest
with thy mouth unto me. It is also thy duty, not only to enquire after my
commandments, but to seek to know my pleasure in all things, and to ask my
counsel, and even with a certain earnest desire to follow and fulfill them
both* Lead a solitary life, being separated from all unnecessary businesses,
from familiarity, and discourses with men, and give thy self to silence,
solitarines, and prayer, as much as thy state will permit thee. My Apostle
says, that the servant of God ought not to be contentious, contend thou not
therefore in words. Abstain also from every idle word, but chiefelie from all
carnal^ and backbiting* peeches, never speak any thing, nor yet hear any
thing of those which be absent, but that which is good. And although that it
may sometime be done with a good intention, to speak evil of him that is
absent, yet never consent to speak or to hear evil of him, except the matter
which is spoken of, be most certain and apparent. And yet if thou do exceed
in this, thou must not go away unpunished, but thou must enjoin some penance
and punishment to thy self for thine offenses. Observe sobriety, in meat and
drink, and use all my creatures with te^perance, that thou may be made pore
in spirit with the love of me, delighting in no worldly thing whatsoever, but
as a stranger and wayfaring man* look upon all things in this world with a
pure and free heart, not subject any way unto them, but as it were passing
lightly by them, and not having any desire to remain with them.

Accustom thy self to show all humility, meekenes, benignity, and piety,
toward thy neighbors, remembering and beholding me in every man and frame thy
self to deal so with them, as thou would deal with me. For in truth I
take any thing whatsoever thou do to thy neighbor as done unto my self.

Thou ought to judge no man, nor yet intrude thy self to dispute, or to
give thy judgment of other men's matters and consciences whatsoever they be:
except thou be appointed a Judge by me, and so by the virtue of thine
Office, art to give thy judgment therein. And yet notwithstanding, if thou
shall see any man offend, and do hope to do him some good by thine
admonition (or at the least have no mistrust to make him commit more grievous
sins by the reprehension) thou may courteously admonish him that does
sin, earnestly, and gently entreating him that he would be mindful of his
own salvation and amend his fault: But if he seek to defend himself, and
obstinately contend with thee in maintaining of his doing; do not thou
dispute with him, except thou have hope by little and little to bring him to a
better course, neither yet labor to defend thine own speeches when it is to
no purpose, but give him place humbly without any anger and with all meekenes
and quietness. Likewise if thou be reprehended at any time without a cause,
thou may if thou will gently and mildly give an account of thy dealing,
but thou shall do better (except any scandal might rise thereby) if thou do
humbly ask pardon, and without any excusing of thy self promise amendment (as
far as thou may lawfully do without offending of me) and with all thou
may give him thanks to show thee charity which did in this sort admonish
thee. I have heretofore warned men in my Gospel, that if any man will come
after me, he must deny h^mselfe. For as in the denying of a man's self, the
whole per^ection of a man's life consists, so by the love of a man's self, he
comes ever to ruin and destruction. Labor therefore by all the means that
thou may, for the utter denying of thy self, and let it be thy principal
study how to mortefie thine own will in thee. Thou must so dispose of all
thine own matters, as thou may be ready either to do or omit things in
such sort as thou shall be counseled and advised by some good man, or one
that fears God, if thou haste not a spiritual governor. Trust not thine own
judgment in any thing. Do nothing of thine own head, chiefly in doubtful
things, where there may be danger. And therefore thou must not procure for thy
self any thing in seeking to please thine own appetite (except such things
only as do manifestly appear without all doubt to be acceptable unto me)
but thou must rather respect the profit of many, and thou must ever prefer
before all things my honor, and commit thy self wholly to my providence.
I will take care of thee, I will take the charge upon my self to provide for
thee, and let this be thine only studdie, to behave thy self in such sort, as
thou do nothing to the derogation of my honor, and the resisting of my good
pleasure. But to the end that thy work may be more pleasing unto me, by the
denying of thy self, (if thou live not in the monastical course of life)
thou may for the undertaking and performance of this course, promise thy
obedience herein to a Priest or some other man that fears me, neither ought
the infelicitie of this present age, nor the impiety of wicked men, which do
slander and impugn vows and promises made unto God, yea even such as are
most profitable for man's salvation, either move or discourage thee an^ whit.

But thou ought to be the rather enduced by this to rely thy self upon my
mercy, and firmly to believe that I which have given thee an aspiration to
have a will to do well, and to make a holy vow, will also give thee power
and abillitie to fulfill it: For neither of them proceed from thy self, but it
comes from my grace both to have a will to do well, and to do well indeed,
and both to promise and perform those things which are profitable for thy
salvation. Choose a place that is secret and desire to live hidd and unknown,
and disclose not thy counsels to every body, but to him only who is the
director and guide of thy conscience. Be not careful or desirous to please
men, seek not for their commendation, or to have a name amongst them, neither
yet study to do any thing whereby thou may obtain a great opinion,
praise, or admiration amongst them, seeing that all things are proper to me
only, to which any praise or commendation is due; but endeavor rather so to
bridle thine affections, as that thou may in all simplicity and purity of
heart, think worse and more baselie of thy self than of any other, and be
desirous that other men should conceive the like opinion of thee; so as
whatsoever thou do, whether it be a thing worthy of commendation, or else
such a thing as may make thee to be contemned, and reproched of others, be no
more moved with it (if it be not sin) either inwardly in thy mind, or
outwardly in thy show, by entering into any passion, then thou would be if
any other man had done the same; and boast nothing of thy self, glory nothing
in thy self, challenge and ascribe nothing to thy self, by the mean of my
gifts, attribute no more to thy self for any virtue that is in thee, or for
any good works that are done by thy means, then thou would do to a
hatchet, or any other instrument, which is nothing at all in it self, and is
able to do nothing by it self, but if any thing be done by it, it is by the
will of the Artificer which works with it, and which could do the same by an
other instrument if it pleased him: For in that it is come to be an instrument,
and that it has any thing in it self, whereby it may now be employed to some
use, it has not this abillitie of it self nor from any other, but from the
Artificer, who did frame it in such sort, as it may work and do somewhat; but
without an Artificer, or one to work with it, it lies still unprofitable, and
serves to no purpose. In like sort must he think of himself which desires
to be my son, and to imitate my humillitie, and will undertake to follow
this rule of life, he must consider of his own estate, how full he is of
miseries, defectes, sins, and infirmities. Moreover he ought to look into
every man, and respect those things only in them, wherein I have adorned them
with any grace and virtue, that he may be brought by this consideration to
acknowledge himself always inferior unto them all: And let him not challenge
or ascribe any thing* unto himself for those virtues, operations, and good
g^^tes, which I bestow upon him; but let him make no other account of them,
then if they were in another, and let him give the praise and glory of them
all to me wholly without chalenging of any thing to himself thereby. And
therefore thou which desire to be a follower of this rule, must have great
care of thy self, and thou must so dilligentlie look into thine own
behavior, and be so watchful in all thy actions, as thou neither may seek
any thing, nor bend thy self to desire or follow any thing besides me: that
is, thou must desire nothing but my glory, and the fulfilling of my pleasure
only. Wherefore in what thing soever thou find thy self to bear rule,
that is, in what thing so ever thou seek to please thy self, or find
self love to reign in thee, there thou must renounce thy self, and omit wholly
the doing of that thing (if thou have no lawful impediment to the contrary)
seeing by it thou did not seek to please me with a pure intention.

Thou must complain to no man of those crosses which thou suffer, except it
be to have counsel at their hands; for thou ought to receive all things
thankefullie which I send thee, and to refer all things unto me.

Therefore howsoever the storms of affliction shall violently assail thee, or
in what sort soever adversity shall chance to ouerwhelme thee, have thou a
mind ever ready to endure all patiently, being wholly subject to me, and
for me to all creatures. Endeavor with violence to repress these motions
which rise up against thee, and labor clean to forsake thy self, and be not
moved with any passion against men, neither yet contend, dispute or resist
them. Seek not moreover means to avoid affliction: nor to deliver thy self
from them, but be content to receive all things with silence in peace and
tranquillity, and with an indifferent mind, as willing to receive adversity
as prosperity at my hands; And be content to bear them with all quietness
in thy soul, as long as it shall be my pleasure.

And when thou art in adversity, do not seek with a deliberate intention,
that is, of set purpose, for any consolation, though it be never so little,
but commit all things unto me, and patiently expect the event, and end of
all things from my hands.

Thou must confess thy sins Sacramentallie to a Priest every week no less
then once, but thou must do it to me every day in prayer, and that very
often, with the sorrow of thy heart, and with an humble accusation of thy self
for thy manifold offenses, and thou must offer thyselfe unto me, ready in all
things to set forth my glory, and to fulfill my pleasure.

Thou must receive also the Sacrament of my blessed body every month, once
at the least, if thou can not every week once or twice, and thou must not
omit to make those courtesies which I set down in the former rule in the
veneration of my glorious Sacrament, and in the memory of my death. If thou
shall fail in any of these things heretofore recited, thou shall not thereby
be guilty of a new fault by undertaking the performance of this rule, neither
shall thou offend more by the mean of it, than another which lives without
this rule and fraternity, but for every transgression which thou make by
being overcome with thine own inconstancy, do not cease altogether from
following this good purpose of thine, but enioine thy self for thy penance and
punishment to say one Aue Marie, or some greater penance as thou shall think
convenient: Thou must say every night notwithstanding three Aue Mary's before
my most holy and glorious Mother: One for those negligences which thou have
ignorantly committed, and which thou do not remember: An other to entreat me
by her intercession for the amendment of thy life, perseverance in virtue and
obtaining of my grace: The third* that the worshipping and honoring of me may
be daily amplified, enlarged, augmented, and increased either by this rule by
what other means so ever, that shall seem best to me.

Use such spiritual exercises as are most agreeable to thy devotion, state,
and nature, wherein thou may spend thy time profitably, and be lifted by
them in thy heart unto me, increasing daily in goodness, and enforcing thy
self from time to time to do better and better.

He that will undertake to follow this fraternity or rule, and govern
himself according to the prescript order thereof, let him kneel before the
Image of me crucified, if he be alone, or had rather be secret by himself, and
let him earnestly entreat me that I will vouchsafe to receive him for my
disciple, that I will power my grace upon him, and both strengthen and confirm
this good will in him so fully, as he may resolve constantly, and vnremouably,
to live according to these rules and directions: Let him also teach others, and
gain souls unto me, and bring them unto my service.

But if there be many that undertake to follow these rules, they may exhort one
an other in me, and may be united in brotherly charity, by the mean of the
likeness and unity they have in their course of life, in that they all do
follow this fraternity. And let them not receive every man at all adventures
into their society, specially such, as there is no hope of the constancy of
their mind, and perseverance of devotion, least that their lightness and
instabilitie, which do not endeavor to attain to the perfection of that
course they have undertaken, may discourage others in their good purpose, and
make them give over their holy intention.

VERSES FOR HELPING a man's memory, wherein are expressed the principal and
speciallest points, of those good lessons which are comprehended in these rules.
Have special care to rule thy tongue,
Forbear to please thy carnal will:
Do good to all, while time thou have, and what thou art remember still.
Forsake thy self, it is not much, Christ took for thee much greater pain:
Be meek in mind, that thou with him in endless glory may remain.
By the rule of thy tongue is understood, that thou must refrain from all
idle, backbiting, contentious and quarrelling words, and from all complaining
speeches. By forbearing to please thy will, is meant that thou must wean thy
self from the desire of all vain pleasures, transitory things, and earthly
delights, and that thou must mortefie all thy senses. By doing good to every
man, thou art exhorted to perform all the works of mercy, and charity
toward thy neighbors. And in that thou art willed to remember what thou art,
it is to make thee know thy self, and to humble thee, because if thou look
into thine own ability, thou shall plainly find, that thou art merely
nothing of thy self, nor yet able by thy self to do any thing at all.

By forsaking of thy self is meant, that thou must renounce thine own will,
deny thine own self, and seek to please God only, and wholly with a pure
intention. Lastly, thou art exhorted to be meek in mind, whereby is
signified, that thou must use all meekenes, courtesy, and benignity toward
thy neighbors, and thou must ever retain all peace, quietness, and
tranquillity in thy soul, patiently expecting the pleasure of almighty God
and accepting always in the best part of his providence, whatsoever it shall
be his will to send thee.

CHRISTO LAVDES, ET SANTAE MATRI EIVS HONOR, Amen.

FINIS.
A VERY SHORT EXercise of Love unto God the Father, God the Son, and God the
holy Ghost, the most blessed Trinity, and one true, GOD, wherewith a man
ought once every day to offer himself with his whole soul unto his divine
Majesty, and to give him most humble thanks for all the benefits which he
has received at his most gracious hands.
O Lord my God which art infinite goodness it self, and both unchangeable and
unspotted, according to all the perfections which I can conceive of thee,
always remaining the very same that thou were from the beginning. Thou made
every creature for thy glory, thou dooest preserve and govern them with such
wisdom, that being so many, so great and so diverse as they are, there is
none which does withdraw himself from being under thy subjection, and yet
thou dooest neither dig nor labor, but always remainest in most blessed
quiet. Thou have created me according to thine own Image and likeness, and do
preserve me in that being which I am. Thou have redeemed me of most pure
charity by the death of thy blessed Son, and in most painful and
troublesome manner, that thou might show unto me the riches of thy grace,
the bounty of thy mercy, and the exceedingnes of thy love toward me: Thou
have made me to come in a noble sort to the acknowledging of thy most holy
name, thou have brought me to that most holy Religion, and thou have raised
me to so high a dignity. Thou have directed me always in thine own
presence, and have carried a single regard toward me, and thou have made me
to find favor in the eyes of thy servant, that they might take care of my
salvation. Thou have delivered me also from many dangers and tribulations
both of body and soul, from infirmities, from sicknesses, from beggerie, from
fallings headlong, from sundry perrils, from wicked men, from drowning, and
from infinite other mischiefs which might have happened to me as well as to
others, if thy love and mercy had not delivered me from them. Thou have also
most often delivered me from sin, from falling into the gulf of sinners,
from being devoured by them, and from eternal damnation. Thou have moreover
given me a firm confidence to believe that thou have chosen me to eternal
happiness, wherein thou will manifest thine own self unto me. Oh, I shall
then plainly know and see thee my Lord and God, I shall love thee perfectly
and most purelie, I shall find most blessed peace in enjoying thee only, and
I shall always most sincerely praise and glorify thee with all thy Saints: O
merciful God confirm this, and perform this quickly in me. O Lord my God
for all the benefits that thou haste wrought, and shall work in me, and in
every one of thy creatures, be all honor, glory, thanks, duetifull
service, hearty affection, chaste fear, and sincere love to thy divine
Majesty, world without end, Amen.

O merciful God make me thankful, and pardon me I beseech thee most
graciously, for all those abominable ingratitudes, intolerable negligences,
and innumerable sins, which I have committed against thee: (And if thou have
communicated, thou may add to this and say) for thine own sake, and by the
virtue of thy blessed Sacrament which I have received, root out of my heart all
malice, grant me an humble confession, a hearty sorrow, a discreet abhorring,
a zealous forsaking and a necessary detestation of all my sins, and both
true repentance and a perfect amendment in this life. Grant also that I may
never again offend thee, for thine unspeakable mercy, and infinite goodness,
and make me to love with all the affection that it is possible for me, thy
most sweet friendship, and thy most precious grace, excite me most earnestly
to desire it, and quickly to find it, with perseverance, therein even to the
end. O merciful God, grant that I may not neglect this goodness and long
suffering of thine: Strengthen me always both in soul and body to do thee
service, and grant me thy grace that I may soberlie use thy creatures, to the
glory and praise of thy name.

I give thee thanks, O Lord Jesus, and thee O holy Ghost, being equal with the
eternal Eather, which were content for my salvation, to be conceived of the
same holy Ghost, and to be borne of the most pure Virgin Marie, and to be
made man. What do I owe thee, and how much am I bound unto thee O Lord Jesus? O
GOD which were man, O man which were God, O Messiah, O Christ, the anointed of
our Lord, O Emanuell, O God with us, O Lord of exceeding Majesty, and most
constant lover of men, how were thou made a mortal man, subject to a mortal
life, to sheddings of thy blood, to persecutions, to sorrow, to pains, and
chiefly to the torments of the Cross, when thou were made poor and
miserable, and most vile and contemptib^e in the sight of men.

What shall I render unto thee, O sweet Lover, for that most bitter death which
thou sufferedst for me, and for that unspeakable charity which thou shewedst
toward me? I beseech thee O Lord Jesus, by thy incarnation, by thy remaining
in the Virgins womb, by the joy of thy soul, at the grace of thine v^ion,
when thy divinity and humanity were joined in one, by thy Nativity in winter
time, by the pain of thy circumcision, by the veneration wherewith the Sages
did adore thee, by the presentatio^ in the temple, by thy flight into Egypt, by
thy banishment there, by thy fearful return again into thine own country,
by thy subjection, obedience, and most virtuous life, by the penance which
thou did for our sins, by thy baptism, fasting, and temptation in the
wilderness, by thy penury, poverty, and necessity which thou enduredst in this
mortal life, by all the troubles which thou feltest, by thy most gracious,
virtuous and glorious life, by that ingratitude which thou did endure at
the Jews hands, when they would have thrown thee down headlong from the top
of the hill, when they sought traiterouslie to entrap thee in thy words and
deeds, and when they did devise how to stone thee with their violent hands.

I beseech thee also by thy modesty, humility, patience, meekenes, and all
the other virtues, by thy humiliation of thy self at thy disciples feet, when
thou washedst them, by the institution of thy most blessed Sacrament of thy
precious body, and by the most delightful taste, and unspeakable sweetness
thereof, by thy sadness, agony, and blody sweat which thou did endure, when
thou praiedst in the grade^* by thy being forsaken of thy disciples and all
me^, by thy being betrayed by thy own servant, by the bands, reproaches,
injuries, buffets, blows, spiting upon and blasphemies which thou did
suffer, by the false accusation, and unjust condemnation which thou receauedst,
by thy grief for Saint Peter's denying thee, Judas betraying thee, and the
other Disciples forsaking thee, by thy being led unto diverse Judges, to receive
the sentence of death, by the mockery, nakedness, scourging of thy body,
crowning of thy head, and vexing of thy innocent soul: by thy being rejected
when Barabas was excepted, by the unjust sentence of the Judge, by thy being
led with thieves, by the carrying of thy Cross, by the mockery of thy
adversaries, and by the shamefulnes of thy death, by the lamentation which
devout persons, but chiefly thy Mother made for thee, by the toil and
wearines which thou sustained, by the bitter drink which thou tasted, by the
plucking of thy flesh, with the plucking of thy garments which thou endured, by
thy being stretched out on the Cross, by thy nayling to the Cross, and the
torments which thou there received, by those blessed tears which thou did
shed, by those intolerable injuries which thou did patiently bear, by thy
most holy prayer, by the commiseration which thou tookest of the thief that
said. Lord remember me when thou come into thy Kingdom.

By the compassion of thy mother, by thy crying thou were forsaken, by thy
drinking of Vinegar and Galle, by thy saying al was finished, by thy most
cruel death, by thy unspeakable charity wherewith thou suffered it, by the
pearcing of thy side, thy mother looking on, by thy holy burial, by the
heaviness of thy friends, by thy resurrection, by thy appearing to the^ again,
by thy assention, by the sending of the holy Ghost, by the institution and
foundation of thy Church, by the assumption of thy mother, by the glorification
of thy Saints, by thy last judgment, and by the eternal salvation which thou will grant to thy servants souls and bodies. Thou did rise again from
death triumphantly, thou did appear to thy Disciples gloriously, thou
did rejoice their hearts wonderfully, thou did ascend up into heaven in
their sight miraculouslie, thou did send the holy Ghost to direct thy
church, thou did gather up thy servants unto thee, thou did assume thy
blessed mother to thy eternal kingdom, thou shall come to judge the quick and
the dead, thou shall reign with all thy Saints world without end, and remain
with thee, O sweet Jesus. What shall I render unto thee, O gracious lover, for
that most bitter death which thou sufferedst for me, and for that unspeakable
charity which thou shewedst toward me? O good Jesus make me I beseech thee
partaker of all thy merits and mercies, make me thankful for them, and in
recompense of them to love thee again which loved me so much, and even to be
ready to die for thy love.

Pardon me for all mine unworthiness, all my vileness, all my undutifulness, and
all my negligences, wherein I have offended thee. Teach me true wisdom, that
thou only may be wisdom unto me, and all other things whatsoever
foolishnes. Grant that I may never use any kind of concupiscence. Grant me
true knowledge, pure intentions, holy purposes, and perfect discretion in my
conscience, and in thy holy service. Make me stout and forward, to show my
self such a one in the sight of thy glorious Majesty, as becomes me.
Encourage me and strengthen me against all faintnes of heart, errors,
scrupulosities, fancies, and such like. Open my understanding in judging
truly of the Scriptures and conceauing rightly of thy good pleasure, that I
may know what is acceptable in thy sight, and when I do know it, grant that
I may both love and perform it,

Deliver me from taking any care for other men's causes, orbusiyng my self
with other men's matters, that by this mean I may more wholly please thee, and
more perfectly, safely and quickly come unto thee. And if it shall please thy
most excellent Majesty, to work this in me, thy will be done, and help me I
beseech thee, that I may be a profitable member in all Offices touching thy
service, and neglect nothing that may express my duty toward thee: Make me
like unto thee both in life and manners. Grant me modesty, humility,
obedience, patience, and whatsoever else is necessary for my vocation.

O most gracious and loving Lord, quicken me and revive me with thy grace,
separate me wholly from all evil and convert me altogether unto thy self, and
grant that I may hate that which thou hate, and love that which thou love.
Make me to increase continually, and abundantly in all virtues. Strengthen
me and confirm me in thy Catholic faith truly understood. Increase faith in
me, settle me and fortefie me in an assured hope, grant me always to conceive
rightly of thee, and to rely wholly upon thee, give me a firm confidence in
thee, and that I may worship thee devoutly, honor thee chastely, and love thee
perfectly with a simple heart, a pure soul, a quiet mind, and a safe
conscience. Grant that thou only may content me, that thou only may
delight me, and that thou only may possess me, and that I may desire thee
only, love thee only, and study how to please thee only. Make me that
I may never be separated from thee, that I may labor earnestly to come unto
thee, find peace in thee alone, and quickly come unto thee. Let all inordinate
love be clean mortefied in me, and remove all other impediments from me,
that may hinder me to come unto thee, which art only to be desired, and
only to be beloved.

I do confess thee, O Lord my God, three persons, the Father, the Son, and
the holy Ghost, and I do adore and worship thee one true God (...) thy self,
(...) wholly and (...) glorious Majesty, as (...) bound lying prostrate (...)
yield themselves in every thing unto thee, read^^ with all (...) will,
perfectly with all obedience, and ^ruelie with all sincerity.

Forgive me (O most merciful God (...) I have not carried that affection
toward thee which I ought, and (...) grace, that I may worship thee, (...) in
truth, and in such (...) as I am bound.

CHRISTO LAVDES, ET SANTAE MATRI EIVS HONOR, Amen.

FINIS.
A HYMN OF THE LIFE and Passion of our Savior Christ, made after the manner
of an Alphabet, every verse beginning with every Letter, as they follow one
another in order in the Christ cross row.
Almighty Lord whose love to us,
was greater then we can express:
Which sufferedst death our souls to save,
and ledst thy life in all distress.
Grant that thy love wherewith for us,
thou meekelie did these torments bear:
May keep us from those dreadful pains,
which for our sins we justly fear.
BEnd down sweet Christ those gracious eyes
which we from thee do still expect:
Thou with thy blood have us redeemde,
thy servants suit do not reject:
Extend to us thy mercy here,
that on this earth in danger live:
Remit those faults which we have made,
and all our sins do thou forgive.
COme down to us which for our sakes,
vouchsafte to leave thy glorious seat,
And taking here on thee our flesh,
did suffer often both cold and heat.
With hunger, thirst, and bitter scorns,
with taunts, reproach and all disdain:
The which of love to work our good,
thou were content for to sustain.
Deliver us from pride O Lord,
which humbly washed thy servants feet:
And scornde it not to make them know,
how humblenes for them was meet.
And when as thou away had washed,
the foulenes of their inward skin:
Thou gave them thy body straight,
to comfort then their souls within.
EXcite our hearts to honor thee,
by thinking of those dreadful fears:
Which in the mount perplexed thy mind,
where thou did pray with floods of tears.
Then unto thee an Angel came,
ere that thou had thy prayer done:
When as thy blood like drops of sweat,
in streams from thee along did run.
FAlse Judas there did thee betray,
then sought thy foes to take thee straight:
And seeking thee to them thou wentst,
which for thy life did lie in weight.
But they like men clean void of grace,
where meekenes could no mercy find:
First pulled and hald thy sacred flesh,
and after fast thy hands did bind.
GOod Jesus how art thou oppressed,
thy servants fly and leave thee quite,
Thy cruel foes on thee do run,
like Wolves on Lambs with all despite.
With whips they scourgde thy tender skin.
they spit upon thy glorious face:
Thy cheeks they box, thy eyes they blind,
and with reproach they thee disgrace.
HOw meek were thou then after this,
thine actions it did still bewray:
Before the Judge they thee accuse,
and thou no word at all did say.
And when thou spakest they blasphemde,
thy holy speech they did deride:
They pulled they halde and thee condemde,
none of thy words they could abide.
IN white thou were for mockery clad,
at thee to jest each way they sought:
And in that robe of greater scorn,
thou after were to Pilate brought.
As Judge he sat, the people there,
with open throat did often cry:
Loose Barabas the murderer,
and on the Cross let Jesus die.
Keep us from care of men's reports,
by seeing thee thus far abusde:
In that they chose a wicked wretch,
when thou by them were clean refusde.
And kill in us all carnal thoughts,
by thinking of thy grievous pain:
When as thy flesh with whips was torn,
and streams of blood ran out amain.
LOrd, Lord, what pains did thou endure?
one might thee now all bloody see:
And swollen with printes of those same stripes,
which these vile men had laid on thee.
And not content thy head they crownde,
with pricking thorns to make thee find:
In every part most grievous pain,
and to afflict thy patient mind.
Meek as a lamb these wrongs thou bare,
and mildely all their taunts endurde:
Not once in speech reproouing them,
which had to thee such harms procurde.
Thou were not mooude when as thy foes,
did thee salute inscornefull wise:
Nor when they spat upon thy face,
and with contempt did thee despise.
NO pity did they take on thee,
in suffering of this cruel pain:
But more and more thee still reuilde,
with scornful spite and all disdain.
Thy life (sweet Lord) to have thee loose,
that was their suit and only cry:
Naught else could slake their blody thirst,
but needs they must have thee to die.
OBedient straight to die thou were,
and with despite thee more to scorn:
Upon thy back thy Cross they laid,
which was with whips so foully torn.
And when thou were condemde to make,
this sacrifice for all our sin:
Thee with two thieves for spite they ioynde,
which all their life had graceles bin.
PAst half the way thou were not gone,
when as this weight did vex thee sore:
A man by blood the steps might find,
which thou had past along before.
Her weeping eyes thy mother cast,
on thee in this thy deep distress:
Which look did both your hearts rejoice,
and made thy pains to seem the less.
QVite root sweet Jesus out of us,
^ll things that may displease thy mind:
To make us thankful for thy love,
which by these pains we plainly find.
For they of thee a spoil to make,
pulled off thy clothes by force at last:
And pulling them pulled off the skin,
which to thy clothes then cleaued fast.
REuiling thee O King of Kings,
they never left all void of shame:
For when thou were upon the Cross,
they iested at thy holy name.
Between two thieves yet hanging there,
in suffering death to ransom us:
Thou ceasedst not for those to pray,
which did revile and use thee thus.
Salvation there thou promised,
unto the theere that it did crave:
And willed John whom thou did love,
of Marie still all care to have.
Unto his charge thou her bequeathd,
but she to see thy grievous pain:
With bitter panges of grief did feel,
her woeful heart quite cut in twain.
THou crydst my God in this distress,
why do thou clean me now forsake:
And to increase thy pain the more,
they gave thee gall thy thirst to slake.
Yet yielding straight to him thy soul,
thy trust in him thou plainly showd:
And then a wretch thy side did pearce,
from whence both blood and water flowde.
Unhappy were thy friends O Lord,
to see thee with this torment killed:
But thou again the third day rose,
whereby their hearts with joy were filled.
And in their sight with triumph did,
ascend to make them know:
That thou will there all those reward,
which serve thee here on earth below.
ZIn was the cause of every grief,
which thou sweet Jesus did sustain:
Keep us therefore from sin O Christ,
that we may escape eternal pain.
Lord wash us with thy precious blood,
let us with sin not spotted be:
That we in heaven with all thy Saints,
for ever may sing praise to thee.
Yield us no pray unto this world,
but give us grace to praise thee still:
Both with our mouths and in our hearts,
to honor thee with all good will.
Make with thy love our hearts inflamde,
imprint it deep within our mind:
And make us always thirst for thee,
that we with thee all joy may find.
Zeal ever keep in us O Lord,
of serving thee and doing well:
That we may walk in virtues path,
and from our thoughts all vice expel.
Sweet Jesus still inspire our hearts,
with lightning of thy holy Ghost:
And guide us in that happy course,
which may content and please thee most.
A Hymn wherein the praise of all creatures are offered up unto the Creator.
O Christ the glorious Crown,
of Virgins that are pure:
Which do a love for thee to thirst,
within their minds procure.
Which are the spouse of those,
that chaste and humble be:
The hope, the life, the only help
of such as trust in thee.
Which ever love best
a chaste and spotles mind:
And thee to love commaundest those,
in whom thou both do find.
To serve thee O sweet Lord,
thy creatures all are pressed:
And for to sound thy praise withal,
that in their might does rest.
All Angels with their troops,
all Saints that are above:
Do laud thee still and never cease,
with songs of fervent love.
The Sky, the Land, the Sea,
and all on earth below:
The glory of thy worthy name,
do with their praises show.
All Virgins purity,
which made thy life their guide:
All piety of humble hearts,
abhorring filthy pride.
All Martirs constancy,
which did this world despise:
All true remorce that they declare,
which do from sin arise.
All charity of those,
whose souls thy love does warm:
All simple plainenes of such minds,
as think no kind of harm.
All sweet delights wherewith,
the pacient hearts abound:
Do blase thy name, and with thy praise,
they make the world resound.
The thunder shows thy power,
and lightning which we see,
The snow and rain with wonder tells,
that none is like to thee.
The winter yields thee praise,
and Summer does the same:
The Sun, the Moon, the stars and all,
do magnify thy name.
The beast, the fish, the depthes,
that in the Sea remain:
With cheerful voice set forth thy praise,
and show thy glory plain.
The pearls the precious stones,
the birds thy praise do sing:
The woods the wells and all delights,
which from this earth does spring.
The earth it self declares,
thine honor and thy state:
It does bewraie how thou for us,
did all these things creat.
The flowers fruits and trees,
the men which thou did frame:
And women eke inuit us still,
to praise thy holy name.
The roses that appear,
so fair in outward sight:
The violets which with their sent,
do yield so great delight.
The Lillies that bring forth,
so pure and white a flower:
With sweet Poungarnets do extol,
and praise thy mighty power.
What creature O sweet Lord,
from praising thee can stay,
What earthly thing but filled with joy,
thine honor does bewraie.
Let us therefore with praise,
thy mighty works express:
With heart and hand, with mind and all,
which we from thee possess.
O Christ whose glorious power,
does far and wide extend:
All creatures praise thy holy name,
and do thy works commend.
So goodly to behold,
so pleasant and so sweet:
So fair thou art as all this praise,
for thee of right is meet.
Thou art that firm delight,
which never will depart:
The chaste, the true and only joy,
of every faithful heart.
The comforter of such,
as sorrow does torment.
The rayser up of those by grace,
which do their sins repent.
O Lord our life and health,
our whole and surest trust:
Remit our faults for we have been,
most wicked and unjust.
Forgive us our misdeedes,
remove them from thine eyes:
Give us thy grace, that we by it,
may earthly things despise.
Grant that all worldly joys,
to us may better seem:
And that we may her vain delights,
as filthy dung esteem.
Transform us unto thee,
and so our hearts inflame:
As we our force and life may spend,
in praising of thy name.
Grant that in loving thee,
we constant may abide:
That thee alone we may desire,
and all things hate beside.
That all in all to us,
thou may for ever be:
And that forsaking clean our selves,
we still may cleave to thee.
Flow thou into our souls,
with streams of thy delight:
Possess us whole and carnal thoughts,
may be surpressed quite.
Let nothing us content,
that may thy mind offend:
Let all our joy and whole delight,
on thee alone depend.
Make us in loving thee,
to languish with desire:
And burn as with the flaming heat,
of that most sacred fire.
That we for thee may thirst,
and thou may us possess:
And that we may alone of thee,
in all our life express.
To thee make us to run,
with a desirous mind:
And senceles else to every thing,
that here on earth we find.
Let us in thee whole drownde,
rejoice with happy peace:
And let us sleep in thee sweet Christ,
whose joy does never cease.
CHRISTO LAVDES, ET SANTAE MATRI EIVS HONOR, Amen.

FINIS.

