Certain devout and Godly Petitions, commonly called, JESUS PSALTER.

Non est aliud Nomen datum hominibus. Act. 4. IHS



There is none other name under heaven given unto men, in which we must be
saved. Act. 4. ANTVERPIAE. Apud Johan. Foulerum. Anno. 1575.

Miserere mei, Jesus, fili David. The Woman of Chanane ceased not to cry.
Matthew. 15.


Have mercy on me, Jesus, the Son of David.

O Lord, help me.

Certain devout and Godly Petitions, commonly called. Jesus Psalter.
IT is to understand, that there be three manner of Psalters.

The First is called David's Psalter, which contains thries Fifty Psalms.
The second is called the Psalter of our Lady, containing thryes Fyfty Aues.
The third is called the Psalter of Jesus, or the invocation of Jesus, containing
xv. principal petitions, which x. times repeted, make also thryes Fyfty. In the
which Psalter and invocation, is the glorious name of our Savior Jesus called
upon iiij. C. and Fyfty times. whosoever uses to say it, trust they verily,
that they shall find thereby special help to resist tentation, and have
increase of grace and virtue by the singular help of Jesus. Of this blessed
name S. Peter in ye Acts of the Apostles says: There is none other name under
heaven given to men, in the which it behooves us to be saved.

And our Savior says in the Gospel of Saint Ihon, that we should make our
petitions in his name, which is the Mediator of our salvation, whose glorious
vision and most amorous fruition in the celestial glory shall be our perpetual
joy and incomprehensible consolation.

Here is to be noted (as it is said before) that the xv. principal petitions
must be said each one by themself, ten times, like as they shall be set
forth in this book by order. And ye may say them upon your ten fingers, or
upon ten beads, or else read them as they be written, and it is good for them
that can not read, to learn these inuocations without book.

Begin your Psalter with devout genuflexion, or at leastwise with
inclinalion to Jesus: and say thus, as follows.

Philipp. 2.
In nomine Jesus omne genu flectatur, coelestium, terrestriu^ and infernorum. Et
omnis lingua confiteatur, quia Dominus Jesus Christus in gloria est Dei Patris.

The first petition.
i Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. mercy. ij Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. mercy. iij Jesus. Jesus. Jesus.
mercy. iiij Jesus. Jesus Jesus. mercy. v Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. mercy. vi Jesus. Jesus.
Jesus. mercy. vij Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. merty. viij Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. mercy. ix
Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. mercy. x Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. mercy.
JEsu have mercy on me, and forgive me ye great offenses which I have done in
the sight of thee.

Grant me grace, Jesus, for the love of thee, to despise sin and al wordly
vanity.

Have mercy on all sinners, Jesus, I beseech thee: turn their vices into
virtues, and make them true obseruers of thy law and lovers of thee, bring them
to bliss in everlasting glory.

Have mercy also on the souls in Purgatory for thy bitter Passion, I beseech
thee, and for thy glorious name Jesus.

The holy Trinity, oue very God, have mercy on me.

Pater noster. Aue Maria.

The second petition.
i Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. help me. ij Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. help me. iij Jesus. Jesus.
Jesus. help me. iiij Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. help me. v Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. help me.
vi Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. help me. vij Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. help me. viij Jesus. Jesus.
Jesus. help me. ix Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. help me. x Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. help me.
Jesus help me, to overcome all tentations to sin, and the malice of my
ghostly enemy.

To spend my time in virtue and labor acceptable to thee, to repress the
motions of my flesh in stouth, glotony, and leacherie.

To have mine heart enamored of virtue and the glorious presence of thee, good
name and fame, Jesus, to thine honor, and to the comfort of me.

Have mercy on all sinners, Jesus, I beseech thee: turn their vices into
virtues, and make them true obseruers of thy law, and lovers of thee, bring
them to bliss in everlasting glory.

Have mercy also on the souls in purgatory for thy bitter Passion, I beseech
thee, and for thy glorious name, Jesus.

The holy Trinity, one very God have mercy on me.

Pater noster. Aue Maria.

The third petition.
i Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. strength me. ij Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. strength me. iij Jesus.
Jesus. Jesus. strength me. iiij Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. strength me. v Jesus. Jesus.
Jesus. strength me. vi Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. strength me. vij Jesus. Jesus. Jesus.
strength me. viij Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. strength me. ix Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. strength
me. x Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. strength me.
Jesus strength me in soul and body, to execute the works of virtue, to the
pleasure of thee, whereby I may come to thy everlasting joy and felicity.

Grant me firm purpose, most mercyful Jesus, to amend my life, and to
recompense for those years, which I have myspent to the displeasure of thee in
evil thoughts, delectations, consentinges, words, works and evil customs.
Also in breaking thy commandments, whereby I have deserved damnation, and
thine enmity.

Make mine heart obedient to fulfill thy will, and ready to do for thy love the
works of pity.

Grant me the seue^n gifts of the Holy Ghost, the eight beatitudes, the four
cardinal virtues and in receiving of the Sacraments devoutly to dispose me.

Have mercy on al sinners, Jesus, I beseech thee: turn their vites into
virtues, and make them true obseruers of thy law, and lovers of thee: bring
them to bliss in everlasting glory.

Have mercy also on the souls in Purgatory for thy bitter Passion, I beseech
thee, and for thy glorious name, Jesus.

The holy Trinity, one very God, have mercy on me.

Pater noster. Aue Maria.

The fourth petition.
i Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. comfort me. ij Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. comfort me. iij Jesus.
Jesus. Jesus. comfort me. iiij Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. comfort me. v Jesus. Jesus.
Jesus. comfort me. vi Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. comfort me. vij Jesus. Jesus. Jesus.
comfort me. viij Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. comfort me. ix Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. comfort
me. x Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. comfort me.
JEsu comfort me, and give me grace, to have my most joy and pleasure in thee.

Send me heavenly meditations, goostly sweetness and fervor of thy glory.

Rauysh my soul with brennyng desire to the heavenly joy, where I shall
euerlastyngly dwell with thee.

Grant me, sweet Savior Jesus, tontempte of al damnable pleasure full of
sin and misery.

Grant me remembrance of my salvation, with fear of damnation.

Also remembrance of thy goodness, thy gifts and great kyndenes showed to me.

Reduce into my mind my sins and unkindness, whereby I have offended thee.

Eraunt me the spirit of perfect penance, contrition, confession, and
satisfaction, to obtain thy grace: and fro filthy sin to pourge me.

Have mercy on al sinners, Jesus, I beseech thee, turn their vices into
virtues, and make the^ true obseruers of thy law and lovers of thee: bring them
to bliss in everlasting glory.

Have mercy also on the souls in Purgatory for thy bitter Passion, I beseech
thee: and for thy glorious name, Jesus.

The holy Trinity, one very God, have mercy on me. Pater. Aue.

The fyfth Petition.
i Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. Make me constant and stable. ij Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. Make me
constant and stable. iij Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. Make me constant and stable. iiij
Jesus. Jesus Jesus. Make me constant and stable. v Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. Make me
constant and stable. vi Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. Make me constant and stable. vij
Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. Make me constant and stable. viij Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. Make me
constant and stable. ix Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. Make me constant and stable. x Jesus.
Jesus Jesus. Make me constant and stable.
JEsu make me constant and stable in faith, hope, and charity, with
continuance in virtue, and will not to offend thee.

Make me often to remember thy Passion and bitter pains, which thou suffredst
for me.

Send me perfect patience in all tribulation and adversity.

Preserve me fro Pride, Ire, Envy, Coueryse, and from all offenses to thy
laws contrary.

The Catholic obserua^ces of ye Church make me to keep truly.

Make my soul to holy doctrine obedient, and to things perteining to my
ghostly weal for the love of thee.

Suffer no false delight of this deceivable life, by fleshly tentation, and
fraud of the fend, for to blind me.

To the hour of my death, my five wits, Jesus, keep I beseech thee.

From excess in speaking, in feeding, and working, preserve my frailty.

Have mercy on al sinners, Jesus, I beseech thee, turn their vices into
virtues, and make them true obseruers of thy law, and lovers of thee: bring
them to bliss in everlasting glory.

Have mercy also on the souls in Purgatory for thy bitter Passion, I beseech
thee, and for thy glorious name, Jesus.

The holy Trinity, one very God, have mercy on me.

Philippens. 2.
Dominus noster Jesus Christus humiliauit femetipsum pro nobis, factus obediens
vsque ad mortem, mortem autem Crucis.

Pater noster. Aue Maria. Credo.

In nomine Jesus omne genu flectatur, coelestium, terrestriu^ and infernorum.
Etomnis lmgua confiteatur, quia Dominus Jesus Christus in gloria est Dei Patris.

The sixth petition.
i Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. Light me. ij Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. Light me. iij Jesus. Jesus.
Jesus. Light me. iiij Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. Light me. v Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. Light me.
vi Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. Light me. vij Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. Light me. viij Jesus. Jesus.
Jesus. Light me. ix Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. Light me. x Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. Light me.
Jesus light me with ghostly wisdom, to know thy goodness, and those things,
which are most acceptable to thee.

Grant me grace to give good ensample to souls profitable, that none be hurt
by me: and to help those with good counsel, which have offended thee.

Make me to proceed fro virtue to virtue, unto such time, that I shall clearly
see thy Majesty.

Let me not turn to those sins, which I have sorowed for and by confession
have accused me of.

The horrible sentence of endless death, the terrible Judgment of damnation,
thy wrath, ire, and indignation, merciful Lord, let never fall upon me.

Thy mercy and thy merits, my Savior, ever be between them and me.

Have mercy on al sinners, Iesn, I beseech thee: turn their vites into
virtues, and make them true obseruers of thy law, and lovers of thee: bring
them to bliss in everlasting glory.

Have mercy also on the souls in Purgatory for thy bitter Passion, I beseech
thee, and for thy glorious name Jesus.

The holy Trinity, one very God, have mercy on me.

Pater noster. Aue Maria.

The seventh petition.
i Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. Grant me grace to dread thee. ij Jesus. Jesus. Jesus.
Grant me grace, to dread thee. iij Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. Grant me grace to
dread thee. iiij Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. Grant me grace, to dread thee. v Jesus.
Jesus. Jesus. Grant me grace, to dread thee. vi Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. Grant me
grace, to dread thee. vij Jesus. Jesus Jesus. Grant me grace, to dread thee.
viij Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. Grant me grace, to dread thee. ix Jesus. Jesus. Jesus.
Grant me grace, to dread thee. x Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. Grant me grace, to dread
thee.
Jesus grant me grace inwardly to dread thee, and to eschew those things,
whereby I might offend thee.

Thy blessed Mother be mediatrice for me, and purchase me a contrite heart,
for that I have offended thee.

Remove my sinful dispositions, which dull mine heart, and like lead do
suppress me.

All thy Saints pray for me, that I be not separate fro thee and their blessed
fellow ship in the heavenly City.

Let me not forget, good Lord, the richesse of thy goodness, of thy patience, of
thy long sufferaunce and benignity.

Let the threatening of pain and tourme^t, which shall fall upon sinners, the
loss of thy love and of thy heavenly enherytaunce, ever fear me to offend
thee.

Suffer me not to lie in sin, but call me soon to penance, when I have
displeased thee: have mercy on me.

Have mercy on all sinners Jesus, I beseech thee, turn their vices into
virtues, and make them true obseruers of thy law, and lovers of thee: bring
them to bliss in everlasting glory.

Have mercy also on the souls in Purgatory for thy bitter Passion, I beseech
thee, and for thy glorious name, Jesus.

The holy Trinity, one very God, have mercy on me.

Pater noster. Aue Maria.

The eight petition.
i Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. Grant me grace, to love thee. ij Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. Grant
me grace, to love thee. iij Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. Grant me grace, to love thee.
iiij Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. Grant me grace, to love thee. v Jesus. Jesus. Jesus.
Grant me grace, to love thee. vi Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. Grant me grace, to love
thee. vij Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. Grant me grace, to love thee. viij Jesus. Jesus.
Jesus. Grant me grace, to love thee. ix Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. Grant me grace, to
love thee. x Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. Grant me grace, to love thee.
JEsu grant me grace, truly to love thee for thy endless goodness, and for
those gyfres, which I have received, and trust to receive of thee.

Lord, when I offend, smite me not with sodeyn death, I beseech the.

Let the remembrannce of thy kyndenes and patience, conquer ye malice and
wretched desire in me.

Draw me, Lord, to thee, by perfect love and charity.

By breaking of thy commandments I have despised thee.

Grant me, good Lord, in keeping of them, as greatly to honor thee.

Fro less sin that I fall not into the greater, Lord, preserve me.

Do with me according to thy mercy, and not after my misery: withdraw thy
sword of vengeance for thy great mercy and pity.

Grant me, Lord, to be the child of salvation, in body and soul to have
glorification, clear sight and fruition of thy Divinity, and ever presently
to see the glorious Trinity.

Have mercy on all sinners, Jesus, I beseech thee: turn their vices into
virtues, and make them true obseruers of thy law, and lovers of thee: bring
them to bliss in everlasting glory.

Have mercy also on the souls in Purgatory for thy bitter Passion, I beseech
thee: and for thy glorious name, Jesus.

The holy Trinity, one very God, have mercy on me. Pater. Aue.

The ninth Petition.
i Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. Grant me grace, to remember. my death. ij Jesus. Jesus.
Jesus. Grant, etc. iij Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. Grant, etc. iiij Jesus. Jesus. Jesus.
Grant, etc. v Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. Grant, etc. vi Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. Grant, etc.
vij Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. Grant etc. viij Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. Grant etc. ix Jesus.
Jesus. Jesus. Grant etc. x Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. Grant me grace, to remember my
death.
Jesus, grant me grace, for to remember perfitly the danger of death, and the
great account, which I must then give to thee, and so dispose me, that my
soul be acceptable to thee, and to thy glorious Mother the blessed Virgin
Marie.

Then with the assistance of thy glorious Angel S. Mighel, deliver me from the
danger of my ghostly enemy. And thee, my good Angel, I beseech, than to help
me.

Then, good Lord, remember thy mercy, and for mine offenses turn not thy
lovely face fro me.

O my Lord, be mercyful King, and meke Judge at that dreadful hour, of me. I
may not hear the rigor of thy righteousness: therefore I appeal to thy mercy.
Thy mercy exalts thy Judgment, and to us sinners it is salvation, when we
cry heartily to thee.

At that dreadful hour help us most merciful Lord, which for the time now
call for mercy.

Have mercy on al sinners, Jesus, I beseech thee, turn their vices into
virtues, and make them true obseruers of thy law, and lovers of thee: bring
them to bliss in everlasting glory.

Have mercy also on the souls in Purgatory for thy bitter Passion, I beseech
thee, and for thy glorious name, Jesus.

The holy Trinity, one very God, have mercy on me.

Pater noster. Aue Maria.

The tenth petition.
i Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. Send me here my purgatory. ij Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. Send
etc. iij Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. Send etc. iiij Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. Send etc. v Jesus.
Jesus. Jesus. Send etc. vi. Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. Send etc. vij. Jesus. Jesus. Jesus.
Send etc. viij. Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. Send etc. ix. Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. Send etc.
x. Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. Send me here my Purgatory.
JEsu send me here my Purgatory, and preserve me fro those tourmentes of
fire, which ever shall punish sin and iniquity.

Let full hope of thine help ever abide in me, yt I never fall in desperation of
thy endless mercy. Mother of God, Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles,
Evangelists, Martyrs, Confessors, Virgins, wydowes, Matrones and Innoce^tes,
I offer me to your merits, and beseech you, to pray for me, and at my passing
help to protect me.

With thy Sacraments, Lord, than recomfort me, and bring me to the kingdom of
endless felicity.

My Lord Jesus crucified for me, by the merits of thy glorious Passion, I
beseech thee, grant me these petitions, which I have axed of thee.

Have mercy on al sinners, Jesus, I beseech thee: turn their vites into
vettues, and make them true obseruers of thy law, and iouers of thee: bring
them to bliss in everlasting glory.

Have mercy also on the souls in Purgatory for thy bitter Passion, I beseech
thee, and for thy glorious name, Jesus.

The holy Trinity, one very God, have mercy on me.

Philipp. 2.
Dominus noster Jesus Christus humiliauit semetipsum pronobis, factus obediens
vsque ad morte^, mortem autem Crucis.

Pater noster. Aue Maria. Credo.

In nomine Jesus omne genu flectatur, coelestium, terrestriu^ and infernorum.
Etomnis lingua confiteatur, quia Dominus Jesus Christus in gloria est Dei
Patris.

The eleventh Petition.
i Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. Grant me grace to flee evil company. ij Jesus. Jesus.
Jesus. Grant, etc. iij Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. Grant, etc. iiij Jesus. Jesus. Jesus.
Grant, etc. v Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. Grant, etc. vi Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. Grant, etc.
vij Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. Grant, etc. viij Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. Grant, etc. ix Jesus.
Jesus. Jesus. Grant, etc. x Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. Grant me grace, to flee evil
company.
JEsu grant me grace, to flee evil company. And when I come among them, for
thy glorious Passion, I beseech thee, preserve me, that none occasion of
mortal sin overcome me. And send me ghostly comfort, by the true lovers of
thee.

Keep my mouth, good Lord, from slanderous speaking, lying, false
witnesse-bearing, cursing, swearing, uncharitable chiding, dissolute laughing
and words of vanity.

Make me, blessed Lord, with dread to remember, that thou presently hear
me, which of al my words shall judge me.

Suffer not my heart to be light of creditte in hearing detraction, and
obliquie, rancour and ire.

Jesus, repress in me al inordinate affection of carnalitie, and where I have by
evil fellow ship offended, mekely I axe mercy of thee, and I beseech thee for
help to all that cry for mercy.

Thy powrr protecte me, thy wisdom direct me, thy satherly pity correct me.

Send me gracious life, blessed endyng, and thy Passion preserve me fro
everlasting damnation and terror of mine enemy.

Have mercy on all sinners, Jesus, I beseech thee: turn their vices into
virtues, and make them true obseruers of thy law, and lovers of thee, bring
them to bliss in everlasting glory.

Have mercy also on the souls in Purgatory for thy bitter Passion, I beseech
thee, and for thy glorious name Jesus.

The holy Triuitie, one very God, have mercy on me.

Pater noster. Aue Maria.

The twelfth petition.
i Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. Give me grace to call for help to thee. ij Jesus. Jesus.
Jesus. Give etc. iij Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. Give etc. iiij Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. Give
etc. v Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. Give etc. vi Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. Give etc. vij Jesus.
Jesus. Jesus. Give etc. viij Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. Give etc. ix Jesus. Jesus. Jesus.
Give etc. x Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. Give me grace to call for help to thee.
Jesus grant me grace, and specially in the time of te^tation, to call for help
to thee, and then with faithful mind to remember thy Passion, which thou
suffredst for me: than, most merciful Lord, keep my soul ^^o consent of sin
for very true ^oue of thee: tha^ let sin appear ^^inking and abominable to
me.

Let the remembrance of the pains of hell, and damnation horrible, and
terrible, and full of thine enmity, with the merits of thy ^^cke patience,
through charity and chastity, mitigate the pronitie to sin and frailty in
me.

In my tentations, Lord, I beseech thee, help me, for the tender love, that
thou did show to thy Mother, and she to thee.

Repel the power of my adversaries, which entende the damnation of me.

Inhabit my soul, o Savior, which with all hunible subjection desires ye
blessed presence of thee.

Make me pure in spirit, meke in speaking, parrient in suffering, hungry of
righteouse working, and merciful to all them that be in misery.

Make me peasable in conversation, clean in heart with holy meditation, and
joyfully to suffer persecution in the cause of thee.

Let all my powers and desires be ruled according to the will of thee: and al
my petitions order to thy wisdom, and to the everlasting profit of me.

Have mercy on all sinners, Jesus, I beseech thee: turn their vices into
virtues, and make them true obseruers of thy law, and lovers of thee: bring
them to bliss in everlasting glory.

Have mercy also on the souls in purgatory for thy bitter Passion, I beseech
thee, and for thy glorious name, Jesus. The holy Trinity, one very God, have
mercy on me. Pater. Aue.

The thyrienth petition.
i Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. Make me to persevere in virtue acceptable to thee. ij Jesus.
Jesus. Jesus. Make etc. iij Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. Make etc. iiij Jesus. Jesus. Jesus.
Make etc. v Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. Make etc. vi Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. Make etc. vij
Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. Make etc. viij Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. Make etc. ix Jesus. Jesus.
Jesus. Make etc. x Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. Make me to persevere in virtue acceptable to
thee.
Jesus, make me perseuerant in the blessed service of thee.

In holy custom and virtuous occupation, Lord, keep my soul and my body.

Make me flee sinful delectation, and patiently to suffer injuries and
rebukes, in recompense of my disobedient heart to thee.

Provide, good Lord, that life to me, which thou know most to thine
honor, and to my eternal felicity.

Fill mine heart with contrition, and mine eyes with tears, that I never be
forsaken of thee.

Awake my dull soul fro siepe of sin: and send me help fro heaven, my
blessed Savior, to overcome the old serpent with all his cautels, by exercise
in virtue, and special grace of thee.

The Angels of light deliver me fro the Angels of darkness, and fro their great
cruelty.

Let thy obedience, Lord, recompense for mine obstinacy, thy abstinence, for
my superfiuitie, thy mekenes and thy patience for my pride, ireful heart and
enmity.

Thy charity for my malice, thy devotion for my dulnes, thy loving heart for
mine unkindness, thy holy death for my wretched life, and for all my misery.

Have mercy on al sinners, Jesus, I beseech thee, turn their vices into
virtues, and make them true obseruers of thy law, and lovers of thee: bring
them to bliss in everlasting glory.

Have mercy also on the souls in Purgatory for thy bitter Passion, I beseech
thee, and for thy glorious name, Jesus.

The holy Triuitie, one very God, have mercy on me. Pater. Aue.

The fourtenth petition.
i. Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. Grant me grace, to fix my mind on thee. ij Jesus. Jesus.
Jesus. Grant, etc. iij Jesus. Jesus Jesus. Grant, etc. iiij Jesus. Jesus. Jesus.
Grant, etc. v Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. Grant, etc. vi Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. Grant, etc.
vij Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. Grant etc. viij Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. Grant etc. ix Jesus.
Jesus. Jesus. Grant etc. x Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. Grant me grace, to fix my mind on
thee.
Jesus, grant me grace, specially in the time of prayer, to fix my mind on
thee, and then remember my wretchedness, and faithfully to call for help to thee.

That time to remember the perilles of body and soul, which I have escaped,
and the benefits that I have received thorough thy great charity: and with all
my heart Lord then to give laud to thee.

In this prayer I thank thee, for all the creatures, which thou have made to
help man, and ye thou have made him to thine image finally in thy glory to
honor thee.

The motions of my running mind, the despre of mine unstable heart in time of
prayer, stop and stay, I beseech thee.

Repress the power of my gostly enemies, which then draw my mind fro ghostly
weal to many imaginations of vanity.

With the hand of thy fervent love than I beseech thee to take me: and
strength me in thy power, and with thy goodness glad me.

Keep me so occupied in good works, that my prayers may be acceptable to thee.

Hear now, sweet Savior Jesus, hear the voice of a sinner, which would feign
love thee, and with the heart as greatly please thee, as ever it has offended
thee: and if it please thy grace, more largely to recompe^se, it besecheth thee.

Jesus, save mine enemies fro thine enmity, and forgive them that they have
offended me, like as I would be forgiven in those things whereby I have
offended thee.

Lord, help al those, which have helped me, or prayed for me, or showed to me
any deed of pity.

Thy grace, Lord, and the merits of they precious blood, defend me fro the
striking Angel and the spirit of pestilence, and make him to ouerpasse me.

Have mercy on al sinners, Jesus, I beseech thee: turn their vices into
virtues, and make them true obseruers of thy law, and lovers of thee: bring
them to bliss in everlasting glory.

Have mercy also on the souls in purgatory for thy bitter Passion, I beseech
thee, and for thy glorious name Jesus.

The holy Trinirie, one very God have mercy on me. Pater. Aue.

The fyftenth petition.
i Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. Give me grace to order my life to thee. ij Jesus. Jesus.
Jesus. Give me etc. iij Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. Give me etc. iiij Jesus. Jesus Jesus.
Give me etc. v Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. Give me etc. vij Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. Give me
etc. viij Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. Give me etc. ix Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. Give me etc. x
Jesus. Jesus. Jesus. Give me grace to order my life to thee.
JEsu give me grace, to order my life and the works of my body and soul with
actual intent finally to thee, and to the reward of thy infiuitie joy and
eternal felicity.

The water and blood, which ran fro thy blessed heart, wassh my soul from
sin and iniquity, and purchase to me abundance of grace faithfully to serve
thee.

O my Lord, my life, my might, my sight, lead me, feed me, and speed me, in
the pilgrimage of this mortality.

Grant me, Lord, by the merits of thy Passion, and virtue of thy most
excellent and glorious Divinity, what so ever thy wisdom knows most
expedient to me, which my miserable life is not worthy to obtain of thee.

At the hour of death (when I shall be accused before thee) for that death that
thou suffredst for sinners, have mercy on me.

Break my froward heart, and make it obedient to thee. Fro sudden and
vnforesene death, Lord, preserve me.

Grant me grace, to depart with contempt of this world, and with joyful
heart to come to thee.

Let the remembrance of thy Passion, make me joyfully to take tentation and
tribulation for the love of thee.

Make me most to love that joyful life, that immortal glory, most excellent
bliss, and endless felicity, which is ordained in the heavenly kingdomme for
the servants of thee.

By the virtue of thy Incarnation, Nativity, Passion and Resurrection, grant
me these supplications, which I have made to thee.

This invocation and Psalter of thee, by the meditation of thy most intierly
beloved Mother, purchase to me gracious life and blessed ending, free fro debt
and deadly sin, I beseech thee, and after my bodily death, everlasting life,
with endless bliss and felicity.

Have mercy on all sinners Jesus, I beseech thee: turn their vices into
virtues, and make them true obseruers of thy law, and lovers of thee: bring
them to bliss in everlasting glory.

Have mercy also on the souls in purgatory for thy bitter Passion, I beseech
thee, and for thy glorious name, Jesus.

The holy Trinity, one very God have mercy on me.

Dominus noster Jesus Christus humiliauit semetipsum pro nobis, factus obediens
vsque ad morte^, mortem autem Crucis.

Pater noster. Aue Maria. Credo.

Thus ends this Psalter.
An Admonition.
Unto such, as have none opportunity to say the whole Psalter together, it is
good that they faie the first v. petitions one day, and the second v. another
day, and the last v. another day, and so in three days they shall say ye whole
Psalter. But else if they may have convenient time, it is better to say the xv.
principal petitions every day, and each of them x. times, with In nomine Jesus,
in ye beginning, Pater nost. Aue Maria. and at every fifth, like as it is
written in the book, with Dominus noster, Pater noster. Aue Maria. Credo.

Here follows a wholesome doctrine, how to resist and overcome the ghostly
tentations of the Fend.
Doctors do write, yt in spiritual tentations we should behave ouerselfe other
wise, than in carnal tentations. For carnal tentations we ought to resist and
wrestle with them: but we may not do so in spiritual tentations. wisely and
discretely we must resist them, but in no wise wrestle with the^: as thus. when
the enemy purteth a motion of infidelity, reason not with him: and likewise
when he casts a suggestion of desperation, strive not with him, but use this
medicine.

Suspend your reason, restrain al your senses, and pluck up al your spirits:
and as the motion comes, so let it pass, without sirife. If it be only of the
disposition of our corrupt nature, this is sufficient, if it be used. If it
come of the enemy, he will not leave so, but he will cleave otherwise, and work
more trouble. Than after ye counsel of Doctors, use this remedy: Dissunble,
and show yourself to set it at naught, though it be great: and lift up your
mind to God, remembering his tender mercy in the redemption of man, and how it
is his ordinance, with such tentations and pains to prove his servants, to
whom be entendeth to give the crown of glory. But if the enemy be fierce and
will not cease for this (as he is most subtle and crafty) tha^ meek your
solfe to God, and offer yourselfe to fuffre for his love (and for ye fruit of
penance for your sins) gladly and with thanks of heart, all pains, yt it
shall please his grace to send you. And with that, call and cry with heart
and word on ye holy name of Jesus x. times, or more or less, as your devotion
serves, with some holy and sweet meditation of reverence to the same, as God
shall put in your mind. This virtue of mekenes, and confession of the name of
Jesus in heart and word, the enemy may not abide. For although for a time he
will pretend and semble, as though he were not abashed for that virtue and
name, as the Serpent, of which Scripture says, that for a time she will stop
her ears, and yet by the word of the enchanter in conclusion she is overcome
and taken: so certanily ye enemy (ye holy name named) is overcome, although he
will not be known, but so^time will make insurrectio^ more fiercely, after yt
holy name spoken. Then strongly pursewe him with the same, and with mekenes,
and ye shall see, how he will flee: to the great comfort of all them, that abide
as true servants perseuera^t in this their proof, to their great triumph, and
utter confusion of the enemy. This has been proved by experience.

A Narration.
A certain person there was, which by the space of two years and more was
troubled with such motions oftentimes by water and by land. He had motions to
desperation, and to ye most abominable that may be, to destroy himself both
by water, and otherwise. And this said person ceased not, but called to God
daily, to strength him, ever confessing himself his servant, and ye worshipper
of ye holy name of Jesus, committing himself only and wholly to the Passion of
Christ and mercy of God. And sone after the said time he had comfort, and was
illumined or lightened in his soul, how to answer ye enemy: to his great
comfort, and to ye edifiyng of other, and yt was thus. It was given to him by
a light, that when soever such a motion came to his mind, he should take ye
motion for an occasion of remembrance to honor the Passion of Christ, and his
blessed Mother the glorions Virgin Marie.

And although that it came to his mind an hundred times in ye day, so often to
say: Adoramus te, Christ Jesus: and to the Mother of mercy, Aue Maria. And thus
ye person was clean delivered from his great tentation and trouble, to ye
great increase of hope in his soul, to ye utter drtuig away of the enemy, and
to ye glory of God: to whom be al honor and praise, world without end, Amen.

Finis.

