CERTAIN Sermons preached before the Queens Majesty, and at Paul's cross,
by the reverend father JOHN IEVVEL late Bishop of Salisburie. Whereunto is
added a short Treatise of the Sacraments, gathered out of other his sermons,
made upon that matter, in his cathedral Church at Salisburie.

Imprinted at London, by Christopher Barker, Printer to the Queens most
excellent Majesty. 1583

To the right honorable, Sir William Cicil Knight, Lord high Treasorer of
England: and to the right honorable L. Robert Dudley, Earl of Leicester, two
of her Majesty's most honorable privy Counsel, and most worthy Chauncelours
of both the Universities, Oxforde and Cambridge.
Untrue reports and sclaunders can neither give falsehoode any credit among
the wise, nor disgrace the due estimation of the truth. Howbeit, it seems
there are some, which hope it will turn them to no small advantage, if to
other their secret and wicked practices, they join a sleyght of ill speaking
and of sclaundering the writings, the godly sayings, the life and the death of
those, whom it has pleased God to use to the setting forth of his Gospel, and
thereby to the great comfort of his people.

Among others, upon whom this has been practiced, they have made some
especial choice of the late Bishop of Salisburie, a man of famous memory,
whose life and death is truly and syncerely written by M. Doctor Humfrey.
Howsoever they dealt uncharitably with him in his life, Christian and godly
discretion would they should spare to reproach the dead. Or, if not so, yet in
wisdom they might foresee, that when matters are called to trial, such
things cannot pass for current and lawful, whereof some due proof has not
been yielded.

Yet, as though the discredit of that one man (who in great humility did
acknowledge himself inferior to many godly fathers then living in this Church
of England) were enough for them to overthrow all that whole work, which the
Almighty God has by his right hand and strong arm established: they deliver
by tradition certain false observations, of his either simple, or negligent,
or wilful and malicious gathering, and abusing the holy Scriptures of God, and
the ancient writings of the Fathers.

It is a hard thing for him that speaks much, to speak nothing worthy just
reprehension. But it is much harder to escape the reprehension of corrupt
Judges, even when he shall speak most uprightly. His defense is abroad,
published by himself. And, notwithstanding the endeavor of a learned
adversary was to empeache it: yet by his last and a moderate answer, he
avouched it good, and approved his plain and sincere dealing to the
consciences of all men.

Whom it may please to understand, after what sort he prepared himself to the
accomplishment of those two notable books, of the defense of the Apology, and
the Reply, which are as two double Canons prepared for the battery of error
and superstition, must needs confess his diligence, and reverent proceeding
in such cause, to have been such, as for which he may well be compared with
any, whomsoever the former, or this present age, has thought therefore worthy
commendation. For, besides his advised observation of all such things, as in
the adversaries books deserved answer: and, besides that he disposed a
summarie, and full collection of such matter, as he would use for the disproofe
of the same, the which he conceived in short notes: this may be a notable
testimony, that he had purpose to set down the aucthorities out of the
Fathers, and the quotations, truly and plainly: whereas in times before, he
had gathered sundry books of common places out of the Greek, and Latin, and
later writers, he did peruse a fresh the authors themselves, and made every
where in them special marks, for the difference of such places, whereofhee
made choice. Those were all drawn forth, and laid to their themes by certain
scholars, who wrote them out by such direction, as he had given unto them. So
reverent regard had he to do the work of the Lord, and to defend the truth
faithfully.

With like reverence also did he in all places where he was occasioned to
preach, handle the word of God. Albeit his gifts of reading, and
understanding, and memory were great, yet it appears he did seldom, or
never deliver any exposition upon any piece of scripture, before any
Congregation in the meanest parish of the country, but upon diligent study,
and whereof he drew his notes. In this his care, Gods providence wrought
mercifully for his Church, that so there might be some way to deliver in common
unto all, the fruits of those godly travails, which he gave forth to some one
especial part of the Church. Hereby it is, that these his Sermons preached
before her Majesty, and at Paul's cross, come now to the reading of all
such, before whom they were once spoken: to seek that of them in true
practice of Christian religion, for which they were in their times uttered. Why
I make choice of these, among so many, so excellent his sermons pronounced in
those places, if any be curious to ask, let him advisedly consider the state
of Gods Church amongst us in these days, and bestow his pains to read
these, which are offered to his Christian judgment, and then make to himself
a charitable answer. And if at such several times as that reverend father,
in the fear of God, moved his petitions before the conscience either of her
highness, or of your honors, or of any others, the good children and servants
of God, he were so well acquitted, that he was thought to speak uprightly in
true zeal, for the advancement of Gods glory, and like a wise buylder of the
house of God: no doubt, in this rehearsal of them altogether, they shall work
that wholesome effect, if through the assistance of Gods holy spirit, they be
considered now with as great diligence, as he was then heard with good
attention.

Your honors have well declared, that you measured not your loving affection to
him by the short term of his life: which gives great hope that his humble
requests, so many as are to crave aid and furtherance of authority, shall
in good time be preferred. They are such, as show how desirous he was to see
the peace and prosperity of Jerusalem, and that the kingdom of God might
never again be taken away from us. He shows what things they are, by which
this may be brought to pass: that among all the means which man's wisdom
can provide, next to the high means of princely authority, the chiefest is,
that all particular Churches may be furnished with sufficient, learned, and
godly Ministers: and therefore that tender and due care be had, to increase the
number of them. Their service is most needeful in the overthrow of Jericho,
the city which God will have destroyed: and in the buylding up unto God his
Temple at Jerusalem. The care which Magistrates take hereof, and that laborers
may be sent into the Lords harvest, which may defend the cause of Christ
against those which charge the Gospel to be heresy, and that the things which
he has done for us, are wrought by the power of Beelzebub: and which as good
watchmen attending their ward, may stir up the people to know the season,
that the night is passed, and the day is come, that it is time to cast away the
works of darkness, and to put on the armor of light: shall witness for
them, what zeal they bear to the house of God. If the ministers be mindful
to perform their duty: if the Lords harvest be not neglected: if the
defense for the Gospel find upright Judges: if all that give outward show of
zeal be in deed zealous, and work the fruits of zeal: what hope may they
of Jericho have, that their cursed dwellings shall stand? or why shall Israel
mistrust that the Temple of God shall not receive again the former and perfect
beauty?

Now, because every where in these sermons he commends the necessary use of
godly learning, and is an humble suter for patronage thereof: I can not but
present them unto your honors, our patrones, and fathers, and right honorable
Chauncelours of both the Universities: that seeing the benefit of this your
gracious protection, has, and does, and shall reach it self so far, to do
so much good to the whole Church of God: you may at home and with your selves
rejoice in the comfort of a good conscience, for the manifold fruits of your
favor bestowed in such sort, and all that have the love of the truth, may
earnestly pray unto God for your honors, that he will continue his goodness
toward you, and give you long and prosperous days in this life, and after, a
joyful entrance into his glory.

Your honors most humble to command John Garbrande.

Certain Sermons of B. Jewel.
Joshua. 6. And Jericho was shut up and closed, because of the children of
Israel, neither might any man go out or in.

2. And the Lord said unto Joshua, behold, I have given into thine hand,
Jericho, and the King thereof, and the strong men of war.

3. And ye shall compass all the City etc.


IN diverse manners god spoke and opened himself to our fathers: by visions and
dreams, by sacraments, by angels, by plain express words, by allegories, by
secret and mystical understanding, where one thing is covered under another.
And all this did he that he might co^descende to our capacity: that we might
be converted and saved: that we might be guyded in the right way, and not go
aside, neither to the right hand nor to the left. By vision GOD spoke to
Ezechiel, as appears in the first Chapter of his prophecy, The wheels
which he saw were horible to behold, they were full Ezekiel. 1.
of rings, and the rings were full of eyes: the four beasts were also
terrible, they had faces like a man, like a lion, like a bullock, and like an
eagle. In dream God spoke to Samuel, saying, Behold I will do a thing in
Israel, 1. Sam. 3.
whereof whosoever shall hear, his two ears shall tingle etc. Touching
Sacraments God him self says, Thou shall show thy Son in Exodus 13.
that day, saying this is done, because of that which the Lord did unto me when
I came out of Egypt, thou shall set apart unto the lord all that first opens
the womb etc. And when thy son shall ask thee to morrow, saying, What is
this? thou shall then say unto him, with a mighty hand the Lord brought us
out of Egypt, out of the house of bondage. For when Pharao was hard hearted
against our departure, the Lord then slew all the first borne in the land of
Egypt, from the first born of man, even to the first born of beast: therefore I
sacrifice unto the Lord all the males that first open the womb, but all the
first borne of my sons I redeem. Sometimes he spoke by Angels, as by sundry
examples it may appear. Sometimes by him self in his own person, as he spoke
to Moses face to face. Sometimes by plain express words, Thou shall love the
Lord thy God with all Deuteronomy. 6.
thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy might. And again, Thou
shall have Deuteronomy. 5.
none other gods before my face, thou shall make thee no graven image etc.
These are plain words: these are the words which our Lord GOD has spoken.
Some times he expressed his holy will, not in words, or visions, or in such
sort as I have showed, but only by some mystical or secret Allegory, by some
deed which the people saw done before their eyes: of which kind is this which
we have now to consider. Therefore Esai. 5.
has God said by the Prophet, What could I have done any more to my
vineyard, that I have not done unto it? What should I do, but it has been
done? What should I say, but it has been said? what warning should I give,
but it has been given? I have been careful for my people, that they should
repent and turn to me, that all Israel should be saved. If they perish, I am
free from their destruction they perish in their own wilfulness, they have
none excuse.

Now touching an Allegory, whereof we are at this present to say: God opened
his mind sometimes not by words, but by some notable kind of deed: and the
people heard GOD speak unto them not with their ears, but with their eyes. The
people of Israel as they were passing through the wilderness, lacked water to
drink, and were like to perish, there stood a mighty great Rock of hard
stone which Moses smote with his rod, it opened and yielded out a great
stream of water, the whole people drank of it, and was refreshed: the same
people being likewise in the same wilderness utterly void of bread, and all
other substenance, was like to famish, God sent them Manna from heaven above,
they gathered it, they ground it, and they ate of it: it was sweet and
delicate, and full of comfort.

This was an Allegory, that is to say, a secret and mystical kind of
utterance. For, by this Manna, and by this Rock, the people was led to
understand and think on that bread and that water that should come from
heaven. Saint Paul says, the Rock was Christ: his side was cloven, his blood
issued out, it is a water springing (...). Cor. 10.
up into everlasting life, we drink of it, and live for ever.

So likewise that Manna was the body of Christ, the people did eat of it, and
lived by it. Christ had not yet taken upon him a natural body, yet they did
eat his body: he had not yet shed his blood, yet they drank his blood.
Saint Paul says, all did eat the same 1. Cor. 10.
spiritual meat, that is, the body of Christ: and all did drink of the same
spiritual drink: that is, the blood of Christ, and that as verily and as
truly as we do now, and who so ever then did so eat Christ, lived for ever,
not because the rock was turned into his flesh, or the water into his blood:
it was an Allegory, as al other Sacraments be: the people hereby was taught to
consider of other things.

When the people was strong with Serpents in the wilderness, and were
swollen, and heaued up, and perished in the wilderness without hope of cure,
Moses erected up a brazen serpent upon a pole: the people beheld it, their
anguish abated, their swelling slaked, and they were healed: Christ was this
serpent, he was lifted upon the cross, who so trusts in him shall never be
ashamed.

In certain of their sacrifices they had a Lamb, they stickte him, they
killed him, and made sacrifice of him, this Lamb was Christ the Son of GOD,
he was killed, stickt, and made a sweet smelling Sacrifice for our sins. Of
him says God himself, This is Mat. 3.
my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased. Of him says John, Behold the
Lamb Ihon. 1.
of God, which takes away the sins of the world. Of him Saint Peter speaks,
among men there is none other name given under Acts. 4.
heaven, whereby we must be saved. In his righteousness only we are received
as righteous, his blood cleanses us from all sin, there is no other sacrifice
wherewith we may be reconciled to GOD our heavenly Father: all these were
Allegories, that is to say, certain resemblaunces and significations of
secret matters. That striking of the Rock, that feeding upon Manna, that
lifting up of the Serpent, that killing of the Lamb, were certain mystical
kinds of speaking. And let no man think these things are impertinent or from
the purpose: they are incident unto the matter, and grow necessarily of the
things we have to speak of.

When Iosuah that noble and worthy Captain by Gods special conducte had past
through the water of Jorden, and taken possession in the Land of Canaan, a Land
flowing with milk and honey, there to plant the people of Israel according to
the promises that GOD had made them: the Citizens of Hiericho that stood in
the frontiers of the Country, rampyred their wall, and placed their
artillery, and appointed them selves to resist him, and to withstand his
force. To assault this City, Iosuah practiced a strange kind of battery. He
commanded that the Arc of Gods Majesty should be carried reverently about
the Walls seven days together, and that the whole host in armor should go
before it: that after them should follow seven Priests with seven Trumpets:
that all the rest of the people should follow after the Arc: and that thus
they should do every day once. The seventh day he increased their labor, and
bade them to go about seven times in like order. The people within laughed
them to scorn to see their folly. At the seventh and last turn, Iosuah
commanded them all to make a showte. Straight way after so long silence, they
lifted up their voices, and showted with a great showte, so many hundred
thousands of men, women, and children: the Trumpets blewe in every corner, the
whole Heaven and earth was full of their noise, and the Wall fell down flat.

Here let us consider, and glorify the power of God: there was neither mine,
nor ram, nor other engine, nor warlike force, nor worldly policy practiced:
only at this roar and sound of Trumpets, and voices of men, the rampyers
were broken, the walls fell down, and sunk, and were made even with the
ground: the Soldiers went over and slew without mercy, man, woman, and
child, and cattle, and whatsoever creature they found before them, they fired
the city, and consumed it, and burnt it to ashes.

Then Joshua swear at that time, saying, Cursed be the man before the Lord,
whosoever hence forth shall take in hand to restore this City of Hiericho:
let him lay the foundation thereof in the death of his eldest son, and in the
death of his youngest child let him close up and finishe the gates: let him
never more rejoice in the fruit of his body, but let him live as a man
accursed in the mids of the people: let his name and memory, and all his
posterity perish with him: this was the tenure of Ioshuas curse.

Six hundred years after in the time of the wicked King Achab, one Hiel
(having 1. King. 16.
no regard to this curse) set upon to restore Hiericho: and it came to pass
even as it was foresaid by Joshua, Gods curse fell upon him, he buried his
eldest son, be huryed his youngest son, he was left without comfort even
as a man that the Lord had cursed: for Gods will was that Hiericho: should
lie waste, and desolate for ever, as an everlasting remembrance of his wrath,
that all people should fear to withstand his will. This is the plain story
only, according to the letter.

But as touching the Allegory, or the matter which therein lies covered, it
has a far deeper meaning. This Hiericho whereof the story speaks, was a
city in Canaan, in a low, sour, barren ground, in the midst of a rotten 2.
King. 2
and pestilent water, by reason whereof before the same water was cured by the
Prophet Elizeus, the men that drank thereof died of sundry diseases, and the
women also became unfruitful. This city withstoode the people of God, and
labored to keep them from their inheritance that God had given them.

That Hiericho of which we have now to consider, is a spiritual power of
darkness, that rests only in flesh, and in worldy promises, that
withstandeth Gods people, and exalts itself against God. For even in this
life, as there is a Jerusalem, so is there a Hiericho: as truth has her house,
so is there also a house wherein falshoode and error dwells. As there is a
glory of the light, so is there a power of darkness. This Hiericho of
falsehood and darkness God overthrows when it seems good in his sight,
with the breath of his mouth, and with the blast of his holy word he does
overthrow it, and whosoever will seek to restore it, shall be accursed.

Three things therefore I have thought good by Gods sufferance to treat of.

1 First, how high this Hiericho is built, and how strongly it is fenced, and
yet how easily it is overthrown. 2 How vainly, and how miserably they loose
their labor, that seek by any means to restore it. 3 What good remedies may
be devised, that this Hiericho be not restored again.
Whatsoever my simple learning or vttera^ce shall be, yet I doubt not, but the
very bare consideration hereof, of it self, unto the godly must needs be
comfortable.

They that go down to the sea in ships, and occupy by the great waters, they
see the Psalm. 107.
works of the lord, and his wonders in the deep. For God is marvelous in the
surges and tempests of the Sea: he is marvelous in the firmament of Heaven:
but much more marvelous is he in the surges and stormy Tempests of his
Church. Here may we behold the work of his hands. This is ye shop of his
power, of his wisdom, of his light, and truth, and righteousness, and
patience, and mercy. Here may we see the children of light, and the children of
darkness: the vessels of honor, and the vessels of shame: the assaults of
falsehood, and the glory and victory of truth. Here shall we see how God leads
even into Hell, and yet brings safely back: how he kills, and yet
reuiueth: how he refuses the full, and feeds the hungrye: how he is the
ruin of many, and the resurrection of many. Here may we see the wonderful
ways, and the unsearchable judgments of GOD. It is a place full of terror,
and a place full of all comfort. In respect hereof the Prophet David says, O
Lord, our Lord, how wonderful is thy name in all the world? Psalm. 8.
Again he says, One thing have I desired of the Lord, that I will require,
that I may dwell Psalm. 27.
in the house of the Lord all the days of my life, to behold the beauty of the
Lord, and to visit his Temple.

Hiericho was a mighty strong Town, well manned, well victualed, well walled,
well fenced: and in affiaunce thereof it withstood the whole power of Gods
army. Iosuah (notwithstanding he had great force of armed men) during the
assault, suffered no man to use his weapon: he willed them all to walk
quietly, and silent, without doing violence: his strength was not in the number
and courage of men, but only in the Arc, that is in the presence and power of
God.

Thus it fares oftentimes in spiritual warfares: falsehood is armed, and
truth goes naked: falsehood makes outcries, and truth says title: falsehood
is bold, and truth is outfaced. Blindness of it self naturally is hardy and
ventrous: and falsehoode is wyly and shifting. When the high priests and
captains of the temple, and the elvers were come to lay hands on Christ, he
said unto them, This is your very hour, and the power of darkness. Their
hearts were darkened, Luke 22.
their eyes were blinded, they saw not their ways, they knew not their
dangers, they would not understand, they would not be taught: malice and
frowardnes had made them blind, therefore the fear of God was not before
their eyes. Herein stood their power, therefore they were bold, and said, Let
us break their bands, and cast their cords from us, Psalm. 2.
Therefore they said, We will not have this man to reign over us. Therefore
they said, Luke 19.
The word that thou have spoken to us in the name of the Lord, we will not
hear it of Ierc. 44.
thee. Thus cried they, because of the blindness which was in them, and because
of the folly of their hearts.

Yet is there no soldier so stout in defense of Hiericho, as he that
thinks his cause is good, and that his doing pleases God well, and therefore
is moved thereto in conscience. None so desperate and wilful for the
falsehoode and darkness of Hiericho, as such who have zeal without knowledge,
as are blind, and follow their blind guides: who when they slander, or
persecute, or kill others for righteousness sake, think they make a sacrifice
unto God, and that GOD is highly pleased with their doing. Such were they that
cried against Christ, Crucify John 19. Matthew. 26.
him, crucify him: and, he has blasphemed. Therefore Christ makes his
prayer for the^, Father, forgive them, for they know not Luke 23.
what they do. They know not me, they know not whence I come, nor who it is
that sent me, they take light for darkness, and darkness for light.
Therefore the wise man says, Lean not Prou. 3.
unto thine own wisdom, do not the things that seem right in thine own eyes.
There is a Prou. 14.
way which seems right to a man, but the issues thereof are the ways of
death. It seems Catholic, it seems holy, but the end thereof leads to
death. S. Paul says of the Jews. If 1. Cor. 2.
they had known the wisdom of God, they would not have crucified the Lord of
glory. If their eyes had been open to see him, if their heart and
understanding had been open to know him, they had not been guilty of innocent
blood, they would not have betrayed the Lord of glory.

But Hiericho is not only thus fensed with blind zeal and wilful
ignorance: but also oftentimes has help of man's strength, and the favor and
succor of worldly power. The Egyptians had mighty Chariots, straked and
barred with iron, in the strength whereof they put their trust. The people of
Babylon built themselves a Tower as high as the Heavens, to show forth their
pride, and get themselves a name. Hereof David says, The kings of the earth
band themselves, and the Princes Psalm. 2.
are assembled together against the Lord, and against his Christ. He says
not, the vulgar people, or a sort of Raskals only, but Kings and Princes, and
they which bear authority in the world, assemble them selves against the
Lord, and in this power they think they are invincible.

When Moses and Aaron did the message of God unto Pharao, saying, Thus says
the Lord God of Israel: Pharao said: Who is Exsd. 5.
the Lord, that I should hear his voice, and let Israel go? I know not the
Lord, neither will I let Israel go. What is his power: what hurt can he do: I
know him not, I care not for him, Israel shall not depart my Country. So said
Nabuchodonosor, who is that God, that can deliver you out of mine hands? In
Dani. 3.
like sort did Sennacherib king of the Assyria^s vaunt himself in the pride of
his strength, and bid defiance against the God of Israel, Thus 1. king. 19.
shall ye speak to Ezechiah king of Judah, and say, Let not thy God deceive
thee, in whom thou trustest, saying, Jerusalem shall not be delivered into the
hand of the King of Asshur. Have the gods of the heathen delivered the^ which
my fathers have destroyed? And eue^ so does Saint John bewray the folly of
Babylon, She says in her heart, I sit, being a Queen, Reave. 18.
and am no widow, and shall see no mourning. In trust hereof they said
sometimes, and commanded the Apostles, that in no wise Act. 4.
they should speak or teach in the name of Jesus. They said, We are the
children of Abraham, we are the sons of the Prophets. They said, we cannot
err, for it is written, The Priests lips should preserve knowledge, and
they should seek the Law at his Malach. 2.
mouth. In trust hereof they said, Does any of the rulers or Pharisees believe
in him? but Ioh. 7.
this people which know not the law are cursed. In trust hereof they have
said: Let us cut them out of the land of the living, let the name of Israel he
had no more in remembrance, this doctrine is schismatic, this Religion is
new, it has no ground, it shall not prevail, it shall not stand. Such
courage have the Citizens of this ignorant Hiericho taken in the strength
ofmannes arm, and in the help of worldely policy

Then they fell to sword and persequution, and all kind of torments and
cruel death, the people despayred, the very elect began to faynte: Saint
Paul says, We are made a gasing stock unto the world, and to the Angels,
and unto men. The Prophet 1. Cor. 4.
David prays unto GOD against such, Arise, O God, maintain thine own
cause: Psalm. 74.
remember thy daily reproach by the foolish man. So strong is the hold of this
spiritual Hiericho: and so stoutely it fights against the Lord.

Albeit Hiericho was so strong, and the walls thereof seemed invincible, such
as no power could pearce, yet at the sound of seven tru^pets, and the showt of
the people, they fell down flat to the ground. So mightily did God in such
weak means show forth his wonderful and fatherly care to work the r^st
and peace of his people. Pharao had Israel even in his mouth as a pray, the Sea
was before them, and the hills on each side: they were unarmed, he had the
power, and all the policy of his country: it seemed impossible they should
ever be able to escape that danger: but mark the turning of Gods mighty
hand, suddenly the Sea opened, Israel passed through the mids of it, as
upon dry land: Pharao followed after, and was swallowed, and drowned with all
his men. Israel looked back and saw the marvelous works of God, how it was
now performed which God had said unto Pharao, Thou shall perish Exodus 9
from the earth, and in deed for this cause have I appointed thee to show my
power in thee, and to declare my name throughout all the world. Therefore they
rejoiced in God, and feared him, and made him sacrifice.

Nabuchodonosor when he fell upon Jury, made the whole country to shake with
the terror of his name. He was like to a mighty great tree, whose height
reached to the heavens and the fight thereof through all the world: yet
suddenly was this mighty tree hewn, down, as the holy one that came down
from heaven had said, Hew down the tree, and destroy it. Dan. 4.
Nabuchodonosor was driven from men, and had his dwelling with the beasts of
the field and did eat grass and fodder as the oxen, seven yers, til his
hears were grown as Eagles feathers, and his nails like birds claws. The
power of Senacherib was terrible y^ people of Israel were not able to
withstand it, he did glory in the pride thereof, he said no god was able to
deliver Jerusalem, nor to save it out of his hands: yet suddenly the Angel of
the lord, 2. King. 19.
in one night smote in the camp of Asshur an hundred fourscore and five
thousand of his men: he fled away with the rest, and was slain by his sounes,
and the people of God left at liberty.

Though Babylon said, she should never mourn, nor feel any heauenes: yet an
Angel came Reave. 1^.
down from heaven, and cried out mightily with a loud voice, saying, It is
fallen, it is fallen, Babylon the great city, and is become the habitation of
Devils, and the hold of al foul spirits, and a cage of every unclean and
hateful bird. It were an infinite labor, and yet very comfortable, to
consider, how marueilously God in the old times has overthrown his enemies,
and delivered his poor servants.

David to save his life, was feign to run from 1. Sam. 23.
king Saul and remained in a mountain in the wilderness of Ziph, and Saul
sought him every day, but God delivered him not into his hand. David was not
only without aid or hope of aid, but also without sustenaunce, and looked when
he should be taken, and thought it not possible to escape: for Saul and his men
compassed David and his men round about to take the^. But there came a
messenger to Saul, saying, have thee, and come, for the Philistims have invaded
thy Land. Wherefore Saul returned from pursuinge David: and thus poor David was
delivered. God is a helper in due season, he comes with aid when things are
desperate, he helps when there is no hope of help else where, the counsels,
attempts, and policies of the wicked are in vain. He that dwells Psalm. 2.
in the heavens shall laugh the^ to scorn. The prophet David found himself
disquieted at the worldly prosperity of the wicked, and says, As for me, my
feet were almost gone, my Psalm. 73.
steps had welneere slipped: for I fretted at the foolish when I saw the
prosperity of the wicked, etc. the^ thought I to know this, but it was to
painful for me, until I went up into y^ Sanctuary of God, the^ understood I
their end. Surely thou have set them in slipperie places, and castest the^
down into desolation. How suddenly are they destroyed, perished, and consumed?
As for me, it is good to draw nere unto god: therefore have I put my trust in y^
Lord god, that I may declare al thy works.

A King is strong, a woman is strong, and wine is strong, but truth does
abide and is strong for ever. Truth is great and strongest. Whither may a man
go from the spirit of the lord: or whither may a man fly from his presence, If
he ascend up into heaven, the lord is there: or if he descend into hell, the
Lord is there also. The face of the Lord is upon them yt do evil. When they
shall say, peace and safety, then shall come upon them sudden destruction.

Let no man be deceived, and think that these things are wrought by the power
of stars, or by the pleasure of princes, it is God that rules the world, and
not the stars. It was not Ioshuah that ouerturned the walls of Hiericho, nor
the cry of the people, and sound of the trumpets. It was neither
Constantinus, nor Iouinian, nor Valentinian, nor Theodosius, that planted the
Gospel, and changed the hearts of the people. These were virtuous and godly
Emperors, yet those changes were not made by their power, but it was God which
sent forth his spirit, and renewed the face of the earth. Christ Jesus the
son of righteousness had looked upon them: The morninge star from an high,
had risen over them. Good princes, and good rulers, are the good instruments by
whom God sets forth his glory, their hearts be in the hands of God, he
^endeth them, and enclineth them to his purpose: but the truth of the Gospel
is not planted, and settled in our hearts, neither by the will of man, nor by
the authority of princes. No creature can claim part of this glory, this glory
belongs unto God, but unto us, and to our fathers, to our kings, and to our
prophets, the confusion of our faces. This is the Lords doing, and it is
marvelous in our eyes. This is ye day which the lord has made Baruch. 1. Psalm.
118.
let us rejoice and be glad in it. This is a change wrought not by the Stars,
but by the right hand of the most high. The sons of God even John. 1.
they which believe in him, ar borne not of blood, nor of the will of flesh, nor
of ye will of man, but of god, as by the Prophet Ezechiel, God himself
declares, A new heart will I give Ezech. 36.
you, and a new sprit will I put within you, I will put my sprit within you, and
cause you to walk in my statuts. And by ye prophet Jeremy, I will put my law in
their inward parts, and write it Iere. 31.
in their hearts, and will be their God, and they shall be my people. Let us then
know this our selves: and of others let us with the prophet Esaias say, Therefore
let them see and know and let Esai. 41.
them consider and understand together, that the hand of the Lord has done
this.

He is able to set stars and heavens out of course, to set the Sun back,
and to make it stand, to open the earth, to divide the sea, to make the dry
rock to yield water, to make the clouds to give bread, to make Children to
preach, to make an Ass to speak, to make the devils to confess his holy name,
and to say, I know Luke 4.
who thou art, eue^ ye holy one of god. With this power he blew down the
walls of Hiericho, with this power he beats down whatsoever hold is built
up against god. This power 1. Cor. 1.
stands not in worldly strength, but is showed in weakness. God has chosen
the weak things of the world, to confound the mighty things, says the
Apostle Paul. Some trust in chariots, and some in horses: but we will
remember the name of the Lord our Psalm. 20.
God. Our help is in the name of the Lord, which has made both heaven and
earth. Thus is the prince of darkness cast out, thus is the Gospel of
Christ carried throughoute the world: this is the overthrow of Hiericho: this
is the might of Gods hand.

But, is Hiericho so laid flat, that no man will attempt or wish to restore
it? Uerily, it was afterward restored in the days of Achab: but be that
restored it was accursed. Even so it fares with this spiritual Hiericho, it
is never so blown down, but some would wyshe to raise it up. God delivered
his people out of Egypt, and yet there were that looked back, and wished to be
there again: and when they had Manna in their mouths, they thought it a
loathsome and a squamishe meat, and wished for their Goordes and Ouyons: and
having the Angels of God to go in visible form before them to he their
guydes both day and night, yet wyshed to be under Pharao, in the house of
bondage, to be tormented with labors, to live in tyranny and oppression, where
they had their children slain before their faces.

Notwithstanding God had delivered his people from the captivity of Babylon,
yet the greatest part of them remained still there, and would never return to
see Jerusalem.

Babylon the great city is fallen, and is become the habitation of devils: yet
John says, Many shall mourn, and weep, and lament and Reave. 18.
cry over her, alas, alas the great city Babylon the mighty city Babylon,
that was clothed in fine linen and purple, and skarlet, and gylded with gold,
and precious stone and pearls: What city was like to this great city?

David says, Their sound is gone forth Psalm. 19. Esaias. 52.
through all yt earth, and their words into the ends of the world. And the
prophet Esaye, How beautiful upon the mountains are ye feet of him yt
declares and publishes peace yt declares good tidings and publishes
salvation? Romans 10. Esai. 53.
Yet S. Paul says, They have not al obeyed the gospel. And Esaias, Lord who has
believed our report? or to who^ is the arm Esaias 65.
of the lord reveled? And again, I have spread out my hands all the day unto a
rebellious people, which walked in a way yt was not good, after their own
imaginations. The truth of god is not always taken, and it is never so received,
that every man likes thereof. The Lord knows who are his, and to whom he will
make himself known.

Christ himself was a stumblinge stone unto the vnbeleeuinge Jews, and a
sign that should be spoken against. Saint John says, This is the
comdemnation, that light is come into the world, and men loved darkness rather
the^ light, because their deeds were evil. The Gospel of Christ is the power
of god to salvation, it is the savor of life unto life, yet is it also the
savor of death unto death. For many will 2. Tim.
not suffer wholesome doctrine, but having their ears itching, shall after
their own lust get them a heap of teachers, and shall turn their ears from
the truth, and shall be given unto fables, and shall give heed unto sprits of 1.
Tim. 4.
error, and doctrins of devils. Because wisdom cannot enter into a wicked heart,
nor dwell in a body that is subject to sin, the devil, the prince of this
world was cast forth: yet S. Peter says, He walks about like a roaring
lion seking 1. Pet. 5.
who^ he may devour. And even so stands it with Jerusalem the City of the
Lord, and that cursed City Hiericho. Many refuse the blessinge of the Lord
in their deliverance from under Pharao, and feedinge them with heavenly Manna,
and giuinge them his Angels to be their guides: they will not return home to
their own country out of their captivity in Babylon, though they see the
judgments of God done upon proud Babylon, yet they mourn and lament over it,
they look not upon the hands that are spread all the day unto them, they obey
not the gospel: Christ is unto them a stumbling stone: and so seek they to
restore again Hiericho, which the Lord has overthrown, and which he would
not have built again, but curses them that shall seek to restore it. And
this do they, because they know not how amiable the Tabernacles of the Lord
are, because they did never taste and see how sweet the Lord is.

Three special helps the devil has used to further this purpose of restoring
Hiericho. First, the hard heart, and blindness of the people: secondly, the
eloquence, and subtle persuasion of the learned: thirdly, the sword and
violence of tyrants. Of these three the first is the greatest, for blindness
and stubburnnesse will prevail, where cunning and tyranny can do nothing.
Hereof the prophet Jeremy complayneth, My Ierem. 4.
people is foolish, they have not known me: they are foolish children, and have
none understanding: they are wise to do evil, but to do well they have no
knowledge. Of this sort our savior speaks, This peoples heart is waxed Mat.
13.
fat, and their ears are dull of hearing, and with their eyes have they winked,
least they should see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and
understand with their hearts, and should Esaias 30
return, that I might heal them. Of this sort Esaias reports, It is a
rebellious people, lying children, and children that would not hear the law,
of the Lord which say unto the Seers, see not: and unto the prophets,
prophecy not unto us right things: but speak flattering things unto us,
prophecy errors, depart out of the way, go out of the path, cause the holy
one of Israel to cease from us. Through blindness and stubburnes, all the
children of Israel murmured against Moses and Aaron* Numb. 14.
Wherefore now has the lord brought us to this land to fall upon the sword?
were it not better for us to return into Egypt? Therefore ye lord said, I will do
to the^ as they have spoken, they shall not see the land, whereof I swear to
their fathers, but their carcases shall fall in this wilderness, they shall not
enter into my rest: with this blindness, god does punish those which obey not
his word. The Lord shall smite thee (says Moses) with madness and blindness, and
with astonyinge Deuteronomy. 28.
of heart, thou shall grope at noone days, as the blind gropeth in darkness.
I will take my spirit from thee, I will command the clouds, that they shall not
give thee rain: thou have forsaken me and I will forsake thee: I will cause the
sun to go down at noone: and I will darken the earth at clear day, says
the Lord. I will send a famine upon the land, not a famine of bread, nor a
thirst for water, but of Amos. 8.
hearing the word of the Lord: they shall seek the word of the Lord and shall not
find it. Saint Paul told the Jews at Antiochia, Seeing Act. 13.
you put the word from you, and judge your selves vnworththy of everlasting
life* lo, we turn to the Gentiles, you shall be left in your filthiness.

Now what shall be done to these hard hearted and blind builders of ye spiritual
Hiericho? Christ tells us, it shall be easier in that day for the^ Luke 10.
of Sodom, then for that city, which will not receive the Disciples. And
again, Except ye John. 8.
believe that I am he, you shall die in your sins. The end of such is worse
then the beginning. Al those plagues, and utter destruction came upon
Jerusalem, because she knew not the time of her visitation, even the day of
Gods mercy, as they were foretold by the Prophet Jeremy, Behold, that which I
have built will Ierem. 45.
I destroy, and that which I have planted will I pluck up, even this whole
land. So does god plague one sin with another, and lets the^ which are
filthy grow in filthiness, because of the hardenes of their heart which can not
repent: whereby they heap unto themselves vengeance against the day of the
Lords wrath: such are not worthy to see Jerusalem: therefore are they left to
perish in Hiericho.

As for the eloquence and deceitefull persuasion of the learned, I will say
nothing. Notwithstanding it has been, and is so used to the restoringe of
Hierico, that a blind man may perceive it, and all the world may rue it. One
said sometimes, that were the matter never so false, he would prove it by
eloquence to be true. Another said, the sun and moon stand still, and the
earth goes about. Another said, that snow is black, and that he was able
well to prove it, and there were many which believed them. Such were they of
whom it is written in the Prophet Esaias, that spoke good of evil, and evil of
good: which put darkness Esaias. 5.
for light, and light for darkness, and put bitter for sweet, and sweet for
sour. So they mocked the eyes of the ignorant, and abused the gifts of God.
Thy wisdom and thy knowledge (says the Prophet) they have Esaias. 47.
caused thee to rebel, and thou have said in thine heart, I am, and none else:
thou art wearyed in the multitude of thy Counsels: let now the Astrologers, the
Star gasers, and Prognosticatours stand up, and save thee from these things
that shall come upon thee.

We may answer such learned disputers, as David answered the proud Goliath,
thou com mest to me with a sword, and with a spear, 1. Sam. 17.
and with a shield: that is, with great eloquence and show of learning: but I
come to thee in the Name of the Lord of hosts, the god of the host of Israel,
whom thou have rayled upon. By the Prophet Jeremy thus says the Lord. Let
not the wise man glory in his wisdom, Ierem. 9.
nor the strong man glory in his strength, neither the rich man glory in his
riches: but let him that glories, glory in this, that he understands and
knows me. Again, it is written (says the Apostle) I will destroy the 1.
Cor. 1.
wisdom of the wise, and will cast away the understanding of the prudent. And
Eliphaz Job. 5.
says, He takes the wise in their craftines, and the counsel of the wicked is
made foolish: he will open their errors, he will bewray their craftiness, he
will overthrow the cunning devises of their wit: these helps shall not suffice
to build up cursed Hiericho.

Now to speak of the third help, of the power of Princes, whom the wicked
builders of this spiritual Hiericho have in all ages deceived. The authority
of a prince is great, he is the servant of God, he carries ye sword for God to
take vengeance on him that does evil. Solomon Pro. 16.
says, The wrath of a king is as messe^gers of death. Unto the^ these builders
have recourse, and accuse the servants of the lord, which have waited upon
Iosuah, and have done ye Lords will, upon this wilful and rebellious city.

The Heathen and Infidels used this help against the Christians, they accused
the^ before Kings that they were wicked, that they worshipped strange gods,
that they lived in adultery, and incest, that they killed their Children, and
did feed upon man's flesh. Before them they charged the Christians with
divisions and schisms, saying, You Christians agree not among your selves,
you have so many sects, and one sect is at defiance with another, and
condemns one another: therefore your religion is not true, it is not of God.
Since the time we forsook our Gods, these and these evils are come upon us.
They charged Christians that they were stirrers up of rebellion, and that they
disquieted the minds of the people. Let these Christians, said they, be cast
to the Iyons. Such complayntes were brought before Kings and Princes against
the Christians of the Primitive Church, and these false charges have been
thought true: therefore were there sharp laws made against them. It was
commanded, that no man should speak in the Name of Christ, and who did not
obey this, should dye the death.

Who is able to express the miseries, which followed in the execution of
those Laws? There was no sword nor weapen, no rack nor torment, no fire, nor
water, but they were prepared for, and stained with Christian blood, Soldiers
were kept in whole garrisons: princes made Leagues, kept Councils, devised new
and cruel laws, used conspiracies, practiced al kinds of strange and
terrible deaths for the defense of Hiericho: they killed Christians by
thousands Maximianus burnt in one Temple twenty thousand, assembled together
to celebrate the memory of the Nativity of Christ. Dioclesian made
proclamation for the ouerthrowinge of the Christian Churches throughout all the
Roman Empire: he caused the Books of holy Scripture to be burned in the
open Market place: and displaced with great ignomie such Christians as were
Magistrates, and all other that bare any office. These thought, that heerby the
gospel of Christ should be abolished, and quite overthrown.

But the Lord, which was mighty to save Daniel in the mids of the lions,
and Jonas in the whales bellye, and his three servants in the flaming fire,
and Israel in the red Seat whose eyes are over the righteous, and which is
nigh unto all that call upon him: was also able to make his own cause good, to
give courage to his Servants, and tremblinge and anguish of mind to their
enemies. For the more his seruannts were deminished, the more they increased:
and the more tyrants prevailed, the more they were weakened. He that should die
was bold and careless: he that should kyl, was fearfully amazed: the
tormentor mourned, the condemned rejoiced: the dead had the glory, the
Tyrants the shame: their sacrifices decayed, their Temples were forsaken,
their Gods laughed to scorn, their Priests were wood, and lacked their large
offringes: the Lord did let the curse fall upon them, which he made by his
servant Ioshuah, and which shall come upon al those that will seek to raise
up Hiericho.

To rehearse the examples of Gods mighty hand, and to declare what he has
done in all ages, to show forth his power, no tongue is able: yet it is
expedient to give forth one or two examples thereof. Licinius an ungodly
Emperor, after he had extended his force against the Christians to suppress
them, and gave greatest show of his favor to such about him, as could best
devise new and strange torments, felt ye plagues of god, was sundry times
vanquished by Constantinus, to whom he yielded Tripart. hist. lib. 1. cap. 8.
Carrion. li. 3
himself, and led a private life in Thessalia, until at length he which had
been before the enemy unto al learning, was slain by his own soldiers. The
palm of the hand which Balthazar saw write upon the plaster of the wall,
Dan. 5.
did more amaze him, his countenance was more changed, and his thoughts more
troubled therewith, then if he dad been assaulted with the force of a hundred
thousand men.

King Pharaoh first said to the messengers of God Moses and Aaron, I know not
the Lord, I care not for him. But when he felt the smart of Gods hand, he cried
out unto them. The Lord is righteous, but I and my people are wicked: Exodus 9.
pray ye unto the Lord (for it is enough) that there be no more mighty
thunders, and hail, and I will let you go, and you shall tarry no longer.

Antiochus placed idols in the Temple of God, and blasphemed his name, and
brought Jerusalem 1. Match. 1.
into bondage, he burnt the books of the Law in the fire, and cut them in
pieces, that so, the name of God might no more be remembered: but when the
torments which God cast upon him began to vex him, then he began to leave
off his great pride and self will: when he was plagued, and came to the
knowledge of him self with the scourge of God, when he himself might not
abide his own stink, he said, It is meet to be subject unto God, and that a
man 2. Match. 9.
which is mortal, should not think himself equal to God through pride. Then
he prayed to the Lord, then he delivered the Jews, the^ he would restore the
temple, then he would also become a Jew himself, and go through all the world,
and preach the power of God. Eusebius. lib. 8: c. 10. and 19.


Maximianus practicing the like attemptes, was likewise stricken: his flesh was
eaten with lice, his body rotted in wardly, he was not able to abide the smell
of himself, Then he confessed his error, found his guilte, called in his
proclamation, stayed his sword, and (albeit it were against his mind)
commanded that the Christians should have their Books, and use their
Churches, and hear the Scriptures and call upon the name of Christ, as they
had done before.

Iuliane of all other began most politiquely and subtlely, and therefore most
mightily to set up Hiericho. He gave commandment that no Christian man's child
should go to school, devising thereby to keep them rude and barbarous, that
no Christian should bear office, or live in any manner authority, thereby to
make them vile: that they should never be Captains or soldiers, that so they
might be kept in weakness, he removed the Christians out of his court. He opened
again the temple of the Heathen, and did erecte Idolles in them, and the more
to give credit and countenance to the matter, he himself being the Emperor,
took upon him the office of a Bishop, and did offer sacrifice: many of the
nobles, and many of ye people, applied themselves to follow this example, and
did the like. He lice^ced the Jews to return home again, and to build up
Jerusalem, he allowed them money, he gave them liberties, and all this only in
the despite of Christ: only to discredit and deface the glory of the son
of God. Hereby the Heretics vpbrayded and defied Christ: the faithful were
dismayed, and the church of GOD was brought to great confusion.

But now let us enter into the sanctuary of the Lords counsels, and behold the
later end of these doings. The Jews fell to work, laid their foundation,
provided al things needful, and began to build: suddenly brake out an
earthquake, and overthrew their work: lighteninges fell from heaven and burnt
their tools in their hands, and their coats on their backs. The print that
the lightning made in their garments was a cross, in token that they were the
enemies of the cross of Christ. Then was the name of Christ more glorious,
and his Gospel more beautiful then before.

Julian took his journey into Persia, and had made great threats, yt at his
return he would consume the name of Christians, root, out the name of the
Galilaeans, and not leave one Christian alive, and would set up the Image of
Venus in all his Churches. But, being in the field, he was suddenly stricken in
the breast with an arrow from heaven: he pulled it out, the wound was deadly,
he cursed Christ, he took of the blood into his hand, threw it up into the
air, and thus cried, Vicisti Galilaee, O thou Christ of Galilee, thou have
conquered. Thus suddenly the tyrant was s^aine, his attempts were accursed, his
frame of Hiericho would not stand. The faithful Christians were set at liberty,
they went to their Churches, they gave God y^ glory, they made triumphs and
were joyful. Thus God looks upon his faithful: such is the power and readiness
of his hand.

The devil himself confessed, that when any Christian was present, his mouth
was musted, he could not speak, he could do nothing. The like might be said
of Nero, Caligula, Maximinus, Hist. tripar. li. 7. cap. 39.
Dioclesian, Valerian, and others: they had ^o^quered France, Spain, Germany,
England, Hungary, Dalmatia, Arabia, India, Persia, and Scithia: they had the
world at commandment, yet a few poor Christians, artificers, women, and
maidens, ignorant and unlearned people, they could never conquer. Nero had
crucified Peter, and beheaded Paul that preached the Gospel, but the Gospel
which they preached, they could not behead, they could not crucify. Nero,
Caligula, Commodus, and sundry others like ^yrants were slain. Dioclesian, as
it is thought, was stricken mad, made unable to rule, and therefore left the
Empire. Valerian was taken in the field by Sapores King of Persia, and tied in
a chain, and being the Emperor of the world, was made to lie down on all
four, that Sapores might set his feet on his shoulders, and so get to
horseback.

All this notwithstanding the Gospel of Christ grew still and went forward.
Such success shall they have, that take in hand to build Hiericho. The Lord
will smite his enemies upon the cheek bone, he will break the teeth of the
wicked. Well may they bark, they shall not byte. God knows the way of the
righteous, and the way of the wicked shall perish. God resists the proud, but
gives grace to the lowly. Yet a little while (says David) and the wicked
shall not appear, and thou shall look Psalm. 37.
after his place, and he shall not be found: The remembrance of him shall
perish. Every plant which our heavenly father has not planted, shall be rooted
out. Put not your trust then in princes, nor in the sons of men, which cannot
save themselves: their breath departs, and they return to their earth. It is
God that is king of kings, which loves the righteous, and overthrows the way
of the wicked. All flesh is grass, Esaias. 40.
and all the grace thereof is as the flower of the field, the grass withers,
the flower fades: but the word of our God shall stand for ever.

Was God able in those days to avenge the cr^elty of Tyrants, to withstand
the proud, to defend the humble and lowly, and shall we think that his hand
is shortened? great is our God, and his power is wonderful, and there is no
end of his judgments. O what leagues, and confederacies, what practices, and
policies have we seen defeyted? what abundance of blood has been shed by
sword, and by fire? the workers thereof are gone, the end of many of them was
horrible, yet the Gospel continues, and increases in all places. Aeneas
Siluius, who was afterward Pope, and called Pius the second, shows in his
story of Bohemia, what great preparation was made to mainteyne the Church of
Rome, Hist. Bohemica. cap. 48.
and to destroy al those which professed the Gospel, whom they called Hussites
and Calixtians, because they defended the receiving of the cup, as well as of
the bread in the Lords Supper. Two Cardinals, the one of them Cardinal
Beauford, an English man, and Bishop of Win, the other Iulianus, were sent into
Germany to leauy power: at whose entreaty the Emperor and States appointed
three armies of men to fulfill the Popes purpose. But (says the story) Non
visum hostem fugerunt, They fled before they did see the enemy. And again the
second time, Priusquam hostis vllus daretur in cospectu, foedis sima caepta
fuga, They fled away with shame, before any enemy came to fight. here of one
of the Cardinals Iulianus, writes thus to Eugenius the fourth, Nonne videbitur
hic digitus Dei? Ecce, exercitus armatorum toties fugit a facie eorum, and nunc
similiter Ecclesia vniuersalis fugit: ecce, nec armis, nec literis vinci
poss^t. Videbitur miraculum Dei euideter, demonstrans illos ver a sentire, nos
falsa. Is not the power of God here to be seen? our armies of soldiers have
fled before the^ many times, and now the vuiuersal Church flees. They cannot
be overcome, neither by weapons, nor by learning. This must needs appear a
miracle wrought by God, to declare that their opinion is true, and ours false.

Thus we see how vainly, and miserably they encumber themselves which take upon
them to restore Hiericho. God withstandeth them and defeateth their purpose, as
we may see this day. Let us therefore rejoice in God, and let us say with the
people of Israel, I will sing unto the Exodus 15.
Lord; for he has triumphed gloriously: the horse and him that rode upon him
has he overthrown in the sea.

It is not enough, that we look back and gaze at this decayed city of
Hiericho, and behold the rampires loosed, the walls thrown down, the houses
burned, and the people thereof slain. God can give peace, God can withdraw
it: we have seen the judgments of the Lord upon them, we have seen the
turning of the Lords hand toward us. That thing which has bin done, may be
done again. The Ark of God was taken by the Philistims, and God suffered his
temple to be spoiled: not that he was offended with the Arc, or with the
temple, but for the unworthiness of the people. He never forsakes, but he is
first forsaken. As he says, Seeing ye have forsaken me, I will also forsake
you. God himself tells us by the prophet Jeremy, (...). Esd. 1.
as you heard before. That which I have built will I destroy, and that which I
have planted will I pluck up. When Christ rebuked the unthankfulness of the
Jews, he said unto them, The kingdom of God shall be taken from you, and shall be
given to a nation, which shall Matt. 21
bring forth the fruits thereof. And again, The children of the kingdom
shall be cast out into utter darkness, for many are called, but Matt. 20.
few are chosen. It behooves us not therefore, overmuch to glory in victory. It
is fickle, and casual, and may be lost. Let us humble our selves under the
mighty hand of God, let us acknowledge the wonderful work that he has
wrought in our days, and pray him to continue the good thing he has
begun among us. In him we have our living, our moving, and our being. We are
nothing but claye before him, that he which rejoices, may rejoice in the
Lord. Now it remains we consider what wholesome remedies may be devised, that
Hiericho be never again restored. Here of I will say somewhat, the time so
requires. Here might we mark the practices and policies of noble
co^querors, what ways they take to keep themselves in safety, and their
conquered subjects from rebellion, Some when they had gotten a city, thought
it enough to overthrow the walls thereof, Some razed all the castles, and threw
down all the holds. Others have built strong places, and Towers, and furnished
them with munition to bridle the people. Others have spoiled them, and kept
the^ poor. Others have unarmed them, and kept them from all weapon. Others to
withdraw them from unquiet fancies, have set them to Plough the ground, and to
other bodily labor. Others have cut off their captains, and al such as might
seem able to lead the people, and to move rebellion. Some have killed their
male children. Some dissolved the old Laws, and gave them new. Others have
forbidden banquets and feasts, and al other conuenticles or asse^blies, to make
them strange one to another. Others have purposely sowed and maintained
factions, and set city against city, surname against surname, blood against
blood, that no man might safely trust another. Some have devised oaths and
bands, of conscience: some have devised laws martial, and other cruelty: some
have transported, and carried away the whole people, man, woman, and child: as
Nabuchodonozor did the Jews into Babilo^, and put others in their place. By
these, and such other like ways, as much as wisdom and policy could devise,
they thought to keep countries and nations in obedience.

But, as touching our spiritual Hiericho, Iosuah suffered nothing to stand, he
burnt houses, and palaces, and killed man, woman, and child, and cattle without
mercy, altogether. For so God had given him in commandment, and so is it often
written of him, that where the Lord gave any people into his hands, he left
nothing remaining, no, were it never so little. Of this policy Moses
speaks. If you will not drive out the inahbitants of the land before you, the^
those Number. 33.
which ye let remain of them, shall be pricks in your eyes, and thorns in your
sides, and shall vex you in the land wherein ye dwell. Destroy not some only,
to leave some: you shall leave nothing, no not a little. If you do leave, you
break the commandment of God.

In religion, no part is to be called little. A hear is but little, yet it
has a shadow. In the body, a little disquiet is oftentimes cause of death.
The Ciniphes were but little, yet are they reckoned among the great plagues of
God.

Metellus a noble man of Rome, by receiving a haere in his milk, was choked
with it, and died thereof. Some things are small and do no hurt: some things
though they be small, do great hurt. Therefore does God straightly charge his
people to keep the law saying, Thou shalt not Iosue. 1. and 6. Deuteronomy. 15. and
28. 1. Co. 5.
turn away from it, neither to the right hand nor to the left. And S. Paul
says, A little leaven leaueneth the whole lump.

I speak not this, because I think nothing at al may be left to any special
purpose. For eue^ in Hiericho, where was made a general destruction, Iosue 6.
God himself commanded, that all silver and gold, and vessels of brass and
iron should be saved, and not saved only, but be brought into the Lords
treasury. How be it, the things that may be reserved, must not be dust, or
chafe, or hay, or stubble: but gold, and silver, and iron, and brass, I
mean, they may not be things meet to furnish and maintain superstition, but
such things as be strong, and may serve either directly to serve God, or else
for comelines and good order. Such things may be reserved. notwithstanding
they came out of the spoil of Hiericho.

Now to stay the restoring of Hiericho, many good ways may be devised. For our
consideration at this present, and because the time is far spent, I will name
only four unto you. The first, Maintenance of schools and learning.
Secondly, understanding of the cause: that is, that every man may consider,
what he has left, and what he has received: out of what darkness, into what
light he is come. Thirdly, kindness toward God, and tha^kfulnes. Fourthly the
discipline of ye church. With these 4. by gods grace, we may keep Hiericho
from restoring. Of each of these a few words, and so I will end.

That learning and knowledge, is able to hinder the builders of Hiericho, it is
so plain that it needs no speech. In the time of Moses Law, Aaron the great
Bishop and high Priest, had written in a tablet before his breast, doctrine, and
truth: not only learning, but also truth: whereby was meant, that neither
might be without other. For, as learning is dangerous and hurtful without
religion, so is religion unable to defend it self, and to convince the gain
sayers, without learning.

For this cause, the Heathen, when they erected temples in the honor of their
gods, did also build libraries, that is, places to keep books: that by such
means, their priests might grow in knowledge, and be better able to persuade
others to their religion. Strabo writes of the Smyrnians, that they builte a
temple in the honor of Homer, and joined thereto a library. Augustus the
Emperor, built a temple and also a library in the honor of Apollo, Traianus
in like manner built a library and called it Ulpia after his own name. At Rome
in the Capitol, where al yt gods ^ad a solemn place for to be worshipped in,
there was also placed a library. Athens was a famous University, and had many
colleges, and schools ^f learning, Academia, S^oa, Lyc^um, Canopus,
Pritanneum, Tempe, Cynosura, in which places were diverse sects of
Philosophers. Such were ^n Persia the wise men, whom they called Ma^i: in
Babylon, the Chaldees: in India, Brachma^es: in Aethiopia, Gimnosophistae: in
France and England Druides, and others in other countries. In all times yt
kings and princes which did set forth religion, were also builders of schools
and colleges, and aua^cers of learning. The people of Israel were never in
better state (as P. Phagius, a ^earned man notes out of their story) then when
they had in every town and village Bathe chenesioth, and Bathe medraschoth,
that is, Synagogues wherein they assembled together, and places to preach in.
The same Phagius reports of Jerusalem, that there were in it more then 4.
hundred common schools and Synagogues, in which y^ Law of God was taught. The
Patriarch Jacob was called Minister domus doctrinae, a Minister of the house of
learning, because he applied himself to the knowledge of ye law of god, and to
godliness. The Prophets of God had their schools, to breed up under them such
as might after their death draw ye people from idolatrye, and resist the false
Prophets. They which were so taught by them, were called Filij Prophetarum, The
sons of the Prophets, Samuel taught in such sort at Rama. Elias and Elizeus
the Prophets, in such sort, taught the Law of God besides Hiericho. Saint
John the Evangelist, taught at Ephesus: and Eusebius reports out of Philo,
that S. Mark had at Alexandria sundry scholars, which gave themselves to
reading and reasoning, and expounding of the Scriptures. Others did the like at
Antioche, and at other places. Out of such schools it pleased God to take many
excellent men, and place them in his Church, as Origin, Tertullian, Cyprian,
Lactantius, Arnobius, Basilius, Nazianzenus, Chrysostomus, Hieronimus,
Ambrosius, Augustinus, who were brought up in all kind of learning, and became
shyning stars, and bright lights in the house of God, notable defenders of
religion, ouerthrowers of idols, and confounders of Heretics. Christian
princes herein have witnessed their zeal, in setting forth the glory of God.
After Charles ye great had made his notable conquests, he erected five famous
Uniuersities, one at Paris, another at Tolouse, another at Papia, another at
Padua, and another at Prage.

Suidas reports of Leo the Emperor, Cum aliqua^do Eulogio Philo^sopho
stipendium dari iussisset, Suidas in Leone.
etc. When Leo on a time commanded that E^logius a Philosopher should have his
princely reward a noble man of his court said, that that money would be better
employed for maintenance of soldiers. Nay (says he) I would rather it might
be brought to pass in my time, that the wages which are now bestowed upon
soldiers, might be given to mainteyne Philosophers.

Alexander Seuerus so highly esteemed that famous and notable Lawyer Vlpian,
that when Charion. Chronic. lib. lib. 3. Alex. Seue.
certain of his soldiers ran fiercely upon Vlpian purposing to slay him, the
Emperor stepped forth, and set himself between the body of Vlpian, and the fury
of the soldiers, and covered him with his own roabes, that the soldiers might
know how careful he was for the good estate of Vlpia^.

As also for the contrary, such as have practiced cruelty upon learned men,
and have hated knowledge, are worthily discommended in the stories of all ages.
I told you before of that wicked Apostata Julian, how he forbad yt Christians
should bring up their children in learning. Such an enemy to knowledge was
also Licinius the Emperor, who called learning the poison and overthrow of
commonweals. The like is reported of Caligula, Caracalla and Domitianus, that
either they utterly hated all manner of learning, or had some special malice
against ye writings of some one notable man, and therefore sought to destroy
them. Such was the policy of Satan, so thought he to get the upper hand, and
to restore again his wicked Hiericho.

And were these the practices of Heathen princes only? May not we remember the
like attempts wrought in our days. Who will call to mind the time that is not
far past, shall find that this ignorant Hiericho had many friends, who by
all means drew men from knowledge: they gave liberty rather to do any thing,
the^ to seek understanding, and yet suffered rather the use and reading of
fabulous and unclean writers, then of the holy scriptures, and books which
carried fruitful instruction.

Good letters, and study to increase knowledge, are not to be neglected. Such
as presume of Gods spirit over boldly, that without their endeavor to use the
wholesome means which he has left unto his Church they shall and do by special
inspiration understand his will, do tempt God. The prophet David prayed for the
presence of Gods spirit, but to the purpose he might take profit and fruit of
his reading in the law of God. Therefore he says, Open mine eyes, that I may
see the wonders of thy law: and give me understanding, Psalm. 119.
and I will keep thy law. And again, incline mine heart unto thy testimonies.
S. Paul taught ye Corinthians. That no man 1. Cor. 12.
ca^ say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the holy Ghost: And in ye 2. Chapter of
his first Epistle, 1. Cor. 2.
says, Now we have received, not the spirit of 1. Cor. 2.
the world, but the spirt which is of god, that we might know the things yt are
given to us Act. 9.
of god. This spirit prepared the heart of Paul, yet sent him to Ananias, that
by him it might be Acts 8.
told him what he should do. This spirit prepared the hearts of the Eunuch,
and of Cornelius: yet Acts. 10.
sent unto the^ Phillip and Peter to open the scriptures unto them. Lydia heard
Paul, and the Lord Acts. 16.
opened her heart, that she attended unto the things that Paul spoke. I have
planted, says he, Apollos watered, but god gave the increase. 1. Cor. 3.
Thus are we taught, not to forsake the helps of reading, of hearing, and such
like: yet to know that neither of them can settle us unto godliness, without
the especial grace of Gods Hom. 3. de verbis Dom. second. Ioh.
spirit. Augustine says well, Non verbis hominis fit vt intelligatur verbum Dei:
facit Deus vt intelligatis. The words of man do not cause that Gods word is
understood: God gives the understanding thereof. And Chrysostom In 3. cap.
2. ad Corint.
upon these words of the Apostle, Such trust have we through christ to god,
not that we are sufficient of our selves to think any thing, as of our selves,
but our sufficie^cy is of god, says: Hoc est, non it a dicebam fiduciam
habemus, vt id partim sit nostrum, partim sit deised totu^ illi tribuo,
acceptumque fero: that is, I did not so say we have trust, yt this work is
partly ours, and partly gods: but I allow it, and yield it wholly unto God.
The consideration hereof puts us in mind to join humble and heartye prayer
to our diligent reading and hearing, yt God will give us understanding and
knowledge.

Now to conclude this first remedy, whereby Hiericho may be kept from
buylding: we may say that of the use of good learning, which S: Augustine
speaks against those that charge De ciuitat. dei. lib. 16. cap. 2.
the scriptures with unnecessary speeches: Solo vomere terra proscinditur: sed
vt hoc fieri possit, etiam caetera aratri membra sunt necessaria. The share
only renteth the ground, but to help this work, the other parts of the
plough are also needeful. We say, eloquence and other liberal arts are to be
likened to that part of the Carpenters wimble, which turns about, goes
round, and by little and little draws in the iron, or steel bit. The wooden
handle enters not into the wood, but wreatheth in the pearser: so do these
arts, if they be rightly used, further the understanding of the word of God.
This use Lactantins seemed to seek when he Lib. 3. instit. cap. 1.
said, Vellem mihi dari eloquentiam, vel quia magis credant homines ornatae
veritati, vel vt ipsi suis armis vincantur, I would gladly have the gift of
eloquence, either because me^ might give better credit to the truth, when it
is beautified: or else because the heathen may the sooner be overcome with
their own weapons. And in another place, he shows that this eloquence must
serve and wait upon the wisdom of God: Circumliniatur poculum coe Lact.
instit. lib. 5. cap. 1
lestis sapientiae melle, vt intelligamus no^ homine^ loqui, sed Deum. Let the
cup (of your speech) be seasoned with y^ honey of Gods wisdom, that we may know
it is god that speaks, and not man. Where this is not done but men give them
selves rather to be curious in hearing eloquence and pleasantnes of speech,
then desirous to learn the truth, the word of God becomes unfruitful, as
it is to be feared in many, that they little account of the Gospel of Christ,
but seek to please their itchinge ears with fantasies of men. Augustine
says De doctrine. chr. lib 4. cap. 11.
to such. Bonorum ingeniorum insignis est indoles, in verbis verum amare, non
verba: Quid enim prodest clauis aurea, si aperire quod volumus non potest? aut
quid obest lignaea, si hoc potest? quando nihil aliud quaerimus nisi vt pateat
quod clausum est. Such as be of good disposition seek not after words but after
ye truth: For what avails a key of gold, if it cannot open yt we would have
opened? and what hurts a key of wood if it can open? seeing we desire no other
thing but that it be opened unto us, which is shut.

The second let or stay that Hiericho be not restored, is, that the people
may be instructed, why it was overthrown, and why God has cursed the^ that
shall seek to restore it. This knowledge is a singular gift of god. When the
Lord declared his favor toward Israel among other his special mercies he
spoke in this sort: This shall be the covenant that I will make with the house
of Isarel: after those days, I Ierem. 31.
will put my Law in their inward parts: and write it in their hearts, and
will be their God, and they shall be my people: and they shall teach no more
every man his neighbor, and every man his brother, saying, Know the Lord: for
they shall all know me, from the least of them to the greatest of them,
says the Lord. And again our Savior says out of the prophet Esaias. They
shall all be taught of God. And in the seuententh of Saint John, he says,
This is life eternal, that Ihon. 6. John. 17.
they know thee to be the only very God, and whom thou have sent Jesus
Christ. To this end, and for this cause, He gave some to be Apostles, and
some Prophets, and Ephe. 4.
some Evangelists, and some Pastors, and teachers, for the gathering together
of the Saints, for the work of the ministry, and for the edificatio^ of the
body of Christ: that we henceforth be no more children wa^ering and carried
about with every wind of doctrine, by the deceit of men, and with craftines,
whereby they lay wait to deceive. Therefore does S. Peter call upon them that
are of the church of god, in all places, that they show forth the mercies of
God, that they witness unto all the world, what the Lord has done for them,
in filling them with all spiritual knowledge and understanding: Be ready
always I. Pet. 3.
to give an answer to every man that asks you a reason of the hope yt is in
you. There fore does God give charge to his people the children of Israel, to
hear his Law and keep his commandments, not as an ordinance that should
stand good but for a season, which should be kept only by them: but also
requires that they teach the same to their posterity, that so his great
blessings may never be forgotten. For thus he says. These words which I
command thee this day, Deuteronomy. 9.
shall be in thine heart, and thou shall rehearce them continually unto thy
children, and shall talk of them, when thou taryest in thine house, and as
thou walk by the way, and when thou lie down, and when thou risest up.
Thus does God, by promise that he will give the Spirit of knowledge and of
understanding unto his people, and by raising up laborers whom he has sent
forth into his viniarde, Prophets, Apostles, Evangelists, and pastors, and
teachers, and by his earnest commandment that we give ear to his word, and
speak of his wonderful kindness showed unto us and our forefathers, make it
appear how needful a thing it is, that we know his will. Without this
knowledge we cannot love him as our father we can not fear him as our Lord.

But, when we see the miserable blindness and ignorance in all places
abroad, what hope may we have to see Hiericho suppressed and quite
overthrown? It cannot be but great inconveniences shall follow in the Church
of God, as confusion of order, and dissolution of life, to the indangering of
the state, unless by godly care of the Magistrates, some help be provided.
This care must show it self in remouinge blind watchmen which have no
knowledge, who are but dumme dogs that can not bark, who lie and sleep, and
delight in sleeping. These greedye Dogs can never have enough (says the
Prophet Esaye,) Non residence and absence from their cure, is Esaias. 56.
a fault that would be amended in the Sheapheardes of the Lords flock.
Though they be never so able to instruct, and therefore worthy to have the
roumes in the Church: yet, if they have not a desire to do good, if they feed
not Christ's sheep, if they be strangers to the people of their charge^, if
they be not at hand to give their flocks their bread in due season, what let
may there be, but that ignorance and blindness shall grow and increase in
the people?

Another fault no less hurtful to the Church of God, is the sufferinge of
pluralities, when one man takes the profit of two or more benefices, which
is not worthy of one. These Non residents and plurality men teach not, they
know not, nor care for the People of their charge: they have brought this
confusion and shame into the house of God. They are blind guides, they are the
darkness of the world. Against those which are such, GOD shows his heavy
displeasure: My Sheep, says Ezech. 34.
he wandered through all the mountains, and upon every high hill* yea, my
flock was scattered through all the earth, and none did seek or search after
them. And again, Neither did my shepherds seek my sheep, Ibidem.
but the shephardes fed themselves, and not my sheep. And by the Prophet
Jeremy he Ierm. 2.
says: They that should minister the law, knew me not. And again, The
Pastors are Ierem. 10.
become Beasts, and have not sought the Lord: therefore have they none
understanding: and all the flocks of their pastures are scattered. These
either be a remnant of the wicked Inhabitants of Hiericho, that resist the
passage of Gods people toward the land of promise: or such as have forgotten
the commandment of the Lord, and have given themselves to do the sins of
the people, whom the Lord gave over unto them. These be they that seek the
restoringe of Hiericho, and the overthrow of Jerusalem therefore the curse of
God will fall upon them: the blood of Gods people shall be required at their
hands, because they bring the abomination of desolation into the holy place:
because they suffer Christ's flock to perish for lack of knowledge, and to
be carried away after every wind of false doctrine. God grant al such, that
they may see with their eyes, and understand in their hearts, and know the
gracious goodness of the Lord, that the people be not through their
negligence like Horse and Mule: but that they may descerne between darkness
and light, and between Hiericho and Jerusalem: that they may be able to
give a reason of the faith which is in them and that they may teach the same
unto their Children. So shall we be builte upon a rock, so shall we stand as
firm as mount Sion, so shall we never be confounded.

The third means to stay the building of Hiericho, is to be thankful for
the benefits which God has bestowed upon us: and in such sort to lead our
life, that it may appear we be his servants. To this end God has given his
holy word: and to this end has he left his holy sacraments, that we should
be put in mind of his kindenes, and not become unmindful or unthankful,
and so receive his grace in vain,

But, you will say, What thanks shall I give? Some lead me one way, and some
another: some say hear is Christ, some say there is Christ: I know not nor
wherefore, nor how to yield thanks, Hereto a short answer can not suffice,
and a long would be tedious. Let us call to remembrance the Lesson that was
given us in this place on Sunday last: Let us search the scriptures. Esaias the
Prophet says, To the Law, and to the testimony, if they Esaias. 8.
spoke not according to this word, it is because there is no light in them.
Chrysostom says, Nullo modo cognoscitur quae sit vera Ecclesia Hom. 49 in
opere imperfecto.
Christi, nisi tantummodo per Scripturas. By no means may it by known, which
is the true Church of Christ, but only by the Scriptures. Without them our
faith is no faith without the help of them we cannot know Christ from
Antichriste, we cannot know the Church of Christ from the Sinagogue of Satan.
Hereby let us learn to know Jerusalem, hereby let us learn to know
Hiericho. Certainly if the word of GOD, and the breathe of his mouth be
not able to show this: tradition and custom shall be much less able.

It is a good thing to be thankful, and to praise the Name of the most
high: the servants of God find cause of thankfulness in consideration of the
great and wonderful mercies continually powered upon them. Moses commanded Nisan
Exodus 12.
to be the first month in the year, because God had delivered Israel from
the hand of Pharao in that month. In like sort Mardocheus the Jew, and Esther
the Queen, sent letters Ester. 9.
unto all the Jews that were through all the provinces of the king Assuerus
both nere and far, enjoying them that they should keep the fourteenth day of
the month Adir with joy and feasting, for that upon that day God had
delivered them from the hand of Haman: and that they would not fail to
observe the fame every year.

Upon this day, even upon this day, I say, the xvii. of this month, God sent
his handemaide, and delivered us. Let us be kind and thankful unto God for so
great blessing. I say not, let us make it the first day of the year. Yet this
I say, let us have it in remembrance, let us singe with the prophet, When the
Lord brought again ye captivity of Sion, we were like them that dreme, the^
was our mouth filled with laughter, Psa. 126.
and our tongue with joy. The Lord has done great things for us, whereof we
rejoice. Let no man be offended herewith, it is only a remembrance of the
mercy of God, it behooves us to remember it, it is good to speak of it. For if
we have eyes to see, and neglect not our own salvation, we have now much
greater cause to rejoice then David had, because the things which are this day
restored unto us by the goodness of our God, are far greater and worthyer
then those, which David and the people of Israel received in their deliverance
out of the capitiuitie of Babylon. For by how much the heavens are greater
then the earth, and God is more excellent then a creature: so much does the
knowledge of God, and his true worship, pass all worldly blessinge, and all
other felicity that can be devised under the Sun. For what knows he,
which knows not God? Or what worshippeth he, which worshippeth not God? He
that worshippeth not God, has not the comfort of GOD: but he that has God,
and knows God, and serves God, has a sure help and defense in all assayes.
Let us therefore be glad and rejoice, let us witness our joy, and singe unto
the Lord a new song. Let us kindle in our hearts the fire of the love of
God, and of our neighbor, and let the flame thereof break out to the glory of
God. Let us deck the Altars of our hearts with the flourishing branches of
virtue, and good works: let us sacrifice and kill our lusts and affections.
In this manner if we show our thankfulness toward GOD, we shall hinder
the wicked purpose of the^ that wish the restoring of Hiericho, we shall see the
land of Gods promise, and enter into his rest.

The fourth stay to hinder this buyldinge is discipline, which is so
needful, that neither without it shall ye be able thoroughly to discomfort
those that seek to build up Jericho again, nor your selves happily and
prosperously to go on forward in setting forth the glory and majesty of our
God, and to pass safely to the country promised. It is as the sinews of the
church to strengthen it, and to join and knit the parts thereof together. But,
because the time is passed and this matter weighty, and worthy of larger
discourse, I will leave it to your godly considerations, and for some other
time.

And thou, O merciful father, rise up we beseech thee, to judge thine own
cause, stablishe the thing thou have begone in us, guide our feet in the way
of peace, give force unto thy word, bless thine inheritance, blow down the
walls of Hiericho: so shall Jerusalem prospet, and her walls be made strong:
so shall the day star lighten our hearts: so shall Israel rejoice, and all
the people truly know thee, and praise thy name for ever.

Amen.
Aggaeus. 1.






THese words be written in the first Chapter of the Prophet Aggaeus. For better
understanding whereof, I must call to your remembrance the story of that time,
upon occasion whereof, these words were spoken.

Almighty God being for many and sundry causes highly displeased with his
people the Jews, after he had chastened the^ many ways, and saw none
amendment, at the last gave them over into the hands of their enemies, and
suffered both the king and all the people of the country to be carried away
prisoners into Babylon, where they continued in misery the space of seventy
years. In the mean season, their country partly lay waste, and grew full of
wild beasts: partly was inhabited by foreyners: the temple that Solomon had
built them, the stateliest and richest work of the whole world, was burnt to
the ground, and all the ornaments thereof rauened up, and carried into Babylon.

After fifty years, king Cyrus showed favor toward his people, and did
license them to depart home again. But as they were about the building, upon
occasion of complaint of their enemies, the whole work was stayed. At y^
length, after 70. years, God remembered his promise and mercy, and stirred up
the heart of king Darius king of Persia, who had then conquered the Chaldees,
to license the Jews to depart home again into their country, and to reedifie
their City and Temple. This king Darius (as the Rabbines, or Doctors of the
Jews, and most part of learned men conjecture) was son unto the king
Assuerus, begotten of the good Lady Queen Hester, which Lady Hester he
married after he had imbased, and divorced from him the proud and stubborn
Queen Vasthi. This was Gods marvelous providence, by that means twice to
deliver his people. First, by the good Lady Hester, from the tyranny of Hama^,
as it appears by the storye: and after, by her Ester. 3.
child Darius clearly to deliver them, and to discharge them out of their
enemies hands for ever.

The Jews, notwithstanding they had so gracious a grant of their king, yet
many of them would not return home, but made their aboade even there among
their enemies in Babylon: and the most part of them that were returned, fell to
building of their own houses, and left the house of God vnbuilded: so soon
they had forgotten Gods mercy toward them. In the time of their trouble, they
cried out, If I shrink from God, I pray God shrink from me. But being
restored home and at liberty, they said, as the Prophet here reports,
Nondum uenit tempus, etc. The time is not yet come, that the Lords house should
be builded.

They saw they had many enemies on every side, the matter it self was
marvelous weighty, and to their judgments almost impossible. They had
begun before under king Cyrus, and because, the matter was then dashe, and
their enemies prevailed against them, they were utterly discouraged and cast
into despair. Wherefore god spoke to them by the Prophet Aggaeus, Is it time
for your selves to dwell in your seeled houses, and this house lie wast? Have
you found le asure to set up and furnish your own house, and can you neglect
the restoring of my house? My house (I say) in which my Law has been read and
preached to you, where your Fathers have made me sacrifices, toward which
house you turned your faces, whenever you prayed unto me in Babylon, and were
heard? Therefore says the Lord. Ye have sown much and bring in little: ye eat,
but yet have not enough: ye looked for much, and lo, it came to little: and
when you brought it home, I did blow it out. You set your joy upon vain
things, and the same shall deceive you.

This place of the Prophet Aggaeus, I have thought good to apply to the present
state of our time. For, as then the city of Jerusalem was miserably rased,
and the Temple of god burnt down by heathens: even so has it fared in time
lately past with the Church of Christ, here among us. And, as then God
mollified and softened the heart of the king Darius for the delivery of his
people, even so of his great mercy has he now stirred up a most noble and
virtuous Lady our sovereign Queen Elizabeth, for the same purpose. And, as
then there were many that set light by Gods benefits, and thought it meet
enough for him to wait upon their leisure: even so, I pray God, the same
security be not found in us at this time. I pray God there be none of us that
make light of Gods grace, and say in our hearts, Nondum venit tempus, etc. The
time is not yet come, that the Lords house should be builded.

1 Wherefore, first I will prove (by Gods grace) that our Church has been
ouergrowne with errors and abuses, as then the temple of Jerusalem was
defaced by the Caldees.

2 Secondly, I will show what things they be that do stay men from
reedifying of this Temple.

3 Last of all, after what sort this Church ought to be builded, and so I will
leave you to God.

Prayers.
Touching the first part, I shall not need many words, for God has in our
days sufficiently revealed, and we have seen the state of the Church in time
past. And indeed, the errors and abuses have been so gross, that who so cannot
see them with his eyes, yet may feel and grope them with his fingers. Yet,
because I know some are not thoroughly persuaded herein, but think that the
church of Rome has evermore been pure and without spot: and, some others in
their writings call it the rule of the truth, that whatsoever that Church
says, whatsouer it be, must needs be true: as Siluester says, it is Siluest.
Prierias contra Lutherum
Infallibilis regula, a rule that never deceives. Some set it above the word
of god, as the same Syluester. A doctrina Ecclesiae Romanae and Romani
Pontificis sacra scriptura robur trahit and authoritate^. The holy scripture
takes force and authority of yt doctrine of the church and Bishop of Rome. And
as Cusanus: Sequuntur Epist. 2. ad Bohemos.
Scripturae Ecclesia^, and non e conuerso. The scriptures follow the church,
and not on the contrary part, yt church follows y^ scriptures. Others say,
Impossible haereticari, etc. It is not possible he should fall into heresies
which follows the church of Rome: some others sai yt if christ and his
Apostles were alive, they were not able to rule the church in better sort, then
it is now ruled, by the Pope and his Cardinals. Thus some school doctors
have written, I am able to aleadge mine authors. Therefore I must of force stand
upon this matter a little not because I think it needful, but y^ al men may be
satisfied,

First, Christ our savior, as he foreshewed the prosperous course of the
gospel, yt it should be preached throughout ye world, and yt the gates of hell
should not be able to withstand it: so he and his Apostles forwarned also the
ruin and decay of y^ Church: and yt in so many places, and in so plain
words, that no man can doubt of it, or deny it.

For, Christ alleging the prophet Daniel, says, that abomination should
sit in the holy Mat. 24.
place, and, that there should be such confusion and disorder, that if it were
possible the very elect should be perverted. He says, that when he shall come
to judge, there shall scarsely be found Luke 18.
faith in the world. Paul likewise says, that the man of sin, that is such a
one as in all things 2. These. 2.
should be contrary to Christ, and is called Antichrist, should sit in the
temple of God, and bear himself as if he were God in deed. Daniel says,
The truth shall be cast down Dan. 8.
to the ground. And to Timothy Paul says, In the latter times some shall
depart from the (...). Tim. 4.
faith, and shall give heed to spirits of error, and doctrins of devils. S.
Peter says, There 2. Pet. ^.
shall be false teachers among you.

And, where says Christ, (I beseech you consider) where says Christ, this
horrible desolation should be? among y^ turks or Jews? no, but in the holy
place. Where shall ye son of man scarsely find faith? where shall the very elect
stand in doubt what they may believe? among ye heathe^s or infidels? No, but
in the church, Where says S. Peter shall be ye masters of lies, where says
Daniel, shall the truth be trodden down? where says S. Paul, shall ye man of
sin perch, and settel, and behave himself as if he were very god? among the
heathen? No, no good brethren, but in templo Dei, In the Temple of God, in the
very Church among the^ that should bear the name of Christ. But, forasmuch as
it cannot be doubted among christian men, that Christ and his Apostles
appointed ye church in their time in such sort, as no better could be devised,
let us compare the church of late time to yt original, as the use is, in trying
of mesures, where, in trial whether is true or falls, ye have evermore recourse
to the standard. For if there be any falt, whatsoever it be, the standerd will
bewray it. This order Christ himself used with the priests and Pharisees,
saying, Domus mea Mat, 21.
domus orationis vocabitur, My house shall be caled the house of prayer. But
you have gone from the pattern or original, and you have made it a harbor for
thieves. And whereas the contention stood upon divorce, Christ called them to
ye first original, A principio non fuit sic, From the beginning it was not so:
they twain shall be one flesh. And S. Paul, when the holy mystery Mat 19.
of the Lords Supper was abused, called the^ home to the first institution, I
have received of the Lord, that which I also have delivered unto you. By this
standerde Christ reproved 1. Cor. 11.
the Sadduces: Erratis, nescientes Scripturas, You err, not knowing the
Scriptures. And Mat. 2.
by the same he confuted the Devil, when he came to tempt him, Soriptum est,
It is written. This standerd shall be able to warrant us, if Mat. 4.
we can say truly, Scriptum est. For as the learned father Irenaeus says,
Scriptura est basis and fundamentum fidei nostrae: The Scripture Iren. lib. 3.
cap. 1.
is the pillar and foundation of our faith. It is rashness to believe without
the warrant or direction of the Scriptures. It is not devotion, nor catholic
faith, but foolish rashness.

Now how many ways, and in how many points the Church of late days has
dissented from the Church of Christ and of the Apostles (which no doubt was
the Catholic Church) it were almost an infinite work to reckon up. For they
disagree in so many things yt in manner they agree in nothing. Notwithstanding,
I will lay out one or two things before you, and by them your wisdoms shall
guess the rest.

Christ gave the Sacrament of his body and blood to be frequented in the
Congregation, that all should be partakers thereof, in remembrance of his
death, and said, Hoc facite Luke. 22.
in meam commemorationem, Do ye this in remembrance of me. Thus Christ
himself ordained and commanded: thus the Apostles, and the catholic fathers
in the primative Church used it: and there can no commandment, nor example, be
showed forth to the contrary. Yet our later fathers, against Christ, against
the Apostles, against the primitive church, have thought it sufficient, that
one priest alone should communicate for all the rest.

Christ delivered the holy Communion under both kinds, and so was it used in
the Primitive Church, and in the times of the doctors, Chrysostom, Ambrose,
Gregory, Augustine, and Hierome. But our fathers in the Council holden at
Constance of late years, have gone from the original, and have decreed
against Christ himself, against his Apostles, and Doctors: that, to minister
the Communion to a lay man under both kinds, is an open heresy. Alas, (good
brethren) I beseech you consider by the way, in what state was the Church of
Christ then, when Christ's own institution, and the Apostles doctrine was
called heresy?

Christ, his Apostles, and the catholque fathers used their prayers in a common
tongue, that the people might perceive what was said in the Church, and say
Amen. But, how near our later fathers come to that original, it needs no
rehearsal. For you have heard it taught you as a necessary doctrine, that your
prayers should be in the Latin tongue, although you did not understand what ye
prayed for: and that kind of prayer has been called devotion.

God left order to his Church, Non facies tibi sculptile, thou shall not make
thee any graue^ image. From Christ's time for the space of 500 years, there was
no allowance of images in the Catholic Church* but our later fathers cannot
take it for a Church, unless it be decked, and set about with images.

The Apostles were married (as Ignatius and Ambrose witness) and so were others
ye ministers of the Church after them, as it is well known, for 1000. years
after Christ. To hold good this original, there have been certain Canons set
down, Si quis do^uerit sacerdotem sub obtentu Distine. 28. Si quis.
religionis, propria^ vxorem co^temnere, anathema sit. If any man teach yt a
priest, for color of religion should conte^n^ his wife, let him be accursed.
And ye general counsel holden at Ga^gra, as it is set down also by Gratian, If
any put difference between the priest that is married, Did. ^8. Si quis
discernit
by reason of his marriage, that he should not offer, and for that cause comes
not to his offering, he is accursed: yet pope Hildebrand one of the later
fathers, decreed and commanded, that no man should hear such priests Mass,
that had a wife: but caused their tenth to be burnt, their prayers and
blessings to be holden as curses, and the sacrament which they had consecrate,
to be spit at, and trodden under men's feet.

You will say, These be but small matters, and may be borne withal, for
decency and good order. But you shall understand, that the canons of the
Apostles, and diverse of the first Bishops of Rome, and other holy Fathers
required, that all such as were present at the ministration of the Communion,
should also be patakers of the Sacrament: and accounted worthy to be put out
af the Church, whosoever would not communicate with the Minister. And
Chrysostom Homil. 3. ad Ephesians.
calls such a one impudent and malepert. Quisquis mysteriorum co^sors nonest,
etc. whosoever says he, does not communicate, and stands by, he is shameless
and malepert. Communion under De consecrat. did. 2. canone Comperimus
one kind, is no small matter, but such a matter, and of such weight, that
Gelasius calls it open sacrilege, to minister ye sacrament in one kind.

Common prayer in a strange tongue, is such a matter, that it takes away the
very use of common prayer. For the people (as Paul says) cannot say, Amen, nor
be edified, nor give God thanks. And the Emperor Justinian in a law that he
makes, touching the public prayers of the Church, says thus, we command al
Bishops and priests to minister the holy oblatio^, and the prayer at ye holy
Baptism, not under silence, but with such voice as may be hard of the faithful
people: to the intent that the hearts of the hearers may be stirred up to more
devotion, etc. And let the holy priests understand, that if they neglect any of
these things, they shall make answer therefore at the dreadful judgment of the
great God, and our savior Jesus Christ. And yet nevertheless, we our selves
understanding the same will not pass it over, nor leave it unpunished.

To have images in the church of God, is no small matter, It is forbidden by a
general council called Eliberinu^: and Epiphanius a catholic father calls
it abomination.

The violent enforcing of sole life, is such a matter, that S. Paul calls it
doctrina^ daemoniorum, the doctrine of devils. And Daniel says, it is one of
the marks of Antichrist: Neither shall he regard the desires of women. Which
Dan. 11.
place S. Hierome experoundeth, Ideo Antichristus simulat cactitatem, vt
plurimos decipiat. Therefore does Antichrist feign or pretend chastity, that
he may deceive many.

Thus far they disagree from the original of Gods word. But they use
commonly to say, the Church was then in her minority and infancy:
afterward, she was better informed. So when Christ, and the Apostles, and the
Doctors please them, they shall rule the matters, they shall be holy Doctors,
and holy Fathers: if not, they shall not be paternes to follow, but children
and infants. They use them as merchants use their counters: for that counter,
which now stands for a pound, anon after shall be removed and made a simple
halfpenny. Yet notwithstanding, they cry Fathers, Doctors, Church: and yet
indeed do al things contrary to the Church of Christ, contrary to the
Doctors, and fathers of the Church.

Two principal things there be, that seem to bear up the whole brunt of the
religion, that has been in the world of late time: the one is the Mass, and
things thereunto belonginge: the other is the authority of the Pope. These
two I will breefely compare to the first original: only running over certain
special branches of them both, in as few words as I can devise.

And as touching the Mass, if there be any man here that has any good opinion
of it, and is also learned and able to judge, let him think with himself,
what Doctor or father in the Primitive Church ever used, or taught us to use
a private Mass: what Doctor or Father ever heard of 10. 20. or 30. Masses in
one Church said at one time: what Father or doctor ever taught the Priest to
communicate for other? Chrysostom notes, it is an error to say. y^
Sacraments received of one, may do good Hom. 40 in 1. ad Cor.
to others, that receive them not. What Father or Doctor ever taught, that hoc
facite, was hoc sacrificate? What Doctor or Father ever taught us, that the
bread is transubsta^tiate into Christ's body? I assure you that word was
never heard of, until now within little more then 300. years under
Innocentius the third. What Father or Doctor taught us, that there remain
accidentiasine subiecto? that Christ's body is in a C. thousand places at once,
that the Priest should hold the bread over his head, and turn his back to
the people? that the Sacrament should be hanged up in a canopie for the
people to adore? What father ever taught us, that their communion bread should
be round, because the earth is round? That the Priest should kiss the
Altar, because Judas kissed Christ? that he should wash his fingers, because
Pilate washed his hands? That he should knock his breast, iu token of the
thieves repentance upon the Cross? Those things have been written by Durande,
Bona^enture, and Innocentius, and others like of late time: but the Fathers in
the Primitive Church never heard of them.

Yet some men of late time have beaten into your heads, y^ these and many
other like things have come by succession, even from the primative Church,
and from the Apostles. But so the coniurers and Sorcerers say, that their
books of coniuration and sorcerie came from Moses, from Enoch, and from Abel.
Plutarche writes, that Theseus, Romulus, Hercules, and other like Princely
gentlemen, indeed were Bastardes, and were be gotten of fathers of very low
degree: but after they came into honor, and estimation, the people (because
they knew not whose sons they were) thought they had come from heaven, and
therefore they called them the sons of the gods.

Even so, these things that I have here reported, nowithstandynge in deed
they are base borne, yet because they have stolen into the Church and have
been had in honor, some men have taught you, they have come even from heaven,
and therefore they have fathered them upon Christ, and his Apostles. But in
the mean season, they have not dealte iustlye with you, but have done wrong
both to Christ and to his Apostles. Hierome writing upon Aggeus, says: Quae
absque authoritate and testimoniis Scripturarum quasi traditione Apostolica
Hierom. in 1. Agge.
sponte reperiunt at que confingunt, percutit gladius Dei: The Sword of God
stricketh those things which men find out and devise of them selves without
the authority and testimonies of the scriptures, and deliver forth, as if
they came by the tradition of the Apostles.

Again, what Catholic Father taught us, that the Pope is the head of the
Church, above kings, above Councils, above the word of god, greater and of more
authority then the Apostles: that he cannot err: that the whole world is his
diocese: that he may not be judged what soever he do, although he draw a
thousand souls down into hell: that he is neither man nor God, but a mixture
meddled together of God and man: Al these things, our later Fathers have
written of the Pope: and yet I leave a hundred things untouched. Thus far
have they gone from their original and pattern.

But what greater disorver can there be in the Church of God, then when
Antichrist shall come and sit in the place of God? There is an old fable of
Antichrist, that when he comes, he would turn trees vpside down, and do
such like wonders. But the marks whereby Antichrist shall be known indeed,
are otherwise set down in the holy Scriptures. In his coming, abomination
shall stand in the holy place, and truth shall be thrown down in the earth.

I know many men are offended to hear the Pope pointed out for Antichrist,
and think it an uncharitable kind of doctrine: therefore I refrain to use
any such names, and only will report to you of other, by what tokens
Antichrist, when he comes, may be known Gregory, as it were in the spirit
of prophecy, writing Greg. lib. 4. epist. 38.
against John bishop of Constantinople, says Rex superbiae prope est, and
(quod dici nefas est) Sa, cerdotum est praeparatus exercitus: The king of pride
is at hand, and (which is unlawful to be said) an army of priests is prepared,
By these tokens, says Gregory, you may know him: he shall be the prince of
pride, and he shall have an army of priests to wait upon him. In another place
he says. Quisquis se vniuersalem sacerdotem Greg. lib. 6. epist. 30.
vocat, vel vocari desiderat, in elatione sua Antichristum praecurrit Whosoever
calls himself the universal priest, or desires so to be called, in the pride
of his heart is the forerunner of Antichrist. These words were written by
Gregory more then 900. years since.

If there were ever any that might be known by these tokens, which was or is
the prince of pride, and is called or desires to be called ye Universal
priest, or B. or has an army of priests, I leave yt to your judgment, whether
the same be he whom Gregory describes, or some other. I pray God to lighten
the eyes of all the world, that all the world may spy him, and the man of sin
may be reueiled.

When the woman of Samaria saw the miracles that Christ had done, and heard
some men doubt whether he were Messiah or no: why (quoth she) when Messiah
shall come, shall he do moresignes, the^ this man has showed? So may we say
by the Bishop of Rome, when Antichrist shall come, shall he work more signs,
then they of that See have done? shall he work more disorder in the Church? shall
he do more to the dishonor of God, and against Christ?

Some man will say, that for unity sake it is meet, yt some man be named head
of the church But Gregory says, Siquantitate^ vocis perpendimus, Greg. lib. 6:
epist. 30.
duae sunt sillabae: Sipondus iniquitatis, vniuersa pernicies. If we weigh the
quantity of the word, it stands in two sillables: if we consider the weight
of the wickedness, it is an universal destruction. Unto Anastasius the Bishop
Lib. 6. epist. 24.
of Antioch, he writes thus, To dissemble the injury don to your honor, if one
bishop be caled universal, the^ if yt one universal bishop fall, the whole
universal church goes to ground. Therefore Francisons Zabarella, a Canonist,
seeinge the great inconveniences yt grew hereof, says, the popes do now
whatsoever they list to do yea although it be unlawful, and ar become more the^
god. Hereof has followed infinite errors: for the Pope has in uaded and entered
upon all the right of the inferior Churches: so that the inferior Bishops may
go for naught, and unless God help the state of the Church, the universal
church is in danger. In consideration of this great danger which hereby grows
to ye whole church. Gregory says to John the Boshop of Constantinople, Tu
quid Christo vniuersalis Ecclesiae Lib. 4. epi. 38.
capiti in extremi iudici^ dicturus es examine, qui cuncta eius membra tibimet
conaris vniuersalis appellatione supponere? What answer will thou make at the
trial of the last judgment unto Christ the head of the universal Church, which
thus by the name of universal Bishop seek to make all his members subject
unto thee? This decay of the church, the old Catholic Fathers foresaw in
their time. When Constantinus yt Emperor endowed the church with lands and
possessions, they say there was a voice of Angels heard in the air, saying,
Hodie venenum infunditur in Ecclesiam, Ioh. de parisiis cap. 22. in vita
Siluesti.
This day poison is powered into the Church. If there were poison powered into
the Church then, I doubt there was never Triacle powered into it since. This we
see that from that time she has done worse and worse. Augustine fyndeth
fault with the multitude of Ceremonies, and says the Church in his time was
in worse case by man's devises, then was the Church of the Jews. Bernarde
said, There is no part sound in the Clergy. And again, They which choose
the first places in the Church, are chiefest in persecuting Christ. And again,
Non doctores, sed seductores: non pastores, sed impostores: non praelati, sed
Pilati. They be not teachers, but deceivers: they are not feeders, but
beguilers: they be not Prelates, but Pilates.

What should I hold you with calling the fathers to witness in this matter: they
themselves that have been proctors for ye Church of Rome, are contented
sometimes to acknowledge, that they have forsaken the original. Latomus finds
fault that ye Lords supper was ministered to the people in one kind only. Abbas
Panormitane, Faber, Pius secundus, found falt with ye forbidding of priests
marriage. Ex agamia (says Faber) multi lapsisunt in pedicas diaboli. Many have
fallen into the snares of the devil, by forsaking marriage. And further,
expresses the mischiuus purpose of those which brought such ordinance into the
Church, by a similitude saying, ar^neae texunt subtiliaretia etc. Spyders weaue
their webs so small and fine, that they may scarcely be seen: if any thing fall
into them, they first set upon the head thereof, and so take away all sense and
feeling. Albertus Pighius confessed there were errors and abuses in the mass:
I will say nothing of their life. Some of themselves say that they succeed
Peter in place, but Judas in life. Boniface being himself a bishop, said, In
old time we had treene chalices and golden priests, but now we have trene
Priests, and golden Chalices. And Adrian being also a Bishop, said, Succedimus
non Petro in docendo, sed Romulo in parricidio. We succeed not Peter in
teaching, but Romulus in slaughter of our brethren.

Yet notwithstanding (say they) we are successors to Peter, and vicars of
christ: we are ye church. But Christ takes it for an argument against ye
Scribes and Pharisees, This did not Abraham. You are not the church, you are of
your father yt devil. And Micheas, My Priests teach for reward, and my Prophets
prophecy for money, Mich. 3.
and yet they rest themselves upon the Lord and say, is not God in the midst
of us? Are not we the church? Therefore night shall be unto you for a vision, and
darkness shall be unto you for a divination, and the sun shall go down over
the Prophets, and the day shall be dark over them.

I will speak nothing of the blindness of the time past, for our adversaries
take that for a special hold, and call ignorance the mother of devotion: and
say, Scriptures are a buckler, and a defense for heretics. Not long sithence,
in this city there were certain interrogatories put forth, to enquire of
such as then they called heretics, wherein one inquiry was made in this sort:
Item, whether you know or have heard of any person or persons within your
parish, that has kept, or at this present does keep, any heretical, naughty,
and seditious book or books, especially, English Testaments, or Bibles. I
feign not this of my self, the book is to be seen, imprinted even in this
yard. But this matter will soon be answered, will they say: for it follows,
Falsely translated. That were somewhat, if they would appointe you out one,
that were translated aright, or did allow any translation of the Testament in
English to be used.

Whenever any great Eclipse chances in the sun or moon, some marvelous
impression, or change, or mortality follows upon the earth: Even so, when
true knowledge fails in the Church of God, it cannot be but the souls of the
people shall perish. If in the little time of Moses absence, the people forgate
God, and fell to idolatry: if when Christ slumbred, and took but a little nappe
in the ship, the ship began to drown: how shall it be with them that
receive not Moses at all, and give no place to our savior Christ, who only is
able to save the Church from drowning? For as Hilarie says, Ecclesiae Hillar.
in Mat. cap. 8.
intra quas verbum Dei non vigilauerit naufragae sunt: No^ quod Christus in
somnum relaxetur, sed quod somno nostro consopiatur in nobis. Those churches
are in danger of drowning, wherein the word of God waketh not: Not for that
Christ is in any slu^ber, but because his word is heavy in us through our
heaviness: and Orig. shows how dangerous ye state of the^ is where, the Gospel
is not preached. Such a Church can not stand before the abominatio^ of
desolation steadfast, or without danger of seducing,

And therefore Christ compares his church to the weakest things that be.
Sometimes he calls it a vine, which vnies it evermore be propte and borne
up, and looked unto, and pruned, of it self is not able to stand, but falls
to the ground, and grows wild. Sometimes he likeneth it to a flock of
sheep, which without attendance, is ready to take infinite maladies. Sometime
to a ship, which if it be not well provided on every side, if it be destitute
of light of sun and stars, is in danger of the rock, and winds, and
surges of the sea. Sometimes to the moon which has no light, but from the
sun.

What needs more proof in a matter being of it self so clear? Christ
himself, and Daniel, and Peter and Paul gave us warning that this confusion
should come to pass in ye church of God. We see with our eyes, how far we
are stra^ed from the original. We see what darkness and blindness has been
even in them that should have ruled the stern. Good men have had their eyes
opened, and have poynted to us that the p^l^te of the ship a long time has
been Antichrist. The ancient and old Doctors in their time foresawe that
this great captiuitye and confusion, was coming even upon them. Our fathers of
later years, though our Adversaries and Patrones of the contrary cause, yea,
the Bishopyes of Rome and their chief pillars, do coufesse that the pattern
and original, has not been kept. Discipline which is the greatest bond of
the church, has been broken: I pray God it may now be restored. The
Sacraments that Christ left for our most comfort, have been miserably mangled
and defaced. Our prayers have been without spirit and veritye, and so abused,
that indeed they were no prayers.

What greater proofs or authorities do we look for? Now then, can there be
any man so wilful, that will say, there has been no disorder in the church?
or, that Christ himself, and his Apostles (if they were alive) could rule the
church in no better sort, then it has been, and is by the Pope and his
Cardinals?

But me think I hear some say, The church cannot be so forsaken, it is the
house and temple of God, it is the spouse of Christ: Christ made her a sure
promise, that he would never forsake her. Ero vobiscum vsque ad consummationem
soeculi, I will be with you to the end of Matt. 28.
the world. All this is true, yet is it not true, that every particular
church of the world shall be established for ever. For, was not this temple
that Solomon built, the temple of God? yet was it over thrown, and burnt down
to the ground by y^ Chaldees. Jupiters image was set up in it by Antiochus. It
was afterward overthrown by the Emperor Titus, yet was it the temple of God.
Gods house is a house of prayer, yet Christ says, Vos fecistis speluncam
latronum, Luke 19.
You have made it a den of thieves. The Lord made choice of his Uine, he
loved it, it was a chosen heritage, yet Jeremy says, Many pastors Iere. 12.
have destroyed my Vineyard, and trodden my portion under foot, of my chosen
place, they have made a desolate wilderness Jerusalem was called the holy city,
yet is she charged, that she has played the harlot and done shamefully. The
Jews called themselves the people of God, but Christ calls them the
Synagogue of Satan. The Church of God is Revel, 2.
called the holy place, yet Christ says, the abomination of desolation, and
S. Paul says, the man of sin shall stand in the holy place.

If we believe Christ, and his Apostles, that forewarned us hereof: if we
believe the old doctors: if we believe the writers of later years, if we
believe such as God has stirred up in our time to revive his Gospel: if we
believe our adversaries: if we believe our own senses an^ experience: let us
confess that the Church has been defaced with abuses: let us give God thanks,
that of his great mercies has restored it, and lee us every man endeavor to
reediffe it.

God had mollified the Kings heart to be gracious toward them, he had
delivered them, he had restored them home to their country, he gave them
Prophets to call upon them, and a godly Prince to rule over them: but the
people cried out, The time is not yet come that the Lords house should be
builded. Here must I touch the causes that withholde men from the buylding up
of Gods Temple, not all that may be reckoned: For that would require more time.
but only the chiefest, that shall come to hand.

The first seemed to be despair of the cause. For they saw it was a long
travail from Babylon to Jerusalem. They had been spoiled of all they had,
and were poor, and the greatest part even of their own people forsook them,
and would not return home with them. Their enemies were strong, and laughed
them to scorn, and hindered their buildinges. Others charged them with
sedition, and said, if these men may once recover their city, they will pay
no more tribute, they will be no longer in subjection, and this matter at
length shall redound to the kings damage. Look in your Chronicles, and you
shall find that the Jews have ever been traitors.

Even so, when the man of God Luther was raised up by God to reform the
church, a friend of his said unto him, O father Luther, you shall never be able
to prevail: the Pope and princes, and all the world are against you: The matter
is past recovery: go into your study, and say, Deus miscreatur nostri. Eue^
so, whensoever it pleases God to build up the walls of his temple* he
chooses out such, y^ for their own infirmities, and for the force and
strength of their enemies, they might be discouraged, and despair. Even now
that it has pleased God to restore his gospel, they that are of the contrary
part, cry out, These men be rebels, they would have no magistrate, they would
have al things in common. Behold what they have done in Heluetia: behold what
they have done in Germany: Look out your Chronicles, you shall find that all the vproares and seditions which have been these forty years, have been stirred
up by some of them.

But all this discouraged not the good Prince Zorobabel,, he armed himself
with Gods promise against all impossibilities, and so called the people to the
huylding of the temple. And therefore GOD prospered him, and moved the king
Darius heart to make proclamation, that whosoever would withstand Zoro^abel in
his doings, timber should be taken out of his own house, and a gallows
made, and he thereon hanged without redemption.

Even so, that man of GOD despayred not, though he same all the world against
him, but gave the glory to GOD. And therefore God blessed his doings as we
see this day. For it is the cause of GOD, and not of man. The zeal of the
Lord of hosts has done this. I will bring this to pass (says the Lord) not
for your sakes, but that my name may be glorified among the nations. For God
chooses ye weak thinks, and the foolish things of the world. As for the
Adversaries, be they never so strong, he that dwells in the heavens laugheth
them to scorn. These, through fear and despair, keep back from building
the temple.

Some there be that confess, that many things are out of frame, and ought to
be looked on, but they say, it is no time to fall a buylding. We must look for
a general Council. And God grant we may once see that day, that a general
Council may be called, wherein Christ may sit president, and all these matters
that are now in question, may have indifferent hearing, and may be decided
by the word of God.

But alas, they that make a face and show of general Councels, them selves
stop and stay, that there may be no general Council. When Luther made his
first appeal from the Pope that then was, to a general council, they made
him answer that it was against the decree of Pope Julius, and Pope Pius, that
any appeal should be made from the Pope to any council.

When the Emperor had compelled them to a Council, and the Princes of Germany
and commonweals, had sent learned men thither: the Bishops that were there
assembled, would not hear any of them preach, or dispute, or declare their
mind. For only bishops may sit and speak in their council, and such as are
sworn to maintain the Pope. Aeneas Syluius, otherwise Aeneas Syluius ad
capitulum Magu^^in.
called Pope Pius the second, says, if a Bishop speak against the Pope, yea
although he speak the truth, yet nevertheless he sins against the oath,
that he has made unto the pope.

And last of all, when the Council has done all that it can, the whole
conclusion of the matter hangs upon ye determination of the Pope. Now judge
you, what sentence there is like to be, where as he shall be judge in his own
cause. Thus when they cry out and speak of Councels, they seek delay, they
mock with God and man, and indeed mean to have no council.

Saint Paul, after he was called of God, and touched in his heart and
couscience with Gods truth, appealed not to a general Council, but says, Non
acquieni carni and sanguini, I communicated not with flesh and blood. The
Galat. (...). Matt. II.
kingdom of heaven suffers violence, and the violent take it by force. There
is no Council above God.

A Council may testify the truth to be truth, but it cannot make falsehood to
be truth. Augustine aunsweared most indifferently, writing to Maximinus a
Bishop of ye Arrsans yt alleged a general council holden at Ariminum. Nec ego
Nicenum, nec tu debes Arimincuse tan qua^ praeiudicaturus L^. 3. co^t. Maxim.
cap. 14.
proferre co^cilium, etc. Neither may I lay to thee the council of Nice, nor
may thou lay to me the counsel of Ariminum, either of us thinking thereby to
find prejudice against the other: But let us lay matter to matter, cause to
cause and reason to reason, by the authority of the Scriptures, which are
indifferent witnesses for both.

When Agisilaus minded to make his passage with his army through his neighbors
land, he desired license of the prince of that country: the prince said, he
could make him no ready answer, but that he would take advise of his
council. Well then said Agesilaus, take you aduisement: in the mean season, I
will pass through. So when our adversaries delay off, and soiourne til they may
take their deliberation in a council, let them deliberate while they will: but
in the mean season, let us pass on in the business of God, and take the
occasion offered us to build by a house to the Lord.

Some other say, it is not yet time: ye Bishops be they that should redress
the church. Would to God they would. For they should be Lux mu^di, The light of
the world, they should be shepherds, and Watchmen, they should be builders of
Gods church. But, what if the light become darkness? What if the shepheardes
become wolves? What if the Watchmen lie asleep? what if the builders become
ouerthrowers? Jeremy says, the Pastors have overthrown the Uineyard: and is
it likely that they will rear it up again? Christ said unto ye bishops, you
have made my house a den of thieves: and is it likely that they will bring it
again to the former state, and make it a place of prayer? But, O merciful God,
what a building is that like to be, where ignorance is the foundation, where
ignorance is devotion, and the greatest corner stone of the buylding. I pray
God lighten their hearts with his holy spirit, and make them to be that they
profess themselves to be, the light of the world, and true laborers in Gods
Uineyarde, and faithful buylders of his house.

In the mean season let us remember, that in the old Law, whenever the
Bishop grew out of order, God raised up sometimes Prophets, sometimes
Princes, to refourme the church, to redress things that were amiss, and to
reedifie the decays. For the Prince is keeper of the Law of GOD, and that of
both Tables, as well of the first that pertayneth to Religion, as of the second
that pertayneth to good order. For he is the Head of the people, not only of
the commons and La^^y, but also of the Ministers and Cleargye. By that
authority. Moses being a Magistrate rebuked Aaron the Bishop, for making the
golden calfe. Ioas being a king, redressed the riot of the Priests, Solomon
being King, first builded the temple of God, and put down the high Bishop
Abiathar, and set up Sadoc. Afterward, the same Temple being polluted was
restored, not by the Bishops, but by the Kings Ezechias, Josias, Abias,
Iehosaephat: and at this time after the captivity of Babylon, it was restored,
not by the Bishops. but by Zorobabel the Prince of Judah.

And after the coming of Christ, when the Emperors became christened,
Constantine a Godly Emperor, threatened the Bishops, if they would not be
ruled. he would take upon him to see them punished, as having in deed
authority and power over Bishops. And Iustinianus in his law threatens the
Bishops, that if they would not make their prayers in a loud voice, that y^
people might say Amen, he would punish them with his sword, as has been said
before.

But what needs more examples? When the Ark of God was restored home, David
being King, played the chiefest part: David being King, made Psalms and
ditties: David being King, daunced before the Arc: and being king, set the
Bishops and Priests in order. And for this cause they are kings, even to serve
y^ Lord. And therefore they do not well that divide commonweals in two, and
devise two heads, the one for the spirituality, the other for the laity. For
S. Paul says, Omnis anima superioribus potestatibus Romans 13.
subdita sit. Let every soul be subject to the higher powers. Every soul,
whether he be bishop, Cardinal, or Pope, al are subject to their Prince. And
Chrysostom upon that place, says, Etiam si Apostolus sis, si Euangelista,
sieve Propheta, sieve quisquis tandem fueris, neque enim pietate^ Hom. 23. in 13.
Romans
subuertit ista subiectio. Yea, if thou be an Apostle, if thou be an
Evangelist, if thou be a Prophet, or of what state soever thou be: for this
subjection is no hindera^ce to godliness. And of the superiority of Princes
power, Tertullian Tertul. ad Scapulam.
speaks thus. Colimus imperatorem, vt homine^ a Deo secundum, solo Deo
minorem. We woorshippe the Emperor as a man next unto God, and inferior
only unto God.

Some other there be that see and know, that the Church of God is now a
building, and yet not only refrain themselves from the work, but also spurn
down that other men have built up: that see we teach nothing but the word of
God, and the doctrine of the primitive church: and yet least they should seem
to receive the doctrine which they have persecuted, enforce them selves to be
constant, and lay violent hands upon their own conscience, and say, Non
regnabit super nos, He shall not bear rule over us: and as Pharao said in the
hardness of his heart, Nescio Dominum. I know not the Lord.

I take not here upon me to judge other men's consciences: but such men there
have been, as we may know by reading, and as God has opened by notable
judgment, and I pray God there be none such now. I pray God there be none that
offend against their own conscience, and knowledge, and against the holy spirit
of God.

But alas, I speak not now of the ignorant and unlearned sort of people, that
offend of simplicity, and have a zeal of God, although it be not according to
knowledge: but I speak of them that be learned, that know well, that we
teach you nothing this day, but that Christ and his Apostles taught before us,
and was evermore freque^ted throughout the church, until al things grew to
corruption. And of the contrary part, they do know, and their consciences do
testify unto them, that their doctrine for the most part is contrary to the
use of the primitive church, contrary to the Apostles, contrary to Christ
himself.

Yet will these men sooner leave their living, then be present at the hearing
of an English prayer, or communicate with the people under both kinds. They
call it a schism to have the common prayers in a tongue that the people may
understand. To communicate under both kinds, they call it a schism. For the
Ministers to be married, they call it a schism. And other like things which were
tedious to rehear se at length. Those things which were ordained by Christ and
his Apostles, and used throughout the whole Catholic primitive Church
without question, they call schismatic.

O merciful God, shall we say, that all the whole world of the Christians,
ever from Christ's time, until the late time of these later Fathers, was in a
continual schism? Shall we say that S. Augustine, S. Ambrose, and other old
fathers, were schismatiques: Shall we say that Christ and his Apostles taught
us schisms: or that was once true, and Christian doctrine-is it now become a
schism? Is the Church now within five hundredth years become Catholic: and
was Christ's church, and the Apostles church, and the Doctors church not
Catholic: O Lord, if we be deceived, thou have deceived us: for if in these
doings we be schismatikes, for having prayer in a known tongue, or for
communion under both kinds, or for the marriage of Priests and Ministers,
where as thou gave thy communion under both kinds, and did choose such as
were married to be thy Apostles, and did pray in the common and vulgar
tongue, as also thy Apostle Paul taught us to do: If this be schism, we are
become schismatiques, for following thine example. and that ordinance which thou
have left unto thy Church.

But S. Hillarie shows, how we shall be sure to know an heresy or a schism.
He est regula fidei: Christus dixit, Apostolus dixit. This is a rule of faith,
to say, Christ has said it, the Apostle has said it. Christ says, Bibite ex
hoc omnes, Drink ye al of this, without exception, Paul bids us to pray so,
that the people may say Amen. And says, Honorabile coniugium in omnibus,
Marriage is honorable in all men. Then is this by Hylaries rule the Catholic
faith, and the contrary is Schismatic: for our faith is builded upon the
foundation of the Apostles and Prophets. S. Cyprian says, Non pax est sed
bellum, nec Ecclesiae iungitur, qui ab Euangelio Cyprian. Sermon 5. de lapsis.
separatur. It is no peace but war, no Catholic peace or unity, but open war
and schism: neither can he say, I am of the Church: that is divided from the
gospel. Justinius martyr, as it is reported by Eusebius, said, Ipsi Domino non
acquiescerem, si alium Deum diceret Ecclesia. histo. lib. 4. cap. 18.
praeter omnium Creatorem. I would not believe Christ himself, if he should say
there were another God then the creator of al things. If he would not believe
God himself, teaching otherwise then is set down by the word of God, much
less would he believe the Church, teaching contrary to the Gospel.

God of his mercy grant that al our controversies that we now stand upon, may
be heard and determined by Gods Gospel, and open the eyes of our adversaries,
that they may see the hope whereunto they are called. In the mean season let
not us shun or refrain them, but exhort and counsel them with all sobriety
in the spirit of meekness, as our brethren. Who knows whether God of his
mercy will call them to repentance? As God said to Saint Paul by
Revelation, Populus mihi multus est in hac ciuitate, I have much people in this
city: So I trust I may say, at least I doubt not but we may charitably hope,
God has a great number even among them that run to the Mass, that will yet
hear no reason, but are stubborn and wilful. Their hearts are in the hands
of God, and he is able, and will mollify them, and of stony will make them
fleshy, and of stones make them the children of Abraham, and the principal
corner stones in the building of his Church.

Other impedimentes there be, that keep men from the buylding of Gods house.
But that which GOD complayneth of by the Prophet, is, that every man fell to
build his own house, and left the house of God vnbuilded. This is the
corruption of our nature. Such things as we should glorify God withal, we
abuse most to the dishonor of God. Therefore Christ calls them thorns,
and the Mammon of wickedness, not because they are so of themselves, for they
are the gifts of God, but because our froward nature makes them so.

The man, as Christ says in the Parable, that was bid to the marriage
feast, sent word that he was married and could not come. Esaias says, The
harp, and viole, and Timbrel, and pype, and wine are in their feasts: but
Esaias. 5.
they regard not the work of the Lord. The fantasies and pleasures of this
life rauishe our minds and pull them clean from GOD. So says the Prophet,
You can have your houses sieled, and furnished: in the mean while, my House
lies forsaken. O that Aggeus the Prophet were now alive, and saw the
rearing up of Gods Temple here in England. What, think you he would say, You
build your own houses, and leave the house of God forsaken? Nay, he would
say, you build your own mansions, and pull down the house of God.

The Masters of the work, build benefice upon benefice, and Deanery upon
Deanrye, as though Rome were yet in England. The poor flock is given over to
a Woolfe: the poor children cry out for bread, the bread of life, and there is
no man to break it to them. The Noble man or Gentleman, the Patrones of
Benefices, give presentatations of benefices, either to be Farmours them
selves, or else with exception of their own Tenthes, or with some other
condition that is worse then this. The poor Minister must keep his House,
buy him Books, relieve the poor, and live, GOD knows how, and so do you
too.

O good my Lords and brethren, I come not hither to be a Patron for money
matters: GOD sees my heart before whom I speak it. But I see Gods Temple by
this means is forsaken. Young men, such as are of most to wardenesse turn
them selves to be Physicians, or men of Law: yea. Clearkes, or Apothecaries.
The matter is so used, that they are ashamed to be Ministers in Gods Church.
They should not so do, say you: no, neither yet you, as your dooinges are,
can be angrye with them. They are not Angels, but your own children, your
brethren, your Cousins, of your own affections, of your own flesh and blood,
and they think themselves too good to become your slaves.

O merciful GOD, at the beginning of the Gospel, every man brought his
goods, and laid them at the feet of the Disciples. Now every manne is
ready to pull out in a manner necessary sustenaunce, even out of the mouths
of Christ's Disciples. Then that that was every man's own, every man made it
common, and no man counted it to be his own. Now that appertains to
others, and is appointed to the building and preserving of Gods Church,, that
every man lays hands on, and counts to be his own. In the mean season,
the poor Uniuersities are neglected, the schools every where unfurnished,
the youth driven and chased away from the building.

Think of this in your hearts: Consider with your selves. There lack already
Ministers throughout the Realm; to teach the people, and to build up the
walls of Gods Church. One poor hireling is driven to serve two or three
Parishes. The sick has no man to comfort or counsel them: the dead have no
man to bury them: one man burieth another. That thing I know is not
material: yet it seems not so to al men, and our bodies are the Temples of
the holy Ghost, and ought reverently to be brought to their graves.

Uiew your Universities: view your schools which ever have been nourceries to
this purpose: alas, how many shall you find in both the Uniuersities, and in
all the Schools through England, not only that are already ripe, but also
that are minded to the Ministerye: If they be not found there, alas where
think you to have them: Where think you will they be found? Think you that
they will spring out of the ground, or drop down from the Heavens: No, no,
they be of you, and must be bred and reared amongst you. If there be none to be
found, nor hope of any to be hereafter: be you well assured that Acts of
Parliament, and Proclamations, are not enough to content the conscience of the
people, and to build up the Temple.

Oh, that the Queens Majesty knew the great scarcity, and miserable need of
Ministers that is abroad. And I beseech you good my Lords, and other
Honorable and Worshipful that are here, that have or may have access unto
her, to put her in remembrance, that her grace will be mindful of the house
of GOD, and redress the greediness both of corupt patrones, and of such who
engrosse and gather into their hands many liuinges, being them selves the
remnaunt of the ignorant and persecuting Babylon: and yet leave to take charge
over the people, blind Sir John's not only lack Latin, but lack honesty,
and lack conscience, and lack religion. It would be a great furtherance to the
Church of God, a wonderful way to increase schools and the Uniuersities.

Now remains the last part that I have taken in hand to speak of: that is of
the manner of the buylding. Where of, because y^ matter of it self is long,
and I scanted of time, I will speak two words, and so make an end. And what
better way can be devised to restore Christ's Church, then that we see used
by Christ himself: Christ, when he was apposed of the Pharisees in the case of
divorce, whether it were lawful for a man to put away his wise upon any kind
of matter, and to marry another, called them back to the scriptures, Ab initio
non fuit sic. Scriptum est. From the beginning it was not so: It is written.
And so in other places in like matters, he says, scriptum est: and ever
returns them to the scriptures. The same order used Esaias: Ad Legem, and ad
Prophetas: Have recourse to the Law and the Prophets. So Josias, so Ezechias,
so Iosaphat reformed the Temple of God when it was polluted, according to the
pattern of the Scriptures. For as Tertullian says, Peraeque ad vniuersas
Tertul. aduersus Praxeam.
haereses iam hinc praeiudicatum est, idesse verum quodcunque primum, id esse
adulterum quodcu^que posterius. By this rule, we may equally prescribe against
al heresies, that is true, y^ was first appointed, that is false that was
afterward devised. Saint Augustine says, In Seripturis didicimus Christum, in
Scripturis didicimus Exhortat. ad concoidiam Eccles. Tom. 2.
Ecclesiam: has Scripturas communiter habemus, quare non in eis and Christum
and Ecclesiam communiter retinemus? In the Scriptures we have learned Christ:
in the Scriptures we have learned the Church: these Scriptures we have
indifferently between us, why do we not after one sort hold Christ and the
Church by them. And again, where he writes against Petilian a Donatist, Non
audiamus, haec dico, haec dicis: De vnitat. Eccles. Tom. 7.
sed audiamus, haec dicit Dominus. Sunt certi libri Dominici, quorum
authoritati vtrique consentimus, vtrique credimus, vtrique seruimus: Ibi
quaeramus Ecclesiam, ibi discutiamus causam nostram. Let us not hear, thus I
say, thus thou say: but let us hear, Thus says the Lord. There be
certain books of our Lord, unto the authority whereof each part agrees, each
part believes, each part yields: there let us seek for the Church. thereby
let us examine and try our matters. This is the Rock upon which Christ has
builte his Church: against this Rock the gates of Hell shall not prevail.
Augustine speaks this in a pretty allusion: Non me aedificabo super te, sed te
aedificabo super me. I will not build my self upon thee, but I will build
thee upon me. The same affirms Hierome, Basil, Cyril, Hilarious, and other
the ancient writers. It would be too long to allege any more, only I will
recite unto you Lyraes judgment of these words, more for that he was one
that favored our Adversaries, then for the weight of his authority. Super
hanc petram, says he, id est super Lyra in 16. Matthew.
Christum: Upon this rock, that is, upon Christ: ex quo patet, quod Ecclesia
non consistit in hominibus ratione potestatis etc. Whereby it is manifest that
the Church is not among men, by reason of any Ecclesiastical or Seculare
authority or dignity: because many Princes and chiefest Bishops have
forsaken the faith: therefore the Church rests in those persons, in who^ are
to be found true knowledge, the confession of faith, and acknowledging of the
truth. Wherefore the foundation of this building; whereupon all the whole work
must rest, must be Christ and his holy word: for 1. Cor. 3.
as Saint Paul says, No man can lay an other foundation, then that which is
laid already, Jesus Christ.

The Emperor Domitian pretending a refourming of the Empire, which before his
time, Tyberius, Caligula, Nero, and other wicked Emperors had spoiled and
defaced. asked a Philosopher, one Apollonius Tyanaeus, what order were best to
be taken therein. Apollonius made him aunsweare, Sir, if it please your
Majesty, you must do as the Musition had his Scholars do. How is that,
said Domitian? Marye Sir, quoth Apollonius, there was a cunning Musition that
set his Scholars to an ignoraunte and homelye minstrell to learn music of
him: but before he sent them out he gave them this Lesson, whatsoever you see
your Master do, see that you avoid it, he is unlearned, and his Lessons and
manner of fingering, naught: therefore see you do the contrary. Even so may I
say, whatsoever we see that they have done, that were our later fathers before
us, that have destroyed Christ's Church, let us remember to do the contrary.
Their foundation as you know, and as they themselves confess, is ignorance:
let our foundation be Christ, and knowledge of Gods word. They have pulled the
Scriptures out of the peoples heads and hands, that no man might see their
doings. Let us exhort all men, as S. Chrysostom, Origin, and other holy
fathers did, to read the Scriptures, that all the world may see our doings.
They buyld Gods word upon the Church: let us, as Paul does teach us, buyld
the Church upon Gods word. They contrary to God, and contrary to his word,
have made the Bishop of Rome supreme head of the Church, contrary I say, to
the word of God have they made him supreme head of all the Church. These are
not my words, but S. Gregory, who was himself a bishop of Rome, says Greg.
lib. 4 epist. 32.
of them, Piae leges, venerandae Sinodi, ipsa Domini nostri Jesus mandata,
superbi atque pompatici cuiusdam sermonis inuentione turbantur. The godly
laws, the reverend Synodes, and the very commandments of our Lord Jesus, are
broken, by the invention of a certain proud and pompous name. And thereof as
Gregory himself testifies, has ensued Vniuersa pernicies, An universal
destruction.

Mark, I beseech you, and let it not out of your remembrance. They say, this
is the key of the Church, that one be the head of it, to rule it, and to
govern and keep in unity all the rest. But Gregory which was himself a
Bishop of Rome, says, it is Vniuersa pernicies, A general corruption and
plague of the Church. Let us according to Gods word, according to the Canons,
know, that as Cyprian says, Vnus est Episcopatus., cuius a singulis in
solidum Cypr. de fimp. Praelatorum.
pars tenetur. There is but one Byshopricke, part whereof is holden in whole, of
every several Bishop. And as Hierome says, Vbicunque fuerit Episcopus, sieve
Romae, sieve Engubij, Hieron. ad Euagrium.
five Constantinopoli. sieve Rhegij, sieve Alexandriae, sieve Tanais, eiusdem
meriti, eiusdem est and sacerdotij. Whersoeuer there be a Bishop, be it at
Rome, be it at Eugubium, be it at Constantinople, be it at Rhegium, be it at
Alexandria, be it at Tanais, they are al of one worthiness, they are al of one
priesthood.

They set the Pope above kings and princes, against Gods word. Let us know,
that according to Gods word, every soul must be subject to y^ higher powers.
In these things, and in all other the like, in which they forsake ye pattern and
original, and in which they do contrary to the scriptures, to Christ, and his
Apostles, contrary to the practice of the Primitive Church, and contrary to the
sound judgment of the ancient Catholic fathers, grounded upon the word of
God: let us remember, whatsoever they do, or have done, to do the contrary.
For it is not possible, by what means things have grown to corruption, that
by the same means they shall ever be well restored again.

After the Temple was builded, or was in building and rearing, Esdras the
Prophet read the Law of GOD, and sacrificed Oxen, sheep, and Lambs. and the
people wept in consider action that they and their fathers had so unkindly
offended God, and deserved so extremely to be punished at his hand. So the
good king Josias, after he had found the book of the Law, and saw how
highly both he and his fathers had offended God, he fell a weeping: (for the
consideration of Gods great benefits, and our own unworthiness, canseth us
to mourn at the sight of our own unkindness.) Then they turned (...) GOD,
repented themselves of their wickedness, and left such vanities as they had
walked in before. So Christ our Savior, when he began to preach the Gospel,
and to spread abroad the unspeakable treasure of our salvation, called us
first to repentance, and said, Poenitentiam agite, appropinquauit enim regnum
coelorum. Repentye, for the kingdom of God is at hand. Zachaeus when he had
received Christ to his table, repented him of his excortion, and made
restitution. Then Jesus said unto him. This day is salvation come unto this
house, forasmuch Luke 19.
as he is also become the son of Abraham. So the Christian men in the
beginning repented themselves, and changed their whole life, and therefore were
called Saints: as S. Paul uses in many places to name them, Vocatis Sanctis,
to those which are called Saints. And, sanctis qui sunt Corinthi, To the
Saints which are at Corinth. Pliny being a heathen, and set by the Emperor
to enquire of Christian men, made report in his Epistle to Traianus, that they
were a sect which would not offer up to Idols, which could not be compelled to
blaspheme Christ, but were wont at certain times appointed to meet together
and sing hymns to one Christ their God, that they were of one mind, and agreed
among themselves, and did abstain from theft, murder, and adultery, and did
keep their faith, and defra^^ed no man.

Even such should we be, thus ought we to live, these things are examples for
us to follow, we should meet often to sing hymns and give thanks to our God,
we should lament our former wickedness, wherwich we have called Gods anger upon
us.

But alas, there appears not in us that change of life that ought to be in
such as turn to Christ, we are as proud, as covetous, and wicked in abusing
the holy name of God, as ever we were in the time of ignorance. Thus we abuse
the great mercy of God, thus we withhold his truth in unrighteousness. We say
we know God, but give him not the glory that is due unto God.

And besides this, we are in love with our own corruption: and as the Prophet
says, we rejoice when we have done wickedly: we cannot abide to have our
fault touched, our pride is grown up as hie as heaven, our covetousness is
sunk as deep as hell, our poor weak brethren be offended, and think that
these be the very fruits of Christ's gospel. Yet we can in no wise suffer to
be reproved, we say to the Preacher, peace, and talk not to us in the name of
the Lord, tell not us of the Scriptures, tell not us of Christ, of Peter, and
Paul: we did him speak us fair, and bless those things that be accursed by
Gods own mouth. We say, he is too busy, he medleth with that he knows not.
Yes, yes man, he knows it well enough, he knows that pride is pride, that
usury is usury, that sin is sin: and thou and thine own conscience know
it too, if thou would be known of it: yea, thou know it, and indeed in
thy heart, of force art weary of it, And this is extreme misery, that we are
so far plunged in sin, that we can neither abide our own faults, nor yet
the amendinge of them. Is this the repentance of our life? Are these the
fruits of Gods Gospel? are these the fruits of the innocent blood, that we
see shead before our eyes? Are these our tears for the sins we have
committed? Is this the thanks that we render unto God, for giving unto us so
great blessings? But, what said I, blessings? Would God we were so blessed,
that we might consider our blessedness. Many already bewray the weakness of
their stomakes, they brook not the Gospel: yea, they seem already weary of
these Preachers, they call them Pulpit men, men of the spirit, and I know not
what: as though they themselves had nothing to do with Gods spirit. Ha
merciful God, what way may GOD take to win you? Alas, what are we? what
have we offended you? Are we become your enemies, for tellinge you the truth?
I fear me, this murinuring is not against us, but against the Lord.

You have had the Mass, and that you worthily hated: you have now the
Communion, and that you regard not. God has sent to call you with fire and
fagots: those which used that severity and cruelty, you called tyrants. He
has sent unto you now simple men, that bring you nothing else, but the
kingdom of God, and seek for nothing, but only for your salvation: and them
you disdain. It is eue^ now come to pass, that Christ said, We have piped to
you, and you Luke 7.
have not danced: we have mourned to you, and you have not wept: but wisedoms
is justified of al her children. Many of you are even full of the gospel, and
full and weary of these schoolemaisters. Therefore shall God send amongst you an
other manner of schoolemaister, y^ shall entreat you after another sort, that
shall pull the pride from your necks, and the ruffes from your shaulders, I
will say (I would God I might not speak thus in ye spirit of truth) I would
to God it might prove untrue, and never come to pass.

But God is just, and the extreme disdain of Gods truth, and his holy
Gospel, justly deserves the extremity of Gods vengeance: and this Gospel,
that you are already so weary of, shall be taken away from us. The kingdom of
God shall be taken away from us, and shall be given to a nation, that shall do the
fruits of it. The kingdom of God, which is the true understanding of Gods
word, shall be taken away. And the^ what shall remain, but blindenes and
falsehood, which is the kingdom of the Devil. I will send (says God) a famine
in the land, not a famine Amos (...).
of bread, nor a thirst of water, but of hearing the word of the Lord.

Let us therefore, good brethren, remember for what causes God suffered his
temple at Jerusalem, to be destroyed and burnt by ye Chaldees: let us remember
wherefore God took from us his holy Gospel that he had planted amongst us of
late time: let us now thankefully receive it, with tears, and repentance for
our former life: let us not make our selves unworthy of the great grace and
blessing of God. To you this holy promise is made, you are the children of
Abraham,, to you Christ spreads out his arms to embrace you: receive not the
grace of God in vain, let us not put out that heavenly light, which God has
kindled, let us pray to God to give us new hearts, and to put a new spirit
within us Why should you perish, you that are so dearly saved? why should you
perish, O you the house of Israel? Let us once fall to the building up of Gods
holy temple, let us not drive it off any longer.

The Foxes have boroughes, and the birds of the air have nests, but the Son
of man has not yet a place to rest his head in. God calls to us by the
Prophet, Bring wood; and build this house, and I will be favorable in it. Is
it time for your selves to dwell in your sieled houses, and this house lie
waste? Your houses are fresh and fair furnished, and yet my house lies
desolate, flat upon the ground. Behold the miserable desolation of my holy
place, my flock is scattered in the mountains: behold your brethren ye lie in
chains in a thousand places bound, beaten, tormented, and drawn to most
cruel death, not for any offense they have committed, but only for the building
of my temple: and professing of my name. They are your own body, flesh, and
blood. My bones are scattered upon the face of the earth, my blood is shed
without compassion, as it were water upon ye ground. O what cruel eyes have
you, that can see this, and not be moved? that can buyld your own houses, and
serve your own pleasures, and leave my house forsaken?

Thus almighty God speaks to us, O good brethren, let us not despise his
calling, let him not speak to us in vain, let us no longer say, it is not yet
time to build up the Lords house. God has raised up unto us a most virtuous
and noble Lady, that has already set laborers a work, and begun the
building Let us remember, that the Chaldees, when they came to Jerusalem, never
strayned courtesy, or said, It is not yet time to pull down the house of God:
they laid hands on it, and spoiled it, they burnt it without mercy, even unto
the ground. Let us not in Gods cause be more negligent, then our enemies were
against God. Let every man say with himself: It is Gods temple that must be
built up, it is the heavenly Jerusalem, it is the ark of the Lord, it is the
Lords business that I have in hand: accursed be he that does the Lords business
unfaithfully.

And you, my Lords, forasmuch as God has planted you in chiefest honor, and
made you the greatest overseers of his work, I beseech you, even for his sake,
when you see your own houses so furnished, as is meet for your estates,
remember the poor house of God. When you see your men waiting and attending at
your Tables, remember how few there be to wait upon Christ at his table.
When you consider that your own houses cannot be mainteyned without
provision, remember there be provision made for the house of God. Let ye zeal
of Gods own house ravish and devour our hearts, let us build up the cabernacle
of the most holy, and dreadful, and ever living God: so will God dwell and
abide with us, and be glorified in the midst amongst us.

And thou most merciful father, deal favorably with Sion, that we may see
the walls of thy Jerusalem restored. For now is the time of thy mercy come
upon us, now is the time. And as thou have begun this work in us, in these our
days, so vouchsafe to bless the same, that it may endure, and continue for
ever, that all the world may know thee, the only true and living God, and thy
Son Jesus Christ, whose Gospel thou have revived amongst us. To whom with
thee, and the holy Ghost, be al honor and glory, world without end.

Amen.
Psalm. 69.
Certain learned and wise men of old time, that had no understanding or savor
of god, when they considered with themselves to what end and purpose mankind
was create and set in this world, after they had driven the matter, as far
as they might by natural knowledge, at length, they concluded: some, that man
was made to know the properties and qualities, the conuenience, or difference
of natural things, either in the air, or in the water, or in the earth, or
under ye earth. Some other, that man was made to consider and behold the Sun
and Moon, the stars, the course, and reuolutions of the Heavens. And so,
they judged that man, which either had most abundance of natural reason, or
beheld and considered the heavens best, to be most perfect of all others, and
that he came nearest to the end of his creation. Thus said they, as men
without feeling of God, only endued with the light of nature.

But (as God himself declares, who fashioned us, and made us, and knows us
best) the very true end why man was made, was to know, and to honor God.
Therefore, who so knows him best, and honoreth him with most reverence, he is
most perfect, he comes nearest the end of his creation.

When Solomon had described the deceyuable vanities of the world, and said,
Vanity of Eccle. (...).
vanities, vanity of vanities, al is vanity: when he had concluded by long
discourse, that riches, empire, honor, pleasures, knowledge, and whatsoever
else under the Sun, is but vanity: he knieteth up the matter with these
words, Fear GOD, and keep his commandments, Eccle. 12.
for this is the whole duty of men. That is, this is truth, and no vanity:
this is our perfection, to this end are we made: not to live in eating and
drinking, not to pass our time in pleasure and follies, not to heap up those
things, which are daily taken from us, or from which we are daily taken
away: but that in our words, in our life, in our body, and in our soul we
do service unto God: that we look above the Sun and Moon, and all the
Heavens: that we become the Temples of the holy Ghost: that the holy spirit
of GOD may dwell in us, and make us fit instruments of the glory of God.

Therefore God gave us his holy word, and has continued it from the beginning
of the world until this day, notwithstanding the Philosophers, and learned
men in all ages, who scorned it out, as the word of f^llie* for so it seems
to them that perish: Notwithstanding the wicked Princes, and Tyrants, and high
^omers of the world, who consumed and burnt it, as false and wicked, or
se^^tious doctrine* notwithstanding the whole world and (...) of darkness
(...) ever bent against it* yet has he wonderfully continued and perserued it,
without loss of one letter, until this day, that we might have whereby truly
to know him the true and only God, and his son Jesus Christ whom he sent.

Therefore have we Temples and Churches, places to resort unto altogether, to
honor, to worship, and to acknowledge him to be our god, to join our hearts
and voices together, and to call upon his holy name. In such places God has
at all times used to open his majesty, and to show his power. In such places
God has made us a special promise, to hear our prayer, when soever we call
upon him. Therefore are they called the dwelling place and house of GOD. In
such places al godly men evermore set their greatest pleasure, and thought
themselves miserable, when they were seciuded or put off from the same: as the
Prophet and ^oiy prince David, Laetatus sum in his quae ^icta sunt (...),
Psalm. 122.
in domum Domini ibimus. O (says that holy man) my heart rejoiced within my
body, when my fellows called upon me, and said, Let us go into the house of
the Lord. Again, I am in love with the beauty of thy house. And again, O how
beautiful is thy tabernacle, O Lord, O thou y^ God of hosts, my heart longs
and faints to come within thy courts. His spirits were ravished with the
sight and majesty of the tabernacle: not for y^ the place it self at y^ time
was so beautiful, for in David's time it was almost rotten, and ruinous, a
homely thing to behold, nothing in comparison to that temple that afterward was
built by Solomon. But therein stood the show and worthiness of that holy place,
y^ Gods truth and law was opened and proclaimed in it, and the sacraments,
and ceremonies so used, in such form and order, as God had commanded them to
be used, and the people received them obediently, and lived thereafter.

Therefore when the tabernacle was restored, when the Arc was fet home from
Obededom, and set in the mount Sion: when Religion revived, which through the
negligence and malice of Saul was forsaken: when he saw his nobility, his
Bishops, his Priests, and all his people willing and forward, he could not
refrain him self, but brake out and song, Haec est dies, quam fecit Dominus,
exultemus and laetemurin ea. This is the day which y^ Lord has made, let us be
glad and rejoice in it. Let us be merry, and joy that ever we lived to see it.
Even so Paul when in his time he saw the Gospel take root and prosper, and
that the savor of life was powered abroad, that the kingdom of God was
enlarged, and the kingdom of Satan shaking down, his heart leaped, and sprung
within him. Ecce nunc tempus acceptabile, Behold now that acceptable time,
behold God has looked down mercifully upon the world, behold the day of
salvation is come upon us.

But the godly man, as he rejoices at the beauty of Gods house, so when
contrariwise he sees the same disordered filthily, when he sees the
Sacraments of God abused, the truth trodden under foot, the people mocked, the
name of god dishonored, he cannot but lament and mourn, and find himself
wounded at heart. When the good king Josias saw the book of god, which was so
long hid in y^ wall, and out of remembrance: when he considered the blindenes,
in which they had lived, and the unkindness of their forfathers, he could not
forbear, but fell a weeping: he feared least god would take vengeance upon
the^ for so great contempt of his word. When Jeremy saw the wilfulnes, and
frowardness of the people, Ierem. 9.
which would not submit themselves, and be obedient unto god, he cried, Oh,
that my head were full of water, and mine eyes a fountain of tears, that I
might weep day and hight etc. Such care had they for Gods people: thus the
zeal of Gods house had eaten them up.

Zeal, if any man know not the nature of the word, is an earnest affection and
vehement love, as is the love of a mother toward her children, or of ye
natural child toward his mother. This zeal cannot abide to see that thing
which it loves, despised or hurt. Such a zeal and care carries God over his
people, he loves them as a mother loves her little children: he will not
suffer them to be hurt. By ye Prophet Esai he says, Can a woman forget her
child, and not have compassion on the son of her womb? though Esa. 49.
they should forget, yet will I not forget thee. Zachary also says, He that
touches you, touches Zach. 2.
the apple of his eye. For God has said, they shall be my people, and I will be
their God. Such care likewise hear all the godly toward their God, they love
him with all their soul, with all their heart, with all their strength: they
reverence him as their dear father, they are grieved at any blasphemy, and
with any contempt of his holy name.

But, as every man be he never so wicked, yea even he that says in his heart
there is no God, which is become filthy and abominable in all his doings, yet
in his talk outwardly says he has a God, and that he believes in him: even
so there is none so wicked, or so forsaken of God in his heart, but he
persuades himself he has the zeal of GOD: and what he does in self love
of his own fantasy, he will bear in hand, he does it for the love of God.
The ouerthrowers and wasters of the Church, will seem to show a special care
for the Church. Dissemblers, hypocrites, despisers, scorners, even such as
sin against the holy Ghost, which deny the truth of God after they have
known it, which witting and knowing fight against the truth, which say of
Christ, we will not have him to rule over us, which work that sin that shall
never be forgeuen in this world, nor in the world to come, yet
notwithstanding will pretend and seem to have the zeal of God.

Thus the Scribes and Pharisees set up their bristles against Christ: thy
Disciples keep not the common fast: thou suffer them to put and to eat the
ears of corn: thou suffer them to eat with unwashed hands: thou breakest
the tradition of the Elders: thou breakest the Law of God, which he gave us by
Moses: thou art a seditious teacher: thou art a schismatike, thou art an
Heretic. They said, we fast twice in the Week: we have Abraham to our
father: we are Moses Disciples. Therefore when they heard Stephen speaking
those heavenly words, Behold, I see the heavens open, Acts 7.
and the Son of man standing at the right hand of God, through zeal they
gave a shoute with a loud voice, and stopped their ears, and ran upon him al
at once.

When Christ had said, Ye shall see the son Mark. ^4*
of man sit at the right hand of God, and come in the clouds of heaven: the hie
priest through zeal rent his clothes, and said, Ye have heard the blasphemy.
This naughty man speaks blasphemy against God. He called a Council, the
Scribes and Pharisees met together, not one man amongst them but of themselves:
they looked about them, as if they only were the pillars and buttresses of the
church, and were only zealous and careful for the house of God. But their
meeting was (as David forespake, and as Peter declares, and as we know)
against the Lord, and against anointed. They were touched with zeal of their
own glory, and not with the zeal of Gods truth. They sought their own
praise, but not the praise which is of God. They made crakes that they knew
the scriptures, that they were the Temple of God, that they had the consent of
al antiquitye: as others have done since that time, and as we see many do this
day, and in very deed, these men now have even as much as they had then, as by
proof and trial it will appear.

There are others, which have a feeling of God, and a great care for his
Church: but such a feeling and care as comes either of their own fantasies,
or of some opinion and credit they have in their Fathers which were before
them, not of the understanding of Gods pleasure. Such are they which offend
God, not of malice or wilfulness, but only for lack of teaching and
understanding. Such were they which withstoode Saint Paul in all his
preaching, for that they took him for an Heretic, and thought his preaching
was against God. I bear them witness (says he) that they have the zeal of
GOD, but not according to Romans 10.
knowledge. Such a zeal have many who forbid that God commands, and command
that which God forbids. Such a zeal had Paul himself, I was a blasphemer,
and a persecutor, (...). Tim. (...).
and an oppressor: but I was received to mercy, for I did it ignorauntly
without belief. Such a zeal have they, who think they do God good service,
when they kill and murder the righteous and good servants of God. Such a zeal
have they, who (as says Nazia^zen) defend Christ against Christ, and defend
the church against the church. And these things do they, not of malice, nor of
wilfulnes, nor against their conscience, but, because they know not God the
father, nor his Christ who^ he has sent. Therefore they tru^ble at Christ, and
spurn away the gospel of God, and think ill, and speak evil of the word or
life, because they know not the Gospel of God, nor the word of life. Thus they
persuade themselves, that they defend the Church, that they honor the son of
God, that they do God great service, and that they have the zeal of God.

But this pride was ever in the heart of man, and it appeared even in our
Graundsire Adam: whatsoever likes us well, we think that cannot but please
GOD. Such is the opinion we fondely conceive in our fantasies: in trust
whereof whatsoever we do, we think our selves sure and safe. Origin writing
upon the place of the Origin. in 10. Romans lib. 8.
Apostle, Zelum Dei habent, sed non secundum scientiam, They have the zeal of
God, but not according to knowledge, says, Similiter potest dicere Apostolus
and de alijs, quod timorem Dei habeant, sed non secundum scientiam, de alijs
etc. In like manner the Apostle may say of others, they have the fear of God,
but not according to knowledge: of others, they have the love of God, but not
according to knowledge: of another, he has the faith of God, but not according
to knowledge: And another may be said to fast, but not according to knowledge.
And so in all things whatsoever we do, unless we have knowledge and
understanding, it may be said unto us, that we have the zeal of a good work;
but not according to knowledge. Ideo danda est praecipue opera scientiae, neres
nobis infaeliciter accidat. vt in fide positi frustremur a fide, zelum habentes
bonorum, decidamus a bonis. Therefore al heed is chiefly to be given to the
attaining of knowledge; least it go not well with us, least we fail from our
faith, when we think we believe, and thinking we have a zeal of good works,
we be found void of all good works. The wise man says. This was not
enough Wisd. 1^.
for the^, that they erred in the knowledge of god: but whereas they lived in
great wars of ignorance, those so many and so great plagues they called
peace. The zeal that they had, and the contentation of their hearts made them
believe that all their superstition and idolatry, and other enormities was
Catholic unity.

This zeal, as on the one side it has many tokens of goodness, for that it
has a conscience, and a fear, and an obedience toward God: so, on the other
side it is very dangerous, because it lacks knowledge: even as a ship for
lack of a Gouernaur is ever in danger of the rocks, and as the body which
has no eye, is ever in danger of falling. Such kind of zeal, the greater it
is, the worser it is: the more vehement it seems, the more vthementlye it
fights against God. For, our good meaning makes not our doings good: our
zeal is not a rule, whereby we may measure our either our faith, or our
works: but only the known will and pleasure of God. Therefore speaks God
in this manner by the prophet Esai, my thoughts are not your thoghts, neither
are your ways Esaias. 5^.
my ways. Therefore says Solomon. Trust in Prou. 3.
the Lord with all thine heart, and lean not to thine own wisdom: in all thy
ways acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy doings. This counsel also does
Moses give, Take heed that ye do as the Lord your God has Deuteronomy. 5.
commanded you: turn not aside to the right hand, nor to the left.

But the true and godly zeal proceeds not from hypocrisy or intention, but
is led and trained by understanding, and is moulten into the heart, and the
vehemence and heat of it, no man knows, but he that feels it. It takes
away the use of reason, it eats and deuoureth up the heart: even as the thing
that is eaten, is turned into the substance of him that eats it: and as iron
whiles it is burning hot is turned into the nature of the fire: so great and so
just is the grief that they which have this zeal conceive, when they see Gods
house spoiled, or his holy name dishonored. So says Elias, I have been very
ielous for y^ Lord God of hosts: for the 1. King. 19.
children of Israel have forsaken thy covenant, broken down thine altars, and
slain thy Prophets with the sword, and I only am left, and they seek my life
to take it away. So when Moses found that the people had forsaken God, and were
fallen down before a moulten calfe, and did put their trust in the work of
their own hands, his wrath waxed hot, and he cast the tables Exodus 32.
out of his hand, and brake them in pieces beneath the mountain. His heart was
so inflamed with zeal, that he considered not what he had in his hand, nor
what he did. Jeremy, when he saw the disorder of the people, and how they
were not mended with his preaching, and would inwardly conceal the grief he
conceived, and purposed not to make mention of the Lord, nor to speak any
more in his name: yet could he not, for his zeal found way, and brake out, His
word (says he) was in mine Ierem. 20.
heart as a burning fire shut up in my bones, and I was weary with forbearing,
and I could not stay.

And, albeit there is much likeness between the rage and fury of hypocrites,
and the godly zeal of good men: for either are hot, either are vehement,
either wishes redress: yet this is an evident difference: godly zeal is
tempered and seasoned with charity, the ungodly is joined with bitterness and
revenge: ye godly seeks to win, the ungodly to kill and to destroy. The
ungodly have their hands full of blood, they kill the Prophets, they say, We
have a law, and by our law he must die. They say, Come, let us destroy them,
that they be no more a nation.

Let not the name of Israel be had any more in remembrance. They burn the holy
books of the Scriptures, as did Aza and Antiochus. They say, ransake it, pull
it down, case it to the foundation, let nor one be left alive. They dig up
the bodies of the dead, out of their graves. They show their cruelty upon the
bones and ashes, which were long before buried, and well nigh consumed. It
grieueth them when they lack upon whom they may whet their blood thyrstie
and cruel zeal. It grieueth them, no one thing else so much, that they did
not work surely, and cut up the root. Such is the zeal of the ungodly. Even
such a zeal as was in Nero, in Caligula, of whom it is reported, he wished
that all the Romans had but one neck, that he might cut off all their beads
at one stroke: as was in Herod, in Annas. and Catphas, and the like murderers.

But the Godly, when they see any disorder, they do nothing like the other:
they mourn in their hearts to see that the truth is not rereyued, and to see
the minds of their brethren so obstinately hardened: they make prayer to God
for them: they are deeply touched with the feeling of such calamittes which
GOD lays upon other. The zeal of Moses could not like the Idolatry of the
people: yet he went unto the Lord again, and said, Now if thou pardon
their sin, thy mercy shall appear: but if thou will not, Exodus 3*
I pray thee raze me out of thy Book which thou have written. Christ
lamented over Jerusalem: O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, M^^h 23*
which killest the Prophets, and stonest them which are sent to thee, how
often would I have gathered thy children together, as the hen gathers her
chickins under her wings and ye would not? Behold, your habitation shall be
left unto you desolate. Paul suffered much at the haudes of the wicked Jews:
They troubled ye church of god, they hindered ye course of the gospel, they
were enemies of the Cross of Christ, they were Dogs, they were con^^sion.
Yet he says, I have great heauenes, and continual sorrow in mine heart: for I
would Rom 9.
wish my self to be separated from Christ, for my brethren and are my kinsmen
according to the flesh, which are the Isralites

David says, Mine eyes gush out with rivers Psa^. 18.
of water, because they keep not thy Law, And again, My zeal has even
consumed me because mine enemies have forgotten thy words. Again, I saw the
transgressors, and was grieved, because they kept not thy word. And when he
saw the whole nation of Israel, wasted by the enemies, how mournful a
complaint made he to god: O god the heathen ax Psalm. (...).
come into thine inheritance: thine holy temple have they defiled and made
Jerusalem heaps of stones. The dead bodies of thy servants, have they given to
be meat unto the fowls of the heaven, and the flesh of thy saints unto the
beasts of the earth. At this time wh^ the tabernacle was lost, when Saul was
unquiet and the Priests were s^ayne, and the Prophets despised, and the people
lef without al comfort, he powers out his hear in these words, Zelus domus
tuae comedit me, O Lord, the zeal I bear unto thine house has eaten me up.
It inflameth my heart, dries my blood, consumes my marowe. Such a care had
be for the house of God: it was death unto him to see it so destroyed and
laid wast.

So Christ, when he saw the temple of God fowly and unseemly abused: that
they made the holy place, a place for their unlawful and vnhanest game by
usury: that they turned Religion into robbery, sold oxen, sheep, and doves,
and keept their banks for exchange in the temple: when the Priests and
Levites, which should serve God, were become marchantes, and served them
selves: when the temple or house of God, which David purposed, and Solomon
finished, and Ezechias and Esras, and other Godly Princes preserved, in which
was kept the book of the Law, whether all the people assembled together to
serve God, was not used like gods house, but like a common fair or market, and
was made a den of theiues: When these gross abuses were suffered, and things
were let run to such extremities, and all this under pretense of holiness, as
if it were not only lawful, but needs it must be so: moved with zeal, he
could not abide it. He made a scourge of small cords, and drove them all out
of the temple, John. (...).
and poured out the changers money, and overthrew the tables, and said, make
not my fathers house a house of marcha^dise. And his disciples remembered that
it was written, the zeal of thine house has eaten me up. This was no
frantique or melancholy passion, neither in Moses, nor in David, nor in Christ.
Moses Number. 12.
was a very meek man above all that were on the earth. David was a man that
hears not, and in whose mouth are no reproves. And Christ said, learn of
me, for I am humble and meek. When his disciples James and John, grew
wrothfull against the Samaritanes that would not receive him, and said, Lord,
will Luke 9.
thou that we command that fire come down from heaven, and consume them,
even as Elias did? He turned about and rebuked them and said, ye know not of
what spyrite you are. Yet through zeal for Gods house, Christ whypped out the
buiers and sellers, David shed forth tears abundantly, and Moses dashte in
pieces the tables of Gods commandments. Al men ought to be pacient and gentle
in matters appertayninge to them selves: but in Gods cause, no man must yield
or be patient.

In our days, upon whom the end of the world is come, when we did lately
see those times, where of our savior foretold so long s^theuce, that
desolatio^ should be in the holy place, and such confusion, ignorance, and
blindenes, that men should stomble at noone days, that truth should be a
stranger upon earth, that men should forsake wholesome doctrine, and give ear
unto fables, that the mystery of iniquity should work, and the very elect (if
it were possible) be deceived, what trial was made of true and godly zeal:
How notably did it show it self against the rage and fury of the wicked: What
should I speak hereof: The examples are fresh, you can not forget them you
heard of them so late, it is so late since you did behold them. What moved so
many, so learned, so virtuous, to yield their backs to the scourge, their
necks to the tormentours, their bodies to the fire, to forsake their goods,
their friends, their parents, their wives and children, but the zeal of Gods
house: Neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor things present, nor things to
come was able to separate them from the love of God. They continued steadfast
unto the end: the zeal of Gods house did eat them up.

But now God has restored us, he has taken away the desolation from us, he
has given us his truth, he has revealed the man of sin, he has raised up
a banner of hope. We se and enjoy such things as many kings, and Prophets
would have eniayed, and could not. What remains, but that we take the zeal
of the Lords house into our hearts, and seek by all means the glory of the
same: As our good fathers and brethren showed the vehemency of their love in
disly king the disorders which troubled ye church of God: so in this blessed
peace which God gives to his Church, let us witness our earneste zeal in
seeking that it may be made beautiful, and established for ever.

Let our next care be to continue possession. Kingdoms are preserved by the
same means, by which they were first gotten. That which is conquered by zeal,
by careful zeal must be kept. It was said of Annibal, that he knew how to
get the victory, but how to use it, be knew not. Many have lost that by
negligence, which they had by diligence won. Therefore we ought, as our
hearts were careful, and desirous to see these days: so by our thankefulnes
to God for so great blessinge, and by Christian and Godly providence foresee
such means, whereby we may long hereafter enjoy the same. When Phydias had
made the pourtraiture of Jupiter Pisanus, he ouerlayed it with oil, yt it
might continue fresh and green, and never putrify. When God gave order to
Noah for Genesis 6.
making the Arc, he said, Thou shall pitch it within and without with pitche,
that it might be sound, and sure, and abide the waves.

He, which chalengeth to himself, that proud and wanton name, to be called
the head of ye universal church, after by little and little he was gotten into
possession, was not behind hand by all means to maintain and keep the same.
In this policy, he took away the reading of the scriptures from the people:
he made noble men and princes his Cardinals. He threw down, and set up, and
changed whom, and what he would. The kings and states of the world, ye bishops,
professors and scholars in universities, and preachers were brought to swear
allegea^ce and obedience unto him. I devise not this, the stories hereof are
abroad, and ye oath which they took is known. His authorite grew greater the^
the authority of general councilles. Nothing might be decreed in councels, but
what pleased him: none might be admitted to speak in cou^cils, but such as were
sworn to him. He had al law in his breast. There was sometimes a proclamation
made in Rome, yt for considerations no man should erect or build up any
theater: and that if any were set up, it should be rased, and pulled down.
Pompeius a gentleman of great wealth, and noble courage, did build a theater,
such a one as before had not been seen, which would receive 2500. men,
contrary to ye proclamation, and order taken. But, dubtinge least the next
maiestrates should destroy it, he caused a place of religion to be set upon
it, and called it the temple of Venus. Whereby he provided, yt if any would
overthrow it, because it was a Theater, they might yet spare it for the temples
sake: for to pull down a temple was sacrilege. Even so, there have been
proclamations, and cannons, yt no man should be called ye chief, or ye head
of al Churches, or usurp such authority over others: but when ye Pope built
up his supremacy against the meaning of such canons, he pretended religion
for his doing: he said, it was de iure diuino, yt no man should presume or
attempt against it, and yt so his power might continue for ever.

If they have been thus careful to maintain falshod, how much more careful
should we be to maintain ye truth: If they to advance their own kingdom, how
much more we, to set forth the kingdom of God, and to build up the Church of
Christ: And if they sought to do yt by lies, and by false means, why should we
be slack to use the right, and true, and good means, whereby that good thing
which God has wrought for us, may be established:

And, albeit there be many ways, by which the kingdom of God may be
maintained: as the favor and countenance of ye prince, which so comforts
and cherishes ye Church, as the sun beams comfort and cherish the earth:
and knowledge, and learning, and discipline, which are as the life, and the
sinues, and without which the Church must needs fall asunder: at this time, I
will leave to speak of the rest, and only stay upon learning, which may truly
be called ye life or ye soul of ye Church, and of christian religien.

How necessary a thing, they have counted learning to the settinge forth of
Religion, the stories of our old fathers, of heathens, and Christians in all
ages, do witness. They thought, that neither Religion might stand without
knowledge, nor knowledge were to be esteemed without Religion. Charles the
great, that he might the better plant Religion in Saxony and Heluetia, did
erect many places for increase of learning. He knew well, that there was no
other way better to establish Religion. The Cathedral Churches, before such
times, as ignorance and blindness grew over all the world, and brought in
an universal corruption, maintained schools of learning, that the doctrine
which was taught in those places, might be defended against the gaynesayers by
such learned men, as were there bred up. The Princes of Germany, and the free
Cities, after they had received the Gospel, they dissolved their monasteries
which had been harbourers for such as lived in idleness, and set up Schools and
colleges, which should be nourceries to breed up learned men, that might be
able to teach the people, and to maintain religion. Whereby it came to pass,
that in short time they had great store of worthy and learned men.

This did they well see, that have been the enemies of religion, and therefore
used all means to hinder the increase of learning, that they might have the
better way to overthrow Religion. For if learning decay, it is likely that
Religion can not abide. Bear with me, if I speak that which may seem more
fit for some other place, then for this audience: the best here understands
me well. In other countries, the receiving of the Gospel, has always been
cause, that learning was more set by: and learning has ever been the
furtherance of the Gospel. In England, I know not how, it commethe otherwise
to pass. For since the Gospel has been received, the maintenance for
learning has been decayed. And, the lack of learning will be the decay of
the Gospel. Would God it were not so: or, that yet before the fault be
incurable, there may be some redress.

Loath I am to speak, yet the case so requires, that it is needful to be
spoken, I trust I shall speak in the hearing of them that will confider it.
Maintenance of learning, whereby an able and sufficient ministry may grow,
and be established in all the Churches of this realm, is to be wished for. The
good estate of this noble kingdom, y^ comfort of posterytie, y^ stay of
Religion, the continuing of the Gospel, the removing of darkness hangs upon
it. One asked sometimes, how it was that in Athens so goodly and great a
city, there were no Physicians, To whom this answer was made, because there
are rewards appointed for them that practice Physic. The same answer may be
made for our times: the cause why y^ Church of God is so forsaken, is the want
of zeal in the^ that should either for their courtesy, or for their ability be
fosterers of learning, and increase the livings where occasion is, and give
hope and confort to learned men. What said I, increase^nay, the livings and
provision which hertofore were given to this use, are taken away.

Have patience, if any such be here, as I well know there are, whom these
things touch. Suffer me to speak the truth, it is Gods cause. The livings of
such as are in the ministry, are not in their hands, to whom they are due. Al
other laborers and artificers have their hire increased double, as much as it
was wont to be: Only the poor man that labors, and sweateth in the
vineyard of the Lord of hosts, has his hire abridged and abated. I speak not
of the Curats, but of Personages and Uicarages, that is, of the places which
are the castles and towers of fence for the Lords temple. They seldom pass
now a days from the patron, if he be no better then a gentleman, but either
for the lease or for present money. Such marcha^ts are broken into y^ church of
God, a great deal more intolerable the^ were they who^ Christ chased and whipped
out of y^ temple. Thus they y^ should be careful for Gods church, that should
be patrones, to provide for y^ consciences of the people, and to place among
the^ a learned Minister, who might be able to preach y^ word unto the^ out of
season, and in season, and to fulfill his ministry: seek their own, and not
y^ which is Jesus Christ's. They serve not Jesus Christ, but their belly. And
this is done, not in one place, or in one country, but throughout England. A
gentleman cannot keep his house, unless he have a Parsonage or two in ferme for
his provision.

O merciful God, whereto will this grow at last? If the misery which this
plague works, would reach but to one age, it were tolerable. But it will be a
plague to the posterity, it will be the decay and desolation of Gods Church.
Young men which are toward and learned, see this. They see that he which
feeds the flock, has least part of the milk: he which goes a warfare,
has not half his wages. Therefore they are weary and discouraged, they
change their studies: some become prentises, some turn to physic, some to
law: all shun and flee the Ministry. And besides the hinderance that thus
grows by wicked dealing of patrons: by reason of the impropriations, the
Uicarages in many places, and in the properest market towns, are so simple,
that no man can live upon them, and therefore no man will take them. They were
wont to say, Beneficia sine cura: Benenefices without charge: but now may be
said, Cura sine beneficio, Charge or cure without benefice. I speak not this
of my self: many here present know I speak the truth. And my self know the
places, which have continued still these many years without a Minister
resident among them, and have provided them selves, as they might, with their
own money.

Your Graces subjects had hope of amendment, in your graces late visitation.
But yet it stands still in case as miserable, as it did before. I know, your
grace hears not of these matters. And I hope God will work in your gracious
heart, to provide some remedy against them. For otherwise, the schools will be
forsaken, the Church desolate, the people wild and dismayed, the Gospel
discredited: otherwise, we shall see that wrought against the house of God,
that never any Jeroboam, or Julian, or Licinius, could have brought to pass
against us. This noble Realm which ever was famous for the name of learning,
is like thereby to come to such ignorance, and barbary, as has not been
heard of in any memory before our time.

I know that there are grievous complaints made, that the Bishops appoint
Priests and Ministers, that are ignorant and have no understanding in the
latin tongue. Would God it were not true. Or would God that they which be the
causers hereof, would somewhat help to amend it. But alas, are we able to
make learned men upon the sudden? Or can we make others then come unto us, or
will come to live in misery?

But there are many which can say, such as be ministers in the Church,
should teach freely, without hope of recompense or hire for their labor. Our
preachers are no better then Peter and Paul, and the other Apostles. They are
no better then the holy prophets, who lived poorly. Poverty is a commendable
estate. So say some, in like devotion as did Judas, What needed this wast? this
might have been sold for much and given to the pore: not that he cared for the
pore, but because he was a thief, and had the bag, and bare yt which was
given. I doubt not, there are many which teach Christ for Christ's sake, which
say in their soul, ye Lord is my portion: who in that heavy time, from which
God delivered the^, if they might have received their life only for a
recompense, would have bin glad to take the pains: who seek you and not
yours: which have forsaken all they had, to follow Christ. I doubt not, there
are such.

But for yt hope of posterity, I report me to al you which are fathers, and
have children for whom you are careful. Although your selves have a zeal, and
a care for the house of god: yet will you breed them up, keep them at school,
until 24. years old to your charges, that in the end they may live in
glorious poverty? yt they may live poorly and naked like the Prophets and
Apostles and Our posterity shall rue, that ever such fathers went before them:
And Chronicles shall report this contempt of learning among the punishments,
and murraines, and other plagues of God. They shall leave it written in what
time, and under whose raygne this was done. Or if we grow so barbarous that
we consider not this, or be not able to draw it into Chronicle, yet foreign
nations will not spare to write this, and publish it to our everlasting
reproach and shame.

In the mean time, what may be ghessed of their meaning, which thus rauine
and spoil the house of God, which decay the provision thereof, and so basely
esteem the Ministers of his Gospel? They can not say to God, the zeal of thy
house has eaten me up. Howsoever in other things they do well, howsoever they
seem to rejoice at the prosperity of Sion, and to seek the safety and
preservation of the Lords anoy^ted: yet needs must it be, that by these
means foreign power, of which this realm by the mercy of God is happily
delivered, shall again be brought in upon us. Such things shall be done unto
us, as we before suffered: the truth of God shall be taken away, the holy
scriptures burnt and consumed in fire. A marvelous darkness and calamity
must needs ensue. For if the tempest be so dark in the sea that the load
star lose her light, and the needle fail to give token of the North Pole, no
marvel though the Ship lose her course, and be swallowed up in the sands.

The Gospel of Christ is the fountain of light, and of knowledge. It cannot
be maintained by ignorance and darkness. These, be the proppes of their
kingdom which take away ye scriptures, which hold the people in blindenes,
which fly the light, which have their common prayers, minister the
Sacraments, Mary, bury their dead in a strange tongue, that the People may
understand nothing: which make a famine of hearing the word of God: which stop
up the springes of the water of life: which take away the Keys of the
Kingdom of Heaven, and neither enter in them selves, nor suffer them that
would enter: which say ignorance is the mother of devotion, and the Church is
then in best order, and the people most devout, when they are hood winckt, and
blinded, and see nothing.

These are not fit instruments, wherewith we may overcome the adversaries. This
is not ye sword of the spirit, these are not the spiritual weapons, which cast
down holds, and every high thing that is exalted against the knowledge of God
What man that would keep out his enemy, will pull down his holds? what
captain that means to give a forcible assault upon the enemy, will
discourage his fighting soldiers? but our soldiers are out of courage, our
Castles are falling: therefore that which we fear will fall upon us,

The ox that treads out the corn is musseled. He that goes a warrefare,
receives not his wages: the cry hereof goes up into the ears of the Lord of
Hosts. He will not abide so great contempt of his word, and preachers: his
own name is thereby dishonored. Our savior says, He that dispiseth you,
dispiseth me. And S. Paul, He yt despises these things, despises Luke 10.
1. These. 4.
not man but god. And think we, that he will suffer his holy name to be
despised? Nay, his wrath is already kindled. He has already begu^ his
judgments, and therefore many places are left desolate. There is none that can
warn them of their sin, none that can move them to repentance, none that can
preach unto them forgeuenes through Christ, none that can instruct them in the
comfort of everlasting life. Because they work such things against the Lord,
the hearts of many are astonished. Though they hear, they understand not. They
scorn and ieste at the word of salvation: it is unto them a savor of death
unto death: they are earthlye minded, whose God is their belly, and whose
glory is to their shame.

For this cause you live still in your sins, in adultery, in couetousues,
and in pride, without any feeling of conscience, without any fear of God. Your
daughters, your heirs, to whom you shall leave your lands, are stolen away
from you, Robberies and theft are so common, as if it were not only lawful,
but also commendable: as if sin were no sin, and he I fire but a fable.

Thus we provoke God to anger. Many walk, of whom we cannot think but with
weeping: they are the enemies of the cross of Christ: the name of God is
blasphemed through them. Many are so ignorant, they know not what the
Scriptures are, they know not that there are any Scriptures. They call them
heretical, and new doctrine. Many will believe neither side, whatsoever they
allege. Bring they truth, bring they falshoode: teach they Christ, teach
they Antichrist: they will believe neither, they have so hardened their
hearts. Be the Preacher rough or gentle, learned or unlearned, let him use
authority of the scriptures, of the doctors, of the councels, of Decrees or
Decretalles, of Gods Law, of man's law, nothing will move them, nothing will
please them, because the ministry of God, and there by God himself, is
despised.

These words happily seem sharp, and over vehement: but the hardness of
our hearts against GOD, and the lack of zeal of his house, enforce me to
them. We are almost fallen into the lowest pit: we are left without zeal, as
senseless men, and as if we had clean forgotten our selves, as the Heathen
which know not God. Therefore, unless we repent, the kingdom of God shall be
taken away from us. He will send upon this land a famine of the word.
Jerusalem shall be ouerthrown, and made an heap of stones, the man of sin,
and they which have not the love of the truth shall prevail with many, and
withdraw them from obedience to the Prince: this noble realm shall be subject
to foreine nations: all this will the zeal of the Lord of hosts bring to
pass.

I could have spent this time in opening some other matter: but nothing in my
judgment is more worthy your good consideration, and speedy redress. I would
be loath rashly or rudely to abuse the reverence of this place: but unless these
things be cared for, unless we show forth greater zeal then hitherto, if the
years to come eat up and take away from the Ministry as the late years
have done, there will not be left within a while, any to speak the word of God
out of this place. The Pulpits shall have none to use them: the people shall
grow wyld and void of understanding.

When Xerxes beheld the great company of his Soldiers, suddenly he brake
into tears, and wept bitterly. One said to him, O Sir, you have cause to
rejoice, you have a goodlye company, they are able to fight for you against
any nation. But what shall become of them, says Xerxes? after a hundred
years: not one of all these shall be left alive. If the view of the small
number of Preachers might be taken, how few they are, and how thin they
come up, we have greater cause then Xerxes to lament, if we have any zeal to
the house of GOD. For, of the Preachers which now are, within few years none
will remain alive. And Xerxes soldiers left issue behind them, which might
afterward serve their Country: But there is like to be small increase for
the supply of Learned men. The Lord shall lack men to bring in his harvest,
the little ones shall call for bread, and there shall be none to give it them.
They that shall come after us, shall see this to be true. There is no house so
spoiled, as the House of the LORD. There is no Servant so little rewarded as
the Servant of Christ, and the disposer of the mysteries of God.

Oh that your Grace did behold the miserable disorder of Gods Church, or that
you might foresee the calamities, which will follow. It is a part of your
kingdom, and such a part, as is the principal proppe and stay of the rest. I
will say to your Majesty, as Cyrillus sometimes said to Ciril. epist. ad Theod.
and Valen.
to the godly Emperor Theodosius and Vale^tinia^, Abea quae erga Deum est
pietate, reipublicae, vestrae status pendet: The good estate and welfare of
your common wealth hangs upon true godliness. You are our Governor, you are
the Nource of Gods Church. We must open this grief before you. God knows if
it may be redressed, it has grown so long, and is run so far. But, if it
may be redressed, there is no other besides your Highness, that can redress
it.

I hope I speak truly, that which I speak without flattery, that God has
endued your Grace with such measure of learning and knowledge, as no other
Christian Prince. He has given you peace, happiness, the love and true hearts
of your subjects. Oh turn and employ these to the glory of God, that God may
co^firm in your Grace the thing which he has begun. To this end has GOD
placed Kings and Princes in their state, as David says, that they serve the
Lord, that they may see and cause others to see to the furniture of the
Church. The good Emperor Justinian cared for this as much, as for his life.
Constantine, Theodosius, Valentinian, and other godly Princes, called
themselves Vasallos, the subjects and bond servants of God. They remembered that
God furnished them in their houses, and were not unmindful to furnish his house.

When Augustus had beautified Rome with setting up many fair buildings, he
said, Inueni lateritiam, marmoream reddidi. I found it made of brick, but I
leave it made of marble. Your grace when God sent you to your inheritance, and
the right of this Realm, found the church in horrible confusion, and in
respect of y^ true worship of God, a church of brick, or rather (as Ezechiel
says) daubed up with unseasoned mortar. Your grace has already redressed the
doctrine: now cast your eyes toward the Ministry, give courage and
countenance unto learning, that Gods house may be served: so shall you leave a
Church of God, and a testimony that the zeal of the Lords house has eaten
you up.

And you, O dearly beloved, if there be any such which are neither hot nor
cold, which do the work of the Lord negligently, which esteem the word of GOD
but as a matter of policy, which are ashamed to be called Professors of the
Gospel of Christ, pray unto God that he will increase your zeal. Let us
continue rooted and built in Christ, and stablished in the faith. Let us have
care for the house of God. Whosoever is not after this sort zealous, is a man
of a double heart. We may not halt between two opinions. If the Lord be God,
follow him: but if Baal be he, then go after him: he that is not with Christ,
is against him. Many talk of the Gospel, and glory in their knowledge: but it
is neither talk nor knowledge which shall save them in that day. He that
fears the Lord, and serves him with a pure heart, and may truly say, the
zeal of thine house has consumed me, he shall be saved. If they shall not
escape which have zeal without knowledge, what shall become of us which have
knowledge without zeal:

And you, whosoever you are, that by such means have decayed the Lords House,
and abridged the provision and maintenance thereof, and see the miserable
wrack of Gods Church: if there be any zeal of God in you, if you have any
fellowship of the spirit, if any compassion and mercy, if you love God, if
you desire the continuance of the Gospel, oh remember you have the patrimony
due unto them that should attend in the Lords house: you take unto your
selves wrongfully, that which was not lotted for you. Give unto Caesar those
things which belong to Caesar, and unto GOD the things which appertain to
him, and make for the beauty and furniture of his house. Enrich your selves by
lawful means, and without the spoil and waste of Gods Church. Let not the
Ministry by your means be despised. You enriched them, which mocked, and
blinded, and devoured you: Spoil not them now that feed, and instruct, and
comfort you. Let us seek the glory of God. Let us at length serve the Lord
and not our belly, and greedy wantonness.

So shall God bless you and prosper you in all your affairs, so shall he strike
a terror of you into all foreign Princes that dwell about you, so shall your
heart be kept steadfast in the hand of God, so shall your heart be perfect
before the Lord, so shall you leave such as shall always praise the Lord in
Sion, so shall you see your childrens children, and peace upon Israel.

And, thou O most merciful Father, grant that thy words be not spoken in
vain: it is thy cause. Thou art our father, we are as claye in thine hands.
Thou have the key of our hearts: Give zeal to them that have knowledge, give
knowledge to them that have zeal, that they may be inflamed and ravished with
the love of thy house, to sorrow for the decay thereof, and to do al their
endeavor to build up and establish the same for ever,

Amen.
Matthew 9.




CHrist our Savior, after he was baptized by John and tempted by Satan in the
wilderness, began to execute y^ Commission whereunto his father had sent him,
chose unto him self a number of disciples to be at his commandment, and so
took his progress through a great part of the Country. In the mean way, in
every place where he came, he taught the people that the kingdom of God was
come amongst them: he healed their diseases: wrought strange miracles before
their eyes: and gave many singular and evident tokens of his coming.

But specially, he beheld in what state the poor people stood, touching their
readiness in receiving Gods truth, in all the country where he had been: and
therefore at the end of his circuit, he was moved with pity, and said, he saw
the^ in most woeful case, forsaken and lost, as if they had been a flock of
sheep without a heard: and that not through their own malice, but through the
wilful blindness and negligence of them that were set to guide them.

Sheep (as Aristotle and Pliny write of them) are a simple kind of cattle,
profitable to many uses, ready to receive all manner wrongs, without skill, to
help or succor it self: it coueteth to break out of the fold or close, if
it may epsy any hole open, it strayeth and wandreth abroad, many times
hangs in the briers, many times is taken up by the Wolf: it is ever in
danger of the wynd and rain, yea, of the very grass and water it lives by,
and thereof is infected oftentimes with a number of maladies: so that the
health and safety of the sheep, rests only in the care and diligence of the
shephearde. To such a kind of cattle are the people likened.

Christ says not, they were like unruly sheep, that would not be guided by
their heard: but he says. They were like poor lost sheep, that had no heard
at al. For, the people of themselves were not unwilling to receive the Gospel:
but there was none to instruct them. And for that, he adds an other
similitude, to declare the same, and says, The harvest indeed is great, but
the workmen are but few: the corn is ripe, and ready to be cut, but there lack
hands to fetch it in.

The coming of these times was promised long before, even from the first
creation of mankind, but the perfourmance thereof at the first was dark, and
as it were wrapped up, and hid in a cloud, and like corn buried in the ground.

After, it was somewhat more clearly set forth in the Law given by Moses.
After that, it was revived by the Prophets, and in manner plainly, in what
place, at what time, of what mother, of what house or stock Christ should be
borne: what doctrine he should teach, what miracles he should work, what death
he should die, how he should be buried, how he should arise, how he should
ascend into heaven, how the heathens should be called to believe in him, how
the holy Ghost should be sent, and to conclude, how Christ should come at the
last, to judge the world. After that came Saint John the Baptist, to point out
Christ plainly with his finger, and to say, Ecce agnus Dei, qui tollit peccata
mundi, Behold the lamb of God, that takes away the sins of the world.

Last of al, Christ himself began to preach and prophecy of himself, and
to gather unto him a chosen people, that should be followers of good works.
Then was the accomplishment and fullness of time come to pass, that had so
long been looked for: then the kingdom of God began to suffer violence, and
men violently even by force, brake in upon it: then the corn sowed and cast
into the ground by the patriarks long before, and watered and cherished by the
dew of the Prophets, was ripened and kerned by the spirit of God: then was the
harvest great, and the ears white, even ready to be cut.

Yet this notwithstanding, Christ says, the harvest men are but few. He says
not, the Harvest is great, and there are but few Scribes, but few Pharisees,
but few Sadduces, but few priests, but few Levites: For the Priests and Levites
were distributed through ye whole country. In every little Town or borough
there was a college, and as one of their Rabbines records, in y^ city of
Jerusalem there were no less then 400 schools: so that the number was almost
infinite.

Moreover, they used commonly to say, as it is reported by the Prophet leremie,
Non peribit Hier. 18.
Lex a sacerdote, nec consilium a sapiente, nec sermo a Propheta. It cannot be
that the true understanding of the Law should be taken from the Priest, nor
good counsel from the wise, nor the word from the Prophet. They read and
expounded the Law to the people every day: they had their daily sacrifice, and
whensoever the ox, or calfe, or sheep, or goat was slain, and offered unto
God, as then the manner was, the priest for his share had the breastlet that
covered the heart, in token, as Origin writes, that the Priest should be a man
of counsel. He had also appointed to him the right shoulder, and the tongue, in
token that he should be prompt and ready in good works, and eloquent to declare
the law of God.

The Bishop had evermore before his breast a tablet, wherein was imbrodered in
letters of Gold, Vrim and Thumim: in token that he should be a man both
perfect in life, and also full and plenteous in the truth of God. In the same
were set twelve stones, and therein graven the names of the twelve tribes of
the people, that he might have the^ evermore in remembrance. The skirtes or
hemmes of his roabes were set with belles of gold, and pomegranates: in token
that his life should give a good savor, and his voice should ring, and be
heard among the people.

The Pharisees had certain special points, and sentences of the Law written
round about in the borders of their garments, that it might never be out of
their eyes: they prayed, no men more, and that in every corner of the streets:
they fasted twice every week: the bed that they lay upon, as Epiphanius
writes, was but a spanne broad, and yet, that they might sleep with less
ease, they strowed thorns underneath the^. Briefly, all their life in
appearance was such, and al their apparel and behavior so seemly and decent,
that if a man would paint out wisdom, sobriety, and perfect holiness, he
could have no better pattern. And therefore they were called Pharisaei, that
is, divided, as men in holiness and perfection of life far passing all the rest
of the people.

Yet for all this, notwithstanding their great show of wisdom, of learning,
of perfection of life, and the great multitude of them, Chrst says there were
few workmen to go to the harvest. For, They did prophecy out of their own
Ezech. 13.
hearts, they did not rise up in the gappes, nor made up the hedge for the house
of Israel to stand in the battle in the day of the Lord: they have seen
vanity, and lying divination, saying, the Lord says it, and the lord has not
sent the^: and they have made others to hope that they would confirm the words
of their prophecy, says Ezechiel.

No, contrariwise, these that should have been the chief harvest men, were the
wasters and destroyers of the harvest, My people (says God) Iere. 50.
has been as lost sheep: their shepherds have caused the^ to go astray, and
have turned them away to the mountains. Christ telleh the Pharisees, they
have made his fathers house a den of thieves. He speaks thus of them. All
John 10.
that ever came before me, are thieves and robbers. Notwithstanding their
stout learning and show of holiness, they were nothing else but thieves and
robbers: they did rob men's souls, chey stale the sheep out of the fold,
they spoiled God of his glory.

When they saw the people follow thick after Christ, and to have him in
reverence, they cried out, none of the Princes and great holy learned men
believe in him, but these Rascals, that thus run after him, are accursed, and
ignorant, and know not the law. The unlearned sort said of Christ, he casts
out unclean spirits by y^ power of God: y^ great learned men said, no, he
throws out devils by y^ power of Beelzebub, y^ prince of y^ devils. The
unlearned marueiled, and were astonished at y^ wonderful works that he did: the
learned said, he has a devil, he is out of his wits. The unlearned said, no
doubt a great Prophet is risen amongst us: the learned said, He deceives the
people. The unlearned said, God has visited, and sent comfort amongst his
people: the learned said, Behold a glutton and a companion of Publicans and
sinners. The great learned shepherds persecuted Christ, and chased him from
place to place: the poor sheep followed him into the desert. They that were
the guyders of the flock, crucified Christ, and shed his blood: the poor
flock set their whole affiance in his death, and so drank his blood to the
relief of their souls, they believed in him, they knew the time of their
visitation.

And therefore, notwithstanding there were gross and damnable errors amongst
the people, as well as amongst the learned: yet Christ challenged not the people
for them, but only y^ priests and the Pharisees that took upon them to lead
the people: for that he saw the Pharisees and priests offended eue^ of malice,
and the poor people only of ignorance and simplicity. Woe be unto you Mat. 3.
Scribes and Pharisees, that have taken away the keys, and shut up the kingdom
of God before the people, and neither will you enter in your selves, nor suffer
others that would gladly enter.

But, as for the people, he had compassion on them, for that he saw they were
forsaken, and perished even as sheep without a heard: that they had a certain
zeal of God, although not according to knowledge: that they fell into the
pit, not of wilful malice, but only because they followed the blind guydes,
that fell before them: that they were Gods harvest, and lay abroad, and were
lost, and no man would take the pains to fetch them in.

Saint Paul was not only lead away by ignorance, but also was a most earnest
persecuter of the Church of Christ, yet was he a portion of Gods harvest. And
therefore as soon as GOD had stricken him down from his horse, he knew he had
done amiss, and cried out, Lord, what Acts 9.
will thou that I do? and after, he writes of him self, God has had mercy,
and taken me to his grace, because I knew not what I did.

Many there were that cried out upon Christ, crucify him, crucify him: and
after when he hung upon the cross, nodded their heads upon him, and made mowes
at him, and did him al manner of spite and vilany, and yet pertayned they to
Gods harvest, and afterward, as it is credible, were crucified for him, and
shed their blood for him themselves:

Even so are there, even at this time, many that of ignorance persecute the
Gospel of Christ, and as it were crucify Christ again: which if they felt
indeed, that it were the Gospel of God, they would not so little regard their
own salvation. God make them to be of his harvest, and send out laborers to
fetch them in.

Whenever we begin to feel a lack within our selves, and can suffer our
selves to be infourmed, and taught by the Spirit of God, then may we be assured
God will take us for his harvest. Plato the old Philosopher imagines, that the
god Love was borne of the Lady (...), that is to say, Madame lack or
necessity. For, no man loves a thing, before he feel himself stand in need
of it: so, love is the Child, and lack or need is the mother.

Saint Augustine writes of himself, that before he became christened, a
friend of his offered him the Scripture to look upon: but he, after he had
read a little, because he felt in himself no lack of it, he despised it, and
^long it from him. Afterward he began to find much follye in himself, and
because he could see no redress, he fell to weeping and prayer. In the midst
of his mourning and groaning, he heard a voice, Toll, lege: toll, lege. Take
up, and read: take up, and Aug. confess. lib. 8. cap. 12.
read. He marueiled much what it should be. At the last, he took up a book
that lay by him of Paulos Epistles, and the first words that he set his eyes
upon, were these, Induimini dominu^ Iesum Christu^, Put ye on the Lord Jesus
Christ.

S. Hierom writing upon the prophet, Nahum, In Nahum. cap. 3.
says, In aduentu Messiae, populus qui fuerat cons^pitus sub magistris,
excitabitur, and ibit ad montes scripturaru^. What time Messiah shall come, the
people that were lulled a sleep in ignorance by such as should have been their
teachers, shall awake, and get them forth to the mountains of the Scriptures.

And Chrisost. upon the Genesis, Si desit ministerium hominis, ipse Dominus
superne illustrabit Hom. 30.
mentem nostra^. If the ministry of man be wa^ ting, the Lord himself will
lighten our mind from above. And Christ in the Gospel of S. John, John 10.
says, My sheep hear my voice, and follow me, and they will not follow a
stranger, but fly from him. And to conclude, whosoever feels a lack within
himself, and can suffer himself to be informed and taught by the spirit of
God, he may be assured, God will take him for his harvest. Thus was the harvest
great, the laborers very few, the scatterers and wasters, almost infinite. This
was the state of the Church at the coming of Christ.

Even likewise, in these our days, Christ our savior has gone abroad in
progress, and done marvelous cures, and showed strange miracles among his
people, and has caused his gospel to ring throughout the world. And as he said
then, eue^ so may it now be said, Messis multa. The harvest is great, and
marvelous forward: yea, even there where as no worldly hope of harvest could
have been. Many there are that hunger and thirst after the kingdom of God,
which is the knowledge of his Gospel: many that are yet green and ignorant,
many that lie by the way side, and yet have gathered no root, many that as yet
are but tares and darnell, I mean blind and obstinate, but when Gods holy
will shall be, may be turned into good corn, and pertain to his harvest.

But the laborers are few. I say not, there be but few Cardinals, few bishops,
few priests, yt should be preachers, few Archdeacons, few Cha^celors, few
Deanes, few prebendaries, few vicars, few parish Priests, few monks, few
friars: For the number of these is almost infinite. Gregory Nazianzene in his
time, complained at the multitude of Priests, and said, they were almost as
many as the rest of the people.

And Justinian the Emperor in his time, was feign to restrain ye number of
the^, and to give commandment, that in one cathedral Church there Co^ci. ^om.
3. council. delect. cardinalium.
should never be above 60. priests, and 100. deaco^s. The like order was taken
in a general counsel, for the abating of the multitude of monks, and friars.

And in the book called opus tripartitum, joined to ye council of Laterane
these words were Council. ^om. 2
written, Totus fere mundus obloquitur, and sca^dalizatur de multitudine
religiosorum pauperu^, qui introierunt in mundum, qui non iam religiosi, sed
trutannij vocantur. Welneare yt whole world cries against, and is offended at
the great multitude of begging monks and friars, which are entered into the
world, and now for their behavior, are called not religious men but varlets.
These be the words of the Council.

The number of these is great: but alas, the number of laborers is very small.
And yet they give a show to the world, that they be pastors and feeders of
the flock, that they be the fathers of the people, that they be the teachers
of the multitude, that they be the laborers in the harvest, that the whole
Catholic Church stays altogether upon them.

They give the Bishop of Rome these titles, that he is the only key of
Christian faith, that he is greater then the Apostles, for that they could
err, and he cannot: they say, he is Christ's Uicar, whereas indeed to any
man's sight, Christ may be contented to be his Uicar. They say, he is no bare
man, but a god, as it is written in the Decretals of Nicholas Pope, and many
other the like, which I leave.

The Pope calls the Cardinals. Cardines mu^di etc. The very hooks and stays
of the world, upon whom the door of the church militant must be turned.
Another says: As a door turns upon the hook, even so ye church of Rome is
ruled by the Cardinals. Therefore they have pillars and pollares carried before
the^, in toke^ that they be the pillars and stays of the Church: and pollaxes,
to beat down al evil doctrine.

And what shall I speak of bishops? their cloven miter signifies perfect
knowledge of the new testament and the old. Their crosiars staff, signifies
diligence in atte^ding y^ flock of Christ, Their purple boots and sandales,
signify y^ they should ever be booted, and ready to go abroad through thick and
thin, to teach the gospel. And thereto they applied the words of the prophet,
Quam speciosi pedes euangelizantiu^ pace^, eua^gelizantiu^ bona? How beautiful
are the feet of the^ which bring glad tidings of peace, which bring glad
tidings of good things: but alas in what kind of thing do, they bear
themselves for bishops These mystical titles and shows are not enough to
fetch in the Lords harvest: they are garments more meet for players, then for
good laborers. S. Bernard writes thus to Eugenius y^ bishop of Rome, who
sometime had bin his scholar. Thou which art the shepherd, iettest up and down
De co^siderat. ad Eug. lib. 4.
shining in gold, and gorgeously attyred: but what get thy sheep? If I durst
speak it, these things are not the fodder for Christ's sheep, but for devils.
Whatsoever apparel they have upon them, unless they will fall to work, Christ
will not know them for laborers.

How then can the bishop of Rome be taken for y^ chief pastor of Christ, which
these 900. years has not opened his mouth to feed the flock: These 900
years. I say, since Gregory the first of that name, it can hardly be found,
that ever any bishop of Rome was seen in a pulpit. One of themselves, Adrianus
4. a bishop of Rome, was wont to say, Succedimus non Petro in doce^do, sed
Romulo in parricidio. We succeed not Peter in teaching, but Romulus in
murdering.

And in a canon of the Apostles it is decreed, that the bishop that teaches
not his flock, should be deposed. To which purpose they allege S. August:
Episcopatus, nomen est operis, no^ honoris: Aug. deciuit. Dei. lib. 19. cap. 19.
vt intelligat se no^ esse Episcopu^, qui vult praeesse, non prodesse. A
Bishops office is a name of labor, not a name of honor, that he which coueteth
the place of preemine^ce, and has not a desire to do good, may know he is
not a bishop. Thus says Orige^, thus says Chrisostom, thus say diverse others
of the old fathers, who^ it were long and needeles to rehearse. Multi
sacerdotes, Chri. hom. 43. in opere imperfecto in Mat.
pauci sacerdotes, says Chrisost, multi nomine, pauciopere. There are many
priests, and few priests: many that bear the name, but few that be priests
indeed. Thus the harvest is great and plenteous, but the laborers are but few.

The laborers are but few, but the destroyers and wasters are exceeding many,
yea, such as should be the harvest men, most of al destroy the corn. I will not
here report that I am well able, that your eyes have seen, and that many of
you have felt, the state of our time has been such. Saint Bernard saw it in
his time, and therefore says, Omnes amici, and omnes inimici: omnes necessarij,
and Sermon. 33. in Cantica.
omnes aduersarij. Al are friends, and al are enemies: all are helpers, and al
are adversaries, or hinderers. Again, Heu, heu, Domine Deus, ipsi Bern. ser.
1. in conuers. S. Pauli.
sunt in persequutione tua primi, qui vide^tur in ecclesia tua primatum
diligere, gerere principatum. Alas, alas, O Lord god, they are the chiefest in
persecuting thee, that seem to love the highest rooms, and to bear rule in thy
church.

The time being so short as it is appointed me, will not suffer me to speak of
the^ that even now hinder Gods harvest: and being such men as should stay the
people, as much as they may do by their example, disquiet and disturb the^ y^
withstand at this time, and resist your graces doings, not in dark or doubtful
matters, wherein something may be said on both sides, but in such things, as they
the^selus do know were appointed by Christ, published by y^ Apostles, received
by the old doctors, and used, and frequented in y^ primitive and catholic
Church.

Why then will they not receive them? Christ himself gives the reason: Quia
dilexeru^t magis John 12.
gloria^ hominum, quam gloriam Dei. Because they loved the^ praise of men, more
then the praise of God. They know they should danger their credit, if they
should once again turn,

Why would not the Pharisees suffer y^ people to believe in Christ: Cyrillus
makes answer, Ciril. in Ioh. lib. 8. cap. 1.
Quia quicquid Christo credentium accesserit, sibi detractum putabant. This was
y^ cause says he, for y^ they thought, how many soever faithful came unto
Christ, so many were lost from the^. And therefore they had lever keep the
traditions of their elders, the^ hazard their estimation.

And Chrisost. upon the same matter says, Cu^ Chrisost. in Mat. hom. 52.
timerent ne principatum amitterent, ceu legum latores, vt maiores esse
videre^tur, multa innouabant, quaeres ad tanta^ peruenit nequitia^, vt
praecepta sua custodire^t magis qua^ mandata dei. Lest they should lose their
authority, as if they had bin law makers, men able to stablish and ordein
laws, to the end they might seem greater, they altered much, which thing (in
the end) grew to such a wickedness, y^ they kept their own commandments more
then the commandments of God. Thus even now the Lords harvest is great, the
laborers few, and the destroyers and hinderers above number.

O lift up your eyes, and consider how the hearts of your poor brethren lie
waste without instruction, without knowledge, without the food of life, without
the comfort of Gods word, such a misery as never was seen among heathe^s. The
Turks have teachers sufficient for their people, the Jews, albeit they have no
stayed country, but live in banishment, and wander about, yet have they their
Teachers: the Christians which this day live in India, Aethiopia, Barbary,
Moorelande, and other places under the persecution of heathen princes, yet have
their instructours in true religion. The Christians in old time, when they
lived under tyrants, and were daily put to most shameful death, and were hated,
and despised of all the world, yet never lacked ministers to instruct them. It
is therefore most lamentable, that Christians living under a Christian prince,
in ye peace and liberty of the gospel, should lack learned ministers to teach
them, and instruct them in the word of God: this is the greatest plague, that
God does send upon any people.

Contrariwise, the greatest blessing which any people ca^ receive at Gods
hands, is to have prophets and preachers, by who^ they may be instructed. When
y^ prophet declares y^ mercy of God toward Israel, y^ he would put an end to
their afflictions, and bring the^ home again from Babylon, he says thus,
Behold (says the Lord) I will send Iere. 16.
out many fishers, and they shall fish the^. In the like sort says Esai, How
beautiful upon y^ mountains are the feet of him, that declares, and Esaias. 52.
publishes peace? that declares good tidings, and publishes salvation,
saying unto Sio^, thy god reigns? The voice of thy watchme^ shall be heard,
they shall lift up their voice, and shout together. And Baruch: Nor the Agare^s
that sought after wisdom upon the earth, nor Baruch. 3.
the marcha^ts of Nerra^ and Thema^, nor the expou^ders of fables, nor the
scarchers out of wisdom, have known the way of wisdom. There were the gia^ts,
famous from the beginning, that were of so great stature, and so expert in war.
Those did not the Lord choose, neither gave he the way of knowledge unto the^,
but they were destroyed because they had no wisdom, and perished through their
own foolishnes. He has found out all the way of knowledge, and has given it
unto Jacob his servant, and to Israel his beloved. And again, Baruc. 4.
O Israel, we are blessed: for the things that are acceptable to god, are
declared unto us. He has not dealt so with every nation, neither Psalm. 147.
have they knowledge of his judgments, says the Prophet David.

But when God takes away his ministers which should preach peace, and open
unto the people the will of God, and make known his judgments, it is a token
that God is highly displeased with his people. Where there is no vision, the
people Prou. 29.
decay: they know not what to believe. Of this misery speaks Iere. The young
children Lamen. 4.
ask bread, but no man breaks it unto them. Of this speaks Esaias, The poor
and Esaias 41.
needy seeks water, and there is none. They would have some counsel, some
comfort, and there is no man to give it them. My sheep Ezech. 34.
wandered (says God) through all the mountains, and on every high hill: yea,
my flock was scattered through all the whole earth, and none did seek or
search after them. They were full of diseases, they were pined for hunger, and
taken up by the wolf, but none had care to deliver them.

In such state as the flock is in, which has no shepherd: or the ship
which is tossed by the tempests amiddes the surges and rocks of the Sea, and
has no skilful Pilote to guide it: or the young sucking child, that has no
nource to feed it: even in such stace are your souls, if you have not the
ministry of Gods word abiding with you. You are children, the Preacher is
your nource: you are a ship in danger of many wreckes through the boisterous
tempests of this world, the Preacher is your Pilote to guide you safely
toward the haven of rest: you are the flock, the Preacher leads you from
dangerous places, to feed upon the whole some pastures of Gods holy word.
Whosoever they be which rejoice not in the increase of the Lords harvest, he
forsakes them, and leaves them comfortless, and gives them few or no
laborers.

Wherefore pray the Lord of the harvest, that he would send forth laborers
into his harvest, It is the Lord which casts the first seed into the
earth, which does moysten the ground, and makes it fruitful, and gives
forth his sun, that it may come to ripening. All the soil, field, corn, and
the husbandry thereof is the Lords. Let us pray to him to send forth laborers
to travail and take pains.

Notwithstanding we ought to pray to God, that he will stir up and set
forth men to instruct his people: yet that nothing embarreth the authority of
princes. For, as God calls him inwardly in the heart, whom he will have to be
a minister of his word: so must he be authorized of his Prince by outward and
civil calling, as I could show at large, if time would suffer it.

So Solomon the king deposed Abiathar the high priest, and set up Sadoc. So
Justinian deposed two bishops of Rome, Siluerius, and Vigilius, and authorized
others. And the same Justinian was wont to say, that he had no less regard to
the Church of God, the^ he had to his own soul. So Constantinus, Valentinianus
and Theodosius called themselves Vasallos Christi, The vasals of Christ. And
Socrates in his story says. We Socrates li. 5. in prooemio.
have also herein comprised the Emperors lives, for that sithence the
Emperors were first christened, the affairs of y^ church have depended of
them, and the greatest counsels both have been, and are kept by their advise. It
pertains therefore also to kings and Princes to send out laborers into the
harvest.

Laborers they must be, and not loyterers. For Christ compares the teaching
of his people to things that be of great labor, as to plowing and fallowing
of the ground, to planting of a Uine, to rearing of a House, to threshing of
Corn, to feeding of sheep, to leading of an Host, and keeping of war: in
which things is required much diligence and labor.

Cato in his books of husbandry, says it was an old saw among husbandmen, Qui
terram colit, ne sedeat: est enim aliquid semper quod agat. He that plougheth
the ground, must not sit still: for he has always somewhat to do. The work of
the husbandman is never ended, he falloweth, stirs, sows, harroweth,
weedeth, and tends his land.

Therefore, if they he Pastors, let them feed the flock: if they be
Doctors, let them teach the people: if they be watchmen, let them stand upon
their watch: if they be messengers, let them do their erraunt. This is the
way to build up the Church of Christ. This commission Christ gave unto his
Disciples, Ite in mundum vniuersum, etc. Go ye into all the world, and preach
the Gospel unto every Mark. 16.
creature. Thus by twelve poor Apostles all the world was conquered: Princes
and kings, and Emperors were subdued to the faith of Christ. This is the key
that opens the conscience, this is the two edged sword which enters through,
even to the dividing asunder of ye soul and the spirit. Therefore the Apostle
says, The weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but 2. Cor. 10.
mighty through God, to cast down holds, casting down the imaginations and
every hie thing that is exalted against the knowledge of God, and bringing into
captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ. This is the only
instrument, wherewith we may cut down and have in the harvest of God.

For all men's devises, Acts, Jaws, or commandments, be the authority thereof
never so great, yet are not sufficient to content one man's conscience. For the
wisdom of man is but folly before God, and God knows the fancies and
cogitations of men, that they be but vain and foolish.

Aristotle the great wise Philosopher on a time being sick, when the physician
came to him to minister him a potion, and showed him not what was in it, began
to chafe and take on with him: why, said he, heal not me as thou would
heal an ox or a horse, but show me what thou give me, what are the
ingredients, and wherefore thou give it me. Even so must the people be
healed of their errors: they must know what is given them, and wherefore.

Fides (says Bernard) suadenda est, non impone^da. Faith may not be compulsed
by force or rigor, but gently brought in by persuasion: For forced faith is no
faith. Saint Paul says, Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by Romans 10.
the word of God. And therefore it is well observed by the wise and politic
father S. Ambrose, that the church of Christ was not gathered by the law, but
by faith. Basil says, If you will have Gods wisedo^ take place, al your worldly
wisdom must be set a part. And in like sort Hilarious, Humanis operib.
extructa no^ permanent: aliter aedificanda Ecclesia, aliter custodienda est
etc. Things that be set up with man's workmanship (says Hillary) will not
endure: the church of God must otherwise be builded and preserved: for the
foundation of it must be laid upon the Apostles and Prophets. The church
being thus built by God, that is to say, by the doctrine of God, shall never
fall.

I speak not this against all civil, and honest lawful policy: for I know it
is the gift of God, without the which, nor common state, nor the Church can be
maintained. But this seems to have been the meaning of these old Fathers,
that in the building of Gods church, ye preaching of Gods word must go
before, to quiet men's consciences: and wisdom and policy, like handmaides
must follow after. For this honor and prerogative God claims only to
himself, that his Church must be built upon the foundation of the Apostles
and Prophets. Which if it be otherwise built, Nisi dominus aedificauerit domu^,
in vanum laborauerunt, qui aedificant eam. Unless God himself build up the
house, they sweat and labor but in vain, that set it up.

Thus Christ at the beginning gathered his Church, not by laws of men, but
against all law and policy, by the preaching of his word. God might have
instructed Cornelius by the Angel that appeared to him, as it appears in ye
Acts of the Apostles: but he would not so, but sent Peter to him, that he
might be instructed by the mouth of a Preacher. He might have taught Paul,
after he had stricken him down from his horse, when he appeared to him, and
said, Ego sum Jesus que^ tu persequeris: I am Jesus who^ thou persecutest: But
he would not so, but rather left him to be taught by Ananias. And as it
appears in the Acts of the Apostles, at the preaching of Peter 3000. people
were converted and wonn in one day, that it might appear by what tools, and
with what workmen God would have his harvest set forward.

Now let us behold the present state of our country. These words of Christ
our Savior were never more true, then we find them now in these our days. The
harvest is great, and the laborers very few: the poor people lies forsaken,
and left as it were sheep without a guide: the afflicted in conscience have no
man to quiet them: they grow wild and sauadge, as it were a people that had
no God: they are commanded to change their religion, and forlacke of
instruction, they know not whither to turn them: they know not, neither what
they leave nor what they should receive.

Some other defy, and spit at the holy gospel of our Savior Christ, and
refuse the Covenant of everlasting life. Some other for lack of knowledge,
follow after wilful and blind masters, and become Arrians or Pelagians, and
thus they blaspheme the son of God. Some other give themselves over to their
own affections, and as he says, rejoice and triumph in their filthiness,
without fear of God, without conscience of sin, and so tread down the
blood of the testament under their feet: and this do they for lack of
teaching, because they have not learned men, and preachers to show them what
they should do.

O, says our Savior Christ the good shepherd and Bishop of our souls, my
harvest is beaten down and lost, and there is none that will go abroad and
save it. My people run headlong to their own destruction, not of malice but of
very simplicity, only because they are not taught, because they know not my
father nor me. Alas, it is not my fathers will, that any of them should be
lost.

They be our brethren, they be the flock of God, they be the harvest, they are
bought with great price: I beseech you, even for that blood that was shed and
spent for them and us al, let us not despise them.

If the kingdom of God be not worthy to be promoted, yet the kingdom of Satan
is worthy to be overthrown. Now is that acceptable and joyful time come
amongst us, even now God has visited his people: now the harvest is great
and plentious. All the world this day longs, and groneth after the Gospel.
Let us therefore altogether, direct our prayers to the Lord and master of the
harvest.

We beseech thee most merciful father, for thy son Jesus Christ's sake, as
thou have plentifully increased thy harvest, and brought it to a ripenes in
these our days, so send out laborers, to get it in, that it be not spilt.
Gather in all thy sheep that lie straying without a heard. Lighten the hearts of
thine adversaries, that they may know the time of their visitation, and see
that blessed hope, whereunto thou haste called them. That all the world with
one mouth, and one mind, may know and gloryfie thee, the only true and
lyuinge God, and thy son Jesus Christ to whom with thee, and the holy Ghost,
be al honor and glory.

Amen.
Luke 11. verse. 15. But some of them said, he casts out devils through
Beelzebub the chief of devils. etc.
THat it may please God so to order both my utterance, and your understanding,
that whatsoever shall be spoken or heard, may turn to the glory of his holy
name, and to the profit and comfort of his Church, before I enter into the
exposition of these words, I desire you to call upon our gracious God with
your earnest and hearty prayer.

And here, I commend unto you the good estate of Gods holy and catholic
Church, and therein the Queens most excellent majesty, by the especial grace
of God, Queen of England, France, and Irelande, defender of the true,
ancient, and Apostolic faith, and the highest governor next under God, of
this Church of England, etc. That as God of his mercy, has marueilously
preserved her to the possession of her right, to the great comfort of all our
her subjects hearts, and to the reformation of the Church: so it may please
him to aid and increase her with his holy spirit, to the continuance and
performance of the same. The Queen's most honorable counsel, with the residue
of the noblitie: The miserable state of both the Uniuersities, and all other
schools of learning, the only nurceries of this Realm: The Bishops and
preachers, that the number of them may be increased, and that they may have
grace, to set forth the truth of Gods Gospel, as their duty is,
diligently, soberly, sincerely, truly, and faithfully: And the whole commons
of this Realm, especially, such as speak ill, or think ill of Gods holy
word, that they may have grace to regard the salvation of their souls, to
lay afide all blind affection, to hear the word of God, and so to come to
the knowledge of the truth.

Who so list to peruse either the whole course of the Scriptures, or other
stories and records of antiquity, shall find that the messengers of God,
such as have been sent of purpose to give knowledge of his holy will, have at
all times been unkindly received of the more part, and sclaunderously
reported of: and whatsoever they have said or done, has been falsely depraved,
and turned to the worst.

Moses that godly Captain, notwithstanding he were purposely called, and
sent from God, and in his name wrought many and strange wonders before the
people: yet were there some that said he was a Sorcerer, and whatsoever he
did, he did by way of coniuration.

The Religion of the Jews, was the true worship of the only God: Yet Pliny
says, it was contemptus omnium numinum, The despising of all the gods. The
Jews suffered no images to be in their Churches, because God had forbidden
them: Yet Cornelius Tacitus says. They worship their god in form of an ass.
Others said, they worship a god whom they call Sobaoth, in the shape and
fashion of a hog: and that therefore they were forbidden to eat swines flesh.
Others, that they worship Saturnus, because they were commanded to keep holy
the Saturday.

The wicked and cruel Aman, to bring the people of God into hatred with the
king Assuerus, made his complaint of them in this wise: May it please your
Majesty, says he, to understand, you have a people here in your realm, that
uses a new kind of religion, and will not be ordered by your graces laws.

When the godly prince Cyrus, had given Esdras and Nehemias, leave to build up
again the Church of God at Jerusalem, there came diverse to him, and had him
take good heed, for that the Jews were his enemies, and ever had hene
traitors to his crown.

Likewise, after that Christ our Savior had ascended into heaven, and the holy
Ghost was powered down upon the Apostles, and they began to speak diverse
tongues that they never had learned, the enemies disdainefully scorned at the
gifts of God, and said, Musto pleni sunt isti, These men be drunken, and full
of new wine. And therefore they talk they know not what.

When Paul and the other Apostles taught free remission of sins, without any
goodness or desert of our parts, only of Gods mercy, and in the blood of
Christ: the enemies iested at that kind of learning, and said, faciamus mala,
vt veniant bona: then if Gods mercy be declared Romans 3. 8.
by forgiveness of sins, Let us do evil that good may come thereof: Let us
continue in sin, that grace may abound. Romans 6. 1


Because the Christians in the ministration of the holy Communion used bread
and wine: some said, they worshipped not Christ, but Bacchus and Ceres, gods
of the heathens.

Whereas the Christian men, soon after the Apostles time, used to resort
together in the night time, or in the morning before day, into some private
house, there to call upon the name of God, and to receive the sacrament
together, for fear of the cruelty of tyrants: the enemies reported, that
being thus together, they killed a child amongst them, and so devoured up his
flesh, and drank his blood, and after put out the lights, and so committed
incest and adultery one with another.

But what needs more examples? Because we say, that justification stands
only upon the free grace and mercy of God: the adversaries report, that we
forbid good works. And because we speak against superstition used in fasting,
as before us did Esaias, Paul, and Christ himself: they report, that we would
have no fasting. And because we reprove the errors and abuses in the manner of
prayer: they say, we would not have the people to pray. And because we restore
the sacraments to the first institution of our Savior Christ, and the example
of the primative Church: they say, we take away the Sacraments.

This is Gods holy will, that for our exercise whatsoever we say or do, be it
never so well, it shall be ill taken.

Julian the apostata found fault with the simplicity and rudenes of Gods word.

Tertullian says, the heathens in the time of the primative Church, were wont
to painte out in mockery the God of the Christians, with an asses head and a
book in his hand, in token that the Christians professed learning, but
indeed were Asses, rude, and ignorant. And do not out adversaries the like
this day, against all those that profess the Gospel of Jesus Christ: O say
they, who are they that favor this way: none but Shoomakers, Taylours,
Weauers, Prentises, such as never were in the university, but be altogether
ignorant and void of learning. Thus have you been borne in hand that you
might be brought to mistruste the Gospel.

And, as the Pharisees vpbrayded those that heard the doctrine of Christ,
Does any of the rulers, or of the Pharisees believe in him? John. 7.
But this people, which know not the law, are cursed. Even so this day, they
say by you: they understand not their pater noster, they know not their
Creed, ye be ignorant. O miserable men, do they advance themselves of your
ignorance: If you know not your belief, if you understand not your Pater
noster, if you be so ignorant, through whose fault are you so ignorant: why
were they your pastors: why did they not teach you? why take they from you the
holy Scriptures: why will they have you be ignorant and unlearned still:

This do they, that they may the more discredit and deface the Gospel, which
GOD of his mercy has in our days restored unto us, and caused the beams
thereof to shine over all Countries in such sort, that now the simple and
unlearned, the rich, the learned, the worshipful, the honorable, the states
and Princes of the world, be become professors and mainteyners of it, as our
eyes do see this day. Blessed be his holy name therefore.

They say, that the preachers of the same are unlearned, as men that read
nothing but a few English books, and never studied or saw the old Doctors.

We find not such fault in their learning neither do we speak those things
by them, that the most part of you does know we might justly and truly
speak. For we seek not to confound them by such means, it is not our
profession. We malice them not, we are not enemies unto them. And that, thou O
Lord that know al things, know best,

Let them have the commendation of learning: God give them grace to join it
with truth, and to use it to his glory, and not to their own, Yet they must
needs be very well learned, that will charge all their adversaries with
ignorance.

Albeit in contention of learning, I may be worst heard to speak, being the
vnworthyest of all my brethren: yet, this dare I be bold to say, because it is
true, we are not so far to seek in learning, as they would have us appear
to be. S. Paul being driven to answer in his own defense in a like matter, in
comparison between 2. Cor. 11.
him and the false prophets, writes on this sort, Hebraei sunt, and ego:
Israelitae sunt, and ego: Semen Abrahae sunt, and ego: ministri Christi sunt,
and ego. They are Hebrews, so am I: they are Israelits, so am I: they are the
seed of Abraham, so am I: they are the ministers of Christ, so am I.

So will I say, and truly say, between us and them. They are seen in the
tongues, Latin, Greek, and Hebrewe: so are we. They have studied the arts,
so have we: they have read the Doctors, the general Councels, and the
scriptures, so have we. If they can be learned doing this: O what unfortunate
and unhappy men are we, that are so unlearned, and yet do the same? This luck
commonly follows al them that be professors of the truth.

S: Paul was counted and called a rebel, and accused that he was an Egiptian,
and had gathered Act. 24.
a number of men of war to disquiet and trouble the Country. We have found
(says Tertullus) This man a pestilent fellow, and a mouer of sedition amongst
all the Jews throughout the world.

So says Tertullian, that in his time the Christians were called hosts
public^, that is, enemies and destroyers of all common states.

And those reports the enemies not only scattred among the common people, but
also dropped them into the magistrates and princes ears, that they might have
an il opinion of Christian religion, and suppress the Ministers and preachers
of it: so unkind commonly many have been toward the messengers of Gods word.

When Christ himself came down from Heaven, from the bosom of his father,
and began to utter and to teach the Gospel of everlasting life, and to
confirm the same with many a strange miracle: the poor people gave ear
unto him, and believed his doctrine, and by his wondrous works knew him to be
the son of David, the very Messiah yt was promised them.

But the Scribes and Pharisees, that bare the name of Doctors, and had been
evermore brought up in learning, and were the instructors of the people, made
light of Christ's miracles, and said to ye people, he casts out devils through
Beelzebub the chief of the devils.

The miracle was such, that no reasonable man would have thought it to be
wrought by ye devil. The poor man that before had been deaf, was now able to
hear: that before was possessed of the devil, was now delivered: that before
was sick, was now restored to his health. The poor people marueiled at the
doing, and glorified God. But the Pharisees cried out against him. In Beelzebub
principe daemoniorum, eiicit daemonia. He casts out devils through Beel
zebub, the chief of ye devils. Not because it was true, nor because it was
likely to be true, nor because they in their conscience thought it to be true:
but only to bring Christ in hatred with the people, and to deface his doctrine,
And therefore they blasphemed that, ye indeed they could not deny: and that
they knew to be the workmanship of God, they said it proceeded from ye devil.

Christ our Savior puts back these slanders with diverse reasons, whereof
at this time for shortness sake, I will touch but two. The first reason is:
Every kingdom that is divided in it self, shall be brought to desolation: if
Satan be divided against him self, then must his kingdom needs be dissolved,
and that by his own workyng. But that is not likely. For all ye Angels of Satan
agree and conspire together to ye upholding of their kingdom: therefore must
you needs confess that I have removed this devil by some other greater power,
and not by the power of Beelzebub the chiefest of the devils.

Here perhaps, some man will reply that witches, and coniurers oftentimes chase
away one devil by ye mean of an other. Possible it is so, but that is
wroughte, not by power, but by collusion of ye devils. For one devil, ye better
to attain his purpose, will give place, and make as though he stood in awe of
another devil. And by ye way, to touch but a word or two of this matter for yt
the horrible using of your poor subjects inforceth thereunto: It may please
your grace to understand, yt this kind of people, I mean witches, and
sorcerers, wtin these few last years, are marueilously increased wtin this
your graces realm. These eyes have seen most evident and manifest marks of
their wickedness. Your graces subtectes pine away even unto the death, their
color fades, their flesh rotteth, their speech is benumbed, their senses are
bereft.

Wherefore, your poor subjects most humble petition unto your highness, is,
that the laws touching such malefactors, may be put in due execution. For
the schole of them is great, their doings horible, their malice intolerable,
the examples most miserable. And I pray GOD, they never practice further, then
upon ye subject. But this only by the way, these be the scholars of Beelzebub
the chief captain of the devils.

This first reason that Christ uses, is taken of common experience. For
natwithstanding there be nothing so puissant, as ye force of a kingdom: yet if
it be divided in it self, it will perish and come to confusion. For, concord and
agreement is the strength and maintenance of al states. Break the hoopes of a
vessel, and all the boordes will fall asunder. The examples hereof are too rife.
The mightiest kingdoms that ever were, by such means have been conquered, and
fallen into the power of their enemies.

Therefore, Esaias prophesying the destruction of the kingdom of the Jews,
says, first the people shall fall at dissension within themselves, and then
should follow their confusion.

When Vespasian the Emperor and his son Titus came with an army against
Jerusalem, the whole nation of the Jews was divided into three factions, each
of them ready to undo the other. Then followed the overthrow of that kingdom.
Then was Jerusalem rased to ye ground: Then were there slain of the Jews to
the number of 1100000. Once again I will say it, because it is marvelous, and
most true, as Josephus (who was the^ a capitain there in ye field) writes
there were then slain of the Jews of men, women and children, no less then
1100000.

Of late years, the dissension between two brothers, brought all Graecia and
Asia, and al ye East parts of Christendom, into the possession of the Turk.
But what needs us to go to Jerusalem or to Turkey for examples:

This kingdom of ours, the mightiest, ye noblest, the richest, ye blessedest
land that is, or ever was under heaven, could never yet be conquered by any
enemy, but only at such time, as the people were at varia^ce within
the^mselues. The^ was Julius Caesar with a small number, then were the English
Saxons, then were the Danes, then was ye Duke of Normandy able to ouerrunne
us, and to possess our country.

Therefore the prince that desires to be a conqueror, labors not so much
to furnishe his own men, and to make himself strong, as to set discord among
his enemies. For that is a manifest token of their undoing, and that Gods
vengeance is at hand. And for that cause, Herodian an old writer pronounces,
y^ as much as war is worse then peace: so much is civil sedition worse then
war. And Titus Liuius in his story says, haec res sola facit, vt magna
imperia sint mortalia: Dissensio^ only, says he, causes that great Empires
can not continue but have an end. For, if the one part conquer, and have the
victory, it is even as if a man with his right hand would maime himself, and
chop off the left. This example Christ uses to confound the malice of the
Pharisees.

The second reason is this: If I cast out devils by the power of Beelzebub, by
what power do your children my disciples, John, James, Peter, Andrew, and the
rest cast them out? They granted that Christ's disciples wrought miracles,
only by the name of God. And yet that they allowed in the scholars, even of
malice and hatred, and contrary to their conscience, they repoued and
blasphemed in ye master. Hereof Christ concludes, if I cast out devils in the
power of god, then doubtless the kingdom of God is among you: your own
children shall be judges over you.

Now to apply these words unto this our present time, wherein under a most
godly and gracious prince, the truth of Christ's Gospel is freely preached,
Gods holy name therefore be praised for ever.

As Moses in his time was counted a sorcerrer: as the Jews were called
despisers of al religion, seditious, and heady against their Princes: as the
Apostles were counted dronken, and full of new wine: as al Christians were
called idolaters, worshippers of Bacchus and Ceres, murderers, incestious, and
adulterers: as S. Paul for his preaching, was judged a Rebel: and al Christians
were taken for enemies of all common estates: even so in these latter days,
all these or other y^ like crimes, have been laid to y^ preachers and
professors of Christ's Gospel: y^ they have been godless, seditious, rebels,
despisers of good orders, incestious, adulterers, masters of al sin and
wickedness.

But this is our comfort, that nothing can be devised to be spoken against us,
but y^ same aforetime has been devised and spoken against Christ himself. For
he himself was called a Samaritan, a companion of publicans and harlotes, a
glucton, a liar, a blasphemer, a subuerter, of y^ whole nation, a seducer of
the people, a rebel against Caesar, a sorcerer, a worker by the devil, and a
breaker of the Sabbath day,

We are set up, says Paul, as a mark for me^ to speak against, and
whatsoever be spoken of us, be it never so untrue or unlikely, yet are there
some that will believe it. Yea such things as would not be believed spoken
of a thief, or a murderer, will soon be believed of him that professes the
name and Gospel of Jesus Jeremy. 5.
Christ. Woe is me, my mother (says Ierimy) that thou have borne me a
contentious man, and a man that strives with ye whole earth: I have neither
lent on usury, nor men have le^t unto me on usury: yet every one does curse
me. The untrue report of these things caused such extremity as this day you
may hear of in other countries, and some times have seen presently before
your eyes.

Princes, and noble men hated the doctrine of the Gospel, before they knew it.
They hated it, and thought ill of it, not of malice, nor against their
conscience, nor against ye testimony of the holy ghost, but only of ignorance,
because they lacked instruction, They had a zeal, and a feeling of god, but
not according to knowledge. And therefore doing as they did, they thought they
did God high service.

This courtesy had christ our sauieur showed him when he was in the world. The
same courtesy must they look for, that will become christ's disciples. They said
of Christ, that whatsoever he did, he did it in the name of Beelzebub ye chief
of the devils. Even so, whereas it has pleased almighty God to bless us with
the true Preachinge, and light of his holy Gospel: yet there are some that
condemn it, and call it heresy, and bear the people in hand, that all this
doctrine is nothing else but a renewing of old heresies.

It is a grievous matter for a Christian man, justly to be accused of heresy.
For whosoever is an heretic, is an enemy of god, and a waster and destroyer
of all true Religion. And therefore, unless the crime be marvelous evident,
he does great wrong that calls any man heretic: and though a man be
falsely charged, yet may he not dissemble it. Ruffinus would say, that man were
not a Christian, whosoever would abide to be called an heretic. All other
injuries may be borne withal, but this is such and so heinous a crime, that
unless it be manifestly evident, no man may suffer to be so judged: and it
should not be believed, when it is laid to the charge of any Christians.

Wherefore, for as much as the cause is gods, and pertains to the conscience
of a great many, let it be as lawful for the poor man that is unjustly hurt,
to make his salve, as others think it lawful for them to give the wound.

Christ our Savior, when he was thus charged, made answer, Si ego in Beelzebub
eiicio daemonia, filii vestri in quo e^iciunt? If I through Beelzebub cast out
devils, by who^ do your children cast the^ out? So may we say to such as this
day be adversaries to this cause, and speak against us. If we be heretics
that teach this doctrine, what are the ancient Fathers, the Doctors, and the
Apostles that have taught the same: If they were Catholics, and have been
evermore so taken, writing as they did, how is it that only we are not
Catholics, writing and saying as they did? they shall judge on our side
against you. And would God in y^ greatest and specialest points of our
controversies, all parts would be contented to stand to their judgment: so
should al contention be soon at anend.

For I call Heaven and Earth to witness, and speak it before God and his holy
Angels, and before the consciences of al them that speak against us, that
touching the very substance of religion, we teach nothing this day, but
that has been taught before by Christ him self: set abroad by his Apostles:
continued in the Primitive Church, and maintained by the old and ancient
Doctors.

And in one or two words only to give a taste of the same, that thereby ye
may the better judge of the rest:

We say, that in the Sacrament after the consecration, remains the
substance and nature of bread and wine. The same says. S. Augustine, S.
Chrysostom, Theodoretus, Gelasius, and others. Gelasius words are so plain,
as no man can deny them: Non desinit esse substantia panis and vini. There
leaves not to be the substance of bread and wine. Thus wrote they, and were
Catholics.

We say, that Christ's last Supper must be used as a communion, and frequented
with more then one. So Christ ordained it, so y^ Apostles, the Primitive
Church, and all the old Doctors practiced it, and never was there any of them
that ever made mention of a private Mass: Thus did they, and yet were they
Catholics.

We say, the holy Communion or sacrament of the breaking and shedding of the
body and blood of Christ, ought of necessity to be used under both kinds:
Thus did all the Doctors use it. And Gelasius an old father says, that
otherwise to use it, is open sacrilege. And for y^ space of 1000. years after
Christ, there can no example be found to the contrary. Thus did they, and yet
were Catholics.

We say, the public prayers ought to be in the common tongue: that the Bishop
of Rome ought not to take upon him to be the head of the universal Church: that
the prince is of right, and by the authority that god has given him, the hiest
ruler of his Church and Realm, as well of the ecclesiastical officers, as of
the temporal.

And all these things be aduouched and confirmed by ye examples of the
primative Church, by the old general Councels, and by the Doctors. And the
contray here of shall never be proved, nor by old father or Doctor, nor by
aucient council, nor by example of y^ primative Church, nor by any sufficient
authority of the Scriptures. I leave the rest, for it were an infinite labor
to say as much as might be said.

Thus they taught, thus did they, and were catholics: and alas, are we saying
the same, only because we say ye same, become heretics: that was once true,
is it now become false: that was once Catholic doctrine, is it now at last
become heresy: O, merciful God, was it thy will, yt thy truth should be true
but for a season, until there should come men to decree the contrary: If we be
heretics that teach the same that the old Doctors of the Church taught,
what then are they, that teach contrary to the Doctors:

Christ our Savior to reprove the Pharisees, thought it sufficient to say to
them, Hoc Abraham non fecit. This thing Abraham never did. Therefore are you
not the children of Abraham. Even so may we truly say to such as hold not
themselves contented with this doctrine, these things that you do, Saint
Augustine never did. Saint Hierome never did: none of the ancient fathers ever
did: the Apostles in the Catholic primative Church never did: therefore ye
are not the children of S. Augustine: ye are not the children of S. Hierome: ye
are not the children of any of the old catholic doctors: ye are not the
children of Christ's primative, Catholyke, and vuiuersal Church.

It may not become me to set order in these things: yet if it were lawful,
I would wysh that once again, as time should serve, there might be had a
quiet and a sober disputation: that each part might be required to show their
grounds, without self will, and without affection: not to maintain or breed
contention, (for I trust it should be the way to take away al contention) but
only that the truth may be known, many consciences quieted, and the right
stone tried, by comparison of the counterfaite. For, at the last disputation
that should have been, you know which party gave over, and would not meddle.
Some will say, the Judges will not be indifferent. And alas, what man that
doubts his own matter, will ever think the Judges indifferent: Let the whole
world let our our adversaries, them selves be Judges heerm, (affection put
apart) let our adversaries themselves be Judges. What can we offer more? if
this be not sufficient, what can there be sufficient:

Pompeius a noble Gentleman of Rome, at what time he should go into the
field against Caesar, that then was his enemy, and some of his counsel told
him he lacked men, and should never be able with so small a number to stand in
field against Caesar being well furnished: Tushe, quoth he, when so ever I
shall but beat the ground with my foot, I shall by and by raise up a swarm
of soldiers. Afterward it befell that Pompey was vanquished, and glad to flee.
Then Marcus Cato an old gentleman, and one of his army said to him, O sir,
remember your promise, you lack men, now let us see your swarm of Soldiers.

It is well known that it has been spoken, both in this place, and in other
like, that all the Doctors, and all the general councels were against us. Now
the army is discomstted, now they stand in need of men, now let them call
for their Doctors and Councels: if they come but with one sufficient Doctor
or Council, they may have the field.

I speak not this to boast my self of any learning, but the goodness of the
cause makes me ye holder. Neither would I have in this behalf said so much
as I have, saving that the matter it self, and very necessity enforced me so
to do. Alas, it were great pity that Gods truth should be defaced with privy
whisperings. It were great pity that whole houses should be overthrown, men's
consciences wounded, the people deceived, Gods truth and the love thereof
pulled from your hearts, his work blasphemed, as if it came from Beelzebub,
without any good ground, without any authorytie of the Scripture, without any
example of the Primative Church, without Counsel, without any ancient
Doctor or father.

But they have another kind of learuynge, which because we have not,
therefore they say we are unlearned. For if controversies might have been tried
by learning, you should never have seen the Mass again after it was once
down.

If there ever come another change, as I pray God we may never see, nor surely
ever shall we, unless our unkindness pull down Gods plague upon us: but,
if a change come, such a one as they look for, you shall see with what
argument they will prove their Mass. We read that Christ did put the Pharisees
to silence, yet afterward when their time came, they said, We have a law,
and by our law he must die. But Gods name be praised, no persecutions, no
torments, no fire, no faggot, have ever weakened the cause of the Gospel.
Tertullian says, Plures Tertul. in apologet.
effi^imur, quoties metimur: the more we be cut down, the more we increase.
These be their arguments, this is their logique: they have no liking to try
the matter by Scripture, by doctors, by Council, or by the practice of the
most ancient Churches: and, if they make any pretense of likinge such trial,
they do it for some other hidden purpose, to move mutinies, and disquiet: that
they may work their practices, whiles men's heads are occupied and busied
with talk of such matters.

Pirrhus a lusty gentleman, and King of Epyrus, when he first took Counsel
with his Nobles to wage war against the Romans, heard say he might soon
conquer them, for that they were nothing else but a sort of wild and
harbarours people: but afterward, when he came to the view of the Romans army
indeed, and saw their Captains and Soldiers well appointed, and their
flagges, and standards in good order: mary (quoth he) whether these men be
barbarous or no, I cannot tell, but well I wot their behavior, and the order of
their camp is not barbarous.

So, what account soever men make of this doctrine, that god be thanked is
taught this day, yet whosoever shall come near and view it well, and try it to
the uttermost, and shall find that al things are done seemly and orderly
according to the old doctors, to the Apostles, and to the primative Church of
Christ, shall fall down to the ground, and confess that the order and manner
thereof, or any thing that is taught therein, is not heretical.

Saint John Baptist sent his disciples to Christ to know whether he were the
true Messiah or no, or else, whether they should look for another: Christ made
them answer, Go and show John what things ye have hard and seen: Luke. 7.
the blind receive sight, and the halte go, the lepers are cleansed, and the
deaf hear, ye dead are raised up, and ye poor receive the Gospel. For these
tokens were sufficient to make John understand, that Christ was the true
Messiah.

Even so, if a man stand in doubt of this Religion, whether it be of God or
no, let him but consider, and think with himself thus: a great number of
errors are now revealed, superstition is removed, idolatry is taken away, the
Sacraments are rightlye and duly used, the dombe speak, the blind see, the
poor afflicted minds receive the Gospel, the prayers are in such sort as the
people may take profit and comfort by them. God give us grace to know how great
need we have to pray, that in all places we may lift up clean hands and
hearts unto God, and call upon him in spirit and truth.

If this be heresy, then, alas, what is true religion? Can these be done by
the power of Beelzebub? Can the devil reform errors, remove superstion, take
away idolatry, cause the Sacraments to be directly used, the dombe to speak,
the blind to see, the poor to receive the Gospel, the people to take fruit
and comfort by their prayers?

O good brethen, this is the work of Gods right hand, the kingdom of God
doubtless is come upon us, the prince of error is put to silence, the
readiness of the people universally and in all places is marvelous, kings and
princes suffer themselves to be led captives to the obedience of Christ. They
that before were enemies and persecutours of this doctrine, are now contented
to yield their bodies and lives for yt defense of the same: and to be short, all the world this day cries, and groneth after the Gospel.

And al these things are come to pass, at such time as to any man's reason it
might seem impossible: when all the world, the people, priests, and princes
were overwhelmed with ignorance: when the word of God was put out of sight:
when he that took upon him the general rule of altogether, was crept into ye
holy place, and had possessed the conscience of man, as if he had been God, and
had set himself above the scriptures of God, and gave out decrees, that
whatsoever he should do, no man should find fault with him: when all
schools, priests, bishops, and kings of the world were sworn to him, that
whatsoever he took in hand, they should uphold it: when he had chosen kings
sons and brothers to be his Cardinales: when his Legates and espies were in
every kings council: when nothing could be attempted any where, but he by and
by must have knowledge of it: when whosoever had but muttered against his
doings, must straight ways have been excommunicate, and put to most cruel
death, as Gods enemy: when no man could have thought there had been any hope,
that ever these days should have been seen that God of his mercy has given
us to see: when al things were void of al hope, and full of desperation:

Even then, I say, even then, contrary to all man's reason, God brought all
these things to pass. Even then God defeited their policies, not with shield
or Spear, but only with the spirit of his mouth, that is with preachinge of
the Gospel. There is no counsel against the Lord, the devils were cast out by
the power of God.

This is the day which ye Lord has wrought: to thee o Lord, ye praise hereof
is due: thou have turned our mourning into joy: thou have put to silence ye
spirit of error: thou have inflamed yt hearts of thy people: thou have brought
princes and kings to the obedience of thy son Jesus Christ: thou have opened
the eyes of ye world to espy out, and to cry for ye comfort of ye gospel. When
al things were in despair, yet thou did reserve unto thy self one little
sparkle, yt should inkindle again light in thy church, yt should remove
rubbish and fylth out of thy temple, whose heart should ever be in thy hand, who
should do that that good is in thy sight, and should walk in y^ ways of her
father David.

This is the hand and power of God, this is the Lords doing, and it is
marvelous in our eyes. God give us grace to have these things ever before our
eyes, that we never be unthankful.

Now, for all these graces yt God has so plentifully powered upon us, let us
consider what kindness ought to be rendered on our part. O Israel, O my people,
says almighty God, what thing is it yt I require of thee, but only that thou
love me, and walk in my ways: this is our homage, this is our duty, this
shall be looked for at our hands. The grace of god, says Paul, yt brings
salvation unto al me^, has appeared, and techeth us yt we Tit. 2.
should live soberly and righteusly in this present world, looking for the
blessed hope, and appearing of the glory of the mighty god, and of our savior
Jesus Christ.

Such, in old times, was the life of all them that professed the name of
Christ. Tertullian of his time says, a Christian man could be known by nothing
so well, as by the changing of his life Cyprian, of the Christians in his time,
says, Veniunt vt discant, discunt vt viuant. They come, Ad Inbaianum.
that they may learn, they learn, that they may know how to live. S. Paul
commends the Philippians, that they shine as lyghtes Philip. 2.
in the world, that their life does testify what they be.

Eusebius says, Valeriani aula, erat referta piis, and Ecclesia Deifacta,
They yt were of the Eccle. hist. Lib. 7. cap. 9.
court of Valerian, were become Christians, and then was the court not like a
court, but like unto the Church of God.

Justinius the martyr says, he was first turned to Christ: for the admiration
that he had of the innocent and godly life of Christian men.

Such then was the life of them that bare the name of Christ, they came to
learn, they learned to live. You might have known their profession, by the
only changing of their manners. The court wherein they lived, was so reverently
kept, without notable sin or wantonness, as if it has been the temple of God.

O almighty God, how fares it now with them that would be called Christians,
and be reckoned among professors of the Gospel? how many are there that come
to learn? how many are there that learn to live? how many are there that may
be known by changing of their manners? Unless it be, for that they make a
mockery of Gods holy Gospel, and so become more dissolute, more fleshly, more
wanton, then ever they were before.

What court can we find, that any part may be like the temple of God? Seldom
is it, that almightye God may be heard to speak his mind. But when he has
spoken, who is he that thinks upon it? who is he that does not despise it?
who is he that spurneth not at it?

If our life should give testimony and report of our religion, sorry I am to
speak it, but alas, it is to true in too many, it cries out, Non est Deus:
the very course of our life bears witness against us, that in our hearts
we think there is no God, and that there is no fear of God before our eyes.
I amplify not, nor enlarge the matter: I would to God it were no more then I
make of it.

Thus we do withholde the truth of God in unrighteousness: thus the grace of
God is abused to the contenting of our pleasures: thus we become the vessels
of Gods wrath, and heap up vengeance upon our heads. Therefore will God take
away his holy spirit from us, therefore will God give us over to a reprobate
mind, therefore shall ye end of us be worse then was ye beginning.

O good brethren, let us not abuse the mercy of god, let us not receive the
grace of god in vain. Remember how many eyes are set upon us, let us take
occasion away from them yt seek occasion to sclander our profession: let not,
let not our life cause the gospel of Jesus Christ to be ill spoken of and
blasphemed: let us walk so as becomes them that are called, and in deed are
Filii lucis, The children of light.

The truth of the gospel of Jesus Christ has now shined over the whole
world: if it be yet hidden from any, it is hidden from them that perish: he
that perishes now, shall perish in his own blood. Now, if any believe not,
he is inexcusable. The wisdom of god in publishing his word, contrary and
against the course of man's policy: ye continual preaching of it in all places:
the ashes of so many learned fath ers and godly men and women, who have yielded
their bodies to the cruel torments of tyrants, to be consumed in the fire for
the testimony thereof, are yet so fresh in your eyes, and spoken of in your
hearing, and witnessed in your hearts and consciences, that you can not deny,
but the kingdom of God is come amongst us.

But if there be any, that is not persuaded in his religion, (for as much as it
is a matter of life and death, of salvation and damnation) I beseech you
before God, and before his Christ, let us not be careless, let us not be
negligent. If we mislike it, let us read the Scriptures, and know wherefore we
mislike it.

Despise not good brethren, despise not to hear gods word declared. As you
tender your own souls, be diligent to come to sermons: for that is the
ordinary place, where men's hearts be moved, and Gods secrets be revealed. For
be the preacher never so weak, yet is the word of God as mighty, and as
puisant as ever it was. If thou hear Gods word spoken by a weak man,
anignorant man, a sinner as thou thy self art, and yet wilt believe it, and
hear it with reverence: it is able to open thine eyes, and to reveal unto
thee the high mysteries of thy salvation.

Remember we are the sons of the Prophets. The kingdom of God is come
amongst us. Let us not withstand the Spirit of God: let us not tread down the
blood of the everlasting Testament. The hand of god has wrought this: let us
not arm our selves against GOD, and say, They are wrought in the name of
Beelzebub.

It is not our doctrine that we bring you this day, we wrote it not, we found
it not out, we are not the inuentours of it, we bring you nothing, but that
the old fathers of the Church, that the Apostles, that Christ our Savior
himself has brought before us. O condemn it not, before you know it, In the
mean while, think well of them that labor for you, that do you service, that
pray for you, that shall give their life for you.

Let us lay aside all blind affection, let us labor to know the truth, let
God, have the victory. And then, when we know God, let us glorify him as our
God, let us so live, ye our words, our deeds, and our whole life may testify,
that ye kingdom of god is amo^ngst us. Let our light so shine before men, that
they may see our good works, and gloryfie our father which is in heaven. So
shall God power down his blessings upon us, so shall god bles whatsoever we
take in hand, so shall we be blessed in peace, so shall we be blessed in war, so
shall god go forth before our armies; so shall we be the children of god, so
shall god be our god, and remain with us for ever.

And thou most merciful father, as thou have sent us thy heavenly kingdom,
that is, the most comfortable tidyngs of the Gospel of thy son Jesus Christ:
so we beseech thee for thy mercy, bless that thing that thou have begun,
that it may continue among us, and remain with us for ever. Open the hearts
of them, that of ignorance think ill of it, that they may see that blessed
hope whereunto thou have called us, that all the world may know thee, and thy
son our savior Jesus Christ, whom thou have sent for the redemption of the
world.

Amen.
Romans 13.
THis little portion of the scripture, has bin often expounded and opened in
your hearing: yet shall it not be unprofitable, once again to entreat thereof.
For, albeit the proportion, and ground of matter be one, yet some difference
may be in the manner of utterance.

The word of God is the water of life, the more ye laue it forth, the fresher
it runs: it is the fire of Gods glory, the more ye blow it, the cleerer it
burns: it is the corn of the Lords field, the better you grind it, the
more it yields: it is the bread of heaven, the more it is broken and given
forth, the more remains: it is the sword of the spirit, the more it is
scoured, the brighter it shines. The voice of God cannot be unpleasant to
their ears, which are the children of God: the oftener they he are it, the
more comfort they receive: they ca^ never have overmuch who never have enough.

Saint Paul in these words stirred up the Romans, and awaked them out of
the slumber of death, that they might behold the clear light of the Gospel,
and know the time of their visitation, and shake off the works of darkness,
and apparel themselves with the righteousness of Christ our Savior.

But before I proceed farther to declare that which is to be spoken at this
present, let us turn our hearts to God, even the father of lights, that it
may please him to open the eyes of our understanding, and to direct al our
doings to his glory. etc.

In worldly business, it is reckoned a great point of wisdom, to do things
in due time, and to choose the fittest season to speak or to hold silence, to
buy or to sell, to build or to pull down. Solomon therefore said, To all
Eccle. 3.
things there is an appointed time, and a time to every purpose under the
heaven. Who so does not weigh the season, and take his convenient time, he is
unwise, and defeiteth himself, and bewrays his folly. But of all wisdoms
this is the greatest, that a man lift up his eyes to the throne of Gods mercy,
and know the time of his blessing, and direct his life to the service of GOD,
as he warns: Make no tarrying to turn unto the Lord, and put Eccle. 5.
not off from day to day: for suddenly shall the wrath of the Lord break
forth, and in thy security thou shall be destroyed. If the good man of the
house were wise, if he knew at what hour the Thief would come, he would
surely watch, and stand in readiness, and not suffer his house to be dug
through. Of this wisdom in taking the vantage of time, spoke the Prophet
David. This day if you hear his voice, harden not Psalm. 94.
your hearts. Forslow not the time, loose not this good occasion, hear his
voice now, this day. Of this wisdom spoke Saint Paul. We 2. Cor. 6.
as workers together beseech you, that ye receive not the grace of GOD in
vain. For he says, I have heard thee in a time accepted, and in the day of
salvation have I succored thee. Behold now the accepted time, behold now
the day of salvation.

Who so knows not this time, is not wise. Of this blindness and heaviness
of the people, God complayneth in many places of the Prophets. In the eight
Chapter of Jeremy, Even the Storke in the air knows her Iere. 8.
appointed times, and the Turtle, and the Crane, and the Swallowe observe the
time of their coming: but my people knows not the judgment of the Lord. Of
this their blindness and folly, our Savior reproves Jerusalem: O if thou
had (even Luke 19.
now at the least in this thy day) known those things, which belong unto thy
peace: but now are they hid from thine eyes. For the days shall come upon
thee, that thine enemies shall cast a trench about thee, and compass thee
round and keep thee in on every side, and shall make thee even with the
ground, and thy children which are within thee, and they shall not leave in
thee a stone upon a stone, because thou know not the time of thy
visitation. Therefore the Apostle calls upon the Romans, tells them that
the Sun is up, and the day open: and warns them, not to lose the season:
for now, even now (says he) it is time to rise.

That we may the better discern the light, let us behold the darkness of
that time, which was before. The whole world was divided into the people of
the Jews, and the heathens: and besides these, there were no other people. The
Heathens were forsaken of God: the Jews were his chosen people. The Heathens
woorshipped the workers of their own hands, and gave the glory of God unto
creatures, which are not God. They went after Idols, even as they were lead:
they had many gods, according to the number of their Cities: they delivered
up their bodies to all manner filthiness: God gave them over to follow their
lusts. The Fathers amongst them slew their own children, and offered them
up in Sacrifice to Devils. So strongly did the Prince of darkness possess
them, they had not the Arc of the Testimony, they lived without Prophets, or
covenant, or Christ, or God: they lived without hope, or light, or comfort.
In such a night, and such a darkness lay the Heathen.

The Jews, Gods chosen people, they were also bereft of knowledge: there was
no prophet left among them, nor any to teach them the will of the Lord. The
law did perish from the priest, and counsel from the ancient: light was
turned into darkness, and judgment into wormwood: they were bitter and
grievous to the poor: they slew the Prophets which were sent unto them, they
did for sake the fountain of living waters, and followed Baal and Astaroth.
Like people, like Priests: from the sole of the Esa. 1. 6.
foot, unto y^ head there was nothing whole in them. Of them God spoke by the
Prophet, I Mala. 1.
have no pleasure in you, neither will I accept an offering at your hand. Of
them he said, Esa. 1.
When you shall stretch out your hands, I will hide mine eyes from you: and
though you make many prayers, I will not hear you, In such a darkness lay
the Jews, in such a darkness lay the Gentiles. All had sinned, they were
all corrupt and abominable in their ways, they were the Children of wrath,
and the vessels of destruction. So were they wrapped in the cloud of
ignorance, and covered in the shadow of death. Such was the night Saint Paul
spoke of, so ugly, so dark, so void of comfort.

But God gave forth his light to shine upon them, he sent the Patriarchs and
Prophets, and holy Fathers, he sent unto them Moses and Aaron, and Angels
from Heaven, to give out sparks of this light. He made it appear by his
Prophet Esaie, Behold, Esa. 7.
the Virgin shall conceive, and bear a Son, and she shall call his name
Emanuell. In him shall all Israel be saved, he is the light to lighten the
Gentiles, his name shall be called wonderful, counselor, the mighty God, the
everlasting father, the Prince of peace: in him shall all the ends of the world
be blessed. This light they beheld, when it was not clearly opened unto
them, they did see it coming, and rejoiced in it, they were under a
Schoolemaister, and had not the perfect knowledge of this light.

But now God has scattered all these Clouds, and we behold as in a mirror
the glory of the Lord with open face. Our elder Fathers in the old Testament
had only a dim candle to guide their Feet, we have the bright Sun beams:
They had only the green blade of the Corn, we have the plentiful
increase, even as in the time of harvest: they had the shadow, we have the
light: they had only a drop to refreshe themselves, we have the whole
stream of Gods mercy powered out upon us.

Now has God remembered his holy covenant, and the oath which he swear to
our father Abraham: now the word was made flesh, and dwelt with us. The day
star is sprung up in our hearts, the Spirit of God has filled the whole
world: the earth is full of his glory. The Idols of the Heathen are fallen,
and are put to silence: their greatest mysteries appear to be follies, and
are laughed to scorn, the children make games of them in their streets. Satan
the Prince of this world, which is the accuser of our brethren, is now cast
forth.

Now is it known, that salvation, and power, and glory belongs to our God.
He has raised his Christ, and has established his kingdom, the kings and
nations of the world shall walk in his light, and his light shall not be put
out, and his kingdom shall have no end. Now is that new Jerusalem, the
glorious City of our God revealed from on high: now has God made the Heavens
new and a new earth, and has fixed his Tabernacle and dwelling place among
men. The fullness of time is come, the sound of the Apostles is gone through
all the earth: the Sun of righteousness has appeared: he is the light and
comfort of the whole world. This is the gracious year of mercy, this is the
day which the Lord has made. Now is the mercy of the Lord showed more and
more toward us, and his truth endures for ever. When Balaam the false
Prophet, behold the glory of this time, he brake out and said, Who shall
live when GOD does Numb. 24.
this? Who shall live, and see, and enjoy these things?

Awake therefore, or arise from sleep, the time so requires: For now is our
Salvation nearer then when we believed it. Of those few words, have grown
diverse senses, al good and godly: yet in my judgment, the simplest and
playnest sense is this. When we were heathen, and sat in darkness, we thought
we did well, and that we should be saved in that way, in which we walked:
and that there was no hope of salvation, but only in that: and we had a
great liking in our doings. This is the vanity, and misery of man: oftetimes
where he thinks himself most sure, he is deeply deceived.

The Turks and the Jews at this day, and others the enemies of the cross of
Christ, think there is no other true religion but theirs: and in yt they are
wonderful zealous, and stand in it unto death: no persuasion nor force can
remove them. When the people of Ephesus heard of the Act. 19.
preaching of Paul, they raised vproare, and filled the City full of tumult:
they caught Gaius and Aristarchus men of Macedonia, and Paul's companions in his
journey, and would have slain them: they made an outcrie, saying, Great is
Diana of the Ephesians, she is a goddess, she has made Heaven and Earth, we
have put our trust in her, we will call upon her, and she will hear us. Christ
she weth his Disciples, Mat. 10.
The brother shall betray the brother to death and the father the son, and the
children shall rise against their parents, and shall cause them to die, and ye
shall be hated of al men for my Name. For zeal to their GOD, the Priests of
Baal cut themselves with knives 1. King 18.
and launcers. Through zeal, many fathers slew their own children, and
burnte them quick in fire, in the honor of the Idol Moloch. Circumcelliones,
which were a sort of Heretics sprung out of the Donatistes about 420. years
after Christ, through zeal murdered one another, they threw them selves
down from high rocks and destroyed them selves, and thought that, the only
way to please God: so hot and fervent was their devotion. The children of light
have seldom suffered more, or more willingly, or with more affiance, then the
children of darkness: so striued they for God, but against God: and abused
his name against him self, and wittingly and willingly went down to Hell.
They have great zeal and earnest desire of the glory of GOD, but not
according to knowledge. They contented them selves with that they had received
of their Fathers, and would seek no further they thought they did serve GOD,
but they blasphemed the Name of the Son of GOD. In such sort did God suffer
them to walk in the blindness of their heart. In the latter day many shall
say Mat. 7.
unto Christ, Lord, Lord, have we not by thy Name prophesied? and by thy
Name cast out Devils? and by thy Name done many great works? We have prayed,
and given alms for thy sake: was it not done of zeal and devotion toward
thee? So well shall they be persuaded of their doings, they shall press
boldly to the throne of Gods Majesty, and require their meede.

But Christ shall aunsweare them, I never knew you: you served your fancy,
you served not me: your alms, and miracles, and your prayers shall condemn
you. Therefore Christ said to the Woman of Samaria, Ye worship that which
you know not. You John. 4.
are led with a zeal, and follow your Fathers, but are deceived. Even so,
he prayed his father for them that crucified him, and stood by, and reviled
him, O Father, thou art full of mercy, forgive them, they are moved of zeal,
and think they please thee, they know not what they do, they know not thee,
nor me thy Son whom thou have sent. Saint Hierome Hierome contra
Luciferianos.
says, Nomine vnitatis and fidei infidelitas scriptae est. Infidelity has
bin written under the name of faith and unity. For herein they thought them
selves good, and holy, and Catholic, if they departed not from the unity of
the world. Therefore they followed the general consent of others, they thought
them selves (says he) the true Church, and seemed to follow unity, though
in deed they fell to infidelity. Whatsoever is not of faith, is sin:
whatsoever Romans 14.
it be, be it never so holy, never so glorious, it is sin, it displeases
God: the end thereof is destruction.

Therefore Christ says, I am the light of the world: he that follows me,
shall John. 8.
not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life. So spoke Almighty
GOD to Deuteronomy 5.
his people, Take heed that you do as the Lord your GOD has commanded you:
turn not aside to the right hand, nor to the left. Thou shall not do the
thing that seems right in thine own eyes: Thou shalt not follow the zeal
of thine own heart. Think that thou may be deceived: dispose thy self to
hearken to the voice of the Lord: whatsoever he shall command thee, that only
shall thou do. For my thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways
my Esaias. 55.
ways, says the Lord: For as the heavens are higher the^ the earth, so are my
ways higher the^ yourwaies, and my thoughts above your thoughts. The will of
ye Lord is the only measure whereby all truth must be tried. Heereunto the
Prophet David humbles himself, and speaks unto GOD in this manner, Lighten
mine eyes, O lord, O teach me to do thy will, teach me to follow it, and to
practice it. Hereof S. Paul speaks, Understand what the will of Ephe. 5.
the Lord is. Leave the pretense of zeal, leave the devotion of your own
heart, rest not upon the will of your forefathers, nor of flesh and blood.
Learn to feel and taste the will of God, it is good, and gracious, and
merciful: thereby direct your steps, therein shall you find the possession
of life.

We were drowned in darkness (says the Apostle) yet thought we had the
light. I my self (says he) was a blasphemer, and did persecute the Church of
God: I followed the way of my fathers, I had a great zeal, and thought I did
well, but the way wherein I walked, was slippery, the light was darkness. I
delighted in vanity, and had pleasure in leasings. I was blind, yet perceived
it not, and therefore was my blindness and misery so much the more.

But now is our Salvation come near unto us: our bodies are made the Temples
of God, and his spirit dwells within us. We have the word of life put both
in our mouth, and in our heart: the kingdom of God is in the mids amongst
us. The Son of God calls unto us, Come unto me al ye that travel and be
heavily laden, and I will refresh you. S, John says, 1. Ioh. 1.
We have looked upon, and our hands have handeled the word of life. And
again, The John. 1.
word was made flesh, and dwelt among us, and we saw the glory thereof as the
glory of the only begotten son of the Father, full of grace and of truth. So
near is the Lord to them that seek him: So near unto us is our salvation.

When David heard the voice of the Lord, he awaked and rose up, he gave
thanks unto God, and powered out his heart before him, saying, O Lord our
Lord, how wonderful is thy Name in all the world? And again, Praise the
Lord, O my soul, and all that is within me, praise his holy Name. When the
Apostles heard this voice of the Lord, they were awaked, they forsook all
they had, they took up their Cross, and went over all the world preaching
the Gospel of salvation. When Paul heard the voice of Christ from heaven
above, he fell flat on the earth, and being astonished, said, Lord, what will thou that I do? I am thy servant, and the son of thy handemayde: make me to
do that thou command me to do.

Then could neither life, nor death, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor
Powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depthe, nor
any other Creature separate Paul from the love of God which is in Christ
Jesus our Lord: then he esteemed not to know any thing saving Jesus
Christ, and him crucified. He brake his sleep, rose up, and went forward. In
like manner the Prophet Esaias stirs up Jerusalem, Arise, be bright for the
light is come, and the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee. Esaias. 60.
Know thy time, and the day of thy visitation, awake thou that sleep, and
stand up from the dead, for the Son of God has shined over thee.

The Apostle therefore says, It is now time that we should arise from
sleep. We are the children of God, we are the children of the truth, we are
the sons of the Prophets, we are they whom GOD has chosen out of the world.
Whosoever puts his hand to the plough, and looks back, is unmeet for
the kingdom of heaven. These things are sent for our understanding: GOD has
given his word unto us. We have seen the works of God, the doumbe to speak,
the deaf to hear, the blind to see, the lame to go, the dead to rise and
come out of their graves: the Sun to be darkened, the earth to quake, rocks
to rent, and the Devil to confess the Son of God: for he was forced to say,
Thou art Christ the Son of God. Now does the kingdom of heaven suffer
violence. The night is passed, the day is at hand: we have slumbered enough
in ignorance, it is now time, we know the blessings which GOD has bestowed
upon us: it is time we should be thankful, and awake out of the sleep of
forgetfulness, that we humble our selves under the mighty hand of God, and
dream no more of our own strength: our conscience is charged: we cannot
plead ignorance: it is time that we rise: the mercy of God, the abundance
of his blessing, the fear of his judgment, the regard of our salvation so
requires.

Let us cast away the works of darkness: they be unfruitful, lothesome,
and horrible, They darken the heart, and blind the conscience: he that does
them shall be cast into utter darkness. Let us be afraid, let us be
ashamed hereof, such things are not fit for the children of light.

Let us put on the armor of light. God has chosen us to be his Soldiers,
and has called us forth into the field. Our fight is not against flesh and
blood, but against the Devil, the Prince of this world, and the Father of
darkness: he rampeth like a Lion, and lies in wait, and seeks whom he
may devour. All the vanities of this life, our bodies, our own hearts
conspire against us: the fight is terrible, the danger great. Let us not be
unprovided, let us not stand open to the stroke of the enemy: Let us take
unto us the whole armor of God, let our loyues be girded with beritie, let us
put on the shield of Faith, the brestplate of righteousness, the sword of
the spirit, and the helmet of salvation. These be the weapons of
righteousness, these be the armor of light. Let us not fear to declare the
truth, though thereby we should danger our life. Let us be faithful unto
the end, let it appear that the weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but
mighty through God to cast down holds, and imaginations, and every hie thing
that is exalted against God: so shall our armor be complete, so shall we show
glorious in the field, and be terrible to the enemy: so shall we stand
strong and boldly against sword, and fire, and death: so shall we like
faithful Soldiers of our captain Christ, manfully stand against the gates
of hell, and resist all the assaults, and quench all the fiery darts of the
wicked: then shall we eat of the fruit in the midst of Paradise, and shall
receive the Crown of everlasting glory.

Let us walk honestly, as in the day, not in gluttony and drunke^nes, neither
in Chambering and wantonness, nor in strife and envying. He sets down three
things, as three botches and carbuncles of the soul: they oppress the body,
defile the mind, and break the bond and unity of the Church of God.

The first is gluttony and drunkenness, the root and mother of al evil:
nothing stands safe, where wine preuayleth. This was the iniquity of
Sadome, abundance, and fullness of bread: they abused the gifts of God, to the
dishonor of god. This was ye cause of all her filthynes, and her filthiness was
the cause of her destruction. Here of God speaks. My chosen people, Deuteronomy. 32.
My darling is waxed fat: Therefore he forsook god that made him, and regarded
not the strong God of his salvation. And again, by the Prophet Esaias, The
harp, and viole, timbrell and pipe, are in their feasts, but Esaias. 5.
they regard not the work of the Lord, neither consider the work of his
hands. And in the xxiichap. Behold joy and gladness slaying Esaias. 22.
oxen, and killing sheep, eating flesh, and drinking wine, eating and
drinking: for to morrow we shall die. So through gluttony, and drunkenn es they
despised the threatenings of God, and entered not into the way of repentance,
but continued in their sins, and made scorn of the Prophets of God. The
people of Israel sat them down to eat and drink and Erod. 32.
rose up to play. They forgot God, and the mercies he had showed upon them, and
worshipped a golden calfe: So gross and so deadly are the clouds of
drunkenness. Our Savior Christ says, toward the latter day the people shall
eat and drink, and be void of care, as in the days of Noah, and destruction
shall suddenly fall upon them: therefore Christ says, Woe be to you that are
full, for you shall hunger. Luke 6.


Many have been slain in the field, but many more have taken their deadly
wound by surfeting: many have been drowned in the sea, but many more have
perished by the strength of wine. It is not set down, that the rich glutton
was an oppressor, an extortioner, an usurer, or y^ he came unjustly by his
goods, but that he abused the same, yt be fared deliciously, and became
unthankful: and therefore was punished in hell fire. Then he which before had
abundance, and did swimine in wine, had not one drop to quench his thirst.
Many make their belly their God. They have more comfort in the cast of sweet
fare, then in the consideratioon of the works of God. Their table is turned
into a snare, their glory is to their shame. Here will I speak nothing of
forcing and quaffinge, God keep it far from Christian tables, it is too too
wild and barbarous: the heathens hate it, nature abhors it, the horse and
mule would not use it. S. Augustine says, Ebrius non peccatu^ facit, sed ipse
totus est peccatum. A drunken man does not commit sin, but he is altogether
sin. And therefore his reward is death. S. Paul says, Drunkardes shall not
inherit 1. Cor. 6.
the kingome of God. They shall drink the cup of y^ wine of the lords wrath.
Therefore Christ says, Take heed to your selves, least Luke 21.
at any time your hearts be opressed with surfeting, and drunkenness, and the
cares of this life: and least that day come on you at unawares. Therefore says
the Apostle, let us not walk in eating and gluttony: it will drown our
senses, it will oppress our nature.

The kingdom of God is neither meat nor drink: our meat is to do ye will of
our father. Let us not abuse the creatures of God: Let us eat and drink, that
we may live, only to y^ sustena^ce of our bodies: yt we by the moderate and
sober use of those things, may be the better hable to follow and please God in
our vocation. The meat for the belly, and the belly for the meats: but God
shall destroy both it and them. Let us think of the cup which Christ had on y^
cross: his cup was eisel and tempered with gall: at his hand let us take the
cup of thanks giving, and call upon the name of the Lord. Let us whether we
eat, or drink, remember who it is that has bestowed his gifts upon us, and
whatsoever we do, let us do it to the glory of God.

An other bo^ch and carbuncle is, chambering, and wantonness. Of this also the
Apostle warns us: for adulterers and fornicators God shall judge, they shall
have their part in the lake, which burns with fire and brimstone, which is
the second death: the Lord is the auenger of al such. It is the will of God,
that our bodies be kept in holiness, they are the temples of GOD, he has
called us to be vessels of honor, that we should be holy in body and holy
in spirit, that we serve him in holiness and righteousness, all the days of our
life.

The last, is strife and envying. We are one body in Christ Jesus, we are
endued with one spirit, we are members one of another. The Gospel of Christ is
the gospel of peace, he has broken the stop of the partiton wall, he has
set al things at peace. He has taught us, learn of me, for I am humble and
meek. Let us not (says S. Paul) be desirous of vain glory, provoking Gal.
5.
one another, ^nuying one another. Let not one of you say, I am Paul's, and
another, I am Apollos, the body of Christ is one, it is not divided. If you
bite and devour one another, take heed least you consume one another. If
there be ^nuying, and strife, and dissentions among you, you are yet carnal,
you savor not of the spirit of God. You are but a little flock, the world
hates you, join together, love one another, bear you one another burden,
and so fulfill the law of Christ. The fruit of the spirit is love, joy, peace,
long sufferinge, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekenes, and temperancie. Love
suffers long, it is bountiful: love enuieth not: love does not boast it
self: it is not puffed up: it disdaineth not: it seeks not her own things:
it is not provoked to anger: it thinks not evil: it rejoices not in
iniquit^e, but rejoices in the truth: it suffers all things: it believes
all things, it hops all things: it endures al things: love is the bond of
perfection. The servant of Christ is not quarrellous: let us keep the unity
of the spirit in the bond of peace. Let not dissension or malice trouble our
hearts, let us walk after this manner, and so, let us glorify God in our
mortal bodies. Let us avoid these things, gluttony, dronkennes, chambering
and wantonness, strife and envying. They be the unfruitful works of darkness:
the way of them leads unto damnation.

But put you on the Lord Jesus Christ.

If we behold our selves, and consider our own nakedness, we shall find, yt by
nature we are nothing else but the children of wrath. Who can call that clean,
that is conceived of unclean seed? David says Behold, I am conceived in
sin, my sins have over gone my head, there is no health in my flesh. No^e
that lives shall be justified in thy sight, who can understand his faults?
Cleanse me from my secret fultes. Job says, Verebar omnia opera mea, I stood in
fear Job. 9.
of al my works, knowing that thou will not judge me innocent. Again, The
stars are unclean Job. 25.
in his sight: How much more man a worm, even the son of man which is but a
worm? In like sort says Esaie, We have al Esa. 6, 4.
been as an unclean thing and all our righteousness is as filthy cloutes, Our
virtue, our holiness, our fasting, our prayers are filthy, when they come to his
sight. We can not say, our heart is clean. We can not say, we have not
sinned. God has shut up al in unbelief, that he may have mercy upon all.
That is borne of the flesh, is flesh. The sperit fights against the flesh,
and the flesh against the spirit. Open shame belongs to us, and to our
fathers. Cursed is he that abides not in all things that are written in the
book of the law. And whosoever offends in one, is made guilty of all the
commandments. When the miserable and writched soul boasts it self,
saying, I am rich, and increased with goods and have need ^euel. 3.
of nothing, the spirit of God makes answer, Thou art wretched, and
miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked. Thou have nothing to put upon
thee, to cover thy shame. I counsel thee to buy of me, gold tried by the
fire, that thou may be made rich: and white raiment, that thou may be
clothed, and that thy filthy nakedness do not appear: and anoint thine eyes
with eye salve, that thou may see. The same spirit in the Apostle, gives
this counsel, that we put on us Jesus Christ. Let him cover us with his body,
and with his blood, as with a garment: his blood has cleansed us from al our
sins. He is the lamb of God that takes away the sins of ye world. He is
become unto us, wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemtion.
S. Hierome says S^ merita nostra consideremus, desperandum Hier. in 64. Esa.
est. If we weigh our own deseruings, if we appear in our own apparel, we
must despair. And Basil says, Qui non fidit recte factis nec sperat ex
operibus iustificari, solam habet spem salutis miserecordias domini. He that
trusts not to good deeds, nor hops to be justified by his works, has no
other hope of salvation but by the mercies of the Lord.

Let us therefore put on us Jesus Christ. Let us cover us under his apparel,
as Jacob covered him self under the coat of his brother Esau, and so let us
present our selves before our heavenly father. The phrase of puttinge on is
usual: whereby he means, we must be wholly clad, and possessed with Christ. In
like phrase it is said in the twelfe of the revelation. There appeared Reave. 12.
a great wonder in heaven, a woman clothed with the sun. And in the 104. psalm.
My soul praise thou the Lord O my God Psalm. 104.
thou art exceeding great, thou art clothed with glory and honor. And which
covers himself with light, as with a garment. And to the Colos. Put on tender
mercy, kindness. humblenes of mind, meeknes, long suffering. Colos. 3.
Chrysostom says, Dominum ipsum, quod horribile est vestimenti loco tradit.
Behold, he gives us Christ to be put on as a garment, Chrisost. sermon. 24. in
13. Romans
which is a heinous thing to be spoken. It passes al sense of nature, it
passes the judgment of flesh and blood.

Here remember, these words may not be taken, as if christ were a material and
earthly coat, made of cloth to cover our bodies: they are spiritual words, and
have a spiritual understanding. Chrysostom says, Omnia tibi factus est
Christus mensa, vestimentum, domus, caput, et radix. Ad populum Antiochenum
hom. 21 Orig. in Exodum cap. 15. hom. 7. Nazianz, in Psalm. 44.
Christ is become all things for thee thy table, thy garment, thy house, thy
head, and thy root. Origin says, verbum dei et caro dicitur, et panis, et
lac, et holera. The word of God is called flesh, and bread, and milk, and
herbes-Nazianzen also says, Quemadmodu^ dominus Jesus appellatur vita, via,
panis, vitis, lux vera, et mill alia: ita etiam appellatur gladius. After the
same manner, as our Lord Jesus Christ is called the life, the way, the bread,
the wine, the true light, and a thousand things else: so is he also called the
sword.

He is spiritually a table, a garment, a house, a root, a head, flesh, milk,
herbs, the way, the light, a sword, bread or drink: we dwell in him
spiritually, we are clothed with him spiritually. We grow out of him, and
walk upon him, and are made one with him, even members of his body,
spiritually. We do spiritually eat him and drink him, we live by him
spiritually, we eat him by hearing, and digest him by faith. Origin says,
appallatur panis vitae, vt habeat gustus Hom. 2. in cantica.
animae quod degustet, he is called the bread of life that the soul may have
whereon to feed.

O brethren, O that we had senses to feel this food, that we could savor of
the bread of life, and taste and see how sweet the Lord is: he that thus
tastes of this bread shall live for ever.

Chrysostom says, Dentes inserimus in earnes Christi. We thrust our teeth
into the flesh of Chrisost. in enceniis. Cip. de caena domini.
Christ. And Cipria^, Intra ipsa vulnera rede^ptoris nostri linguam figimus. We
faste^ our tongue within the wounds of our redemer. These be vehement and
spiritual kind of speeches, to raise up our senses, and to teach us to feel
the vnspeaeable sweetenes of this heavenly feeding.

Likewise said Bernard, Desidero totum Christum videre et tangere, et non id
solum, sed accedere Bern. de a more Dei. cap. 1.
vsque ad sanctum vulnus lateris eius, ostium arcae quod factum est in latere,
vt intrem totus vsque ad cor Jesus. I desire to behold whole Christ, and to
touch him: and not so only, but also to come to the holy wound of his side,
which is the door that was made in the side of the arc, that I may enter
wholly, and go in, even unto the heart of Jesus. Thus are we taught to lift up
our hearts. and to seek those things which are above, where Christ sits
at the right hand of God. Why should we then follow the fleshly error of the
Capernaites: why should we be so insensible in heavenly things: Let us have
some feeling hereof in our heart Solomon says, The wise man's eyes are in his
head, but the fool walks in darkness. Ecclesi. 2.
Our savior therefore says The words y^ I spoke unto you, are spirit and
life. To eat Ioh. 6
the body of Christ, and to drink his blood, is not the part of the body:
it is rather a work of our mind. And therefore, S. Ambrose says, Non
corporali tactu Christum, sed fide tangimus. We In Lucam. lib. 10. cap. 24.
touch not Christ by bodily touching, but we touch him by faith. And again
Stephanus in terris positus, Christum tangit in caelo. Stephen being in the
earth touches Christ being Sermon. 58.
in heaven. By faith therefore we eat Christ, and by faith we drink Christ:
by faith we are apparelled and clothed with Christ. And this is that the
Apostle, says, Put ye on the Lord Psalm. 23.
Jesus Christ. Let us be incorporate in him. Let God see nothing in us but
the image of his son, so shall he dwell in us, and we in him.

Take no thought for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof.

The sons of God rest upon the providence of God their father, He gives the^
water out of the rocks: he raineth down bread from heaven: he opens his
hands, and fills every living thing with his blessing. The Prophet says, The
Lord is my shepherd, I shall not want. The things of this world shall have
an end, 1. Tim 5.
they fade away and will not continue. If riches abound, we must not set our
heart upon them, but rather be careful for the life to come. We must seek
the kingdom of God, and the righteousness thereof: then al these things shall be
ministered unto us.

He does not forbid honest and moderate forecast and, provision: as if it were
not lawful for Christians, to deal in matters appertaininge to the good
estate of this life. For he has said unto Timothy, If there be any y^
provides not 1. Tim. 5.
for his own, and namely for them of his houshoulde, he denies the faith, and
is worse then an infidel again he says, no man ever yet hated Ephel. 5.
his own flesh, but nourishes it, and cherishes it. Again, writing to
Timothy, drink no longer water, but use a little wine for thy 1. Tim. 5.
stomakes sake, and thine often infirmities. In which speeches, he shows we
are bond to nourish, and feed, and be careful for our bodies.

Though the conversation of the faithful be in heaven and they seek after
the things which are on high, yet whiles they pass the pilgrimage of this
life, they must needs have the fellowship and company of their natural
bodies: the which they must not so weaken, that thereby they shall become
unprofitable, and not hable to do service in the Church of god: and yet so
keep them under, that they may be made obedient to the spirit.

Only we may not be over careful. To take great care for the body, is to
cast away all care for the soul. For they that will be rich, fall into
temptation and snares, and into many 1. Tim. 6.
foolish and noisome lusts, which drown men in perdition and destruction: for
the desire of money is the root of al evil, which whiles some lusted after,
they erred from the faith, and perced themselves with many sorrows. Of this
care speaks our savior, It is easier for a Camel to go through y^ eye of a
needle, then for a rich man to enter Mat. 19.
into the kingdom of God.

No care can satisfy the discontented mind. The righteous eats, and is
satisfied: but the Pro. 13.
belly of the wicked ever wants. He has enlarged his desire as hell, and
ladeth him self with thick clay, he increases that which is not his, and
cannot be satisfied. The horse leache Pro. 30.
has two daughters, which cry, give, give. There be there things y^ will not
be satisfied: Yea, four y^ say not it is enough. They care not by what means
they make their gaynes, they live in usury, a most filthy trade, a trade
which God detesteth, a trade which is the very overthrow of all Christian
love. They eat up the people as they eat bread. Such are the ways of every
one, that is greedy of gain, He would take away y^ life of y^ owners thereof.
Pro. 1.
They have hardened their heart against God, they do not serve God, but Mammon.

But their gain shall be to their loss, and their money, to their destruction.
He that gives his money unto Usurie, shall not dwell in the tabernacle of the
Lord, nor rest upon his holy mountain.

We have here no continuing City, we are strangers as were al our fathers
before us. If we gather riches to our selves, and be not rich in God, he shall
say unto us, O fool, this night will they fetch away thy soul from thee: Then
whose shall those things be which thou have provided: Let him therefore that
has this worlds goods, be as if he had them not. They are the gifts of God.
The Lord gives them and the Lord takes them away. Settle not your hearts
upon the^. As they come, so will they fade away: they be uncertain, they will
deceive you. Set your desire upon heavenly things, seek after the life which
is to come in the land of the living. When we shall see those unspeakable
joys, we shall perceive, that all the pleasures of this life, in comparison of
them were nothing.

Now, somewhat more specially to apply the words of the Apostle to this
present time. It is now time also, that we should arise from sleep. God has
delivered us also from the night. We may say, This is the day which the Lord
has made: Let us rejoice and be glad in it. We may say, he has showed his
mercies toward us, and the truth of the Lord endures for ever.

Let us look back to the time late past, and behold the night of error, and
ignorance. What shall I say? Where should I begin, or how may I end? The
matter is of great compass: the time I have to speak is but short: and I
have no delight to speak of darkness. After God had delivered the people of
Israel, and given them passage through the red sea, Marie the Prophetess,
sister of Aaron looked back into Egypt. There she remembered Pharao, and his
cruelty, how he plagued the children of God: she remembered how by a mighty
hand and out stretched arm, he delivered them, and wrought his wonders upon
Pharao, and all the land of Egypt. She looked back upon the great darkness,
and upon the frogs, and flies, and botches: she beheld the waters turned
into blood, the killinge of the first borne of man and beast, the overthrow of
Pharao and all his Charets in the mids of the sea. And therefore she answered
the men, Singe ye Exodus 15.
unto the Lord, for he has triumphed gloriously: The horse and his rider has
he overthrown in the sea.

Even so, let us cast back our eyes, and make a view of the Church. Loath I am
to speak of it: Yet it is needful to say somewhat thereof, that we way
rejoice in our deliverance. All things were done in a strange tongue: the
priest spoke, and the people heard they knew not what. No man could say Amen
to their prayers. The matters were such, that he might be reconed happy which
heard them not. They abused the Church of God with vain fables. If you doubt
hereof read their Legendes and festiuals. They know this, they acknowledge it.
It might well be spoken of them which Hillarie Hilar. con. Auxentisi.
said, Sanctiores sunt aures populi quam corda sacerdotum The ears of the
people are more holy, then the hearts of the Priests.

I beseech you, mark the form and fashion of their prays. To the blessed
virgin, they said, Aue Maria, salus, et consolatrix viuorum et mortuorum, Hail
Marie, the savior and co^forter, both of quick and dead. And again, O
gloriosa virgo Maria, libera nos ab omni malo, et a paenis inferni. O glorious
virgin Mary, deliver us from al evil, and from the pains of hell. Again,
Monstra te esse matrem, show that thou art a mother. They call her, Regina
Coeli, domina mundi, vnica spes miserorum, Queen of heaven, Lady of y^ world,
the only hope of them that be in misery. It were tedious, and unpleasant to
recite the like their blasphemies. How did these men account of the cross and
passion of Christ? What leave they to be wrought by the price of his blood? To
speak nothing of the multitude of their intercessours and patrones, of their
false miracles, of their deceivable merits and works of supererogation: how
foul a kind of Idolatry was it, to worship the image with the selfsame
honor, wherewith they worship the thing it self, that is represented by the
Image? As, if the thing it self be worshipped with godly honor, then must
the Image thereof be worshipped with godly honor.

The holy Scriptures, which are the light to direct our ways, and the power of
God to save our souls, were hid under a bushel. Whosoever built him self and
his faith upon them, was adjudged an Heretic. Marriage was forbidden, and
fornication suffered. They did not only devour widows houses, but drew to
them selves the fat of the land, by pretense of their long prayers. I spare
your chaste and godly ears: otherwise, I were able to rehearse many their
foul abuses, and works of darkness.

Yet will I show you one of their nightbirdes, lately hatched in the nest of
all superstition. It is the Agnus dei, here it is. It was lately consecrate
by the holy Father, and sent from Rome. They teach, that by the virtue of
their consecration, (or rather coniuration) and blessing, these little things
have power to defend the faithful from lightening and tempest.

O merciful God, what has the Pope to do with the lightening: what can a
piece of wax prevail to the staying of a tempest? The Lord of heaven and
earth, it is he that sends forth lightnings, and raises up tempests. Fire
and Psalm. 148.
hail, snow and vapors, stormy wind execute his word. God will send
forth his lightening and consume them. Behold (says Iere. 23.
Jeremy) the tempest of the Lord goes forth in his wrath, and a violent
whirle wind shall fall down upon the head of the wicked.

O, what a shepherd is he, that now in this light of the day, thus mocketh
and deceives the lambs and sheep of Christ? Is this to woorshippe Christ in
spirit and truth? Is this the hope we have in Christ? Is this the profession
of the Gospel? Is this the will of GOD, to commit our lives to so vile a cake?
Howbeeit, there is no cause why any man should marvel hereat. For, ignorance
which is the mother of error, by their own confession, is become the mother
of devotion: and these be the fruits, and children of blindness and
ignorance. I will speak nothing of that man from whence this gear comes.
Would God he were the man he would seem to be. But if the light it self
be darkness, how great then is the darkness? Yet they say of him, his voice
must be received, as the voice of Peter, and the word of God him self must
take authority and credit of him. Thus has he come between, like a Cloud,
and eclipsed the sun of Gods glorious Gospel.

If we behold either their Schools, or their Churches, their quier, their
pulpit, their prayers, their Sacraments, their Clergy, their people, their
doctrine, or their life: we may truly say as the Prophet said, Surely our
fathers have inherited lies, and vanity, Iere. 16.
wherein was no profit. We may truly say, the Law has perished from the
Priest, and counsel from the wise, and the word from the Prophet: the blind
did lead the blind, they have turned silver into dross, and fed the people
with chafe, in steed of wholesome and good meats. Blessed be the name of
God, who has given us eyes to epsy their dealinges, and has revealed unto us
his word, to guide our feet into the way of peace.

I know these things are defended boldly and obstinately: no marvel. For
the Apostle says, They have not all obeyed the Gospel. Romans 10.
There have bin, that have called the light darkness, and the darkness light.
If our Gospel be hid (says he) it is hid in them that perish, in 2. Cor. 4.
whom the God of this world has blinded the minds.

I will not here make answer to any particular, albeit occasion be offered,
and happily it be looked for. Contention and quarrels have no end: All
doctrine shall be brought to trial, the day of the Lord shall reueal^
errors, and give witness for the truth. God will turn all to his glory.
What so ever stir is raised up against the truth, it is but a smoke, it will
soon fade and come to nothing.

There are this day many, to all appearance godly men, of good life, of
righteous dealing, of great zeal and conscience: but yet have not eyes to see
these things. I protest in their behalf, as did Paul, they have a great
zeal of Gods glory, would God it were according to knowledge. We may say
with the Prophet, O Lord, thy judgments are like a great Psalm. 36.
deep. Who has known the mind of the Lord: or, who is of his counsel: God
knows his time. He has the key of David, he opens, and no man shuts:
he is the Father of lights. We are in his hand, both we and al our counsels:
God grant we may put off all fleshly affections, and put on Jesus Christ, and
that all the earth may see his glory.

Now on the other side, let us consider how mercifully God has dealt with
us. He has restored unto us the light of his Gospel, and has taught us the
secrets of his heavenly will. We hear him talk with us familiarly in the
Scriptures. as a father talks with his child. Thereby he kindeleth our
faith, and strengthens our hope: thereby our hearts receive joy and
comfort. We have the holy ministration of the Sacraments: we know the covenant
of baptism: we know the covenant and mystery of the Lords Supper. We
fall down together, and confess our life before God: we pray together, and
understand what we pray. This was the order of the Primitive Church: this was
the order of the Apostles of Christ. If we compare this with the former, we
shall soon see the difference between light and darkness.

The kingdom of God now suffers violence. The sound of the Gospel has
gone over all the world, and the whole world is awaked therewith, and draws
to it. The sun is risen, the day is open: God has made his kingdom
wonderful among us. It is now time, now is it time that we should arise
from sleep: for now is our salvation near. Now it is in our mouth, we can
speak of it: GOD grant it may be nearer us, even in our hearts. The night
is past, GOD grant it be past for ever: that we be never again thrown into
the darkness of death: that the word of life, the truth of Christ, be never
again taken from us. And it shall never be taken away, if we be thankful.
Unkindness can never escape vnplagued. Let us wake, let us wake, our sleep is
deadly. Let us pray to GOD to awake us: he is able to raise the dead. Our
Savior says, The hour shall come, when John. 5.
the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and they that hear it,
shall live. Lazarus was dead, yet he heard the voice of Christ, and rose up
again, and came abroad.

Let us put on Jesus Christ, let it appear upon us that we wear him, let us
not be ashamed of his Gospel, it is the power of God to salvation. If we be
ashamed of him and of his words, he will be also ashamed of us, when he
comes in the glory of his father, with the holy Angels.

Let us cast away the works of darkness, and all doctrines of superstition
and ignorance. Let us behold the troubles and miseries of other countries.
Heaven and earth, our brethren, the care of our salvation, the Son of God
himself put us in mind, that it is now time.

Whiles we have time, let us do good: let us seek God whiles he may be
found. The Lord wayteth when he may show his mercies: Let us turn unto him
with an upright heart. So shall he turn to us: so shall we walk as the
children of light, so shall we shine as the sun in the kingdom of our
Father, so shall God be our God, and will abide with us for ever.

And thou, O most merciful Father, we beseech thee for thy mercy sake,
continue thy grace and favor toward us: let the sun of thy Gospel never
go down out of our hearts, let thy truth abide, and be stablished among us
for ever. Help our unbelief, encreace our faith, give us hearts to consider
the time of our visitation: Apparel us thoroughly with Christ, that he may
live in us, and so thy Name may be glorified in us in the sight of all the
world.

Amen.
FINIS.
Ornatissimo viro Thomae Randolpho armigero serenissimo ad Scotos Legato
integerrimo.
QVis te iunxit amor docto Randolphe Iuello
Oxonia, exilium, musa, laborque notant.
Et, quod ad exequias defuncti ducere plectrum
Triste, Buchananos Patritiosque facis:
(Quis tibi gratus erit pro tali munere?) certe
Auctior hoc studio gratia facta tua est.
Nec nihil ex illo referes. Sacra signa redemptor,
Essent vt fidei tessera fida, dedit.
Haec tuus exposuit sancte; tibi dedico: ne sit
Tam rarae, and fidei tessera nulla, piae.
Tuae dignitatis studiosus Johan. Garbrandus.

A treatise of the Sacraments gathered out of certain Sermons, which the
Reverend Father in God, Bishop Jewel, preached at Salisburie.
I Have opened unto you y^ contents of the Lords prayer, and showed you upon
whom we ought to call, and what to ask: and y^ articles of our Christian
faith, in God ye father, y^ son, and the holy Ghost, of ye church, of
remission of sins, of the resurrection, and of life everlasting, etc. And I
have opened unto you the ten commandments, and in them what our duty is
toward God, toward our Prince and magistrates, toward our parents, toward
our neighbor, and toward our selves. All this have I done simply, and plainly,
without al show of learning, that it might the better sink into our hearts.

Now I think good to speak of the Sacraments of the Church, that al you may
know what they are, because you are all partakers of the holy sacraments.
Christ has ordained them, that by them he might set before our eyes the
mysteries of our salvation, and might more strongly confirm the faith, which
we have in his blood, and might seal his grace in our hearts. As Princes
seals confirm and warrant their deeds and char^ers: so do the Sacraments
witness unto our conscience, that Gods promises are true, and shall continue
for ever. Thus does God make known his secret purpose to his Church: first,
he declares his mercy by his word: then he seals it, and assures it by
his sacraments. In the word we have his promises: in the sacraments we see them.

It would require a long time, if I should utter that might be said in this
matter: especially in laying open such errors and abuses, as have crept into
the Church. But I will have regard to this place, and so frame my speech, that
the meanest and simplest may reap profit thereby. That you may the better
remember it, I will keep this order. I will show you, what a Sacrament is:
Secondly, who has ordained them: thirdly, wherefore they were ordained, and,
what they work in us: fourthly, how many there are: and then I will briefly
speak of every of them.

A Sacrament is an outward and visible sign, whereby GOD seals up his grace
in our hearts, to the confirmation of our Faith. Saint Augustine says,
Sacramentum est inuisibilis gratiae visibile signum. A Sacrament is a visible
sign of grace invisible. And yt we may the better understand him, he tells
us what thing we should call a sign. A sign, is a thing Aug. de doct. Chri.
li. 2. ca. 1
that besides the sight itself, which it offreth to the se^ses, causes of
itself some other certain thing to come to knowledge. In Baptism, the water
is the sign: and the thing signified, is the grace of God. We see the water,
but the grace of God is invisible: we cannot see it. Moreover he says, Signa,
cum ad res diuinas Ad Marcellinum epist. 5.
adhibentur, Sacramenta vocantur. Signs, when they be applied to godly things,
be called sacraments. The signification and substance of the sacrament, is to
show us, how we are washed with the passion of Christ, and how we are fed
with the body of Christ. And again, If Sacraments Aug. epist, 23. ad
Bonifaciu^.
had not a certain likeness, and representatio^ of the things whereof they be
sacraments, then indeed they were no sacraments. And because of this likeness
which they have with the things they represent, they be ofttimes termed by the
names of the things themselves. Therefore after a certain manner of speech (and
not otherwise) the Sacrament of the body of Christ, is the body of Christ, and
the Sacrament of the blood of Christ, is the blood of Christ: so the sacrament
of faith, is faith.

Who has ordained the Sacraments? Not any Prelate, not any Prince, not any
Angel, or Archangel, but only God himself. For, he only has authority to
seal the charter, in whose authority only it is to grant it. And only he
gives the pledge, and confirms his grace to us, which gives his grace into
our hearts. Chrisost. says, Diuinu^ and integrum non esset mysterium, si
quicquam ex te adderes. The mystery Hom. 7. in 1. Corin.
were not of God nor perfect, if thou should put any thing to it. In the
days of Noah, when God determined to be merciful unto his people, and never
to drown the whole world with water, he said, I have set my bow in the
cloud, and it shall be for a sign of the covenant Genesis 9.
between me and the earth and when I shall cover the earth with a cloud, and
the bow shall be seen in the cloud, then will I remember my covenant which is
between me and you, and between every living thing in flesh, and there shall be
no more waters of a flood to destroy al flesh.

In like manner, when God would witness and stablish to Abraham and his seed
after him, the promise of his mercy: he himself ordained a sacrament to
confirm the same: This is my covenant which ye shall keep between me and you,
and thy Genesis 17.
seed after thee. Let every manchild among you be circumcised. Thus God
ordained yt sacrament of circumcision. This sacrament was a seal of Gods
promise to Abraham, and a seal of Abraham's faith, and obedience toward God.
By this sacrament man was bound to yt Lord: and by yt same sacrament God
vouchsafed to bind himself to man. But how is the sacrament formed? of what
parts is it made? August. says, Accedat verbu^ Tract. 80. in 13. Ioh.
ad elementu^, and fit sacramentu^. Join yt word of Christ's institution with
the sensible creature, and thereof is made a sacrament. Ioyue the word to the
creature of water, and thereof is made the sacrament of Baptism: take away the
word, then what is the water other then water? The word of God and the
creature make a sacrament.

But why were sacraments ordained? he tells you: In nullu^ nonce^ religionis,
ceu veru^ etc. Men Lib. 19. co^tra Faust. cap. 11.
cannot be gathered together to the profession of any religion, whether it be
true or false: unless they be bound inthe fellowship of visible signs or
sacraments. The first cause why they were ordained, is, that thereby one
should acknowledge another, as fellows of one household, and members of one
body. So was al Israel reckoned the children of Abraham, because of their
circumcision, and al such as were uncircumcised, were cut off from the people,
and had no part in the common wealth of Israel, because they were
uncircumcised: Even as we take them that are not baptized, to be none of our
brethren, to be no children of God, nor members of his Church, because they
will not take the Sacrament of Babtisme.

An other cause, is, to move, instruct, and teach our dull and heavy hearts, by
sensible creatures, that so our negligence in not heeding or marking the word
of God spoken unto us, might be amended. For if any man have the outward seal,
and have not the faith thereof sealed within his heart, it avails him not:
he is but an hypocrite and dissembler. So the circumcision of the foreskinne
of the flesh, taught them to mortify their fleshly affections, and to cut off
the thoughts and devises of their wicked hearts. Therefore said Stephen to the
Jews, Ye stiffenecked, and of uncircumcised hearts and ears, Act. 7.
you have always resisted the holy Ghost.

So, when in Baptism our bodies are washed with water, we are taught that our
souls are washed in the blood of Christ. The outward washing or spriukling,
does represent the spriukeling and washing which is wrought within us: the
water does signify the blood of Christ. If we were nothing else but soul,
he would give us his grace barely and alone, without joining it to any
creature, as he does to his Angels: but seeing our spirit is drowned in our
body, and our flesh does make our understanding dull: therefore we receive
his grace by sensible things.

Chrysostom. says, Aliter ego, and aliter incredulus disponitur. Ille cu^ etc. I
am otherwise affected, Hom. 7. in 1. Cor.
the^ is he which believes not. When he hears of the water of Baptism, he
thinks it is nothing else but water: But, I see (not the creature only,
which mine eyes do see, but also) the cleansing of my soul by the holy Ghost.
He thinks yt my body oneli is washed: I believe, that my soul is thereby made
pure and holy: and withal I consider Christ's burial, his resurrection, our
sanctification, righteousness, redemption, adoption, our inheritance, the
kingdom of heaven, and the fulness of the spirit. For I judge not of ye things I
see by my bodily eyes, but by the eyes of my mind.

When one that is unlearned, and can not read, looks upon a book, be the
book never so true, never so well written, yet because be knows not the
letters, and cannot read, he looks upon it in vain. He may turn over all
the leaves, and look upon all, and see nothing: but another that can read,
and has judgment to understand, co^sidereth the whole story, the dough^^e
deeds, grave counsels, discrete answers, examples, promises, threatenings, the
very drifte, and meaning of him that wrote it. So do the faithful receive the
fruit and comfort by the Sacraments, which the wicked and ungodly neither
consider, nor receive. Thus do the sacraments lead us, and instruct us to
behold the secret and unknown mercies of God, and to carry our selves to the
obedience of his will. And this is the other cause, why sacraments were
ordained.

Thirdely, they are seals and confirmations of Gods promise. S. Paul says,
Abraham received Romans 4.
the sign of circumcision, as the seal of the righteousness of the faith,
which he had when he was uncircumcised. By these, we stoy y^ mouth of
heretics. For, if they deny that our Lord Jesus Christ was delivered to
death for our sins, and is risen again for our justification: we show them
our sacraments, that they were ordained, to put us in remembrance of Christ,
and that by the use of them, we show the Lords death til he come. We tell them,
these are proofs, and signs, that Christ suffered death for us on the cross.
As Chrysostom says, Laying out these Chrisost. in Mat. hom. 83.
mysteries, we stop their mouths.

What? Are they nothing else but bare and naked signs? God forbid. They are the
seals of God, heavenly tokens and signs of the grace, and righteousness, and
mercy given and imputed to us. Circumcision was not a bare sign. That is not
circumcision, which is outward in the flesh, says Paul, but the circumcision
of Romans 2.
the heart. And again, In Christ ye are circumcised with circumcision made
without hands, Coloss. 2.
by putting off the sinful body of the flesh, through the circumcision of
Christ. Even so is not Baptism ante bare sign. Baptisma eius, Ad Hebr. hom.
16.
says Chrysostom, etiam passio eius est. Christ's baptism, is Christ's
passion. They are not bare signs: it were blasphemy so to say. The grace of
God does always work with his Sacraments: but we are taught not to seek
that grace in the sign, but to assure our selves by receiving the sign, that
it is given us by the thing signified. We are not washed from our sins by the
water, we are not fed to eternal life by the bread and wine, but by the
precious blood of our savior Christ, that lies hid in these Sacraments.

Bernard says, Datur annulus ad inuestiendu^, etc. The fashion is to deliver a
ring, when seisin Sermon. de coena Do.
and possession of inheritance is given: the ring is a sign of the possession.
So that he which has taken it, may say, the ring is nothing, I care not for
it: it is the inheritance, which I sought for. In like manner when christ our
Lord drew nigh to his passion, he thought good to give seisin and possession
of his grace to his disciples, and y^ they might receive his invisible grace by
some visible sign

Chrisost. says, In nobis non simplex aqua operatur Hom. 35. in Johan.
sed cu^ accepit gratiam spiritus, abluit omnia peccata. Plain or bare water
works not in us, but when it has received the grace of the holy Ghost, it
washes away all our sins. Amb. de Sac. lib. 1. cap. 5.
So says Ambrose also, Spiritus sanctus descendit, and consecrat aqua^. The
holy Ghost comes down, and halloweth the water. And, Praesentia Trinitatis
adest. There is the presence of the Ciril. in Ioh. lib. 2. cap. 42.
Trinity. So says Ciril, Quemadmodu^ viribus ignis aqua etc. As water
thoroughly heat with fire, burns as well as the fire: so the waters which
wash the body of him that is baptized, are changed into divine power, by the
working of y^ holy ghost. So said Leo, sometimes a bishop of Rome: Dedit aquae,
quod Leo. Ser. 5. de not. Dom.
dedit matri. Virtus enim altissimi, and obu^bratio Spiritus sancti, quae fecit
vt Maria pareret saluatorem, eade^ fecit, vt regeneret vnda credente^. Christ
has given like preeminence to the water of Baptism, as he gave to his mother.
For, that power of the highest, and that ouershadowing of the holy Ghost
which brought to pass, y^ Mary should bring forth the savior of the world,
has also brought to pass, that the water should bear a new, or regenerate
him that believes.

Such opinion had the ancient learned fathers, and such reverent words they
used, when they entreated of the Sacraments, For, it is not man, but God which
works by them: yet is it not the creature of bread or water, but the soul of
man, that receives the grace of God. These corruptible creatures need it not:
we have need of Gods grace. But this is a phrase of speaking. For the power of
God, the grace of GOD, the presence of the Trinity, the holy Ghost, the gift
of God, are not in the water, but in us. And we were not made, because of the
sacraments: but the sacraments were ordained for our sake.

Now, for the number of Sacraments, how many there be: it may seem somewhat
hard to say, and that it cannot be spoken without offense. For men's judgments
herein have swarued very much: some have said, there are two: others three:
others four: and others, that there are seven Sacraments. This difference of
opinions stands rather in terms, then in the matter. For a Sacrament in ye
manner of speaking which the Church uses, and in the writings of the holy
scripture, and of ancient fathers sometimes signifies properly every such
Sacrament which Christ has ordained in the new Testament, for which he has
chosen some certain element, and spoken special words to make it a Sacrament,
and has annexed thereto the promise of grace: sometimes it is used in a
general kind of taking, and so every mystery set down to teach the people,
and many things that indeed and by special property be no sacraments, may
nevertheless pass under the general name of a Sacrament.

The sacraments instituted by Christ, are only two: the sacrament of Baptism,
and of our Lords Supper, as the ancient learned fathers have made acompt of
them. S. Ambrose haueing occasion of purpose to entreat of ye Sacraments,
speaks but of two. De Sacramentis, says he, Lib. 1. de Sac. cap. 1.
quae accepistis, sermone^ adorior. I begin to speak of the Sacraments which
you have received. And yet in his whole treatise divided into six books, he
writes but of two: his book is exta^t if any man doubt this, he may see it.

S. Augustine reckons them to be but two: Haec sunt ecclesiae gemina
Sacramenta. These be De Symb. ad catachumen. Lib. 3. ca. 9. de doct. Christ.
the two Sacraments of the church. Again he says, Quaedam pauca pro multis,
eademque factu facilima, etc. Our Lord and his Apostles have delivered unto us,
a few sacraments in steed of many: and the same in doing most easy, in
signification most excellent, in observation most reverend, as is the Sacrament
of Baptism, and the celebration of the body and blood of our Lord. Thus
Augustine and Ambrose, unto whom I might also join other ancient fathers,
reckon but two Sacraments. Let no man then be offended with us for so doing:
we do no new thing, but restore the ordinance of Christ, and keep the
example of the holy fathers.

What then: Do we refuse confirmation, penance, orders, and matrimony: Is
there no use of these among us? do we not allow them: yes. For we do confirm
and teach repentance, and minister holy orders, and account matrimony, and so
use it, as an honorable state of life. We visit ye sick among us, and anoint
them with the precious oil of the mercy of God. But we call not these
sacraments, because they have not the like institution. Confirmation was not
ordained by Christ: penance has not any outward element joined to the word:
the same may be said of orders. And matrimony was not first instituted by
Christ: for God ordained it in paradise long before. But in these two, we have
both the element and the institution. In Baptism, the element is water, in the
Lords Supper, bread and wine. Baptism has the word of institution. Teach al
nations, baptizing them in the name of y^ Mat. 28.
Father, and the Son, and the holy Ghost. The Lords supper in like manner has
the word of institution, Do this in remembrance of me. Luke 22.
Therefore these two are properly and truly called the Sacraments of the
Church, because in them the element is joined to the word, and they take their
ordinance of Christ, and be visible signs of invisible grace.

Now, whatsoever lacks either of these, it is no Sacrament. Therefore are
not the other five, which are so reckoned, and make up the number of seven, in
due signification and right meaning, taken for sacraments. For, in such sort as
these are called sacraments, that is, because they signify some holy thing,
we shall find a great number of things, which the godly learned Fathers have
called Sacraments, and yet I trow, we must not hold them as sacraments
ordained to be kept and continued in the church: for then should there be not
seven, but seventeen sacraments.

S. Bernard calls the washing of the Apostles feet a sacrament, Ablutio
pedum sacramentu^ Sermon. de coena Dom.
est quotidianorum peccatorum. The washing of feet, is the Sacrament of daily
sins. So Leo calls the cross of Christ a sacrament. Crux Christi quae
saluandis est impensa fidelibus, and sacramentu^ Sermon. 2. de resur. D.
est, and exemplu^ The cross of Christ, which was given to save the faithful,
is both a Sacrament, and also an example. Tertullian calls the whole state of
Christian faith, Religionis Christianae Sacramentum. The sacrament Lib. 4.
contra Marcion.
of Christian religion. S. Hillary in diverse places says, Sacramentum
orationis, sacramentum esuritionis, sacramentum sitis, sacramentu^ fletus,
sacramentu^ scripturaru^. The sacrament of prayer, the sacrament of fasting,
the sacrament of thirst, the sacrament of weeping, the Sacrament of the
scriptures. Thus much for the number, that by the institution of Christ, there
are but two sacraments, as Cardinal Bessarion confesses, Haec duo sola
Sacramenta in Euangelijs manifest Bessar. de Sacram. Euchar.
tradita legimus. We read, that these two only Sacraments were delivered us
plainly in the Gospel.

I will now speak briefly of the sacraments in several, and leave all idle and
vain questions, and only lay open so much as is needful, and profitable for
you to know. Baptism therefore is our regeneration or new birth, whereby we
are borne a new in Christ, and are made the sons of God, and heirs of the
kingdom of heaven, it is a sacrament of the remission of sins, and of that
washing which we have in the blood of Christ. We are al borne the children of
wrath, and have our part in the offense of Adam. S. Paul says. By one man
sin entered into the world. August. Romans 5. De verbis Apostol. Ser. 14.
says, Non dixit, veniet super eum, sed manet super eum. Respexit originem
etc. Christ said not, it shall come upon him, but it abides on him: He had
regard to our offspring, when he says, the wrath of God abides on him. Upon
which when the Apostle also looked, he said, and we our selves also were
sometimes the children of wrath. That which in Adam was imputed to his offense,
and not to be of nature, is now in us, which are come of Ada^, become natural.
Therefore says the Prophet, Behold, I was borne in iniquity, and in sin Psalm.
51.
has my mother conceived me. So yt we all have cause to cry out and moan with
Saint Paul, I see another law in my members rebelling Romans 7.
against the law of my mind, and leading me captive unto the law of sin
which is in my members. O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from
the body of this death? Here of speaks our savior, That which John. 3.
is born of the flesh is flesh: and that which is borne of the spirit, is
spirit. And for this cause, says he, except a man be borne of the water and
the spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God.

For this cause are infants baptized, because they are borne in sin, and
cannot become spiritual, but by this new birth of the water and the spirit.
They are the heirs of the promise: the covenant of Gods favor is made unto
them. God said to Abraham, I will establish my covenant between me and thee,
and thy seed after thee in their generations, for Genesis 17.
an everlasting covenant, to be God unto thee, and to thy seed after thee.
Therefore says the Apostle, If the root be holy, so are Romans 11. 1. Cor. 7.
the branches. And again, The unbelieving Husband is sanctified by the wife,
and the unbelieving wife is sanctified by the Husband: else were your Children
unclean: but now are they holy. When the Disciples rebuked those that brought
little Children to Christ, that he might touch them, he said, Suffer the
little children to come unto me, and Mar. 10.
forbid them not, for of such is the kingdom of GOD. And again, Their Angels
always behold the face of my Father which Matthew. 10.
is in Heaven. The kingdom of Heaven is of such, says Christ: not only
then of those, but of other like infantes, which shall be in all times.

As God took the seed of Abraham to be partakers of the covenant which he
gave to Abraham: so he appointed that every man child of eight days old
should be circumcised. And Abraham circumcised his son Genesis 21.
Isaac, when he was eight days old, as God had commanded him. May we think,
that the promise of God has an end, so that it reaches not to our children?
Or might the children of the Jews receive the sign of the covenant, and may
not the children of the Christians? Whatsoever was promised to Abraham, the
same is also performed unto us. We enjoy the same blessings, and free
privilege of Gods favor. Saint Paul to the Galathia^s says, Know ye, that
they which are of faith, are Gal. 3.
the children of Abraham. Again, If ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's
seed, and heirs by promise.

Now is the sign of the Covenant also changed, and Baptism is in steed of
Circumcision, as Saint Paul declares, and calls them circumcised, which are
baptized, In whom (meaning Christ) also ye are circumcised, Colos. 2.
with circumcision made without hands, by putting off the sinful body of the
flesh, through the circumcision of Christ, in that you are buried with him
through baptism. Our Savior gives charge to his Apostles, to baptize all
nations in the name of the Father, and of the son, and of the holy ghost. The
Apostles baptized not only such as professed their belief, but whole
housholdes. The keeper of y^ prison was baptized with all Acts 16.
that belonged unto him. So was Crispus the chief ruler of y^ Synagogue, and
his household, and the household of Stephanas. Infantes are a part of the
Church of God: they are the sheep of Christ, and belong to his flock. Why
should they not bear the mark of Christ: they have the promise of
salvation: Why should they not receive the seal whereby it is confirmed unto
them: they are of the fellowship of the faithful: Augustine says, Vbi ponis
paruulos non baptizatos? profecto in numero credentium. Where place you young
children, De verbis Apost. Ser. 14.
which are not yet baptized? Verily in the number of them that believe. Why
then should not they be partakers of the sacrament together with the faithful:

And as the children of the faithful by right ought to be baptized: So such
others also as were borne of unbelieving parents, and were aliants from the
common wealth of Israel, and were strangers from the covenant of promise, and
had no hope, if they acknowledge the error in which they lived, and seek the
forgiveness of their former sins, may well receive this sacrament of their
regeneration. So when they which heard Peter were pricked in their hearts, and
said to Peter and the other Apostles, Acts. 2.
Men and brethren what shall we do? Peter said unto the^, Amend your lives,
and be baptized every one of you in the Name of Jesus Christ, for the remission
of sins, They were buried with Christ by Baptism into his death, and made
partakers of his blood, and continued in the Apostles doctrine and fellowshippe.

Christ, says the Apostle, loved the Church, Ephe. 5.
and gave himself for it, that he might sanctify it and cleanse it by the
washing of water through the word. Again, According to his mercy he saved us
by the washing of the Tit. 3.
new birth, and the renewing of the holy Ghost. For this cause is baptism
called salvation, life, regeneration, the forgiveness of sins, the power of
God to resurrection, the Image and pledge of resurrection, and the weed of
immortality. And yet are not these things wrought by the water: for then what
need had we of Christ? what good did his passion? what does the holy Ghost
work in our hearts? what power or force is left to the word of God:

Augustine says, Quare non ait, mundi estis Tract. 80. in Ioh.
propter Baptismum quo loti estis: nisi quia etiam in aqua verbum mundat?
detrahe verbum, and quid est aqua nisi aqua? Why does not Christ say, now ye
are clean, because of the Baptism wherewith ye are washed: saving that
because in the water it is the word that makes clean? take away the word,
and what is water more then water? It is the covenant, and promise, and mercy
of God which clotheth us with immortality, assures our resurrectivn, by
which we receive regeneration, forgiveness of sins, life, and salvation.
His word declares his love toward us: and that word is sealed and made
good by Baptism. Our faith which are baptized, and our continuance in the
profession which we have made, establishes in us this grace which we
receive. As it is said, Verus Baptismus constat non tam etc. True Baptism
stands Deconsecrat. did. 4. Verus.
not so much in washing of the body, as in the faith of the heart. As the
Doctrine of the Apostles has taught us, saying, By Faith Acts 15.
purifiyng their hearts. And in another place, Baptism saves us, not the
putting away 1. Pet. 3.
of the filth of the flesh, but the examining of a good conscience before God,
by the resurrection of Jesus Christ. Therefore Hierom says, They that receive
not Baptism In Eze. ca. 16.
with perfect faith, receive the water, but the holy Ghost they receive not.

The water wherein we are baptized, does not cleanse the soul: But the blood
of Jesus 1. John 1.
Christ his son does cleanse us from al sin. Not the water, but the blood of
Christ reconcileth us unto GOD, strengthens our conscience, and works our
redemption. We must seek salvation in Christ alone, and not in any outward
thing. Hereof says Cyprian, Remissio peccatorum, sieve per Baptismum, sieve per
alia Sacramenta Cyp. de Baptis. Christi.
donetur, proprie spiritus sancti est. Verborum solennitas etc. The remission
of sins, whether it be given by baptism, or by any other Sacraments, do
properly appertain to the holy ghost. The solennitie of the words, and the
invocation of Gods holy Name, and the outward signs appointed to the
ministry of the Priest by the institution of the Apostles, work the visible
outward Sacrament. But, touching the substance thereof, it is the holy Ghost
that works it. Saint Ambrose Lib. 1. de Sac. cap. 3.
also says, Vidisti fontem, vidisti sacerdote^ etc. Thou have seen the water,
thou have seen the Priest, thou have seen those things, which thou might see
with the eyes of thy body, and by such sight as man has: but those things
which work and do the deed of salvation, which no eye can see, thou have not
seen.

Such a change is made in the sacrament of baptism. Through yt power of Gods
working, the water is turned into blood. They yt be washed in it, receive the
remission of sins: their robes are made clean in the blood of the lamb. The
water it self is nothing: but by the working of Gods spirit, the death and
merits of our Lord and Savior Christ, are thereby assured unto us.

A figure hereof was given at the red Sea. The children of Israel passed
through in safety: but Pharao and his whole army were drowned. Another figure
hereof was given in the Arc. The whole world was drowned, but Noah and his
family were saved alive: Even so in the fountain of Baptism, our spiritual
Pharao the Devil, is choked: his army, that is, our sins are drowned, and
we saved. The wicked of the world are swallowed in concupiscence, and
vanities, and we abide safe in the Arc: GOD has chosen us to be a peculiar
people to himself, we walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit,
therefore we are in Christ Jesus, and there is now no condemnation unto us.

Now, touching the Minister of this Sacrament, whether he be a good man or
an evil man, godly or godless, an heretic or a Catholic, an Idolater or a
true worshipper of God: the effect is all one, the value or worthiness of the
Sacrament depends not of man, but of God. Man pronounces the word, but GOD
setleth our hearts with grace: man touches or washes us with water, but God
makes us clean by the Cross of Christ. It is not the minister, but Christ
himself which is the Lamb of GOD that takes away the sins of the world.

Again, whether the infant be signed with yt sign of the cross, or be put
into the water once or thrice, whether one or two or three, or more be
Godfathers, or witnesses of the Baptism, it makes nothing to the virtue of
the sacrament, they are no part thereof: without these, baptism is whole and
perfect. Hereof Gregory says, In vna fide nihil officit consuetudo Ecclesiae
diuersa. Greg. lib. 1. Epist. 41.
The Faith being one, the diversity of customs hurts nothing. Christ left
no order for the use of these things, neither did by his word or example
require them. The Church of God has liberty to dispose herein, as may be
most ^itting for decency and godliness.

Some make doubt of those infantes the children of the faithful, which depart
before baptism, whether they be saved or not. What, shall we say that they are
damned? It is a hard matter, and too curious for man to enter into the
judgments of God: his mercy is infinite, and his purpose secret, He shows
mercy unto those, upon whom he will have mercy. Who can appoint him, or set
him an order what he shall do: It is not good, nor stands with Christian
reverence to be contentious and busy in searching out, or reasoning of
matters, which the wisdom of God has hid from our knowledge.

Yet, if any would feign be resolved: he may thus safely reason. It is true,
that children are borne in sin, and that by the sin of one man death has
entered into the world, and that the reward of sin is death: but who knows
if God have forgiven them their sin? Who is his Counsailour, who knows his
meaning? Our children are the children of God. He is our God, and the God of
our seed. They be under the covenant with us. The sobrest way is to speak
least, and to leave them to the judgment and mercy of God.

Howbeit, if any should despise, and of wilfulnes refuse this holy ordinance,
so that they would in no case be baptized, or suffer their children to be
baptized: that were damnable. Otherwise the grace of God is not tied so to the
ministration of the sacrament, that if any be prevented by death, so that he
cannot be received to the fellowship thereof, he should therefore be thought
to be damned. For many have suffered death for Gods cause, for their Faith in
Christ, who never were baptized: yet are they reckoned, and are indeed blessed
Martirs. So Valentinianus a Christian Emperor died without baptism: yet does
Ambrose commend him, and nothing doubts, but that he Orat. de obit.
Valentiniani.
is saved. He says, Audiui vos dolere, quod non acceperit etc. I have heard
that you are grieved, because he took not the Sacrament of baptism. Tell me,
what other thing is there in us, but our will, and our desire? Again, He which
was endued with thy spirit, O God, how might it be that he should be void of
thy grace? Or, If this move you, because the mysteries were not solemnly
ministered: are not the Martirs crowned if they be only nouices (that be not yet
christened?) But if they be washed in their blood, then is he also washed in his
godliness and in his desire. S. Augustine says, He is not deprived from the
partaking and benefit of the sacrament, so In sermon. ad infantes.
long as he finds in himself that thing, that the sacrament signifies.

Constantinus the great, was the first Christian Emperor: yet was not baptized
until the time of his death. Qui, cum Nicomediae ageret, Hist. tripart. lib.
3, cap. 12.
(says Theodoretus) la^guore grauatus, nec ignorans vitae huius incertum,
gratiam baptismatis est adeptus. Who, when he was at Nicomedia, being
grievously sick, and knowing the uncertainty of this life, was baptized. The
thief upon the cross, was not baptized: Yet Christ said unto him, this day
thou shall be with me in Paradise. The Prophet Jeremy, and John Bapt. were
sanctified in their mothers wombes. By these few it may appear, that the
sacrament makes not a Christian, but is a seal and assurance unto all yt
receive it of the grace of God, unless they make themselves unworthy thereof:
And yt no man may despise this holy ordinance, and keep back his infants from
baptism, for in so doing he procures his own damnation. In time of ignorance
many could see this, and acknowledge it, that the outward baptism by water
was not necessary unto salvation, so that the children or others that died
without it, were for lack thereof damned. The church has always received
three sorts of Baptism: the Baptism of the spirit, or of blood, or of water,
If any were prevented by death, or hindered by cruelty or persecution, so that
they could not receive the sacrament of Baptism at the hands of the minister,
yet haueing the sanctification of the holy Ghost, or making their faith known
by their suffering, they were borne a new, and baptized. God has his purpose
in us and our children. Before we be borne, when we had do^e neither good nor
evil, he has mercy and compassion on us. Judgment appertains unto God. He
knows who are his. No man knows the things of God, but the sprite of God
only. And thus much of the Sacrament of Baptism, which is the badge and
cognizance of every Christian. If any be not baptized, but lacks the mark
of Gods fold, we cannot discern him to be one of the flock. If any take
not the seal of regeneration, we cannot say, he is borne the child of God.
This is the ordinary way, let us use it, let us not despise, nor foreslow to
receive the Sacraments: they are the means by which God makes sure his good
will toward us.

It shall not be amiss, to speak a word or two, of the naming of your
children. Some are herein ouerseene, they refuse to call their children by the
names of holy men and women, because they think it to savor somewhat to much
of religion, and therefore either they name them at adventure, having no
regard at all, how they be named: or else they give them the names of Heathen
men, and call the^ Julius, Caesar, Hercules, Lucretia, Scipio, or such like.
These, although they were notable in wisdom, learning, chastity, boldness,
and in conquestes: yet were they Heathen men, and knew not God. The name is
nothing, it commends us not to God. Yet may a Christian father be ashamed to
call his child by the name of such, who were enemies to the cross of Christ.

Chrisost. a godly father, says, Non solum hic parentum monstratur pietas, sed
and magna erga Hom. 21. in Genesim.
pueros diligentia etc. In this thing, that is, in the naming of their
children, both the godliness of the parents, and also their great care for
their children is declared. And, how have they forthwith and from the beginning
taught the children which were borne unto the^, giving them warning, by the
names wherewith they call them, that they should practice virtue? They did not
give names at adventure and without reason, as is used now a days. For now
me^ say, let the child be called, after the name of his gra^dfather, or great
gra^dfather: but our old fathers did not so. They took all heed to call their
children by such names, which should not only provoke the^ to virtue which
carried ye names, but should teach al others much wisdom, whosoever should
remain many years after the^. Again, he says, See how great understanding
they of old time had, that even y^ women named not Hom. 51. in Genesis
their children rashly or by chance, but called the^ by names that foreshewed
such things as might happen after. And of Lia Iaacobs wife he makes a special
commendation. Vidisti quomodo no^ simpliciter, neque temere nomina natis
indiderit, Hom. 56. in Genesis
Vocauit eum Simeon, quoniam audiuit (inquit) Dominus. See how she names not
her children simply, nor at adventure. she called him Simeon, because (says
she) the lord has Hom. 21. in Genesis
heard. Therefore he says, Igitur nos ne vulgaria nomina pueris indamus, neque
auoru^, etc. Let not us therefore give names unto our children y^ are common
names, or because they were the names of our grandfathers, or great
gra^dfathers, or of such who have been famous for their pere^tage: but rather
let us call the^ by y^ names of such as have excelled in virtue, and have bin
most faithful toward God. Let the^ carry the names of the Apostles, of ye
prophets, of ye Martirs, of such who have bin constant in y^ faith, and have
suffered death for Christ's sake. That so they may be taught by their name to
remember whose name they bear, and yt they neither speak, nor do any thing
unworthy of their name.

As, if any be called John, that he pray for grace, and desire to be filled
with grace: that he give witness of Christ, that he is the Lamb of GOD which
takes away the sins of the world: that he rebuke vice boldly, as John
did in Herod, though he were a mighty Prince. Or, if he be called Paul,
that he so become a follower of Paul, as Paul was of Christ: and say with
Paul, That I might live Galat. 2.
unto God, I am crucified with Christ. Thus I live, yet, not I now, but Christ
lives in me: and hear Christ speaking unto him as did Paul, and fall down and
say, Lord, what will thou that I Act. 9.
do? So let him that is called Thomas, touch the bosom of Christ, and handle
his wounds, and make a good confession as Thomas did, and say, My Lord, and my
God. Let Matthew forsake his custom, even the deceitful gains of y^ world,
and follow Christ. Let Daniel remember Daniel, and though he should be thrown
in to the den of Lions, or be burnt in the fire, or suffer any cruel
torments, yet let him not therefore forsake God, but put his whole trust in
him. Thus should our names teach us, that whether we write them, or utter them,
or hear them spoken, they may put us in mind of christian duty and Godliness.

The other Sacrament of Christ's Church, is the sacrament of the Lords Supper,
which some have called the Sacrament of the Altar: some the Sacrament of the
holy table: some the Sacrament of bread and wine: but we most properly may
call it the sacrament of the body and blood of Christ. And that we wander not
at large, but may stand in certain ground, I will expound those words of our
Savior, This is my body: and, this is my blood of the new Mat. 26.
testament, that is shed for many: for the remission of sins.

This matter these two or three hundredth years late past, has been encumbred
with many questions and much controversy. Some say, the words are plain.
Christ him self spoke them: he is almightte, and can do what soever he
will: he has not spoken otherwise then he meant: If we expound them by
signs and figures, we take away the force of the holy mystery, and make
nothing of it: the words must be taken even as they lie, they must not have
any other construction. Therefore at this day, many wise men, which yield from
other points of superstition, and in many other things receive the truth,
stand here, and stick at this, and cannot yield.

I will declare the whole matter simplye, and plainly, and submit my self to
the understanding and capacity of all men. That which I will utter herein
shall not be of my self, but of the Fathers of the Church: not of those
which have been of later years: but of the most ancient: not of the
Heretiques^: but of the most Catholic, which ever have been the enemies and
confounders of Heretics. I will show the use, and order, and faith of the
Primitive Church which was in the times of the Apostles, and of Tertullian,
Ciprian, Basil, Nazianzene, Hierome, Augustine, Chrysostom, and others
Catholic and godly learned Fathers. Let no man regard me, or my speech: I
am only a finger: these are clear and bright stars. I do but show them
unto you, and point them, that you may behold them. God give us grace that
we may see them truly, and by them be able to guide, and to direct our way.
let us lay aside all contention, and quietly hear that shall be spoken.
Whatsoever shall be said, if it be true, if it be ancient, if it be
Catholic, if it be so clear, as the sun beams, let us humble our
hearts, and believe it. There is no truth, but of God. Whosoever resists
the truth, resists God.

First, I will show you, that we do truly and indeed eat the body of
Christ, and drink his blood. And this shall be the foundation, and key of
entrance into all the rest.

Secondely, I will open these words. This is my body: and there, how, by
what sort, in what sense and meaning, the bread is the body of Christ. Thirdly,
that the bread abides still in former nature and substance as before: even as
the nature and substance of water remains in Baptism. Fourthly, how the body
of Christ is eaten: whether by faith or with the mouth of our body: and how
the body of Christ is present in the Sacrament.

Fifthly, What difference is between the body of Christ, and the Sacrament of
the body of Christ. Sixthly, how we ought to prepare our minds, and with what
faith, and devotion we must come to the receiving thereof.

We say, and believe, that we receive the body and blood of Christ truly,
and not a figure or sign: but even that body which suffered death on the
cross, and that blood which was shed for the forgiveness of sins. So says
Christ, My flesh is meat in deed, and my John 6.
blood is drink indeed. And again, Except ye eat the flesh of the son of
man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in you. And again, He that eats
me, even he shall live, by me. We say, there is no other substantial food of
our souls: and that he is divided among all the faithful: and that he is
void of salvation, and the grace of Christ, whosoever is not partaker of his
body and blood. This we say, and may not flee from it hereafter.

Yet, least happily any should be deceived, we say this meat is spiritual,
and therefore it must be eaten by faith, and not with the mouth of our body.
Augustine says, Vt quid paras dentes and Tract. 25. in Ioh.
ventrem? creed, and manducasti. Why preparest thou thy teeth, and thy belly?
believe, and thou have eaten. And again, Nolite fauces parare, Sermon. 23. in
Lucam.
sed cor. Prepare not your jaws, but your heart. As material bread nourishes
our body, so does the body of Christ nourishe our soul, and is therefore
called bread. Deus panis Confess. lib. 1.
intus est animae meae, says Augustine God is the inward bread of my soul.
For we receive him, and eat him, and live by him. But hereof hereafter more
at large.

Now, let us consider the words of Christ, This is my body: and, this is my
blood. These words you say, are plain, open, easy, and manifest. So are
they: yet, albeit they are plain, they must have a right construction. The
plainest words that be, unless they be duly expounded, may breed
error. S. John John 1.
says, The word was made flesh. These words are plain: yet of these plain
words Apollinaris did breed an heresy. Christ says, My father is greater
then I. His words are plain: John 14.
yet did the Arrians gather thereof an heresy, that Christ is not equal with
his Father. Christ says of John the Baptist, This is Matt. 11.
Elias, which was to come. He says not, he Man. 11.
does signify Elias, but, he is Elias. The words are plain: yet were there
some, that stood in the mayntainance of their erorour thereby, and said, that
the soul of Elias, did abide in John Baptist. Christ says, If thine eye cause
thee to offend, pluck it out, and cast it from thee. And, If thy Mat 18.
hand or foot cause thee to offend, cut them off, and cast them from thee. The
words are plain: yet he means not, that you should pick out your eyes out
of your head, nor choppe off your hands or feet from your body. John says of
Christ, He will baptize you with the holy ghost, and with fire. These words are
plain, yet Mat. 3.
hereof some raised this error, yt children at the time of their baptism,
should be marked in the forehead with a hot burning iron. S. Paul says, He
has made him to be sin for us, which knew no sin. The words are plain:
Yet 2. Cor. 5.
Christ never sinned. He is the Lamb of God, in whom there is no spot. He is
hereby said to be the sacrifice for sin. Christ says, They two shall be one
flesh. And, They are no more two, Mat. 19.
but one flesh. These words are plain: Yet if you try the words by common
sense, it is not so, they are not one, but two of several flesh. Christ
says, You are the salt of the earth: you are the light of the world. The
words are Mat. 6.
plain: yet indeed, the Apostles were neither material light, nor material
salt. Christ said of Judas, One of you is a devil. The words are plain: Yet
Judas in nature and substance was Ioh. 6.
not a Devil.

S. Paul says of Melchisedech, He was without Heb. 7.
father, and without mother, without kindred, and has neither beginning of his
days, neither end of his life. These words are plain: Yet indeed he had
father and mother, and was a man, and was borne, and died as other men. So he
says, The rock was Christ. So Moses 1. Cor. 10. Lenit. 17.
says, The life of al flesh, is his blood. And so is Christ called a Lamb, a
lion, a worm, a way, a bridegroom, a head, a door, a vine, the light, bread,
water, a garment.

These speeches, and infinite others the like, are plain, open, and evident:
yet are they not true, as yt words sound them, and literally. For Christ is
not a Lamb in substance and nature, but a spiritual Lamb. So is he a
spiritual garment, spiritual light, spiritual water, and spiritual bread.

Christ said to Nicodemus, Except a man be borne again, he cannot see the
kingdom of Ioh. 3.
God. These words are plain: yet Nicodemus mistook them, and was deceived,
and said, How can a man be borne that is old? can he enter into his mothers
womb again, and be born? Ioh. 6.
Christ meant ye spiritual birth of the soul, and the spirit, not yt natural
and corporal birth of ye body.

And to come nearer to the matter in hand, when Christ said, I am ye bread
which is come down from Heaven: and, except ye eat the flesh of the Son of
man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in you: and, my flesh is meat in
deed: and, my blood is drink indeed. He that eats of this bread, shall
live for ever. The Capernaites thought these words plain enough: therefore they
say, How ca^ this man give us his flesh to eat? This is an hard saying, who
can hear it? And they departed away from him. Then said Jesus, The words that
I speak unto you are spirit and life. Upon occasion hereof, S. Augustine
writes thus, Spiritualiter intelligite In Psalm. 98.
quod loquutus sum vobis. Non hoe corpus, etc. Understand ye spiritually, that
I have spoken unto you. Ye shall not eat this body that ye see, neither shall ye
drink that blood, that they shall shed that shall crucify me. I have
reco^mended unto you a certain sacrament: being spiritually understood, it
will give you life. Even so Chrysostom, What is it, In 6. Ioh. hom. 46.
that he says, the flesh profits nothing? He speaks it not of flesh
indeed, God forbid: but of such which take the things carnally yt are spoke.
And what is it to understand carnally? Even to take things simply as they be
spoken, and to seek no further meaning. For the things which are seen, are
not so to be judged of: but al mysteries should be considered with inward eyes,
that is, spiritually.

Again, upon these words, If any man eat Ibidem.
of this bread, he shall live for ever: he says, Panem vero sieve doctrinam hoc
in loco, and salutem, and fidem in se, sieve corpus suum dicit: vtrumque enim
animam fortiore^ reddit. He calls bread in this place, either doctrine and
salvation and faith in him, or else his body: For either of these makes the
soul stronger. S. Paul says. He that eats or drinks unworthily, 1. Cor.
11.
eats and drinks his own damnation. Damnation is a spiritual thing, which
is not received in by the mouth, or broken with the teeth. So Christ says,
This cup is the new Testament in Luke. 22.
my blood, which is shed for you. Yet now is not his blood shed any more: for
he is risen, and dies not.

And these words which are so plain, if they be examined, will not be so
plain to yield the sense, unto which they are forced. It is written, He took
bread, and when he had given thanks Ibid.
he brake it, and gave to the^, saying, this is my body. This bread is my
body. The bread was still bread, and neither flesh nor his body. And, this cup
is the new testament. In due, and right, and open meaning, the cup cannot be
the new testament. Here we see, how the words are not al so plain, but must
have a reasonable co^siruction. It is a rule in the law, In fraude^ legis
facit, qui verbis Dell. and Senatusc. and lon. con. contra.
legis saluis, sententiam eius circumuenit. He does wrong to the law, that
following only the bare words, defraudeth the meaning of the Law.

Orig. says, Est et in nouo testamento litera, quae occidit eum etc. There is
also in the new testament Hom. 7. in Leuit.
a letter which kills him, that does not spiritually understand those
things which are spoken. For if he follow this after the letter, where it is
said, except ye eat my flesh, and drink my blood: This letter kills. Mark, if
ye take the word of Christ barely, and nakedly, and as the letter sounds, it
kills. S. Augustine says, In allegoria omni haec regula tenenda est, vt Aug.
in Psa. 8.
pro sententia praesent is loci consideretur, quod per similitudinem dicitur.
This rule is to be kept in every allegory, that what is spoken by similitude,
be weighed by the meaning of the present place. Hiero^ says, No^ in verbis
Scripturarum est euangelium, sed in sensu. The gospel Iero. in 1. Gal
is not in the words of Scriptures, but in the meaning. And, Non in superficie,
sed in medulla, non in sermonum folijs, sed in radice rationis. It is not in
the outward show, but in the inner marow: not in the leafes of words, but in
the root of reason. When Christ said, Destroy this Temple, and in three days
I will Ioh. 2.
raise it up again, The Jews following the bare letter, did bear false
witness against him, saying, We heard him say, I will destroy this temple made
with hands, and within tree Mark. 14.
days I will build another made without hands.

We may not take the letter in all places of the scripture as it lies. The
scriptures stand not in the reading, but in the understanding. By taking the
bare letter, the Jews foun^^ matter to put Christ to death. Orig. says, There
is a let ter in the new Testament, which kills. Jerome says, The gospel is
not in the words of the Scripture, not in the outward show, nor in the
leaves: but in ye meaning, in ye marow, and in the root, which are hid, and not
open and manifest. So yt they may not be taken by ye bare sound, but must have
some other construction.

But what shall be the construction of these words, This is my body? whose
interpretation or judgment of them shall stand? The learned men which have been
of late years, and which yet live, are suspected. Let us hear the elder
ancient fathers, whom, there is no cause, that any should suspect: they were
not Sacramentaries, nor Zuinglians nor Lutheranes: they were not divided into
any of these sects.

Tertullian an ancient father, who lived more Lib. 4. cont. Marcion.
then 1300. years since, expounds them thus. Acceptum panem, and distributum
discipulis, corpus suum illum fecit, dicendo, hoc est corpus meu^: id est,
figura corporis mei. Figura autem non esset, nisi veritatis esset corpus.
Caeteru^ vacua res, quae est phantasma, figuram capere non potest. Christ
taking the bread, and distributing it to his disciples, made it his body,
saying, This is my body: yt is to say, this is a figure of my body. But a
figure it could not be, unless there were a body of a truth, and in deed.
For a void thing, as is a fantasy, can receive no figure. Chrysostom says,
Si mortuus Christus non est, Hom. 83. in Mat.
cuius Symbolu^ ac signum hoc sacramentum est? If Christ died not, whose sign
and whose token is this Sacrament? Again, The very body of Christ it self is
not in the holy vessels, Hom. 11. in Matthew.
but the mystery or Sacrament thereof is there contained.

Augustine against the heretic Adimantus, writes, Non dubitauit Dominus
dicere, hoc est Ang cont. Adim. cap. 12.
corpus meum, cum signum daret corporis sui. Our Lord doubted not to say, this
is my body, when he gave a toke^ of his body. And in another place, Christ
took Judas unto his table, whereat he gave unto his disciples the figure Aug.
in Psa. 3
of his body. Saint Hierom says, Christ represented the verity of his body.
In Mat. ca. 26.


S. Ambrose says, Before consecration, it is called another kind: after
consecration, the De iis qui initiantur cap. 9.
body of Christ is signified. And again, In eating and drinking (that is, in
receiving the holy communion) we signify the body and blood Amb. 1. Cor. 11.
Gelas. cont. Eutych.
of Christ, that was offered for us. So also Gelasius says, Imago and
similitudo corporis and sanguinis, in action mysteriorum celebratur. The image
and similitude of his body and blood is showed in the action of the mysteries.
It would be ouerlong to lay forth unto you what other reverend old Fathers
have written to like effect, and have expounded those words of Christ by
such terms as you have heard, of sign, figure, token, image, and likeness.
I trust no man be offended: these speeches are not mine own, but the speeches
of most ancient Fathers, and have been spoken or written, and continued in
the Church, these 1200, 1300. and well near 1400. years, and never condemned in
them as false, though many of late times have sought otherwise to understand
the words of Christ. The gloss upon the Canons joins herein with the
Fathers: Dicitur corpus Christi, sed improprie: vt sit sensus. uocatur corpus
Christi De co^se. did. 2
etc. It is called the body of Christ, but improperly: the meaning thereof may
be this, it is called Christ's body, that is to say, it signifies Christ's
body.

Therefore does S. August. give us good and wholesome aduertisements, thus he
writes to Bonifacius: Unless sacraments had a certain Aug. ad Bonif. Epi. 23.
likeness of the things, of which they be sacraments, then indeed they were no
sacraments. And of this likeness oftentimes, they bear the names of yt things
themselves, that are represented by the sacraments. And again, In sacraments we
must consider, not what they be, Lib. 3. cont. Maxim. Lib. 3. ca. 5. de doct.
Christ.
(in substance and nature) but what they signify. Again he says, It is a
dangerous matter, and a servitude of the soul, to take the sign in stead of
the thing that is signified. And again, if it be a speech that commands,
either by Lib. 3. cap. 16. de doc. Chri.
forbidding an horible wickedness, or requiring that which is profitable, it is
not figurative: but if it seem to require horrible wickedness, and to forbid yt
is good and profitable, it is spoken figuratively. Exceptyee eat (says
Christ) the flesh of the son of man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in
you. He seems to require the doing of that which is horrible, or most wicked:
it is a figure therefore commanding us to communicate with the passion of
Christ, and co^fortably, and profitably to lay up in our remembrance, that his
flesh was crucified, and wounded for us. In another place, he says, It is a
more horrible thing to eat ma^s flesh, the^ to kill it: and to drink ma^s
blood, the^ Li. 2. ca. 9. co^t. aduersar. legis and Prophet. Lib. 3. ca. 5. de
doct. Christi.
it is to shed it. Again he says, We must beware, that we take not a
figurative speech according to the letter: for thereto it pertains, that the
Apostle says, the letter kills, Besides that which has been showed you out
of the godly learned old fathers, how they have expounded these words: who
soever will advisedly consider these principal sentences, or rather rules of
Saint Augustine, shall be helped much, and directed to the due and Catholic
construction and meaning of them.

The next matter, and the third of the six, is, whether the bread and wine
abide still in former nature and substance as before, even as the nature and
substance of water remains in the Sacrament of Baptism. There are some that
say by virtue of these words, Hoc est corpus meum, the bread is changed
into the body of Christ, that the substance of bread is gone, and nothing
remaining, but only accidents: that is, a show, and appearance, and
likeness of bread. They say, it seems to be the same it was, but it is
changed: it seems to be bread, but it is not bread: and the wine, by the
taste and color seems to be wine, but it is not wine. They say we may not
believe our eye sight, nor stand to the judgment of our senses. They say,
Christ is almighty, he spoke the word, and al things were made: he has said,
Hoc est corpus meum, therefore it is now no more bread, but his body: and that
this is the faith of the Church, in which we were borne and christened.

In deed, this has lately been received, as a matter of faith. But if we
examine it well, we shall find it to be an error, and no point of faith. I
say it has been received of late: for our old Fathers never believed it, as
I will declare and prove, and let you see, that it has not been the
Catholic faith, nor the faith of the Primitive church, nor of the Apostles of
Christ, and therefore no faith at all. The opening of this matter will be
somewhat dark, and where with you have not been acquainted: but give me your
attendance, lend me your senses, and I trust by the grace of God I shall make
it plain.

They say, the bread is changed, and done away utterly: and, that it is no
bread, though it seem to be bread: that in this case, we may not trust our
eyes, but lean to faith. Mark, I say they tell us that the bread remains
not: and for trial hereof, they require us not to lean to any other thing then
faith. We will then close and shut up our senses, and hearken what Christ,
what S. Paul, what the holy fathers of the church, who are best able to
instruct our Faith, have spoken.

S. Paul to the Corinthians, in one piece of a Chapter: calls it bread, four
times. Read the 1. Cor. 11.
place, ye shall find it so, in the eleventh of the first Epistle. The Lord
Jesus in the night that he was betrayed, took bread. And, as often as ye shall
eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye show the Lords death till he
come. Again: Whosoever shall eat this bread, and drink the cup of the Lord
unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord. And again,
Let a man therefore examine himself, and so let him eat of this bread, and
drink of this cup. They say it is not bread, but Paul says, and so many
times says, it is bread. And of the wine, Christ said after he had given
thanks, and it was consecrate, and after his Supper, I will not drink of this
fruit of the vine he^ceforth, until that Mat. 26.
day, when I shall drink it new with you in my fathers kingdom. The fruit
of the vine is wine: therefore the self same fruit of the vine, the same wine
in substance did abide still after consecration, as before

S. Augustine calls this holy mystery, Sacramentu^ De fide ad Pet. cap. 19.
panis, and vini. The sacrament of bread and wine. Justinius Martyr says,
Diaconi distribuunt vnicuique praesentium de pane in quo gratiae actae sunt:
and de vino and aqua ad eos qui non sunt praesentes deferunt. The Deacons
divide unto every one of them that are present, part of that bread over which
thanks were given: and they carry of the wine and water, to such as are not
present. Again he says, Alimento humido and sicco admonemur, quae propter nos
Deus In Colloq. cu^ Tryphone.
dei filius perpessus sit. By dry and moist food (whereby he means the
sacrament) we are taught what things God the Son of God has suffered for us.
What mea^t he by dry food, but bread? or by moist food, but wine? It can not be
avoided, but that he thought y^ bread and wine remain after the consecration.
He lived 1400, years since. And before him Ignatius, Vnus panis Ignat. ad
Philabel. Aduer. he. li. 5.
omnibus fractus. It is one bread which is broken for all. So Iraen. who also
lived 1400. years since, says, Eum calicem, qui est creatura etc. He made yt
cup, which is a creature, his body, by which he increases our bodies. Therefore
when the cup of mixture, and the bread which is broken, receives the word,
it is made the sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, by which the
substance of our flesh is increased and nourished. He says, after
consecration it is a creature, and such a creature as nourishes the substance
of our flesh.

Origin, who lived well nigh 1400, years since, In 15. Mat.
says, Ille cibus qui sanctificatur per verbum Dei perque obsecrationem, iuxta
id quod habet materile, in ventrem abit, and in secessum eijcitur. The meat,
which is sanctified by the word of God and by prayer, as touching the
material substance thereof goes into the belly, and is cast out into the
privy. Certainly, unless bread, in the substance and nature of bread did remain
in the sacrament, these words were too horrible to be spoken. Dionisius says,
Pontifex opertum panem aperit, and in frusta concidit. The Bishop Eccl.
hierar^. cap. 3.
uncovers the bread that was covered, and cutteth it in pieces. He notes,
that the loaf of the communion was of some bigness, and that the minister
after consecration divided it, and gave to every man a portion.

S. Cipria^ writes, Dedit Dominus noster in me^sa, in qua vltimum cu^
apostolis participauit co^uiuium De vinctione Chrismatis.
etc. Our Lord at the table, whereat he received his last Supper with his
Disciples, with his own hands gave, (not his very body and very blood really,
but) bread, and wine: but upon the cross, he gave his own body, by y^ hands of
the soldiers to be wounded. He makes a difference between that which Christ
gave upon the cross, and that which he gave at the table. At the table he
gave bread and wine, upon the cross he gave his body and blood. Again, he
calls the bread after consecration. Panem ex Id. in orat. Dominicam.
multoru^ granorum adunatione co^gestum. Bread made (not of forms and
accidents, but) of the substance, and moulding of many corns,

Ambrose says, Quanto magis operatorius est Lib. 4. ca. 4. de Sacra.
sermo Dei, vt sint quae erant, and in aliud co^mutentur? How much more
effectual is the word of God, that the bread and wine may be (in substance and
nature) the same that they were before, and yet be changed into another thing?
They are changed into a Sacrament, which they were not before, and remain
bread and wine, which they were before. Chrysostom says, In similitudine^
corporis and sanguinis Christi, In Psalm. 22.
pane^ and vinum secundum ordinem Melchisedec, nobis ostendit in sacrame^to. He
showed us in a Sacrament bread and wine, after the order of Melchisedec, to be
the likeness of the body and blood of Christ. What should I strande to trouble
you with the rest? As these say, so say the other: that the things which are
seen in the sacrament, are bread and wine.

But, say they, it is called bread, because it was bread, or because it has a
likeness of bread. A pretty shift, but it will not help. For S. Augustine Aug.
ad infa^t.
says, Quod videtis, panis est, and calix: quod vobis etiam oculi renuntiant.
The thing that you see, is the bread, and the cup: which thing your eyes do
testify. Gelasius says, Non desinit esse Co^tra Eutych
substantia panis, vel natura vini. Et certe imago vel similitudo corporis and
sanguinis Christi in action mysteriorum celebratur. There leaves not to be
the substance of bread, or the nature of wine. And indeed, the image or
represe^tation, and likeness of the body and blood of Christ is published in the
ministration of the mysteries. He says, it leaves not, it remains, it is
still, (not the form or appearance, but) the substance and nature.

Chrysostom says, Natura panis in Sacrame^to remane^. The nature of bread
remains in ye Ad Caesar, dialog 2.
sacrament. And, Theodoretus, Signa mystic a post sanctificationem no^ recedu^t
a natura sua: mane^t enim in priori substa^tia, and figura, and forma. The
mystical tokens, or sacraments after the consecration depart not from their own
nature: for they remain still in their former substance, and form, and figure.
Not only in form and figure, not only in show, but it remains bread and
wine in nature and substance. Likewise Cirillus, Christus fragme^t a panis
dedit discipulis. Christ In Ioh. lib. 4. cap. 14.
gave fragme^ts, or pieces of bread to his discipies. It was very bread,
divided into sundry pieces. And Rabanus says, Sacrame^tu^ ore percipitur,
Lib. 1. ca. 31.
and in alime^tum corporis redigitur. The sacrament is received with the mouth,
and is turned into the nourishment of the body.

Bertramus says, Secundum creaturarum substantiam, De corp. and sang. Dom.
quod fuerunt ante consecrationem, hoc and postea consistunt. Touching the
substance of the creatures (of bread and wine) they abide ye same after, as
they were before the consecration. Even so says Cleme^s, Vinum esse illud quod
In paedag. lib. 2. cap. 2.
benedictum est ostendit, rursus dicens, non bibam amplius ex hoc germine
vitis. Christ showed that that was wine which was blessed, by saying again, I
will no more drink of the fruit of the vine. I will bring forth no more
witnesses in this matter, you have enough, and so many as may satisfy any
reasonable man. You see the consent of the old doctors, I know not how any
thing may be more plainly set down, and declared.

Why, then say you, how came transubstantiation into the Church? How it came in
I cannot show you. The husbandma^, that finds his field ouergrowen with
cockel, and ill weeds, knows not how they come. They grow of themselves, he
sows them not. But when, or since what time it has been received and allowed
of, I will tell you. It was first determined and enacted in the Council of
Laterane under Pope Innocentius the third, in the time of king John, king of
England, and in the year of our Lord a thousand two hundredth and fifteen,
that is, 350 years ago, and not before. Then was it first so named, and made a
matter of faith, and never before. This I speak not of my self: they that
maintain that error confess it, the most learned, and wisest, and sagest of
them say it. And yet then was it no Catholic faith, for it was only received
in the Church of Rome, the other churches over all the world received it not,
as appears by a Council holden at Florence. Therefore, if transubstantiation
be a matter of faith, it is a new late found faith, and no old and Catholic
faith. In the time of our great graundfathers it was not so taken. Afterward
Pope Honorius 3. commanded, that it should be kept under a canopie, and that
the people An. 1226.
should worship the sacrament. And after him Vrbanus 4. made a new holy day
in honor of An. 1265.
it, which he called corpus Christi day. And all these things have been done
within these few years. For before, in the times of Augustine, Jerome,
Chrysostom, and the old fathers, they were never heard of.

But, to return to that we have in hand: whether the bread and wine in the
Sacrament remain in their proper nature. Yes verily: for so is it avouched by
our Savior, by Saint Paul, by Ignatius, Justinius, Irenaeus, Origin, Dionisius,
Cyprian, Ambrose, Chrysostom, Augustine, Gelasius, Theodoretus, Cirillus,
Bertramus, and Rabanus. By so many good and lawful witnesses it appears,
that the bread and wine remain in the same nature and substance, as before.

I seek not to astonishe you, by bringing in such a heap of Authors: nor yet
to seek mine own glory thereby, God is my witness, and his Christ. If I would
seek mine own commodity, I should hold my peace, and not unfold these
errors, wherewith the Church of God has been disquieted these late years. As
for glory, I have none in these things: shame come upon them, that seek the
glory and commendation of men: our glory is to discharge our conscience, and
to speak the truth, that we may be blameless in the day of our Lord.

And yet in speaking thus of the sacrament of the Lords supper, and denying
the strange and new learning of transubstantiation, and making it known, that
the bread and wine continue still, that they were before, we do not conceive
basely or irreverently of the sacrament: we do not make it a bare or naked
token. Let no man be deceived. We do both think, and speak soberly, and
with reverence of the holy mysteries. As we cannot call them more then they are:
so may we not esteem them less then they are by the ordinance and
institution of Christ.

We say, they are changed, that they have a dignity and preeminence which they
had not before, that they are not now common bread, or common wine, but the
sacrament of the body and blood of Christ: a holy mystery: a covenant between
Christ and us: a testimony unto our conscience, that Christ is the Lamb of
God: a perfect seal, and sufficient warrant of Gods promises, whereby God
binds himself to us, and we stand likewise bounden unto God, so as God is
our God, and we are his people.

In Baptism, the nature and substance of water does remain still: and yet is
not it bare water. It is changed, and made the sacrament of our regeneration.
It is water consecrated, and made holy by the blood of Christ. They which are
washed therein, are not washed with water, but in the blood of the unspotted
Lamb. One thing is seen, and an other understand. We see the water, but we
understand the blood of Christ. Even so we see the bread and wine, but with
the eyes of our understanding we look beyond these creatures, we reach our
spiritual senses into heaven, and behold the ransom and prise of our
salvation. We do behold in the Sacrament, not what it is, but what it does
signify. When we receive it with due reverence and faith, we say as said
Gregorius Nyssenus, Ego aliam escam agnosco, quae etc. I know De crea. hom.
cap. 20.
another kind of meat, bearing the likeness and resembla^ce of our bodily meat,
the pleasure and sweetness whereof passes only into the soul. It goes not into
the mouth or belly, but only into the soul, and it feeds the mind
inwardly, as the other outwardly feeds the body.

We say as S. Aug. Ipse est panis cordis nostri. In Psa 48. Basil. in Psalm. 33.
Christ is the bread of our heart. And as S. Basil, Est spirituale os
interioris hominis, quo nutritur recipie^s verbu^ vitae, quod verbu^ est panis,
qui desce^dit de coelo. There is a spiritual mouth of y^ inner man, by which he
is nourished, by receiving (Christ) y^ word of life, which is the bread that
came from heaven. In this mystery of y^ death of Christ, his death and passion
is renewed to our remembrance. We are so moved to sorrow, for our sins, which
have bin cause of his death, and to be tha^kful for ye great mercy of God,
which by this means wrought our redemption, as if we did see him present
before our faces hanging upon ye cross. We know y^ Christ has left his
sacraments to his Church, that they might be helps to lift us up into heaven.
By them we are joined with Christ, and made partakers of his passion.

Next, let us consider, how and after what sort we eat the body of Christ in
the sacrament. And here, I beseech you, that you may take the comfort of the
body and blood of Christ, to give good ear. For, of mistaking this mystery,
grew the first error in the Church. When y^ disciples of Christ heard Christ
speak of this matter, and understood him not, they were offended, and shrounke
back, and departed. If we take the words of Christ in such meaning as they
did, we shall be deceived, and offended as they were.

This it is then which we have to consider, whether the body of Christ go
into our mouth, and our bodies, as other meats: or whether it be received
spiritually, as a spiritual meat, and so pass into, and nourishe our soul.
Hereof somewhat was said before, by the way, and shortly. But for cleerer
understanding of the same, we have to weigh and declare, that the eating of the
body of Christ, is not gross, or corporal, but ghostly and spiritual, as a
peculiar work of the mind.

The truth hereof is founded in our Creed, and is an article of our Christian
faith. We believe that Christ did rise again from the dead, and ascended into
heaven, and sits at the right hand of God in glory. So says Saint Paul,
If ye then be risen with Christ, seek those Col. 3.
things which are above, where Christ sits at the right hand of god. And
again Our conversation is in heaven, from whence we Phil. 3.
also look for the savior, even the Lord Jesus Christ. Christ himself says
to his disciples, John. 16. Ioh. 12.
It is expedient for you that I go away. And, The poor always ye have with
you, but me ye shall not have always. So S. Peter says, Whom the heaven must
contain, until the Act. 5.
time that al things be restored, which God had spoken by the mouth of al his
holy prophets since the world began.

Which speeches have occasioned the old ancient learned Fathers, to teach
the people after this sort, touching the body of Christ. Vigilius a godly
Bishop and Martyr, says, Caro Christi cu^ esset in terra, no^ erat in coelo:
and nunc, Contra Eutych. lib. 2.
quia est in coelo, non est vtique in terra. The flesh of Christ when it was in
earth, was not in heaven: and now, because it is in Heaven, doubtless it is
not in earth. Ambrose says, Seek the things that be above, and not the In
Luc. lib. 10. cap. 24.
things that be upon earth. Therefore we must seek thee neither upon the earth,
nor in the earth, nor according to the flesh, if we list to find thee.

S. August. says, According to the flesh that Tract. 50. in Ioh.
the word received: according to that he was borne of the Virgin: according to
that he was taken of the Jews: according to that he was nailed to the cross:
according to that he was taken down, and lapt in a shrowde, and laid in the
grave, and rose again, and showed himself: in this respect, it is true that
he said, Ye shall not evermore have me with you. And again he says,
Donec De consecrat. did. 2.
saeculum finiatur sursum est Dominus, etc. Until the world be ended, the
Lord is above: yet notwithstanding even here is the truth of ye Lord. For the
body wherein he rose again, must needs be in one place. So Cirillus said,
Christus non poterat in carne versari cum Apostolis, postquam asce^disset ad
patre^. Christ could Ciril. in Ioh. lib. 11. cap. 3.
not be conversant together with his Disciples in his flesh, after he had
ascended unto his father. It would be tedious to allege all yt might be
said to like purpose. Thus Christ, and Paul, and Peter: thus Vigilius,
Ambrose, Augustine, Cirill, and all the old Catholic fathers say: and we are
taught to believe, that Christ is not corporally in the church, but is
ascended into Heaven, and that he has given to his body immortality, but
has not taken from the same the nature of a body. Vigilius having cause to
prove this same article against Eutiches, shuts up the matter thus: Haec
est fides vig. contra Eutyc. lib. 1.
and professio catholica, quam Apostolitradiderunt, martyrs roborauerunt, and
fideles huc vsque custodiunt. This is the Catholic faith and profession,
which the Apostles have delivered, the martirs have confirmed, and the faithful
hitherto do continue.

The body then which we eat, is in Heaven: above all Angels, and Archangels,
and powers, and principalities. Our meat is in Heaven on high, and we are
here below on the earth. How may it be, that we may reach it, or taste, or
eat it? Here let us imagine, that there are two men in every man, and that
every man is flesh and spirit, body, and soul. This man thus doubled, must
be furnished with double senses: bodily to serve the body: and spiritual, to
serve the soul. He must have eyes of the body, and eyes of the soul: ears
of the body, and ears of the soul. Spiritual senses, ars quick, sharp,
and lively. They pearce any thing, be it never so thick: they reach any
thing, be it never so far off. Christ says of Abraham, Abraham John (...).
rejoiced to see my day: he saw it, and was glad. He saw it, not with
his bodylie eyes, but with the inner eyes of the soul.

When we speak of the mystery of Christ, and of eating his body, we must
shut up and abandon all our bodily senses. And, as we cannot say, that we see
him with our bodily eyes, or hear him with our bodilye ears, or touch him
with bodily feeling: so likewise can we not, and therefore may we not say,
we taste him, or eat him with our badylie mouth. In this work we must open
all the inner and spiritual senses of our soul: so shall we not only see
his body, but hear him, and feel him, and taste him, and eat him. This is
the mouth, and the feeling of faith. By the hand of faith we reach unto him,
and by the mouth of Faith we receive his body.

Touching the eating of Christ's body, S. August: taught the people on this
wise. Creed, Trac. 26. in Johan.
and manducasti. Credere in Christum, hoc est, ma^ducare panem viuum. Believe
in Christ, and thou have eaten Christ. For, believing in Christ, is the eating
of the bread of life. Believe y^ he is that Lamb of God that takes away the
sins of the world. Believe that there is no other name given unto men, wherein
we shall be saved, but yt name of Jesus Christ. Believe that he has paid the
ransom for the sins of the whole world. Believe that he has made peace
between God and man. Believe, that it is he, which has reconciled all
things by his blood. Here is nothing to be done by the mouth of the body.
Whosoever thus believes, he eats he drinks him.

Clemens says, Hoc est bibere sanguinem Jesus, participe^ esse incorruptionis
eius. This is y^ drinking In paedag. lib. 2. cap. 2.
of the blood of Jesus, to be made partaker of his immortality. Tertul. says,
He must be received in cause of life: he must be devoured by hearing: he must
be chewed by understanding: he must be digested by Faith. Thus did Christ
himself teach his disciples to understand him The words which I speak are
spirit and life. S. Ierom therefore says, Qua^do audimus John 6. in Psalm. 147.
sermone^ domini, caro Christi and sa^guis eius in aures nostras infunditur.
When we hear the word of God, the flesh of Christ, and his blood is powered
into our ears.

The Patriarchs and Prophets, and people of God, which lived before the birth
of Christ, did by faith eat his flesh and drink his blood. S. Paul says,
They did al eat the same spiritual meat, 1. Cor. 10.
and did al drink of the same spiritual drink. Whosoever believed in Christ,
they were nourished by him then, as we are now. They did not see Christ: he was
not yet borne: he had not yet a natural body, yet did they eat his body: he
had not yet any blood, yet did they drink his blood. They believed that it was
he, in whom the promises should be fulfilled, that he should be that blessed
seed, in whom al nations should be blessed. Thus they believed, thus they
received, and did eat his body.

But say some, the fathers of the old law, were in darkness, in a shadow, and
a figure: it was meet they should receive the Sacrament spiritually, or the
body of our Lord spiritually: but al otherwise with us, unto whose benefit, yt
sacraments of the new Testament work y^ thing it self that they signify: so
that we receive Christ really, bodily, and with the mouth of our bodies.

S. Paul tells us, the fathers of the old law did eat the same spiritual
meat, that is to say, Tract. 26. in Johan.
the same Christ, that we eat. So says S. Augustine, Sacramenta illa
fuerunt, in signis diuersa: in rebus quae significabantur, paria. These things
were Sacraments, in the outward tokens diverse, but in the things signified,
all one with ours. Likewise says Leo, Mysteria pro temporum ratione variata
sunt: quum fides, qua v^uimus nulla fuerit aetate diuersa. De natiui. Dom. ser.
3.
The Sacraments are altered according to the diversity of times: but the
faith whereby we live, was ever in all ages one. If they did eat the same
meat, if the things, that is, the matter of their Sacraments were all one
with ours, if their faith was al one with our faith, what difference is there
between their and our eating? As they did eat Christ by faith, and not by the
mouth of the body: so we eat Christ by faith, and not by the mouth of our
body.

To make this somewhat more evident, let us take the judgment of the Fathers.
They teach us plainly, that the spiritual eating of Christ's body by faith,
is the true eatinge: and that we do not grossly, fleshely, really, or
naturally eat him in the Sacrament. Saint Cyprian says, the body of Christ
est cibus mentis, non ventris. It is meat for the Cypr. de coena Domini.
mind, not for the belly: Not for the teeth to chewe, but for the soul to
believe. Cyrillus says, Sacramentum nostrum, hominis ma^ducationem non
asserit, mentes credentium ad Ad obie. Theodo. anath. 11
Grassas cogitationes irreligiose inducens. Our Sacrament avouches not the
eating of a man, leading the minds of the faithful in In illud Euan.
Quicunque dixerit verbu^.
ungodly manner to gross (or fleshly) cogitations. Athanasius says, Quot
hominibus suffecisset corpus eius, etc. Unto how many men could Christ's body
have sufficed, that he should be the food of all the world? Therefore he
made mention of his ascension into heaven, that he might withdraw them from
corporal and fleshly understanding. What thing may be spoken more playnelye:
It were impossible his natural body naturallye received, might suffice all
the world: to let them see he had no such meaning, he speaks of his going
up into heaven. Spiritually then, he is received of every one, and is
digested, and becomes the nourishment of all the world.

S Augustine expounding these words of Christ, Tract. 26. in John.
Who so eats of this bread, shall not die, says thus, Quod pertinet ad
virtutem sacrame^ti, non quod pertinet ad visibilile sacramentum. Qui ma^ducat
intus, no^ foris: qui manducat in cord, non qui premit dente. That pertains
to y^ virtue and effect of the sacrament, not yt pertai neth to the visible
sacrament. He that eats inwardly, and not he yt eats outwardly: that eats
with his heart, not that bruseth (the sacrament) with his tooth. Thus is
Christ's body received, as these holy fathers say: not to the filling our
contentation of the body, not with mouth or tooth, but with spirit and faith,
unto the holiness, and sanctification of the mind. After this sort we eat
his flesh, and drink his blood.

Therefore wicked men, and such as believe not, receive not the body of
Christ: they have no portion in it. So says Orig Est cibus verus, quem nemo
malus potest edere, etc. The body Orig. in 15. Mat.
of Christ, is the true food, which no evil man can eat: For if the evil man
could eat the body of our Lord, it should not be written, he that eats this
bread shall live for ever. Ambrose says, Hu^c panem qui ma^ducauerit, non
esuriet: De bened. Patriarch. ca. 9.
est esca sa^ctorum: non morietur morte peccatoris, quia remissio peccatorum
est. He that eats this bread, shall not hunger: it is the food of those that
are holy He shall not die ye death of a sinner: because it is the remission of
sins. S. Aug. says, Qui discordat a Christo, nec panem eius ma^ducat, nec
sa^guine^ bibit, etc. Who In Ioh. tra. 26.
so disagreeth from Christ, neither eats his bread, nor drinks his blood:
although he daily receive the sacrament of so great a thing without difference,
to the judgment of his presumption. And again, Qui in me non manet, etc. He
that abides not in me, and in ^ug. de ciuit. Dei lib. 21. cap. 25.
whom I do not abide, let him not say, or think, that he either eats my
body, or drinks my blood. And again, Caecus interius Aug. in Psa. 57
panem Christumnon videt. Et beatus est? Hoc non dicet, nisi pariter caecus. He
yt is blind in his heart within, sees not Christ that is our bread. And is he
blessed? No man will say so, unless it be one, as blind as he.

Chrisost. says, Where as the carkeis is, there Hom. 24. in 1. ad Cor.
are Eagles: The carcass is y^ body of Christ, in respect of his death. But
he names Eagles, to show, that who so will approach to this body, must
mount aloft, and have no dealing with the earth, nor be drawn, and creep
downward, but must evermore flee up, and behold the Sun of justice, and have
the eye of his mind quick and sharp. For this is a table of eagles, (that
fly on high,) not of iaies (that creep beneath.) So says Saint Ier. ad
Hedibiam quaest. 2.
Hierome, Let us go up with the Lord (in to heaven) into that great parlar
spread, and clean: and let us receive of him above the cup of the new
Testament. He says, They that rise not up by faith, receive not the cup of
Christ. So says Hillary, The bread that came De trinit. li. 8.
down from heaven, is not received, but of him that has our Lord, and is the
member of Christ,

This is the undoubted meaning of the old fathers, that the wicked are not
partakers of the passion of Christ, because they lack faith, whereby only
Christ is received of us. As Augustine says, How shall I hold Christ beeinge
Tract. in John. 50.
absent? how shall I thruste my hand up into heaven, that I may hold him
sitting there Send up thy faith, and thou hold him. By this means we draw
nigh to Christ, we hyde our selves in his wounds, we suck at his breast, we
feed of his body, and comfortablye lay up in our mind, that his flesh was
crucified and wounded for our sakes.

Now let us examine what difference is between the body of Christ, and the
sacrament of the body. It behooves us to take each part aright as it is, least
we be deceived and take one for another. Origin says, Simpliciores nescientes
distinguere. etc. Simple me^, not being able In Prolog. in cant.
to discern what things in the Scriptures ought to be applied to the outward
man, and what to the inner, being deceived by the likeness of words, have
turned them selves to a sort of peeuishe fables, and vain fantasies.
Therefore says Chrysostom, Magnum creed mihi bonum est, scire quid sit
creatura, and quid sit Creator, etc. Believe me, De ieiuniis and lectione Genesis
it is a great matter to understand what is the creature, and what is God the
Creator: what are the works, and what is the workman. The difference herein
is this, A Sacrament is a figure or token: the body of Christ is figured or
tokened. The Sacrament bread is bread, it is not the body of Christ. The body
of Christ is flesh, it is no bread. The bread is beneath, the body is above.
The bread is on the table, the body is in heaven. The bread is in the mouth,
the body in the heart. The bread feeds the outward man, the body feeds
the inward man. The bread feeds the body, the body feeds the soul. The
bread shall come to nothing: the body is immortal, and shall not perish. The
bread is vile, the body of Christ glorious. Such a difference is there
between the bread, which is a Sacrament of the body, and the body of Christ
it self. The Sacrament is eaten as well of the wicked, as of the faithful:
the body is only eaten of the faithful. The Sacrament may be eaten unto
judgment: the body can not be eaten, but unto salvation. Without the
Sacrament we may be saved: but without the body of Christ we have no
salvation, we can not be saved. As Saint Augustine says, Trect. 26. in Ioh.
Quinon sumit carnem Christi, non habet vitam: and qui eam sumit, habet vitam,
and eam vtique aeternam. He that receives not the flesh of Christ, has not
life: and he that receives the same, has life, and that for ever.

Such a difference makes Epiphanius, Hoc est rotundae figurae and insensibile,
quantum ad potentiam Epiph. in Anchor.
etc. This thing (that is, the sacrament) is of a round form, (for it was a
great thick round cake) and touching any power that is in it, utterly void of
sense. But we know that our Lord is whole sense, whole sensible, whole God,
whole moving. Again, S. August. says for the difference of them, The Sacrament
Tra. 26. in Ioh
(of Christ's bod^) is received of some unto life, of some unto destruction: but
the thing it self, (that is, the flesh of Christ) whereof this is a Sacrament,
is received of all men unto life, and of no man to destruction, whosoever shall
be partaker of it.

Of the difference which is between a figure of any thing, and the thing it
self, Chrysostom. says, Audisti fuisse figuram, ne ergo mirare, neque omnia
require in typo: Neque enim typus esset, si omnia Hom. 35. in Genesis
quae veritati accidunt haberentur. Ye have heard that it was a figure,
therefore marvel not, and being a figure, require not al things to agree: for
otherwise it were no figure. These and such like reasons no doubt moved the
godly Father to say as we have learned to say, Aliud est Sacramentum, aliud
res sacrame^ti. The Sacrament is one thing, and the matter Trac. 26. in Ioh.
of the Sacrament (which is Christ's very body) is another thing. And therefore
he says, Honorem, tanqua^ religiosa habere possunt: stuporem, ta^quam mira
no^ possu^t These things (speaking Aug. de trinit. lib. 3. cap. 10.
of the sacrament of Christ's body) may have honor as things appointed to
religion: but wonder, as things marvelous, they can not have. Thus are we
taught by the Catholic Learned Fathers, to put a difference between the
Sacrament, and the body of Christ: and that the one of them is not really
lapped up or shut within the other: that the one (as Epiphan^us says) is
utterly void of sense: the other, whole sense and whole sensible: that the one
is received (...) destruction unto some, as Saint Augustine ^aith: the other is
received of all men unto life: That the one is a figure, as Chrysostom says:
the other a truth.

It remains, that we consider how we ought to prepare our hearts: and
with what faith, and reverence we should resort to these holy mysteries. We
may not come, as we use to do to our usual meats. For here, in a mystery and
Sacrament of bread, is set before us the body of Christ our Savior: and his
blood in the Sacrament of Wine. We see one thing, we must conceive another
thing. Therefore we must in such manner be affected, as if we were present to
behold his death upon the cross, and the sheading of his blood for our sins.

Let us set before our eyes that dreadful tragedy, and the causes and
effects of his death: that so our hearts may be the rather moved to yield
that allegiance, obedience, and reverence, which is due. We were the children
of wrath, the enemies of God, shut up under sin, and the heirs of
everlasting damnation. In this case God so loved y^ world, that he gave his
only begotten Son, y^ whosoever believes in him should not perish, but
have life everlasting. And as Saint Paul says, God sent his Romans (...).
own Son in the similitude of sinful flesh, and by sin co^^emned sin in
the flesh. There was no other thing in He auen or earth, which would be taken
for our ransom. Therefore was the Son of GOD brought before the Judge, and
arraigned as a Thief, and condemned, and scourged, and put to death: his side
was opened with a spear, and the blood flowed out: and he said, It is
finished: that is to say, the price for man is now paid. Thus, being in the
form of God, he thought it no robbery to be equal with God: but Phil. 2.
he made himself of no reputation, and took on him the form of a servant,
and was made like unto men, and was found in shape as a man. He humbled
himself, and became obedient unto the death, even the death of the Cross. He
gave his body to be crucified, and his blood to be shed for our sakes.
There was no other sacrifice left for sin: woe worth the sin of man, that
was the cause of the death of Christ.

What were the effects of his death? What followed? God has highly exalted
him, and given him a name above every name, that at Phil. 2.
the name of Jesus should every knee bow: and that every tongue should
confess that Jesus Christ is the Lord, to the glory of God the Father. God
spoke out of the heavens, and said, This is my beloved son, in whom I am
well pleased. He crowned him with glory and honor: he has not only
advanced Christ, but us also together with him, And made us sit together in
heavenly places in Christ Jesus: Ephe. 2.
He has made us like to the Image of his son. Thus has he made us an
acceptable people, and has renewed the face of the earth: so y^ now he says
not, as he did to Adam, thou art earth, and shall return to earth: but he
says: Thou art heaven, an immortal and undefiled inheritance that fades not
away, is reserved in heaven for thee. This is the effect, and value of the
death of Christ.

All these things are laid before us in the holy Table, if we have eyes to
see and behold them. There may we see the crucifiyng of his body, and the
shedding of his blood, as it were in a glass. Therefore Christ says, do
this in remembrance of me: in remembrance of my benefit wrought for you: in
remembrance of your salvation purchased by me. Saint Paul says, As often as ye
shall eat this bread, and 1. Cor. 11.
drink this cup, ye show the Lords death til he come.

In this supper, lies a hidden mystery, There is the horror of sin, there is
ye death of our Lord for our sin represented, how he was wounded for our
sins, and tormented for our iniquities, and led as a lamb to the
slaughter. There may we see the shame of the cross: the darkness over the
world: the earth to quake: the stones to cleave asunder: the graves to open,
and the dead to rise. These things may we see in the Supper: this is the
meaning of these holy mysteries.

Therefore, let every one examine him self, and search and weigh his own
heart, whether he be the child of GOD, and a member of the body of Christ:
and so let him eat of this bread, and drink of this cup. The sacrament of
the Lords Supper, is a holy food, the seal of our Faith, the assurance of
Gods promises, and a covenant between God and man. He that does un worthily
thrust himself to this table, eats and drinks his own damnation. When a
sick man, of a weak and feeble stomach, sits down to eat with them that
are whole, whatsoever he eats or drinks, it does increase his sickness. To
them that perish, the word of God is a savor of death unto death. Who so
disagreeth from Christ, neither eats his bread, nor drinks his blood, as
says S. Augustine.

If any of us come to the Sacrament of the body of Christ, and yet make our
selves the members of the Devil, we tread Christ under our feet, we
regard not his body crucified, nor his blood shed for us, we regard not the
price of our salvation, we are guilty of his death, we betraie the innocent
blood, we are fallen from grace, and Christ has died in vain for us.

Let us remember Christ was forsaken, scorned, buffeted, crucified, and left
upon the cross: he was a worm and no man, a reproach among men. Nature it
self yearned and yielded at the sight hereof. The whole land grew dark, the
earth did quake, the sun lost his light, the powers of heaven were moved, the
rocks were cloven, the veil of the temple rent, the thief repented, and
said, Lord remember me when thou co^mest into thy kingdom: the centurion
glorified God, and said, of a surety this man was just.

Where is the power of Christ's death now? Where is the force and power of his
word? By these means he speaks to thee, and calls, saying, Behold, O man,
thus have I sought thee: these things I suffer for thy sake, that thou
should eat my flesh, and drink my blood, and be made one with me: that
thou might come into me, and I into thee. I have made thee a member of my
body, bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh. Thou that wallowest in thy
sins, thou Sodoma, and Gomorrah, thou child of destruction, which have
reioysed in my shame, and art not moved with the pains which I have suffered,
what might I do for thy sake, to save thee, that I have not done? What might I
suffer, and have not endured it? O be a partener of my death, that thou matest
have part in my resurrection.

Let us die with Christ, let us be crucified unto the world. Let us be holy
Egles, and scare above. Let us go up into the great parlar, and receive of our
Lord the cup of the new testament. There let us behold the body that was
crucified for us, and the blood which was shead for us. There let us say, this
is the raunsom of the world: this was once offered, and has made perfect for
ever al them that believe: this entered once into the holy place, and obtained
everlasting redemption for us: this stands always in the presence of God,
and makes intercession for us: this is the Lamb of God, that takes away the
sins of the world: by this body I am now no more earth and ashes: by this, I
am now not a bondsman, but made free. This body has broken the gates of hell,
and has opened heaven. In this are all the treasures of Gods mercy by this
the prince of darkness is cast forth, in this body shall he come again to
judge the quick and the dead.

Let no unclean or filthy person, no adulterer, no usurer, no cruel
extortioner, or deuourer of Gods people, offer him self to the receiving of
this Sacrament. If any be such a one, I require him by the body and blood of
Jesus Christ, and by the judge of the quick and the dead, that he come not to
the Lords table: that he betraie not the son of God. It were better he had
never been borne, and that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and he
thrown into ye sea. Let us not deceive our selves: God will not be mocked. He
receives damnation, yt receives unworthily.

Let us fall down before our Lord, and give thanks unto him: Let us say,
what shall I give unto the Lord, for all that he has given unto me? I will take
the cup of salvation, and call upon the name of the Lord. Let us say, O Lord
our Lord, how wonderful is thy name in all the world. Let us say, praise the
Lord, O my soul, and all that is within me, praise his holy name. Let us
purpose, and promise amendment of our life: let us go out with Peter, and
weep: let us fall at Christ's feet with Marie Magdalene, and with our tears
wash his feet: Let us say with David, I have sinned to the Lord: Let us
say with the Prodigal son, father, I have sinned against heaven and against
thee, I am no more worthy to be called thy son: Let us say, have mercy on
me O God, according to thy great mercy: thou art my God, I am thy servant. O
save me for thy mercies sake. Let us offer up our bodies, a living, pure, holy,
and acceptable sacrifice to God. So shall we be partakers of the death of
Christ, and of his resurrection. Thus have we briefly gone through the whole
matter of the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, and followed the same
order which was set down. First that we do in the Sacrament truly eat the
body of Christ. Secondly, what is the meaning of the words, Hoc est corpus
meum. Thirdely, whether y^ bread remeaine in nature and substance, Fourthly,
whether it be eaten with the mouth of the body, or by faith only. Fifthly,
what difference is between the body of Christ, and the mystical signs.
Sixthly, how we must be prepared, and with what devotion we ought to come to
receive this Sacrament.

Having thus treated of the Sacraments of the new testament, and said so much
as is needful for you to know of them both, as well of Baptism, which is the
sacrament of our regeneration, as of our Lords supper, which is the sacrament
of our refection or nourishment: I will now in few words speak something of
confirmation, of matrimony of ecclesiastical ministry, which some call holy
orders, of repentance or penance, and of extreme vnctio^ which some of late
years have called Sacraments, and by joining these to the other, have made up
the number of seven Sacraments, and so have charged the Church with five
sacraments more then Christ did ever ordain.

For these five, want either the word, or the element, or both: and therefore
may not be taken for true sacraments. Such as have with all their skill showed
them selves helpers and furtherers of our adversaries. yet have plainly
confessed that they are not sacraments of Christ's institution: Alexander of
Hales, says of confirmation. The sacrament of confirmation, as it is a
Sacrament, was not ordained either by Christ or by the Apostles, but afterward
in the Counsel of Melda: Which Counsel was kept many years after Christ. And
Durandus says of matrimony, Matrimony in due and proper kind of speech, is
no Sacrament. And Bessarion a Cardinal, confesses (as it was showed before)
that in due and right consideration, none of these five may be called
Sacraments: We read (says he) that these two only Sacraments, were
delivered us plainly in the Gospel.

First, of Confirmation, which is so called because that which was done on our
behalf in baptism, is ratified and confirmed, many parents had not such due
care as they ought in the godly bringing up of their children: so that many
children knew not whether they were baptized or no: many were never taught what
covenant was made between them and God in their baptism: many swarued away
from Christian profession, and carried them selves to the fellowship of the
heathens: and of the sons of God, became the sons of the deuel. Upon this
occasion, the Church of God lays charge upon the parents, and the witnesses
of the baptizing of young children, that they teach the^ the ways of the
Lord, and to know ye holy mystery that they have received, and what they have
promised and professed in baptism: that they put them in mind, how God has
called them out of the kingdom of darkness, unto his wonderful light, and to
the fellowship of the saints in light.

When the children of the Christians were thus brought up, and had learned the
religyo^ of Christ, and to walk in the ways of Godliness, they were brought to
the church, and by their parents presented unto the Bishop: and yeeled a reason
of their faith openly, before the whole congregation: they professed they would
so believe, that they would live and die in that faith. Then the Bishop and all
the people fell down on their knees, and prayed unto God, that he would
continue the good thing he had begone, and the bishop laying his hand upon
them, commended them unto God. This was the ratifying of the profession which
they made by others at their baptism, and for that cause called Confirmation.

Now, whether it be a sacrament: and when I say a sacrament, I mean a
ceremony commanded by God in express words: For God only has the
authorytie to institute a Sacrament. Sacraments are confirmations, and seals
of the promises of God, and are not of the earth, but from heaven. As Christ
says, The babtisme Mat. 21.
of John Whence was it? from heaven or of men? Chrysostom says, The mystery
were not of God, nor perfect, if thou should put any thing to it. Mark, and
judge, and your selves shall see, whether this were a sacrament instituted by
Christ. Augustine said, Accedat verbum ad elementum, and fit sacramentum. Join
the word to the creature, and it is made a sacrament.

This creature or element is visible, as are water, bread and wine. The word
which must be joined, is the commandment, and institution of christ: without
the word, and the commandment and institution, it is no sacrament.

I protest yt the use and order of confirmation rightly used, is profitable,
and necessary in the Church, and no way to be broken. But all yt is
profitable, and necessary, is not a sacrament. Christ did not comma^de it, he
spoke no word of it. Look, and read, if you doubt it. Christ's words are
written, and may be seen. You shall never find that he commanded
Confirmation, or that he ever made any special promise to it. Therefore may
you conclude, that it is no sacrament. Otherwise, being rightly used, it is a
good ceremony, and well ordained of our ancient fathers.

The Apostles laid their hands on them, and confirmed them which were
baptized of John* But that proves not this confirmation: that was
extraordinary, it was a miracle. The holy Ghost came down upon them, and
lightened their hearts by this laying on of the Apostles hands. But it is not
so now, the holy Ghost does not now descend in visible form upon those which
are confirmed: there is no such miracle wrought. There is no need, that it
should so be. There was no commandment, either to appoint it unto the Church,
or to continue it until the coming of Christ, and the end of the world.
Therefore it is no Sacrament by the institution of Christ, Hitherto of the use:
Now, somewhat of the abuse.

Nothing so good and holy, but it may be abused. The word of God has been
abused to Heresies, to Necromancie, to Charms, and Sorcerie, and Witchcrafte.
The supper of the Lord was abused in y^ time of S. Paul. He tells the
Corinthians, This is not to eat the Lords Supper. Less marvel then, if this
happen to 1. Cor. 11.
a ceremony. Time rusteth and consumes all things, and makes many a thing to
prove naught in the end, which was first devised for good. The brazen Serpent,
at the first was made by Moses, and set it up for good purpose. But, after
ward it was abused: The children of Israel did burn incense unto it, and
therefore Ezechias brake it in pieces.

The first abuse in confirmation was, that it was done in a strange tongue, y^
no man might understand what was meant. Then, that they received to confirmation
such children, and so young, as were not able to make profession of their
faith: so that the infant promised, he knew not what: and the Bishop ratified
and confirmed, where there was nothing to be confirmed: he set to his seal,
where there was nothing to be sealed. These abuses, were far unmeet for the
Church of God.

Besides these, there was great abuse in the manner of doing. For thus the
Bishop said, Consigno te signo crucis, and confirmo te chrismate salutis. I
sign thee with the sign of the cross, and confirm thee with the oil of
salvation. Thus they used to do: these were their words, with the oil of
salvation. They took not this of Christ, nor of his Apostles, nor of the holy
ancient fathers. It agrees not with our Christian faith, to give the power of
salvation unto oil. He that s^eketh salvation in oil, loses his salvation
in Christ, and has no part in the kingdom of God. Oil for the belly, and
for necessary uses of life. It is no fit instrument without commandment or
promise by the word, to work salvation.

More, they said, he was no perfect Christian, that was not anointed by the
Bishop with this holy oil. This was another abuse. For, whosoever is baptized,
receives thereby the full name of a perfect Christian, and has the full and
perfice covenant and assurance of salvation: he is perfitely buried with
Christ, does perfitely put on Christ, and is perfitely made partaker of his
resurrection. Therefore they are deceived, that say, no man is a perfect
Christian, that is not marked with this oil. Else the Apostles, and holy
Martyrs were but half Christians, because the lacked this oil. Else, what hope
and comfort might the pore fathers have? In what state shall he think to find
his child if he die before confirmation, and pass without perfect
Christendom? verily they write thus, Sine oleo Chrismatis, nemo potest sisti
ante tribunal christi. Without ye oil of chrisme, no man can appear before
the Judgment seat of Christ.

Again, they say, confirmation is more honorable then baptism: because any
priest may baptize, but confirmation is given only by a Bishop, or a
suffragain. So do they give a greater preeminence to confirmation, which is
divised by man, then to the holy sacrament of baptism, which Christ him self
ordained. I need not speak more hereof, the error is so gross, so thick,
so sensible and palpable.

Again, when they blessed, or hallowed their oil, they used these words, Fiat
domine hoc oleum, te benedicente; vnctio spiritualis ad purificationem me^tis
and corporis, O Lord, let this oil by thy blessing, be made a spritual
ointme^t, to purify both soul and body. O Christ Jesus, where was thy cross,
where was thy blood, and the price of thy death and passion, when a drop of
oil was of power to work remission of all sins, to save and defend against
all the darts of the wicked spirits, and to refresh both body and soul? Yet
so were we taught, so were we lead. I feign not these things: The words may be
seen. Neither do I speak this, to bring you to a misliking or loathing of our
latter fathers: but only that we may humble our hearts, and give thanks to
GOD, that has brought us out of that darkness, and given us better knowledge.

Now, a word or two of the bringing up of children, and preparing them to
confirmation. Wherein I would God the old order were duly observed, that
they were instructed perfitly to know relygion, and their duty to God: and so
might be brought before the Congregation, and make an open profession of their
faith, with promise, that neither tribulation, nor anguish, nor persecution,
nor famine, nor nakedness, nor fire, nor sword, nor life, nor death, shall ever
make them deny their faith. Hereof might much be spoken, but I will be short.

The whole stands in knowledge and in the fear of God: that they may know
God, and walk before him in reverence and in fear, and serve him in holiness,
and righteousness, all the days of their life. The Jews are a miserable people:
they live in error, they die in their own blood: yet have they so much
understanding, that they bring up their children in the knowledge of God, and
that knowledge they teach out of the word of God. They remember what charge
God gave them: Thou shall teach them thy sons, and thy sons sons. Deuteronomy. 4.


Therefore, a father must teach his child what God is: That he is our father,
that he has made us, and does feed us, and gives us all things needful,
both for body, and soul: that he is our Lord, and therefore we must serve him,
and obey him, and do nothing whereby he may be displeased: that he is our
judge, and shall come to judge the quick and the dead, and that all men shall
come before him, to receive according as they have done in the flesh. He must
put his child in mind of his baptisine, and teach him that it is a couenent
of Gods mercy to us, and of our duty to God: that it is a mystery of our
salvation: that our soul is so washed with the blood of Christ, as the water
of baptism washes our body. So must he also teach his child the mystery of
the Lords supper: what and how he receives there to his comfort: that as the
bread is broken, and the wine poured out, so the body of Christ was crucified,
and his blood shed for the remission of sins: that, if we believe in Christ,
we are through the promise of GOD, so certainly nourished in our souls to
everlasting life, by the passion of Christ Jesus our Savior, as our bodies are
truly nourished with the creaturs of bread and wine. Thus Paul was brought up at
the feet of Gamaliel, Act. 22.
and instructed according to the perfect manner of the law of the fathers. Thus
Timothy was 2. Tim. 3.
brought up to know the holy Scripturs of a child. How are we become so
superstitious? Why have we been so delited in darkness? why is it so hard a
matter to remove us from the errors wherein we have lived? Why had we rather
fall down before dombe things and worship them, and continue still in
ignorance, rather then harken unto the word of God? Why have we played yt
part of the Jews, and cried Crucifige upon our dear friends, and kinsmen:
upon those whom we could not justly accuse of any crime: who offended us no
ways, but in that they did point us to Christ, and called us to seek salvation
only in him? Hereof there cannot any better cause be yielded, then this, that
we were ignorantly bred up, without knowledge of God, without understanding of
his word The wise man says, Teach a child the trade Prou. 22.
of his way, and when he is old he shall not depart from it. And again, Who
so awaketh unto wisdom betimes, shall have no great Wis. 6.
travel: for he shall find her sitti^g at his doors.

Therefore wicked rulers, as Iulianus, Licinius, Maximinus, and such others,
have forbidden that children should be brought up in the knowledge of God. They
taught them to blaspheme Christ, and holy men, and to speak ill of them before
they knew them. But let us look upon our children, as upon the great
blessings of god. They are the Lords vessels ordained to honor, let us keep
the^ clean: they are christ's lambs, and sheep of his flock, let us lead
them forth into wholesome pasture. They are the seed plot of heaven, let us
water them, that god may give the increase: their angels behold ye face of God,
let us not offend them: they are the temples, and tabernacles of the holy
ghost, let us not suffer ye foul spirit to possess the^, and dwell within
them.

God says, your children, are my children. They are the sons of God. They
are borne a new, and are well shapen in beautiful proportion: make the^ not
mo^sters. He is a mo^ster whosoever knows not God. By you they are borne into
the world, be careful also that by your means they may be begotten unto God,
you are careful to train the^ in nourture and comely behavior of the body,
seek also to fashion their minds unto godliness. You have brought them to the
fountain of baptism to receive the mark of Christ, bring them up in
knowledge, and watch over them that they be not lost. So shall they be
confirmed, and will keep the promise they have made, and will grow unto
perfect age in Christ.

Of marriage I shall need say ye less, the matter is so known, and common.
This fellowship was first ordained by God himself in paradise. God himself
said, It is not good that man should Genesis 2.
be himself alone: I will make him an helper meet for him. God, which
fashioned man, and breathed in him the breath of life, and knows his very
heart and raines, said, it is not good, it is not fit, that man should be
himself alone. Although man were in Paradise, although he were in the
perfection of virtue, yet says God he has need of a helper. Christ disdayned
not to be at a marriage, he honored it both by his presence, and by ye working
of a miracle. S. Paul says Marriage, is Heb. 13.
honorable in all men and the bed undefiled. In all men says he, in the
Patriarchs, in the Prophets, in the Apostles, in Martyrs, in Bishops.

That all the Apostles S. John only excepted, were married, appears by
Ignatius, Clemens, and Eusebius. Spiridio^ was a married Bishop, and yet he was
thereby nothing hindered, nether to discharge his duty, nor to any other godly
purpose. Tertullian was a Priest, and married as appears by his own Book,
written to his wife. Gregory S. Basils brother, was Bishop of Nyssa, yet
married. Another Gregory, was Bishop of Nazianzu^, yet married, and
nevertheless, a faithful servant and steward of ye mysteries of God. Hilarie was
Bishop of Poitiers, yet married. All these were holy, and Godly, and chaste in
bedy, and in spirit, and yet were married. Gregory Nazianzene In funere
Gorgoniae.
says, Marriage is worthy of praise, for ye quietness and contentation that is
in it. And Clemens Alexandrinus says, As well marriage Strom. li. 3.
as also chastity, have their peculier offices pertaining to God. and Chrysostom
says, marriage Hom. 57. ad Heb. Hom. 7. ad Heb.
is void of fault, and is no hindrance to virtue. Again, So precious a thing
is matrimony, that with the same thou may be promoted even to a Bishops
chair.

What are they then that call marriage uncleanness, filthiness, a work of the
flesh? that say it defiles a man, and therefore Gods ministers may not be
married? How can they thus speak that have any knowledge of yt which God has
spoken? May we not worthily say unto such despisers of lawful matrimony, yt
which S. Bernard Berm. Sermon. 66. in cantica.
in like case said? Fingunt se amore castitatis ista dicere, cum ea magis causa
turpitudinis fouendae, and multiplicandae adinuenerint. They Bear us in hand
that they speak these things for love of chastity: where as in deed they
have devised the same, to the end to nourish, and to increse their filthiness.
Or, as Augustine sometime said August. de moribus Manich. li. 2 cap. 18.
to ye Manichees, Non co^cubitum, sed vt ab Apostolo long ante dictum est,
vere nuptias prohibetis. Ye forbid not copulatio^: but as it was long ago
forespoken by the Apostle, in deed ye forbid very marriage. If you mark
these few words which I delivered, it will easily appear, how reverent an
account is to be made of that state of life. For if you regard the
necessity thereof, God found it good to give man a wife: if the antiquity,
it was ordained in the beginning of the world: if the place, in Paradise: if
the time, in the innocence of man. If you regard any thing the rather,
because of him that ordained it, God was the author of marriage: even God
which made heaven, and earth, and which is the father of our Lord Jesus
Christ. If you seek the allowance, Christ approved it by his birth in
marriage, and by his presence at marriage: if the dignity, it is honorable:
if among whom, in all men of all estates, of all callinges: in Prince, in
subject, in minister, in Priest, and in people. It is honorable in Prophets,
honorable in Apostles, in Martirs, in Bishops.

Marriage is honorable in all men, but whoremongers and adulterers God will
judge: Their portion shall be with the infidels, they shall be cast into utter
darkness, their worm shall never die, their fire shall never be quenched,
they shall go down headlong into the fire that is prepared for the devil and
his angels. Be not deceived, (says Saint Paul) neither fornicatours, 1. Cor. 6.
nor adulterers, nor wanto^s, nor bouggerers, shall inherit the kingdom of God.

Now are we to speak in the next place of the ministry of the Church, which
some have called holy orders. Shall we account it a Sacrament? there is no
reason so to do. It is a heavenly office, a holy ministry or Service. By
such as have this office, God lighteneth our darkness, he declares his
mind to us, he gathers together his scattered sheep, and publishes unto
the world the glad ridings of salvation. The Patriarchs did bear this office.
This was the office of the prophets. God says, I have sent unto you al my
servants the prophets, rising up eueri day, and sending the^. Iere. 7.
Again he says, I have put my words in thy mouth. Therefore when they taught
the people Esaias. 51.
of God, the Prophets signed their speech thus. The mouth of the Lord has
spoken it: The Lord has said: The voice and ye word of the Lord: Hear the
word of the Lord.

But when the fullness of the time came, God sent his Son, and has spoken
unto us by him. He became our Prophet, to show us the will of his father. He
says, I have not spoken John. 12.
of my self: but the Father which sent me, he gave me a commandment, what
I should say, and what I should speak. Hereof Saint John says, No man has
seen God John. 1.
at any time. He is invisible, he is incomprehensible, no mind can conceive
him, no eye can see him: but, the only begotten Son, which is in the bosom
of ye Father, he has declared him. Of him the father said, This Mat. 3.
is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased: hear him. Hearken unto. him,
receive his word, credit him, believe him. No doubt the Ministry of the
Gospel is hyghlye to be esteemed, seeinge our Savior was not ashamed to
publish the will of his Father in his own person: yet it appears not, where
ever he did ordeine it to be a Sacrament.

He appointed that the comfort thereof should be carried into all nations,
and gave that charge unto his Apostles, Go teach all Mat. 28. Mat. 10.
nations. Again, What I tell you in darkness, that speak you in light: and
what you hear in the ear, ye preach you on the houses. He saw the people,
and had compassion on them, he saw they were dispearsed, and scattered abroad
like sheep without a shepherd, and that they perished, because they had no
knowledge of the will of God. Therefore Mat. 9.
he says, Pray the Lord of the harvest, that he would send laborers into
the harvest. Therefore he ordayneth them to this ministry, I will make you
fishers of men. And sends Mat. 4. John. 20. Mat. 10.
them forth, as my father sent me, so send I you. And, Go to the lost
sheep of the house of Israel. He wylled them to call the people to
repentance, and to preach the kingdom of God.

By this ministry, God has gathered to himself an acceptable people, and
has brought them to the obedience of the Gospel of Christ, and has turned
the hearts of the Fathers unto their children, and so made it to be the
foundation of religion, They that exercise this ministry are ye eyes of
Christ, the pillars of ye Church, the interpreters of Gods will, the watchmen
of the Lords tower, the leaders of Christ's sheep, the salt of the earth, the
light of the world. Daniel says, They that turn many to righteousness, Dan. 12.
shall shine as the stars for ever and ever. Not that there is any so great
wisdom, or eloquence in men: they are but weak, they are unfit to do this
service. Esaias says of himself, I am Esaias. 6. Ierem. 1.
a man of polluted lips And Jeremy says, O Lord god, behold, I cannot
speak, for I am a child. So says S. Paul, I have planted Apollos watered, but
God gave the increase. So 1. Cor. 3.
the^, nether is he that planteth any thing, nether he that waters, but God
yt gives the increase. So said Saint John, that he was not Christ, nor that
Prophet, but the voice of him that cries in the wilderness, and not worthy to
unloose the latchet of his shoe that should come after him.

The power, whereby they did conquer the world, was not in them, but in the
word which they preached. It is the power of God to salvation to every one
that believes. It is Romans 1.
like a fire, and like a hammer that breaks a stone. When ye received of us
ye word of the Iere. 23.
preaching of god, (says S. Paul to the Thessalonians) ye received it not as
the word of 1. These. 2.
men, but as it is indeed the word of god, which also works in you that
believe. The power of an earthly Prince is great. The Prou. 20.
wise man says, The fear of a King, is like the roaring of a Lion. Yet is a
Prince but mortal, and the Law of a Prince is but mortal: it has no power to
force the conscience. But the word of God does break into the heart, it
forces a way into the Conscience: it is sharper then any two edged sword: it
enters through, even to the deuidinge a sunder of the soul and the spirit,
because it is the word of God.

For, it is not man, but God that speaks, as Christ tells the Apostles, It
is not ye that Mat. 10.
speak, but the spirit of your father, which speaks in you. So says the
Prophet Zachary, Luck. 1.
He spoke by the mouth of his holy Prophets, which have been since the world
began. The Prophets, and Apostles, and holy men of God were but instruments.
It was God which gave his holy spirit, which gave them tongues to speak, and
words to utter. Therefore said Christ, I will give you a mouth, Luke. 21.
and wisdom, where against al your adversaries shall not be able to speak,
nor resist. Though men be but simple, yet the word they deliver, is mighty:
though they be mortal, the word of the Lord endures for ever.

Where this word is received, it is fire, and burns: it is a hammer, and
breaks the hardness of the heart: it is mighty in operation: it cleanses
the inner man: it opens the consctence: it is a savor of life unto life: it
is the means of salvation. He that receives this word and believes, shall
be saved. This is the word of reconciliation. God has committed it unto us.

If any hide this word, he slays the people: He is a dombe dog. Of such
God says, Behold, I will come against the Prophets, that steal my word
euerione from his neighbor. Ierem. 23.
They are thieues and robbers. Woe, be unto you interpreters of the law: for
ye have taken away the key of knowledge (says Christ) Luke. 11.
ye entered not in your selves, and them that came in, ye forbad. And again,
Woe be unto you Scribes, and Pharisees, hypocrites, Mat. 23.
because ye shut up the kingdom of heaven before men: for ye your selves go
not in, nether suffer ye the^ that would enter, to come in. Of these, and
against them God speaks by the Prophet Jeremy, Woe be unto the pastors,
Ierem. 23.
that destroy, and scatter the sheep of my pasture. And by the Prophet
Zachary, O Idolshepherd Zach. 11.
that leaves the flock. Thou have ears, and hear not: thou have eyes, and
see not: thou have a tongue, and speak not: and a heart, but understand
not: thou art an idol, Christ said to thee, feed my lambs, feed my sheep,
but thou carest not for them. Thou have the room of an Evangelist, and
Pastor, and Teacher: but thou gatherest not the saints together: thou do
not the work of the ministry: thou buildest not up the body of Christ.
They shall perish in their wickedness, but their blood will I require at thy
hands.

Here note, this ministry of the Church was not ordained to offer sacrifice
for forgiveness of sins. Whosoever takes that office upon him, be does
wrong and injury to the death and passion of Christ. He only is called of god
Hebr. 5.
an high Priest after ye order of Melchisedec. He only, by his own blood
entered in once Heb. 9.
into the holy place, and obtained eternal redemption for us. He only with one
offeringe Hebr. 10.
has consecrated for ever them yt are sanctified. He only has said,
Consummatum est. It is finished. The ransom or price for man's salvation, and
for forgiveness of the sins of the world is paid in me, in my death upon
the Cross. Of him alone, and only of him, has it been spoken, This is my
well beloved Mat. 3.
Son in whom I am well pleased. And by Esaias, With his stripes only, we are
healed. It Esaias. 53.
is he only which has made of both, one. It is he only, which did put out y^
hand writing Ephe. 2. Colos. 2.
of ordinances y^ was against us: he even took it out of the way, and fastened
it upon the Cross. He alone, is our hye Priest, the Lamb of God, the
Sacrifice for sins, the Altar, the Propitiation for sinners, and redeemer of
the world, He only has appeased the wrath of god. He only appears in the
sight of GOD, to make intercession for our sins. All others whatsoever,
Apostles, Prophets, Teachers, and Pastors, are not in office to offer any
propitiatory sacrifice: but are called to the ministry of the Saints, to
the edification of the body of Christ, and to the repayringe of the Church of
God.

Thus much of the holy ministry of the Church, which stands in the setting
forth of the mystery of our salvation, both by the Preachinge of the word
of GOD, and by the due and reverent ministration of the Sacraments. The
principallest part of this office, is to preach repentance, that so we may
amend our lives, and be converted unto GOD. So Joel the Prophet followed his
ministry, saying, Rent your hearts and not your garments, and turn to the
Lord Joel. 2.
your God, for he is gracious and merciful. So S. Paul teaches, that true
circumcision is by Colos. 2.
putting off the sinful body of the fleesh: that it is in mortifying our
members that be on the earth, Fornication, uncleanness, the inordinate
affections, evil concupiscence, and Col. 3.
covetousness, which is idolatry: y^ it is in putting away al these things,
wrath, anger, maliciousnes, cursed speakinge, filthy speakinge out of your
mouth in putting of the old man with his works, and putting on the new, which
is renewed in knowledge after ye image of him that created him.

So John Baptist said, Repent, for the kingdom Mat. 3.
of God is at hand. Prepare ye y^ ways of the Lord, and make his paths
straight. So our Savior Christ, when he began to preach, Mat. 4.
said, Am end your lives, for the kingdom of God is at hand.

Therefore it will not be amiss now, to speak of repentance, which some of
late years have changed into pennaunce, and there of have also made a
Sacrament. Here it behooves to rippe up the whole life of man. There is not any
man that lives, and sins not. God says, The imagination of man's heart is
evil Genesis 9.
from his youth. The Prophet Jeremy says, The heart is deceitful and wicked
above all Ierem. 17.
things who can know it? Saint John therefore says, If we say, that we have
no sin, we 1. John. 1.
deceive our selves, and truth is not in us. Of himself Saint Paul says, I
know that in me, that is, in my flesh dwells no good thing. Romans 7.
Of himself the Prophet David says, There is nothing sound in my flesh,
because of thine Psalm. 38.
anger: neither is there rest in my bones, because of my sins, For mine
iniquities are gone over mine head, and as a weighti burden they are to heavy
for me. He says, If thou, O Psalm. 130.
Lord, straightly markest iniquities, O Lord, who shall abide it? So says the
Wise man, A Prou. 24.
iustman falls seven times.

God is a righteous God, and the auenger of all them that offende^^. Saint Paul
says, The Romans 6.
wages of sin is death. And the Prophet Ezechiel, The soul that sins
shall dye. For this cause then God ordained the ministry of Ezech. 18.
his word, and appointed certain to this office, that they should warn his
people of their sins, and fear them by the terror of Gods assured
displeasure, and heavy wrath. As is seen by yt to Esaias, Cry aloude, spare not:
lift up thy voice like a trumpet, and show my Esaias. 58.
people their transgressions, and the house of Jacob their sins. So Saint Paul
unto Timothy, I charge thee before God, and the Lord 1. Tim. 4.
Jesus Christ, which shall judge the quick and dead at his appearing, and in his
kingdom, preach the word: be instant in season and out of season: improve,
rebuke, exhort with all long suffering and doctrine.

So would God have our filth laid open before our eyes, that we might weigh
and judge our own hearts, that every man might make charge upon him self,
and say, I am an unprofitable servant, my righteousness is as a foul and
steined cloth. My soul has sinned, and has deserved to dye the death.

In this case, some fall into desperation, and say, as sometimes did Caine, My
sin is Genesis 4.
greater, then can be pardoned. God withdraws his mercy from me, I am
unworthy of it. I have offended against the holy spirit of GOD: mine own
conscience accuses me. I have no part in the kingdom of GOD, and of Christ:
there is no sacrifice left for my sins. Thus the wicked live in trembling and
agony, as did Cain: thus they leave their life with horror and misery: so
have they no grace to repent, no taste nor feelyng of the mercy of God.

But, the children of God, though they be wounded, yet they find relief in
the certain hope of Gods mercy. Though they say, I am a sinner, my sins are
more in number then the hears of my head: I have offended against heaven and
earth. Yet they know that Christ came to call sinuers to repentance, and that
he heals those that are sick. That he said, Come unto Mat. 11.
me all ye that are wearye and laden, and I will ease you. For, what lays he
on his shoulders with joy? Is it not the lost sheep? Wherefore does the woman
light a candle, and sweep the house, and seek diligently, till she find it?
Is it not for the peace of silver, which she had lost? Over whom had the
father compassion, and ran, and fell on his neck, and kissed him? Was not
this done for him which was dead, but lived again, and for him which was
lost, but was found again? The son of man came to save that which was lost.
And, There is joy in Mat. 18. Luke. 15.
the presence of the Angels of God, for one sinner that conuerteth.

God is merciful, and his mercy endures for ever. So ^ayeth the Prophet
David. Mercy is with the Lord. By the Prophet Ezechiel, I desire Psalm. 130.
Ezech. 18.
not the death of him that dies, says the Lord God. It is the will of God,
that all men shall be saved, and come to the knowledge of yt 1. Tim. 2.
truth. By Esaias the Prophet, God says, If your sins were as crimosyn, they
shall be made as Esaias. 1.
white as snow. For I, even I am he that puts away thine iniquities, for
mine own Esaias. 43.
sake, and will not remember thy sins. The children of God hear this, and are
glad. They lift themselves up in the faith of the mercy of God: they see the
filthynesse of their sin: they know though the wrath of God be kindeled
against sin, yet he does not utterly destroy those that have sinned, but such
as continue in their sins without repentance: they know god will not despise
an humble and contrite heart.

Therefore they say, Enter not into judgment Psalm. 143.
with thy servant, O Lord, for no flesh is righteous in thy sight. Take away
the iniquity of thy servant. They say, Why art thou heavy, O my soul, and
why art thou unquiet within me? Wait on God: for I will yet give him thanks
for the help of his presence. They say, there is no condemnation to them
which are in Christ Jesus. Though I should walk through the valleye of the
shadow of death, I will fear no evil, because thou art with me. They say,
If our heart condemn us, God is greater then our heart. Thus 1. John. 3.
are we taught by the office of the ministry, and by the word of God, to
see our selves, to know our weakness, to repent our sins, to believe the
forgiveness of our sins, and to turn unto God.

We are taught to lay open and acknowledge our sins, not to hide them, but to
make confession of them. This is done two ways: either in the secret thought
of thy heart before God, or else in the hearing and presence of men. David made
confession of his sins before God. I acknowledged my sin before thee, neither
hid I mine iniquity. I said I will confess against Psalm. 32.
my self my wickedness unto the Lord, and thou forgauest ye punishment of my
sin. And again, I know mine iniquities, and my Psalm. 15.
sin is ever before me. Against thee, against thee only have I sinned, and
done evil in thy sight. Such a confession made Daeniel. We have Dan. 9.
sinned, and have committed iniquity, and have done wickedly: yea, we have
rebelled, and have departed from thy precepts, and from thy judgments. For we
would not obey thy servants the Prophets, which spoke in thy name to our
kings, to our princes, and to our fathers, and to all the people of the land.
Even so the prophet Esaias, Behold thou art angry, Esaias. 64.
for we have sinned. We have all been as an unclean thing, and all our
righteousness as is filthy cloutes, and we al do fade like a leaf, and our
iniquities like ye wind have taken us away. But now, O Lord, thou art our
father: We are the clay, and thou art our potter, and we al are the work of
thy hands. This is true and Christian confession. We are required after this
sort to examine our selves, and confess our sins before God: who does not
so, he shall not find mercy and forgiveness of his sins.

The other sort of confession made unto men, I do not condemn. It may do
much good, if it be well used. S. James commends it among the faithful,
Acknowledge your faults one to Iocob. 5.
another, and pray one for another, yt ye may be healed. He speaks not of
Priest or minister, but of every one of the faithful. Every Christian may do
this help unto another, to take knowledge of the secret and inner grief of
the heart: to look upon the wound, which sin and wickedness has made, and
by godly advise and earnest prayer for him, to receuer his brother. This is a
private exhortation, and as it were a Catechizing, or instructing in the faith,
and a means to lead us by familiar and special conference, to examine our
conscience, and to epsy wherein we have offended God. The use and practice
hereof is not only to be allowed, but most needful and requisite, if so the
superstition, and necessity, and conscience, which many have fondely used and
put therein, be taken away.

That the Priests should hear the private confessions of the people, and
listen to their whisperings: that every man should be bound to their auriculer
confession, it is no commandment or ordinance of God. It is devised and
establyshed by men, and was lately confirmed by Innocentius the third. The
Church of God in the time of our elder fathers, was not tied to any such
necessity.

Chrysostom says, Non dico, vt confitearis Hom. 2. in psalm. 50
conseruo tuo peccata tua^ dicito deo, qui curet ea. I will thee not to
confessethy sins to thy fellow servant, (that is, to the Priest) confess
the^ unto God, that may heal them. Again he says, Cogitatione tua fiat
delictorum exquisitio: sine test sit hoc iudicium, solus Deus te confitent em
Hom. de poenit. and confess.
videat. Examine thy sins in thy heart within thee: let this judgment be
without witness, let god only see thee making thy confession. And again, Non
dico tibi, vt te pro das in publicum, neque vt te apud alios accuses: Hom. 31.
ad Hebr. vel hom. 30. quaere.
sed obedire te volo Prophetae dicenti, Reuela Domino viam tuam. Apud Deum ergo
etc. I say not to thee, that thou openly show forth thy self, nor that thou
accuse thy self in y^ presence of others: but I will have thee obey God, which
says, Disclose thy ways unto the Lord. Confess thy sins therefore before
God: declare thine offenses, and make thy prayer for them before God, which is
the true and righteous Judge. Make thy confession, not with the tongue, but in
the record of thine own conscience.

Likewise S. Augustine: Quid mihi est cum hominibus, vt audiant confessiones
meas, quasi ipsi sanaturi sint omnes languores meos? Curiosum genus ad
inquirendam vitam alienam, desidiosum ad corrigendam suam. What have I to do
with men, that they should hear my confessions, as if they could heal all
my wounds, or diseases? They be a curious sort, in searching out the life of
others, and slothful in correctynge their own life. S. Ambrose says, Lauat
lachrima delictum, quod voce pudor est co^fiteri. The tear washes away Dc
paenit. Petri Sormo. 46
that offense, which shame would not suffer to confess in speech. The Church
of God in Graecia, never received it. And Erasmus witnesses, it was not used
in the time of S. Hierome. Apparat tempore Hieronimi nondum institutam In scho
in Epitaph. Fabiolae.
fuisse secretam admissorum confessionem. It appears that in the time of S.
Hierome (which was four hundred years after Christ) secret confession of
sins was not yet ordained.

And Beatus Rhenanus, a man of great readyng, says: Tertullianus de
clancularia ista confessione admissoru^ kihil loquitur, neque eam vsqua^ olim
preceptam legimus. Tertullian speaks nothing of this secret confession of
sins: and we read not any where, that it was commanded in times past.

By these testimonies of Chrysostom. August. Ambrose, and by y^ observation of
Erasmus, and Rhenanus it may appear, that this secret confession in the ear
of the Priest, has not been taken to be necessary: and that it is not of
Gods determinate appointment, but an ordinance of man. As the De paenit. did.
5. in paenit. in glossa.
gloss upon the decrees something plainly confesses: Melius dicitur,
confessionem institutam fuisse a quadam vniuersalis ecclesiae traditione,
potius quam ex noui vel veteris testamenti authoritate. It is better said, y^
confession was appointed by some tradition of the universal Church, then by
any authority, or commandment of the new, or old testament.

Now in a word or two, I will somewhat speak of sacisfaction or recompense
for offenses which we have done, whereby we satisfy and make amends to the
full conten^ation of him that is offended. Such a recompense the law required,
An eye for an eye a tooth for a tooth: a hand for an hand: a foot for a
foot. Such amends, Exodus 21.
for such harm, so much for so much: and this was accounted due and lawful
satisfaction.

This is of two sorts, either that which is done unto God, or that which is
done unto men. We are never able to satisfy, and make amends unto God. We
must always confess, that we are unprofitable servants, and unworthy to stand
in his presence: and by no means able of our selves, to make recompense for
that we have offended him. Our only and full satisfaction for our trespasses
done against him, is the blood of our savior Jesus Christ.

The thief upon y^ cross, called upon Jesus, Lord remember me when thou
co^mest into thy kingdom. He knew he had offended God, but found not how he
might make amends, otherwise the^ by the righteous^es of Christ. Jesus answered
him, verily I say unto thee, to day thou shall be with me in paradise. Today,
that is, by and by. He refuses him not, nor fears him that God will refufe
him, because he had done amiss, and made no recompense: but promises him,
because he repented, and believed, that he shall be saved. Paul was thrown
down a persequutor, and raised up a preacher. What amends might he make in so
short time?

Saint Ciprian says, Sanguis tuus, O Christ, Cipria. de passione domini.
non quaerit vindictam. Thy blood O Christ looks not for any revenge. And
saint Ambrose Lachrimas Petri lego, satisfactionem non lego. I read of Peter's
tears, but I read nothing De paenit. Pe. Apo^t. Ser. (...)
of any satisfaction he made. For our whole life cannot sufficyently acquit us
from the gu^l^inesse of one sin: much less is any man able to work or
deserve y^ forgiveness of all his sins. The only things that God requires of
us when we have sinned, ar that we sorrow for our sins, and amend our lives.
So John the Baptist spoke to the P^arisies, Bring forth fruit Mat. 3. Ephe.
(...)*
worthy amendment of life. So saint Paul calls the Ephesians to make
recompense for their former naughtines: Cast of lyinge, and speak every man
the truth unto his neighbor. Let him y^ stole steal no more, but le^ him
rather labor, and work with his hands the thing that is good. Other
recompense, god looks not for at our hands.

But, when the godly have taken offense at any our doings that are evil, we
must give all heed to content their minds, and reconcile our selves again
unto them. It has been an ancient order in the Church of God, that, if any had
openly offended the congregation, he should come openly again before them to
satisfy them by amends. There he fell down on his knees, confessed his fault,
wept, and lamented for it: prayed the brethren that they would forgive him,
and would also pray unto God to be merciful unto him. There the whole
congregation fell down before God: their hearts moulted: their eyes gushed
out in tears: they held up their hands: prayed together for him, and gave
thanks to God, that their brother which had been lost, was found again. Such
satisfaction was it, which has been made to the Church of God.

The last of those which some have of late misused, and counted one of the
sacraments of the Church, is Extreme unction. And this they have founded upon
the words of S. ^ames, Is any ^^cob. 5.
sick among you? let him call for y^ elders of the Church, and let them pray
for him, and anoint him with oil in y^ name of the Lord, and the prayer of
faith shall save the sick, and the Lord shall raise him up: and if he have
committed sin, it shall be forgiven him.

For the better understanding of which words, consider that God is merciful to
the sons of men, and shows forth his mercy at sundry times by sundry
ways. And to leave the examples of the old Testament: in the time of the
gospel, he has given to some y^ g^ft of tongues, and has made them able
being simple men, to speak the wonderful works of God in tongues which they
never learned. To some he has given the gift of power, and of the operation of
great works. By this power, many signs and wonders were wrought by y^ hands
of the Apostles. At the word of Peter, Ananias and Saphira his Act. 5. Act. 13.
wife, fell down dead. In this power Paul stroke Elimas the sorcerer with
blindness.

To some he gave the gift of healing. By this S. Peter healed a man which was a
creeple from Act. 3.
his mothers womb, and said, In the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, rise up
and walk: and he took him by the right hand, and lift him up, and
immediately his feet and ancle bones received strength. They were able to make
the blind, see: the lame, to walk: the leapers, to be clean: the dead to
receive life again. For when he sent forth his Apostles to preach. Christ
gave them power against unclean Mat. 10.
spirits, to cast them out, and to heal every sickness, and every disease.

These things they wrought, sometimes by their shadow, as many were healed by
the shadow of Peter: sometimes with their word: sometimes with
handekerchifes: sometimes by laying on of hands, and by touching: sometimes
with oil, as is in the sixth of S. Mark, Mark. 6.
they cast out many devils, and they anointed many y^ were sick with oil, and
healed the^: even as Christ also by many sundry ways healed many. He healed
sometimes, though he were absent: sometimes by his word: sometimes by mourning
and sorowinge: sometimes by his garment: sometimes by touching: sometimes with
specle, and dust: for at that time the Church had the especial gift of working
miracles.

Therefore S. James puts them in mind, that they despise not to use the
means which God has appointed: that whosoever falls into sickness, he call
for the Elders, and that they use their gift of healinge, and anointe him with
oil, because it has pleased GOD thereby to work health. This was the manner
and order of those times. Even as christ used dust and spetle: so S. James
wills them to use oil for the restoring of health. As the Corinthians did
abuse the gift of tongues, and were taught by S. Paul how to use it better: so
did many abuse y^ gift of healing, and were therefore warned by S. James how
they should use it better. As the gift of tongues was not to last for ever, but
only for a time: so y^ gift of healing was not to continue ever, but for a
time. Christ says, When thou fastest, anoint Mat. 6.
thine head, and wash thy face. He does not in these words give an universal
commandment, that must ever be kept in our fasting, that we use the ceremony
of anointing: but, means thereby, that in our fast we be fresh and merry.
Even so S. James, in saying, anoint him with oil, does not set down an order,
whereunto he would have the Church of God tied for ever: it is not an universal
commandment, that the after ages should do the like: but only a particular
ordinance for the time, to use the gift of healing. This is the meaning of his
words.

Let us mark what abuses have grown by mistaking them. S. James speaks of
bare and simple oil: They understand it of their oil, which they consecrate,
and halow in unadvised order. For these words the Bishop uses when he
consecrateth it. Aue sanctu^ oleum, chrisma, balsamum. Hail O holy oil, and
chrisme, and balsame. Again, exerciso te immu^de spiritus, in nomine patris,
and filii, and spiritus sancti, vt recedas ab hoc oleo, vt possit effici vnctio
spiritualis, vt spiritus sanctus possit in eo habitare. I adjure thee thou
unclean spirit, in y^ name of the father, and of the son, and of the holy
ghost, that thou depart from this oil, yt it may be a spiritual ointment, and
y^ the holy ghost may dwell in it. Again, Emitte quaesumus, sancte pater,
spiritum sanctum paracletum tuum de coelis in hanc pinguedinem oliuae, ad
refectione^ corporum, and sanationem animarum, O holy father we beseech thee
send down thy holy spirit y^ comforter from heaven into this fatness of y^
olive, to the refreshing of body and soul. In like sort they are taught to
pray over y^ sick Per hanc sactam vnctionem, and suam piissimam misericond^^m
ignoscat tibi deus, vt per hanc vnctione^ habeas remissionem omniu^ peccatorum:
By this holy anointing, and by his great mercy God pardon thee, that by this
anointinge, thou may have remission of al thy sins.

I devise not these things, I imagine them not of my self, nor report them
untruly. The Bishop in such words blesses the oil: and with such words
does the Priest anoint the sick with oil: In their Books it is easy to be
seen. Now judge you, if this were S James doctrine, or if this order were kept
in the church in the time of the Apostles. Would you think that S. James gave
courtesy by bowing his body, and saying Aue to the oil: did he speak words
of coniuration to drive forth the evil spirit: would he ever say that the
Oil does heal both body and soul: or that remission of al sins is given
by anointing: S. James knew that remission of sins is not given by any
creature: that there is no name in heaven or earth, by which we are saved, but
the name of Jesus only: that the holy ghost rests not, nor dwells in oil,
but in the hearts of the faithful: that God gives health, not in respect of
the corruptible creature, but at the prayers of the Church, which are offered
up to him by his son, our savior. So great difference is there between the
late meaning, and the meaning of S. James.

Such use of y^ oil we have not, neither does the Church of God allow it. Yet
hold we the rule of the Apostle in visitation of the sick: When any is sick
among us, the Minister comes unto him, and discretlye instructs him in what
sort he should prepare himself to depart this life, and so leads him to
comfort, and labors to make him strong in the certain hope of everlasting
life.

Thus he says: Brother, you are entringe the way of al flesh. Al y^ sons of
Adam are heirs of this sentence of God upon Adam, thou art duste, and to dust
thou shall return. Man that is borne of woman, is of short continuance, and
full of trouble. He shoots forth as a flower, and is cut down: he vanishes
also as a shadow, and continues not. Humble thy self under the mighty hand
of God. He is our good father, and does correct those children whom he
loves. Blessed is he, whom the Lord does chastise, and instruct in his ways.

Here is the proof and trial of your patience, and faith: remember the
patience of Job, in all his miseries he praised y^ name of the Lord. Although
(says he) he should kill me, yet will I put my trust in God. Although my
bowels be consumed within me, and my members of my body be rent a sunder, and
the pangues be never so great, yet can I not but trust in him. Love not 1.
John. 2.
the world, nor yt things that be in the world. The world passes away, and the
lust thereof. The wise man says. I have considered all the works that are done
under the sun, and behold, al is vanity Eccles. 1.
and vexatio^ of spirit. Again, great travel is created for all men, and an
heavy yoke upon the sons of Adam, from the day ye they go out of Eccles. 40.
their mothers womb, til the day yt they return to ye mother of al things.
Christ has therefore wille^ us to wake, and be ready, because we know not in
what hour our master will come. He says, Behold, I come as a thief: blessed
is he which watches and keeps his garments, Revel. 16.
least he walk naked, and men see his filthiness.

Examine your self, consider how, and in what things you have offended God,
make a true and humble confession of your sins: say with David, I have sinned
against the Lord, and I will confess against my self my wickedness unto ye
Lord. Call to mind how you have gotten your goods, how you have used the^, and
whether you have delighted in the^, or put any confidence in the^. Call to
mind how you have taken care for your Children and servants, if by your good
means, they have been nourtered in the fear of yt Lord. In these, and such
other parts of your life, lay open your sins, let them come forth before you,
acknowledge the^ against yourselfe unto the Lord, say boldly, because you may
say it truly, I am an unprofitable servant, I have not done that which I
ought to have done: there is no good thing dwellinge in me: the Law in my
members has prevailed against the Law of my mind. It can not be, but God
will cast his eyes upon you, and will hear you, and will pardon the wickedness of
your sins.

What wants in you to the fullness of righteousness, is already satisfied in
the rigeteousnes of Christ. God has said, and sworn, As I Ezech. 33.
live says the Lord God, I desire not ye death of the wicked, but yt the
wicked turn from his way, and live. And again, if the wicked will Ezech. 18.
return from all his sins yt he has committed: al his transgressions yt he
has committed, they shall not be mentioned unto him. The Lord is full of
compassion and mercy. For as high as the heaven is above the earth, so great is
his mercy towared them that fear him. As far as the East is from the West, so
far has he removed our sins from us. Christ himself says, God John. 3.
so loved the world, yt he has given his only begotten son, that whosoever
believes in him, should not perish, but have life everlasting. And S. Paul, god
sets out his love toward us, seeing yt while we were yet sinners, Romans 5.
Christ died for us, much more the^ being justified by his blod, we shall be
saved from wrath through him. Thus in time of sickness are we put in mind to
examine and view our sins, and to solace our selves in yt bloodshedding of
Christ.

Farther, he that is sick, is counseled to call to mind, what any man has
trespassed him, and to forgive them: because God is ye God of love: and if any
man hate his brother, he abides in death: and we are commanded to say,
forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us: and if
we do forgive men their trespasses, our heavenly father will also forgive us.
But if we do not forgive men their trespasses, no more will our heavenly father
forgive us our trespasses, That so, all we which are redeemed with one price,
by the precious blood of the unspotted lamb, may join together as partakers
of one inheritance, and the children of one father, and so go forewarde to one
glory by one way, and become al one in Jesus Christ our Lord.

In this case, the good father calls his son unto him, and exhorts him in
this manner. My son harken unto me: these be the last words, which I shall
speak unto thee. Thou see in me the weakness and decay of flesh: thou shall
be, as I am now One passes before another, the world and the beauty thereof
fade away, and come to an end. Trust not the world, it will deceive thee:
walk advisedly: know yt thou shall give an account of thy doings. For we must
al appear before ye judgment seat of christ. 2. Cor. 5.
yt every man may receive the things which are done in his body, according to
that he has done, whether it be good or evil.

Deceive no man by wrongful dealing: increase not thy goods by extortion, nor
by usury: he that gives his money unto usury, shall not enter into the
tabernacle of the Lord. He that takes usury of his neighbor, kills him
without a sword. The Lord will avenge it: he will not bless ill gotten goods:
they cannot prosper: they will never continue, nor remain unto the third heir.

My son, in all thy doings fear the Lord. If thou fear the Lord, thou shall
prosper, and in the day of thine end, thou shall be blessed. Meddle not much
with other men's business, least thou be entangled with controversies: abhor
the flanderer and double tongued. Let my doings which am thy father, be ever
before thine eyes. Those few goods which I have, were truly gotten. I have not
gathered them of the tears, and heaviness, and undoing, or hindering of any. Be
faithful to thy wife, and besides her know none other. Help thy neighbor
according to thy power: and turn not thy face from the poor and needy. Be
merciful after thy power. If thou have much, give plentiously: if thou have
licle, do thy diligence gladly to give of that little. Be not slow to visit the
sick: whatsoever thou take in hand, remember the end, and thou shall never
do amiss.

As for me, I have passed the vanities and miseries of this world. The Lord
has given, and the Lord takes away, blessed be the name of the Lord. He is
the Lord my God, let him do with me, as it seems good unto him. I know
that this shall hasten my saluatien: And that Christ shall be magnified in my
body, whether it be by life, or by death. I have not so lived, that I am
ashamed to live: neither am I afraid to die, for we have a gracious Lord. I
know, that if my earthly house of this tabernacle be destroyed. I have a
building given of God, that is, an house not made with hands, but eternal in
y^ heavens. They that die in the Lord are blessed, they shall rest from their
labors. Christ is unto me both in life, and in death, advantage. In such sort
do the Godly prepare themselves to their journey out of this life.

Then the Minister prays, that he e may be constant in this faith: he
strengthens him, and confirms him in it. He exhorts the sick to commend
him self unto God: he prays unto God, that he will give his Angels charge
over him to keep him and defend him, that he fall not into temptation. He
teaches him to say, O lord, in thee have I trusted, let me never be
confounded. Come Lord Jesus, come, and take me unto thee: Lord, let thy
servant depart in peace: thy kindome come. I am thy son, thine am I, O save
me: into thine hands, O Lord, I commend my spirit, thou have redeemed me, O
Lord God of truth. In this state he dies, and has his eyes always fastened
upon God, and so sees, how indeed, the dead are blessed which dye in the Lord.

Thus does the Church of God instruct all men to live, and to die, and to be
in readiness. Thus ar the sick among us anointed with the inner and in
uisible oil of y^ mercy of God. Thus are they put in mind to have the oil
of faith, and of a good conscience, and that their lamps may ever be burning,
that so they may enter in with the bridegroom: that the day spring from an high
may visit their hearts: and that it may be said unto them, come ye blessed of
my father, inherit ye the kingdom prepared for you from the foundatio^s of the
world.

FINIS.
Imprinted at London by Christopher Barker, Printer to the Queens most
excellens May ie. Anno. 1583.


