An Apology, or answer in defense of the Church of England, concerning the
state of Religion used in the same.

Newly set forth in Latin, and now translated into English.

Romans 1. I am not ashamed of the Gospel of CHRIST, for it is the power of GOD
unto salvation to every one that believes.

Londini, ANNO DOMINI M.D.LXII.



Lord save the Queen.

The Apology of the Church of England.
IT has been always an old complainte, even from the times of the Patryarkes
and Prophets, and confyrmed by the writings and testimonies of all ages, yt
Truth dwells as a stranger here upon earth: and sone finds enemies and
slaunderers among such as do not know her. Tertull. in Apologetic^.
The which thing although peradventure it may seem incredible unto others,
True religion was always slau^dered among men.
such as have not diligently marked these things: specially because yt the
whole ofspringe of mankind by very course of nature, without a teacher, even
of his own inclination coueteth after truth: and Christ himself our
savior, what time he was here conuersante amongst men, called himself the
Truth, as by that name which most aptly did express all divine power:
nevertheless we that are exercysed in the holy Scriptures, and have read and
seen what has happened in manner to all godly men of al ages, even unto the
Prophets, unto the Apostles, unto the holy Martyrs, and unto Christ himself:
with what reproaches, what reuylinges, what slanderous names they were vexed here
in their life time for only truths sake: we I say do se, that it is a thing
not only nothing new nor incredible, but also very current and common to all
ages. Mary on the other side it might seem much more merueylous and
incredible: in case that the Devil, the very father of lies and enemy to al
truth, should now suddenly change his natural disposition, and hope to
find some other way then by lying, to oppress the truth: or that by other
sleyghtes then such as he has always used, he should now begin to
establishe his kingedome. For out of all records you shall scantly find any
time, (other whiles religion was newly growing and increasing, or after it was
stayed and setteled, or when it began to spring again (wherein truth and
innocence amongst men was not most unworthily and most shamefully entreated:
for the Dyuill sees, whiles truth prevails, he can not prevail nor keep
his own.

For to pass over, and to speak nothing of the times of ye ancient
Patriarchs and Prophets, in whose days, as I have said before, there was no
season void of slanders and reproaches against the truth. We know that there
were certain persons that said and openly pronounced of ye ancient Jews,
(of whom we doubt not, but they worshypped the only and the true God) that instead of God they worshipped other a Sow or an Ass: Cor. Tacitus. Tertul. in
Apologetico. cap. 7. C. Plinius.
and that all their religion was nothing else but a sacrilege and a contempt of
al divine power. We know that the son of God, our savior Jesus Christ,
for teachinge of the truth, was taken for an enchaunter, for a worker of
mischief, for a Samaritane, for Beelzebub, for a deceiuer of the people, and
for a man that followed his delight in eatinge and drinkinge. And who is ignorant
of those things that were spoken in time past against that most earnest
setter forth and champion of the truth S. Paul: sometime that he was a
seditious person, that he gathered soldiers, that he intended uproar:
sometimes that he was an Heretic, sometime that he was mad, sometimes that
only to make strife and for his pleasure, he blasphemed the law of God, and
despised the ordinances of the fathers? Who knows not how that S. Stephan,
Act. 26. Epiphanius.
so sone as he had received into the inward bosom of his mind the truth, and
had begone freely (according as he was bound) and stoutly to preach it and to
profess it, was by and by brought to plead for his life, as though he had
wickedly spoken blasphemy against the law, against Moses, against the
Temple, and against God? Or who is ignorant that there were men in times paste,
which accused the holy Scriptures of lies, saying that they contained things
plain contrary and repugnant one to an other: and that the Apostles did
dissent every one from an other, Marcion ex Tertull. Aelius e Lactantio.
and Paul from them all? And least it should be to long to rehearse all, for
that were infinite: who is ignorannt, how that our Fathers which first
began to acknowledge and to profess the name of Christ, were slanderously
reported of, Euse. li. 5 ca. 2 Tertul. 3. Apologetico. 1.2.3. and 7.8.9.
that they conspired together amongst themselves, and that in their secret
assembles they had consultations against the state over the commonwealth, and
that even therefore their meetings were appointed before day in the dark, that
they killed young children, filled them selves with man's flesh, and like most
cruel beasts, drank man's blood, and how that at the last, when the
candels were out, they committed adultery and incest at adventure together, the
brother with the sister, the son with the Mother, without any reverence of
kyndred, without shame, without difference, even a sort of wicked men,
without all religion, without God, enemies of mankind, men unworthy to
behold the light, unworthy of life.

All these things in those days were spoken against ye people of God, against
Christ Jesus, against Paul, against Stephan, and against al those that in the
primitive Church embraced the truth of the Gospel, and were content to be
called by the name of Christians, a name in those days very odious amongst
the people. And albeit those things were not true, yet the Devil thought it
enough for him, if at the least he could bring it to pass, to cause them to
be taken for true, and that the Christians should be hated of al men, and by all men persequuted unto the death. Wherefore Kings and Princes leadde by such
persuasions, killed the Prophets of God, even to the last man. Esaie they
condemned to the saw, Jeremy to be stoned, Daniel to the lions, Amos to the
club, Paul to the sword, Christ to the cross, al Christian men to prisons,
to tortures in horses bellyes, to the gallows, to rocks, to cliues, to wild
beasts, to fyers. Yea and they sticked not to make great bonefiers of their
living bodies, only for a light to serve them in the night season, Sueton.
Tranquil. in Nero.
and for a scorn, of whom they made none other account then as of most vile
donge, and as of accursed persons appointed to be slain for Sacrifice, and to
be a scorn of all the world. Thus I say the mainetainers and professors of
the truth has been always delte withal.

So much the more ought we that have taken upon us the profession of the
Gospel of Jesus Christ, to take it in better part, if in the same quarrel we be
handled after the same sort, and like as our forefathers in times paste, so
we at this day, without any our desert, only because we teach and profess
the truth, 1. Timoth. 4.
are vexed with slanderous names, reproaches and lies.

Slanders devised by Papists.
1. Now a days they cry every where, that all we are Heretykes, that we are
departed from the faith, and that we with our new persuasions and wicked
doctrine, have broken the consent of the Church: That we do raise, general
Counsel, new rites and ceremonies: And that we have done all these things
not for any respect of religion, but only of a desire to maintain strife and
contention. As for them, they have changed utterly nothing at all, but all
things even as they received them from the Apostles, and were approved by the
most ancient fathers, so they have kept them from age to age unto this day.

But now, least they should seem only to pick quarrels, and to speak evil
of us in corners, only to the intent to bring us into hatred, the Romyshe
Bishops have provided themselves of certain men, eloquente enough and not
unlearned, for to undertake this desperate cause, and to set it forth with
books and long orations, to the intent that the matter being co^ningly handled
after the best fasshion, the simple and ignorant man might suppose there were
somewhat in it: for truly they saw how their cause began to decline in all
places, how their sleights were now espied, and therefore less set by, and that
their Garrysons decayed every day: and therefore their cause to be such, that
it had great need of help. Now as touching those things which they do
obiecte against us, part of them are manifestly false, and even by the
judgment of the self same persons that do object them, A general answer.
condemned for lies: part of them, although they be as false as the other,
yet in as much as they carrye a show and a counterfeat of truth, in such the
simple reader if he take not head, specially, if unto the probabylitie of the
matter, the painted and delicate speech of these fellows be cunningly
applied, may easily be entrapped and carried out of the way: part of the^
again ar such as we ought not to decline from them as crimes, but as things
right well and advisedly done, to acknowledge and to profess them: and even to
tell you at a word how the matter goes, these men do slander all our doings,
even those things which them selves can not deny to be well and ordrely done,
and as thoe it were not possible that any thing should be other done or spoken
well of us, so all our sayings and doings they most maliciously deprave. No
doubt, it had been their part to have gone more simply and more plainly to
work, if they had meant to deal truly, whereas now another truly nor
courteously nor Christianly, but covertly and craftily they assault us with
lies: abusinge the blindness of the people and the ignorance of Princes, to
bring us into hatred and to oppress the truth: this is the power of darkness
and proprety of men, that for the furtherance of their cause, have more
confydence in the blockishnesse of the unskillful multitude, and in darkness
then in truth and light, and as S. Jerome says, of such as with closed eyes do
bark against the manifest truth. But we give thanks unto the almighty God,
that our quarrel is such that even these men would they never so feign, can say
nothing in reproach thereof: which might not be turned in reprofe of the
fathers, of the Prophets, of the Apostles, of Peter, of Paul, and of Christ
himself.

Now then in case it be lawful for these men in railinge and speaking evil to
be thus loud and eloquent, Slanders that tend toward blasphemye, must be
confuted.
truly we in our just quarrel answeringe for the truth, ought not to be dumme
and specheles, for they that have noe regard what is said of them self or of
their quarrel, althoe it be falsely and slanderously spoken, specially when it
is such, as thereby the majesty of God and the state of religion is
blasphemed, they surely declare them self to be dissolute men, and such as
carelessly and wickedly do wink at the injuries done to ye name of God. For
albeyt many times other great and grievous injuries of a sobre and a Christian
man may be borne withal and dissembled: nevertheless who that patiently can
endure to be accounted an Heretic, such a one Ruffine was wont to deny to be
a Christian. Wherefore we will now do that thing, which all laws, which the
very voice of nature commands to be done, and which Christ him self being
in the like matter in like sort railed upon, did before us, yt is to say, we
will give a repulse to the accusations of these men, and modestly and truly
defend our cause and our innocence. For Christ what time he was accused by
the Pharisees of sorcery, as one that had familiarity with Devils, and did
many things by their help: Joan. 8.
I (says he) have no Devil, but I glorify my father, and you have dishonored
me. And Paul, what time as Festus the leutenante contemned him as a mad
man, Act. 26.
I (says he) noble Festus, am not mad as thou think, but I speak the
words of truth and of sobrenesse. And the Christians of the primitive Church
what time as they were injuriously slaundered unto the people as murderers of
men, adulterers, incestuous persons, and troublers of common wealths, and saw
that by such slanders the religion which they professed, might be brought
in question, specially if they should seem by their silence in manner to
acknoledg the fault: Quadratu^. Justinius. Molitol. Tertuli and others.
least I say, this silence should hinder ye course of the Gospel, they made
orations, they wrote supplications, and spoke before Emperors and Princes in
the open defense of them and of theirs.

As for us, inasmuche as within these.20. years last paste, so many
thousands of our brethren, in the midst of their extreme torments, have
borne witness to ye truth, and Princes coveting to bridel ye Gospel, in moyling
many ways, have lobored all in vain, and that the whole world in manner
begins now to open their eyes to behold ye light, we think that our cause
is already sufficiently pleaded and defended: and that whereas the matter it
self speaks enough for it self, there is no great need of words. For if the
Popes themselves would, or rather if they could consider with them selves the
whole matter, the beginnings and the manner of the increase of out religion,
how that their trasshe in manner every white when no man touched it, without
all help of man sell down to the ground: again how our profession at the
first, not withstandinge the continual resistance of Emperors, of so many
Kings, of Popes and Bishops, of all men in manner, has increased, and by
little and little spread over all the earth, and now also at the length is entered
in to the Courts and Palaces of kings: even these things only might be
sufficient tokens whereby to understand, that God himself does fight in our
defense, and skorneth from heaven all their endeavors, and that so mighty is
the power of truth, yt no force of man nor yet Hell gates can withstand it. For
be ye sure, so many free cities, so many kings, so many Princes as at this day
have abandoned the sea of Rome, and adjoined themself to the Gospel of Christ,
are not become mad.

And albeit peradventure hitherto the Popes have had no leisure to think
aduisedli and earnestly upon these matters, or if now at this day they be
let and encombred with other business, or if they take these kind of trauails
to be base and light matters, and to appertain nothing to the majesty of a
Pope, yet our cause ought to seem therefore never a whit the worse. Another,
if perhaps they will not see these things which they do see, but rather fight
against the known truth, ar we therefore by and by to be taken for Heretics,
which do not apply our selves to their will? Pius the.iiii.
Truly if Pope Pius had been the man, I say not, which he desiereth to be
taken for, but if he were at the least such a one, as had accounted us to be
other as his brothren, or at the least as men, he would first have
diligently waied our reasons, both what we have to say for us, and what may
be said against us, and not so rashely, only with a blind sentence
determined before hand, in that Bull of his, wherein of late he made a
counterfaite show of a Council, have condemned a good part of the world, so
many learned and godly men, so many commonweals, so many Kings, so many
Princes, the persons unheard, the cause not pleaded.

Why this Apology was written*
But inasmuche as he has now openly slaundered us after this sort, least
that by silence we might seem to confess the fault, and specially because
that in the open Council, wherein he will suffer no man, but only such as
are sworn and addicted unto his usurped power, to have authority, to give a
voice or to declare his mind, we can in no wise be heard (for thereof in the
last assemble at Trente we had over much experience, what time the
Ambassadors and divines of the Princes and of the free citees of Germany were
utterly excluded out of all their assembles: another can we yet forget how that
Julius the, 3, ten years past, in his bull strayghtly did forbid, that no man
of our proffessyon should be heard in the council, unless paraduenture
there were any that would recante and change his opinion even for these
causes specially we have thought it good to render a reason of our faith by
writing, and unto such things as are openly objected against us, truly and
openly to answer, to the intent the whole world may see the parts and the
foundation of that doctrine, which so many godly men have preferred before
their own liffes, and that all men may understand what manner of men they be,
and what they do think of God and of religion, whom the Bishop of Rome not
well advised, has condemned for Heretics, yea before they were called to
plead their cause, without law, without example, only because he heard say
they differed from him and from his in some part of Religion.

And although in the suspicion of Heresy S. Jerome will have noe man to be
pacient: nevertheless we will demean our self another bitterly nor tantingly
with many words, nor yet be carried into any chauffe with anger: although in deed
he ought not to seem bitter or ta^tinge that speaks truth. But this kind of
eloquence we are content to leave to our adversaries, who what soever they
speak against us, thoe it be never so bytterly or slanderously spoken, yet it
is modestly spoken and to good purpose, how truly or falslye, thereof they make
no great account. Such kind of sleights we have no need of that defend the
truth.

But in case we do prove that the sacred Gospel of God and the ancient
Bishops, together with the primitive Church does make for us, and that we
have upon just cause, both departed from these men, and also returned now
again unto the Apostles and old catholic fathers, and that we do it in deed
not covertly or craftily, but with a good conscience before God, truly,
frankly, clearly and plainly: if they them selves which flee our doctrine and
will be caled Catholics, shall evidently se al those tytles of a^tiquitie,
wherein they glory so much, wrounge out of their hands, and that there is more
pith in our cause then ever they could imagine: we trust no man amongst them
will be so negligente of his salvation, but that he will at some time take in
hand to bethynke him self, unto whether part it were best for him to stick
unto, and truly no man, except such a one as has hardened his heart and will not
hear, shall repent him self of his labor to have given ear unto our
defense, and to have marked both what we do say, and how agreably unto ye
whole course of Christian religion.

Answer to the objection of Heresye.
For where as they call us Heretics, truly the fault is so great, yt unless it be
seen, unless it be felt, unless it be gryped with hands and fingers, it ought
not easily to be believed of him that is a Christian man. For Heresy is a
renouncing of salvation, a casting away of the grace of God, a departing from
the bodi and spirit of Christ. But this thing was never amongst these kind of
me^, or to their fathers before them, any thing new or strange, that in case
there were any yt would complain of their errors, and desire the restitution
of true religion, such by and by as inuentors of new things, and as factious
persons to be condemned for Heretics. For Christ was called for none other
cause a Samaritane, the^ for that he was supposed to have declined unto a
certain new religion and unto Heresy. And Paul the Apostle of Christ, Act.
24.
was called before the Judge answer for himself upon Heresy: I says he, do
worship the God of my fathers, according to this way which they call Heresy,
believing al things that are written in the law and the Prophets.

To be short, this whole religion which Cristia^ me^ do profess at this day,
Tertul. in Apologetico.
in the first beginnings thereof was called of Heathen men a set and an
Heresye, they with these voices always filled the ears of Princes, to the
ente^te that they being ones brought upon an opinion conceived before hand,
to hate us, and to take whatsoever should be said on our behalf to be factious
and Heresy, might be carried from the matter it self and from hearing of the
cause. But the greater and ye horribler the fault is, so much ought it to be
proved with greater and more evident arguments, specially in these days, now
that men have begone to give less credit unto these men's dreams, and more
diligently to examine their doctrine then before they were accustomed. For the
people of God is otherwise instructed now, then they were when all things that
were set forth by the Popes of Rome, were taken for the Gospel, and al religion
depended only upon their authority. The holy scriptures are now abroad, the
writings of the Apostles and Prophets ar abroad, out of the which both all
truth and catholic doctrine may be proved, 2. Timoth. 3.
and all Heresye confuted.

But whereas of all these authorities these men bring not a word against us,
and nevertheless to be called Heretics that have not declined another from
Christ, nor from the Apostles, nor from the Prophets, it is very iniuriouse
and to to grievous. With this sword Christ repulsed the Devil when he was
tempted of him: with these weapons all loftynesse that auaunceth it self
against god must be overthrown and vanquished. For all scripture, says Paul,
2. Cor. 10.
inspired of God, is profitable to teach, to confute, 2. Timoth. 1.
to instruct, to reprove: yt the man of God may be perfect and furnished unto
all good works. De imitate Eccle. cap. 3.
Thus alwais ye godly fathers fought against Heretics with none other weapons,
but out of ye holy scriptures. Augustine when he disputed against Petylyan the
Donatiste heretic: Suffer not, says he, to be heard these words amongst us,
I say, or you say: rather let us speak thus, This says the Lord. The same
sentence is found against Maximum Bishop of the Arria^s lib. iii. ca. xiiii
upon the first Chapter of Agge.
there let us leke the Church, there let us try out our cause. And Jerome
says: All those things which without the testimony of the Scriptures are
affirmed, as thoe they were delivered from the Apostles, are beaten down with
the swordde of God. Ambrose also unto Gratian: Let the Scriptures, says he, be
asked the question, let the Apostles be asked, let the Prophets be asked, let
Christ be asked, for the Catholic fathers and Bishops in those days doubted
nothing that our religion might be sufficiently proved out of the Scriptures
of God. Nor at any time durst they accounte any man for an Heretic, whose
errore they could not plainly and evidently reprove out of ye self same
scriptures. We therefore do say, for to answer with S. Paul, Act. 24.
that according unto this way which they call Heresy, we do worship God the
father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and we receive al things yt are written other
in ye law or in the Prophets, or in the books of ye Apostles.

Wherefore if we be Heretics, if these men be as they will be called
Catholics, why do they not that thing which they se the Fathers, true
Catholic men in deed, always did? Why do they not convince us out of the holy
scriptures? Why do they not call us to be tried by the^? Why do they not make
it appear that we have severed our selves from Christ, from the Prophets,
from the Apostles, from the holy Fathers? Why stagger they? why flee they? it
is Gods cause. Why doubt they to commit it to Gods word? But if we be
Heretics which refer all our controversies unto the holy Scriptures, and
make our appeal unto the self same words which we know are sealed by God
him self, and do prefer them before all things that may be devised by
manne: what shall we say to these men, what manner of men, or by what name
were it convenient to call these that are afraid to stand to the trial of the
sacred scriptures, that is to say, the judgment of God himself, and prefer
before them their own dreams and most cold inventions, and for their own
traditions sake, now many years have broken the ordinances of Christ and of
the Apostles? Sophocles the Poet, when he was accused, being an old man, to
the Judges, of his sons for a dotarde and a fool, and as one that fondely
consumed his goods, and therefore seemed to have need of a tutor: for to
purge himself of this slander came into the court, and after he had read
Oedipus Coloneus, a tragedy, which even in the self same time that he was
accused in, he had written with great diligence and very elegantly, by and by he
asked of the Judges, whether that verse seemed to be the verse of a dotinge man.

Even so we, because that unto these men we seem to be madd, and are
slaundered of them as Heretics, as who would say, we had now nothing to do
another with Christ, nor with the Church of God, have thought it should not be
inconvenient nor unprofitable, if we did plainly and freely declare unto the
world that faith wherein we stand, and all our hope which we have in Jesus
Christ, that al men may see what we do hold touching every part of Christian
religion, and may judge with themselves, whether that faith which they shall
see confirmed with the words of Christ, with the writings of the Apostles,
with the testimonies of the Catholic fathers and with the examples of many
ages be only a raginge of mad men, and a conspiracy of Heretics.

The doctrine commonly received in the Church of England. Of God.
We believe therefore that there is one divine nature and power, which we do call
GOD, and the same is distincted into three equa persons, the Father, the Son,
and the holy Ghost, al of one power, of one majesty, of one eternity, of one
divinity, of one substance. And all be yt those three persons be so
distincted, that another the father is the son, another the son is the holy
ghost or the father, yet that there is but one God, and the same only to have
created heaven and earth and all things that are contained within the compass
of heaven.

Of Christ.
We do believe that Jesus Christ the only son of the eternal father,
according as it was decreed long sythens before all beginninges, when the
fullness of time was come, took flesh and the whole nature of man of that same
blessed and pure Uirgine, to the intent to declare unto men the secret and
hid will of his father, which was hydden from all ages and generations, and
to the entente that in the body and nature of man he might accomplish the
mystery of our redemption, naylinge our Sins and yt same Handewriting
which was written against us, unto the Cross.

We believe that for our sakes he dyed and was buried, descended into Hell, the
third day by divine power returned unto life and rose again, after forty
days in the sight of his disciples he ascended into heaven for to fulfill all
things, and the very same body wherein he was borne, wherein he was
conuersaunte upon earth, wherein he was mocked, wherein he suffered most
grievous torments and cruel kind of death, Aug. tract. 5^ in Ioannem.
wherein he rose again, wherein he ascended unto the right hand of the
father, he has placed in majesty and glory above all princely dignity and
power and virtue and rule and all names that are named not only in this
world, but also in the world to come, and that now he sits there, Act. 3.
and shall sit until al things be perfectly fynyshed. Aug. tract. 3. in
Ioannem. Ad Dardanu^.
And albeit that the majesty and divinity of Christ be spread over all, yet
his body, as Augustine says, must be in one place, Christ gave unto his
body majesty, but the nature of his body he took not away. Nor we must
not affirm Christ in such sort to be God that we shall deny him to be man.
And as Uygill ye martyr says: chen. li 3. Fulgentius ad Regem Trasimundum.
Christ in his human nature did leave us, but in his divinity he did not
leave us: and though he be absent from us touching the form (...) a servant,
yet he is always with us in ye form of God.

From that place we believe that Christ shall come again for to execute that
same public and universal Judgment, as well over those which he shall
find yet remayninge a live in their bodies, as those that be dead. Of the
holy Ghooste.


We believe that the holy ghost, who is the third person in the holy
trinity, is very God: not made, not created, not begotten, but proceedinge
from boothe the father and the son by a certain way which is unknown to
men, and not able with words to be expressed, that yt is his work to make
tender the hardness of manes heart, what time as other by the wholesome
preaching of the Gospel, or by any other means he is received into man's
heart, and that he lightneth them and leads them into the knowledge of God and
into all way of truth, and into a newness of their whole life, and perpetual
hope of salvation.

Of the Churhe.
We do believe that there is only one Church of God, and that the same is not
shut up as in time past among the Jews into any one corner of kingedome, butte
is Catholic and universal, and dispersed into all the world, so that now
there is no nation that may truly complain that they be excluded, and can
have no part with the Church and people of God. He do believe that the same
Church is the kingdom, is the body, is the spouse of Christ, and of this
kingdom that Christ is the only Prince, of this body that Christ is the
only head, of this spouse that Christ is the only bridgrome: and that there
be in the Church diverse ordres of ministers, some be Deacons, some Elders,
some Bishops, unto whom the instruction of the people and the charge and
provision for things appertaininge to religion is committed, and yet that
there is noe one man, nor that any one can be superioure and ruler over all:
for we believe both that Christ is always present with his Church, Christ
has no universal depute.
and that he needs no Uicare that should supply his room in all points:
and that it is impossible for any mortal man so much as to comprehend in
his mind, much more to set in order and rightly and profytablye to govern the
whole universal Church, that is to say, all parts of the world: that the
Apostles as Cypriane says, De simplicitate Praelatorum.
were all of like authority, and that the rest were in the very same degree
that Peter was. That it was spoken indifferently to them al, Feed. to them
all, Go in to the whole world. to them all, Teach the Gospel: And as S.
Jerome says, Ad Euagriu^.
that all Bishops in what place so ever they be, other at Rome, or at Eugubin,
or at Constantinople, or at Rhegium, be al of like desert and of like
Preesthoode. De simplicitate Praelatoru^.
And as Cyprian says, that there is but one Bishoperike, and every one holdyng
a part thereof, does administer the whole: and according to the sentence of
the Council of Nice, that the Roman Bishop has no more right over the
Church of God, then the other Patriarks of Alexandria and of Antioche: as for
the bishop of Rome, who at this day chalengeth all things to himself alone,
unless he do his office, unless he administer the Sacraments, unless he
instruct the people, unless he admonish, unless he teach, ought not of right
to be accounted a Bishop, or so much as an Elder in the Church: for a
Bishop as Augustine says, 1. Tim. 3.
is the name of a work and not of honor: so that he may know and assure
himself to be no Bishop that coueteth to bear rule and not to profit: as for
to be head of the whole Church or an universal Bishop, it is no more
possible for him or any other mortal man, then to be the bridegroom, the
light, the salvation, the life of the Church, for these be the privileges and
names of Christ only, and unto him alone proprely and only they do appertain.
Another before Phoeas the Emperors time, (who we know well inoughe by a
most detestable murder, in killinge the Emperor Maurice his Lord and
master, aspired unto the Empire) that is to say, before six hundredth and
thirtene years after the birth of Christ, was there ever any Bishop of Rome
that ever suffered himself to be called by so proud a name? Gregor. in Regist.
Li. 7. Epist. 69. cap. 47.
The Council also of Carthage did expressly forbid, that any Bishop should be
called other the highest Bishop or the chief priest. And for the bishop of
Rome, in as much as he will be called at this day after this sort, and
chalengeth to hymfelfe an authority not due unto him, besides that openly he
doothe contrary to the old Councels and contrary to the fathers: if he will
believe his predecessor Gregory, Gregor. lib. 4 Epist. 76.78 80. and lib. 7.
Epist. 95.
he takes to himself an arrogant, profane, sacrilegious and Antichristian
name: he is the king of all pride: he is Lucifer, in as much as he prefers
himself before his brothren, he has cast away faith, he is the fore runner of
Antichriste.

The calling of Ministers.
We say also, yt ministers ought to be lawfully called and rightly and ordrely
appointed unto the administration of the Church of God, and that no man may
thruste in himself to the holy ministry after his own will and pleasure. So
much greater is the injury yt these men do unto us, in whose mouths nothing is
more common, then that amongst us nothing is done by order, nothing comely,
al things in confusion and full of troble amongst us: all men to be priests,
al men to be doctors, all men to be interpreters.

The authority of Ministers.
We say, that Christ has given unto ministers authority to bind, to lose,
to open and to shut. And yt the office of losinge does consiste herein: when
that other to such as are overthrown in their own consciences and ar truly
returned to a better mind, the minister by the preaching of ye Gospel offers
ye merits of Christ and absolucion, and does assure him of the remission of
his sins and of the hope of eternal salvation: other when such as in any
grievous and slauderous offense, and by some notable and public fault have
offended their brothrens consciences, and thereby have in manner alienated
themselves from the common society of ye Church and from the body of Christ,
after that they do return again to a better mind, he does reconcile, gather
and restore home again unto the fellowship and unity of the faithefull: and
the authority of bindinge and shutting, we say, he exercises as often as
other unto the unbelievers and stubburne persons, he shuts up the gates of
the kingedom of heaven, and threateneth unto them the revenge of God and
everlasting punishment: or when he excludes out from the bosom of the Church
such as are openly excommunicated, the sentence that is given after this sort
by the ministers of the Church, God does so confirm, yt whatsoever by their
ministry here in earth is losed or bound, that same will he lose and bind
and make good also in heaven. The keys of the kingdom of heaven.
The key whereby they have power other to shut up or to open the kyngedome of
heaven, we say with S. Chrysostom, that yt is the knowledge of the scriptures,
and with Tertullian, the interpretation of the law, and with Eusebius the
word of God, and that the disciples of Christ received this authority, not
for to hear the secret co^fessions of the people, or to occupy themselves
about privy whysperinges (which their sacrifisinge Prestes, at this day al of
them, do in every corner, and in such sort they do it, as thoe the whole
power and use of the keys did consist therein alone) butte to the intent they
should go, they should teach, they should openly preach the Gospel, that
unto such as believed they might be a sauer of life unto life: unto the
unbelieving and unfaithful persons, the sauer of death unto death, to the intent
yt the minds of the godly being ones astonnied with the conscience of their
life paste and of their sins, after they should begin to behold the light
of the Gospel and believe in Christ, 2 Timoth. 3.
even as a door with the key, so might they be opened with the word of God,
and that the wicked and stubborn and such as would not believe and return
into ye high way, as men yt were fast locked and shut up should be left to
themselves, and become every day as S. Paul says, worse and worse. This (say
we) is the reason and order of the keys, and by this means, men's consciences
ar other opened or closed up. The minister we deny not is the Judge, De
poenitent. did. 1. ca. uerbum Dei.
but as Ambrose says, he has no title of right to take any rule and power
upon him. Wherefore Christ for to reprove their negligence in teachinge, cried
out upon the Scribes and Pharisees in these words: Woe (says he) be unto you
Scribes and Pharisees, Luc. 11.
which have taken away the keis of knowledge, Mat. 23.
and have shut up the kingedome of heaven before men. And for as much as the
key wherewith the entry into the kingdom of God is opened unto us, is the word
of the Gospel, and the interpretation of the law and of the scriptures: whereas
Gods word is not, there we say is not the key. And by reason that one Word is
given unto al, and all have but one key, the authority of al ministers,
concerning openinge and shutting, must needs be one. Yea moreover the Pope
himself, although his Parasites singe this song never so sweetlye unto him,
Unto thee will I give the keys of the kingedome of heaven. Mat. 16.
as though they appertained unto him only and to no man else, unless he
endeavor himself so that the consciences of men may be turned, and submit
themself unto Gods word, we deny that other he opens or shuts or has
any keys at al. And albeit he should teach and instruct the people, the
which would God he would both do it in deed, and find in his heart at ye
length to think, yt it were at the least some part of his office, yet his key
should be another better nor greater than the keys of other men. for who did
exempt him? Who did teach him to open more cunningly, or to loose better then
his brothren?

Matrimony we say, Matrimony of Ministers*
in all kinds and states of men, in Patriarchs, in Prophets, in Apostles, in
holy Martyrs, in Ministers of the Church, in Bishops, is holy and honorable.
In Titum primo, hom. 11. Theophyl. ad Titum. 10. Eu. li. 10. ca 5. In monodia
sua super Basilium.
And as Chrysostom says, that it is lawful and rightefull to ascend
therewith unto the Byshopps chair: and as Sozomenus says of Spiridion, and
Nazianzenus of his father, that a godly and a diligent Bishop exercises his
office in the Ministry never a whitte the worse for that cause, but rather
better and to more profit. That law which violently takes this liberty
from men, and drives them against their will to a single life, we say with S.
Paul, 1. Timoth. 4.
is the doctrine of Devils. And yt thereupon (as the Bishop of Ausboroughe,
Faber, the Abbot Panormitanus, Latomus, and the Three parted work which is
added unto the second Tome of the Counsels, with others of the Popes guard,
yea and the matter it self, and al histories do confess) an incredible
uncleanness of life and of manners in the ministers of God, and most horrible
mischiefs have insued. And therefore Pius the second, Platina in uita Pij. 2.
a Bishop of Rome said very well, that he saw many causes, why wives should
be taken away from the ministers of the Church: but he saw both many more
and more waightier, why they should be restored again.

We do receive and embrace all the Canonical scriptures, Of the canonical
scriptures.
both of the old and of the new Testament: and we give thanks unto our God,
that he has raised up that light before us, that we might always have it
before our eyes, lest that other by the deceit of me^, or guiles of the devil,
we should be carried away after errors and fables. These we acknowledge to be ye
heavenly words, by the which God has declared his will unto us: upon them
only men may repose there conscyences: In them all, those things, what soever
are necessary unto our salvation (as Origin, Augustine, Chyrsostom, and Cyryl
did teach) are fully and plentifully contained. These be the might and power
of God unto salvation: these be the foundation of the prophets and the
Apostles, whereupon is builded the Church of God: these be the most certain
rule, whereby the Church of God, in case it do stagger or err, may be
directed, and to the which al doctrine of the Church ought to be called to
his trial: Against the which no law, no tradition, no custom is to be
heard: no not if Paul him self or an Angel from heaven should come and
teach an other way.

The Sacraments of the Church.
We do receive the sacraments of the Church, that is to say, certain holy
tokens and ceremonies, which Christ would have us to use, that in them he
might set before our eyes the mysteries of our salvation, and more strongli
confirm that faith which we have in his blood, and seal up his grace in
our hearts. And these we do call with Tertullian, Origin, Ambrose, Augustine,
Hierome, Chrysostom, Basile, Dionyse, and other Catholic fathers Figurs,
Signs, Badges, paterns, counterpanes, forms, seals, tokens, Similitudes,
examples, Images, Remembrances, and memories. And we doubt not also to say with
the self same fathers, that they be certain visible words, seals of
righteousness, badges of grace: and we do expressly pronounce, that in the
supper, unto such as do believe, there is truly delivered the Body and Blood
of the Lord, the flesh of the son of God, quickening our souls, the food of
immortalite, grace, troth, life: and that ye same supper is the communion of
the body and blood of Christ, by the partaking whereof we are quickened, we are
norished and fed unto immortalite, and by the which we are ocupied, we are
united and grafted into ye body of Christ, that we might dwell in him and he in
us.

Of Sacraments which are proprely to be reckened under that name, The number of
Sacraments
we do acknowledge twoe: the sacrament of Baptism, and the sacrament of Thanks
giving: for so many do we find delivered and consecrated by Christ, and
approved of the old fathers, Ambrose and Augustine.

And that Baptism is a sacrament of Remission of sins, Baptism.
and of that same wasshing whereby we are clensid in the blood of Christ: and
from this sacrament no man, that will profess the name of Christ, another yet
the young Infantes of Christian men, in as much as they are borne in sin and
do appertain unto the people of God, ought to be put back.

We do acknowledge the Lords supper to be a sacrament: The Lords Supper.
that is to say, an apparent symbol and sign of the body and blood of Christ,
wherein is set after a manner before our eis the death of Christ and his
Resurrection, and whatsoever he did here in his humane body, to the intent we
should give thanks for his death and our deliverance, and yt by often resorting
unto the sacraments, we should continually renew the remembrance thereof: that
we might be fed with the true body and blood of Christ to the hope of
resurrection and of life euerla(...) that we might be most assured, that the
body and (...) Christ is the same thing toward the nourishing (...) our
souls, yt bread and wine is in ye feding of our bodies. Unto this ba^ket
ought all the people to be bidde^, that altogether might be partakers one with
an other, and might yield an open signification and testimony of the fellowship
they have amongst them self, and of that same hope which they have in
Christ Jesus. Wherefore in case there were any that would only be a looker on,
and abstain from the holy communion, such ye old fathers, and the Bishops of
Rome in the first age of the Church before that private masses came up,
Chrisostom. ad Ephesians. ser. 3. cap. 1.
did excommunicate as a wicked and a Heathen man: neither was there any
Christian man in those days that took upon him, De Cons. did. 1. cap. omnes.
whiles other men gased on, to communicate alone. Such a decree Calixtus in
time paste did make, Did. ca. secularis.
that after the consecration, all should communicate, unless they had rather
stand without the Church doors: for so says he, has the Apostles ordained,
De consecra. did. 2. ca. peracta.
and the holy Church of Rome does hold. Unto the people also what time they
come to the holy communion, we say both the parts of the sacrament ought to
be given: for so Christ commanded it, Both kinds appertain to the people.
and the Apostles in all places did ordeine it: and all the old fathers and
catholic Bishops did follow it. And yt if any man do the contrary, he
commits (as Gelasius says) sacrylege: De Consecra. Did. 2. ca. com perimus.
and that our adversaries, such as at this day reyecting and abolishing the
holy communion without gods word, without any authority of the old
Counsels, without any Catholic father, yea and without reason, do defend
private Masses, and the dismemberinge of sacraments, and do it not only
contrary to the express commandment and will of Christ, but also contrary
to al Antiquity, do most wickedly therein, and are cursed thieves, and commit
sacrilege.

The presence of Christ in the Supper.
We say that the bread and wine are holy and heavenly mysteries of the body
and blood of Christ: and that in them Christ himself, the true bread of
eternal life, is so presently delivered unto us, yt we do truly receive his
body and blood through faith. Nevertheless we do not so speak it, as though
we supposed that the natures of bread and wine were utterly changed and came
to nothing, as many in these last ages have dreamed, though hitherto they
could never well agree among themself of their dream. For Christ never went
about to make that a wheaten cake should cast away his own nature, and put upon
hit a certain new Godheade, but rather for to change us, Transubstantiation
unknown to the Fathers.
and as Theophylactus speaks, to transelement us into his body: What may be
more plainly spoken, then that which Ambrose says: The bread and wine are
the same things, In Joan. cap. 6 De sacra. li. 4. cap. 4.
that they were, and are changed into an other thing. Or which Gelasius
says: It cease not to be the substance of bread or nature of wine: In
Dialogis primo and.2.
or which Theodorete says, After the sanctification, the mystycall signs
cast not away their own propre nature, for they remain in their own former
substance, In sermon ad infantes.
figure and kind: or which Augustine says, That which you se, is the bread
and the cup, the which thing even your eyes do tell you, De Consecrat. Did.
2. ca. qui manducant.
but that which your faith coming to be instructed does require, the bread
is the body of Christ, the cup his blood. or which Origin says, In Mat. 15.
That bread which is sanctified by the word of God, as concerning the matter,
goes into the belly, and is cast into the withdrawing place. Or which Christ
said, Luc. 22.
not only after the consecration, but also after the Communion ended: I will
drink no more of the fruit of the vine: for it is certain that out of the
vine comes Wine, not blood. Another yet in saying of these things do we take
any thing from the dignity of the Lords supper, or teach that it is only a
cold ceremony, and that in hit there is nothing done: as many men do slander
us, for we do constantly affirm, that Christ does truly exhibit him self
present unto us in his sacraments: in baptism, to the intent we should put
him upon us: in the Supper, that by faith and in spirit we might eat him,
and out of his passion and blood we might drink life everlasting. And all
this we say, is done not faynedly and coldely, but in very deed and truly. For
albeit we touch not the body of Christ with pure teeth and jaws: yet with
faith, mind, and spirit we take hold of him and crushe him. Another is that
faith vain which imbraceth Christ, another is that thing coldely received
which is received with mind, faith and spirit. For so in these mysteries
Christ himself wholly in his perfection is offered and given unto us, that we
know most assuredly, that we are now become flesh of his flesh, and bone
of his bones: and that Christ dwells in us, and we in him.

Wherefore, in the administration of these mysteries before men come unto the
Communion, it is to good purpose that the people are admonyshed to lift up
their hearts, and to dyrecte up their minds toward heaven: De Consecra..1.
ca. Quando.
for there is he upon whom we must satisfye our hunger, and live. And
Cyrillus says, that in the receauinge of misteryes, all gross imaginacions
must be put away. And the Council of Nyce, as yt is cited in greek of
some, does expressly forbydde us, that we should not basely occupy our
minds about the bread and wine set before us. And as Chrysostom writes
rig^^ (...), We say that the body of Christ is the Car^^^ (...) we must be
the Egles, that we may know that we ought to fly a high gate, if we will
attain unto the body of Christ: De coeno Domini.
for this is the Table of Egles, not of Iays. And Cyprian, This bread says
he, In Io. tra. 50.
is meat of the mind, not meat of the belly. And Augustine: How, says he,
shall I hold him that is absent? How shall I reach forth my hand into
heaven, that I might hold him there sitting? Reach out, says he, faith,
and thou haste caught him.

As for the Marchaundyses and open saales of masses, Abuses of the Lords supper
and the bearing up and down and worshipping of bread, and such other
ydolatrous and blasphemous follies, which no man can affirm that Christ and
his Apostles delivered unto us, we suffer not in our Churches. And we do
justly reprove the Bishops of Rome, which without Gods word, without
authority of the holy fathers, without any example, after a new guyse, do
not only set forth to the people the sacramental bread to be worshypped
with godly honor, but also they carry it about upon an ambelinge horse, Libro
de Ceremoniis ecclesiae Roman.
where soever they ride themselves, as in times paste the Persians did fire,
and the Egyptians the relikes of Isis: and thus they have now brought the
sacraments of Christ to be a pagent and a solemn pomp, to the intent that
that thing whereby the death of Christ should be continually remembered and
celebrated, and wherein the mysteries of our redemption should be devoutly
and reverently renewed, should serve for nothing else but to feed men's eyes
with foolyshe sightes and wanton boys games. And where as they say and
persuade also sometimes to fools, How the merits of Christ ar applied unto us.
yt in their masses they can distribute and apply unto men (which many times
think nothing on yt matter, nor understand what is in hand) all the merits of
the death of Christ, it is a matter to be laughed at, and also both Hethenish
and foolish. For our faith does apply unto us the death and cross of
Christ, not the masking of a sacrifising preeste. Ad Romans ca. 3. lib. 3.
The faith says S. Augustine, of the sacraments, does justify, not the
sacrament. And Origin says, He is the priest and the propitiation, and the
sacrifice, the which propitiation comes to every man by the way of faith. And
in like wise say we, that without faith the sacraments of Christ profit
nothing, no not the living, much less them that be dead. For as touching
that they ar wont to boast them of their Purgatory, Purgatory.
althoe we know it is not very newly invented: yet yt is nothing but mere
foolish and an old wiffes tale. Aug. in psa. 85 In Enchiridion cap. 67.
Augustine sometimes says, that there is such a certain kind of place,
sometimes he denies not but it may be, sometimes he is in doubt, De ciuit.
Dei. li. 21. ca. 26.
sometimes he does utterly deny it, and supposes that men ar deceuid therein
through a certain curtaise inclination of good will. Co^tra Pelagianos. lib.
hypognosticon. 5.
Never the less of this one error, so great a harvest is grown to the
sacrifising priests, that in as much as Masses were publicly and openly sold
in every corner, the temples of God were made shoppes of marchandyse, and the
miserable world was persuaded, that nothing was more salable, out of doubt to
these men there was nothing more profitable.

Of Ceremonies.
Towching ye multitude of idle cerimones, we know S. Augustine greuousli
complained of the^ in his time. Wherefore we have cut of a great number of
them, Ad Ianuarium epist. 119.
because we knew that men's consciences were greuouslye combered with them, and
the Church of God burdened.

Nevertheless we do retain and reverently excercyse not only such as we know
were commended unto us by the Apostles, but also certain others, such as seemed
unto us might be borne without any hurt in the Church, because we would have
all things done in the holy assembly, according as S. Paul commands, co^ly
and in order. Again, all such as we perceived to be other very superstitiouse,
or could, or filthy, or foolish, or contrary to the holy Scriptures, or that
were unfit for me^ that had their right wits, of which sort of ceremonies
there be at this day in the Papacy an infinite number, without exception we
have utterly refused, because we would not have the right worship of God any
longer defiled with such foolishnes.

We pray, Prayer in our own tongue.
as it is meet, in that tongue which every man amongst us does understand, to
the intent that the people, as Paul does admonish us, by ye common prayer may
receive a common profit, according as all the good fathers and catholic
bishops, not only in the old testament, but also in the new, both did pray
them selfs and taught ye people to pray also: August. in Psa. 18.
least that, as S. Augustine says, like Popingays and black birds we might
seem to pronounce that thing, which we know not what it means.

As concerning mediators and spokes me^, Of intercession and worshipinge of
Saints.
by whom we might have access unto God the father, we have none other but
Jesus Christ, in whose name only al things ar obtained of the father. It is
very foul and altogether Heathenish, that which we see done every where in
the Popes Churches, not only because they will have an infinite number of
meansmakers to speak for them, and that altogether without the authority of
Gods word, Hier. 2. etc. 11.
in so much, that as Ieremye says, the nu^bre of Gods now does co^teruaile
or rather excede the nu^bre of the cities, and the wretched people knows not,
toward which of them it behooved them most to turn themself: not because
that albeit they be so many that they can not be numbered, yet unto every one of
the^ they have appointed a several office what they shall procure, what they
shall give, what they shall bring to pass: but also because that both wickedly
and impudently they call upon the virgin Mary, that she would remember how she
was a mother, Bernardus.
that she should command her son, and put in ure the authority that she
has over him.

Of original sin.
We say that man is borne in sin, and leads his life in sin. That no man
can say truly, My heart is clean: yt the most iustest man is an unprofitable
servant: that the law of God is perfect, and requires of us a perfect and a
full obedience: that we in this life by no means ca^ satisfy the duty yt
thereto does appertain: Nor that there is any man that by his own strength
can be justified in ye sight of God: Of redemption by Christ.
and therefore that our only sanctuary and refuge is to the mercy of our
Father through Jesus Christ, to thinte^t we may assuredly persuade our selfs yt
he is the propitiatio^ and mercy sacrifice for our sins, that with his blood
al our spots ar wiped away: that he has pacified al things with his blood
shed upon the cross: that he with that one and only sacrifice, which ones
he offered upon ye Cross, has thoroughly perfected all things, and for this
cause what time he was dyeng, he said: It is finished. as thoe he would signify
thereby, that the Ransom for sin of all mankind is paid.

The sacrifice of Christ is perfect.
This sacrifice, in case there be any man that think it not sufficient, let
them go hardely and seek out a better. We truly both because we know there is
but one, we are content with one, and look for none other: and because it was to
be offered but only ones, we do not command it to be repeted: and also
because it was full and perfect in all respects, we have not instituted a
continual succession of sacrifices.

Now although we say we have no confidence in our works and doings, Of good
works.
and do ground the whole course of our salvation in Christ only,
nevertheless we say not thereupon yt we may live loosly and wa^tonly, as thoe
it were enough for a Christian man to be dipped only in ye water and to
believe, and yt nothing else is to be looked for at his hand. True faith is
lively and can not be idell.

Wherefore thus we do teach the people: that God has called us not to give
our selfs to excess and our own lust, but as Paul says, unto good works,
to the intent to walk in them: yt God has drawn us out of the power of
darkness, for to serve the living God, for to cut of the remains of sin, for
to work our salvation in fear and trembling, that the spirit of
sanctification might appear to be in our members, and Christ him self thorough
faith to dwell in our hearts.

To conclude, Of the resurrection.
we do believe yt this self same flesh of ours, wherein we do live, albeit when
it is dead it turns into duste, yet at the last day it shall return again
to life, through the spirit of Christ which dwells in us. In that day, what
so ever in the mean time we suffer for his sake, Christ will wipe from our
eyes all manner of tears: and we by him shall enjoy life everlasting, and be
with him for ever in glory. So be it.

These be those heresies for the which a good part of the world is condemned
at this day, unheard. Wherefore they ought rather to have brought their action
against Christ, against the Apostles, against the holy Fathers: for these
things have not only procedid from them, but also by them they were
establyshed: onles peraue^ture these men will say, the which also perhaps they
will not stick to say, that Christ did not ordeyne the holy co^mmunion, to
the intent it should be distributed among the faithful: or that the Apostles of
Christ and the old fathers said private Masses in every corner of their
churches, sometimes ten, sometimes twenty at ones in one day: or that Christ and
the Apostles did restrain all the people from the Sacrament of his blood: or
that eue^ that thing, which at this day is done every where amongst them, and
is so done, that who that does otherwise, they condemn him for an Heretic,
is not called of Gelasius their own man, sacrilege, or that these be not the
words of Ambrose, Augustine, Gelasius, Theodorete, Chrysostom, and Origene:
that bread and wine in the Sacraments remain the same things yt they were
before: That which is seen upon the holy table is bread: that it ceasseth not
to be the substance of bread and nature of wine: that the substance and nature
of bread is not changed: that the self same bread, for so much as
apperteyneth to the matter, goes down into the belly, and is cast out into
the privy place of withdrawing. Or that Christ, the Apostles and holy fathers
did not pray in that tongue which the people did understand: or that Christ by
ye one only sacrifice which he offered ones, did not perfectly finishe all
things, or that that sacrifice was imperfect, so that now we have need of an
other. All these things they must needs say: onles perauenture they had rather
say, that all law and right is contained in the treasury of the Popes bosom:
Did. 36. Lector. In glosa.
or as one of his hyerlinges and parasytes douted not in time paste to say,
that he might dispens against the Apostles, against the Councels, against the
Canons of the Apostles, Did. 8^. Presbyter.
and that he is not bound by these examples, ordinances and laws of Christ.

These things have we learned of Christ, of the Apostles and holy Fathers,
and the same we do faithfully teach the people of God, and for the same at
this day we are called of him, forsothe that will be the prince of Religion,
Heretics.

O merciful God. Do you conclude therefore that Christ him self, and the
Apostles, and so many fathers have together all erred? do you conclude that
Origin, Ambrose, Angustine, Chrysostom, Gelasius, Theodorete, were men that
abandoned and forsook the Catholic faith? Do you conclude that so perfect
agreement of so many Bishops and learned men was nothing else but a conspiracy
of Heretics? Or else that that thing which at that time was commended in
them, is now condemned in us? and that which in them was catholic, is now,
only because men have changed their fantasies, suddenly become Schismatike? or
that which ones was true, now by and by, because it pleases not these men,
shall be false? Wherefore let them bring forth an other Gospel, or let them
show causes, wherefore these things which so long time has been openly
observed and approved in the Church of God, ought now at the last to be
revoked. But we do certainly know, that that same word which by Christ was
reveled, and published abroad by the Apostles, is sufficient as well for our
salvation, as also to defend al truth, and to convince al heresy. A
Detestatio^ of Heresye.
By that same only, we do condemn all kind of old heretics, which these
men say we do raise up again out of Hell, the Arrians, Eutychians,
Marcionites, Ebions, Ualentinians, Carpocratians, Tatians, Nouatians, and at a
word, all such as have had wicked opinion, other of God the father, or of
Christ, or of ye holy Ghost, or of any other part of christian Religion, in as
much as by the gospel of Christ they are reproved, them we do openly
pronounce to be wicked and damned, and even unto Hell gates do detest them.
And not only this, but also in case they break out in any place and utter them
self, we do severely and earnestly correct them with lawefull and convenient
punishments.

Heresies that rise with the Gospel, are not bredd by the Gospel.
We confess in deed, that certain new sects, and such as before has not ben
heard of, as Anabaptists, Libertines, Mennonions, Zuenkfeldians, by and by at
the springyng of the Gospel did starte up. But we give thanks unto our God,
the world sees now well enough that we another have bred, nor taught, nor
fostered these monsters. Read I pray thee who so ever thou art our books,
they be in every place to be sold, what was ever written by any of our men,
that might evidently fauer the madness of these fellows? No there is no country
so free from these pestilent fellows, as these be wherein the Gospel is
freely and openly taught. But if men will consider the very matter diligently
and rightly: this is a great argument that this doctrine which we teach is
the truth of the Gospel: For another is darnell commonly wont to grow, but
with some kind of grain: nor chafe, but with corn. By and by after the time
of the Apostles, what time the Gospel was first spread abroad, who knows not
how many heresies suddenly sprang up together? Who ever heard before of Simon,
Menander, Saturnine, Basilides, Carpocrates, Cherinthus, Ebion, Ualentine,
Secundus, Marcosius, Colorbasius, Heracleo, Luciane, Seuerus? And what should
we rehearse these? Epiphanius reckeneth fourscore, Augustine more, and that
distinct heresies, which grew up together with the gospel. How then? was
the gospel no gospel, because that heresies sprange up together with it?
other was Christ therefore no Christ?

And yet, The cause of heresies.
as we said, this seed buddeth not amongst us that openly and freely teach
the gospel. Amongst our adversaries eue^ in blindness and in ye dark, these
pestile^ces do rise, and gather increase and strength, whereas truth is
oppressed with tyranny and cruelty, and can not be heard but only in corners
and in secret metinges. Let them make a proof, let them give free course to
the gospel: suffer the truth of Jesus Christ to shine and to cast forth
his beams into all parts: they shall see by and by these shadows, at the
light of the gospel to vanishe away, even as the darkness of the night at
the appearyng ot the Sun. For all those heresies, which these men do
flaunder us to foster and to nurrishe, we daily, whiles they sit still and ar
otherwise occupied, do confute and chase away.

Where as they say that we are fallen into diverse sects, Dissension amongst
those that profess the Gospel is no certain note of heresy.
and that some will be called Lutherans, some Zuinglians, and that we could
never well agree amongst our selfs touching the sum of our doctrine: what I
pray you would they have said, if they had been in the first age of the
Apostles and of the Fathers? when one said, I hold of Paul: an other, I of
Cephas: an other, I of Apollo. or when Paul reproved Peter: when upon occasion
of strife, Barnabas departed from Paul: when that, as Origene does testifye,
the Christians were divided into so many factions, that they retained only the
name of Christians commune to them al, else nothing that was like unto Christian
me^: And as Socrates says, yt for their dissensions and sects, they were
scorned openly in stage plays, of the people: and when that as the Emperor
Constantine does say, there were so many dissensions and braules in the
Church, that the misery thereof might seem to pass all the other miseries that
were before: Also when that Theophilus, Epiphanius, Chrysostom, Augustine,
Rufine, Jerome, all being Christians, al Fathers, al Catholics, did strive
amongst themselves with most bitter contentions, and such as could not be
appeased: when that as Nazianzenus says, the members of one body, one
destroyed an other: when the East part of the world was divided from the
West, about leuened bread and for Easter, matters of no great waighte: when in
all Counsels now and then new Creedes and new Decrees were stamped, what trow
ye these men would have said in those days? To which would they have
chiefly applied themself? From which would they have fled? Which Gospel
would they have believed? Which would they have taken for Heretics, which for
Catholics? Now for two names only, Luther and Zuinglius, what a business do
they make? Only to the intent, that because there is something whereupon they two
do not yet agree, we should ymagine that both of them erred, another of them
had the Gospel, and that another of them did teach rightlye and truly.

Sects and Dissensions of the Papists
But Lord, what men, trow ye, be these that find fault with dissensions
amongst us? Do they all agree amongst themself? Has every one of them well
aduysed himself what way to follow? Was there never no dissensions, no
braules amongst them? How happens it then that the Scotistes and the
Thomistes do agree no better about merytes of conueniency, De merito c^^ grui
and co^^ dig ni.
and merits of duty: about oryginall sin in the blessed virgin, about a
solemn and a simple vow? why do the Canonistes say, that ear confession is
ordained by humayne and positive law, and the Schooleme^ contrary, by gods law?
Why does Albert Pighius dissent from the Cardinal of Caieta, Thomas from
Lumbarde, Scotus from Thomas, Occame from the Scot, Alliensis from Occame, the
Nominales from the Reales? And although we pass over the infinite dissensions
of Friars and Monks, whereof some of them do appoint their holiness to be in
fish, some in herbs, some in shoes, some in slippers, some in a linen
garment, some in a woollen, some go in white, some in black, some are shaven
brother, some narrower, some are shodde, some are barefoote, some girded, some
vngirded: yet they ought to remember that there be some among them that say.
the body of Christ is present in the supper naturallye: Stephan Ga^^diner in
the Devils sophi. Richard. Faber.
again there be some even of their own company also that deny it: that there
be some that say the body of Christ in the holy Communion is torn and
crusshed with teeth: Recantatio Berengari, Scholae, and Glosa. Guima^dus do con.
did. 2. Ego Beren* Thomas.
again there be some that deny it: that there be some that write that the body
of Christ in the sacrament has quantite and bygnesse, on the other side there
be some that deny it: that there be some that say, Christ did Consecrate by a
certain power of divinity, some yt by blessing, some by five specially
prescribed words: some by repeting of the self same five words, some also
that in those five words, by the Pronoune demonstratiue, Hoc, that is to say,
This, think that the bread of wheat is pointed to: Gardinerus.
some think rather that a certain thing which they call Indiuiduum uagum, is
showed thereby: that there be some that say, dogs and mise may truly and in
very deed eat the body of Christ, some again that stedfastlye deny it:
that there be also some that say, De consecra. did. 2. Species in Glosa.
that the accidences of bread and wine may nourrishe, some that say the
substance retourneth again. What needs any more? it were to long and over
tedious to rehearse all, so uncertain and so full of controuersye is the whole
platt of these men's religion and doctrine: even yet still amongst the self
same men, from whom it first sprange and proceeded, for they never lightly
agree amongst themselves: except peradventure, The agreement of Papists.
as in time paste the Pharasies and Sadducies, or as Herod and Pilat, against
Christ.

Every consent is not a true token of the Church of God.
Wherefore let them go hardely: and let them rather make peace at home amongst
their own company. True it is, that unity and agreement is a thing most
convenient for Religion: and yet it is no certain and proper note of the
Church of God, for there was perfect agreement amongst those that worshipped
the goulden caulfe: and amongst those which together with one voice cried out
against our savior Jesus Christ: Crucifye him. Nether yet because the
Corinthians were at variaunce among themselves, or because Paul differed from
Peter, or Barnabas from Paul, or for that the Christians that were shortly
after the beginning of the Gospel, varied about some matters one from an other,
follows it therefore, that amongst them there was no Church of God? As for
those whom these men do call in reproach, Zuinglians and Lutherans, in very
deed are both of them Christians, and friends one to an other, and brothren.
They dissent not in the principles and foundation of our religion, nether of
God nor of Christ, nor of the holy Ghost, nor of the way of Justification, nor
of eternal life, only they do vary about one, and that not very weighty or
great question. Nor we despair not, or rather we doubt not, but shortly they
shall be agreed: and if there be any of them that are otherwise persuaded then
were fit and convenient, that all partial affections and factious names laid
a part, God will reuyele their error unto them, to the intent that when they
have better considered and examined the matter, all causes and roots of
dissension, even like as it came ones to pass in the council of Calcedonia,
may be utterly dug up and buried in perpetual forgetfulness. So be it.

But the waightyest matter of all is, Impiety in times paste objected against
Christians.
that they do call us wicked men, and such as have cast away all care of
religion: although in deed it ought not to trouble us very much, when they
themselves by whom it is objected, know that it is slaunderouse and false. For
Iustine the martyr writes, that what time the Gospel began first to be
publyshed, and the name of Christ to spread abroad, that all Christians were
called Godless. (...).
And what time Polycarpe was arraigned in judgment, the people stirred up the
Lieuttenant to slay and to destroy all them that professed the Gospel, Eusebius.
lib. 4.
with those words, (...), that is to say, Away with the wicked men that have
no God. Not because the Christians had no God in very deed, but because they
would not worship stones and stocks, which at that time were honored as
gods. But the whole world sees now well enough, what we and our brothren have
suffered at these men's hands for religion only, and for our Gods sake. They
have throwe^ us into prisonnes, into waters, into liars, and have walowed in
our blood: not because we were other adulterers, or thieves, or mankillers: but
only because we did profess the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and did trust in the
living God: and because we did complain upon to just occasion, thou know O
Lord, and to truly, that for most vain and trifling traditions, the law of
God was by our adversaries broken and trodden under foot, and because we said
that in as much as with knowledge and aduisement they did so obstinately
contempne the commandments of God, they were rebels to the gospel, and
enemies of the Cross of Christ.

The objection of manners answered.
But these men what time they saw that our doctrine could not be justly
accused, they thought it better to inuey against our manners: saying that we
destroyed all good deeds, that we opened the gates unto license and lust, and
led the people from al endeavor of virtue. And truly the life of all men, even
of the godly and Christian men, has always been such, that in the most
parfect and chaste ma^ners, yet there was somewhat wherein thou might find
fault. And moreover al men are so inclyned to do evil, and all so ready to
suspect, that even those things which were never done nor thought, may
nevertheless easily be heard of, and sone believed. And like as in a very white
garment a little spotte is easilye perceived, so in a most pure life the least
blott of filthy doings is sone espied. Nether do we suppose that all they
which at this day have embraced the doctrine of the Gospel, are Angels, and
live altogether without spot or wrinkle: or that these men be so blind, that if
there be any thing that may be reproved in us, they can not espy it at never
so little a hole: or yt they be so curteouse, that they will interpret any thing
in ye better part: or so honest that they will turn their eyes toward
themself, and esteem our ma^ners by their own. But if we will consider the
matter from the beginning: we know that in the very times of the apostles,
there was amongst the Christians, thorough whom the name of the Lord was
blasphemed, The manners of the ancient Church decayed.
and evil spoken of among the Gentiles. Constantius the Emperor complained as
Sozomene writes, that manny after they were come unto Christian religion, were
become worse. And Cyprian with a sorrowful oration does complain of the
corruption of his time. De laps^^.
The discypline says he, which the Apostles left unto us, quietness and long
peace has corrupted. Every man studied to increase his patrimony, and
forgetting what the faithful other before in the Apostles time had done, or
always ought to do, they gave themself to multiplyeng of riches, with an
insatiable rage of covetousness. In Bishops there was no devotion: in ministers
no upright dealyng, no mercy in their doings, no discipline in their manners.
In man the bearde was corrupted, in woman beauty counterfaite. And before him
Tertullian: O says he, how miserable are we, that in these days are called
Christians: We live like Gentiles under ye name of Christ.

To conclude, because we will not rehearse all: Gregory Nazianzene, of the
miserable state of his time speaks thus: We are now hated, says he, amongst
ye Gentiles for our vices, also we are made now a spectacle not only to Angels
and to me^, but also to al wicked me^. In this case was the church of God, what
time ye Gospel began first to shine: what time the raging fury of Tyrauntes was
not yet cooled, or the sword drawn away from over the necks of the
Christians. And no marvel at all, for it is no new thing that men be men,
though they be called Christians.

But these men yt so hainously accuse us, do they in the mean season think
nothing of themselves? They that have leisure to look so far, both what is
done in Germany and what in England, have they either forgotten, or can they
not se what is done in Rome? Ar we accused by the^, of whose life no man ca^
speak with honesty and reverence?

A Contrary objection of manners.
We do not take upon us now at this time to bring to light and to the show of
the world those doings, which ought rather together with the Authors of them
to be buried, our religion, our shamfastnes, our blusshi^g does not bear it.
Nevertheless he yt commands al men to call him Christ's vicare and head of ye
Church, who hears these things to be done at Rome, who sees it, who
suffers it (more we will not add) of what quality they be, he may easly
consider with himself. For let him call to remembrance, Ioannes de magistris,
De ^^mperantia.
let him consider yt they be his Canonystes that have taught the people, that
simple fornication is no sin, as though they had learned that doctrine of
Mitio in Terence, where he says: It is no fault believe me, 3. Quaest. 7. la
ta Extra. De Bigamis. Quia circa.
for a young man to lie with a harlote. Let him consider that they be his men
that have decreed, that a Preeste for fornication ought not to be removed from
his benefice: let him remember that Cardinal Campegius, Albert Pighius, and
mani others of his affinity has taught, yt that priest lives much more holily
and more chastely yt keeps a concubine, then he that has taken a wife in
matrimony. We trust he has not yet forgotten, yt at Rome there be many
thousands of common harlots, and that he gathers of them yearly by ye way
of imposition, about thirty thousand ducats. Wherefore he can not forget, yt in
Rome openly he occupies baudery, and of most filthy gain, filthely and
wickedly feeds his own delight. I pray you, were al things at Rome other
sound or holy enough, what time as Ione a woman of perfect age rather then of
life, Her Image as she traualled with child is yet at Rome.
was Pope, and took upon her to be head of ye Church, and after that two years
together she had applied her self in yt holy seat unto other men's lusts, at
the last in going a Procession about in the City, in the sight of the
Cardinals and Bishops, was openly delivered of child in the street?

But what should we speak of concubines and bawdes? For that is now at Rome
a common and an open and no unprofitable sin. For harlots now a days sit
there, Genes. 38.
not as in times past, without the city with their heads covered and muffeled, but
dwell in pallaices, wander in ye market place with open face, as though it were
not only lawful, In consilio d^^ lectoru^ Cardin. to. 3.
but also commendable for them so to do, what needs any more? Their letcherous
lustinges ar now well enough known to all the world. S. Bernard touching the
Popes family, and eue^ of ye Pope himself speaks freely and truly. De
consideratione ad Eugenium.
Does thy court, says he, receive good men? It does not: Evil men there go
forewardes, good men go backwards. And whosoever he was that did write that
same Three parted work which is joined to ye Counsel of Lateran: The excess,
says he, at this day is so great not only in Clerks and Preests, but also in
prelates and bishops, yt it is horrible to here of.

But these things are not only common, and therefore by reason of custom and
continuance of time allowed, as the rest of these men's matters are in manner
al, but also old and now stinking ripe. For who has not hard what Petre
Aloisius, P. Aloisius.
the son of Paul ye third, did unto Cosmus Cherius bishop of Fauense, or what
Ihon Casus Archbishop of Beneuento the Popes legate at Uenice, Ihon Casus.
wrote of that horrible fylthinesse, where as even that thing which ought not to
be heard of, out of any man's mouth, he does commend with most filthy words
and diuelishe eloquence? Who has not heard, ^. Diasius.
how that N. Diazius a Spaniarde, being sent from Rome into Germany for that
purpose, traitorously and wyckedly killed Ihon Diazius his brother, a most
innocent and holy man, only because he had embraced the Gospel of Jesus
Christ, and would not return to Rome. But these things, will they say, may
so^times happen in a well ordered common wealth, whether ye magistrates will or
no, and by good laws ar punished.

Heinous sins vnpunnished among the Romysshe.
Be it so hardily. But with what good laws were these beasts punished? Peter
Aloisius after he had don those vylanous deeds, which we spoke of, was
always in special favor and in the bosom of his father Paul ye third. Diazius
after he had killed his brother, by help of ye Pope, was violently pulled
away, least he should have been punished according to good laws: Ihon Casus
Archbishop of Beneuento lives yet, and lives even at Rome, and in the eyes
and sight of the most holy. They have killed of our brothren an infinite
number, only because they believed truli and sincerely in Jesus Christ: only
because they believed truly and sincerely in Jesus Christ: but of that huge
multitude of whores, whoremo^gers and adulterers, whom did they ever, I say
not, kill, but other excommunicate, or at any time lay hand on? Ar, I pray
you, lecherous lusts, Adulteries, Baudery, whorhuntings, Murders, Incests, and
other more wicked doings no sin at Rome? Or if they be sin, may it be
that in the City of Rome, in the tower of holiness, of the vicare of Christ,
of the successor of Peter, of the most holy Father, they should be so easily
and so mildly suffered, as thoe they were no sin at all?

O holy Scribes and Pharisees, unto whom this holiness was never known. O
holiness and Catholic faith. These things Petre never taught at Rome: Paul
lived not at Rome after this manner: They did not openly maynteine baudery: they
did not exact any impositions or taxes upon harlots: They did not allow that
open adulterers and murderers should go unpunished. They did not receive them,
another into their bosoms, another into Council, nor into their family, nor
into the assembly of Christian me^. These men truly ought not so haynouslye to
exclayme against our life. It were a great deal more wisdom for them, first
other to make good their own doings before men, or at the least to cover them
somewhat more conningly.

For we do keep in ure our old and ancient laws, Of discipline.
and so far forth as it may be in these days, and manners, and in so great a
corruption of al things, we do execute diligently and earnestly Church
discipline: as for stews for common whores or flocks of concubines and
harlots, we have not. Nor we do not prefarre adultery before marriage: nor we
do not occupy bawdery: nor we gather no rentes upon bawdy houses: nor we do
not suffer incests and deuelish abuses of bodily lust, nor such as Aloisius,
or as Casus, or as Diazius the murderer to go unpunished. For if these things
had liked us, we needed not to have departed from the fellowship of these men,
where those things do flourish and ar had in price, and by rayson of our
departing, thus to fall into the hatered of men and into present perils. Paul
the fourth had not many months paste in prysonne at Rome certain Augustine
friars and diverse Bishops, and a great no^bre of other godly me^, for the cause
of religion. He put them to tortures, he examined them upon interrogatories, he
assaide always that might be. At the last how many could he find of all
these to be me^ of inordinate lusts, how many whorehu^ters, how many
adulterers, how many incestes? Thanks be unto our god, although we be not such
as we ought to be, and such as our profession does require, yet what so ever we
be, if we be compared with these men, even our life and our innocence shall
easily confute these slau^ders. For we do exhort the people not only with
books and sermons, but also with examples and well doing, unto all kind of
virtue and of good deeds. We teach that the gospel is not an ostentation of
knowledge, but the law of life: and as Tertullian says, that a christian man
ought not to speak nobly, In Apologet. 45.
but to live nobly: And not the hearer, but the doers of the law ar justified
before God. Romans 2.


The objectio^ of sedition.
Unto al these things they are wont also to add this, and to enlarge it with all
kinds of railing: that we be seditious persons: that we pluck the scepters
from out of the hands of Kings: that we arm the people: that we overthrowe
all courts of Justice: that we abolyshe laws: that we bring possessions into
common: that we turn kingdoms into a popular state: that we confou^de al
things vpside down. To conclude, we would have nothing in ye common wealth to
remain vnfoyled. O how often have therewith these words inflamed the hearts of
princes, Tertull. in Apologet. 1.2 and 3.
to the intent they should put out the light of the gospel whiles it were yet
in kindelyng, and should first begin to hate it, before they might attain to
know it. And that the magistrate as often as he should see any of us, so often he
should imagine that he saw his enemy.

It would trouble us very much to be thus odiously accused of high trayson: The
same objectio^ against the primitive church.
but that we know that Christ him self before us, and the Apostles, and
infinite other good men and Christians were brought in hatered in manner for
the same matter. For Christ although he had taught that we ought to give unto
Caesar yt which was Cesars: yet he was accused of sedition, because he was
reported to be a man that went about new devises and aspired to a kyngedome.
For this cause in open court of judgment, the people cried against him: If
thou let this man go, thou art not Cesars friend. And the Apostles
although they had always and constantly taught, that magistrates ought to be
obeyed, and that every soul is subject unto the higher powers, and that not
only for fear of displeasure and of punishment, but also for conscience sake:
yet they weer reported that they troubled the people, and stirred up the
multitude unto rebellion. Aman chyefly by this means, brought the whole
nation and name of the Jews into hatered of the king Assuerus, Hester.
in sayng that they were a rebellious and a stubbern people, and that they
contemned the proclamations and ordinances of Princes. The wicked king Achab,
speaking unto Eli the prophet of God: 3. Regum. 18.
Thou, says he, troublest Israel. Amasias the priest of Bethel accuses Amos
the Prophet unto king Hieroboam of co^spiracy: Behold, Amos. 7.
says he, Amos has made a conspiracy against thee, in the midst of the
house of Israel. To conclude, Tertullian says, that this was a common
complaint in his time against all Christian men, In Apologet. cap. 37.
that they were traitors, that they were enemies of their country, that they
were enemies to all mankind.

Wherefore if truth now also at this time be evil spoken of, and as it is the
same thing, so it be intertayned with the same reproaches, wherewith it was
wont to be: although it be grievous and unpleasant, yet it can not seem to be
new, or a thing that has not ben before accustomed.

It was an easy matter for these men, forty years paste, to devise these
slanders and other more grievous matters against us, what time as in the
midst of that darkness, some little lightsome beam of the truth as yet in
those days unknown and not heard of, began first to rise and to shine:
what time as Martine Luther, and Huldericus Zuinglius twoe most excellent
personages sent of God to give light unto the world, came first unto the
Gospel: what time as the matter was yet but new, and the success uncertain,
and men's minds were waueryng and astonished, and their ears open unto
slanders, and no mischief so heinous could be devised against us, which for
the novelty and strau^gnes of the doctrine it self, should not of ye people
easily be believed. For after this manner the old enemies of ye Gospel,
Simmachus, Celsus, Julian, Porphyry in times paste took in hand to accuse all
Christians of sedition and of treyson, before that other the Prince or the
people could know what manner of me^ those Christians were, or what they did
profess, or what they believed, or what they would have. Now after that our
very enemies do see, and can not deny, but that always in all our words and
writings, we have diligently admonished ye people of their duty: how that
they ought to obey their Princes and Magistrates, although they were wicked:
and that use and experience does declare the same, and the eyes of all men
whatsoever and whersoeuer they be, do see it and bear witness thereof: It was
but an unsavory devise to obiecte such things against us, and for want of
new and fresh matter, to go about to bring us into hatred, only with old
forworne lies.

For we give thanks unto our God, The Gospel does not destroy common
welthes.
to whom alone this cause does appertain, that in all the kingdoms,
Jurisdictions, countrays and Commonweales which have received the Gospel,
hitherto no such example has been at any time. For we have overthrown no
kingdom, we have deminished no man's rule or right of possession: we have
disordered no common wealth. They remain yet in their place and in their
ancient dignity. The kings of our country of England, of Scotland, of
Denmark, of Suetia, the Dukes of Saxony, the Earls of Palse, the Marqueses of
Brandeburgh, the Lantgraues of Hess, the commonweals of the Heluetians and of
the Grysonnes, the free cities, Strausborough, Basile, Francforde, Ulme,
Anguste, Norinberge: all these I say remain in the same right, in the same
state wherein they were before, or rather, by rayson that for the gospels sake
they have the people more obedient, in a much better estate. Let them go
hardely into those places, whereas now through the goodness of God the gospel
is heard: where is more Majesty? where is less ostentatio^ and tyranny?
where is the prince more honored? where does the people less rise into vprores
and tumultes, where was there ever any common weal, where any Church more
calm and quiet?

But you will say, that at the beginning of this doctrine, the husband men of
the country began to rage and to make vprores in Germany. Admit it were so.
But Martine Luther ye setter forth of this doctrine, wrote vehemently and
sharply many things against them: and brought them again to peace and to dew
obediens.

Now as to that that is wont to be sometimes objected of men not well
acquaynted with matters of the world, touching the alteration of the state of
Suycherlande, and the killynge of Leopolde duke of Austria, and restorynge of
their country into liberty: all this was done as it is evident enough by all
the Histories, towe hundred and threscore years past, under pope Boniface the
eight, at what time the Popes authority did chiefly florishe: the which was
about towe hundred years before Hulderichus Zuinglius either began to teach
the gospel, or yet was borne. From that time hitherto, they have ever kept all
things in rest and peace, not only from outward enemies, but also from civil
wars and vprores at home.

But admit it were an offense to deliver their country from the rule of
strangers, specially when they were arrogantly and tirannously ouerpressed:
yet were it against all right and rayson either to burden us with faults that
appertain nothing unto us, or the^ with the offenses of their forefathers.

But o merciful God, The objection turned aginst the adversaries.
will the Bishop of Rome accuse us of trayson? will he teach ye people to be
obedient and subject unto magistrates? or has he any regard to magistrates at
al? why the^ does he at this day, ye which thing none of the ancient bishops
of Rome ever did? suffer himself, eue^ as though he would have at Kings and
Princes whosoever or where so ever they be, to become his servants, Aug.
Steuchus Anton. de Rosellis.
of his parasites and hierlinges to be called lord of lords? why does he
auaunt himself to be king of kings, and that he has over them as his
subjects, a kings authority. De Maiori. et obed. solite.
Why does he compel all Emperors and princes to promise by their oath true
obedience unto him: why does he boaste that the imperial majesty is a
thousandfolde inferior to his estate, grounding him self chiefly upon this
rayson, that God made twoe lights in Heaven, De mayor. and obed. Vnam sanctam.
and because heaven and earth were not in twoe beginninges, but in one?
wherefore has he and all of his mark, like to the Anabaptists and Libertines,
to the intent they might the more losely and safely range in all mischief,
shaken of the yoke of obedience, and exempted themselves from under all civil
authority? wherefore has he his legates, that is to say, most crafty spies,
to lie as it were in a wait, in the courts, in the councels, in the chambers
of all kings? Wherefore does he, when it likes him, set christian princes
together by the ears, and to serve his own lust, turmoileth the whole wolrd
with seditio^s? why does he excommunicate and command him to be taken for an
Heathen man and a Pagane if any Christian Prince do refuse to obey him? and
moreover promises so liberalli his Purgatory pardones to any man that by any
means does kill his enemy? Does he I pray you maintain Empires and
Kingdoms, or has he any desire at al, that commonweals should be at rest
and quiet? Thou must pardon us good reader, if we shall seem to utter these
things with more vehemency and bitterness then should become divines. For the
matter of it self is so shameful, and the desire of dominion is so great, and
outrageth so far in the Pope, that with other words it can not be uttered or
after any more quiet manner. Clemens 5. in Council. Viennensi.
For he was not afraid to say in open Council that the whole pour of all
kings depe^ded altogether upon him. He through ambition and desire of dominion
has plucked the Roman Empire in sondre, and has tossed and torn into pieces
al christendom, he traitorously discharged the Romans and the Italia^s and
also himself of that oath whereby he ought his allegia^ce to the Emperor that
remained in Greece: and provoked the subjects unto rebellion: and called
Charles Martel out of France into Italy, and beginning a new form of
regiment, made him Emperor. He did cast out Chilperiche king of France,
Zacharias Papa.
being no evil prince, from his kingedome, only because he liked him not, and
made Pipine king in his place. He decreed and judged the kyngedome of France
unto Alberte the king of Romans. And that Philip should be cast out, if his
power might have served him thereto. He brake the force of the most
florisshynge city and commonwealth of Florence his own country: Clemens Pa^a
7.
and out of a free and quiet state, he delivered it up to be ruled after the
lust of one man. He through his setting on, brought to pass, that all Sauoy,
on the one side by the Emperor Charles the fyft, and by Fraunces the French
king on the other, was miserably torn in pieces, so that the poor Duke had
sea^tli one city left him to repair unto.

I am weary of examples, and it would be over tedious to rehearse all the
notable deeds of the Popes of Rome. Of what religion I pray you were they that
poisonned Henry the Emperor in the consecrated bread? that poysonned Pope
Uictor in the holy Chalyce? that poysonned Ihon our king here in England, in a
drinking cup? Sure I am, who soever they were, and of what sect so ever they
were, they were another Lutherans nor Zuinglians. Who is it that is content at
this day to let the greatest Kings and Monarchs of the world, to come and
kiss his blessed fete? Who is he that commands the Emperor to hold his
horse by the bridel, and the French king to hold his stirrope, when he goes
to horsebak? Who was he that took Fraunces Dandalo Duke of Uenice, Sabellicus.
king of Candy and of Cypres, bound him in chains, Caelestinus Papa.
and threw him under his table there to gnaw bones amongst the dogs? Who was
he that at Rome did set the crown upon the Emperors head Henry the sixte,
not with his hand, but with his foot, and with the same foot did cast yt
down again, saying withal, that he had power both to make Emperors and to
remove them? Hildebrandus Papa.
Who did set Henry the son, upon Henry the fourth his father being
Emperor: and brought to pass that the Father was taken prisoner of the
son, and that after they had shorn his crown and scornfully abused him, was
thrown into a monastery, Innocentius. 8.
where for hunger and sorrow he might pine away to death? Who was he that in
most shameful wise did set his feet upon Frederike themperours neck, and as
though that had not been enough, he added moreover these words out of the
Psalms of David: Psalm. 90.
Thou shall walk upon the Aspis and upon the Cockatryce, and shall tread
down the Lion and the Dragonne. Such an example of despite and contempt
against princely Majesty, as never was heard of before in any age: except
parauenture in Tamerlane the Scithian, that savage and barbarouse man, or in
Sapor the king of Persia.

All these were Popes, al successors of Peter, all most holy: out of whose
mouths every word must be unto us a several Gospel.

A comparison of the obedience and doctrine of both parts.
If we be appeached as gilty of treyson which do honor our Princes: which
yield over unto them all things, so far as it is lawful by gods word: which do
pray for them: what I beseech you ar these, that have not only done all these
things that we spoke of before, but also by one assent have allowed them as
things right nobly done? Trow ye then that either this is ye way to teach the
people to reverence the Maiestrate: or that they without shame may accuse us for
seditious persons, for disturbers of the common peace, and despisers of
princely Majesty? For we neither shake of ye yoke of our obedience, nor remove
kingdoms from one to an other, nor take upon us either to make kings or to put
them down: nor translate Empires, nor poison our kings, nor offer them our
feet to kiss, nor triumph over them, setting our feet on their necks: this
rather is our profession, this is our doctrine: that eueri soul whatsoever it
be; Chrysostom: 13. ad To.
whether it be monk, whether it be Evangelist, whether it be Prophet, whether
it be Apostle, must of necessite be subject unto Kings and Maiestrates: yea
and the Pope himself, onles he will seem to be greater then the Evangelists,
then ye Prophets, then the Apostels, must both acknowledge the Emperor to be
his Lord, the which thing the ancient Bishops of Rome, Gregor. saepe in Epist.
when the world was in better estate, did never refuse, and also call him by
the name of Lord.

We teach openly that princes are so to be obaied, The obediens due to
magistrates.
as men sent of God, and who that resists against the^, resists the
ordinance of God: these be our ordinances and these lessons are evident in our
books, these are in our sermons, and these do shine in ye ma^ners and modesty
of our people.

But as touching that where they say that we have forsaken the unite of the
Catholic Church: The objection of departing from the catholic Church.
it is not only odious, but also although it be most untrue, yet has it some
appearance and likelyhode of truth. Now amongst the common people and ignorant
multitude, not only those things that be true in deed and certain, are
believed, but also such things, if any come in place, that may seem to have a
lykelihoode of truth. Whereupon we se how yt crafty and subtle fellows
having no truth where with to maintain their cause, have ever vpholden their
matters by those things that had a resemblance of truth, to the intent yt such
as are not able to see the bottom of the matter themselfes, might at ye least
be entangled with some color and probalitie of the truth.

Thus in times past, because the Christians our forefathers what time they made
their prayers unto God, turned themselves toward the East: Tertull. in
Apologetico. ca. 16.
there were some that said they worshypped the Sun, and took hit to be their
God. And when as they said, that as touching the everlasting and immortal
life, they lived upon none other thing but of the flesh and blood of that
Lamb that had no spott, that is to say, of our savior Jesus Christ: The
enuyers and enemies of the Cross of Christ, who sought after nothing else, but
that Christian religion by any manner of means might be evil spoken of,
Tertull. in Apologetico. ca. 7.8.9.
persuaded the people that they were wicked persons, that they killed men to
make sacryfices of them, and that they drunk man's blood. Likewise when they
said, that before God there is another Male nor Female: nor, so far as
appertains to the attayninge of righteousness, there is at all noe
dyfference of persons, and when as amongst themselves every one called an
other brother and sister: there lacked not malycious persons to quarrel
against them, Idem. ca. 39.
that the Christians made no manner of dyfference among themselves, other of
age, or of kind, but lay together at adventure al of them as it came to hand
like brute beasts. And whereas for common prayer and hearing of the Gospel,
they were often times feign to assemble themselves together in secret vauts and
hydden places: because that practisers of conspyracies has accustomed
sometimes to do the like, rumors were openly spread abroad that they
conspired among themselves, and practiced together other to murder magistrates,
or to ouertourne the common welthe. And further, Augustinus.
because that in celebratynge the holy mysteries, they used according unto
Christ's institution to have bread and wine, it was supposed of many, that
they worshipped not Christ, but Baccus and Ceres: by reason that these
counterfeyt gods amongst the hethen were worshipped after their profane
superstition in a like ceremony with bread and wine.

These things were believed of many men, not because they were true, for what
could be more untrue? but because they were somewhat lykely, and might well
deceive men with the resemblaunce of truth.

Even after the same manner these men slander us for Heretics, and to have
forsaken the Church and the communion of Christ, not for that they think it to
be true, for thereof they take no care, but because that unto ignorant men it
might paraduenture some way have an appearance of truth. For we have forsaken,
not as Heretykes are wont to do, the Church of Christ, but as all good men
are bound to do, the contagious infection of lewd men and of Hypocrytes.
And yet do they in this point tryumphe merueilousely, saying, This is the
Church, this is the spouse of Christ: this is the pyller of truth: this is the
ark of Noah, out of which no salvation is to be looked for: and that we have
forsaken it, we have torn Christ's coat: We are cut of from the body of
Christ, and have abandoned the Catholyke Faith.

And when they have left nothing vnsayde that may be said, although falsely
and slaunderousely against us: yet this one thing they can not say, that we
have aparted our selves either from the word of God, or from the Apostels of
Christ, or from the primityue Church.

The Catholic Church
But we have always esteemed the first age of the Church to be catholyke, ye
which was in tune of Christ and of the Apostles and of the holy fathers: Nor
we doubt not to call yt Church the ark of Noah, the spouse of Christ, the
pillar and perfect stay of the truth, or upon the same to repose the whole
course of our salvation.

It is doutles an odyous thing for any man to forsake yt fellowship whereunto he
has accustomed himself, but specially of those men which although they be not
yet, at the least seem to be and are called Christians. And to say truth
concerning their Church even for the names sake, and because yt in time paste,
of what sort so ever it be now, the Gospel of Jesus Christ was truly and
purely set forth in it, we do not so greatly contemn it: nor would not have
forsaken it, but only of very necessity, and yt very much against our wills.
But what if an Idol be raised up in the Church of God, and that same
desolation whereof Christ did prophecy, should stand openly in the holy
place? What if a strong thief or a pyrate get the possession of ye Ark of Noah? Doubtless these me^ as often as they preach unto us ye Church, they make
themselfes only to be the Church, and all those tytles they challenge to
themselfes, and so they triumph even as they did in times paste that cried,
The temple of the Lord, The temple of the Lord: or as the Pharasies and Scribes
did, when they boasted themselfes to be the sons of Abraham. Joan. 8.


Thus they deceive the simple with a vain appearance of gay things: and seek
utterly to oppress us with ye very name of the Church, even like as if a
thief, when that he had entered upon an other man's house, and had other
violently thrust out or murdered ye owner thereof, should afterward challenge
it for his own, and keep out of possession the right heir: or if Antichrist
after ye he had gotten himself into possession of the temple of God, should say
afterward, that it were his own, and that it appertained nothing unto
Christ. For these me^ whereas in the Church of God they have left nothing like
to gods Church, yet they will seem to be maintainers and defenders of the
Church, even altogether as Gracchus in times paste defended the treasure of
Rome, what time as with launching out of large gifts, and vndiscreat expenses,
he utterly consumed and cast it away. There was never nothing so wicked or so
far against reason, that under the name of ye Church might not easily be
covered and defended. For even the waspes also do make honycombes: and the
wicked have their assembles and fellowshyppes together, like unto the Church of
God.

But not whosoever are called the people of God, Aug. Epi. 48. ad Vince.
are by and by the people of God. Nor all that are descended from their father
Israel, ar all Israelytes. The Arryans yt were Heretics boasted themselves
that they only were Catholykes, for the rest they called them al sometime
Ambrosyans, sometime Athanasians, sometime Iohannites, Nestoria^s, as Theodoret
says, although he were an Heritike, yet he covered himself (...), yt is to say,
with a certain appearance and cloak of the right faith. Ebion, although he
agreed in opinion with the Samaritanes, yet, as Epiphanius says, he would be
called a Christian. And the Mahometans although it be evident out of all
hystories, and can not deny themselfes, but that they came of Agar the
bondwoman, yet they had rather, as though they were descended out of the stock
of Sara, a free woman and the wife of Abraham, be called Sarracens, for the
reputation of the name and of the stock.

The known church may err.
Thus the false Prophets of all ages, which did withstand the Prophets of God,
as Esaias, as Hieremy, as Christ, as ye Apostles, had nothing more rife in their
mouths then the name of the Church. Nether for any other cause did they so
bitterly turmoile them, or call them runnawaies and forsakers of their
profession, the^ because they had gone from their fellowship, and observed not
the ordia^nces of the elders. And in case we will follow the judgment of those
men only, by whom the Church was governed at that time, and have no respect
other to God or to his word or to any other thing: doubtless it ca^ not be
denied, but that the Apostles, in as much as they declined away from the high
Bishops and priests, that is to say from the catholyke Church, and contrary to
their wills, cried they never so much, brought in an innovation and a change
of many things in religion, were rightly condemned and according to law.
Wherefore like as they writ of Hercules, yt in wrestling with Anteus the Gyaunt,
he was feign to hoist him up from the earth, his mother, before he could
overcome him: so our adversaries must be lifted up from this mother of theirs,
that is to say, from this counterfeit shape and shadow of the Church, which
they mass themselves wtall, for otherwise they can not give place to ye word of
God. Wherefore Ieremye says, Boast not your selves so much that the temple of
God is amongst you: that is but a vain confidence: for these be, says he, ye
words of lies. And ye Angel in the revelation, They say, says he, they be
Jews, but they be the Synagoge of Satan. Joan. 8.
And Christ, what time the Pharasies bosted themselves of the stock and kindred
of Abraham: You says he, are of your father the Devil: for you do nothing
resemble your father Abraham. As though he should say thus: You are not the
men which you desire so much to be taken for: you deceive the people with
counterfeit tytles: and abuse the name of ye Church, to the overthrowing of the
Church.

Wherefore this they ought first evidently and truly to have proved: Why we
departed from the Church of Rome.
that the Church of Rome is ye true and the right believing Church of God, and
that the same, according as it is governed by them at this day, does agree with
the primitive Church of Christ, of the Apostles, and of the holy fathers, which
no man doubted to be the Catholic Church. True it is in deed, in case we
could have believed that ignorance, error, superstition, worshipping of Idols,
man's inventions, such as many times are contrary to the holy Scriptures, either
pleased God, or were sufficient to the obtaining of everlasting salvation: or
if we could have persuaded our selves, that the word of God was written only
for a few years, and then to be put out of all authority: or that at any
time the sayings and ordinances of God should stand at the discretion of the
will of man, that whatsoever God said or commanded, unless the Bishop of
Rome admitted and commanded the same, it ought to be taken as a thing vain,
and as unsaid at all: if we could have found in our hearts to believe these
things, we confess there had been no cause, why we should have forsaken
their fellowshipp. But as touching that yt we have now done, in going from that
Church, whose errors are openly testified and manifest, and which has it self
most evidently gone back from the word of God, in as much I say, as we have
departed rather from the errors thereof, then from it self, and yt nether
disorderly, nor stubbernely, but quietly and soberly, we have done nothing that
disagreed other from Christ or from the Apostles. For the Church of God is not
in that state, as that it may not be blemmished with some spott, or that it
shall not have need sometimes of reformation: for else what neded there so
many assemblies and Councels, In Laterane^. Council. sub Iulio.
without which as Egidius says, Christian faith can not stand? For as often,
says he, as Councelles are neglected, so often is the Church forsaken of Christ.
Or if there be no danger of any damage that may come unto the Church, what
needs, as the case stands now amongst these men, the counterfeit names of
Bishops? For why be they called Shephardes, if there be no sheep that may go
astraye? Why are they called Watchmen, if there be no City yt may be betraide?
Why are they called Pillars, if there be nothing that can fall? The Church of
God began forthwith from the beginning of the world to spredde abroad, and
was taught with the heavenly word which God himself powered out of his mouth,
was taught with holy Ceremonies, taught with the Spirit of God, taught with the
Patriarchs and Prophets, and was so continued until those days when Christ
showed himself in flesh.

The state and condition of the Church upon earth.
But, O merciful God, how often was it in that mean time, and how horribly
defaced and empaired? Where was the Church at that time, when all flesh had
defiled his way upon earth? Where was it, when as of the whole multitude of
mankind, there was left but eight persons, and they not all chaste and
Godly, which it pleased God to preserve out of the common slaughter and
destructyon? iii. Kings.xix.
Or when Elias the Prophet complained so lamentablye and bitterly, that
amongst all them that lived upon earth, there was left none but he alone
that truly and rightlye worshipped God? Esai. ^^
And when Esaye said: The Silver of the people of God, that is to say, the
Church, is turned into dross: and that City which sometime had been
faithful, was becomme a harlott: and that in hit from the hedd to the foot
throughout the whole body, there was nothing uncorrupted? or what time Christ
said, Mat. xxi.
that the Pharyseis and Priests had made the house of God a den of thieves?
For the Church, even like unto a corn field, except it be tylled, except it
be harrowed, except it be labored, except it be husbanded, in stead of Wheat
it will bring forth Thistels, Darnell and Nettels. Wherefore God sent from
time to time Prophets and Apostles, and also at the length his anointed
Christ, which should lead the people home again into the right way, and
thoroughly repair the Church at such times as it was ready to fall. But least
any man should say, that these things happened only under the law and in ye
shadow and infancy of the Church, what time as the truth was covered with
figures and ceremonies: what time nothing as yet was brought into perfection:
what time the law was engraven, not into men's hearts, but in tables of stone:
(although the same also be but a foolish objection) for even at that time was
also the same God, the same spirit, the same Christ, the same Faith, ye same
doctrine, ye same hope, the same enherita^ce, ye same covenant, the same force
of gods word. ^. i. r. ca. 1.
And Eusebius says: that all the faithful, even from the time of Adam, were in
very deed Christians, although they were not so called: but least I say any
man should make this objection: Lo Paul the Apostle found out like errors and
like faults in ye time of the Gospel, in the time of perfection and of light:
in so much that he was driven of necessite to write unto the Galathians, whom
he had before instructed, after this manner: I am afraid, least yt I have
labored amongst you in vain: and that in vain you have heard ye Gospel. ^al*
4*
My little Children, in whose birthe I travail again, until Christ be formed
in you: for as touching ye Church of the Corinthia^s, how filthily it was
defiled, it is not needful to speak of. Now I pray you then, might the
Churches of the Galathians and the Corinthians fall from the faith, and only ye
Church of Rome may neither err nor slide away? Mat. 24.
Doubtless Christ touching his Church, pronounced so long aforehand that the
time should come, ^. Thessalonians. 2.
when that desolation should stand in the holy place. And Paul says, that
Antichrist in time to come, should set his chair of state in ye temple of God.
^. Timo. 4.
And that it should come to pass, yt me^ would not endure to hear sound
doctrine: but eue^ in the very Church, men should turn their ears to the
hearing of fables. ^ Pet. 2.
And Peter says, that in the Church there shall be masters of lies. Dani. 8.
And Daniel the Prophet speaking of the last days of Antichrist, says that
in those days truth shall be overthrown, and trodden down to the ground.
Mat. 24.
And Christ says, that miserye and confusion amongst men shall be so great,
that even the elect if it were possible, should be ledd away in to error. And
that all these things should come to pass, not amongst the Paganes or Turks,
but in the holy place, in the Temple of God, in the Church, in the Congregation
and fellowshipp of them that shall profess the name of Christ.

And albeit these warnings alone might suffice a wise man to beware that he
suffer not himself unadvisedly to be so deceived with the name of the Church,
so yt he should neglect to make inquisition out of Gods word, concerning the
truth thereof: nevertheless many of the fathers also, learned and Godly men has
oftimes grievously complained, that all these things has also happened in their
times. for God eue^ in the mids of that darkness, would have some, which
although they did not open so manifest and clear light, yet they should
kyndle as it were some sparkell, whereof, men sitting in darkness, might have a
glymse.

Hylary, Cont: Auxentium.
what time as things remained yet in manner uncorrupted and pure,
nevertheless, in an evil hour says he, Of the corrupted state of the church
of Rome.
have you set your love upon walls. In an evil hour do you worship the
Church of God in great houses and buildings: In an evil hour do you thrust in
under these, the name of peace: Is there any doubt but Antichrist in these
places shall have his seat? unto me, I tell you, Hills, Forestes, Lakes,
Prisonnes, and Whorlepooles seem more safe a great deal: for in them the
Prophets, either remaining of their own choice, or violently, driven,
prophesied with the spyrite of God.

Gregory, even as though he had seen and perceived aforehand the ruin of
things, writing unto John the Bishop of Constantinople, who first of all men
took upon him to be called by a name that never was heard of before, In
Registro Epist, ad Mau. Lib. 4. Epist. 32.
the universal Bishop of the whole Church of Christ, said thus. If ye Church
shall depe^de upon one man, the whole shall fall to ground. And who is it,
that has not seen this thing done long ago? It is now long ago that the
Bishop of Rome has brought to pass that the whole Church should depend upon
him alone: wherefore it is no marvel, if the same now long ago be wholly
fallen to ground. Bernarde ye Abbot writing four hundred years past: There
is nothing, Papists do confess the errors of their Church.
says he, pure and sou^de in ye Clergy: only there remains that the man of
sin should be discovered unto the world. The same man upon S. Paul's
Conversion: It seems, says he, that persecution is now cessed: no, rather
now begins persecution, even at their hands, which bear chief rule in
the Church. Thy friends and thy neighbors has drawn near, and stand up
against thee. From the sole of the foot unto the crown of the head, there is
no soundnes at all. Iniquity has issued out from the Elders, Judges and thy
vicares, which seem to govern thy people. We can not now say, As the people
are, so is the priest. for the people are not in ye state, as ye priest is. Out
alas, O Lord God: they be in persecuting of thee, the Chief, that seem to love
ye chief pre-eminence in thy Church, and to bear the chief rule. The same
upon the song of Solomon: Sermon. 33.
All friends are becomme all enemies: al familiars, all adversaries: and the
servants of Christ serve Antichrist. Behold in my peace is my most bitter
bitterness. Roger Bacon a man of great fame, In Libello de Idiomate linguarum,
Platina.
after that with a sharp oration he had reproved the miserable state of his
time: These heaps of errors, says he, do seek after Antichrist.

Gerson complains, that in his time, all the fruit and exercise of the sacred
study of Divinity, was brought to an ambitious contention of wits, and to a
mere Sophistrye.

The Friars of Lions, which as touching the manner of their living were no evil
men, were wont boldly to affirm, yt the Church of Rome, from which only at yt
time, the certain resolution of al doubtful matters were fetched, was that same
whore of Babylon, whereof in the Revelation of John there be so many evident
prophecies, and the assemble of helhoundes.

I know well enough that they make light of these men's aucthorite: but what
if I bring them for witnesses, whom they are wont to have in great honor?

What, Platina.
if I say that Adrian the Bishop of Rome has francklye confessed, that all
these euilles began to fall hedlonge from the top of the Papal dignity?

Pighius does confess, that in this point they have erred, because that in to
the Mass, which for all other respects he would have to be accounted holy,
many abuses are brought in. Gerson also, because yt through the multitude of
trifling Ceremonies, the whole virtue of the holy Ghost, which ought to be
strong in us, and true devotion, is altogether quenched. Al Greece and Asia
likewise, because the Popes of Rome, with the merchandise of their Purgatory
and pardonnes both have oppressed men's consciences, and robbed their purses.

Touching the tirannie of the Bishops of Rome and intolerable pride to pass
over such as they, because they have freely and franckly reproved their vices,
account paraduenture as enemies, eue^ they which lead their life at Rome in
the holy City under the nose of the most holy father, and might se al his
secrets, and never forsook the Catholic Faith, as Laurens Ualla, Marril of
Padoa, Francis Petrarche, Hieronymus Sauanorola, Iochym Abbot, Baptist of
Mantua, and before the^ al, Bernarde the Abbot. Al these I say, have greatly
and often complained: In so much that sometimes they declared the Pope himself
to be Antichrist, whether they spoke truly or falsely, we leave it unto others:
but doubtless they spoke it plainly.

Neither is there any cause that any man should object that they were ye
dysciples of Martin Luther or of Zuinglius: For they were not only many
years, but also diverse ages, before these men's names were heard of.

Yea, they did see also even at that time, that errors were crept into the
Church, and wished for ye amendment of them. And what marvel I pray you, if
the Church were lead away with errors, specially in those days, what time
neither the Bishopp of Rome, who had the whole rule in his own hands, nor any
other man, in manner either did his duty, or did at al understand what his
duty was. For it is not easy to be believed that the Devil whilst they were
idle and slept, that in all yt time was always either a sleep or idle. For
how they in the mean time demeaned themselves, and with what uprightness
they governed the house of God, though we say nothing, let them be content at
the least to hear Bernarde a man of theirs.

The Bishops, Ad Eugeniu^.
says he, unto whom the Church is committed at this day, are not doctors, but
deceauers: are not shepeheardes, but shepeweriers: are not Prelates, but Pilates.

Thus said Bernard of the bishop that called him self the chief bishop, and
of the bishops which at that time held the stern. He was no Lutherane: he
was no heretic: he forsook not the Church: yet was he not afraid to call the
bishops that lived in those days, seducers, deceauers and Pylates. Now the^
what time the people was openly seduced, and the eyes of Christian men
manifestly deceived, and when Pylate sittyng in court of Judgment adiugged
Christ and his members to sword and fire, in what case, o Lord, was the Church
in those days? But of so many and so gross errors, what error have these
men purged at any time? Or what error at the least would these me^ ever
acknowledge or confess?

But for as much as these men do affirm that they do stand in full
possession of the catholic Church, and call us, because we do dissent from
them, heretics, mark I pray you, what note or token this Church has of the
Church of God. Neither is it so hard a matter, in case thou will earnestly
and diligently seek it, to find out the Church of God. For it stands upon
an high and a stately place, even on the top of a hill. that is to say: it
is builded upon the foundation of the Prophets and the Apostels. De Vnitate
Ecclesiae ca. 3. Cap. 4.
There says S. Augustine, let us seek the Church: there let us try our
cause: and as he says in an other place: The Church ought to be tried out by
the holy and canonical Scriptures: and yt, which can not abide the trial of
the^, is not ye Church.

Yet these men, I can not tell how, whether it be of reverence or of
conscience, or for despair of the victory, do always abhor and flee Gods
word, even as a thief does the gallous. Another is it any marvel at al. For
like as it is said of the gold worm, that in the joyce of Balsme, an
ointment, to all other respects of most sweet and delicate savor, he is
sone dispatched and killed: so they in Gods word do see their cause, as it
were in poison to be utterly dispatched and destroyed.

The Papists do deface the Scriptures.
Wherefore to the intent they might the more easily drive the people from the
scriptures, as from a most dangerous and a hurtful thing, the which
nevertheless our savior Jesus Christ did not only use in all his common talk,
but also at the last sealed them with his blood, they ar wont to call the^, a
cold, an uncertain, an unprofitable, a dumme, a killing and a dead lettre.
Which unto us seems to be as much, as thoe they had said, they be no
scriptures at all. But they stick not to add thereunto a similitude, Pighius
in Hierarchia,
not al together of the best making, that they be in manner as it were a nose
of wax: that may be fashioned and turned into all manner of shapes, and serve
every man's purpose. Trow ye the Pope is ignorant that these things ar spoken
even by his own derelinges? Or does he not understand that he has such
Champions?

Let him hear therefore how devoutly and how godly one Hosius writes of this
matter, a Poloniane, and as he him self says, a Bishop, doutles an eloquent
man and not unlearned, and a very earnest and stout defender of his cause. He
will marvel, I suppose, that any man fearyng God, could other think so
wickedly of those words, which he knows to have proceeded from the mouth of
God, or write so slanderously: and that specially in such sort, as that he
would not have it to be taken for his own judgment alone, but as the common
judgment of them all. In deed I do not deny but he does dissemble his own
person, and does so propou^de the matter, as thoe not he nor me^ of his
sort, but ye heretics called Zuenkfeldians did speak after yt manner.

We, says he, as touching ye very scriptures, whereof we see brought in now a
days so many interpretatio^s, not only diverse amongst them self, but also
contrary one to an other, will bid, Away with the^. And will rather hear God
speak, then turn our selfs toward these beggarly elements, and in them
repose ye hope of our salvation. It is not requisite to be cunning in the law
and in ye scriptures, but to be taught of God. It is but vain labor, yt which
is bestowed upon ye scripture: for ye scripture is a creature and a certain
beggarly eleme^t. These be ye words of Nosius, written no doubt with the same
spirit and mind, wherwt Montanus in time paste, and Marcion did speak: of
whom it is said, yt they were wo^te to say, at what time they would
contemptuously reject the holy scriptures, that they knew many, both more and
better things, then ever other Christ or his Apostles did know. What shall I
say therefore in this point? O ye pillars of Religion: o ye prelates of the
Church of Christ: is this the reverence that you give unto Gods word? Dare you
so deal with the holy Scriptures, the which S. Paul says, ar delivered unto
us by inspiracio^ from God, the which God has adorned and set forth with so
many miracles, in the which the most evident footesteppes of Christ's passage
ar certainly imprynted, which all the holy fathers, which the Apostles,
which the Angels, which Christ him self the son of God, when need
required, did call to witness: Dare you, I say, abide away with the^, as though
they were unworthy to be heard of you? Is not this to command God him self,
who most evidently speaks unto you in the scriptures to keep silence? or will
you call that word, by the which only as S. Paul says, we are reconciled
unto God, and which David says, is holy and pure and shall endure for ever,
by the name only of a beggarly and a dead element: or will you say that to
bestow our labor about that thing, which Christ commanded us diligently to
search, and always to have before our eyes, is a vain labor and to none
effect? And that Christ and the Apostles, what time they did exhort the people
to the redyng of the holy scriptures, that out of them they might become
plentiful in all wisdom and knowledge, did go about to abuse men with lies?
It is no marvel thoe these men despise us and all that we do or say, which
make so little accounte of God him self, and of his most holy word. Yet was it
but a folish devise of them, in seking to hurt us, to commit so heinous an
injury against the word of God. But Hosius will cry out, we do him injury,
and that these be not his, but Zuinkfeldius words. But what if Zuenkfeldius
also cry, that they be not his, but Hosius words? For where did Zuinkfelde
ever write the^: or if he did write them and Nosius judged them to be wicked,
why did he not at ye least speak one word to confute them, how so ever the
matter go? Althoe peradventure Hosius will not allow the words, yet he does
not disallow the meaning. For in all controversies almost, and namely touching
the use of the holy communion under both kinds, although Christ's words be
most plain, yet he co^temptuously rejects them as cold and dead elements,
and would have us believe certain new devises prescribed by the Church, and
certain revelations, I know not what, of the holy ghost. And Albert Pighius
says: we ought not to believe the words of the scripture, althoe they were
most manifest, unless the same be allowed by the interpretation and
authority of the Church.

Nevertheless as though this were but a small matter: Impiety against the
holy scriptures.
they stick not also to burn up ye sacred scriptures, as in time paste wicked
king Aza did: or as Antiochus or Maximinus did: and these they are wont to call
heretics books: wherein they seem to intend the same practice, which
Herod in time paste, for the mayntena^ce of his estate, went about in Jury.
For he, whereas he was an Edomite, a very stranger to the stock and kindred of
the Jews, and nevertheless couetid to be taken for a Jew, to the intent he
might the rather establish for him and his posterity his kingdom over the^,
the which he had before obtained at the hands of Augustus the emperor:
commanded all their enrolments of petigrees, which even from the time of
Abraham unto that day had been diligently kept amongst their records, and
by the which it might, with out al error, easily be perceived out of what
kindred every man was descendid, to be burned and utterly to be defaced. only
to this end, that nothing hereafter should remain in record, whereby it might
appear that he were a stranger. Even so do these men in all points, when as
because they would have all their devises to be had in as great price as though
they had been delivered from the Apostels or from Christ, least that any
thing should at any time remain, that might reprove such dreams and lies,
other they burn the holy scriptures, or craftily conueye them from the people.

In opere. Imperfecto.
Chrysostom surely writes very well, and against the endeavor of these men
excedyng aptly. Heretics, says he, shut up the gates against the truth: for
they know right well, if they be open, the Church shall not be on their side.
And Theophylacte, The word of God says he, is the lantern of light, whereby
the thief is espied. And Tertullian says, The holy scripture does try out the
guyles and theftes of heretics. For why do they hyde, why do they keep under
covert that gospel, which Christ would have to sound from the tops of
houses? Why do they convey yt light under a busshel, which ought to stand
upon the candelstike? why do they repose their trust rather in the blindness
and ignorance of the unskillful multitude, than in the goodness of their cause?
Do they suppose that their sleyghts be not yet espied? or that they can now,
as thoe they had Gyges ring, walk invisible? Assure your self, now all men
sees well enough what is within that same storeboxe of the Popes bosom: even
this thing only may be a good argument, yt they deal not uprightly and
truly. That cause ought of right to be suspected, that flies the trial and
light. For he that does evil, as Christ says, seeks after darkness and
hates the light. A clear conscience offers him self willingly to the show,
that those works, which do proceed from God, may be seen. They are not so
utterly blind, but that they see this well enough, that if the scriptures have
the upper hand, their kingdom is by and by overthrown: and that like as it
is said of the Idols of the Ge^tyles, from whom in old time they fetched all
oracles and answers, that at the presence of Christ, when he came into the
world, they suddenly became dumme: even so now also at the sight of the gospel,
al their sleightes by and by fall headlong to the ground. 2 Thessalonians. 2.
For Antichrist is not overthrown, but by the clearness of Christ's coming.

We flee not, The autheritie of Gods word:
as these men are wont to do, to the fire, but to the scriptures: nor we
do not besege them with the sword, but with the word of God: thereby as
Tertullian says, we do nurrish our faith: thereby we do raise up our hope:
thereby we do establish our assurance. For we know that the gospel of Jesus
Christ is the power of God unto salvation: and that in hit is everlasting life.
And therefore we give no ear, according as S. Paul does admonish us, no not to
an Angel of God coming from heaven, in case he go about to withdraw us from
any part of this doctrine. No, as ye right holy man Justinius martyr says of
him self, We would not believe God himself, in case he would teach us an other
gospel. For where as these me^ do shake of ye scriptures as things yt ca^ not
speak and ar good for nothing: and appeal rather unto God himself, speaking
in the Church and in councels, yt is to say, to their own fancies and
opinions: yt is both a very uncertain way to find out the truth and very full
of danger, and somewhat like ye heathenysh manner of illudynge the people with
their furious inspirations, and such a way as of the holy fathers was never
approved. Chrysostom says, yt often times there be many that brag of the
holy ghost: but certainly says he, they yt speak of their own heads, do
untruly boaste the^ self to have the spirit of God. For like as Christ,
says he, what time he spoke out of the law and the Prophets, denied that he
spoke of him self: eue^ so now, if any other thing but the gospel be enforced
upon us, under the name of the holy ghost, we ought not to believe it: for as
Christ is the fulfilling of the law and the Prophets, so is the Spirit the
fulfillyng of the gospel. these be the words of S. Chrysostom.

Answer to the objection of fathers and old counsels.
But these men although they have not the holy scriptures, yet peradventure
they have the ancient doctors and holy fathers. For in this they have always
made their vaunt, that all antiquite and the universal consent of al ages was
on their side: Again that al our opinions, ar new and grene, and never heard
of before these few years now last paste.

Doubtless there is nothing can be spoken of greater weight against the religion
of God, then when it is accused of novelty: for like as in God him self, so in
his religion there ought to be nothing new: nevertheless we can not tell how
it comes to pass, that from the beginning of the world, we have always seen
it in experience, that as often as God would, as it were, kindle and disclose
his truth unto men, althoe it were of it self not only most ancient, but also
everlasting: yet of wicked men and of such as were enemies thereunto, it was
called grene and new stuff. A man that wicked and bloody man, only to bring
the Jews into hatered, accused them to the king Assuerus after this sort.
Thou haste here says he, O king, a people, which in using certain new laws,
ar against al thy laws stobberne and rebellious. Paul also at Athens, so sone
as he began to teach and to set forth the gospel, was reported to be a
setter forth of new gods: that is to say, of new religion. And may we not,
say they, learn of the what manner of new doctrine is this? And Celsus, what
time he wrote of purpose against Christ, to the intent that after a more
contemptuous manner he might scoff out the Gospel with a slander of nouelty,
Has God says he, now at the length after so many ages called himself to so
late a rememberance? Eusebius says also, that Christian religion even from the
beginning was called in reproach (...), that is to say, new and strange. Even
after the same sort these men do condemn all things that we do allow, for
new and strange: their own things again, whatsoever they be, they will have
them to be commended as most ancient. And like as Necromanciers and Witches,
at this day such as have to do with Devils, are wont to say: that they have
their books and all their sacred and hidd mysteries from Athanasius, from
Cyprian, from Moises, from Abel, from Adam, and also from Raphael the
Archangel, to the intent that that skill which had proceeded from such authors
and inuentours, might be adjudged to be more glorious and more heavenly. Even
so these men, to the end that their religion, which they themselves have
hatched and that not so long ago to themselves, might be the eassier and
better set forth unto men, that either were fools in deed, or little
considered what they did, and where about they went, are wont to say, that it
came unto their hands from Augustine, from Hierome, from Chrysostom, from
Ambrose, from the Apostls, and from Christ himself.

For right well they know, that there is nothing more plausible unto the people,
the^ these names, or better accepted of ye common sorts of men. But what if
those things, which these men would have accounted to be new, be found to be
most ancient? Again, what if those things, in manner all, which these men so
hyghly set forth with the name of antiquity, after that they have been well
and diligently syfted, shall be found at the last to be but grene and new?

Truly the laws and Ceremonies of the Jews, although that Aman did accuse
them of nouelty, yet unto any man that considered them truly and uprightly,
they could not appear to be new, for they were written in most ancient
tables. And Christ, although many supposed that he did declyne from Abraham
and from the old fathers, and that he brought in a new Religion of his own
head, yet he answered truly: If you believed Moises, you should believe me
also: for my doctrine is not so new as you take it. Moises a most ancient
aucthor, whom you do esteem above all men, did speak of me. And. S. Paul,
Although the Gospel of Jesus Christ be reputed of many to be new, yet it has
says he, a most ancient testimony of the law and the Prophets. As for our
doctrine, the which we may call more rightly the Catholic doctrine of Christ,
is so far of from all nouslty, that the old God of all ages and the father of
our Lord Jesus Christ has commended it unto us in most ancient monuments,
even in the Gospel, and in the books of the Prophets and of the Apostles. So
that now it can not seem new unto any man, except there be any, to whom either
the faith of the Prophets, or the Gospel, or Christ himself seems to be
new. But in case their Religion be so ancient and so old, as they would
have it to appear, wherefore do they not prove it out of the examples of the
primitive Church, out of the ancient fathers, out of the old Councels? Why
lies so old a cause abandoned so long time without a defender? as for Sword
and Fire they have had always at hand: but of old Councels and Fathers no
word at all.

And surely it had been altogether against reason, to begin at these bloody and
cruel reasons, if they could have found any gentyler and mylder arguments.
But if they have in deed such trust in Antiquity, without any manner of
counterfeiting: why did John Clement a Country man of ours, not many years
paste, in the sight of certain honest men and men of good credit, tear and
cast into the fire certain leaves, out of a most ancient Father and a Greek
Bishop called Theodoret, in the which he did evidently and expressly teach,
that in the Sacrament the nature of bread was not taken away? And that at such
time as he thought no other example could be found in any place, Did. 27.
Quidam.
why does Albert Pighius deny that Saint Augustine that old Father did
hold a right opinion of Original sin? or of such marriages as are contracted
after a vow professed? De bonis uid^itatis ca. 10. Cons. 27.4.1. nuptiarum
bonum.
And where as Augustine affirms it to be perfect Matrimonye and can not be
revoked, why says he, that he does err and is deceived, and that he uses no
good Logike? Why did they now of late, in ye printing of yt ancient father
Origene upon ye Gospel of John, In co^trouersijs.
leave out ye whole sixth chapter, wherein it is very credible or rather certain,
yt he taught many things touching the Sacrament contrary to their doctrine: and
so had rather set forth ye book in manner maimed, the^ being perfect it should
reprove their errors? Is this to trust to a^tiquiti, to tear, to suppress, to
ma^gle, to burn the books of the ancient fathers? It is a world to behold,
how well these men do agree in Religion with those fathers, of whom they are
wont to brag to be on their side. A comparion between the papists and the
old fathers.
The old Council, called Eliberinum, decreed, that nothing that ye people
worshipped, should be painted in Temples. An ancient father Epiphanius says,
that it is an horrible wickedness and an offense intolerable, If any man should
set up so much as a painted Image, though it were of Christ himself, in the
Churches of Christian men. These me^, as though there were no Religion without
them, have filled their Church and eueri corner of them with painted and graven
Images. The old fathers Origin and Chrysostom do exhort the people to the
reading of ye holy Scriptures, Origene in Le^^itic. ca. 16.
to bye books, to reason of matters pertaining to religion among themselves in
their own howses: Chrysostom. in Mat. 1. hom. 2 In Job. ho. 31.
the husbands with their wives, the parents with there Children. Co^trariwyse,
these me^ do condemn the Scriptures as dead elements: and by all means they
can possibly, restrain the people from them. The ancient fathers Cyprian,
Epiphanius and Hierome, say, Epist. 11. li. 5. co^t. Ap. here. 61.
that if any has made a vow to live an unmarried life, and afterward leads
his life in uncleanness, and can not restrain the flammes of his lustinge, that
it is better for him to mary a wife, De Virginta. serua^da ad De metriadem.
and to live chastely in wedlock. And the self same Matrimony the old father
Augustine determines to be lawful and good, nor ought not to be revoked. These
men contrariwise, such as have once bound themselves by now, although
afterward he burn in lusting, although he hunt after Hores, although never
so filthely and damnably he defile himself, yet they will not suffer him to
mary: or if perchance he do marry, they deny it to be matrimony: affirming, yt
it is much better and more godly to keep a Concubine or a Harlot, then to live
in that state. That ancient father. S. Augustine did complain of ye multitude
of vain Ceremonies, by yt which he saw, how even in those days men's minds
and consciences were oppressed. These me^ as though God delyted in nothing else,
have increased ceremonies so out of al measure, that now in their Churches and
holy service, they have left in manner nothing else. De opere monachorum.
Augustine an old father denies yt it is lawful for a sluggishe monk to
live in idleness, and under a color and pretense of holiness, to live upon
other men's labors: and such as lives after yt sort, an old father Apollonius
says, they be like unto thieves. These men have, shall I say, heardes or
flocks of monks, which albeit they do utterly nothing, and neither trouble
themselves so much as to counterfeit, or to bear any face of holiness at all,
yet they do not only live, but also launch out riotouslye of other men's goods.
The old council of Rome ordained, Can. 3.
that no man should be present at any service of God, yt were said by yt
minister of who^ it was certainly known yt he kept a Concubine. These me^ for
money do both let out to hyer Concubines to their priests, and also drive
men perforce to be present against their wills at their blasphemouse serving
of ye Devil. The old Canones of the Apostles do command yt Bishop, Can. 8.
that will take upon him to execute the office both of a cyuill gouerner, and
of an Ecclesiastical minister, to be removed from his Bishopric. These men
both do take upon them and will take upon them both the regiments whosoever
say nay: or rather the one, which they ought most chiefly to execute, that they
do not once touch: yet is there no man that commands them out of office.
The old Counsel called Gangrense, commands, that no man shall make any
such difference between a married and an unmarried priest, as for his wiuelesse
estate he should think the one holyer the^ the other. These me^ do make such
difference between them, that they ymagine, al their holy mysteries, if they
come in the hands of any godly honest man yt has married a wife, to be by and
by unhallowed and polluted. That ancient Emperor Justinian commanded yt al
things in the holy administration of the Church should be pronounced with a
clear, In Nouellis constable. 123 and 146.
a loud, and an open voice, that some fruit might come thereof to the people.
These men, least the people should understand somewhat, do whysper al their
holy mysteries, not only with an uncertain and a low voice, but also in a
strange and a barbarouse tongue. The old Council of Carthage forbids that
any thing should be read in the holy congregation other then the Canonical
Scriptures. Tertium Car. ca. 47.
These men read those things in their Churches, which they themselves doubt
not but they be manifest lies and vain fables. But if there be any man that
does think these things to be weak and of small aucthorite, because they
were decreed by Emperors and certain mean Bishops and Councels assembled in no
great number: and that does better allow the authority and name of the Pope:
De consecra. did. 2. Cum enim nemo.
Pope Julius does expressly forbid the priest, in the administration of the holy
mysteries, to dippe the bread in the cup: these men contrary to the decree of
Pope Julius, break the bread and dipp it into the wine. Pope Clement denies
it to be lawful for a Bishop to exercise both the Swords, saying. If thou will have both, thou shall both deceive thy self and them that harken unto
the. Now the Pope chalengeth both the swords and exercises them both:
wherefore it ought to seem less marvel, if that has followed since, which
Clement spoke of: that he has both deceived himself, and them that have given
ear unto him. Leo the Pope says, yt in one Church and upon one day it is
lawful to say but one Mass: These men in one Church do say sometimes ten,
sometimes twenty, sometime thirtye Masses, and often times more in one day, in so
much that the unhappy man that stands by, and is the looker on, can scantly
tell, which way it is best to turn himself. Pope Gelasius says, that if any
man divide the Sacrament, so that when he takes the one part he leaves the
other, he does lewdely and commits sacrilege. These men both contrary to
gods word and contrary to Pope Gelasius, command that the one part of the
Sacrament only be given to the people: and in so doing, they make al their
Priests gilty of sacrilege. But in case they will say, that all these matters
are now worn out of ure, and become utterly dead, so that unto these days
they appertain nothing at al: yet to the intent that all men may understand,
what credit is to be given unto these manner of men, and what good is to be
looked for of those Councels which they assemble together: let us see a little,
what regard they have to those things, which now in these latter years, whils
they be yet in fresh reme^bera^ce they have decreed, and in open Counsel
lawfully called to be inuiolably observed. In the last Council, of Trente, yet
scantly fortene years paste, it was decreed with the general consent of all
degrees, that no one man should have two benefices at one time. Where is this
decree now become* Is this also so sone worn out of ure, and become stark
dead. For, as for these men they give not only two benefices, but also many
times diverse Abbais and Bysshoprickes, sometimes two, sometimes three, sometimes
four unto one man, and such a one as is not only unlearned, but also oftimes a
man of war. It was decreed in the same Council, yt al Bishops should teach
the Gospel: These men neither teach, nor never come in pulpit: nor think yt
this matter pertains any thing to their office. The^ I pray you what a
wonderful ostentation of Antiquity is this? Why do they brag of the old
fathers? Why do they glory in the names of the new and old Councils? Why
will they seem to ground themselves upon the authority of those, which when
they list, they contemn at their pleasure? But it does me good to deal
rather with the Pope himself, and to talk of these matters presently to his
face. The popes usurpation is new.
Tell us therefore, O holy Pope yt crakest altogether of Antiquity, and
vauntest thy self yt all men are appointed to obey thee alone. Amongst all the
ancient fathers, which of them ever did call the other chief Bisshopp, or
universal Bishop, or head of the Church? Which, ever said, that both the
swords were committed unto the? De Mayor. and obed. Vna^ sanctam.
Which, that thou haste aucthorite and right to call Councelles? Which, that
the whole world was thy diocese? Which, that of thy fullness all Bisshops
received their portion? In Extra. Bonifacij. 8.
Which, that all power was given unto the as well in heaven as in earth? Which,
Dura^dus Council. Lat. sub Iulio. 2. Did. 9. Innocentij.
that thou could be judged neither of kings, nor of the whole Clergy, nor
of all the people together? Which, yt all kings and Emperors by the
commandment and ordinance of Christ, received their authority at thy hand?
which, De Mayor and obedien. solite.
that thou, after so exquisite and just a reckening, warte seventy times seven
fold greater then the greatest kings: Ihon. 22. cap. Cum inter no^nullos. In
glosa finali. In ^dit. impressa Parisijs. 1503.
Which, that a more ample authority was given unto thee, then to the rest of
the Patriarchs? which, that thou warte Lord and God, or that thou warte not
simply a bare man? or that thou warte a certain thing co^clowted and grown
together of God and man? which, that thou alone warte the well head of al
laws? which, that thou had dominion over purgatory? which, Anton. de
Rosellis.
that thou might at thy pleasure command the Angels of God? which of the^
did ever say, that thou warte king over kings, and Lord over lords? We can
appose thee also of other matters after the same sort. I pray the, amongst
the whole number of old Bishops and fathers, where did ever any one of them
teach thee, either to say a private mass whiles the people looked on, or to
lift up the sacrament over thy head, in the which thing all thy religion is
at this day contained: or to mangel Christ's sacraments, and contrary to his
ordinance and express words, to deceive the people of the one part? And that
I may come ones to an end: of all the fathers which any one of them did
teach the to dispose the blood of Christ, and merits of the holy Marters: and
as it were marchaundise, to sell thy pardons in a common market and all the
corners of purgatory? These kind of men ar often times wont to talk much of
their hid and deep learning, and of their manifold and great variete of
reading. Let them therefore now bring out somewhat if they can, whereby it may
at the least appear that they have readde and know somewhat. They have cried
it out lustily in all companies where they came, that all parts of their
religion were ancient and approved, not only of the multitude, but also by the
consent and continuance of all nations and times.

Wherefore let them at one time or other show this antiquity which they speak
of. Let the^ make these things to appear, which ar spread, as they say, so far
and so wide. Let them prove that al Christian nations have agreed unto their
religion. But they flee, as we said a little before, even them selfs from their
own decrees: and those things, which so few years paste they had
established to remain for ever, in so short time have made to be of none
effect. I pray you then, how should they trust in the fathers, in the old
councils, in the words of God? They have not, O merciful God, they have not
those things, which they boaste themselves to have, another antiquity, nor
universality, another the consent of all places, nor of al times. And thereof
they themselves, although they would rather have the matter dissembled, are not
ignorant. Yea sometimes they stick not also plamly to confess it. And therefore
they say, that the constitutions of old Councels and fathers ar of that
condition, that sometimes they may be changed: for according to the diversity
of times, diverse decrees ar convenient to be had in the Church. And thus they
cover the^ self under the name and title of the Church, and with a counterfaite
shadow do scornfully abuse the simple and wretched people. And a marvel it
is, that either me^ should be so blind, as they can not see these things: or
if they do see them, that they be so pacient, as they can thus easily endure
them, and with so quiet a mind.

But in as much as they have abolished and repealed those ancient decrees, as
things that are now become over old, and worn out of use, peradventure they
have set other in their place, that be better and also more profitable. For
they are wont to say, yt not even Christ himself or his Apostles, if they
should live again, could devise a better or a more holyer way to direct the
Church of God, then that whereby it is governed now at their hands. What new
devises are brought instede of ancient and true relygyon by the Papists.
True it is in deed, that they have put other in their places, but according
as Hieremias said, chafe in stead of wheat: and as Esaias says, Those
things, which God has not required at their hands. They have stopped up all
the veins of the springyng water, and they have dug broken and durty
pittes, full of slyme and filthiness, which another have any clean water, nor
ar able to contain it. They have taken from the people the holy communion, the
word of God, from whence should have come all comfort, the true worship of
God, the right use of sacraments and of prayer. Again they have given unto us
of their own store, wherewith in the mean season we might chiere our selfs,
salt, water, cream, pottes, spittell, palms, bulls, Iubiles, pardonnes,
crosses, smoky ince^ce, and an infinite nombre of ceremonies, and mere mockes
as Plautus says, merely to be mocked at. In these things, have they fixed
their whole religion. With these things, they taught that God might be well
appeased: that with these, Devils be driven away. That with these, men's
consciences were confirmed. For these forsothe be the ornaments and denty
storeboxes of Christian religion. These, in the sight of God be pleasant and
acceptable: that these things might be auaunced unto honor, it behooved that
the ordinances of Christ and of the Apostles should be taken out of place. And
as the wicked king Hieroboam in time paste, after he had taken away the true
worship of God, and had brought the people to the worshipping of golden calves,
least that afterward they should peradventure have changed their minds,
and slipping from him, have returned again unto Jerusalem to the Temple of
God, he exhorted them with a long oration unto consta^cie, sayng: These o
Israel ar thy gods: after this sort your God has commanded that you should
worship him: It should be a paynefull and a troublesome thing for you to
undertake so long a Journey, and every year to go to Jerusalem, to the intent
to honor and to worship God. After the same manner in all points, these men,
when that for their own traditions sake, they had ones made void the law of
God, least that the people should afterward open their eyes, and slip an
other way, and find at others hands a more certain course for their
salvation, O how often have they cried, This is yt kind of worshippyng that
pleases God: and which he does straightly require at our hands: and
wherewith he will be appeased in his anger: By these things the agreement in
the Church is conserved: with these things all sin is cleansid, and
consciences ar made quiet: who that shall forsake these things, he leaves
himself no hope of eternal salvation? It is a paynefull and a troublesome
thing for the people to look back upon Christ, upon the Apostles, upon the
old fathers: and ever more to be attentife what their will and commandment
is. This I warrant you, is the very way to bring the people of God from the
weak elements of the world, from the leauenne of scribes and Pharisees, and
from man's traditions. It behoved that the ordenaunces of Christ and of his
Apostles should be thruste out of place, that these might be accepted in their
stead. O this was a sufficient cause, why that good old doctrine which many
ages had been approved, should be abiected, and a new form of Religion should
be brought into ye Church of God. Nevertheless what so ever it is, these men
cry still: Nothing must be changed: with these things men's minds ar
satisfied: these things ar decreed by the church of Rome: that church can not
err: for Siluester Prierias says, yt the Church of Rome is the squire and
rule of truth: from the which the holy scriptures receive their authority.
The doctrine, says he, of the Church of Rome, is the infallible rule of
faith, from the which the holy Scriptures fetches her strength. And pardonnes
says he, are not come to our knowledge by the authority of the scriptures, but
they ar known unto us by the authority of the Church of Rome, and of the
Roman Popes, the which is a greater authority. Pighius also is not afraid
to say, that we ought not to believe any text of the scripture be it never so
plain, unless we have our warrant from the Church of Rome. Much like as if
any of these that can not speak good and pure Latin, and yet can babble
somewhat after the manner of Scholemens Latin very roundly and redily, would
needs maynteyne, that all other me^ also ought to speak such Latin now in
these times, as many years past Mammetrect or Catholicon did speak, and such
as at this day is used amongst themselves in their common schools: for so
both that which is spoken may be well enough understood, and also men's
minds well satisfied: and that it were a mockery, now after so long
co^tinua^ce, to trouble ye world with a new kind of speech, and to call home
again the old pureness and elega^cy in speaking, which Cicero or Caesar used
in their days. Such is the duty forsooth that these men do owe unto the
ignorance and darkness of the times paste. Many things, Plicius.
as a certain man says, ar often times in good estimation, only because they
had been ones dedicated to the temples of Heathen Gods. Even so we see that
these men at this day do allow many things and highly esteem them, not
because they judge them to be so much worth, but only because they have been
received by coustume, and dedicated after a certain manner to the Church of
God.

The Church of Rome may err.
But our Church say they, can not err, the which thing I suppose they speak
much like as in time paste the Lacedaemonians were wont to say, yt in the whole
state of their commonwealth it was not possible to find an aduouterer: whereas
in deed they were rather al aduouterers, in as much as they cupled the^self in
uncertain marriages, and occupied their wifes together in common. Or as the
Canonistes, Summa Angelica Did. Papa.
for their bealies sake, ar wo^te to speak now a days of the Pope: That he
in that he is lord over all benefices, although he do sell for money
Bysshoprickes, Abbeys, personages, and suffers nothing freely to depart from
him: nevertheless because he says that all is his, thoe he would never so
feign, he can not commit symonie. But how this argument should be good, and
how the words may agree with reason, Theodoricum de schismate.
we can not as yet surely perceive: except peradventure, like as the ancient
Romans in time past dealt with Lady Victory, so these me^, after that truth
came fliyng unto them, they pulled of her wings, that never after she should
be able to fly from them. But what if Jeremy say unto them, according as we
said before, that these be the words of lies? What if the same man say
again, that even they which ought to have manured the vineyarde, have wasted
and destroyed the Uineyarde of the Lord? What if Christ say, that they which
chyeflye ought to have been careful over the Temple: of the Lords temple have
made a den of thieues? But in case the Church of Rome can not err, then
must it needs be that the happynes thereof is greater then the wisdom of
these men. For such is their life, doctrine and diligence, that the Church
may full well for all them not only err, but also perish utterly, and come
to nothing. Doubtless if that Church may err which has utterly gone astraye
from the word of God, from the commandments of Christ, from the ordinances
of the Apostles, from the examples of the primitive Church, from the
constitutions of the old fathers and ancient Councels, and from the very
decrees of their own making: and which will not be kept in order with no
laws, another old nor new, another of their own nor of others, another of God
nor of man: then is it most certain, not only that the Church of Rome
might err, but also that most lewdely and shamefully it has erred.

But you were ones, say they, of our fellowship, but now you ar become
Apostatas and ru^negates, and have separated your selfs from us. True it is yt
we have disseuered our selfs from the^: and for that cause we both give
thanks to our most merciful and mighty God, and also on our own behalfes
we do most hyghlye rejoice. But we have not departed at all from the
primitive Church, from the Apostles, nor from Christ. We can not deny but we
were brought up amongst them in darkness and in the ignorance of God: even as
Moses was in the discipline and in the bosom of the Aegyptia^s. We were says
Tertullian, of your fellowshippe, I confess, and no marvel: for men ar made
and not borne Christians. But let these men tell me wherefore they are come
down from these seven hills, whereupon before time Rome did stand, and have
chosen rather to dwell upon the plain which is called the field of Mars? They
will say peradventure, because the conduytes of water that were in those hills,
without the which they could not well live, ar now decayed and dried up. Then
let them give us that same leave, touching the water of everlasting life,
which they will have to be granted unto them in this case of material water.
Amongst the^ this water failed long a go: the elders, as Hieremy says,
sent their you^gelings to ye waters, but they, when they could find nothing,
brought home their empty vessels, being in great misery and utterly lost for
thirste. The needy, says Esaias, and the poor sought after water, but they
found none in no place: their tongues were now even dried for thyrst: these
me^ had broken up all their water courses and their conduytes: these had choked
all their springes, and had filled with mire and durte the fountain of the
water of life. And like as Caligula in time paste, by closing up of all men's
barnes, brought upon the people a general hunger and famine: so these men in
chokyng up of all the fou^taynes of Gods word, have brought the people into a
miserable thyrste. They brought as Amos the Prophet says, hunger and thirst
upon men, not a famine of bread, not a thirste of water, but of hearing the
word of God. The poor wretches wandered up and down sekyng after some little
spark of that light of God, wherewith they might chiere their consciences: but
it was clean quenched out: they could find none at all: Such was the very
state, such was the pytifull condition of the Church of God. Most miserably
men lived therein without the gospel, without light, without all comfort.

Wherefore, although our departing be somewhat grievous unto them: yet ought
they to consider how just the cause of our departing is. For in case they will
say: it is lawefull for thee by no means to depart from that fellowship,
wherein thou haste ben brought up: Thus they may easily in our persons
condemn both the Prophets and the Apostles, and also Christ him self. For
why do they not likewise find fawte at this: that Loath departed from Sodom,
Abraham out of Calde, the Hebrews out of Egypt, Christ from the Jews, Paul
from the Pharisees? For unless there may be some just cause of such
departynges, we see not, why they also may not in like sort be accused as
factious and seditious men.

Now if we ought to be condemned for heretics, because we do not al things
which these men do command us: who I pray you, or what manner of men
shall we account them to be, which do despise the commandments of Christ
and of the Apostles? If we be Schismatikes that have disseuered our selfs from
these fellows, by what name I pray you, shall we call them, that have departed
from the Greeks, at whose hands they received the faith, from the primitive
church, from Christ him self, from the Apostels, eue^ as it were from their
own parents? For as for the Greeks, such as at this day do profess the
religion and name of Christ, althoe they have many things that are corrupted,
yet they retain to this hour a great part of those things which they
received of the Apostles. Therefore another have they private Masses, nor their
sacraments mangeled, nor purgatory, nor pardonnes: As for the Popes titles and
proud names, so much they do regard them, that whosoever does take them upon
him, and will needs be called either the universal Bishop or head of the whole
Church: of him they will not stick to say, that he is both an intolerable
arrogant man, and a person that injuriously defaceth all other Bishops his
brethren, and also an heretic.

Now then, sins the matter is plain and can not be denied, yt these fellows
ar gone back from those, of whom they received the gospel, of whom they
received ye faith, of whom the true religion and the Church: what cause is
there, why they should not be content to be called home again, even unto the
same persons, as it were to the fountains of religion? Wherefore ar they so
afraid, as thoe all the Apostles and old fathers saw nothing, to follow the
example of their times? for do they, trow ye, see more, or be they more
careful over the Church of God, then they yt first delivered these things? And
now to return to our selfs, we have departed from that Church, wherein another
the word of God could be heard purely taught: nor the Sacraments rightly
administered: nor the name of God, as it ought to be, called upon: and which
they themselves do confess to be corrupted in many things: and wherein, to
say the truth, there was nothing that could stay any man that was wise, and
that had any consideration, of his own salvation. To conclude, we have
departed from that Church that is now founded, not from that Church that was
in time past: and we have departed in such sort, as Daniel did out of the
den of Lions: as the three children out of the fire: yea rather cast out by
them with their cursinges and banninges, then departed of our selfs.

Again, we have adjoined our selfs unto that Church, wherein they them selfs,
in case they will speak truly and according to their own consciences, can not
deny, but all things ar soberly and reverently handeled, and so far forth
as we were able to attain, most nearly unto the order of the old time. A
comparion of both the Churches.
For let them compare their Churches and ours together, they shall see, both
that they most shamefully have departed from the Apostels, and we most justly
have forsaken them. For we, after the example of Christ, of the Apostles and
of the holy fathers, do give the whole sacrament unto the people: These men,
contrary to all the fathers, contrary to all the Apostels, and contrary to
Christ him self, not without (as Gelasius says) high sacrilege, do divide the
sacraments, and pluck the one part away from the people. We have restored
the Lords supper according to the institution of Christ, and desire to have it
as much as may be, and to as many as may be, most common, and as it is called,
so to be in very deed, a Communion. These men have changed all things from
the institution of Christ: and of the holy communion they have made a private
mass: so that we present unto the people a holy Supper: they, a vain pagent
to gase upon.

We do affirm with the most ancient Fathers, that the body of Christ is
eaten of none other, but of godly and of faithful men, and such as ar
endued with the spirit of Christ: these fellows do teach that the very
body of Christ, may in very deed, and as they term it, really and
substantially be eaten, not only of wicked and unfaithful men, but also, it is
horrible to speak it, of myse and dogs.

We do pray in our Churches after such sort, that, according as Paul
does admonish us, the people may know what we do pray, 1. Cor. 14.
and with one mind answer, Amen. These men power out in the churches unknown
and strange words, like unto the noise of soundyng brass, without any
understanding, without sense, without judgment, and this is their only
endeavor, that the people should not be able to understand any thing at all.

And because we will not rehearse all the differences between us and them, for
they are in manner infinite: We translate the Scriptures into all languages:
these men will scantly suffer them to be abroad in any tongue: We do exhort
the people to hear and read the word of God: these men drive them from it:
We would have our cause heard before all the world: these men flee al
judgment and trial: We lean unto knowledge, they unto ignorance: We trust to
the light, they unto darkness: We have in reverence, as reason is, the words
of the Apostles and of the Prophets: these men do burn them. To conclude, we
in Gods cause will stand to the judgment of God only: these men will stand to
their own. But if they will consider all these things with a quiet mind and
a prepared purpose to hear and to learn: they shall not only allow our doyngs,
which leaving all errors, have followed Christ and his Apostles, but also they
themselves shall fall away from themselves, and of their own accord, incline
themselves to join with our fellowship.

But they will say, Of general Councels.
that it was an unlawful attempt to go about such matters without an holy
general Counsel: for therein is the whole power of the Church: there Christ
has promised that he will always be ready at hand. And yet they themselves
have broken the commandments of God and the decrees of the Apostles, and as
we said a little before, have scatered and torn in pieces in manner all, not
only the ordinances, but also the certain principles concerning doctrine of
the primitive Church, and that without tariyng for any general Council.

But where as they say, that it is not lawful for any man to appoint any new
order without a Counsel: who I pray you has prescribed these laws unto us?
or where have they found this decree?

It was folishly done of Agesilaus the king, who being ones acertained of the
mind and pleasure of the high Jupiter, would needs present the whole matter
again unto Apollo, for to know whether he were of the same mind that his
Father was. But we should do more foolyshlye a great deal, in case that,
when we do hear God him self speaking most plainly unto us in the holy
Scriptures, and understand his will and pleasure, if I say, afterward, as
though all this were nothing, we would refarre the whole matter to a council.
The which is nothing else, but to search whether men be of the same mind
that God is: and whether men will allow by their authority the
commandments of God. What I pray you, shall not the truth be truth, or
shall not God be God, except a council will and command it so to be? If
Christ would have handeled the matter so from the beginning, that he would
have taught or said nothing without the consent of the Bysshoppes, and would
have referred over his whole doctrine unto Annas and Cayphas, where should the
faith of Christ be at this day? or who should ever have heard of the gospel?
Peter forsothe, of whom the Pope is wont to speak more often and with more
reverence then of Jesus Christ, did boldly withstand the sacred council:
and said, it was better to obey God, Galat. 1.
then men. And Paul, what time he had ones received the gospel into his
mind, and that not of men, nor by man, but only by the will of God, did not
counsel with flesh and blood, nor did not refer the matter unto his kinsemen
or brothern: but went by and by into Arabia, for to publishe, by the authority
of God, Gods mysteries.

We surely do not despise Councels or assemblies and conferences of Bysshoppes
and learned men: Another have we done those things that be done altogether
without Bysshoppes or without a counsel. The matter was handeled in full
parliament, with long deliberation, and in a great assembly. But as touching
this council, which Pope Pius does at this time counterfetly set forth,
wherein men being another called, nor heard, nor seen, ar so lightly
condemned, what we may look or hope to get thereby, it is not hard to guess.

Nazianzenus long ago, when that in his time he saw men that came to such
assemblies, to be so blind and so obstinate, that they were carried after
their own affections, and fought rather for victory then for truth:
pronounced in plain words, that he never saw good end of any council.
What would he say now, if he were a live at this day, and should
understand what these men went about? For in that time all though they
were given to parts, yet both men's causes were heard, and manifest
errors by the common consent of all parts were taken away. These men
again neither will suffer the cause to be freelye debated: another will endure
to have any thing changed, how many errors so ever there be.

For that is a thing which they are wont often and with out all shame to
boaste of, that their Church can not err: that in hit there is no blemyshe:
that there is nothing to be granted unto us: or if there be any thing, that
the judgment thereof appertains unto Bysshoppes and Abbots: they be the
directers of those matters, they be the Church of God. Aristotel says, that
bastardes can not make a city. But whether the Church of God may be made of
these fellows or no, let them consider: for surely, another be they lawful
Abbots nor right Bysshoppes.

But let them hardely be the Church: let them be heard in councils: let
them only have authority to give a voice: Nevertheless in times paste, when
the Church of God (if it be compared with their Church) was resonably well
governed, as Cipryan says, both Elders and Deacons and some part also of the
common people were called to the hearing of Ecclesiastical causes.

But what if these Abbotes and Bysshoppes have no knowledge? What if they
understand not what religion is, and what opinion they ought to have of God?
What if law be lost of the preeste, and counsel of the Elders? What if the
night, as Micheas says, be unto them instead of a vision, and darkness instead of forseyng things to come? What if all the watchemen of the City, as
Esaye says, ar become blind? What if the salt has lost his strength and
his taste? and as Christ says, is good for nothing, not so much as to be
cast out upon the dunge hill?

Forsothe they will commit all things to the Pope, The Pope is above the
Council.
who can not err. But that, to begin withal, is a folishe devise: that the
holy ghost should fly away in haste from the holy Council to Rome, to the
intent that if he doubt or stick in any thing, and not be able to wind him
self out, he might take counsel of some other spyrite I wot not who, better
learned the^ him self: For if the case stand so, what needed it that so many
Bishops should in this time at so great charges and through so long journeys be
summoned to come to Trent? It were yet a much more wiser and better way, sure I
am it were both shorter and more commodious for them, rather to put of all
things to the Pope: and to repair at the first dasshe, to the heavenly
determination of his sacred breaste. Moreover it is against equity, to put
over our cause from so many Bysshoppes and Abbottes to the judgment of one
man, specially of him, who stands accused by us of most weyghtye and
grievous offenses: and as yet has not brought in his answer: who also has
condemned us without judgment before we were once called to be judged. What?
trow ye that these be things of our own devise? Or is not this ye order of
their Councels at this day? Or be not all things committed over from ye holy
Councels unto the Pope alone, in such sort, that as though so many voices and
subscriptio^s served to no purpose, he alone may add, change, diminish, take
away, allow, release, and again restrain what him lyfteth? Then I pray you, of
what manner of men were these words spoken? Or why did the Bishops and Abbots
not long ago in the last Counsel of Trente decree after this manner at the end
of their constitutions: Saving always in all things the Authorite of the
Apostolical seat? De electione and electi potestate. ca. Significae.
Or why does Paschale the Pope write of himself so arrogantly? As though,
says he, any Councils had prescribed a law unto the Church of Rome, whereas
all Councels both are made by aucthority of ye Church of Rome, and by the same
aucthorite have their power and stre^gthes: and also in their statutes, ye
Popes aucthorite is plainly and manifestly excepted? If they think good to
allow these things, to what purpose are Councels called? But if they determine
to make them of no force, wherefore be they left uncancelled in their books?

But let it be so hardely, yt the Pope alone is above all Councels: that is to
say, let some one part be more then ye whole: let him be of greater power, of
more wisdom then all his fellows together: Yea and though Hierome say nay, Ad
Euagr^^^
let the aucthorite of one City be greater then of the whole world: But what
if he never saw nothing pertaining to these matters, and never read neither the
holy Scriptures, nor the old fathers, nor his own councels? What if he, as in
time past Pope Liberius did, should fall away to the Arrians? Or, as Pope John,
not many years past, should have a wicked and a heathenishe opinion of the
life to come, and of the immortality of souls? Or as Pope Zosimus did before
time with the council of Nice, so he should also now falsify other councils
for ye aua^ceme^t of his power and authority: and those things which were
never, no not so much as thought, those he should say were debated and decreed
by the holy fathers: and should, as Camotenses says, the Popes are wont often
times to do violently, rack the Scriptures, to procure unto himself the
fullness of all power? What if he abandone ye Christian faith and become an
Apostata, like as by the testimony of Lyran, mani Popes have done? Trow ye yt
notwithstanding all this, the holy Ghost will knock at his breast and kindle
in him, will he or no, yea altogether against his will, such a light, as he can
not err? Or shall he nevertheless be the fountain of all law? and shall the
whole treasure of wisdom and understanding be found in him as it were in a
jewel box? or if these things be not in him, may he be able in so great matters
to judge rightly and conuenienly? Or if he can not judge, does he require that
all things should be referred unto him? What if the Abbots and Bishops that
are the Popes advocates dissemble not at all, but openly take upon them to be
enemies of the Gospel, and will not see that which they do see, and violently
constrain the Scriptures and wittingly and advisedly deprave and falsefy the
word of God, and those things which are evidently and properlye spoken of
Christ, and can not be applied to any other person, do filthilye and lewdely
turn them upon the Pope? What if they say that the Pope is all and above all?
Hostien. ca. Quanto. Abba^ de Electione. ca. Venerabil.
Or that he can do all things yt Christ can do? or that the Pope and Christ
have one chair of state to give judgment in, and one consistory? or that he
is that same light that came in to the world, the which, Christ pronounced
only of himself, and that he that is an evil doer, Cornelius. Episcopi in
Concilio. Try dentino. Durandus.
hates and slyeth that light? or that all other Bishops have received of his
fullness? To conclude, what if they should, not colorably or darkely, but
evidently and flatly make a decre contrary to the express word of God? Trow
ye that whatsoever these men say, that shall be straight way the Gospel? Trow
ye this shall be gods army? trow ye Christ will be present there? Trow ye that
the holy Ghost will swim in these men's tongues? or that they may say truly of
themselves: It has seemed good unto the holy Ghost and to us? Hosius contra
Brentiu^. li. 2. caleth it a laufull, Counsel wheri^ Christ was condemned.
For so the Petrus a Soto and his puefellow Hosius, are not afraid to affirm,
that the very same council wherein Christ was adjudged to death, had the spirit
of prophecy, the holy spirit, the spirit of truth: and yt it was not false nor
a lie, that which those Bishops said. We have a law, and according to the law
he ought to dye: and yt they judged (for so Hosius does write) ye truth of ye
judgment: And yt the same decree, wherein they pronounced yt Christ was worthy
of death, was just to all respects: It is surely a merueilouse case yt these
me^ ca^ not plead for the^self, and maintain their own cause, unless wtal
they become the patrones of Annas and Caiphas. For they that will say that the
very same council, wherein the son of God was most despitefully condemned to
the Cross, was a lawefull and an upright council: what council I pray you
will they allow to be corrupted? But their councels, in manner all of them,
being such as they be, it was necessary for them, to give this sentence of the
council of Annas and Caiphas. But suppose ye that these men will restore us
the Church again? the self same being judges that are themselves accused?
Will these men abate their ambition and pride? will they cast out themselves, or
give sentence against themselves, that Bisshops shall not be unlearned, or that
Bishops shall not be sluggishe bellies, or shall not heap benefice upon
benefice, or shall not take upon them to be Princes, or shall not make wars?
Think you that Abbots the Popes dear children, will make a decree, that a
Monk that seeks not to get his living with his own labor, is a thief? or
that it is not lawefull for him to live other in Cities, or in places of much
resort, or of other men's goods: and that a Monk ought to lie upon ye
ground, and to sustain his life with herbs and pease, apply himself to
learning, dispute, pray, work, and prepare himself to the ministry of the
Church? Surely even as sone will the Pharisees and Scribes reform the temple
of God, and of a den of thieves will restore it unto us to be an house of
prayer.

The Papystes though they acknowledge their errors, yet will they not amend
them.
There were some amongst them that espied out diverse errors in the Church, as
Pope Adriane, Aeneas Siluius, Cardinal Poole, Pighius, and others as we said
before. They held afterward a Council at Trente, even in the same place,
where it is now holden. There assembled diverse Bishops and Abbots, and others
to whom the matter appertained: they were alone, whatsoever passed among them,
there was no man to gainesay it: for as for our me^, they had utterly shut the^
out from al conference. There they satt in great expectation of the world six
years: the first six months, as though the matter had been very needful,
they decreed many things of the holy Trinitee, of the father, of the Son, of
the holy Ghost: good things in deed, although for that time not very
necessary. Nevertheless in all this mean time amongst so many errors, so
evident, so often by their own mouths confessed, so manifest, what one error
did they ever correct? from what kind of Idolatry did they wtdraw the people?
What superstition did they take away? What part of their pomp and tyranny
have they abated? as though forsoothe that now also the whole world might not
perceive that this is a very conspiracy and not a Counsel, and that these
Bishops which the Pope has called unto him at this time, are not by their oath
and affection utterly addicted unto his name, and will never do any thing but
that which they shall perceive to agree with his pleasure, to make for the
aduaucement of his power, and to be according to his will: or that amongst
them every man's reason and sentence were not rather nu^bered, then wayed: or
that the better part were not often times oppressed with the greater. Whereupon
we know that often times it has come to pass, yt many good men and Catholic
Bishops, what time such Councels were summoned, wherein factions and parts were
openly maintained, knowing that they should only leese their labor, in as much
as the minds of their adversaries were bent upon evil, and therefore not
possible to do any good, have tarried at home. Athanasius being called by
The Emperor to the Council of Cesarea, when he saw that he should present
himself to ye deadly hatered of his adversaries, Theodoreius Li. 1. ca. 28.
he refused to come. The same man afterward, being come to the Council of
Syrmin, when his mind gave him, by reason of the fiersenes and hatred of his
enemies, to what end ye matter would come, he trussed up his baggage and went
his way. Tripar. li. 10. ca. 13.
John Chrysostom, although the Emperor Consta^tius had sent for him by four
letters, to come to the Council of the Arrians, yet he kept himself at home.
Eusebius. Li^. ca. 17.
What time as Maximus the Bishop of Jerusalem sat in the council of
Palestine, the old man Paphnutius taking him by the hand, led him out of
the doors: saying, it is not lawefull for us, to sit in council of these
matters, amongst these wicked men.

Unto the council of Syrmin, from which Athanasius did convey himself away,
the Bishops of the Weste countries would not repair. Cyril appealed by his
letters from the council, Tripar. Sozome. li. 5, ca. 15
of those that were called Patropassiani. Pauline the Bishop of Trier and
diverse others, when they saw the practice and power of Auxentius, refused to
come to the council of Millane. For in vain they saw they should go unto yt
place, where no reason but faction was heard, and where al causes were
determinable, not according to judgment, but according to favor.

And yet they, albeit they had never so grievous and obstinate adversaries,
nevertheless if they had come, at the least they should have had free liberty
to speak and to be heard in the council.

But as for us, in as much as it is not lawful for any of our sort once to
sit, or so much as to be seen in the assembly of these men, much less to
be heard freely to speak: and on the other side, for as much as the Popes
Legates, the Patriarchs, the Archbyshops, the Bysshoppes, the Abbots all
coniured together, al fettered in one fault, al bound with one oath, and only
have place to sit, only have authority to give their voice, and in
co^clusio^, as though they had done nothing, to submit al their judgments to
the Popes will and pleasure alone: even to the intent that he who ought rather
to have pleaded his own cause at the bar, should give sentence of himself: in
as much, I say, as that old and Christian liberty, which in all Christian
Councels ought chiefly to be maintained, is now in counsel utterly taken away,
no good and godly man ought to marvel, if we do now at this time, that
thing, which they see the fathers and Catholic Bishops did before time, when
like cause was offered: so that because in the council we ca^ not be heard,
and Princes Ambassadors ar laughed to scorn, and we all, as though the matter
were already dispatched and concluded, ar before judgment condemned, if I
say, we had rather tarry at home and commit the whole matter unto God, then to
go to ye place, where we shall neither have any place, nor yet any thing
prevail at al. But as touching our own injuries, we can bear them patiently
and quietly enough. But wherefore I pray you do they exclude Christian Kings
and godly Princes from their councels? Why do they either so vncurtesly
dispatche them out of their company, or reject them with such reproach: when that
as though they were no Christian men, or were not able to judge, they will not
suffer them to sit in counsel in causes of Religion, nor to know the state of
their own Churches. Or in case they do entermedle at any time by their
authority, and do ye thing which they may do, which they are commanded to
do, which they are bound to do, and which we know David, Salomo^, and other
good princes have done: and take upon them, other whiles the Bishops be a
sleep, or whiles they do rebellyously resist, to bridle ye raging lusts of
priests, and both drive them to the doing of their duty, and keep them from
disorder: and moreover if they pluck down Idols, withdraw superstition, set
up the true worship of God: Why cry they by and by, that they turn all things
vpside down: that they break into other men's offices, and behave themselves
lewdely and arrogantly? What Scripture has at any time forbidden Christian
Princes from ye hearing of such causes? Who did ever make these laws but
these fellows only? But they will say, Civil princes have learned how to
manege the common welthe, and to exercise arms: as for the mysteries of
Religion they understand them not. Then I pray you, what other is ye Pope at
this day, but a Monarche or a prince? What be the Cardinals? which degree it is
now scantly lawful for any others to have, then Kings and Princes sons.
What be the Patriarchs? what Archbisshops for the most part, what Bishops,
what other be the Abbots at this day in ye Popes kingdom, but worldly Princes,
but Dukes, but Earls, with stately gardes about them whersoeuer they go, and
decked also many times with collers and chains of Gold?

They have in deed sometime a peculier apparel, Crosses, Pillars, Hattes,
Myters, Palls, the which kind of pomp the ancient Bishops, Chrysostom,
Augustine and Ambrose had never. Now besides these things, what teach they,
what say they, what do they, what live they in any point that is comlye and
comme^dable not only for a Bishop, but also for a Christian man? Is it so
great a matter to carry a counterfeit title and for only change of garments,
to be called a Bishop?

Surely yt the weight of all government should be assigned over unto the^
only, which nether do know nor will know what appertains to these things,
nor set not a halfpeny by any part of Religion, further the^ as it touches the
kitchen and the belly, yt they only should be made judges, and be appointed
as it were blind men to keep the watch tower: and on the other side to have a
Christian prince that is well instructed, to stand a very block and a post
without giving any voice, without uttering his opinion, only to awaite what they
will appoint or command him to do, without ears, without eyes, without
stomach, without courage, to receive without exception whatsoever these
fellows shall lay upon him, and at a blind adventure do their commau^dements,
how blasphemous and wicked soever they be, yea though they should command
them to destroy Religion all together, and to hang up Christ himself upon
the Cross: this is surely a matter both of great pride, and of great reproach,
and of great iniquite, and also intolerable for Christian and wise Princes to
endure. For what think you? Can Annas and Caiphas understand these matters? and
can not David and Ezechias understand them? Is it lawful for a Cardinal being
a man of war and deliting in blood, to sit in the counsel? And is it not
lawful for the Emperor or a Christian king? For we do give no authority unto
our magistrates more then yt we know is both given unto them out of gods word,
and also approved by the example of the best governed common welthes. For
besides yt God has committed unto every faithful Prince the charge of both
the tables, to the intent he should understand yt not only Civil matters,
but also religious and Ecclesiastical causes appertained to his office.
Besides yt, kings or oftentimes and expressly comanded of God to cut down
superstitious groves, to overthrow Images of Idols and aulters, to have at
hand a copye of the book of the law: and that Esaie says, he ought to be a
patron and a fosterer of the Church: Besides, I say, al these things, we see by
the stories and examples of the best tims for government, yt godly Princes
never thought it a thing estranged from their office, to take the charge of
Churches.

Moses a civil magistrate, and a leader of the people, both received of God
and also delivered unto the people the whole order of religion and of
sacrifices: Exodus 32.
and moreover sharply and grievously chastened Aaron the Bishop for the
golden calfe, and for transgression of Religion. Iosue although he was none
other but a cyuile magistrate, nevertheless what time he was first advanced
to his office, Iosu. ^.
and appointed to be ruler over the people, he received his commission, namely
for religion, and for the worshipping of God.

King David, what time as all religion by wicked king Saul was utterly
destroyed, brought home again the ark of God: that is to say, he restored
religion: neither was he there as one that only did call upon them and exhort
them to that work: ^. P^^. 13*
but also he made Psalms and Hymns, and did set in order every degree, and
ordained their solemn array, and was in manner the chief among the Priests.

Salamon the king builded a Temple to the Lord, the which his father Dauide
had only in purpose to set up, and when all was finished he made a goodly
oration to the people touching Religion, and the worship of God: and afterward
he removed Abiathar the Bishop out of office, and did apoint in his place
Sadoke: and what time as the Lords Temple was afterward through the defaulte
and negligence of the priests in most filthy wise defiled, 1. Pa^r. 1^.
Ezechias the king commanded that the rubbishe and filth should be carried
away, that lights should be set up, that incense should be offered, and
sacrifices be made according to the old appointed order, 2. Reg. 18.
also that the brazen Serpent which at that time the people did most ungodly
worsship, should be taken down and broken into powder. 2. Pa^r. 17.
King Iosaphat, what time he saw the true worship of God was hindered, and that
the people was wtholden by a private superstition, from the common Temple which
was at Jerusalem, whereunto men ought to resort yearly from al parts of the
realm, he overthrew and took away their hill altars and superstitious groves.
4. Reg. 23.
King Josias was diligent in admonisshing the priests and Bishops of their
duty. King Ioas corrected ye ryoting and arrogance of priests. 4. Reg. 12.
Iehu did put the wicked Prophets to death. 4. Reg. 10.
But now to speak no more of examples out of the holy Scriptures, and that we
may rather come to consider in what sort the Church has been governed since
the birth of Christ in the time of the gospel, in time past Christian Emperors
did su^mon ye Bishops to come to councils. Constantine the Council of Nice,
Theodosius ye first, the Counsel of Constantinople. Theodosius ye second, ye
counsel of Ephesus. Marcio^ the counsel of Calcedon. and what time as Rufine
alleged a counsel, as an authority that made for his purpose, his aduersari
Hieroe for to confute him, says: Tell me, by what Emperor was it su^moned. The
same man in an Epitaphe of Paula does cite the letters of Emperors, which
commanded the Latin and Greek Bishops to appear at Rome.

Doubtless for five hundred years together, The Emperor alone called the holy
assemblies, and held the councils of Bishops. So much the more do we
marvel at the untimely boldness of the Bishop of Rome, at this day, who so
unadvisedly entyteleth himself alone unto that thing, which he knows, whiles
the Christian commonwealth was united in one, was the Emperors right: and now
sythens that kings have encroched upon part of the Emperors estate, is the
common right of all princes: and yet he thinks it sufficient for him to
signify his pleasure of holding a counsel to the greatest estate of the
world, even as he would send to his man. Pa^^. 4. in Bulla sua ad Imp.
Ferdinandum.


And in case that Ferdinando paraduenture be of such modesty, by reason he is
not sufficiently instructed of ye Popes sleightes, that he can bear this
iniurye: yet the Pope himself for his holiness sake should not offer him
injury, and chale^g unto himself the right of an other man.

But some man will say: true it is that in those days the Emperor called the
councels, because the Bishop of Rome was not yet come to this greatness: yet
neither at that time did he sit together in council with the Bishops, nor
entermeddle his authority with any part of their consultation. Yes truly
the Emperor Constantine, Hist. Eccle. li. ^* ca. 5.
as Theodoret says, did not only sit amongst them in the council of Nice,
but also admonished ye Bishops how they ought to try their co^trouersy out of
the books of the Prophets and of the Apostles. In disputation, says he, of
matters of divinity, we have the doctrine of the holy Ghost set before us, to
the intent we should follow it. For the books of the Eua^gelistes, of ye
Apostles, and of the Prophets, does sufficiently declare unto us what we ought
to think of gods will. Li. 1. ca. 5.
Theodosius the Emperor, as Socrates says, did not only sit amongst the
Bishops, but also was chief judge of the controversy, and did both tear the
writings of the Heretics, and also allowed the judgment of the Catholykes.

In the council of Chalcedon, Socra. li. ^. cap. 10.
the civil Magistrate condemned by sentence pronounced by his own mouth,
Dioscorus, Iuuenal, and Thalassius being Bishops, for Heretykes: and gave
judgment that they should be disgraded from that dignite of the Church.

In the third council of Constantinople, Actio ne. 2.
Constantine a civil Magistrate did not only sit amongst the Bishops, but
also subscribed with the Bishops. We have read it, says he, and we have
subscribed. In the second council called Aransicanum, Princes ambassadors
being noble men, did not only declare their minds touching Religion, but also
subscribed amongst the Bishops. For it is written in the end of that council
after this sort, Petrus Marcellinus, Felix, Liberius. men of great honor and
most renouned Lieutenantes of those countries that appertain to France, and
me^ of noble parentage, have subscribed their consent. Siagrius, Opilio,
Pantagathus, Deodatus, Cariattho, Marcellus, right noble men, have subscribed.

But if Lieutena^ts general and noble me^ might subscribe in the council,
might not Emperors and Kings do the same? It was not needful, we confess, to
prosequute so largly and in so many words, so clear a matter if we had not to
do with such men as of contention and for desire of victory, are wo^t to deny
al things that are most plain, and even those things which they see and have
daily in their eyes. Iustinia^ the Emperor made a law touching the amendeme^t
of the manners and brideling of ye arroga^cy of priests: and although he were a
Christian and a Catholic Emperor, yet he was so bold to thrust out of ye
Papal dignity two Popes, Siluerius and Uigilius ye successors of Peter and
vicars of Christ.

Now then they which take upon them aucthorite over Bishops which receive
commission from God touching Religion, which bring home ye ark of God, make
holy Psalms, have rule over priests, build Temples, make sermons touching ye
worshipping of God, which cle^se temples, throw down hylle altares, set fire
on superstious groves, which admonish priests of their duty, and prescribe
laws wherafter they shall live, which put wicked prophets to death, which
deprive Bishops, which call ye assemblies of Bishops, which sit together with
the Bishops, and direct them what they shall do, which do condemn an
Heretic Bishop to be punished, which sit in judgment of matters of Religion,
which subscribe, which pronounce their opinion, they I say yt, do al these
things not at other men's co^mau^dements, but in their own name, and yt
uprightly and godly, shall we say yt unto such does not appertain the charge of
Religion? or yt a Christian magistrate entermedling with these matters does other
leudly or arroga^tly, or wickedly? truly ye most ancient and most Christian
Emperors and kings, have entermedled with these matters, yet were they never
therefore noted other to be ungodly or presu^ptuouse. And who would wish for
either more catholic Princes, or more notable examples?

Now if this were lawful in them, being only cyuile magistrates and rulers of
common welthes, what have our Princes offended, which being in ye same office,
may not also have ye same liberty? or what great excellency of lerning, of
judgment, of holiness is in these me^, yt contrary to the custom of al ye old
and catholic Bishops, which were wont to confer in matters of Religion with
noble me^, they should now reject them from the hearing of such matters, and
from their common asse^blie? But full well do they provide for themself and for
their kingdom: which otherwise they see would shortly come to ground. For if
they, whom God has placed in the highest degree, did se and understand the
sleightes of these me^, how by them the co^mandeme^ts of Christ are despised:
the light of and Gospel darkened and utterly put out: themselves abused, and
at unawares laughed to scorn, and also debarred from the entry into the
kingdom of God: they would never suffer themselves to be other so proudly
despised, or so shamfully laughed to scorn: whereas now through ignorance and
blindness, they keep the^ under awe, and in their danger.

As for us, touching the change of Religion, we have done nothing, as we said
before, rashly or presu^ptuously, nothing but leisurly and with great
deliberatio^. Neither would we ever have taken in hand to do it, had not the
manifest and the express will of God declared unto us in ye holy scriptures,
and the regard of our own salvation compelled us thereunto. And albeit we have
forsaken yt Church. which these me^ do call. Catholic, and by reason thereof do
bring us in hatered of those yt cannot judge. nevertheless this is sufficient
for us, and ought to be sufficient for every man yt is wise and godly and
careful of everlasting life, that we have forsaken that Church which might
err, which Christ himself that can not err, so long before did prophecy,
that it should err: and which we our selves did evidently see before our
eyes, swerve away from the holy Fathers, from the Apostles, from Christ
himself, from the Primitive and Catholic Church. Again we are come, even as
nere as we could possible, to the Church of the Apostles, and of the old
catholic Bishops and Fathers, even to yt Church, which we know was as yet a
pure, and as Tertullian says, an undefiled Uirgine: infected as yet neither
with any ydolatry, nor with any grievous and known error: and we have directed
not our doctrine only, but also our Sacraments and the form of our common
prayers, according to their rules and ordinances. And whereas, before, Religion
was shamefully neglected and depraved at these men's hands, we, according as we
know both Christ himself and all other godly men in manner had done heretofore,
have brought it home unto the original, and to the first principles. For we
thought it requisite there to seek the reformation of Religion, from whence the
first principles thereof were derived. For this argument, says the most
ancient father Tertullian, is strong against all Heresies: That is true,
whatsoever is first: whatsoever is of latter time, that is counterfeit. Ireneus
appealed often times to the most ancient Churches, such as were nerest unto
Christ's time, and of which it was hardely to be believed that they did err.
Wherefore is not yt way followed at this day? Wherefore do we not return unto
the example of the ancient Churches? Wherefore can not that sentence be
heard now a days amongst us, which in the counsel of Nice long ago,
without the gainesaying of any man, was pronounced of so many Bishops and
Catholic fathers,.i. Let the old or ancient customs of manners prouayle.
(...). Esdras, what time he went about to make up the decayed places of Gods
temple, he sent not to Ephesus, although there was a very beutifull and
gorgious temple of Diana: and when he would restore their ceremonies and
sacrifices, he sent not to Rome, althoe peradventure he had heard of their
solemn sacrifices, called Hecatombas, Solitaurilia, Lectisternia, of their
supplications, and of the ceremonial books of Numa Po^pilius. He thought it
enough for him to set before his eyes, and to follow the pattern of the old
temple which Solomon did raise up at the first, according to the appointment of
God: and to behold those old orders and ceremonies, which God him self
prescribed by name unto Moses.

Aggeus the Prophet, what time the temple was builded up again by Esdras, and
the people might seem to have a very good occasion offered them to rejoice at
so great a benefit of the most mighty and merciful God: yet he constrained the
teeres to fall from all their eyes, because that they, which remaynyng yet
alive, had seen the buyldinges of the first temple, before it was razed by the
Babylonians, remembered that it lacked much of that beauty that it had in
times paste. For then surely would they have thought their temple thoroughly
well restored, if it had answered to the old pattern and to the majesty of
the first Temple.

S. Paul, for to purge the Supper of our Lord, which the Corinthians had
begone even then to corrupt, did set before them Christ's institution for them
to follow: I have, says he, delivered unto you that, which I received of
the Lord. And Christ for to confute the error of the Pharisees: You must
return, says he, to the beginning: from the beginning it was not so.

And to the intent he might the better rebuke the filthy gain and
covetousness of priests, and purge the temple: From the beginning, says he,
this was a house of prayer, where all the people together should devoutly and
soberly call upon God: and so ought you also to use it at this day: for it was
not builded to that intent, for to become a den of thieves.

So likewise all the godly Princes, and such as were commended in the holy
Scriptures, were therefore chiefly commended, because they had walked in the
ways of David their father: that is to say, because they had resorted back to
the first principles, and to the well heads, and restored religion to his first
estate.

Therefore, what time we saw that these men had utterly thrown all things
under foot, and that in the Church of God there remained nothing but miserable
ruynes, we thought it best to set before us those Churches, which we did
know certainly both that they had not erred, and also that they had nothing to
do, another with private Masses, nor with prayers in an unknown and strange
tongue, another yet with this corruption of Sacraments, nor other folyshe toys.

And whereas our desire was, that the lords Temple should be restored to his
first estate: we went not about to seek any other foundation, then that which
we knew was laid now long ago by the Apostles: the which is our savior
Jesus Christ.

Of provincial Councels.
And whereas we heard God him self speaking unto us in his word, and saw
euidente examples of the old and primitive Church: again whereas the hope of
a general council was very uncertain, and much more uncertain the
success thereof: but chiefly whereas we were certain of Gods will, and
therefore thought it a very unlawful thing to be overmuch careful and
troubled about the judgments of men: we could no longer stand in
deliberation with flesh and blood: but rather we did that thing, which both
might well be done, and which had been often times done of many godly men
and catholic Bysshoppes: taking in hand to provide for our Churches by a
provincial Council. For thus we know right well the old Fathers were wont
to make a proof, before they did come to councels assembled out of the whole
world. There be abroad at this day Canones written in particular counsels, at
Carthage under Cyprian, at Ancyra, at Neocesaria, at Grangra, also in
Paphlagonia, as some men think, before the name of the universal council of
Nice was ever heard of. After this manner in time past, the Pelagians and
Donatistes, without a general council, were by and by met with all at home
in a pryuate co^sultation. Thus Ambrose a Christian Bishop, what time
Constantius the emperor did evidently favor Auxentius a Bishop of the Arrians
faction, appealed not unto the general counsel, wherein he saw, by reso^ of
themperours power, and of affection unto parts, nothing could be done, but
unto his own clergy and people: yt is to say, unto a Provincial assembly.
Thus in the council of Nice it was decreed, that every year twice: in the
council of Carthage, yt yerly ones at the least, there should be in every
province assemblies of Bishops: the which thing, the council of Chalcedone
says was done for this cause: that, if any errors or abuses should crepe out
in any place, they might by and by, even in the very place where they sprange
up, be destroyed. So that when Secundus and Palladius refused the council of
Aquileia, because it was not a general and a common council, Ambrose the
Bishop of Millane answered: It ought not to seem new or strange to any man, if
the Bishops of the weste called councels amongst them selves, and made
provincial assemblies: for that has been done both of the Western Bishops
not a few times, and of the Greeks very often. Thus had Charles the great a
provincial council in Germany, touching the taking away of images, against
the second council of Nice. Neither is this way of proceeding utterly unheard
of, or new amongst us. For we have had in times paste here in England
provincial assemblies, and with our own laws we have ordered our Churches.
What needs many words? Truly, even those same councels that were the
fullest and greatest, and whereof these men ar wont so much to make their
auaunt, if they be compared with all the other Churches, which through out the
world do acknowledge and confess the name of Christ: what other thing I pray
you they seem to be, then certain private councils of a few Bishops, and
prouincial assemblies? For althoe peradventure Italy, France, Spain,
England, Germany, Denmark and Scotland should assemble themselves together
and yet all Asia, Greece, Armenia, Persia, Media, Mesopotamia, Egypt, Ethiope,
Inde, Mauritania should be absent, in all which places there be both many
Christian men and also Bishops: how might it appear to any sobre manne, that
such a council were general? Or when so many parts of the world ar absent,
how can they say truly, that they have the consent of the whole world? or
what manner of council was this last holden at Trente? or how might it be
called general, when that out of all Christian kingdoms and countries there
came unto it but forty Bysshoppes, and of them some that were so eloquent, that
they seemed more mete to be sent to the Gra^mer schole: but so well learned,
that they never read over the holy Scriptures? How so ever it is, the truth
of the gospel of Jesus Christ, does not depend upon councels, or as Paul
says, upon the day of man. But in case they, who ought to be careful over the
Church of God, will not become wise, but will aba^don their duty, and harden
their hearts against God and his anointed Christ, and continue still in
peruertyng the straight ways of the Lord: God will raise up the very stones,
and make litel babes eloquent, that always there may be some, by whom the
lies of these men may be confuted. For God is able not only without councels,
but also maugre the councels, both to defend and to increase his kingdom.
There be, says Salomo^, many devises in man's heart, but the council of the
Lord abides stable: for there is no knowledge, there is no wisdom, there is
no council against the Lord. Things, says Hilary, that are builded up by
man's work, do not endure. The Church of God must be otherwise builded,
and otherwise conserved. For it is grounded upon the foundation of the Apostls
and Prophets, and ioynted together with one corner stone Jesus Christ. But S.
Hierome of all other speaks most plainly and most aptly for these times: In
prophetam Naum. ca. 3.
Who^soeuer says he, the Devil has deceived, and has as it were with sweet
and impoysened enchauntment of the meremaydes, entised to fall a sleep, those
the word of God does awake, and says: Rise thou that slepeste, stand up,
and Christ will give the light. Wherefore at the coming of Christ and of
Gods word, and of the doctrine of the Church, and of the utter overthrow of
Niniue, and of that most beautiful harlot: the people that before under
sholemasters was rocked a sleep, shall be raised up, and with haste shall go to
the mountains of the Scriptures, there they shall find mountains, Moses,
Jesus the son of Naue: mountains the Prophets: mountains of the new
testamente, the Apostles, the Evangelists: And when they shall flee unto such
mountains, and exercise themself in the readyng of these kind of mountains:
if they find no man to teach them (for the harvest shall be great, and the
workmen few) nevertheless both the endeavor of the people, because they
flee unto these kind of mountains, shall be allowed, and the negligence of
the scholemasters shall be co^trolled. These be the words of Hierome, so plain
that there needs no interpreter: so well applied to those things which we
see now before our eyes, that he seems unto us, to foreshewe as it were with
the spirit of Prophecy, and to entende to set before our eyes the whole state
of our times, and the fall of that most sumptuously attiered harlot of
Babylone, and the reformation of the Church, and the blindness and loytering
of the Bishops, and the endeavor and cherefulnesse of the people. For who is
so blind, that he sees not these men to be those sholemasters, by whom the
people, as Hierome says, has been led into error and therein rocked a
sleep? or sees not Niniue, their Rome, which sometime was counterfetly
beautified with most excellent colors, now that her visar is taken away, both
to be better perceived and less set by? or the sees hot how godly men,
being raised up as it were out of a dead sleep, at the light of the gospel and
at the sound of Gods word, have gone forth, without tariyng for ye
assemblies of these kind of doctors, unto the mountains of the Scriptures.

But at ye least (some man will say) these things ought not to be attempted
without the Pope of Romes leave: Of the Popes authorytye in Councels.
for he only is ye buckle and the bo^d of Christian fellowship: he only is that
same Priest of the stoke of Leui, which God did speak of in Deuteronomye, that
from him in matters of great difficulty, men should fetch Council and
Judgment of the truth: and that if any man do not submit himself unto his
judgment, he should be slain in the sight of his brethren: he whatsoever he
does, can not be judged of any man: Christ reigns in heaven, he upon earth:
that he alone is able to do what soever Christ or God himself can do: for he
and Christ have but one consistory, without him there is no faith, no hope, no
Church: and that whosoever forsakes him, he casts away and abandoneth his
own salvation. These be ye flatteries of ye Canonists, ye Popes belly servants:
wherein forsothe they use not over much sobrenes: for scarsly could they ascribe
more things unto Christ him self: but sure I am, that greater things they
could not.

And to return again to our own doings. We truly have not departed from ye
pope for any worldly pleasure, or for profits sake. And would God that he
would so behave himself, that we had no need to forsake him. But such was
our case, that unless we went from him, we could not come unto Christ.
Neither will he yet at this day make any other league with us, then as Naas the
king of the Ammonites would have made with the men of Iabes: 1. Regum. 11.
that was, to put out the right eye of every one of them. For he will pluck
away from us the holy scriptures, the gospel of our salvation, and all that
hope which we have in Christ Jesus: for with other conditions we can have no
peace.

The argument of succession confuted.
For as to that which certain men ar wont so much to speak of, that the
Pope only is Peter's successor, as thoe that by reason thereof he carries the
holy ghost in his bosom, and can not err: it is a folishe and a triflying
tale. The grace of God is promised unto a well disposed mind, and to him that
fears God: not unto Chayres and Successio^s. Riches says S. Hierome, may
make a Bishop of greater power: but all Bishops what so ever they be, ar the
successors of the Apostels: If the place and the enstalment alone be
sufficient, both Manasses succeeded to David, and Caiphas to Aaron: and often
times an idol has stand up in the temple of God. Archidamus a Lacedemonian
was wo^t to auante him self much, because he was come out of the stock of
Hercules: whose arrogancy Nicostratus daunted in this wise: As for thou,
says he, semest not to be come of Hercules: for he killed evil men: whereas
thou of good men make men evil. And what time the Pharisees boasted their
succession and kindred, and blood of Abraham: you, says Christ, do seek to
kill me, a man that have spoken that truth unto you, which I have heard of
God. Thus did Abraham never: you ar of your father the Devil, and his will you
will obey. Nevertheless that we should grant some thing unto succession: Does
the Pope only succeed Peter? In what thing I pray you? in what Religion? in
what use of service? in what part of his life does he succeed him? What thing
had ever either Peter like the Pope, or the Pope like Peter? Except
paraduenture they will say this: that Peter whiles he was at Rome never taught
the Gospel: never fed his flock, that he took away the keys of the kingdom
of heaven, hid the treasures of his Lord: only that he satt him down in
Laterane, and with his finger did set an order for all the roumes in
purgatory, and for all kinds of punishment: as for the poor unhappy souls,
some he assigned unto punishment, some again for money he took out by and by
at his pleasure: also that he took order for private masses, that they should
be said in every corner. That he whispered the holy mysteries with a low voice
and in a strange tongue: set up the Sacrament in all Churches and upon every
altar: and carried it whersoeuer he went, with lights and sacring belles,
before him, upon an ambeling Genet: that he consecrated Oil, Wax, Woolle,
Belles, Chalices, Churches, Alters, with his holy brethe: that he sold
Jubilees, graces, licenses, expectations, preuentions, Annates, Palles, the use
of Palles, Bulls, pardons, charters: yt he called himself the head of the
Church, the chief Bishop, and Bishop of Bishops, and the only Most holy: yt
by usurpation he took upon him a right and aucthorite over other men's
Churches: exempted himself from under all civil power: yt he made wars, set
Princes together by the ears: and yt having his crown garnished with golden
pendantes, his pompous apparel comparable with the Persians, his royal Scepter,
his golden diadem glyttering with precious stones, he rode in a chair of
gold carried upon noble men's shoulders. these things forsoothe did Peter
when he was at Rome: and the very same he delivered as it were, from hand to
hand unto his successors. For these things be done by the Popes at this day
in Rome, and be so done, as though nothing else ought to be done. Or except
paraduenture they had rather answer thus: that the Pope at this day does all
those things, which we know Peter did in time paste: that he trauaileth hear
and there in to all Countries: preaching the Gospel not only in open
assemblies, but also priually from house to house: yt he plieth his business
in season, out of season: in time, out of time: that he does the duty of an
Evangelist: accomplisheth the ministry of Christ: becomes a watchman over
the house of Israel: receives ye scriptures and word of God, and as he has
received them, so delivers them again to ye people: that he is the salt of
ye earth: the light of the world: that he fedeth not himself, but his flock:
that he does not entangle himself with worldly buisines appertaining to this
life, nor usurps no dominion over the Lords people: yt he seeks not to be
served himself of others, but rather himself to serve others: that he
accou^teth all Bishops for his fellows and equalles: that he is a subject
unto Princes, as unto those that are sent of God: gives unto Caesar that which
appertains to Caesar: and that according, as the ancient Bishops of Rome did,
without exception, he calls the Emperor his Lord: Now onles the Popes do
these things at this day: and except Peter do those things which we spoke of
before, there is no cause why they should brag so much of the name of Peter,
and of this succession: and less a great deal why they should complain of
our departing, and call us home again unto their faith and fellowship. It is
said, that a certain Lacedemonian called Cobilo, what time he was sent
Ambassador to make a league with the King of Persia, and found by chance
certain courtyers playing at the dise: by and by, without further
consideration of his business, returned home again, and when he was asked,
wherefore he had so little regard to the doing of those things, which he had in
commission by common authority for to do, he answered: that he thought it
should have turned to the slander of the commonwealth, if he should have
made a league with diseplaiers. But if we should dispose our selves to retourn
again unto the Pope and to his errors, and make a league not only with
diseplaiers, but also with men of much lewder condition then disers: this
should be not only slanderous toward our good name, but also toward the
procuring of gods wrath against us, and the oppressyon and utter ouerwhelming
of our own consciences, full of present myschyefe. For we surely departed
from him, whom we saw had blinded the world now many years together: from
him that was wont over arrogantelye to auaunte himself that he could not
err: and what soever he did, that he might not be judged of any mortal man:
not of kings, not of Emperors, not of the whole clergy, not of all the
world together, no not if he should carye with him a thousand souls to
Hell, from him that took upon him to command not only men, but also the
Angels of God, to go, to come, to lead souls into purgatory, and to bring
them back again when it liked him, whom Gregory did most plainly affirm to be
the Uaunteurrer and standerdberer of Antichrist, and that he had renounced the
catholic Faith: from whom not long ago, those country men of ours, that be
the ringleders of such as bend themself against the Gospel and against the
known truth, did of their own choice and gladly, every one of them disseuer
themself: neither yet would they be unwilling to do it at this day, were it
not that that the blemishe of inconstancye and shame and their estimation
amongst the people did let them. To conclude, we have forsaken him, to whom we
were not bound, and who had nothing, except it were only a certain fond
ymagination of preeminence of the place and succession, that he could say for
himself. And yet we of all other nations had most just cause to depart from
him, for our Kings, even those also which most carefully inclined themself to
obey the Authorite and faith of the Bishops of Rome, have felt sufficiently now
long ago the yoke and tyranny of the Popes kingdom. For both from our king
Henry the second of that name, the Roman Bishops did pluck the Crown from
his head, commanding him, all his Majesty laid a part, and in a private
arraye, to the intent he should be a laughinge stock to all his people, to
present himself as an humble petitioner and suter before his legate: And also
against our king Ihon, armed the Bishops and Monks, and some part also of the
nobility, and discharged all his subjects of the oath of their allegiance,
whereby they were bound unto him, and last of all, most wyckedly they spoiled
him by traiterous means, not only of his kingdom, but also of his life. And
upon king Henry the eight of yt name a most noble Prince, they thundered out
their curses and lightnings of excommunication, and stirred up against him
sometimes the Emperor, sometimes the French king: and so much as was in them,
gave over the whole Realm to the pray and to ye spoil: doubtless very mad
and foolished men, that could believe that either so great a king might be made
a gaste with bugges and with clyckets: or that so mighty a kingdom might be so
easily devoured, as it were at one morsel. And as though all these things
had not been enough: they would have had the whole Realm, also to be
tributary unto them: and out of it most unjustly they did exact an yearly
rent. So costlye forsooth was the friendship of the City of Rome unto us. But
in as much as by crafty means and with lewd sleightes they wrested out these
things from us: there is no cause why the same again by lawefull means and
good laws might not be taken from them. Yea if our kings in those times of
darkness, ledd by some opinion of their cou^terfet holiness, of their own
accord and liberality, gave them those things for Religion sake: yet
afterward when the error is espied of other kings that have the same
authority, they may be taken away, for that gift is of none effect that is
not approved by the will of the gyuer: but that can not seem to be a will,
which is darkened and empeched with error.

Thou haste heard Christian reader that it is no new thing, yt at this day
Christian Religion being restored to his former estate, and as it were new
borne again, be slaulderously and shamefully spoken of. For the same thing
happened unto Christ himself and to the Apostles. Nevertheless, least thou
should suffer thy self to be led out of the way, and to be deceived with
these outraging clamors of our adversaries, we have set forth before the, the
whole course of our Religion: what we do believe of God the Father, what of
his only son Jesus Christ, what of the holy Ghost, what of the Church,
what of the Sacraments, what of the Ministry, what of the holy Scriptures,
what of Ceremonies, and what of every part of a Christian man's profession. We
have declared, how that we do detest al old Heresies, the which other the
holy Scriptures or the ancient Councels have condemned as pestilences and
poisons of men's souls, and that as much as we can possibly, we do call home
again the discipline of the Church, the which our adversaries have utterly
brought to nothing: and do punish, according to the ancient laws of our
forefathers, all losenes of life and licencious manners: and that with such
severity, as the cause does require, and so far as our power will stretche:
that we do uphold the state of kingedomes, in the same condition that we
found them, without empairing or changing any thing: and do maintain to the
best of our power the Majesty of our Princes safe and sound: that we have
forsaken yt Church which these men had made a den of thieves, and wherein they
had left nothing sound or sauering of the Church of God, and which by their
own testimony had erred in many things: none otherwise then as Loath in time
past went out of Sodoma, or Abraham out of Chaldey, not of a desire to contend,
but by ye commandment of God himself: and yt we have sought out of the holy
Scriptures, which we know can not deceive us, a certain constant form of
Religion, and are now returned unto the primitive Church of the Apostles and
of the ancient fathers: yt is to say, to the first original and to the
beginnings, and as it were, to the very fountains of Christ's Church. True it
is in deed, yt for the accomplisheme^t hereof, we have not attended upon the
authority or consent of the council of Trente, in which we could not hope to
see any thing uprightly and orderly done, specially where all me^ are sworn
to one man, where our Princes Ambassadors ar contemned, where none of our
divines may be heard, and where men ar evidently inclined unto parts and to
ambition: but according as the holy fathers in time past and our predecessors
have done often time, we reformed our Churches by a council gathered in our own
province: and that as touching the yoke and tirannye of the Bishop of Rome,
unto whom we ought no duty, and in whom there is no resemblance either of
Christ, or of Petre, or of an Apostle, or in any point of a Bishop, according
as it behooved us, we have shaken of and cast away: And last of all, how yt we
do agree amongst our selves in all the principles and articles of Christian
Religion, and with one mouth and one spirit do worship God and the father
of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Wherefore good Christian reader, in as much as you see the reasons and causes
both of our doings touching the restitutio^ of Religion amongst us, and also of
our departing from the fellowship of these men, thou ought not to marvel
if yt we had rather obey our Jesus Christ then men. Paul did admonish us,
that we should not suffer, our selves to be carried out of the way with these
variable doctrines: and thal specially we should fly from them that would
sow any dissension from that doctrine which we had received from Christ, and
from the Apostles. Their iuggeling toys, even as the owl at the rising of the
Sun, begin already to fall and fly away at the presence and light of the
Gospel: And although they were pyled and heaped up, even to the high skies:
yet they fall down again upon the least occasion and in manner of their own
accord. For thou ought not to imagine that al these things are happened at
a blind adventure or by chance: for it was gods will that maugre the malice
in manner of all men, the Gospel of Jesus Christ should be spredde in these
days throughout the world. Wherefore men, being admonysshed by gods word,
have of their own accord applied themselves to the doctrine of Christ. We
surely have not sought to win unto our selves either glory, either riches,
either pleasure, either ease thereby. For all these things our adversaries
have in great abundance, and we also, what time we were amongst them, had
such things more largely and more plentifully. Neither do we abhor from
peace and agreement: but for conservation of worldly peace, we will wage no
wars with God. Doubtless, says Hylarius, the name of peace is sweet: but peace
says he, is one thing, and thraldom is an other. For to assent, which is the
thing that these men do seek for, that Christ should be commanded to
silence, that the truth of the Gospel should be betrayed, that wicked
errors, should be dissembled, that the eyes of Christian men should be
blered, that men should manifestly conspire against God, is not an
establyshment of peace, but a most horrible covenant of thraldom. There is
says Nazianzene a certain kind of peace, unprofitable: there is a profitable
discord. For we must allow peace with an exception, so far as it is
laweful, and so far as we may. For otherwise Christ himself brought not peace
into the world, but a sword. Wherefore yt the Pope will have us to be friends
again with him, let him first reconcile himself with God. For hereof
says Cyprian, scismes do arise, because the head is not sought for, and
men return not home to the fountaynes of the holy Scriptures, and the
commandments of the heavenly doctor are not kept. For that says he, is not
peace, but war: another is he that is disseuered from the gospel, joined to
the Church, but these men do only set to sale the name of peace to their
own gain: for that peace which they so much require, is nothing but the ease
and satisfaction of idle beallies. For all these matters might be ended well
enough amongst us, if ambition, bellychere and licencious living were no
hinderance thereto. From hence comes all the sorrow: their mind is upon their
platters. This is hit they cry and make all this buysines for, that things
evil gotten, they might more filthily and lewdly maintain. Al Pardoners,
Dataries, Collectors, Bawdes and others that think gain, to be godliness, and
serve not Jesus Christ but their own bellies, do grievously complain of us at
this day: For in time paste this kind of men had good days in the old
world. But now what so ever increase comes unto Christ, that think they
turns them to loss. This is hit, whereon the Pope himself complains at
this day, that charity forsooth is waxen could, because his rentes ar less
now then they were wont to be. Thus he brings us into hatered all that he
may, and rayleth upon us and condemns us for heretics: to the intent that
they which understand not the matter, should think there were no worse men
upon earth. Yet we for all this another ar, nor ought to be ashamed of the
gospel. For we regard more the glory of God, then the estimation of men. We
know that all these things which we do teach, ar true, neither can we
either use violence against the knowledge of our own conscience, another yet
present our selfs as witnesses against God. For if we deny any part of the
gospel of Jesus Christ before men, he on the other side, will deny us
again before his father. Now if there be any that will be offended and may
not endure the doctrine of Christ, they be blind themself, and leaders of
such as ar blind: Nevertheless the truth must be preached and set forth by
our open profession of the same, and patiently we must look for the Judgment
of God to come. In the mean while let these men take heed what they do,
let the^ have some regard of their own salvation, and let them cease to hate
and to persequute the gospel of the son of God, least at the length they
find him to be the punisher and revenger of his own cause. God will not
suffer himself to be mocked. Men do see all ready how the matter goes. This
flame the more it is kept under, so much the more and more it breaks out
and flies abroad. Their unfaithfulness shall not deface the faith of God: but
if they dispose not themself to lay away this hardness of their hearts and
to receive the gospel, the Publicanes and sinners shall go before them into
the kingdom of God.

God and the father of our Lord Jesus Christ open all their eyes, that they
may see that same blessed hope whereunto they are called: that we may all
together in one, worship that same only and true God, and that same Jesus
Christ, whom he sent down to us from Heaven. To whom together with the
Father and the holy Ghost, be given all honor and glory for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.
IMPRINTED AT LONDON by Reginalde Wolf. Anno 1562.


