THE MOTHERS Legacy, To her unborn CHILD.

By ELIZABETH IOCELIN.

The second Impression.

LONDON Printed by John Hauiland, for William Barret. 1624.

The Approbation.
Our laws disable those, that are under Couertbaron, from disposing by Will
and Testament any temporal estate. But no law prohibiteth any possessor of
moral and spiritual riches, to impart them unto others, either in life by
communicating, or in death by bequeathing. The reason is, for that corruptible
riches, even to those who have capacity of alienating them, bring only a
civil propriety, but no moral and vertous influence for the well dispensing,
or bestowing them: whereas virtue and grace have power beyond all empeachment
of sex or other debility, to enable and instruct the possessor to employ the
same unquestionably for the inward enriching of others.

This truly rich bequeather, taking that care for the providing an everlasting
portion for her hoped issue, which too many parents bend wholly upon earthly
inheritance, by her death already has given unto her Testament that life and
strength, whereof the Scripture speaks, A Testament is of force after death:
Heb. 9, 17.
Now remained the other validity and privilege of a Testament, that it be
enacted in perpetual and inviolable Record. Which in this was necessary not so
much for the security of the chief and immediate Legatary, as for the benefit
of all those, who, by the common kindred of Christianity, may claim their
portion in this Legacy, left in pios vsus; whereout, whosoever takes, yet
leaves no whit the less for others in remainder.

Wherefore upon the very first view, I willingly not only subscribed my
Approbat for the registering this Will, among the most public Monuments, (the
rather worthy, because proceeding from the weaker sex) but also, as bound to do
right unto known virtue, undertook the care of the publication thereof, my
self having heretofore bin no stranger to the Testators education and eminent
virtues. Whereof, I here beheld reflection clear enough, though perhaps not so
particularly evident to those that take knowledge of them only by this
Abstract.

In her zealous affection to the holy Ministry, thereto dedicating, (if by sex
capable) her yet scarce budding first fruits, I saw the lineaments of her own
parentage: She being the only offspring derived from a reverend Grandfather,
Doctor Chaderton, sometime Master of Queens College in Cambridge, and public
Professor of Divinity in that University, afterward Lord Bishop, first of
Chester, and thence of Lincoln: by and under whom she was from her tender
years carefully nurtured, as in those accomplishments of knowledge in
Languages, History, and some Arts, so principally in studies of piety. And thus
having from a 2 Timothy 3.15, 16
child known the holy Scriptures, which made her wife unto salvation through
faith in Christ, how well she continued in those things, which she had
learned, appears, as otherwise to those that knew her, so here to all by the
frequent and pertinent application of them in these instructions.

In her prosecution of the duty of obedience unto Parents I view the deep
impression, long since, when she was not above six years old, made in her
mind by the last words of her own Mother, charging her upon her blessing to
show all obedience and reverence to her Father (Sir Richard Brook) and to her
reverend Grandfather.

In the whole course of her pen, I observe her piety and humility: these her
lines scarce showing one spark of the elementary fire of her secular learning:
this her candle being rather lighted from the lamp of the Sanctuary.

In her commission of the office of an Ouerseer to her husband, what eyes
cannot behold the flames of her true and unspotted love toward her dearest, who
enjoyed her about the space of six years and a half, being all that while
both an impartial witness of her virtues, and an happy partner of those
blessings both transitory and spiritual, wherewith she was endowed.

Beside the domestique cares pertaining to a wife, the former part of those
years were employed by her in the studies of morality and history, the better
by the help of foreign languages, not without a taste and faculty in Poetry:
Wherein some essay she has left, ingenious, but chaste and modest like the
Author. Of all which knowledge she was very sparing in her discourses, as
possessing it rather to hide, than to boast of.

Among those her eminencies deserving our memory, was her own most ready
memory, enabling her upon the first rehearsal to repeat above forty lines in
English or Latin: a gift the more happy by her employment of it in carrying
away an entire Sermon, so that she could (almost following the steps of the
words, or phrase) write it down in her Chamber.

The latter years of her life she addicted to no other studies than Divinity,
whereof some imperfect notes remain, but principally this small Treatise found
in her Deske unfinished, by reason either of some troubles befalling her about
a month before her end, or of prevention by mis-reckoning the time of her
going with this her first (now also last) Child: which Treatise, intended for
her child, she so leaving, recommended the same to her husband by her letter
to him, written and subscribed by her own hand, as hereafter follows.

The many blessings, she enjoyed, were not without some seasoning of
afflictions, which, by the good use she made of them, bred in her a constant
temper of patience, and more than womanly fortitude: especially in her latter
time, when as the course of her life was a perpetual meditation of death,
amounting almost to a prophetical sense of her dissolution, even then when she
had not finished the 27. year of her age, nor was oppressed by any disease, or
danger, other than the common lot of childbirth, within some months
approaching. Accordingly when she first felt her self quick with child (as
then traveling with death it self) she secretly took order for the buying a
new winding sheet: thus preparing and consecrating her self to him, who rested
in a new Sepulcher wherein was never man yet laid. And about that time,
undauntedly looking death in the face, privately in her Closet between God and
her, she wrote these pious Meditations; whereof her self strangely speaks
to her own bowels in this manner, It may seem strange to thee to receive
these lines from a mother, that died when thou were borne.

October 12. 1622. In Cambridge-shire she was made a mother of a daughter,
whom shortly after, being baptized and brought unto her, she blessed, and gave
God thanks that her self had lived to see it a Christian: and then instantly
called for her winding sheet to be brought forth and laid upon her.

So having patiently borne for some nine days a violent fever, and giving a
comfortable testimony of her godly resolution, she ended her prayers, speech,
and life together, rendering her soul into the hand of her Redeemer, and
leaving behind her unto the world a sweet perfume of good name, and to her
only child (besides a competent inheritance) this Manuell, being a deputed
Mother for instruction, and for solace a twinne-like sister, issuing from the
same Parent, and seeing the light about the same time.

Which composure because it comes forth imperfect from the pen, does the more
expect to be supplied and made up by practice and execution.

Sic approbauit Tho. Goad.

TO MY TRVLY loving, and most dearly loved Husband, Tourell Iocelin.
MINE own dear love, I no sooner conceived an hope, that I should be made a
mother by thee, but with it entered the consideration of a mothers duty, and
shortly after followed the apprehension of danger that might prevent me from
executing that care I so exceedingly desired, I mean in religious training our
Child. And in truth death appearing in this shape, was doubly terrible unto
me. First, in respect of the painfulnesse of that kind of death, and next of
the loss my little one should have in wanting me.

But I thank God, these fears were cured with the remembrance that all things
work together for the best to those that love God, and a certain assurance
that he will give me patience according to my pain.

Yet still I thought there was some good office I might do for my Child more
than only to bring it forth (though it should please God to take me) when I
considered our frailty, our apt inclination to sin, the Devils subtlety, and
the worlds deceitfulness, against these how much desired I to admonish it? But
still it came into my mind that death might deprive me of time if I should
neglect the present. I knew not what to do: I thought of writing, but then
mine own weakness appeared so manifestly, that I was ashamed, and durst not
undertake it. But when I could find no other means to express my motherly
zeal, I encouraged my self with these reasons.

First, that I wrote to a Child, and though I were but a woman, yet to a
child's judgment, what I understood might serve for a foundation to a better
learning.

Again, I considered it was to my own, and in private sort, and my love to my
own might excuse my errors.

And lastly, but chiefly, I comforted my self, that my intent was good, and
that I was well assured God is the prosperer of good purposes.

Thus resolved, I writ this ensuing Letter to our little one, to whom I could
not find a fitter hand to convey it than thine own, which may with
authority see the performance of this my little legacy, of which my Child is
Executor.

And (dear love) as thou must be the ouerseer, for Gods sake, when it shall
fail in duty to God, or to the world, let not thy indulgence wink at such
folly, but severely correct it: and that thy trouble may be little when it
comes to years, take the more care when it is young. First, in providing it a
nurse: O make choice, not so much for her complexion, as for her mild and
honest disposition: Likewise if the child be to remain long abroad after
waining, as near as may be, choose a house where it may not learn to swear,
or speak scurrilous words.

I know I may be thought too scrupulous in this: but I am sure thou shall find
it a hard matter to break a child of that it learnes so young. It will be a
great while ere it will be thought old enough to be beaten for evil words,
and by that time it will be so perfect in imperfections, that blows will not
mend it. And when some charitable body reproues or corrects it for these
faults, let no body pity it with the loss of the mother.

Next, good sweet heart, keep it not from school, but let it learn betimes:
if it be a son, I doubt not but thou will dedicate it to the Lord as his
Minister, if he will please of his mercy to give him grace and capacity for that
great work. If it be a daughter, I hope my mother Brook (if thou desire her)
will take it among hers, and let them all learn one lesson.

I desire her bringing up may be learning the Bible, as my sisters do, good
houswifery, writing, and good works: other learning a woman needs not: though
I admire it in those whom God has blessed with discretion, yet I desired not
much in my own, having seen that sometimes women have greater portions of
learning, than wisdom, which is of no better use to them than a maine sail to
a flye-boat, which runs in under water. But where learning and wisdom meet in
a virtuous disposed woman, she is the fittest closet for all goodness. She is
like a well-ballanced ship that may bear all her sail. She is-Indeed, I
should but shame my self, if I should go about to praise her more.

But, my dear, though she have all this in her, she will hardly make a poor
man's wife: Yet I leave it to thy will. If thou desire a learned daughter, I
pray God give her a wife and religious heart, that she may use it to his glory
thy comfort, and her own salvation.

But how soever thou disposest of her education, I pray thee labor by all
means to teach her true humility, though I much desire it may be as humble if
it be a son as a daughter; yet in a daughter I more fear that vice; Pride
being now rather accounted a virtue in our sex worthy praise, than a vice fit
for reproof.

Many Parents read lectures of it to their children how necessary it is, and
they have principles that must not be disputed against. As first, look how
much you esteem your self, others will esteem of you. Again, what you give to
others, you derogate from your self. And many more of these kinds. I have
heard men accounted wise that have maintained this kind of pride under the
name of generous knowing or understanding themselves: But I am sure that he
that truly knows himself shall know so much evil by himself, that he shall
have small reason to think himself better than another man.

Dearest, I am so fearful to bring thee a proud high minded child, that,
though I know thy care will need no spur, yet I cannot but desire thee to
double thy watchfulness over this vice, it is such a crafty insinuating
devil, it will enter little children in the likeness of wit, with which their
parents are delighted, and that is sweet nourishment to it.

I pray thee dear heart, delight not to have a bold child: modesty and
humility are the sweetest ground-works of all virtue. Let not thy servants
give it any other title than the Christen-name, till it have discretion to
understand how to respect others.

And I pray thee be not profuse in the expense of clothes upon it. Me thinks
it is a vain delight in parents to bestow that cost upon one child which
would serve two or three. If they have not children enough of their own to
employ so much cost upon, Pauper vbiqueiacet. There wanis not poor at every
door.


Thus, Dear, thou see my belief, if thou can teach thy little one
humility, it must needs make thee a glad father.

But I know thou wonderest by this time what the cause should be that we two
continually vnclasping our hearts one to the other, I should reserve this to
writing. When thou think thus, dear, remember how grievous it was to thee
but to hear me say, I may die, and thou will confess this would have been
an unpleasant discourse to thee, and thou know I never durst displease thee
willingly, so much I love thee. All I now desire is, that the unexpectedness
of it make it not more grievous to thee. But I know thou art a Christian, and
therefore will not doubt of thy patience.

And though I thus write to thee, as heartily desiring to be religiously
prepared to die, yet, my dear, I despair not of life, nay, I hope and daily
pray for it, if so God will be pleased.

Nor shall I think this labor lost, though I do live: for I will make it my
own looking-glass, wherein to see when I am too severe, when too remiss, and
in my childs fault through this glass to discern mine own errors. And I
hope God will so give me his grace, that I shall more skilfully act than
apprehend a mothers duty.

My dear, thou know me so well, I shall not need to tell thee, I have
written honest thoughts in a disordered fashion, not observing method. For thou
know how short I am of learning and natural endowments to take such a
course in writing. Or if that strong affection of thine have hid my weakness
from thy sight, I now profess seriously my own ignorance: and though I did
not, this following Treatise would bewray it: But I send it only to the eyes
of a most loving Husband, and of a child exceedingly beloved, to whom I hope
it will not be altogether unprofitable.

Thus humbly desiring God to give thee all comfort in this life, and happiness
in the life to come, I leave thee and thine to his most gracious protection.

Thine inviolable, Eliza. Iocelin.

THE MOTHERS LEGACY to her unborn CHILD.
Having long, often and earnestly desired of God, that I might be a mother to
one of his children, and the time now drawing on, which I hope he has
appointed to give thee unto me: It drew me into a consideration both
wherefore I so earnestly desired thee, and (having found that the true cause
was to make thee happy) how I might compass this happiness for thee.

I knew it consisted not in honor, wealth, strength of body or friends (though
all these are great blessings) therefore it had been a weak request to desire
thee only for an heir to my fortune. No, I never aimed at so poor an
inheritance for thee, as the whole world: Neither would I have begged of God so
much pain, as I know I must endure, to have only possessed thee with earthly
riches, of which to day thou may be a great man, tomorrow a poor beggar.
Nor did an hope to dandle thy infancy move me to desire thee. For I know all
the delight a Parent can take in a child is honey mingled with gall.

But the true reason that I have so often kneeled to God for thee, is, that
thou might be an inheritour of the Kingdom of Heaven. To which end I
humbly beseech Almighty God thou may bend all thy actions, and (if it be
his blessed will) give thee so plentiful a measure of his grace, that thou
majesty serve him as his Minister, if he make thee a man.

It is true that this age holds it a most contemptible office, fit only for
poor men's children, younger brothers, and such as have no other means to
live. But for Gods sake be not discouraged with these vain speeches; but
fortify your self with remembering of how great worth the winning of one soul
is in Gods sight, and you shall quickly find how great a place it is to be a
Priest unto the living God. If it will please him to move your heart with his
holy Spirit, it will glow and burn with zeal to do him service. The Lord
open thy lips, that thy mouth may show forth his praise.

If I had skill to write, I would write all I apprehend of the happy estate of
true laboring Ministers: but I may plainly say that of all men they by their
calling are the most truly happy; they are familiar with God, they labor in
his Vineyard, and they are so beloved of him, that he gives them abundance of
knowledge. Oh be one of them, let not the scorn of evil men hinderthee. Look
how GOD has provided for thee sufficient means; thou need not hinder thy
study to look out for living, as the Israelites hindered their work to look
for straw: If thou be not content with this, thou will not be with more;
GOD deliver thee from covetousness.

I desire thee that though thou take a spiritual calling, thou will not
seek after the livings of the Church, nor promotions, though I honor them as
I have great cause, but I would have thee so truly an humble and zealous
Minister, that thy only end should be to do God service, without desire of
any thing to thy self, save the Kingdom of Heaven. Yet as I would not have
thee seek these things, so I would have thee as careful not to neglect Gods
blessings, but with all thankfulness to receive what he bestows, and to be
a careful steward, distributing it to those that have need.

I could not choose but manifest this desire in writing, lest it should please
God to deprive me of time to speak.

And if thou be a daughter, thou may perhaps think I have lost my labor;
but read on, and thou shall see my love and care of thee and thy salvation is
as great, as if thou were a son, and my fear greater.

It may peradventure when thou come to some discretion, appear strange to
thee to receive these lines from a Mother that died when thou were borne, but
when thou see men purchase land, and store up treasure for their unborn
babes, wonder not at me that I am careful for thy salvation, being such an
eternal portion: and not knowing whether I shall live to instruct thee when
thou art borne, let me not be blamed though I write to thee before. Who would
not condemn me if I should be careless of thy body while it is within me?
Sure a far greater care belongs to thy soul, to both these cares I will
endeavor my self so long as I live.

Again, I may perhaps be wondered at for writing in this kind, considering
there are so many excellent books, whose least note is worth all my
meditations. I confess it, and thus excuse my self. I write not to the world,
but to mine own child, who it may be, will more profit by a few weak
instructions coming from a dead mother (who cannot every day praise or reprove
it as it deserves) than by far better from much more learned. These things
considered, neither the true knowledge of mine own weakness, nor the fear
this may come to the worlds eye, and bring scorn upon my grave, can stay my
hand from expressing how much I covet thy salvation.

Therefore, dear child, read here my love, and if God take me from thee,
be obedient to these instructions, as thou ought to be unto me, I have
learnt them, out of Gods Word, I beseech him that they may be profitable to
thee.

(1)
The first charge I give thee, I learned of Solomon, Eccles. 12. 1. Remember
thy Creator in the days of thy youth. It is an excellent beginning, and a fit
lesson for a child. Look with what the Vessel is first seasoned, it retains
the taste: and if thou beginnest to remember to serve GOD when thou art young,
before the world, the flesh, and the devil take hold on thee, God will love
thee, and send his holy Spirit to take possession of thee, who shall resist
those enemies, and not suffer them to hurt thee.

To move thy heart to remember thy Creator betimes, meditate upon the benefits
thou continually receiuest: First, how he has created thee when thou were
nothing, redeemed thee being worse than naught, and now of mere grace he has
given thee his holy Spirit, sanctifying thee to an eternal Kingdom. Thou
can not possibly understand how great these mercies are, but straight thy
soul must cry, What shall I do for so gracious a God? All the powers of my
soul and body will I give to his service, my first thoughts will I dedicate
to him, like Abels sacrifice I will present to him the first fruits of my
youth; In the strength of my age will I fall down before him, and if I live to
old age, that weakness will not let my knees bow, nor my hands be lifted up,
yet shall my heart meditate on his goodness night and day, and my tongue shall
be always telling of his marvelous works.

When thou have thus remembered the infinite mercies of God, it behoues thee to
settle thy self to a constant service of him, to order thy thoughts, words and
actions to his glory, and to covenant with thy self that thou will not break
thy promises to God. That thou may the more easily perform these duties,
mark I pray thee these following rules for ordering thy life, and God will
bless thee and all thy good endeavors.

(2)
At thy first waking in the morning, be careful of thy self, that thou harbor
in thy brain no vain or unprofitable, but of all no ungodly fancy to hinder
thy morning sacrifice, but straight frame thy self to meditate on the mercies
of God, the maliciousness of the devil, and thine own weakness.

Thine own weakness is apparent to thee: for even but now thine eyes were
closed, thou could not see to defend thy self, thy strength was gone, so
that thou were not able to resist the weakest creature, a gnat or a flea might
glut themselves with thy blood.

The Devils malice is as easily perceived, for even now he lies lurking ready
to catch every good motion from thy heart, suggesting things more delightful
to thy fancy, and persuading thee to defer thy service of God though but for
a little while.

But be warned and armed against his tentations; for be assured if thou once
yield to neglect praying to God, but one half hour, when that time comes thou
shall find thy self far more unapt, and thy heart more dull to pray than
before: whereas if thou disposest thy self to pray, though thou be heavy
and vncheerefull in it, yet God, who searches the heart, and sees thy desire to
pray, though thou can not, will enlighten thee and prepare thy heart against
the next time, that thou shall find comfort. Therefore, take heed the Devil
deceive you not, for you see his malice is not small that seeks to cosen you
of all happiness present and to come: For be assured you can take no true joy
in earthly pleasures, no longer than you seek after heavenly.

Having thus discerned the infinite malice of the Devil, and your own
exceeding weakness, how do you think you were preserved from his snares
while you slept? or do you think he only besets you when you are awake? No,
be not deceived, he is not so fair an enemy: his hate is such to you, that
if he could he would tear your body and drag your soul to hell while you
slept. Alas, all this he might have done, your strength was small to resist
him. Now you must needs confess who it is that is only able to preserve you,
that it is God, and that it is his mercy, not your desert, that you are
preserved: and gather to your self a strong resolution with all your force to
serve him all the day, and to resist all the tentations of the devil.

Then being thoroughly awake (for sure God likes not sleeping prayer) begin to
give God thanks, and to desire the continuance of his mercy toward thee in
these words, till thou can find such as may better express thine own soul.

O eternal God, gracious from the beginning, and merciful to the latter
ending of the world, I give thee humble thanks, that according to thine
abundant goodness, thou have graciously defended me this night from all
dangers that might have happened unto me. I beseech thee continue this thy
favorable goodness toward me, and so grant me thy grace, that in all my
thoughts, words, and actions I may seek thy glory, and evermore so live in thy
fear, that I may die in thy favor, for thy Son my only Saviors sake. Amen.
(3)
Having thus invited God into your soul, take heed you offend not against so
great and glorious a guest: Think if thou see a superior entertained with
such observance of the Master, such diligence in the servants, such a general
care that all things may give a testimony of his welcome, O think, sinful
soul, what care ought thou to have when the living God vouchsafes to dwell
in thee: Oh watch, Oh be wary. Do not (my dear Child) Oh, not wilfully
offend him, for hardly are presumptuous sins forgiven: but if out of
weakness thou offend against him, run straight before he can be gone, for
he is merciful, and will stay a while after thou have sinned to expect thy
repentance: but if thou do not make haste, then the devil, who will not
delay to seek thy destruction, he will accuse thee, mocking thy impiety, and
God will leave thee, being more offended at thy neglect, or rather contempt of
his mercy, than at thy first offense.

Therefore run quickly esteem no sin small, but what member soever caused
thee to offend him, bring it before him, and let it assist thee chiefly in thy
repentance. If thine eye teach thee wantonness, covetousness, or the like,
let them power forth tears to purchase thee a pardon. If thy tongue have
offended toward God or thy neighbor, bring it with shame and sorrow to
confess in private, what it was not ashamed to glory of in public. Learn to
be ashamed to commit sin, but, being committed, hope not to hide it from God
by any other means, than by hearty repentance: so indeed thou may win his
mercy to cover thy transgression, and in his Sons passion he will bury thine
offenses, so as he will hide them from himself: but then thou must delay no
time, go quickly, get thee alone, wear thy knees, wring thy hands, beat thy
breast, know as little measure in thy sorrow, as thou did in thy sin. The
Lord will not despise a contrite heart, and though he let thee kneel long,
he will have mercy at the last. Learn of Jacob to wrestle with God, and to
cry with a fervent spirit, I will not let thee go unless thou bless me. Our
Savior says, The Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence, and the violent take
it by force.

(4)
Thus you see, it must be an eager, not a slothful course, that must bring you
to Heaven. Take heed therefore that you avoid all the kinds of this sin.
Whatsoever you go about, do it with cheerfulness. Be ashamed of idleness,
as thou art a man, but tremble at it, as thou art a Christian. For be sure the
devil never is so happy in his tentations, as when he emploies them on a
slothful man, who cannot endure to take so much pains as to resist him.

Solomon promises no other patrimony to a sluggard but poverty. GOD hates the
slothful. Witness the five foolish Virgins, and the unprofitable servant,
Matthew. 25. The one Christ would not know; the other is branded with two
shameful marks, evil and slothful, and his talent taken from him. What more
wretched estate can there be in the world? first to be hated of God as an idle
Drone, not fit for his service: then through extreme poverty to be contemned
of all the world. Oh then at no hand yield thy youth to sloth, but so soon as
thou have made thy prayer to God, prepare to rise, and rising use this Prayer.

In thy Name, Oh blessed Savior, I arise, who with the Father, and the holy
Spirit, created me, and with thine own most precious blood have redeemed me.
I beseech thee this day, to govern, keep, and bless me: lead me forth in
every good way, therein direct and confirm me, and after this frail and
miserable life, bring me to that blessed life which has no end, for thy great
merit and mercies sake. Amen.
(5)
Thou art no sooner broke out of the arms of sloth, but pride steps in
diligently, waiting to furnish thee with any vain toy in thy attire. And
though I believe there are diverse sorts of pride more pestilent to the soul
than this of apparel, yet this is enough dangerous, and I am sure betraies a
man's folly more than any other. Is it not a monstrous thing to see a man, whom
God has created of an excellent form, each part answering the due proportion
of another, should by a fantastical habit make himself so ugly, that one
cannot find amongst all Gods creatures any thing like him? One man, though not
resembling another in shape or face, yet for his rational soul is like
another: but these fashionists have (I fear) changed their reasonable souls
for proud souls without reason: could they else deforme and transform
themselves by these new fangled fashions, and apish behavior; crindging,
shrugging, starting, and playing the fantastiques every way. So that they may
truly say when they are fashionable, that they are not like other men: and I
believe wife men will not be sorry for it. For who would be like them?

I desire thee for Gods sake shun this vanity, whether thou be son or
daughter. If a daughter, I confess thy task is harder because thou art
weaker, and thy temptations to this vice greater, for thou shall see those whom
perhaps thou will think less able, exalted far above thee in this kind,
and it may be thou will desire to be like them, if not to out-goe them. But
believe and remember that I tell thee, the end of all these vanities is bitter
as gall.

Oh the remembrance of misspent time, when thou shall grow in years, and have
attained no other knowledge, than to dress thy self. When thou shall see
half, perhaps all, thy time spent, and that of all thou have sowed, thou have
nothing to reap but repentance, late repentance, how will thou grieve? How
will thou accuse one folly for bringing in another? and in thy memory cast over
the cause of each misfortune which has befallen thee, till passing from one to
another, at last thou find thy corrupt will to be the first cause, and then
thou will with grief enough perceive, that if thou had served God when thou
seruedst thy fond desires, thou had now had peace of heart. The God of mercy
give thee grace to remember him in the days of thy youth.

Mistake me not, nor give your self leave to take too much liberty with
saying, My mother was too strict. No, I am not, for I give you leave to follow
modest fashions, but not to be a beginner of fashions: nor would I have you
follow it till it be general; so that in not doing as others do, you might
appear more singular than wise: but in one word, this is all I desire, that
you will not set your heart on such fooleries, and you shall see that this
modest carriage will win you reputation and love with the wise and virtuous
sort.

And once again, remember how many hours may thou give to God, which if
thou spendest in these vanities, thou shall never be able to make account of.
If thou do but endeavor to do well, God will accept the will for the deed,
but if thou wilfully spend the morning of thy time in these vanities, God will
not be put off with such reckonings, but punishments will follow, such as I
pray God thou may not pull upon thee.

Yet alas, this is but one sort of pride, and so far from being accounted a
vice, that, if the time mends not before you come to understanding, you will
hear a well dressed woman, (for that is the style of honor) more commended than
a wife or honest, or religious woman. And it may be, this may move you to
follow their idleness: but when you have any such desire, draw your self to
consider what manner of persons the commended and commenders are, and you shall
find them all of one batch, such as being vain themselves, applaud it in
others.

But if you will desire praise, follow the example of those religious women,
whose virtuous fames time has not power to raze out: as devout Anna, who
served the Lord with fasting and prayer, Luke 2. Just Elizabeth, who served God
without reproof: Religious Ester, who taught her Maids to fast and pray, Est.
4. 15, and the chaste Susanna, whose story, I hope, the strictest will allow
for a worthy example.

I am so fearful that thou should fall into this sin, that I could spend
my little time of life in exhorting thee from it. I know it is the most
dangerous subtle sin that can steal the heart of man, it will alter shapes
as often as the Camelion does colors, it will fit it self to all dispositions,
and (which is most strange) it will so disguise it self, that he must be
cunning who discernes it from humility, nay it may lie in thine own heart,
and it thou be not a diligent searcher of thy self, thou shall not know it:
but it thou watch well thou shall take it, for it has one property that cannot
change, as the common people believe the Devil cannot alter the shape of one
foot. It is true of pride, that though it be changed into that Angel of
light, Humility, yet thou may know it by self-love; if thou find that
within thee, be sure pride is not far off. For humility will make thee seem
vile in thine own eyes, it will make thee see thine own faults, and confess
them to be greater than other men's; so that thou will respect every man above
thy self. But the rules of self-conceit are just contrary, they stand on
tiptoes, reckning their virtues like the proud Pharisie, scorning to be like
other men.

Shun it for thy souls sake, for if thou entertain it, it is such a
shameless flatterer, that it will make thee believe thou art greater, wiser,
learneder than all the company, when indeed, thou will prove thy self the
greatest fool of them, wearying them all with thy vain talk.

Solomon says, Pride goes before destruction, Prou. 16. 18. And a high mind
before the fall. And our blessed Savior, the true pattern of humility,
exhorts us to learn of him that was lowly and meek in heart, Mat. 11. 29. And
if we do so, he promises we shall find rest unto our souls. Neither want
there curses, threatening, where persuasions will not serve. Whosoever exalts
himself shall be humbled, Luke 14. 11. Read the holy Scriptures often and
diligently, and thou shall find continual threatenings against pride,
punishment of pride, and warnings from pride. Thou shall find no sin so
heavily punished as this: it made Devils of Angels, a beast of great
Nabuchodonezzar, dogs meat of Iezabel, and I will conclude with a good man's
saying, If all the sins reigning in the world were burnt to ashes, even the
ashes of pride would be able to reduce them all again.

I know in fewer words there might much more have been said against this
sin, but I know not who will say so much to thee when I am gone. Therefore I
desire thou may be taught these my instructions when thou art young, that
this foul sin may be weeded out before it take deep root in thy heart. I
will return now to my first purpose, which is to set thee down one day for a
pattern, how I would have thee spend all the days of thy life.

(6)
Therefore avoiding all manner of pride, make thy self decently ready, which
being done, retire to a place alone, where humbling thy self upon thy knees,
again renew thy prayers, humbly confessing, and earnestly desiring
forgiveness for all thy sins, and use Doctor Smiths morning prayer, than
which I know not a better, nor ever did I find more comfort in any.

In aduising you to a set form of prayer, I do not prohibit conceived Prayer,
but humbly beg of God to give you grace to pray often out of your own
meditations according to his will.

But when it shall please God to call you to the charge of a family, I will not
direct, but deliver my opinion, that then a set form of prayer is most
necessary: my reason is, that your servants being used to it, are always ready
to go along with you in their hearts, word for word, as you pray, and
continuance makes them to understand every word, which must needs cause greater
devotion, and give more life to the prayers.

(7)
When you have finished your private prayer, be sure that you absent not your
self from public prayer, if it be used in the house where you live: which
ended, go and use any lawful creation, either for thy profit or pleasure, and
from all these exercises reserve a time to fit down to some good study, but
use that most that may make thee greatest, Divinity. It will make thee
greater, richer, happier than the greatest Kingdom of the earth, though thou
could possess it. If any man serve me, says Christ, him will my father
honor; If Mordecay were thought so highly honored by Ahasuerus for a little
gay trapping, what shall be done to him whom God will honor?

Therefore if thou desire honor, serve the Lord, and thou art sure of it. If
riches be thy aim, Saint Paul assures thee, that Godliness is great gain.
If thou covet pleasure, set David's delight before thine eyes, I have had more
delight in thy testimonies than in all manner of riches, Psalm. 119. And in the
92. Psalm he says, Thou Lord have made me glad by thy works. In the 4.
Psalm, Thou have given me more joy of heart, etc. and reading the 91. Psalm,
thou shall see what manner of blessings they are that God makes his children
merry withal. And when thou have once fixed thy heart to this study, it will be
so sweet, that the more thou learnest, the more thou will desire, and the more
thou desire, the more God will love thee. Thou will study so well in private,
and practice it in all thy actions publicly, thou will weigh thy thoughts so
even, that thy words shall not be light, and a few lines I will use to
persuade thee to be advised in thy words.

(8)
Though it is as much to say, Remember thy Creator when thou speak, as if I
could use all the exhortations, and tell thee all the perils that belong to
speech, yet so apt are we to forget God in our foolish talk, that sometimes
we by our discourse would make Gods of our selves. Therefore it will not be
amiss to receive a few instructions, though weak, from me for ordering thy
speech.

The morning I have dedicated to meditation, prayer, good studies, and honest
recreation. The noone time is most used for discourse, it being all a man can
do while he eats, and it is a time wherein a man ought to be careful of his
speech, having before him Gods good blessings to refresh his body, and honest
company to recreate his mind, and therefore ought to be no way offensive in
his speech either to God or good men. But most especially take heed that
neither heedlesnesse nor earnestness in thy discourse, cause thee to take Gods
holy Name in vain, but always speak of him with reverence and understanding.

Next, let not thy neighbor suffer in thy speech, but be rather silent than
speak ill of any man, though he deserve it. And that thou may do thus,
observe this rule; whenever thou hear one ill spoken of, before thou
second it, examine thine own heart, and it is ods but thou may find in thy
self either the same fault, or a worse than that he is accused for. So thou
shall be forced either to mend thy self, or not to condemn him.

Also shun multiplicity of words, and what thou speak, be sure to
understand fully, for it is a grating to the ear to hear a man talk at
random. If thou desire to better thy self, modestly ask a question of
those whom thou see to have knowledge to resolve thee, and be less ashamed
to confess thy ignorance, than by holding a foolish argument, to betray it.
And ever avoid that scornful fashion of questioning a man, who, thou know,
cannot make thee a satisfying answer: neither make a scorn of his ignorance,
for be assured he knows something that thou do not know.

If God have given thee a ready wit, take heed thou abuse it not. At no time
maintain arguments against the truth, especially in sacred or moral matter:
for it is hard to do it, without offending the God of truth; and by it thou
may harm thy weak brother, but the greatest harm will be thine own when
thou come to give account for thy idle words.

In thy mirth shun such jesting as may make thee offensive, scoffing becomes
not a Christian. Prise not therefore the froth of an idle wit, before the faith
of a virtuous friend.

And I pray thee, asthou would have blessings multiplied upon thee, let no
speech pass from thee that may grieve chaste ears. How hateful is obscene
speech in rude people? But it makes one of gentle birth odious to all honest
company. Solomon says, A wise man conceales k nowledge, but the heart of a
fool publisbeth foolishness, Prou. 12. 23. and he that keeps his mouth,
keeps his life, 13. 3. and in the 14. 5. The lips of the wife preserve them.

To conclude, let thy tongue and thy heart go together, hate dissimulation and
lying, and God will love thee, which I humbly beg of him.

(9)
If thou keep thy thoughts holy, and thy words pure, I shall not need to
fear, but all thy actions will be honest. But my fear thou should know
the way, and yet go aside, will not suffer my counsel to leave thee alone,
till thou come to thy iournies end.

First then be careful when thou art alone, that thou do nothing that thou
would not do if men saw thee: remember that Gods eye is always open, and
thine own conscience will be witness enough against thee.

Next be sure that no action of thine may be a scandal to thy profession, I
mean to the profession of the true Religion. This indeed is as much as to say
to thee, Eschew evil. For there is not the least sin thou can do, but the
enemies of truth will be glad to say, Lo, this is one of them that professes
God in his mouth, but see what his life is. Therefore a great care ought a
Christian to have, especially those whom God has set as lights in his Church.

Whatsoever thou art about to do, examine it by Gods Commandments: if it be
agreeable to them, go on cheerfully, and though the end answer not thy hopes,
never grieve nor grudge, but be glad that Gods will is performed, and let thy
trust in him assure thee, that all things work together for the best to them
that love GOD. And though it appear a cross, be assured it is a blessing.
Therefore make right use of it; examine thy self what sin thou have
committed that may challenge that punishment, repent of it, and reconcile God
unto thee, bearing thy Cross with patience, and doubt not he that deprived
thee of thy hope to try thee, will (if thou bear it well) give thee as great
or a greater blessing than thou hopest for. But if thou shall find that thy
attempts will not endure that trial, break from them, and tell the Devil in
plain terms thou have a light to discern his snares by, and therefore
scornest to be his slave. For believe me, my child, if thou shall out of any
worldly respect do a dishonest act, it may be thou may thrive in it a
while, but the end is miserable. Oh the burden of a wounded conscience who can
bear?

If thou see others thrive and grow great in such courses, read the 73.
Psalm; there thou shall see David himself confesses his foot had wel-nigh
slipped when he saw the prosperity of the wicked. He describes all their
felicities, but at the last when he went into the Sanctuary, he found what
their end was, how they were set in slippery places, etc. and then he cries,
Whom have I in Heaven but thee? And I have desired none in the earth with thee.
Alas, all their labor is but to build a paper house upon the sand, which
though it be never so glorious to look upon, a small tempest will shatter it.
When if thou lay the foundation of thy happiness upon Christ the rock of thy
salvation, and build it with zealous service of him according to truth, then
though the floods beat against it, and huge tempests threaten it, thou need
not fear, for thy walls will stand fast, and thy foundations will secure thee.

It were enough to persuade any man to be honest if he would consider the day
of affliction, and store up the comfort of a quiet conscience against it came:
for only that discernes the patient Job from despairing Caine. Caine hideously
cries out, his punishment is greater than he can bear. Job sighs forth, Lo
though he slay me, yet will I trust in him. Indeed, till affliction comes,
the worser sort of men appear to be the happiest, but then the chafe is
soon known from the wheat: the good man knows his cross is good for him,
bears it patiently; and casts his care on Christ, his heart knows no
repining, nor his tongue other complaining, but Shall I receive good from God
and not evil?

On the contrary, when affliction falls upon those who have laid their
foundation on the sand, alas, they have no comfort, they are either ashamed or
besotted, they cannot find God, nay they will not seek him: but in stead of
seeking counsel from him, they are not ashamed (with forsaken Saul) to implore
the Devil. What do they less that seek after Witches for lost goods, cure
for themselves, their children, or cattle? I hope there are but few of these:
but I know where God is once forsaken, man is apt to fall into the depth of
sin. It is grace, mere grace, that preserues Gods children from these
dangerous falls, of which grace I beseech Almighty God make us all partakers.

And to conclude, how I would have thee square thine actions, whatsoever thou
do, remember that thou art in the presence of God, (who will expect an
account from thee) so thou will not dare to do evil, and thou will do well
cheerfully, because thou art sure it pleases the Lord, who fees thy
willingness, and will not leave thee unrewarded.

The vices most reigning in these times I must particularly advise thee to
shun: first, swearing. For Gods sake, let your communication be yea, yea, and
nay, nay, for what is more (says Christ) comes of evil. Keep not company
with a swearer, lest custom make thee forget how great the sin is, and so by
little and little thou may get thy self a habit of it. Reprove it in thy
friend, if he will brook reproof: but it is to no end to reprove a scorner:
Rebuke not a scorner lest he hate thee, but rebuke a wife man, and he will
love thee, Prou. 9. 8.

Always keep a watch before thine own lips, and remember that thou need
not swear if thou do not accustom thy self to lie. For if thou use to
tell truths, thy word will be as current as thy oath. I hope thy calling (if
God has made thee a man) will be of authority to reprove this vice in others,
and not to delight in it thy self. If thou be a Daughter, remember thou art
a Maid, and such ought thy modesty to be, that thou should scarce speak,
but when thou answerest: thou art young, speak if need be, and yet scarcely
when thou art twice asked, Eccles. 32. 8. Whatsoever thou be, thou have a
calling, which thou must not dishonor: thou art a Christian, and Christ
commands thou shall not swear at all, Mat. 5. 34.

The next vice too too common in this age is Drunkenness, which is the high
way to hell: a man may travel in it from sin to sin, till the Devil show
him he can go no further, as a Traveler from Inn to Inn, till he come to
his iourneyes end. Oh think how filthy is that sin that makes a man a beast
all his life, and a Devil at his death. Solomon asks, To whom is woe? to whom
is sorrow? to whom is strife? to wbom is murmuring? to whom are wounds without
cause? and to whom is redness of the eyes? And in the next verse answers, Even
to them that tarry long at the Wine, and to the end of the Chapter, sets forth
the miseries occasioned by this vice, Prou. 23.

That thou may avoid this sin, be careful in the choice of thy friends,
for it is they that will betray thee to this sin. Never make choice of a
Drunkard to thy companion, much less thy friend. For our Kingdom has of late
afforded more examples of those who have been slain by their friends in a
drunken quarrel, than those that have fallen by the enemies sword: and how
unfit is he to be a friend, that when thou shall have need of his counsel,
will have his head, instead of wisdom, filled with wine, and add rather grief
than comfort to thy necessities? And again, what secret thou shall trust him
with, thou may be sure shall be vomited forth, and all thy comfort must be,
He did it unwillingly, when he knew not what he did. Thus thou see to be a
Drunkard, is to be a man unfit for Gods service, or good men's company. I
beseech God give thee grace to detest it.

Next, I must exhort thee from a sin, that I cannot name, thou must search
thine own heart for it. It is thy darling sin, that which to enjoy, thou
could resist all others, at least thou think so. But do not harbor it,
search diligently for it in thine own nature, and when thou have found it,
cast it headlong from thee. It is thy souls subtle betraier, and all thy
other sins depend upon it. There is not so much danger in all the rest that
thou contendest with, as in this one, that thou art loath to call a sin. Thy
other sins are like a rebellious multitude in a common wealth, which wanting
a head, do little harm. This is their head, cut it off, and thou shall see
all thy other sins dispersed, as an army of fearful Rebels, when they hear
their great leaders head has kissed the block.

(10)
When thou have spent the day in religious and honest exercises, in the evening
return again to some good meditation or study, which conclude with prayer,
commending thy self to God, and so shall thou joyfully go to thy supper;
which done, and the time of rest come, as thou begannest in the morning, so
shut up the day with humble thanksgiving for all the benefits that day
received, hearty repentance for all thy sins committed, naming and bewailing
them. For thou know not if thou repentest not to night, whether thou shall
live to repent tomorrow. And though thou were sure of it, yet the oftener thou
make even thy accounts with God, thy sleeps will be the sounder, and thou
shall awake with a heart full of joy, and ready to serve the Lord.

Last, commit thy self, and all that is thine, to God in zealous Prayer, using
Doctor Smiths evening prayer, as his morning: both which though they be for a
family, yet are they easily reduced to a private man's prayer. So going to bed,
take thy rest, beginning and ending in him who is both first and last. Thus
spend the six days thou have to labor in, that thou may be ready to
celebrate the Sabbath, to which there belongs another Remember.

(11)
Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath day. This duty so often and earnestly
commanded by GOD himself in the old Testament, so confirmed to us in the new,
by the Resurrection of our Savior, in memory whereof it is called the Lords
day, and perpetually celebrated by the Church, yet in these days, as if we
neither had part in the creation, nor redemption of the world, too many keep
no Sabbath, or at the most but a shadow of a Sabbath. Where almost can we
find one that will lose a good bargain rather than make it on the Lords day?
Or that will bridle his own desires to sanctify that day?

Seeing therefore this danger, in which thou may easily be entrapped by the
Devils subtilty, and following the multitude; I cannot but with all my power
exhort thee, carefully to keep the Sabbath, to which end I pray thee mark
well the fourth Commandment, Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath day,
six days shall thou labor, and do all that thou have to do, but the seventh
is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God, in it thou shall do no manner of work,
thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter, thy man servant, nor thy maid-seruant,
nor thy cattle that is within thy gates: For in six days the Lord made Heaven
and Earth, the Sea, and all that is therein, and rested the seventh day,
wherefore the Lord blessed the seventh day and hallowed it.

If thou will be won to the due observation of this day as an obedient
servant, see God commands, Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath day. If as
a loving and dutiful son, see how GOD persuades thee, by equity, grounded
upon his own bounty to thee: He has given thee six days to do thine own
works, and he requires but one of thee. What can thou say for thy self,
why thou should not wholly that day give thy self to his service? Lastly,
if thou will learn how to serve him as a good Scholar, he teaches thee an
admirable way, both by rule and example. First, by rule, Thou shall do no
manner of work in it: then by example, He made the whole world in six days,
and he rested the seventh, wherefore he blessed it.

Seeing God thus commands thee by his power, persuades thee in his mercy, and
teaches thee both by rule, and his own most gracious example, how can thou
be so deuoid of grace, nay of reason, as not to obey so just a Master? so
merciful a Father? so gracious a Teacher? If thou make not a conscience of
keeping this day, howsoever a dull security may possess thee to flatter thy
self, thou indeed make conscience of nothing. For I am persuaded, if thou
can dispense with thy self to profane this day, either for thy profit or
pleasure, thou will not stick upon the like occasion to break all the rest of
the Commandments one after another.

Therefore for Christ's sake be watchful that the Devil deceive you not, nor
none of his instruments draw thee away from this days duty, He is always
busy and ready at hand to draw thee away from God, but this day without doubt
he doubles all his forces, he will provoke thine eyes to sleep, he will
send heaviness and dullness to thy heart, and perhaps pain to thy body, if he
can so much prevail: any slight, any trick to stay thee from Gods house, and
from the Congregation of his people, he will surely use, nay he will
sometimes do it with religious pretenses, as to pray at home, read a Sermon,
study the Scripture, and to spend the time in such Christian exercises, as are
infinitely good at other times. But I once heard a religious Preacher affirm
(and I believed him) that those who had ability of body to go to Church, and
yet out of any evil disposition (for good it can hardly be) absented
themselves, though they prayed, they were not heard.

It behoues thee by how much greater his practices are against thee that day,
so much the more to fortify thy self against him: at no hand let him stay
thee from the Church, there GOD has promised to be present, and there he is.
Dare thou then, silly wretch, absent thy self from him? I know, thou dare
not. Go then with a heart prepared to pray by prayer, and going meditate on
Gods great mercies in the creation of the world, his greater mercy in redeeming
it, and mingle with thy meditation prayers, that may apply these great
blessings to thy self.

So approach and enter, with reverent and fervent zeal, the house of GOD, and
throwing away all thoughts, but such as may further the good work thou art
about, bend thy knees and heart to God, desiring of him his holy Spirit, that
thou may join with the Congregation in zealous prayer, and earnest attention
to his word preached. And though perhaps thou hear a Minister preach, as
thou think, weakly, yet give him thine attention, and thou shall find that
he will deliver something profitable to thy soul, either that thou have not
heard before, or not marked, or forgotten, or not well put in practice. And it
is fit thou should be often put in mind of those things concerning thy
salvation.

Thus if thou spend thy time at Church, thou will be ready to give thy self
to meditate of the holy Word thou have heard, without which truly hearing
profits little. For it is with the soul as with the body, though meat be
never so wholesome, and the appetite never so great, yet if any ill disposition
in the stomach hinder digestion, it turns not to nourishment, but rather
proves more dangerous. So the Word if after hearing it be not digested by
meditation, it is not nourishing to the soul. Therefore let the time thou have
to be absent from Church, be spent in praising God, praying to God, and
applying to thy self what thou have heard. If thou have heard a sin reproved
that thou art guilty of, take it for a warning, do it no more. If thou hear
of a good action which thou have ouerslipt, strive to recover time, and resolve
to put it in act. Thus by practicing what thou hear, thou shall bind it to
thy memory, and by making it thine own, make thy self most happy.

Learn of Isaiah, the true observation of the Sabbath: If thou turn away thy
foot from the Sabbath, from doing thy will on my holy day, and call the Sabbath
a delight to consecrate it as glorious to the Lord, and shall honor him, not
doing thy own ways, nor seeking thine own will, nor speaking a vain word:
Then shall thou delight in the Lord, and I will cause thee to mount upon the
high places of the earth, and feed thee with the heritage of Jacob thy father,
for the mouth of the Lord has spoken it, Isaiah 58.13.

It is a wonder to see how often God has commanded this one Commandment, and
yet how slack we are to keep it. Exodus 31. from the 12. verse, is all
commanding this: again in the 34.21. and diverse places more.

Learn then to prepare thy heart early for this day, which if thou obseruest
well, God will bless thee and thy labors all the week. Thus far I have
endeavored to exhort thee to thy duty toward God.

(12)
Of which the honor due to thy Parents is such a part as cannot be separated;
for God commands it, Honor thy father and thy mother, it is the first
Commandment of the second table, as, Thou shall have none other Gods but me,
is of the first: Idolatry being the greatest sin against God, and disobedience
to parents, being the ringleader in sins against man, we are first warned
of them, as if in case we should fall into them, it were too late to avoid the
other. For if we once become in heart Idolaters, it will be no hard matter to
be a bower down to an Image, to abuse Gods holy Name, and to profane his
Sabbath: So if we dare disobey good Parents, at that breach, theft, murder,
adultery, falsenesse, covetousness easily enter.

Nay, I dare say, if thou breakest either of these Commandments, thou breakest
all of the first and second Table: for as thou can not be idolatrous without
breaking all the rest, so thou can not be a disobedient child, but thou art
a murderer, a double one: first of nature in thy self, which if thy wicked
purposes do not smother, will of her self break forth into that duty. For an
example, the story of AEneas Ihewes how much it was observed by them that
received not the Commandment from Gods own mouth, as did the Jews, yet he
exposed himself to all dangers rather than he would forsake his father.
Secondly, thou art a murderer of thy father, who having stored up all his joy
in thee, has by thy disobedience his gray head brought with sorrow to the
grave; which God forbid.

And what difference, shall I say, is there between a disobedient child, and
an adulterer? the one forsakes her, by whom he gives being unto others; the
other despises those from whom he had his own being. Truly this is a
fearful adultery, and sin is a crafty strumpet, she will allure thee and
delude thee.

Again, in being disobedient thou art a thief, an impudent thief, for thou
do not only secretly steal, but openly detain the honor, reverence and
obedient duty, which all the world can witness is thy fathers.

And how will thou avoid being a false witness? will not one sin draw on
another? Wilt not thou be ready to excuse thy unnatural obstinacy, by
throwing calumnious aspersions on thy parents, giving thy tongue leave to lie
against thy conscience?

And lastly (Oh horrible) how easy a step is it to covet what thou think
thy parents life too long detaines from thee?

Thus thou seeft in being disobedient thou breakest six Commandments, from
which outrage, I beseech Almighty GOD preserve thee, and give thee grace to be
obedient to him, and to thy parents. I am sure thou have a father, who will
never command thee any thing contrary to the Commandments of God. Therefore I
have no need to speak to thee, how far a father ought to be obeyed: but
humbly desire of God to continue him in his good desires with long life, that
he may bring thee up in the fear of the Lord, and to give thee a heart ready
to embrace all religious learning.

(13)
The next duty equal to this, thou must perform to all the world in general,
Do to all men as thou would they should do unto thee. This is the
commandment our Savior gives us; Love one another: by this we shall be
known to be his, if we love one another, as he has loved us.

Yet of all that is commanded us, there is nothing more contrary to our wicked
nature than this loving our neighbor as our selves. We can with ease envy
him if he be rich, or scorn him if he be poor; but love him? nay the Devil
has more craft than so. It were hard for him if men should once begin to love
one another: therefore he uses all Art to stir dissension among as many as he
can, and to mix love with dissimulation.

To avoid this, consider well that God is the Author of peace and love, and
that strifes and contentions proceed of the Devil. Then if thou be the
child of God, do the works of God, love thy neighbor as he has commanded,
lest thou provoke our blessed Savior, when he shall see, that mark of the
Devil, malice in thee, to say as once to the unbelieving Jews, You are of
your father the devil, and the lusts of your father will you do, Ioh. 8.44.

Oh take heed thou offend not God thus grievously, that he shall disclaim
thee as none of his, because thou do not love those that are his.

This, if well weighed, were enough to make every man charitable, if it were
only for fear to hate whom God loved. But to believe or judge that God should
hate where thou do, were such an impious uncharitableness as a good
Christian must needs tremble at. God has given thee no authority to judge any
man, but he has commanded thee to love thine enemy; Love your enemies, bless
them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them that
hurt and persecute you, that you may be the children of your father which is in
heaven, Matthew. 5.44.

A man may find ways enough to possess the Devil of his soul, but none with
less pleasure to himself than this: he may sell it, as did Judas, to
satisfy a covetous desire; he may lose it, as does many a lazy man his
worldly estate; because he will not trouble himself to look over an account
of his fortune, he sinkes ere he thinks of it; so fares it with a negligent
Christian. Thirdly, he may pawn it, like a foolish unthrift, who pawnes that
which should keep him all his life, to purchase a gay toy, which shall serve
him a day or two: so does he that pawnes that rich jewel his soul, to the
griping usurer the Devil, for pleasure; happily he means one day to redeem
it, but runs on his selfe-pleasing course till the use has devoured the
principal, and his unmerciful Creditor hales him to a dungeon, where he has
time for ever to be wail, not only his present misery, but the loss of
infinite happiness.

These are strange enough that a man should sell eternity of joy for wealth,
or sleep away the time wherein he might make such a purchase, or pawn an
inestimable treasure for things not worth esteem. But yet they are all better
than he that gives away his soul for nothing, as does the envious man. The
covetous gets riches, the slothful ease, the wanton pleasure, but this hater
of his brother gets nothing (no not in present) but torment, fretting and
vexation: he is not the fatter for his meat, nor does he rest though he
sleep, yet he for whom, or against whom he thus toiles his spirit, happily
eats, sleeps, and laughes at his enuiers folly, or peradventure pitties him.

The more easily to avoid this sin, consider well the disprofits of it. Read
in the first Epistle of Saint John 3. Chap. 14. and 15. Verses, and in the 4.
chap. the 8. and the 20. verses: read the 13. of the first to the Corinthians;
there Saint Paul shows that without charity even spiritual graces are of no
worth. As the want of it brings infinite misery, so the posession infinite
joy. By Charity we perform our Savior Christ's commandment, who often
requires this of us, as if he should say, I have satisfied my father for all
the commandments that you have broke. Now your task is easy, I leave you
nothing to do, but to love one another; do this and you do all. By it we
fulfill the Law, Romans 13. 8. and 10. verses. By it we abide in the light, 1
Job. 2. 10.

Is it possible, when these are well weighed, that any man should be so mad to
bear an uncharitable heart about him, or so fool hardy to harbor a spleen
that shall hazard his salvation? Can we be so cruel to our selves, as to deny
Christ one commandment? For all his love to us, he requires but this testimony
of our love to him, which we cannot choose but perform if we do love him.
Therefore take heed if thou feel any malice toward thy brother, be sure thy
heart is not upright toward God. So root it out from thy heart, that no sting
of it be left, for it will grow faster than Ionahs Gourd.

Answer me not with Flesh and blood cannot do this: I know it. But if thou
desire God to give thee his holy Spirit, thou shall be strong to suffer, and
ready to forgive. Thou must not in any thing be subject to the flesh, for the
wisdom of the flesh is death. But always make thy spirit thy guide, for there
is life and peace.

The devil would desire no greater advantage than that thou would trust thy
soul to the discretion of thy corrupt flesh, he would soon inueigle that to
betray thee. But when thou have put thy self under the spirit, submitting thy
will to the will of God, he is no more able to hurt thee.

The next excuse I would take from thee, is a very foolish one, but so common,
that I fear you may happen on it, and that is this; If I should suffer wrongs
patiently, what will become of my reputation? what will the world say? Truly if
you remember, Christ has suffered more for you, than it is possible for you to
suffer: yet he never reviled any of his enemies, nor struck his persecutors,
but prayed for them. And his example teaches all that love him to do the like.
He wills you to turn the left cheek to him that smote the right, to give to
him that takes from you, and to go with him that compels you.

But these are strange rules for a generous spirit in these times, nay sure if
I be struck I must strike again, else I am a coward. Indeed as for giving, if
it were to one that would desire it at my hands, I had rather give a fragment
of my right than go to law, but if he will not sue to me, I Will spend all I am
worth ere I yield: Or I would go out of my door to show a man his way, but I
would feign see who could compel me. I mary, this is of the right strain;
but now look with a considerate eye upon this custom of the world, and the
former Commandment of Christ, and thou shall find them just opposite.

Therefore take heed, and let it be thy chief care never to prize thy
reputation with men equal to the salvation of thine own soul. But if thou
desire to keep thy credit unblemished, serve God with an upright heart, and
do nothing to any man, that thou would not be content he should do unto
thee. Open thy hand to the poor according to thy ability, meddle not with
other men's occasions, but where thou may do good, and have a calling to it.
And if it be in thy power to hurt thine enemy, let it pass, do him good if
thou can, and boast not of it: he that sees thee in private, will openly
reward thee.

Lastly, let thy heart be kept always in awe of this want of charity, by
continual remembering that thou have of thy Savior no other form of prayer to
desire forgiveness for thy self, than that wherein thou couenantest to
forgive others. All the other petitions we present unto God absolutely: only
this is conditional, he forgive us as we forgive others. Our Savior has
taught us no other way to desire it, and in the 18. of Matthew he shows God
will no otherwise grant it.

Sine fine finis.

