A VIEW OF A SEDITIOVS Bull sent into England, from Pius Quintus Bishop of
Rome, ANNO. 1569. Taken by the reverend Father in God, JOHN JEWEL, late Bishop
of SALISBVRIE. Whereunto is added A short Treatise of the holy Scriptures. Both
which he delivered in diverse Sermons in his Cathedral Church of Salisburie,
Anno. 1570.



AT LONDON: Printed by R. Newberie, and H. Bynneman, ANNO. 1582.

To the godly Reader.
THE present state of these our days, and the honorable, and reverent love,
that every one of us subjects owes to so gracious a Prince, as GOD in mercy
has set over us: has caused this small work to be persented unto thee
(gentle Reader.) For, it carries in it self, and brings unto thee a ripping
up, and an unfolding of that seditious BVL of Pius Quinius, that was set up
and published by FELTON, a rebellious traitor, in the twelfth year of her
Majesty's reign, to withdraw thee from the obedience and love that thou owe
to her Majesty, to her Laws and godly proceedinges, and to this Realm thy
dear Country.

To which is also adioined an other Treatise of the Holy Scriptures. Wherein
is showed thee the authority, and the profit, and the pleasure, and the
necessity of the word of God.

Both these, the reverend Father in GOD, D. JEWEL, late Bishop of SARVM,
delivered to that Church and people: in the great care he had to do his
Masters service, and to keep the people committed to his charge, from
incurring such offense to GOD, or undutifulness to her Majesty, or their own
everlasting damnation. His meaning herein was good toward the^: and, not doubt
but they reapt the comfortable fruit of his godly travails. The like may
thou gather to thy self, by direction of the same his speeches thus drawn into
short and compendious form: if thou will read them with diligence and
judgment.

If thou learn to humble thy self before GOD, and to seek wisdom of him: if
thou search the scriptures and make them thy guides to lead thee through the
desert and wide sea of this life, as thou art advertised by the later: thou
shall soon epsy the danger of all such practices toward disloialtie, and
rebellion, whereto the BVL drives thee, which is disclosed in the former. For,
it is not only said by the wise man, Prou. 1.
The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom: Ierem. 8.
but also set down by the Prophet; They have rejected the word of the Lord, and
what wisdom is in them? that is, therefore men become foolish, and do such
things as are unmeet, because they care not for the word of God: and therefore
David in his experience so confesses, Psa. 119.
that by the commaundeme^ts of God he was made wiser than his enemies, and had
more understanding than al his teachers: because the testimonies of the Lord
were ever with him, and he did meditate them. If thou settle thy heart to like
and do those things which please God, if thou have the love of his word, he
will teach thee the way wherein thou should walk in obedience to him, and in
duty to her Majesty our dread Sovereign his servant.

I trust thou will take good instructions out of these two Treatises to thy
duty and zeal to them both: and be thankful to God for that learned Father,
who has left a light unto thee, both in ex-example, and by these and other
his works. whose steps if thou shall follow, thou shall live godly, and die
with comfort, as a good servant of thy merciful GOD and Father. The
benefits of his great travails taken in time of his life, are thine. And unto
the end, he ceased not to continue in the faith which he before professed.
For (as I, one of many yet living, can testify) in the day and night before
his departure out of this world, he expounded the Lords prayer, and gave
short notes upon the 71. Psalm, to such as were by him. He thought good to say
somewhat at that time, of his Books written by him, and set forth in Print; and
also of his Preaching. In both which services done by him to the glory of God,
and thy comfort: he made protestation of his good conscience, which even then,
as he declared, witnessed and should witness with him before God, that he
dealt simply, and plainly: having God only before his eyes, and seeking the
defense of the Ghospel of Christ, and that the truth thereof might be opened
and maintained. And farther gave thanks to God that made him his servant in
so great a work; and then visited him by this messenger of death, whiles he
was doing the message of God, in visiting his Dioecese: that then he called
him to rest from his labors, when his weak body was spent and worn out in
setting forth the glory of God, for which he many times prayed, it would
pleas^ God to let him be offered in sacrifice.

He was at that time very fervent in Prayer: which he poured out before the
Lord abundantly, and in great faith: crying often, Lord let thy servant now
depart in peace. Lord let thy servant now come to thee. I have not so lived,
that I am ashamed to live: neither am I afraid to die, for we have a gracious
Lord. There is laid up for me a crown of righteousness. Christ is my
righteousness. Thy will be done o Lord, for mine is frail. With many other
such godly speehes. In the extremity of his disease he showed great
patience, and when his voice failed that he lay speechelesse, he lifted up
his hands and eyes, in witness of his consent to those prayers which were
made. Thus, being virtuously occupied, and wholly resting himself upon the
mercies of God through Ies^s Christ our savior, he rendered up his soul to God,
the 23. of September. 1571.

Be thou thankful to God for giving his Church so worthy an instrument of his
glory: and be careful to follow the good doctrine, which he left behind
him, not only in this that comes forth at this present, but in all other his
Books, which have been set forth before, or shall be put forth hereafter to
thy benefit, and increase of godliness.

27. Ian. 1582. North Crowlie. Thine in the Lord, IO: GARBRAND.

A VIEW OF A SEDITIOVS BVL SENT INTO ENGLAND.
WHiles I opened unto you ye words of ye Apostle, 2. These. 2.
That day shall not come, except there come a departing first, and that man of
sin be disclosed, even the son of perdition: which is an adversary, and
is exalted above all that is called God, or that is worshipped: so that he
shall sit as God in the Temple of God, and bear in hand that he is God: there
came to my hands a copy of a Bull latelye sent into this Realm by the Bishop
of Rome: I read it, and weighed it thoroughly, and found it to be a matter of
great blasphemy against God, and a practice to work much unquietness,
sedition, and treason against our blessed and prosperous government: For, it
deposes the Queens Majesty (whom GOD long preserve) from her royal seat,
and teareth the Crown from her head: it discharges all us her natural
Subjects from all due obedience: it armeth one side of us against an other: it
emboldeneth us to burn, to spoil, to rob, to kill, and to cut one an
others throat: it is much like that box which Pandora sent to Epimetheus
full of hurtefull and unwholesome euilles. Are you desirous to hear it? it
greeueth me to disclose, and your godly ears will hardely abide his unseemly
speeches. Yet seeing he has written them, and has conveyed his Copies
thereof to work the mischief he has ente^ded: I may the better rehearse
them unto you, if withal your discreation provide to season them with the
fear of God, and with due obedience unto our dread Sovereign, using these two
as the wholesome meal of Elizeus to preserve from infection in the tasting of
these wild gourdes: then shall you by this Bull epsy out Antichrist, even that
man of sin, the son of perdition, who is exalted above all that is called
God, or that is worshipped. The matter is long: Pope Pius has bestowed some
pains in writiting of falshod, let us take some pains to hear the truth.

But before I lay abroad to your sight the packet of his gross untruths, and
in the duty of a good Subject make a true report of that estate wherein we
live, as well of religion, as of civil policy, against the slanderous Libel
of this man of sin: if otherwise than my wonted manner has been, any
hard or sharp speech pass from me: or, if I speak more particularly of
persons living, and matters well known unto you, than may seem fit for this
place: I must desire your pardon, seeing the occasion is such, that it
drives me to be plain and earnest. For she is the servant of GOD: she is my
gracious Lady, and dread Sovereign. I have sworn truth to her Majesty. If I
knew there were in mine heart, one drop of disloyal blood toward her, I
would take my knife and let it out.

The Title is, Sententia declaratoria contra Elizabeth, etc. A Sentence
denou^ced against Elizabeth our noble and renowned Queen, whom God has
mercifully appointed to rule over us in place of her noble Progenitors. A
Sentence is the conclusion of Judgment, and the end of controversies, wherein
many things are to be considered: that the Judge be competent, also grave
and sober, and wise, and upright: that he call the party, and examine the
cause, and weigh the circumstances, and have conference with the learned: that
then upon great advise and du^ proofs (setting all affection aside, and having
God only before his eyes) he open his mouth, and pronounce sentence. Now if
the Judge be a party, or have no jurisdiction over them whom he judges, and
therefore be not a competent Judge: if he send forth no process, keep no
order nor form of judgment: if the party be not called: if the matter be not
duly examined: if the presumption be false: if there be no proofs: if he
begin where he should end, and declare a sentence of his own affection,
without the fear of God, against God and against his anointed: the^ he is no
Judge, and his sentence is no sentence, but rather a wicked Judge, and a
corrupt sentence. These circumstances are substantial, and being well
considered, will make you the better able to judge of these rash proceedings.

After this his angry Title, his Holiness has thought good to show us some
little of his pretty imagery, and makes Peter stand on the one side with
Keys, and a poesy: Tibi dabo claues regni coelorum, I will give the Keys of
the kingdom of Heaven to thee. And least you should not yet find which is
he, he is marked, Petrus clauiger, Peter the Keybearer. Paul is placed on the
left side, with his Sword: his mark is Paulus ^nsifer, Paul the Sword
bearer, and his circumscription, Paulus doctor gentium and vas electionis,
Paul the Doctor of Gentiles, and elect vessel: and between them both the Popes
Arms, the triple Myter, the Cross Keys, and six Gunne stones: so he makes
the two Apostles supporters of his Arms, and sets forth himself under
their name, and credit. As if he should say, I sit here in the seat of Peter
and Paul, even as did the Pharisees sometimes, We are the seed of Abraham,
We are the children of the Prophets, We sit in the chair of Moses. But the
Apostle warns us, 2 Cor. 11.
Such false Apostles are deceitful workmen, and transform themselves into the
Apostles of Christ: and no marvel, for Satan him self is transfourmed into an
Angel of Light. What right has he to carry Peter's Keys? Hom. 44. in opere
imperf.
Chrysostom says, Clauisest scientia Scripturarum, the Key is the knowledge
of the Scriptures: and Tertullian an other ancient Writer says, Clauis est
expositio legis, Lib. 4. cont. Marc.
the Key is the exposition of the Law. Again, what has he to do with
Paul's Sword? that Sword wherewith Paul fought, is the word of God, Hebr. 4.
which is lively and mighty in operation, and sharper than any two edged
Sword, and enters thorough, even to the dividing asunder of the soul and the
spirit, and of the ioints and the marowe, and is a discerner of the thoughts
and intentes of the heart. Why brings he forth Paul with his naked Sword,
and why makes he show of Peter's Keys? In what Pulpit did he ever set
foot? where has he opened the Scripturs of God? where has he taught the
exposition of the law? where did he ever fight with the Sword of the spirit?
the Sword which he uses, is the Sword of ambition, and of covetousness,
the Sword of extortion, the Sword of cruelty and tyranny, wherewith he
fights against al truth, and al equity, and al honesty. It is the Sword of
which the Prophet speaks: their tongue is a sharp Sword: Psalm. 56.
yt Key which he bears, Revel. 20.
is the Key of Error, it is the Key of the bottomless pit. Certainly Christ
will say unto this Keykeeper, woe be to thee Scribe and Pharisee, hypocrite,
because thou shuttest up the kingdom of Heaven before men: for thou have taken
away the Key of Knowledge, thou have not entered in thy self, and them that came
in, thou forbaddest. Let him therefore leave to deceive the world any longer
under the names, and by the countenance of the Apostles of Christ. S. Hierome
says, Ad Heliodorum.
it is no easy matter to stand in the place of Peter and Paul, and to hold
the Chair of them now reigning with Christ. And again he says: Non sunt
filij sanctorum, Did. 40. ex Hier.
qui tenent loca sanctorum, they be not evermore the children of holy me^,
which sit in the rooms of holy men. Peter was a principal Apostle: Paul was
a vessel chosen of God to bear his name before the Gentiles, and Kings, and
the children of Israel. Did they send such Bulls into the world? were they such
workers of Treason? did they disquiet the Land by stirring up civil wars?
verily these holy Apostles will reason this case with Pope Pius. What warrant
had thou to use our names? why do thou make our Images, and set them
before thy Bulls? what do thou like unto us? or, what did we like unto that
thou do? is this our Gospel? did we preach thus? is this that for which we
lost our lives? thou art not our successor: thou do us wrong: we know
thee not. We never discharged subjects from their oath of obedience: we did
never stir up one Prince against an other: thou haste no deed of ours for
thine example, thou have no word of ours for thy doings: thou do us wrong,
we disclaim thee, we know thee not. Thus much of his Title and Arms.

Pius Episcopus, seruus seruorum Dei, ad futuram rei memortam: Pius Bishop, the
servant of Gods servants, to be kept in remembrance for ever. O how lowly and
humble this man seems: meek words, when he is contented to be a servant, yea
a servant unto servants. He has made his Style so low, that you would
think he were put to the worste and vilest service among his fellow^^, that
he were the common drudge, maintained with cast apparel, little accounted of,
and ready to run and go at every bodies commandment. But what service does
he, either worldly, or heavenly, or bodily, or ghostly?

Let Pope Pius tell his own tale: he says, hunc vnum super omnes gentes, and
super omnia regna principem constituit: Christ has appointed him only to
be the Prince over al nations, and over al kingdoms Mark his words well,
and see how they hang together, he says I am a Servant, and that is not all:
I am the Servant of Servant, therefore I am no Prince: But, as though he
were sorry those words had escaped him, he mendeth the matter, I have power over
all nations, and over all kingdoms, therefore I am no servant. If he be a
servant, and so vile a servant, how is he a Prince? or, if he be a Prince, and
so mighty a Prince, how is he a servant? what shift soever he uses, needs he
must be taken. If he be true in the one, he is false in the other. It is well
with him, that he can not err, and that his words must be taken as the word
of God: that he may judge all men, but all the world may not judge him: and
that he may not with M. Hardings liking) be accused by In the Confut. of the
Apology of the Church of England, fol. 282. page 2.
Hicke, Hob, and Haunce, and judged by Jack and Gill. Were it not that he has
given himself privilege, thus to sit as God in the Temple of God, and to
bear in hand, that he is God: Were it not that his props and vpholders might
so scorn and disdain the judgment of the whole world: it would be no hard
matter to trippe him in his tale, and take him in manifest untruth. For, when
this Servant sits at table, the Emperor may not sit with him: When he
sits in Council, the Emperor sits below at his feet: Princes and Kings
do him service: they hold his Styrrop, lead his bridle, carry his train,
and bear dishes to his Table: he walks not forth on foot, but is carried
on men's shoulders, in gorgeous attire, shining and glittering with gold and
precious stones. It is worthy the noting which Albertus Krantzius, who
writes the History of Germany, reports of Pope Boniface the eight,
Vtriusque penes se vnum gladij potestatem manner affirmabat, Saxonic lib. 8.
cap. 36.
quod ipso apparatu in eo qui tum agebatur in vrbe iubileo solenniter fertur
ostentasse, primo quidem solenni die in pontificalibus apparens populo,
apostolicam illis benedictionem impartitur: postero autem die imperiali habitu,
insula nihilominus Cesarea insignis, gladium ante se nudatu^ iussit deferri,
and sedens alta voce testatur, Ecce duo gladij hic, Boniface did affirm,
that the power of both Swords did remain in him alone, which thing (they
say) he did solemnly declare in his attire at the Iubilee, which was then
kept in the City. For, the first day of that solemnity, he showed forth
himself before the people in Bishop-like arraye, and gave them Apostolic
blessing. But the next day he was clothed in Robes like an Emperor, having
the Imperial Crown upon his head. He commanded a naked Sword to be
carried before him, and as he sat spoke out in a loud voice, behold here are
two Swords. Ibidem.
Vides o Petre (says Krantzius) Successorem tuum, and tu salutifer Christ
tuum cerne Vicarium. Vide quo ascendit superbia serui seruorum tuoru^. Thou
see thy successor o Peter: and thou o Savior Christ look upon thy Vicar.
Behold the pride of the servant of thy servants, whether, and to what it is
come.

No doubt, his Holiness has bestowed some study about the matter, and
therefore would feign it should be known, and never forgotten, but registered
Ad futuram rei memoriam, to remain and be remembered hereafter. Hear it
therefore ye men and brethren, ye Babes and children. You are the sons of
God, you are the children of the holy fathers. You shall see that Babylon,
Revel. 17.
which has made drunken the Princes of the world with her golden cup. 2.
These. 2.
You shall see him that does sit as God in the Temple of God, showing
himself that he is God. And that you may take the better view of him, I will
lay open before you the manifest untruths of his Libel, and so make you judges
of his unjust sentence.

First, 1. Untruth.
it is untrue, that he is the servant of servants, because he writes him
self in the same Sentence, Prince over al nations and kingdoms. Again, it is
untrue, 2. Untruth.
that he is Prince over al nations and kingdoms, because he writes himself,
seruus seruorum, a servant unto servants. That also which follows is false.
Regnans in excelsis vni soli Petro Sanctam Ecclesiam Catholicam and Apostolicam
commist gubernandam. 3. Untruth.
He that rules in the Heavens has given to Peter alone the government of
the holy, Catholic, and Apostolic Church. For, where did Christ make this
commission to Peter only? where be the words? in what Scripture? in what
Gospel or Epistle? where did Christ ever say to Peter, I commit the
government of the Church to thee alone? if Pope Pius tale be true, why does
he not prove it? if it be false, how dare he write it? it is not meet the
Vicar of Christ should falsify the words of Christ. Christ spoke to all the
Apostles and not to Peter alone, Matt. 20.
Go to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. Christ said to all the
Apostles, and not to Peter alone, Mat. 28.
Go and teach al nations, baptising them in the name of the of the father,
and of the son, and of the holy Ghost. David the Prophet spoke not of Peter
alone, but of all the Apostles, Psalm. 19.
Their sound is gone into the ends of the world. Wherefore does he then
enclose that to Peter alone, which is common unto all the Apostles? He says,
Christ has given charge over his Church to Peter alone. But Ciprian says,
Cipr. de simplicitate praelatorum.
Parem tribuit Apostolis omnibus auctoritatem, hoc vtique erant caeteri
Apostoli quod fuit Petrus, pari consortio praediti and honoris and potestatis.
The Lord gave unto his Apostles like power, the rest of the Apostles were even
the same that Peter was, endewed with like fellowship, both of honor and of
power. And Hierome says, Lib. 1. aduersus Iouinianum.
Ex aequo super omnes Apostolos Ecclesiae fortitudo solidatur. The strength of
the Church is founded equally upon all the Apostles.

He adds further, Petrique successori Romano pontifici, And to the Bishop
of Rome Peter's Successor. This is another untruth, 4. Untruth.
and the cause of all this stir: this is it, wherefore Peter is set so far
before his fellows. The Pope makes Peter a rock, the other Apostles small
peeplestones to be builte upon him: Peter a Shepherd, ye other Apostles
sheep: Peter a Schoolemaister, the other Apostles his scholars: Peter a Giant,
the other Apostles little Babes. And al this he does to enfeoff the Pope with
that fullness of power whereunto he entitleth Peter. To proof whereof M.
Harding says, Now we are not bound to obey Peter and Paul, but him that
sits in their Chair. This is their Doctrine, thus they teach: so boldly
dare they set out their blasphemies against God.

The whole Church, (says Pope Pius) is committed to the Pope alone, by the
commandment and word of God. What Apostle or Evangelist ever wrote so? where
did Christ at any time speak of the Pope, or of Peter's successor, or of
the Bishop of Rome? What ancient Counsel, what old Doctor, what Father,
Augustine, Ambrose, Hierome. Chrysostom, Basil, ever said, that the whole
Church was committed to the Pope alone? It is not fit the Pope should draw
his own Charter. If no Evangelist, nor Apostle: no ancient Doctor, nor old
Council, will come in and bear him witness, it is not likely he has given true
evidence. Yet he says moreover: In plenitudine potestatis tradidit: 5. Untruth.
Christ has given this commission in fullness of power. This is a fifth
untruth.

It is wonderful to see how much they make of this fullness of power. Abbot
Panormitane tells us, Extra. de constit. cap. 1.
Plenitudo potestatis omnem superat legem positiuam, and sufficit quod in Papa
sit pro ratione voluntas: The fullness of power passes all positive law: and
it is sufficient in the Pope, that will stand in stead of reason. Durande
does tell us, Lib. 2. de minist. and ordinib. ecct.
al Bishops are derived from the Pope, as members from the head, and all they
receive of his fullness: there was a Council holden at Laterane in Rome under
Leo the tenth, where one Stephanus Patracensis gave forth these words: In the
Pope is al manner of power above all powers, as well in Heaven as in earth. They
tell us, that whatsoever he do, no man may presume to say, De concess.
^raeb. in gloss.
Domine cur it a facis? Sir, why do you so? To make an end of their tales and
vain ambitious claim, an other of his flatterers bears the world in hand,
Hostiensis.
Potest Papa quasi omnia facere quae Deus potest. The Pope in a manner may do
al things that God may do. Nay, Zabarella.
not so only says an other, Papa facit quicquid libet, etiam illicita, and
est plusquam Deus: The Pope does whatsoever he lists, yea, although it be
unlawful, and is more than God. They say, He makes right wrong, and wrong to
be right at his pleasure. He may command Angels, Archaungels, Cherubin
and Seraphin. This is the fullness of power whereof they dream. Who would thus
presume but that man of Sin and child of Perdition? let them show, where ever
Peter had like fullness of power. If he never had it, with what face can they
require it? Ciprian told us, Christ gave like authority to all the Apostles.
The authority of Peter was such as the authority of John and of James, and
no otherwise. All the Apostles were the light of the world, al were Ministers of
Christ, and disposers of the secrets of God, they al had the same authority
and fullness which Peter had.

Extra quam (Ecclesiam Roman) nulla est salus. Without which (the Church of
Rome) there is no salvation. That is, who live not under the obedience of the
Church of Rome, can not be saved. No man can be saved without her Bulls and
Pardons. The Church of Rome is the Arc of Noah, whosoever is without it, is
drowned. Extra de maiorit. and obedien. vnam. S.
Subesse Romano Pontifici (says Pope Boniface) omni humanae creaturae
declaramus, dicimus, definimus, and pronuntiamus omnino esse de necessitate
salutis. We declare, say, determine, and pronounce, that it is of the
necesitie of salvation, for every mortal creature to be subject to the
Bishop of Rome. If the case were so hard as it is made by his words, then
it would go amiss with all those Nations and Kingdoms, and people which
believe in Christ in Aethiopia, India, Arabia, Africa, Asia, Graecia,
Moscouia, of which some are greater than all Christendom. They are not
subject to the Pope, they yield no obedience to the Church of Rome. Are they
al drowned, because they be not within that Arc? are they al damned because
they know not their good manner to the Bishop of Rome? the kingdoms of England,
Scotland, Denmark, and Sweden: the Dukes of Saxony, Brunswicke, and
Wittenberge: the Palsegraue of Rheine, the Lantgraue of Hessia, the Earls and
Noble men through the whole Country of Germany, the infinite number of their
people and subjects: many hundred thousands in Spain, Italy, France,
Hungary, and in the kingdom of Pole, are without that Church, and live not
under the obedience thereof: are they all therefore damned: God forbid: the
mercy of the Lord is above al his works, in every place, who so ever
calls on the name of the Lord shall be saved, who soever trusts in the
Lord, shall not be confounded. You may well reckon this for the sixth untruth:
6. Untruth.
all which six are made in the compass of six lines.

Nos nullum laborem intermittimus, 7. Untruth.
We take pains, we spare no travel, we forsake no labor. Alas good man, I
had thought he would have said, 2. Cor. 11.
I was often in perilles of waters, in perilles among the Gentiles, in perilles
in the Sea, in weariness and painfulnesse, in watching often, in hunger and
thirst, in fastings often, in cold and in nakedness. I had thought he
would have said: Romans 15.
from lerusalem, and round about to Illyricum, I have caused to abound the
Gospel of Christ. 2. Tim 4.
I have preached in season and out of season. I have done the work of an
Evangelist. I have fought a good fight, 1. Cor. 9.
and have finished my course. I made my self servant to all men, that I
might win the more. I am made al things to all men, that I might save
some: and this do I for the Gospelles sake. He keeps him self safe enough
from these pains and trauelles. Yet we must believe him, that he spares no
labor. He comes not into the Pulpit, he preaches not the Gospel, he spares
that labor. He is a Shepherd, but fedeth not the Sheep, and feeds not the
Lambs: he is a Steward, yet disposes not the mysteries of God: this labor
also he spares. As for some other his travails, we deny them not. He se^deth
his Inquisitours, Espies, Agnos Dei, and Bulls. He spreads rumors, styrreth
sedition, raises subjects against their Princes, and forces Princes to
plague their subjects. He has conference with Traitors in England, with
Traitors in Irelande, with Traitors in Germany, with Traitors in Heluetia,
with Traitors in Denmark, with Traitors in Polelande. He has been cause of
all that spoil and waste in the noble kingdom of France. He has loosed and
weakened the state of al Christendom: it was never so weak as it is at this
day. And can we think all this could be brought to pass without pain and
travel: It may appear he spares no labor. And this does he (For the Gospels
sake? and That he may save some?) No, but as did Caiaphas, to arraigne
Christ, to crucify the Lord of glory, to cut al those out of the land of
the living, that their name may be no more in memory, whose mouths the Lord
has opened to publishe the secret of the Gospel, by whom the word of truth is
come unto all the world, and is fruiteful. He is child to them that murdered
the Prophets, and takes al travel and pains to fulfill the measure of his
Fathers.

Sed impiorum numerus tantum potentiae inualuit, vt nullus iam in orb locus
relictus sit, quem illi pessimis doctrinis corrumpere non tentarint: But, the
number of the wicked has increased so much, that there is now no place in
the world, which they have not sought to infect with corrupt doctrine. Now
at length it breaks from the^. Here is the matter of al their grief. When
the Scribes and Pharisees perceived the passage and glory of the Gospel of
Christ, and could not stay it, they said among themselves, John. 12.
Perceive ye how ye prevail nothing? Behold, the world goes after him. And
again, What shall we do? John. 11.
if we let him thus alone, all men will believe in him. Our credit is gone,
Acts. 4.
his doctrine is received, and ours is forsaken. The Priests and Saduces took
it greeuouslye that Peter and John taught the people, and when they saw the
boldness of them, they conferred among themselves, saying, What shall we do
to these men? let us threaten and charge them that they speak henceforth to no
man in this name. So they called them, and commanded them, that in no case
they should speak or teach in the name of Jesus. So did Annas the chief
Priest, and Caiphas, and John, and Alexander, and as many as were of the
kindred of the high Priests, gather themselves together, to resist the truth
then: so did the Pharisees then devise, that the light of the glorious Gospel
of Jesus Christ might not shine, and be known to the world. And so does
Pope Pius now for the like cause, rage, and storm, and speak his pleasure of
us. They are wicked (says he) their number daily increases, their doctrine
spreads far and wide: it does much harm, it has prevailed in most
places: they are a wicked rabble, their doctrine is corrupt, it has infected
the world. Belike his Holiness is much disquieted, else he would write
more modestlye, and make more advised reports of such with whom he is not
acquainted. A man would think he has to do with Turks and Infidelles:
with such who neither believe in God, nor keep his laws, nor dread his
Judgments. That he has made out Commission against Outlawries, who rob,
and spoil, and murder, and destroy, without mercy: against such, who have
no regard of honesty, but being paste shame, maintain Stews, and Harlottes,
even as his Holiness likes well, and suffers to be done at Rome. But where
are they, and who be they, whom he calls wicked? what say they? what do they
wickedly? it is much, to be accused and condemned of wickedness. This he
speaks and writes of you and your children, whose eyes the Lord has opened
to epsy his errors. You are they whom he accounts wicked, even you and al
such who (like as you do) know that Jesus Christ is the power of God, 1. Cor.
1.
and the wisdom of God. Which confess that he is the Lamb of God, John. 1.
which takes away the sins of the world. Which say with the Apostles, Act.
4.
Among men there is given none other name under Heaven whereby we must be
saved. Galat. 6.
And with Paul, God forbid that I should rejoice, but in the Cross of our Lord
Jesus Christ.

We read the Scriptures of God: we send the people to the fountains, there
we require the^ to examine our doctrine: we call upon the name of the Lord who
lives for ever: we teach the people to make their prayers in a language they
understand: we administer the Sacraments according to Christ's institution: we
say, that Christ is the only Sacrifice for the forgiveness of sins, and,
that God has appointed him over all things to be the head of the Church: we
do not make our prayers to dead Creatures: we seek no help at their hands
which neither hear us, nor can help us. We move the people to repentance: we
rebuke sin: we seek reformation of life: we make it manifest, that the Pope
has shamefully abused the whole world: that the man of sin, even the son of
perdition shall be destroyed with the Sword of the Spirit: that euerys Plant
which our heavenly Father has not planted, shall be rooted out, and that the
word of the Lord shall continue for ever. This is our profession, this is that
doctrine which we receive from God, and learn by the word of truth, which
is able to make us wise unto salvation thorough the Faith which is in Christ
Jesus. This doctrine the Pope calls wicked. This doctrine (he says) has
done much hurt. Baruch. 4.
Blessed be God: For the things that are acceptable to god are declared to us.
1. Cor. 2.
The things which eye has not seen, neither ear has heard, neither came
into man's heart, which God has prepared for them that love him, God has
revealed them unto us by his Spirit. 1. Cor. 1.
It has pleased God by the foolishness of preaching to save the^ that
believe. The number of them which are converted unto God by this word,
increases, and will more and more increase in all places. It is not the
counsel or work of men, for then it would come to naught. But it is of God:
the Pope cannot destroy it. Luc. 12.
Christ came to put fire on the Earth, it shall not be quenched. If we
hold our peace, or if we all (whom the Pope thus reuileth) be taken out of
the World, the stones shall cry out, and give witness to this Doctrine. For
GOD is able of stones to raise up children unto Abraham. Mat. 3.
He is GOD alone, he will make his name to be known, he will not Give his
glory to an other. This makes up eighte untruths, 8. Untruth.
plain, and evident to be seen. Unto which number he lays five more, al
together in one line, so that he makes almost a several falshoode for every
several word.

Missae sacrificium, preces, ieiunia, ciborum delectum, caelibatum aboleuit.
She (Queen Elizabeth) has clean put away the Sacrifice of the Mass,
Prayers, Fastings, choice or difference of Meats, and single Life. I beseech
you consider this speech, and judge uprightly. You are able to discern truth
from falshoode. You have knowledge of these things, be not deceived. Have we no
sacrifice? no Prayers? no Fastings? no difference in meats? are none unmarried?
be al these abolished? I ask you again, be they all abolished? when was this
done? at whose suit? by what law, or Statute, or Proclamation, or Parliamente?
in deed the Mass is abolished thorough the gracious working of God. It was a
work of his great merey to do it away. For it was a dumb, vncomforble, and
unprofitable thing. They did tell us that in their Mass they were able to make
Christ the son of God, and to offer him unto God his Father for our sins.
Oh blasphemous speech, and most injurious to the glorious work of our
redemption. Shall a vile wretch, a lump of earth, a sinful man take upon him the
power of God in Creation, and presume to make his Creator? shall he which is
conceived in sin, in whom there dwells no good, who is altogether
unprofitable, which never can recompense his own debte of ten thousand
Talents: who is a stranger to the couenaunte of promise, and has no entrance
unto the father, but through Jesus Christ, make intercession to the Father,
that for his sake, he will look upon, and receive his son, even because he
does offer him for a Sacrifice? what is blasphemy, if this be not? such
kind of Sacrifice we have not.

Christ himself is our high Priest, which offers us up unto God, which
makes us a pure, a lively, and a well pleasing Sacrifice: by whom also we
have access thoroughe Faith unto this grace wherein we stand, and rejoice
under the hope of the glory of GOD: by whom we are sanctified, even by the
offering of the body of Jesus Christ once made: who took away our sins,
and fastened them upon the Cross. It is therefore the blood of Jesus Christ,
which cleanses us from all sin. This is our Sacrifice, this is our
propitiation, this is the propitiation and Sacrifice for the whole world. How
then says Pope Pius we have no Sacrifice? 9. Untruth.
It is the ninth untruth.

Again, 10. Untruth.
he says we have no Prayers. He thinks we meet together like wild men, or
rather like brute beasts. You know he speaks untruly. Behold the
Suffrages, the Psalms, the Lessons taken out of the old and new Testament.
Consider the form and order of our Churches. We make humble confession of our
sins, we hear especial comfortable places of Scripture, which show us
how merciful God is, to them that truly and earnestly repent. We give
thanks to God for his mercies and blessings which he pours upon us. We
pray him to continue his goodness toward us, and to lead us into al truth. We
pray for the Queens Majesty, for all that are in authority, for all the
people, for those whice suffer affliction, for all that either obstinately, or
ignorantly refuse the comfort of the Gospel. To be short, with one mind,
and with one mouth, we praise God, even the father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
and all the people say Amen. Why should Pope Pius report untruths? what
means he to say we have no Prayers? Is it because we have not his Latin
Prayers? The people do not understand them, they are like the chirping of
Birds, and the tinckling of Cimballes: thanks be to God for the Prayers
which we have, and grant that we may hold them unto the end.

Again, Untruth.
Al Fasting is abolished. So the Scribes and Phariseis said unto Christ,
(...). 15.
Why do thy Disciples, break the traditions of the Elders? (...). 5.
They eat and drink, (...). 58.
they do not fast. Would God we wereall more careful than we are, of keeping
the true fast, the fasting which the Lord has chosen (says the Prophet)
is it that a man should afflicte his soul for a day, and to bow down his
head as a bull rushe, and to lie down in sackecloth and ashes? Will thou call
this Fasting, or an acceptable day to the Lord? Is not this the Fasting that
I have chosen, to loose the bands of wickedness, to take off the heavy
burdens, to let the oppressed go free, that ye break every yoke? Is it not to
deal thy bread to the hungry, and that thou bring the pore that wandreth unto
thine house? When thou see the naked that thou cover him, and hide not thy
self from thine own flesh?

In like sort the Apostle Paul having occasion to speak of the true Fast, 1.
Tim. 4.
says: Bodily exercise profits little: but godliness is profitable to al
things. Whereby we learn, not to esteem the works of the body, such as are,
watchings, abstaining from meats, often rehearsal of Prayers, and long
Prayers, going barefoote, and lying on the ground, and such like (which the
body suffers) as an acceptable Fast: but we require the crucifying of the
flesh, with the affections and the lusts, that in the days of our Fast the
Lord be honored, in that no man do his own ways, nor seek his own will,
nor speak a vain word.

And herein we follow the judgment of the holy Fathers. (...). 47. in 13. (...)
Chrysostom says, Ib jest ieiunium, si pecuniam despicis, si ardeas
charitate, si famelicos pascas, si gloriam contemnas. There thou do fast,
if thou despise money, if thou be fervent in love, if thou feed the hungry,
and if thou forsake glory. ^euit. cap. 16. 10.
And Origin: Will thou that I yet show what manner of Fast thou must keep?
fast from al sin, eat none of the meat of malice, eat none of the
delicates of pleasure, stir not up lust with the wine of riotousnesse, fast
from doing evil, abstain from evil words, keep thy self from evil
thoughts, touch not the stolle^ bread of corrupt doctrine, desire not the
deceiptfull meats of Philosophy, which will lead thee from the truth. Such a
fast pleases God. But to abstain from meats which God has created to be
received with giving thanks of them which believe and know his truth: and this
to do after the example of them which have crucified Christ, cannot be
acceptable to God. And again says Chrysostom. Hom. 6. in 1. Genesis
What profit comes of thy fasting, if thou eat nothing all the day long,
and yet playest, and triflest, yea often times take false Oaths, and
blasphemest, and so do spend the day? I pray you let us not neglecte our
own salvation: but let our talk rather be of spiritual things, and let some
one take the Book of God in his hand, and call his neighbors together, and
with godly speeches water the mind both of himself, and the congregation:
that so we may escape the snares of the devil, and reap much fruit by our
fasting, and be partakers of the mercy of God. Thus far Chrysostom.

Now, what if some few be wanton, and neglect the wholesome use of Fasting?
What if godly Preachers exhort the people to put away the abuse, and do
teach them out of the word of God, and the ancient writings of holy Fathers,
the true order and use of Fasting? should Pope Pius therefore untruly charge
her Majesty, that she has abolished Fasting days? You know the Laws stand
in force, which are made for that purpose: and moreover that common. Prayers,
and an order for public Fast to be used in time of contagious sickness,
and other troubles and unquietness, have been set forth by the Queens
Majesty's special commandment. Anno 5. Elizab. ^0. Augusti.
You know the manner and form of that general Fast was first, that it
should be kept in every week upon the Wednesday: secondly, by all persons
between sixeteene years of age, and threescore, (sick folks and laborers
etc. excepted) that it appointed but one only competent and moderate meal,
that it leaves it indifferent in the same meal to eat flesh or fish, so
that the quantity be small, and fit for sober and spare diet, without variety
of meat, spices, confections, or wines, but only such as may serve for
necessity, comeliness, and health: and that men of wealth and ability, who
by this order did abate the costlinesse of their fare, should increase their
liberality toward the pore, with that which they spared: the^, that the same
day ought to be bestowed in Prayers, study, reading or hearing of the
Scriptures, or good exhortations, and other godly exercises: but no part
thereof to be spent in plays, pastimes, or idleness, much less in lewd,
wicked, or wa^ton behavior. This Fast was commanded, and set forth in
print, this Fast we observed, and taught the people, that they should aunsweare
before God, if in such godly exercises, they either should contemn public
order, or dissemble with God, pretending abstine^ce, and doing nothing less.
Let Pope Pius show what Law of this Realm has forbidden, or what doctrine
of ours has condemned Fasting. We commend it, and show the necessary use
thereof.

Again, She has abolished all choice of meats. I pray you where did God ever
command the choice of meats? Paul says: Colos. 2.
Let no man condemn you in meat and drink: and to the Corinth: Meat makes
us not acceptable to God. 1. Cor. 8. Mat. 15.
And Christ says: That which goes into the mouth defiles not a man. What if
some eat flesh, whose weak stomachs can not be nourished with fish? Do
they not kill and eat flesh in the City of Rome? Does not Pope Pius for money
sell license to eat what a man lists? The thing is not made holy, because
he sells it, nor unholy because it comes freely. This might be sufficient
for answer. But yet, because he makes him self so privy to our doings, and
does so precisely charge us with his vain accusations, let him consider,
that we to whom he makes this report, and sends over this tale, are
Englishemen, acquainted (better than he seems to be) with the laws of our
country. What one fish day is changed thorough the whole year? What
Lenten, Ember, Saturday, Friday, or other usual Fasting day? Our Law says,
Elizab. Anno quinto. cap. 5.
It shall not be lawful to any person or persons within this Realm to eat any
flesh upon any days now usually observed as Fish days. Nay, besides those
days which our forefathers kept, we have appointed that Wednesday in every
week through out the year, be kept fish day, and that no manner of person
shall eat any flesh on the same day. Whereby we have made nigh fifty fish
days more, than have bin observed heretofore by the laws and customs of this
realm. We cannot hear of the like increase of fasting days procured by the
Pope, and kept in the Countries of Spain, France, Italy, or in his own City
at Rome. It may be he is angrye, with the Prouisoe in the said Statute,
Ibidem.
Because no manner of person shall misse-iudge of the intent of this Statute,
limiting orders to eat fish, and forbear the eating of flesh, but that the
same is purposely intended and meant politiquely, and not for any superstition
to be maintained in the choice of meats, be it enacted, that whosoever shall
by preaching, teaching, writing, or open speech, notify that any eating of
Fish, or forbearing of flesh, mentioned in this statute is of any necessity
for the saving of the soul of man, or that it is the service of Cod, otherwise
than as other politic laws are and be, that then such person shall be
punished as Spreaders of false news are or ought to be. Why does he lay it
against her Majesty, that she has abolished al difference of meats? Aug. ad
Casulan.
we profess as does S. Augustine, In nostro i^^unio nihil melius est, quam vt
non manducans manducantem ne iudicet. In our Fasting, there is nothing worthy
better account than this, that he which eats not, does not condemn another
which eats. We warn the people in times of abstinence to live in the
obedience of such order, as the Law and Magistrates have appointed, and that,
whiles they forsake a common and necessary diet of flesh, they feed not their
fantasy with such costly sorts of fish, or such dainty banqueting and
iunquets, whereby they should give force to the lusts of the flesh in the day
of their Fasting.

It follows: 13. Untruth.
She has abolished single life in Priests and Ministers. Is it not lawful
for a Minister to be single? you are witnesses to the contrary, you know some
unmarried, and again you know some that have wives, and are married. They
which marry do well: God grant they do no worsse which do not marry. The
Apostle says: Heb. 13.
Marriage is honorable among all, and the bed undefiled: but Whoremo^gers and
Adulterers God will judge. All have not the gift of Chastity, save they to whom
it is given: for every man has his proper gift, 11. Cor. 7.
one after this manner, and an other after that. The holy Patriarks, the
Prophets, and the Apostles of Christ, Peter, Paul, James, Philip, and others,
had Wines: they lived in Marriage. Eusebius reports out of Clemens
Alexandrinus, Lib. 3. ca. 30.
that Peter when he saw his wife lead away to execution, called her by her
proper name, and said O wife, remember the Lord. Hierome says, Hieron. epist.
ad Oceanum.
if he should name severally all the married Bishops, they would be more in
number than all the multitude of the Council of Ariminum. And in another
place: Idem lib. 1. aduersus Iouinian.
quasinon hodie quoque plurimi Sacerdotes habeant Matrimonia: As though at this
day many Priests had not their wives. We hear of the Bishops in Aethiopia,
that they are at this day married. It is not long sithence Priests were married
here in England, and in France and in Germany. Will these men be more holy
than so many Bishops, and Saints, and Martirs, and Patriarchs, and
Prophets, and Apostles, which by their example have approved, and commended
unto us this divine ordinance?

Let every man consider the strength of his own dessell, for which he shall
render account before God in that Consistory, where we shall be judged, not by
the laws of Rome, but by the laws of God, our own conscience accusing or
excusing us. Paul says, If they can not abstain, 1. Cor. 7.
let them marry: it is better to marry than to burn. The name of Uirginitie is
commendable, but every thing is not as it shows. I protest before the living
GOD which is the Judge of the quick and the dead, that no filthiness under
the Sun is comparable to forced Uirginitie. I condemn not, but rather highly
commend single life. No doubt there are many true Uirgins, holy in body, and
holy in spirit: but yet al are not Uirgins which live unmarried, as Hierome
seems to note: Lib. 1. aduers. Iouinian.
Eliguntur mariti in sacerdotium, non nego, etc. Such as are married are chosen
into the Priestehode, I deny not. For Virgins are not to be so much accounted
of, as Priests. And again: Ibidem:
But why (say you) in giving of priestly orders, is one, which is a Virgin,
oftentimes refused, and another which is married admitted? It may be, because
his doings are not agreeable to his Virginity, or because he is thought to be a
Virgin, yet is not: or because his virginity is infamous. So much says
Hierome, for reason why married me^ were preferred to orders of the Church
before others which carried the show of Virginity. Now to conclude this, we
say: our laws (after the counsel of the Apostle, and finding so many examples
in all ages of the godly which were married, and the notable inconveniences
which grew by forced chastity,) have given liberty, that those who have not
the gift of Chastity, to avoid Fornication, may marry. But no law made among
us, has forbidden Virginity, or Single life. This is the thyrteenth untruth.
And so have you in these few words, the number which I spoke of: even five
untruths in little more than five words.

First, that we have no Sacrifice. This is not true. For we have the Sacrifice
of the death and blood of Christ, a Sacrifice which lasts for ever.

Again, that we have no Prayers This is untrue. For we call upon the name of
the Lord. We glorify God even the Father of our Lore Jesus Christ. God grant
all the Churches in Christendom may do the like.

Again, that we have no Fasting. This is untrue. Our doctrine requires
fasting our laws command it, we commend it.

Again, They make no difference of Meats. This is untrue. For we have not
put down one Fish day: and we have appointed 50. more than our forefathers
kept.

Again, Single life is abolished. This is untrue: for, a Minister may live
single if he will, there is no law to the contrary. God grant our lives may be
single and simple, and pleasing him: else we are like painted graves, fair and
holy without, but within full of stinking carren.

Now let us proceed. You have heard 13. untruths: and may we think, that he
which has uttered so much falshode, will stay there?

Eadem occupato regno supremi Ecclesiae capitis locum in omni Anglia, 14.
Untruth.
eiusque praecipuam authoritatem atque iurisdictionem monstrose sibi vsurpans,
regnum ipsum rursum in miseru^ exitiu^ reuocauit: She (the Queen's Majesty)
invaded the kingdom, and by usurping monstrously the place of the supreme
head of the Church in all England, and the chief authority and
jurisdiction of the same, has again brought the said Realm into miserable
destruction.

You must keep reconing, for here to the 13. untruths, he gives three others,
more wicked and slanderous than the rest. Has Queen Elizabeth invaded the
Realm? O vain man. Is it beseeming for Christ's Uicar to speak so untruly?
What sends he such tales unto us, who know the truth, and can reprove him?
Did her Majesty invade this realm? Came she by force and violence to her
Crown? No child so simple, but he may control him herein. Was not Queen
Marie her Sister? Was not King Edward her Brother? Was not King Henry her
natural Father? and King Henry the 7. her Grandfather? Is she not the right
inheritour of both the houses queorke and Lancaster? Has she not both the
Roses, that is, both the Titles to the kingdom enclosed in one? Did not the
whole body of the Counsel take their Oath to her xxxv. years ago? Was not the
Crown due to her by inheritance and by succession, and by the laws of this
Realm? Did not her Father warrante it to her by Will, as to his daughter? Did
not Queen Marie by express words leave it to her, as to her Sister? Did not
the whole Noblitie of the Realm confirm it? Did not Queen Mary's Bishops
kneel down before her, and acknowledge her to be their natural and lawful
Queen? Did not you? Did not all the Commons of this Realm, willingly of your
selves, make Bonfiers, ring your Belles, and clap your hands for joy? Did not
the children and little Babes cry out in your streets God save Queeene
Elizabeth?

How then dares the Pope a wilful Friar, a wilful and unlearned Friar, how
dares he say, that Queen Elizabeth is no lawful Queen, but did invade
this Realm with force and violence? O good and gracious Lady, what Host had
she? what Captain? what Soldiers? what weapon was worn? what Sword
drawn? what Spear bente? what Banner displayed? what Trumpet sounded? She
entered to her right peaceably, and has reigned in great peace, save that Pope
Pius has practiced her trouble by certain rebels and traitors. But God does
mercifully peserue her, to the confusion of her enemies, to the comfort of her
subjects, and the adnauncement of his glory. Young men and Maidens, Old men
and children, may see and say, Pope Pius is a forger, a reporter of untruth,
has no regard what he says or does: that, he is paste al shame, and has no
sear of God.

Again, ^^Vntruth.
Supremi capitis locum vsurpans: Taking upon her the place of the supreme head
This is untrue. Here lay a chase. If the Pope go forward, he will win the
game. Where is she ever called the supreme head? Peruse the acts of
Parliament, the Records, the Rolls, and the Writs of Chauncerie or Exchequer,
which pass in her Graces name: where is she ever called the supreme head of
the Church? No, no, brethren, she refuses it, she would not have it, nor be
so called. Why then does Christ's Uicar blaze and spread abroad so gross
untruth? why should he say Queen Eliz. makes her self the head of the
Church?

Nay, yet more, 16. Untruth.
Monstrose praecipuam eius auctoritatem atque iurisdictione^ vsurpans: Taking
upon her monstrously the chief authority and jurisdiction of the same: Here I
might well say O monstrum hominis, O monster in the likeness of man. He
imagines, that her Majesty preaches in the Pulpittes, that she administreth
the Sacraments, that she sits in the Consistories and hears all spiritual
causes. Which if she do, she does more than the Pope does. It were monstrous
to see the Pope in a Pulpit. And it is monstrous to see Antichriste sit in
the Temple of God, to see a Bishop girded with both swords, to see a Priest
take upon him the rule of Heaven and Earth, the servant of servants advanced
above all the Princes of the world, and to set his foot upon their necks:
a wretched man to claim authority over the Angels of God, and a sinful
creature to suffer himself to be called by y^ name of God. This is a misshapen
wonder, and a monster in nature. Let the Pope therefore look upon him self,
and know what supreme authority and jurisdiction, and over whom he takes it
upon him monstrously.

Queen Elizabeth does not any thing monstrously. She preaches not, she
ministers not ye Sacraments, she does neither excommunicate, nor absolve from
excommunication: she sits not to give sentence in spiritual causes: she
chalengeth not the dispensation of the Keys of the kingdom of Heaven. She
does nothing but which she may lawfully do, nothing but whereunto the Lord God
has given her especial warrant. Her Majesty is supreme Governor over her
Subjects. The Bishops within her Realm are subjects to her. She governs,
they yield obedience. When occasion is offered to dispose of any thing,
specially appertaining to the service of God, or to judge of any controversy
arising in Spiritual causes: She commends and gives to her learned Divines,
the due consideration thereof: All other pleas and suites she causes to be
ended at home, and suffers no appeals to fly to Rome. Which is done for the
ease, and quietness, and wealth of her good subjects. For, wherein grew more
extremity against plain dealing, simple, and honest pore men? Whereby were
they oftener shifted off, and put from the right of their suite, tha^ by such
appeals? when, after they had been haled thorough all the Courts in their
own Country, they were driven to follow the matter 1500. miles at the Popes
Courts in Rome.

To be short, Queen Elizabeth does, as did Moses, Joshua, David, Solomon,
Josias, Iehosaphat, as Constantine, Valentinian, Gratian, Theodosius, Arcadius,
Honorius, and other godly Emperors have done. God has given charge to her of
both Tables. In the first she has charge of Religion, in the other, of Civil
causes. By the Prophet Esaias God promises to his Church, Esaias. 49.
Kings shall be thy noursing Fathers, and Queens thy Nursses. And David says:
Psalm. 2.
Be wise therefore ye Kings, be learned ye Judges of the earth, serve the Lord
in fear. Upon which place, the learned father Augustine says: Epist. 50. ad
Bonifaciu^ Comitem.
Quomodo ergo Reges seruiunt Domino in timore, nisi ^a quae contra iussa Domini
fiunt, religiosa seueritate prohibendo atque plectendo? aliter enim seruit quia
homo est: aliter quia rex est. Quia homo est, ei seruit viuendo fideliter: quia
vero etiam rex est, seruit ei leges iusta praecipientes, and contraria
prohibentes conuenienti rigore sanciendo, sicut seruiuit Ezechias, etc. How
then do Kings serve the Lord in fear, but in that they do forbid, and in a
religious severity punish such things as are done against the Lords
commandments? for he serves after one manner, as a man, and after another,
as a Prince: as a man he serves the Lord in living faithfully: but in that he
is also a King, he serves him by making Laws, which command the things
that are right, and which with convenient rigor forbid the contrary. as
Ezechias served the Lord, when he destroyed the Woods, and Temples of Idolles,
and those high places, which were builte against the commandments of God,
as JOSIAS served, doing also the like: as the King of Niniute served, gathering
together al his City, to appease the wrath of the Lord: as DARIUS served,
giving authority to DANIEL to break the Idol, and casting his enemies into
the Lions: as NABVCHODONOSOR served, of whom we spoke before, who by a
terrible Law forbad al within his kingdom, to blaspheme God. In ho^ ergo
(says he) seruiunt domino Reges, quando ea faciunt ad seruiendum illi, quae
non possunt facere nisi Reges. Herein therefore do Kings serve the Lord, when
they do those things to serve him, which none may do but Kings. The Pope
therefore writes unadvisedly. We know not any so monstrous and unlawful
doing. It is her office, it is her duty. I trust God will give her grace to
discharge the same to his glory.

Regium concilium e^ Anglica Nobilitate conflatum diremit: 17. Untruth.
She has removed the Noble men of England from the Kings Council. The Poets
had a fond devise of their great God IVPITER, that he held a golden Chain in
his hand, and tied to the end of it both the Land and Sea, and coasts of the
whole world, and so might toss and turn, and set them higher and lower at
his pleasure. Pope Pius bestirreth himself, as though he were in Jupiters
place, and might by his Bulls and cursses set higher and lower, place and
displace, appoint who shall, and again who shall not be in Princes Councels.
Nothing may be done but by his sufferance. Such a practice he has to make
himself King of Kings, and the God of this world. For, when he may rule the
Council, he may rule the King: and being able to rule the King, he may rule
the people throughout the world. He says Queen Elizabeth's Conncell is not
to my liking. She has put those from the Council, which were of the Nobility
of England.

Thus he goes on, and increases his folly. He sings by reports, and
speaks he wotteth not what. Has her Majesty removed all the Nobility? Who
would think the Uicar of Christ would be so vain? You which have lived in
countenance, and have been at the Court, and have these many years known
the state of our Country, you know well that this is false. The Nobility are
all in England, and in Court, and in Council, as before. I do not speak of
such as became Traitors. You know what unnatural attempts were lately made.
Their guilty conscience did make some to fly. I speak not of one in
duraunce: I dispute not his case. A Prince ought to be very careful and
jealous, for his preservation. It touches not himself only, but the welfare
of his people. Of these I speak nothing. Yet when this Bull was stamped at
Rome, all were at liberty. Mark the date, the fifth of the Calends of March
in the year paste: Anno Do. 1569.
at which time they were al at liberty and of the Council, or at least in
good favor. Since which time, what has bin wroughte by this Bull, I pray you
consider. Remember what ensued the Summer following. The coals were kindled
here, but the bellows which gave the wind lay at Rome, and there sat he which
made the fire. At what time he wrote this Bull, she had displaced none, neither
Lord, Baron, nor Earl: nor touched the^ in their lives, bodies, goods, or
lands. Indeed Pope Paulus 4. cast Moronus into prison, and there kept him all the time of his papacy. Pius. 4. took Caraffa, a chief Cardinal, he cast him
into prison, and in the midnight sent a slaughterman to put him to death. Pope
Vrbanus took six Cardinals, and knit them in bags, and threw the^ into the
sea. Her mild, gracious, and merciful nature, has never been distained by any
the like cruelty, neither have any of her Noble men been so by her dishonored.

Again, ^^. Untruth.
Hominibus obscuris compleuit: She has made her Council of poor, dark,
beggarly fellows, and has placed them over the people. What has Pope Pius
to do with the Council of Princes? May not a King choose a Counselor,
unless he allow of him? Men take their own eyes to choose there wives, and
Princes take their own hearts to choose their Councillors. As well he might
say: No King shall have any Secretary, any Judge or Justice, or Sergeant, or
Attorney, or Solicitour, or man at Law: any Captain for wars, any Guard to his
person, any Physician to his body, any Sewer or Taster, but by his appointment.
Oh what a charge this man takes?

He calls her honorable Councillors dark, and obscure, and beggarly. What
if they had been such? May not Princes have any other Councelloures than Dukes
and Earls? Cardinal Woolsey was able to do something in this realm in the
late time of King Henry. Of what noble house came he? Of what noble house came
B. Heth, Stephen Gardner, John Bourne, and M. Boxall? Of what honorable
Parentage, of what noble blood came they? They were of the Council: yet who was
their Father Grandfather, what Duke, Earl, Lord, Baron, or Knight? I speak not
this in dispite of their persons, let no man so mistake me: some of the^ ar yet
alive, I pray for the^ for my self: God direct them to do those things which
may be for his glory. He is noble, which is the child of God, which is
borne from above: he is honorable, he is noble.

But what are they who are now in authority, whom Pius calls so poor and
beggarly? I will not name them. I cannot flatter: it were unseemly I should. You
know them, and are thankful to God for them. There is none of them which
has not bin at the least a Knight, or worthy of that degree, above these xx.
years: so wise, learned, virtuous, and godly, so careful of the Commune weal
as ever were bredde up in this Realm. They have ever been in credit, in
the countenance, and knowledge of the world.

As Pope Pius complains now of the Counselors of England. so did the Wolf
sometimes make complaint to the shepherd against his Dogs. Thou haste two
vile ill favored Curres, they iette up and down, they bark, and howl, and
trouble thy flock, which can not be quiet nor feed for them. Remove them
away, tie them up, brain them, hang them, what do they here? the
Sheepehearde aunsweareth: would you so? nay I may not spare my dogs, they do
me good service. Spaniels and Greyhounds are fair and dainty, yet they never
do me so much good: these watch when I sleep, they ease me much pain, and
save my flock. If I should tie them up, thou would be bold with me, and
take thy pleasure. I shall not need to apply this. The Queens Majesty is
our Sheepehearde, we are left by God to her safe keeping. The faithful
Counselors are like the watchful Mastiffs, they take pains, they ease our
Sheepeheard, they save the flock. Now you may soon judge who is the Woolfe.
If Pope Pius could place his Pilot in our Ship, he would make us arrive at
what Port he listed.

Seeing Pius has upon ghesses or vain reports after this manner unseemly dealt
with the Peers and honorable estate of our Country: let us look somewhat
abroad, and see what worthy wightes the Pope has placed in the Councelles of
Kings. And so let us be advised by the harms of our neighbors. Did he not
place one David Retchio so high in Scotland that he took upon him to rule
the Queen there, and sought al means to disgrace and disquiet the Nobles, and
to undo that Country, and therefore was slain in the Queens presence? Was
not the Cardinal of Lorraine the highest Counselor in France? Did not
Cardinal Granvele bear the whole swaye in Flaunders? they were appointed by
Pope Pius, they were endewed with his spirit, they went from his side, they
knew what he would have done. Have not they spoiled and wasted those two noble
Countries, and brought them to such vilanie and misery, as they never felt
before? the King of Spain suffers Monks and Friars to govern him and his
Country. It is well known what good they have done him. By these few you may
see what Counselors the Pope allows, and for what purpose. Yet that we may
the better mark the order of their government, and what good Cardinals work
in Princes Councels, one tells us, Cornel. Agri. de Van. Sci. ca. 61. ex
Camotense.
Legati Romanorum Pontificum sic bacchantur in prouincijs, acsi ad flagellandam
Ecclesiam Satan egressus sit a facie Domini: The Popes Legates keep such
revels in Kingdoms and Countries, as if Satan were sent abroad from the face
of the Lord to scourge the Church. He was wise, and did see what was done. If
we open our eyes and behold the story and present course of their doings,
we may find the like. What Prince soever receives them, receives traitors
and enemies to his estate. They always breed suspicion, stir up dissension,
increase hatred between Prince and Prince, and set the one against another,
they seek to advance their master ye Pope, they spoil al Churches to furnish
one, they be ye very plagues and decay of Countries. Let not Pope Pius
complain of the Counselors of England no Prince in Christendom this day has
better, God grant them the spirit of understanding and of counsel, God
continue them in his fear, and direct them in his glory. If Pope Pius had but
one so wise a Counselor, he never would have sent such Bulls and Bables
about the world.

Again, hominibus haereticis compleuit, The Counsailours are not only pore,
and beggarly, but also Heretics. The accusation of Heresy is heavy, and
should not be laid upon any, but after due proof. Paul the Apostle was
accused for Heresy: but he answered: Acts. 24.
After that way, which they call heresy, worship I the God of my Fathers,
believing al things which are written in the Law and the Prophets. The high
Priests and Phariseis called our Savior a Deceiuer. Mat. 27.
All the Christians of the Primitive Church were called Heretics. Eusebius. lib.
4. cap. 18.
Misistis per omne^ terram, qui circumirent and dicerent impiam haeresim
surrexisse Christianorum. You have chosen (says Iustine the Martyr) certain
men fit for that purpose, and have sent them over the world, to go about and
say there is a wicked heresy of the Christians sprung up. Even so it likes
the Pope to speak of them which be in authority among us, and calls them
Heretics. God forbid his mouth should be a sclander, and all be Heretics,
whom he so calls. Then as many, as reprove his errors, and refuse to fall
down and worship him, shall be Heretics. They spare not to say so. Did. 22.
omnes
Qui Romanae Ecclesiae Priuilegium auferre conatur, hic procul dubio labitur in
haresim: He doubtless falls into heresy, which goes about to take away
the privilege of the Church of Rome.

But Heresy is an other matter. An Heretic is he which denies the Articles
of our Christian faith. We deny the^ not, no not any one article. We hold the
Creed of the Apostles, and of the Nicene Council, and of Athanasius. We hold
all the Scriptures of the old and new Testament. We hold all the ancient
Councelles. We hold all the ancient Fathers, Augustine, Ambrose, Chrysostom,
etc. We condemn all Heresies, which our Fathers condemned. This is our
profession, and yet notwithstanding does the Pope lightly and rashly give
sentence against us of Heresy. But let him take heed, least whiles he calls
others Heretics, and reconeth not the causes wherefore, his Arrowe which he
has shot up, fall upon his own head, and he fall into the pit he has dug
for others.

Yet there remains one pretense more against her Majesty, ad quam velut ad
asylum omnium infestissimi perfugium inuenerunt. Unto whom all such as are
the worst of the people resort, and are by her received into safe protection.
Is it not lawful for the Queen to receive strangers without the Popes
warrant? This he speaks of the pore exiles of Flaunders and France, and
other Countries, who either lost, or left behind them all that they had,
goods, lands, and houses: not for adultery, or theft, or treason, but for
the profession of the Gospel. It pleased God here to cast them on land: the
Queen of her gracious pity has granted them harbor. Is it become so
heinous a thing to show mercy, GOD willed the children of Israel, Deuteronomy. 10.
to love the stranger, because they were strangers in the land of Egypt. He
that shows mercy, shall find mercy. If God shall turn his hand, thou may
be in case of poverty and banishment as well as they. I am not a Prophet, nor
the son of a Prophet, but I doubt the time will come, when men shall look
for the Pope at Rome, and not find him. His seat shall be removed, he shall
not be there. Then shall he know what it is to be a stranger. He which
deuoureth, shall be devoured.

But what is the number of such, who have come in unto us? Are they three or
four thousand? Thanks be to God this Realm is able to receive them if the
number be greater. You may remember what other strangers arrived within these
parts not long sithence: These are few, they were many: These are pore and
miserable, they were lofty and proud: These are naked, they were armed: These
are spoiled by others, they came to spoil us: These are driven from their
country, they came to drive us from our country: These to save their lives,
they came to have our lives. The difference is great beetweene these
strangers. If we were content to bear them then, now let it not grieve us to
bear these: It is the commandment of God, that we love the stranger: yet a
Prince that does it, shall abide the Popes controlment.

He himself is good to them, and spares the liberties of his City to some
number, and of worse condition. For (besides those which resort thither out
of England, Germany, France, Spain, etc. he gives harbor to 6000. Jews,
which live by usury, and pay him yearly pensions. He allows in his City of
Rom^ 20000. Courteghians or common women. This was the old reconing. It may be,
the number is now improued. All these live by filthiness, and yields him
therefore a pension of 30000. Ducates.

If the Pope may maintain so many thousand adultereres, harlots, Jews, and
enemies of the cross of Christ, why may not Queen Elizabeth receive a few
afflicted members of Christ, which are compelled to carry his cross? If it be
no fault in him to receive so many servants of the Devil, why may not Queen
Elizabeth receive a few servants of God? Whom when he thought good to bring
safely by the dangers of the sea, and to set in at our havens, should we
cruelly have driven them back again, or drown them, or hang them, or sterue
them? Would the Uicar of Christ give this counsel? or, if a King receive such,
and give them succor, must he therefore be deprived? they are our brethren,
they live not idly. If they have houses of us, they pay rent for them. They
hold not our grounds, but by making due recompense. They beg not in our
streets, nor crave any thing at our hands, but to breath our air, and to see
our Sun. They labor truly, they live sparefully. They are good examples of
virtue, travel, faith and patience. The towns in which they abide are happy,
for God does follow the^ with his blessings.

Thus have I opened 19. untruths all packed in this Bull. If I would have been
curious or quarelous, I might have gathered twice so many. But I have no
pleasure to pass farther in them. God and man, heaven and earth know they are
untrue. Psalm. 4.
I may say to Pope Pius, thou son of man how long will thou blaspheme the
honor of God? Why have thou such pleasure in vanity, and seek after
leasing? What opinion has he of our nation? Does he think we are so simple
to be led in a masket with so vain fables? Does he think we have neither
eyes to see, nor hearts to judge? Does he think his bare word will go for
Gospel? Would he write thus if he thought there were a God? If he deceive us
in these earthly things which we see with our eyes, no reason we credit him in
heavenly things, Christ is the truth. It becomes not his Uicar to speak
falsehood.

Now let us examine how he wresteth and corrupts the Scriptures of God, how
he gives us a false interpretation, and corrupts them. In his whole Bull he
has one only place out of the Scripture, only one place, I say, and no more:
and the same he sets down to maintain his own authority, and to uphold
his power, whereby he sets up, and deposes the Kings, and Princes, and
states of the world. The words be ye first Chapter of Jeremy: 1. Ierem.
Behold this day have I set thee over the nations, and over the kingdoms, to
pluck up, and to root out, and to destroy, and throw down, to build and to
plant. If he abuse this place of Scripture, which he has advisedly chose^,
and sent over to make thereby some show of his devilish practices to work
rebellion and treasons among us: we may well think he deals the like with
other places, when he draws them to serve his turn.

Hunc vnum super omnes gentes principem constituit, qui euellat, destruat etc.
He has appointed him only (Peter and his Successor the Bishop of Rome)
Prince over all nations, to pluck up, and to destroy, to root out and throw
down to build and plant. No doubt this co^missio^ is large. There can be no
greater authority given in matters of the world. But this authority has no
man. God keeps it to himself. Proverb. 8.
By me Kings reign, and Princes decree justice. They bear my name, they draw
my sword, they are my Ministers to take vengeance on him that does evil: their
hearts are in my hands, I turn them whether soever it pleases me: I take the
prayers and supplications, and intercession for Kings, and for all that are in
authority, that men may lead a quiet, and peaceable life in all godliness and
honesty. Daniel tells King Nabuchodonosor, Daniel. 4.
that the most high bears rule over the kingdoms of men, and gives it to
whomsoever he will. Wherefore does he not give this glory unto God?
Wherefore says he I will go up and be like unto the highest: I will exalt my
self, and show my self that I am God? I have (says he) a deed of gift. The
words set down by the Prophet Hieremie, are my warrant to place and depose
whom I will.

And he does not only say thus, but as if it were too small and base a title,
to set the name of God or of our Savior Christ before the words of his
privilege, he keeps his feet from ye ground, and raises alofte, and
ietteth in the air above, Ephesians. 6.
as though he were one of the spiritual wickednesses which are in the hie
places, and says, Regnans in excelsis cui data est omnis in caelo and in terra
potestas, etc. He that rules in the heights, to whom al power is given both
in heaven and in earth, etc. Let him not deceive you with vain words. You
shall witness against him, that he takes the name of the Lord his God in
vain. For, if any word in that piece of Scripture be spoken either of Prince,
or removing of Princes: if ye whole sense of those words carry any greater
authority to the Pope than to the Bishop of any other place, or to the
simplest Minister in the world, let me be no more credited. Mark therefore,
and see how boldly and fondly Pope Pius seeks to mock the world. First he
says: Deus constituit me vnum Principem super gentes: God has appointed me
alone, to be Prince over the nations. Here is a shameless falsifying of Gods
words. The Prophet says: I have set thee over the nations. The Pope thrusts
in three words more, Me, alone, and Prince, that so he, and none but he, may
revel and rule in all places. Read the place of the Prophet, if you have your
books. The words are: I set thee over the nations. They say nothing, neither
of the Pope, nor of Peter's Successor, nor of one alone, nor of Prince. All
these the Pope has peeced of his own devise.

But Solomon warns him, Prouer. 30.
Put nothing to his words least he reprove thee, and thou be found a liar.
Also S. John tells him, Revel. 22.
If any man shall add unto these things, GOD shall add unto him the plagues
that are written in this Book. Whose words, or what evidence will he not
corrupt, which dares in such presumption to handle the word of GOD
deceitfullye, and without shame, send it forth so into the world?

As for Hieremie the Prophet, unto whom God spoke the words, which the Pope
sends us, will Pius say that he was a Prince, and had authority over
nations and kingdoms? will he say that Hieremie deprived Princes, and thrust
them from their royal seats? Hieremie did no such thing. But al contrary, he
suffered persecution, not only of the Princes, Hier. 2^.
but of the wicked people. Pashur smote him and put him in the stocks. He was
in derision daily, every one mocked him. He heard the railing of many, and
fear came on him on every side. All his familiars lay in wait for him, ye so
they might prevail against him, and execute their vengeance upon him. He
month his case before God, saying, how is it that I came forth of the womb,
to see labor and sorrow, that my days should be consumed with shame? And in
the six and twentieth Chapter, Hier^. 2^.
all the people were gathered against Hieremie in the house of y^ Lord, then
the Priests and the Prophets and all the people took him and said, thou
shall die the death.

Was all this done unto him by rebellion as against their Prince? was it because
he had used him self proudely or cruelly in matters of temporal government?
Hiere. 19. and 20.
was it not rather, because he stood in the Court of the Lords house, where
the Lord had sent him to Prophecy, and said to all the people the words of
the Lord of Hosts. Hiere. 26.
Was it not because he prophesied in the name of the Lord?

Would Pope Pius be thus set over nations add kingdoms? would he be smitten
and put into the stocks, and rayled at? ^d. cap. 38.
would he have his days consumed in shame? would he be let down with cords
into the dungeon where was no water but mire, and so stick fast in the mire?
would he have his friends moan his case to the King, and tell what evil has
been done to him, in that they have cast him into the dungeon, and say, he
dies for hunger in the place where he is? would he, I say, thus be set over
nations and kingdoms? or will he say, that Hieremie suffering these reproaches
of the Rulers, and the Priests, and the people, did enjoy an earthly peace, and
possess a worldly kingdom? or will he say, that God mocked his Prophet, when
he said unto him, This day I set thee over nations?

The words therefore must needs have an other meaning, and what that meaning
is, who is better able to declare than Hieremie him self? Hiere. 1.
The Lord stretched out his hand, and touched my mouth, and the Lord said
unto me, behold I have put my words in thy mouth. I have ordained thee to be a
Prophet unto the nations. Thou shall go to all that I shall send thee, and
what soever I command thee, thou shall speak. Be not afraid of their faces.
For I this day have made thee a defensed City and an iron pillar, and walls
of brass against the whole land, against the Kings of Judah, and against the
Princes thereof: against the Priests thereof, and against the people of the
land. For they shall fight against thee, but shall not prevail against thee.
For I am with thee says the Lord. Such authority had he over the nations:
to be their Prophet, to speak what the Lord commanded, to reprove them
without fear.

In like authority spoke Elias to Achab, I have not troubled Israel, but thou
and thy Fathers house in that you have forsaken the commandments of the
Lord, and thou have followed Baalim. In like authority spoke John the Baptist
unto Herod. Mark. 6.
It is not lawful for thee to have thy brothers wife. And the like authority
did God give unto Moses. Behold I have made thee Pharaos God. Exodus 7.
Thou shall speak all that I command thee. And thou shall say unto him, the
Lord God of the Hebrews has sent me unto thee. As Moses was set over
Pharao King of Egypt, and Elias over Achab king of Israel, and John over King
Herod, so was this Prophet set over the nations: not to remove or pull them
down, but to rebuke their errors, and to direct their lives: to plant the
truth, to overthrow the vanity of men, and to build the fear of the Lord.
In all this we find nothing for the Popes purpose.

But, if it were so, and that had been the meaning of this place, what had that
made for him? Was Hieremie his predecessor in the Bishopric of Rome? or is
he the successor of Hieremie in Israel? was the Prophet called the head of
the Church? had he and did he exercise such jurisdiction over Kings and
Princes, as the Pope hereby chalengeth? if he never attempted any such things,
how does Pope Pius maintain his proceedings by the example of Hier.? or, if
the words will car yno such meaning, why does he so vainly allege them? one
of their own Doctors says, Ioh. de Pari^uh^ cap. 15.
He speaks not of the overthrowing of the kingdoms of the world, but of the
overthrowing of vices, and of the planting of Faith and manners. And so Hierome
Hieron. in. 1. Hierem.
writing upon the same place. Omnis plantatio quam non plantauerit pater
caelestis eradicabitur, and aedificatio quae super petram non habet
fundamentum, sed extructa est in arena sermon dei suffoditur atque destruitur.
Every plant which our Heavenly Father has not planted, is rooted up: and
that building which is not founded on a Rock, but is built upon the Sand, is
undermined, and overthrown with the word of God.

Such poor Hieremies has God given unto the world who have overthrown and
pulled up the vanities and folies which were grown to a great height in the
Church of God. They have planted faith and manners. They have opened and
preached the truth. The Lord has prospered their labors, as we see this
day. He has rooted out those strange plants, and thrown down the weak
foundations with the breath of his mouth. This is the plucking up, the rooting
out, the destroying, and throwing down: this is the building and planting
whereof the Prophet speaks: as we have heard it proved by the Prophet him
self, by the interpretation of Hierome a learned Father, who makes good this
saying with two several places written in the new Testament, and by the
confession of their own Doctor Johan. de Paras^^s, and might be further
proved by sundry others.

Yet all this notwithstanding it must be taken in the sense wherein Pius uses
it, or else some of his predecessors Popes of Rome might likewise be worthily
blamed for their doings. Auentinus in Adriano. 4. an. 1154.
Pope Adrian wrote somewhat roundly to the Emperor Frederick. Imperator quod
habe^, totum habet a nobis. Sicut Zacharias transtulit imperium a Graecis ad
Teutonicos: it a not possumus illud transfer ab Alemannis ad Graecos. Ecce in
potestate nostra est, vt demus illud cui volumus. Propterea constituti sumus a
Deo super gentes and regna, Hier. 1.
vt destruamus, and euellamus, aedificemus, and plantemus. What soever the
Emperor has, he has it of us. As Pope Zachary translated the Empire from
the Greeks unto the Germans, so may we again translate the same from the
Germans to the Greeks. Behold it is in our power to bestow the Empire upon
whom we list. Therefore are we appointed by God over nations, and kingdoms,
to pull down, to root up, to build and to plant again. No mouth would utter
these blasphemies but the mouth of Antichrist.

Thus have we tried the Pope to be a corrupter, and a falsifier of the
Scriptures He puts in three words, Me, Alone, Prince. He applies the place
to himself, and among all other to himself alone, and so sets him self
above Princes. He changes the rooting out of error, to the overthrowing of
Princes: and the prea-ching of the truth, to the deposing of Kings. He forgeth
a sense which the spirit of God, and the Prophet Hieremie never meant. He says,
Thus says the Lord, when the Lord never spoke it. He knew them well, which
said, They wrest the Scriptures to maintain their power. This thou see o
God, and suffer. He calls himself the Uicar of thy Christ he abuses thy
most holy word, he deceives thy people, he makes thee to be a false
witness to his folly, and all this does he to countenance his ambition and
pride.

Now upon warrant of these words so fondly applied, he addresseth himself
solemnly to pronounce sentence. Declaramus praedictam Elizabeth eique
adherentes in praedictis anathematis sententiam incurrisse. We make it known,
that Elizabeth aforesaid, and as many as stand on her side in the matters
above named, have run into the danger of our curse. This is a terrible
thunderbolt shot in among us from Rome, in Paper. These clouds are without
rain: These Gunnes will do no harm. Even so did the Phariseis, cast Christ
Jesus out of theri Sinagogues, and excommunicate him, and accurse him. So did
Diothrephes excommunicate John the Evangelist, and did neither him self
receive the brethren, Epist. 3. Ioh.
but forbadde them that would, and did thrust them out of the Church. So was
Hilarie accursed and excommunicated by the Arians. He lays his curse not
only upon the Lords anointed our blessed Queen, but upon all that follow
her godly proceedings, that is, upon every one of you, and upon al other her
Magisties true subjects. He knows you not, and yet accurseth you. You are
children of God, yet he makes you the children of the devil. The Lord has
showed the light of his countenance upon you, and has given you his heavenly
word, whereby you have gotten understanding, and are made wiser than your
enemies, and are taught to refrain your feet from every evil way, and
therefore the Pope cries out against you, and does reckon you accursed. But
his own words tell us: Nem^em ligare debet iniqua sententia: 11. Q. 3.
A wrongful sentence binds no man. The curs shall come into his own bosom.
Deuteronomy. 23.
For the Lord our God turns the curse unto a blessing to us, because the
Lord our God loves us. Malac. 2.
And, He will send a curse upon them, and will curse their blessings: yea, he
has cursed them already, because they do not consider in their hearts, nor
give glory unto his name. He has also made them to be despised and vile
before all the people, because they have not kept (...) ways.

In this case Christ says, Ne^oice and be glad. For so persecuted they the
Prophets which were before you. Origin. ho^. 3. in Exodus
Origin shows how all that be like minded unto Pharao cry out that men are
seduced, and led out of theri way, if Moses and Aaron, that is, if the speech
of the Preachers call upon them to be diligent in the Law of God, and to
follow his word. Chryso. Hom. 1. ad popul. Antiochen.
And Chrysostom tells us, this is no new thing. Ne admiremur quod
spiritualibus instantes multa patiamur aduersa, etc. Let us not marvel, if we
abide many adversities, because we follow after and desire those things which
are spiritual: For, as the thief diggeth not, nor lays his wait at the
place, where straw, and chafe, and feathers are laid, but, there, where is
gold and silver: so is the Devil most out of quiet, with those which take
in hand spiritual business. Ioh. 16.
These things (says our Savior) have I said unto you, that ye should not be
offended. They shall excommunicate you: yea the time shall come, that whosoever
^^^leth you will think that he does God (...). And these things will they do
unto you, because they have not known he Father, nor me.

But what are the effects and force? what success take the Popes blessings
and his cursses? he stirred up the K. of France, to plague his subjects, and
to that purpose he blessed him and his folowers: they and their Country were
brought to great misery. He blessed Philip King of Spain: he has bin
wonderfully troubled by the Moeres at home, and lives in continual turmoyle
with his subjects in other his dominions abroad. He blessed the states of
Venice: they are still disquieted by the Turk. On the other side, he has
accurssed England: thanks be to God it was never better in worldly peace, in
health of body, in abundance of corn and victuals. He has accursed the
Princes and states of Germany: they were never stronger. He blesses his own
side: but it decays and withers. He cursseth the Gospel, but it prevails
and prospers. The more he cursseth, the more it prospers. This is the
Lords doing, and it is marvelous in our eyes. So does God turn the Popes
curse into a blessing unto us. And so we may well say with Seneca. Seneca in
Hercule Oeto.
Caelestis ir a quos premit miseros facit, humana nullos. The anger of God
makes those me^ miserable upon whom it lights: but so does not the wrath of
man.

Quin et^ia^ ipsam pret enso regni praedicti iure, necnon omni and quocunque
dominio dignitate, priuilegioque priuatam. We also make it known, that we
have deprived her from that right she pretended to have in the Kingdom
aforesaid, and also from al and every her authority, dignity, and
privilege. This is the other part of the Popes sentence. In this his vain
fantasy, and by this childish mockery he thinks to depose Queen Elizabeth
from her kingdom. O vain man, as though the coasts and ends of the world
were in his hands, or as if no prince in y^ world might rule without his
suffera^ce.

So have the proud Prelates of that See, these many years troubled the
states of al Christendom, and thereby been cause of much slaughter and sheding
innocent blood. And so at this present he seeks to disquiet Elizabeth:
Elizabeth I say our sovereign and most gracious Lady, a Uirgin full of
wisdom, virtue, grace and compassion: she is unto us as a comfortable water
in a dry place, as a refuge for the tempest, and as the shadow of a great
rock in a weary land.

The greatest blessing which God gives to any people, is a godly Prince to
rule over them. The greatest misery that can fall upon a people, is to have a
godly Prince taken from them. For by a godly Prince he does so rule the people
as if God himself were with them in visible appearaunce. The Prince walks in
the ways of the Lord: the Nobles follow the steps of the Prince: and the
people fashion them selves to the example of the Nobles. The face of a godly
Prince shines as the Sun beams, and brings joy and comfort to his
subjects.

When the Lord was displeased with the people of Israel, he took Samuel from
them, and gave them Saul to be their King. Saul did wickedly, without Justice,
without Mercy. He devoured the people like a Lion, he overthrew the
tabernacle, and slew the Priests. Then was there no Revelation: None that did
Prophecy, or care for the name of the Lord.

But when God took mercy upon the people, he gave unto them David, a man
after his own heart. He delivered him from danger, and took him out of the
Lions mouth. He crowned him, and did set a crown of pure gold upon his head.
David loved the people, he taught them the ways of God, he put down
Idolatry, and destroyed the Groves, he set up a Tabernacle to the God of
Jacob. Under him the people had great prosperity in their houses, and abroad,
in their Uines, in their Corn, and in their Cattle, in time of Peace, and in
time of War.

When it pleased God to send a blessing vpou us, he gave us his servant
Elizabeth to be our Queen, and to be the instrument of his glory in the sight
of all the world. Who is so blind which sees not? who is so unthankful that
remembers not what things God has wroughte by her? who sees not the glorious
beams of the truth? who sees not the wonderful peace in which we have
lived? who sees not the wise and safe guiding of the people? one of those
alone were a great blessing, but al together are such a blessing, as our
Fathers before us never enioied so happily.

As touching religion, let us think of that time of ignorance, wherein we
were before. How miserable a case was it to see such deadlye dumbness in the
Church of God? to see the people led away in the dark, they knew not
whether? to see the word of life taken away? to see the people fed with
fables? to see an Idol set up in the place of God? to see Jesus Christ our
Savior put to silence? In this case were we. This we did see, we did feel
this. Out of this deadly dungeon GOD delivered us by the hand of our Queen. By
her he restored the truth: by her he sent us the light of his holy word: by
her he has relieved the hearts of the people. God himself has been the
worker hereof. Elizabeth has been his instrument, and the mean by whom he
has done this work.

And mark the time when she attempted this. Even at the first entry into
her kingdom: at which time the King of Spain, the King of France, the
Queen of Scotts, and many of the Nobles and the Bishops of this Realm were
against it. Mat. 6.
She had larned, First to seek the kingdom of God: she had learned to seek
his glory, and not her dwne: she had learned to say as David said, Psalm. 13^
I will not suffer mine eyes to sleep, nor mine eye liddes to slumber until I
find out a place for the Lord, an habitation for the mighty God of Jacob:
she had learned to say, Romans 8.
If God be on our side, who can be against us? So was her gracious heart
consumed with the zeal of Gods house. O who can conceive the joy and comfort
of the people? it was so great, as no man can declare. They held up their
hands to God, they had not words to give him, they could not speak for joy.
They reioiced as a Bird does at the day spring: as Jonas reioiced when he
came out of y^ Whales belly: as Daniel reioiced when he was brought safe out
of the Lions den: as the children of Israel reioiced when they came out of
Aegipt: as the three children reioiced when they came forth of the burning
furnace: so did we rejoice and said: This is the day which the Lord has
made, let us rejoice and be glad in it.

I need not speak of the continual peace, which God has given us all the
time of her government. He that knows not the price of peace, and how to
esteem it, let him behold the kingdoms which border next upon us, how
pitifully they be afflicted. Let him behold Spain, France, Denmark,
Flaunders, and Scotland: and consider what they have suffered these few years
past: what houses have been ouerthrown, what Cities have been burnt, what
blood has been shed? how many women have lost their husbands? how many mothers
have lost their children? and how many children have been made fatherless.

But God, even our God, gave us Queen Elizabeth. and with her gave us Peace,
and so long a Peace as England has seldom seen before.

What should I speak of her wisdom in government. Let us look upon the
state as it was before: what hunger was in this land? many of our brethren
dyed for lack of food. What cruel executions were then in London? there were
few streets where was not set up a galous or a gibbet. In Oxford 52. were
executed at one Sessions. What diseases fell upon us? the grauest, and wisest,
and richest men were taken away. Calais was lost. A stranger and foreign
people had the rule over us. Al things went against us, because God was not
with us.

But God restored by his servant our Queen those ioies again, which we
lacked. He has given us civil peace among our selves, and peace with foreign
nations. He has given us health of body, and store of victuals: discharge of
debts, and avoiding of strangers: he has given us mercy in justice,
abandoning all cruelty. We are now with God, and al things go well with us.

They talk much of an unbloody Sacrifice. It is not theirs to offer it. Queen
Elizabeth shall offer it up unto God: even her unbloody hands, and unbloody
sword, an unbloody people, and an unbloody government. This is an unbloody
Sacrifice. This Sacrifice is acceptable unto God. I say not, that it is not
lawful for her to put to death. God says, Deuteronomy. 13.
Thine eye shall not pity the wicked, nor show mercy: but thou shall kill
him: that all Israel may hear and fear, and do no more any such
wickedness as this, among you. She must do it: if she would not, yet her
laws would see offenders punished. But I speak it to show the gracious goodness
of her merciful nature.

Oh how graciously did her Majesty commend us her subjects, to the careful
and wise government of her Counsel, and Judges, when she spoke thus unto
them: Have care over my people. You have my place, Do you that which I ought
to do. They are my people. Every man oppresses them, and spoileth them
without mercy. They can not revenge their quarrel, nor help themselves. See
unto them, see unto them, for they are my charge. I charge you, even as God
has charged me. I care not for my self, my life is not dear to me, my care
is for my people. I pray God who soever succeed me, be as careful as I am.
They which might know what cares I bear, would not think I took any
great joy in wearing the Crown.

These ears, heard when her Majesty spoke such words. I trust they will work
such affection in your hearts, which hear them reported, as they did in me
when I heard them spoken. She loves her Subjects, and they reverence her: She
is careful for them, and they are true to her, God continue his blessing
toward her, and over shadow her with his merciful hand. For she is the
comfort and Diamond of al Christendom. This is she against whom Pope Pius
rages and stormeth, and has sent his curse, and sentence of deprivation
against her. If he had been acquainted with our happy estate under her, he
might with better grace have said to her, Because thy God loves England, to
establish it for ever, therefore has he made thee Queen over them to execute
Judgment and Justice. He might with more and better aduisement have said,
Number. 23.
How shall I curse where the Lord has not curssed? Or how shall I detest
where the Lord has not detested? He is not so wise as Balaam, which would not
for a house full of gold, pass the commandment of the Lord, to do either
good or badde of his own mind.

Praecipimus and interdicimus vniuersis, and singulis proceribus, subditis, and
populis, and alijs praedictis: ne illi eiusu^e monitis, mandatis, and legibus,
audeant obedire: qui secus egerint, ^os simili anathematis sententia innodamus:
We charge and forbid al and every the Nobles and Subjects, and people, and
others aforesaid, that they be not so hardy as to obey her, or her will, or
commandementes upon pain of like accursse upon them. Would you take this
man to be the Uicar of Christ? He seems rather to be some Master of
misrule, which so discharges all manner of Subjects from all manner
obedience. For, what order will he leave us, when we may not do those things
which we do under her obedience, by charge of her will, or commandments or
laws? His words speak very broad. I command under pain of damnation,
that no servant obey his Master, no wife obey her husband, no child obey
his Parents, and that no Subject obey his Prince. I command and forbid,
that you dare not obey her, etc.

But what if you show him of our laws which Queen Elizabeth has made and
established against Burglarie and robbing by the high way, and any other kind
of theft: against murder, adultery, and all f^lthinesse (as keeping of
Concubines and Courteghians) (like to the use of his City at Rome) keep them
not says the Pope, under pain of my curse. Again, sir by her laws we are
required to resort to our several Churches, there to hear the word of God,
to give thanks unto him, and to pour^ out our prayers before him, etc. he yet
says, obey them not. What shall we do then for laws of common peace, and of
holding our possessions, and goods to our private use, and so maintaining the
good estate of our neighbors? For paying our rents to Landlordes, and custom,
and tribute, where tribute and custom are due? Let not any obey these laws,
says the Pope. Let no man dare obey her, or her will, or commandments, or
laws. Esteem not her law, as a law, take not her to be your Queen.

Is not this fatherly Counsel? Are they not happy which follow it? What godly
creature ever gave the like? What Patriarch, or Prophet, or Evangelist, or
Apostle ever sent the like commissions into the world? Pius will be called the
Uicar of Christ. Did Christ ever set up himself against the Prince, did he
so teach his Disciples, was it any part of that doctrine he has left us?

Pius tells us, he is Successor to Peter and Paul, that he is invested in
their authority, and enthronized in their chair. Let us confer the doctrine
of Peter and Paul, with that which is written vy their Successor. Pius
says of our Sovereign: Let no man be subject to her, 1. Pet. 2.
or obey her. But Peter says: Submit your selves to all manner ordinance of
man for the Lords sake, whether it be unto the King, as unto the Superior: or
unto Governors, as unto them which are sent of him for the punishment of
evil doers, and for the praise of them that do well: for o i^ the will of God.
And again he says: Fear God, honor the King. Peter says, it is the will
of God, that you obey your Prince. Pius gainesayth, Obey not your Prince, my
will is, that you obey not.

Paul has left words for our obedie^cs. Let every soul be subject to the
higher powers, Romans 13.
for there is no power but of God, and the powers that be, are ordained of God.
Whosoever therefore resists the power, resists the ordinance of God, and
they that resist, receive unto them selves judgment. For he is the Minister
of God for thy wealth: But, if thou do evil, fear, for he bears not the
sword in vain. Wherefore ye must be subject, not because of wrath only,
but also for conscience sake. Give therefore tribute to whom you owe tribute,
custom to whom custom, fear to whom fear, honor to whom you owe honor.
Now says Pius, Let no soul be subject to the higher powers, resist power,
resist the ordinance of God, be not Subject neither for wrath, nor for
conscience. Yield your Prince no tribute, no custom, no fear, and no
honor. How agrees this with the Apostle? Whether it be right in the sight of
God that you be lead by Peter and Paul, the Apostles of Christ, or by Pope
Pius, judge ye.

And for what Prince does Paul require this of the Romans? for Nero, an enemy
unto God and godliness, and all that lived godly: who destroyed and burned
their city: who slew his mother, and ripped that belly which brought him to
life: a Monster in nature, and the most wicked ruler that ever reigned. And yet
does Paul require them to obey him, because he is the Minister of God, etc.

Who was like to Nabuchodonosor, King of Babylon? he was the rod of the Lords
wrath, he oppressed the people of God: fired and razed their City, sacked
their Sanctuary, Baruch. 1.
and spoiled their Temple, yet are the people commanded to pray for the life
of Nabuchodonosor King of Babylon, and for the life of Baltazar his son, that
their days may be upon earth as the days of heaven. And again God speaks
by the Prophet Hieremie: I have caused you to be carried away Captives from
Jerusalem unto Babylon. Seek the prosperity of the city, whether I have sent
you away Captives, and pray unto the Lord for it: for in the peace thereof
shall you have peace. If the Apostle withdrewe not the Romans from the
subjection of Nero, if the Prophets willed the children of Israel to pray for
Nabuchodonosor, who were wicked Princes, will Pope Pius tell the Subjects unto
a godly and virtuous Lady, that they must not obey her?

Into what case does he lead miserable simple men, that give him some credit?
How does he amaze them? God tells us we receive to our selves judgment, if
we resist his ordinance. Pius says, we are accursed unless we do resist it.
What shall a simple man do? Which way shall he follow? If he obey God, he must
forsake Pope: Or, if he obey the Pope, he must forsake God. If he obey the
Prince as God wills him, then the Pope cursseth him: Or, if he disobey the
Prince, as the Pope wills him, then does God condemn him. The commandment
of the one is as contrary to the commandment of the other, as light is
contrary unto darkness. But thanks be to God who has filled us with the
knowledge of his will. We know Pope Pius is no God. We pray for him that he may
be the servant of God,

Paul has warned us, Galat. 1.
if an Angel from heaven, or if any man preach unto you otherwise than that you
have received, let him be accursed. We have received of Paul, and of Peter, and
of God him self, that we should obey: yet dares Pope Pius no Angel, but a
man, command us that no man obey, no not under pain of his curse Accursed is
he for so commanding, we have good warrant to say he is accursed.

^mnes qui illt quomodocunque iurauerunt, a (...) amento huiusmod^ ac omni
prorsus domin^^^ fidelitatis, and obsequij debito, perpetuo absolutos
declaramus: We pronounce that all, whosoever by any occasion have taken their
oathe unto her, are for ever discharged of such their oath, and also from all
fealty and service, which was due to her by reason of her government. Does
Pope Pius know what an oath means? Does he know what it is to swear by
the name of God? An oathe is a solemn promise made between men, wherein God
(who knows the secrets of the heart) is called to witness of the doing. As
for example: we have taken this oath. I will be a true and liege Subject to
our Sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth, I will neither in word nor deed procure
her evil, I will not conceal any treason or conspiracy against her, and this
do I promise, as I hope to be saved by the blood of Jesus Christ: and I take
witness to this of God, who sees the singleness of my heart, beseeching him
to avenge it upon me, to put my name out of the book of the living, and to
give me no portion in the kingdom of Christ, and of God, if I willingly or
wittingly break this my promise. Such is the oath, which we have taken to her
highness.

This is nothing (says Pope Pius) I can dispense with it, I am able to
dispense against the law of nature, against the Canons of the Apostles,
against the new Testament: I can dispense for all things done contrary to the
commandments of the old and new Testament: I can dispense against the law of
God. I am above all general Councels, my will must be kept for a law. And does
he only say this? Or shall we think they be words of reverence, written by
such as are devout to his holiness, and that he does not so much as he may by
virtue of his special privilege? Who was it y^ gave a dispensation to the
brother, y^ he might marie his own sister? Who was it that gave dispensation
to Henry the fifth to rise up against Henry the fourth his own father, and put
him from the Empire? What dispensation Pope Pius sent to King Philip God
knows, but the young Prince the Kings son lost his life. I know not what
dispensation past lately into Scotland, but the King was strangled, etc.

A horrible deed, the world knows it was so, what mistes and prete^ces
soever they make. To work such practices, the Pope sends abroad his
dispensations.

Such a dispensation did Pope Pius lately send into England, and discharged the
Subjects from their due obedience to our Prince, and thereby made way for them,
with his favor and license to run headlong into everlasting damnation. With
some weak heads he has prevailed. It is likely he has used secret
conference with them some long time, before they would be drawn to be
traitors to their own country, and be emboldened to put themselves in armor,
and rob, and spoil, and burn, and kill their country men, and friends, and
kinsefolkes, and children, and parents against the law of nature, and the
commandment of God.

This was done not long sithence. You can not but remember it, they were in
arms, and had gathered a great company of Confederats: the banner was
displaied in field. What think you was their meaning? Or to what end did
they rise? Among all those that live within this realm, whose person sought
they? against whom bente they their spears? And against whose body drew they
their swords? But the Lord preserved his anointed: he has placed her upon
his holy hill of Sion: no traitorous malice shall annoy her.

Consider now whence all this rebellion grew. There is no treason, without
conference. There, even there began all our trouble. The master of all this
mischief fitteth at Rome, as I told you before: y^ coals were kindled here,
but the belloes were there, and there sat he y^ blew the fire. We saw the
poppets, but y^ iuggler that drew the strings kept him self close. They which
rebelled brake their oaths, forswore themselves robbed their country, spoiled
towns, burnt y^ holy Bible ye word of God, they cared neither for God, nor man:
neither for Prince, nor for law. They were promised furtherance in their
doings, by insurrections which should have been likewise made in other places
of the Realm. In all this they took courage and countenance of Pope Pius. He
furnished them with all devise of counsel, he blessed the^ in their purpose,
he promised them forgiveness of their sins, for part of their wages.

Miserable man which could find no better company: and in miserable case, when
he cannot be vpholden by other means than by treason. But most miserable are
they which through his wicked persuasions are content to cast themselves, and
to seek how their country may be brought under the subjection of foreine
enemies, into bondage and misery. So does he lose and set at liberty the
consciences of men, and flattereth the wicked in their ungodliness, as if his
dispensation should be their excuse.

It is an old saying, Caveat emptor, let him that buieth take heed. What
color soever the Pope sets on his merchandise, let the buier take heed of
them. We have called God to record unto our souls: our conscience stands
charged. If we commit perjury, God will avenge it. If we resist the power, we
break the ordinance of God, and then we receive to our selves damnation. Let
us therefore be wise and circumspect. As for Pope Pius word, it is no warrant
for us against the judgment of God. In the day of the Lord, when we would
call him forth for our discharge, we shall not find him. He is not able to
warrant himself.

Yet for his better credit, and to prevail the more with us, he says well of
him self, and magnifieth and aduaunceth his own name, when he tells us, I
am a Prince, I am above nations and kingdoms: I excommunicate Kings and
Princes: I deprive them, and put them down, and root them up: I have
authority over their Subjects, I discharge them of their oaths, I curse them
and give them up to the Devil: I am like to the highest. These are blasphemous,
and abominable words, meet words for him that sent them: to who^ is given a
mouth to speak great things, and blasphemies. And thus he imagines all the
world should fall down before him with a Sa^ctus. He imagines he holds the
Sun and Moon in his hands, and can rule them as it pleases him: and thus
he is fallen into a pleasant frenzy: he dreameth of great matters, and with
his own breath he blows him self big like a bladder.

But this breath is nothing, it is easy to let it out, and then the bladder
will also be as nothing. It will not be so easy as he thinks, to have such
place given him in the consciences of men, as he sometimes had: or to root
out all that profess the Gospel of Christ, or to make that the name of the
holy one of Israel shall be no more spoken of. Yet he attempteth it, and
thereto employeth all his power, and his wisdom, and his counsel. Psalm. 2.
But he that dwells in heaven, laugheth him to scorn, the Lord shall have him
in derision As though he were a Sampson, he takes hold of the pillars, he
crasheth them in pieces: but the house which he pulls down, shall fall upon
his own head. His heart is exalted against his fall, which is at hand. All
his great boast is but a cloud of darkness, a clear wind will blow it over.

And now to give you a short view of the whole matter. Remember that Pope Pius
has sent us over against our gracious Queen, and all her Subjects, a
Sentence of his curse and deprivation. Wherein he has dealt ignorantly, and
contrary to the laws, without wit, or discretion, and follows no order. For
the Sentence which should be kept until the last, is given out before the
parties were called, or the cause and proofs, duly alleged and examined.

Remember, that he is no competent Judge, that he has no jurisdiction over us,
that he him self is a party, that he has been accused and found guilty by
the judgment of the whole world, that he is over much affectionate in the
case, wherein he seeks to exalt and enrich him self.

Remember that he has conveyed 19 untruths into this one bundle: that he has
forged a false commission: that he has corrupted and falsified the word of
God, and has made God a false witness unto his folies. Remember that he
teaches us contrary to that we have received of Peter, and of Paul, and of
Christ, and of God: and that he says, Let no soul be subject to the higher
powers, let every soul resist the Prince, let him withstand the ordinance of
God, be not obedient neither for wrath, nor for conscience, give no custom,
nor tribute, nor fear, nor honor unto her.

Remember, if thou obey thy Prince as God has commanded thee, thou art
accursed by the Pope: or, if thou disobey the Prince as the Pope requires
thee, thou art condemned by the judgment of God.

Remember, that the Pope has conference with traitors in all countries, that
he raises Subjects against their Princes, that he causes Princes to plague
their Subjects, that he has no regard of the stranger and the fatherless,
that he suffers Jews and Harlots to live in wealth and peace with him at
Rome: and yet will not suffer a Christian and lawful Prince, to live in y^
peace of her own Country at home, that he is the procurer of theft, and
murder, of rebellion and dissension in the land: that he has sent in a Bul^ to
show his meaning, and to work our disquiet: so bold, and vain, and impudent
a Bull, and so full fraught with blasphemy and untruth, as never before him did
any. Let these things never be forgotten. Let your children remember them for
ever.

Let us, and your children with us pray, God save Queen Elizabeth, and
confound all those which rise up against her. Let us at the length take
knowledge of the Pope, and of his enterprise, and boldness. He and his
Predecessors have deceived y^ world, and our Fathers before us. Let us be no
more children in understanding. God has given us the light of his word: we
have by it espied, wherein they robbed us, let us be no more deceived. I say
unto you again, I beseech you, let us at the length take knowledge of the
Pope, and of his enterprise, and boldness. He and his Predecessors have
deceived the world, and our Fathers before us. Let us be no more children in
understanding. God has given us the light of his word, we have by it espied
wherein they robbed us. Let us be no more deceived.

And thou O most merciful Father be our defense in these dangerous times. The
Lion rangeth and seeks whom he may devour. Look down from thy heavens upon
us. Give thy grace unto Elizabeth thy servant. Thou have placed her in the
seat of her fathers: thou have made her to be a comfort unto thy people: thou
have endewed her with manifold gifts: shadow her under the wings of thy
merciful protection: confound and bring to nothing the counsel of her
enemies: direct the work of thine own hands: establish that, O God, which
thou have wrought in us: so we which be thy people, and the sheep of thy
pasture, shall give thee honor and praise for ever and ever.

Amen.
A Treatise of the holy Scriptures, gathered out of certain Sermons, which the
reverend Father in God, Bishop Jewel preached at Salisburie.
Anno. Domini. 1570.
AMONG al his creatures in heaven or earth God has not made any like unto the
Sun in the firmament, the beams where of are beautiful and pleasant, and
do give comfort in all places to all things. It rejoices the whole, and
relieueth the sick: it causes birds to sing, fishes to play, cattle to
stir, worms to creep, grass to grow, and trees to bring fruit: it renews
the face of the whole earth. Yet a blind man has no pleasure in the beauty
thereof, because he is blind, and cannot see it. Yet a dead man has no warmth
by the heat thereof, because he is dead and feels it not.

Adam was placed in Paradise, in perfect estate, and in the company of Gods
Angles. God walked and did talk with him. He heard the voice and beheld the
presence of God. The rivers yielded waters abundantly, the trees brought him
food of life. He had plenty without travel, he had pleasures, joy, and his
hearts desire. But Adam was unthankful, he knew not God the worker of his
happiness, he knew not the place in which he was, he knew not his own state
and blessedness: therefore the wrath of the Lord grew against him: he fell
into the snares of the Devil, he became mortal, and returned to dust.

What nation in all the World so happy as Israel? they were delivered by a
mighty hand out of Aegipt, from the tyranny of Pharao, from seruage and
vilanie. Their children were no more slain before their faces. They passed
through the bottom of the Sea, as upon dry land. When they were hungry,
there went forth a wind from the Lord, and brought them Quails from the sea,
and Manna was given them from Heaven to eat: when they thirsted, the rocks
opened and powered out water that they and their beasts might drink. In
battle they were mighty and strong, no power was able to stand against
them. The Lord went before them by day in a pillar of a cloud, to lead them
the way, and by night in a pillar of fire, to give them light. When they
called upon the Lord, he heard them. When they trusted in him, they were not
confounded. But they grew unmindful of all these mercies, and murmured
against the Lord, and against his servants: therefore God raught forth his
hand against them. He swear in his wrath that they should not enter into his
rest. He sent his Angel and destroyed them in the wilderness.

Even so fares it with all such which regard not the word of their
salvation, because they have ears and hear not, nor will understand with
their hearts, the fury of the Lord shall be kindled against them. The Prophet
says in the name of God to Israel, Hier. 7.
I have sent unto them al my servants the Prophets, yet would they not hear
me, nor incline their ear. 2. Esdra. 9.
And, Behold, I sow my law in you, that it may bring forth fruit in you. But
our fathers which received the law, kept it not: neither observed thine
ordinances, neither did the fruit of thy law appear. For they that received
it perished, because they kept not the thing that was sown in them. Samuel
tells Saul: ^. Sam. 15.
Thou haste cast away the word of the Lord, and the Lord has cast away
thee. Again Jeremy says: How do ye say, we are wise, and the Law of the
Lord is with us? they have rejected the word of the Lord, and what wisdom is
in them? Again, Unto whom shall I speak, Hier. 6.
and admonish that they may hear? Behold their ears are uncircumcised, and
they cannot hearken: behold, the word of the Lord is unto them as a reproach:
they have no delight in it. I will cause a plague to come upon this people, even
the fruit of their own imaginations: because they have not taken heed unto
my words, nor to my law, but cast it off.

After this sort does God show the cause, why his word takes not place in
us, because we are wilful, and will not hear it, nor receive it, nor take
delight in it, nor let the fruit thereof appear, but reject it, and make it a
reproach, and cast it away from us: and therefore is it, that the Lord does cast
us away, that we are unwise, that we please our selves with our own devises,
and follow our own imaginatio^s, and perish, because we have not understanding
to hear ye instruction of the Lords word, but like ignorant me^ disallow it,
and cast it behind the back.

The consideration hereof moves me to say somewhat of the holy Scriptures,
which are the bright Sun of God, which bring light unto our ways, and
comfort to all parts of our life, and salvation to our souls. In which is
made known unto us our estate, and the mercy of God in Christ our Savior
witnessed. That we may the better see the path which we have to walk in, my
meaning is, truly, and plainly, and shortly, to show you, what Authority
and Majesty the word of God bears: then, what Profit we may reap by it:
also, how needeful it is, that we be well instructed in the holy Scriptures:
and, what Pleasure and Delectation a Christian conscience may find in them:
and lastle, whether they be dark and doubtful, or plain and easy for your
understanding: that, when we know the Majesty and Authority of the word, and
what comfort and profitte GOD gives us by it, we deprive not our selves
thereof by our unthankfulness, nor close up our eyes that we see it not: but
hear it in reverence and in fear, that it may be fruitful in us, and we
receive it not in vain.

The Scriptures are the word of God. The authority of the Scriptures. 2. Pet.
1.
What title can there be of greater value? what may be said of them to make them
of greater authority, tha^ to say. The Lord has spoken them? That they came
not by the will of men, but holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the
holy Ghost? At the word or Proclamation of an earthly Prince we stand up,
and veil our bonnets, and give good ear to it: we are bound so to do, it is
our duty, such honor belongs to the powers that are placed to rule over
us: for they are ordained of God. And who soever resists them, resssteth the
ordinance of God. If we should have a revelation, and hear an Angel speak
unto us, how careful would we be to mark, and remember, and be able to
declare the words of the Aungel? yet is an Aungel but a glorious creature, and
not God. And what is a King? great and mighty: yet mortal and subject to
death. creature, and not God. And what is a King? great and mighty: yet
mortal and subject to death. His breath departs, and his name shall perish.
Both he and his word, his power and his puissance shall have an end. But the
word of the Gospel is not as the word of an earthly Prince. It is of more
Majesty than the word of an Angel. The Apostle says: Heb. 2.
If the word spoken by Angels was steadfast, and every transgression and
disobedience received a just recompense of reward: how shall we escape if we
neglecte so great salvation which at the first began to be preached by the
Lord, and was confirmed unto us by them that heard him? God says by the
Prophet Esaias, Esaias. 55.
My word shall accomplish that which I will, and it shall prosper in the thing
whereto I sent it. And the same Prophet says: Esaias. 40.
The word of God shall stand for ever. And, It is more easy that Heaven and
Earth pass away, Luke. 16.
than that one title of the Law should fail, says our fauiour. For, it is
the word of the living and almighty God, of the God of Hosts, which has
done whatsoever pleased him, both in heaven and in earth. By this word he
makes his will known. John. 12.
I have not spoken of my self (says Christ) but the Father which sent
me, gave me a commandment, what I should say, and what I should speak.
John. 15.
And again, If I had not come and spoken unto them, they should not have
had sin: but now have they no cloak for their sin. No man has seen God
at any time: He is invisible, no eye can reach unto him. The only begotten
son which is in the bosom of his Father, he has declared him: he has
showed us the throne of grace, that we may seek for mercy, and find grace
in time of need: he has disclosed unto us the will of his father. He has
left unto us, and ordained that we should hear his holy word.

This word the Angels and blessed spirits used when they came down from
Heaven, to speak unto the people: when they came to the blessed Uirgine, and
to Joseph, and to others: they spoke as it was written in the Prophets and in
the Scriptures of God: they thought not their own authority sufficient, but
they took credit to their saying, and authority to their message, out of
the word of God. This Word the Prophets vouched and alleged to the people.
Albeit they were sanctified in their mothers womb: albeit God had endued them
with his heavenly spirit: although a Seraphin came unto one of them and
touched his mouth with a hot coal: albeit he saw the Lord sitting upon an
high throne: yet they would not speak as of themselves, but only in the
name of the Lord: for thus they used to say. The Lord has spoken: this is the
word of the Lord. Hear what the Lord says. Saint Paul albeit he was
taken up into the third Heaven, and into Paradise, and heard words that are
not lawefull for man to utter: yet he wrote not his own words to the Churches
of Rome, of Corinth, and Thessalonica. and of other places, but delivered which
had received, and taught them according to the Scriptures.

This word is the true Manna: it is the bread which came down from Heaven: it
is the key of the kingdom of heaven: it is the savor of life unto life: it is
the power of God unto salvation. In it God shows unto us his might, his
wisdom, and his glory. By it he will be known of us. By it he will be
honored of his creaturs. Whatsoever truth is brought unto us contrary to the
word of God, it is not truth but falsehoode, and error: whatsoever honor done
unto God, disagreeth from the honor required by his word, it is not honor
unto God, but blasphemy. Mat. 15.
As Christ says, In vain they worship me, teaching for doctrines men's
precepts. Esa. 1.
By Esaias God says, Who required this at your hands? And by Jeremy, Ierem. 7.
I spoke not unto your Fathers, nor commanded them, when I brought them out of
the land of Aegipt, concerning burnt offerings and Sacrifices. But this thing
commanded I them, saying, obey my voice, and I will be your God, and ye
shall be my people: and walk ye in all the ways which I have commanded
you, that it may be well unto you. Ierem. 23.
Again, What is the Chafe to the Wheat, says the Lord? What are your
dreams to be weighed with the truth of God? Search the Scriptures: In them ye
shall learn to know me, and how you should worship me: in them you shall find
everlasting life: the words of the Lord are pure words, as the silver tried in
the furnace: there is no filth, nor dross, remaining in them. They are the
storehouse of wisdom, and of the knowledge of God. In respect whereof, all the
wisdom of this world is but vain and foolish.

Numa Pompilius King of the Romans, Lycurgus King of Lacedemon, and Minos King
of Creta, were wise men, and of great government: they devised laws to rule
the people, and bare them in hand, that they were taught by revelation: that
so their ordinances might win the more credit, and be established for ever.
But where are they now? Where is Numa, Minos, or Lycurgus? where be their
Books? What is become of their Laws? They were unwise, and had no knowledge,
nor understanding of God: they and their Laws are dead, and their names
forgotten. But the law of God came from Heaven indeed, GOD wrote it with his
finger, it is the fountain of al wisdom, and therefore shall it continue for
ever, and never have an end.

Here let us behold the great power and work of God. Exodus 19.
When Moses received the Law, God himself came down in person, with thousand
thousand of Angels: the Air was darkened at his presence, the Mount stood
al covered with fire, the earth shook, the heavens thundered, the people stood
a far off, and fled for fear, and said unto Moses talk thou with us, and we
will hear: but let not God talk with us, least we die. This was the first
proclayming and publishing of ye law: such force and credit God gave to his
word, and warra^ted himself to be y^ Lord.

Since that time, so many thousand years are already passed. In the mean
time ye people of Israel were oppressed by Tyrants, were spoiled and chased
out of their Country. First by Nabuchodonosor into Babylon: after that by
Antiochus into Syria, and lastly, were as vagabondes driven from country to
country. Thyir City Jerusalem was sackte, their houses overthrown, their
Temple razed, and not a stone left upon a stone: their Library destroyed:
their Books burnte: the tabernacle lost, the covenant broken: No vision, no
revelation, no comfort for the people left, nor prophet, nor priest, nor any
to speak in the name of the Lord. In all those times of decays, of sackings,
of darkness, and of misery, what was done with the word of God? It was
wickedly burnt by Ioachim King of Judah: Ierem. 36.
and Antiochus burnt the Books of the Law, 1. Mac. 1.
and cut them in peeces^ No man durst be known to have them, and auouche
the having. So thought they utterly to deface the glory of God, and abolish al
remembrance of his Laws.

Then came the Phariseis, they drowned the word of God with their traditions:
they took away the key of Knowledge, and entered not in them selves, but
forbade them that came in. After them came Heretics, they denied some one
part, and some an other part of Scriptures. They razed, blotted, corrupted,
and altered the word of God, of the word of God, they made it their own word,
or which is worse, they made it the word of the Devil.

By the space of so many thousand yers, the word of God passed by so many
dangers of Tyrants, of Phariseis, of Heretics, of fire, and of sword: and
yet continues and stands until this day, without altering, or changing one
letter. This was a wonderful work of God, that having so many, so great
enimes, and passing thorough so many, so great dangers, it yet continues
still without adding or altering of any one sentence, or word, or letter. No
creature was able to do this, it was Gods work. He preserved it, that no
Tyrant should consume it, no Tradition choke it, no Heretic maliciously
should corrupt it. For For his names sake, and for the elects sake, he would
not suffer it to perish. For in it God has ordained a blessing for his
people, and by it he makes covenant with them for life everlasting. Tirants,
and Phariseis, and Heretics, and the enemies of the Cross of Christ have an
end, but the word of God has no end. No force shall be able to decay it. The
gates of Hell shall not prevail against^ it. Cities shall fall: Kingdoms shall
come to nothing: Empires shall fade away as the smoke: but the truth of the
Lord shall continue for ever. Burn it, it will rise again: kill it, it will
live again: cut it down by the root, Prou. 21.
it will spring again, There is no wisdom, neither understanding, nor Counsel
against the Lord.

Let us behold the nations and kingdoms which sometimes professed Christ, and
are now heathnish: I^^yricum, Epyrus, Peloponnesus, Macedonia, and others.
Again, let us behold such kingdoms and countries, which were in times past
heathnish, and knew not God: As England, Ireland, Rome, Scotland, and diverse
other. They were al without y^ Gospel, without Christ, without God, and
without hope of life. They worshipped Idols, even ye work of their own hands.
To them they appointed Priests for their service, days and places for the
people to resort together to worship the^. Here in England, Paul's Church in
London, was the Temple of Diana: Peter's Church in Westminst. was the Temple of
Apollo. In Rome they had ye Temple of the great God Iuppiter: and in Florence
ye Temple of Mars, and in other places they had Temples dedicated to other
Idols.

Jupiter, Mars, Apollo, and Diana were unclean spirits, and filthy Devils:
yet gave they thanks to them for their peace and prosperity, prayed to them in
war and in misery, and commended unto them, their wives, their children,
themselves, ye safe keeping and custody of their souls. They built gorgeous
Churches and Chapels, set up images of silver and gold to the^: prayed, lifted
up their hands, did sacrifice, and offered up their children to the^. A horrible
thing to say, yet true it is: ye darkness of those times were such, that me^
slew their own offered them up to Idolles. They said, great is Jupiter,
great is Apollo, and great is Diana of the Ephesians. These are the Gods of
our Fathers, our Fathers trusted in them, they made us, and have defended us,
and have given us victory against our enemies. Whosoever denied the^, were
thought worthy to die.

Thus were the Kings and the Princes, and the people persuaded. And so
continued they by the space of some thousand years, without controllment, or
contradiction. They had great proppes of Antiquity, Universality, and
Consent. Antiquity of all times, Uniuersalitie of al places, consent of all the
people. So strongly, and so mightily were they founded. Who would think such
a religion, so ancient, so universal, and so defended by common consent,
should ever possibly be removed?

But when the fullness of time came, God sent forth his word, and al was
changed. Error fell down, and truth stood up: me^ forsook their Idols, and
went to God. The Kings and Priests, and people were changed: the Temples, and
Sacrifices, and Prayers were changed: men's eyes, and hearts were changed.
They forsook their Gods, their Kings, their Priests: they forsook their
antiquity, customs, consent, their Fathers, and themselves. What power was
able to work these things? What Emperor by force ever prevailed so much? what
strength could ever shake down so mighty idols from their seat? What hand of
man could subdue and co^quer the whole world, and make such mighty nations
confess they had done amiss? This did the Lord bring to pass by the power of
his word, and the breath of his mouth. This was it, yt lead captiui^ie captive,
and threw down every high thing that lifted it self up against the Lord: and
brought all powers under subjection unto the Lord It is the image, the power,
the arm, ye sword, and the glory of God. It is mighty, of great force and
virtue, of authority, and majesty, because it is the word of God: therefore
the glory thereof is great.

Now let us stand a far of, and humble our selves, and in reverence and fear
learn to take the fruit and comfort of the same: The profit which Christians
reap by the Scriptures.
for so is the will of God, that we may be partakers of his glory. But where
shall we find entrance into this matter? And how shall we be able to come a
land? For this is the Sea, and the depth of all the works, of the judgments,
and mercies, and of the kingdom of God. This is a Sea that has no shore, a
pit that has no botome. The holy Scriptures are the mercy seat, the registry
of the mysteries of God, our Chartre for the life to come, the holy place in
which God shows him self to the people, the Mount Ston, where God has
appointed to dwell for ever. The more comfort in the^, so much the more greedily
let us desire them: the more heavenly and glorious they are, with so much the
more reverence let us come unto them.

For consideration of this matter of the fruit and comfort which God works by
the word: what may we better call to mind, Romans 15.
than that is reecorded by S. Paul: Whatsoever things are written aforetime,
are written for our learning, that we through patience and comfort of the
Scriptures might have hope. All that is written in the word of God, is not
written for Angels, or Archangels, or heavenly Spirits, but for the sons of
men, for us and for our instruction: that by them we may receive strength, and
comfort in all adversities, and have hope of the life to come. It is the word
of God, God opens his mouth and speaks to us, to guide us into all truth,
to make us full and ready in all good works, that we may be perfect men in
Christ Jesus: so rooted and grounded in him, that we be not tossed to and fro
with every tempest.

The profit which the word of God brings, shall best apeare, if we first
take a view of our estate, what we are, in what place we stand, and what
enemies make force against us. We are ye sons of Adam, stubborn children, the
children of vanity, and of wrath: The ch^ldren of those fathers which forsook
God, and have erred in their hearts, and were deceived. God which created man
and breathed into him the breath of life, Genesis 8.
says: The imagination of man's heart is evil from his youth. Such are we eue^
by the judgment of God: and his judgment fails not. What error, what idol,
what wickedness ever has been heard, which has not been forged and wrought in
the heart of man? we can neither do, nor speak, nor think the thing that is
good: our understanding is heavy, our will froward, our eyes blind, and our
heart unclean. We go astray through this world as lost sheep, every man
after his own way. Even as a leaf is carried up and down with a blast of
wind, so are we easily driven into error: in our selves we find no stay, no
succor, nor help. Such are we, and so weak of our selves.

But where are we? in the world. And what is the world? Some think it to be a
place full of all delights and pleasures, a goodly strong and gorgious palace,
and a paradise of joy. Let no man deceive us, nay rather let us not deceive our
selves: the world is a shop of vanities, it is a dungeon of darkness, a
pot full of poison, a ship full of leakes, a way full of snares. It
blinds our eyes, beguileth our senses, and helps us forward into all
dangers. We are blind our selves, and the place wherein we are is nothing else
but darkness.

Whereunto may I resemble our case? Jeremy the Prophet was cast into a du^geon.
There he sat without light, and without comfort. His case was miserable, and
the place loathsome, yet he knew where he was: he knew what he lacked: he cried
unto the Lord and was delivered. Daniel was cast into the den of Lions, there
to be torn in pieces and devoured. But he saw his misery, and the danger in
which he stood: he saw the Lions, the paws which should gripe him, and the
teeth which should tear him. His case was miserable: yet is ours more
miserable. We are in the deep dungeon of hell, and think we are in safety: we
are in the midst of darkness, and think it to be light: we are compassed
with Lio^s, with Dragons, and Scorpions, yet think not of our misery.

Who has not heard the story of Jonas? Jonas was in a Whales belly: The place
was very dark: the waves beat on every side: he was drowned, yet touched no
water: he was swallowed up, yet not consumed: he lived without any sense of
life: the fish was his death, y^ sea was death, and the tempest was death: yet
he died not, but lived in the mids of death: he could not see, he could not
hear, he knew not to whom he might call for help: he was taken and carried
away, he knew not whether. Let us mark well this story, it is a true pattern
of our estate, and shows what our life is in this world. We are beset with
like dangers, we are driven with te^pests we are drowned in like floods, we live
in ye midst of horrible darkness, we are carried we know not whether.

The Philosopher tells us, truth and falsehode are nigh neighbors, and dwell
one by the other: the utter porch of ye one is like the porch of the other, yet
their way is contrary: the one leads to life, the other leads to death:
they differ little to the show save that often times the door of falshod is
fair, painted, graven, and beautifully adorned: but the door or fore front of
truth, is plain and homely. Thereby it happens that men be deceived, they
mistake the door, and go into errors house, when they seek truth. They call
evil good, falsehoode truth, and darkness light. They forsake that is good,
deny the truth, and love not the light. This moved S. Paul to say of his
brethren the Jews: Romans 10.
I bear them record that they have the zeal of God, but not according to
knowledge: they have the care and fear of God: they are zealous in their
doings: they have devotion: they pretend conscience: they think they do well,
and that they please God. Romans 1.
When they professed themselves to be wise, they became fools. They knew not
what they did: for if they had knowledge, they would never have crucified the
Lord of glory. But they know not the truth of God: they know not God: they
are carried away in y^ vanity of their own heart. Their prayers are no prayers:
The truth they hold is falshoode: their faith is no faith: they are sheep
without a shephearde. Thus we have heard, what we are, and in what place.

Now let us see what enemies bend their force against us. We fight against
the gates of hell, with the Devil, the prince of darkness, the father of
lies: with the Devil, which has power over the children of disobedience, by
whose malice death came into the world Even that Devil bends his force
against us, which deceived Adam in Paradise: which has deceived the learned
Philosophers: and beguiled the Princes, and wiseme^, and the worthies of the
world: Which does abuse, and entice our hands, our eyes, our learning, our wit,
and our own heart to deceive us. He rampeth as a Lion, and raungeth over the
world, seeking whom he may devour. This is his delight and study. He has
been a murderer from the beginning. If this were ever true at any time, our
times have found it most true. We are they upon whom ye ends of ye world are
come.

Now is this Scripture fulfilled in our ears. Now see we the days whereof
Christ warned his disciples so earnestly: Matthew. 24.
They shall say, Lo here is Christ, and there is Christ, This is the truth,
that is the truth. There shall arise false Christ's, and false prophets, and
shall deceive many, they shall betray the truth. Many shall be offended by them:
if it were possible, the very elect. They whose names are written in ye book
of life should be deceived. And except those days should be shortened, there
should no flesh be saved: but for the elects sake those days shall be shortened.
The sun shall be darkened, and the moon shall not give her light. The sun is the
word of God: the moon signifies the Church. The powers of heaven shall be
moved, all the kinreds of the earth shall mourn. Abomination of desolatio^ shall
stand in the holy place. Let him that reads, consider it. This is the
mystery of iniquity of which S. Paul speaks to the Thessalonians, 2. These. ^
Which works among them that perish. Thus are we forewarned. God has given
us his word to advise us, that we be not cast away unawares. They that walk
in the dark know not whether they go: if the blind lead the blind, both
fall into the ditch: he that is ignorant, shall not be known. Christ shall say
unto him, I know you not: depart from me ye curssed into everlasting fire.
Their worm shall not die, and their fire shall not be put out.

In this case, what shall a godly disposed simple man do? How shall he settle
himself? To which fide may he safelye join himself? If he make reconing of
learning, there are learned men on both sides: if he make reconing of virtue,
and godly life, there be virtuous men and of godly life on both sides: if he
make reconing of zeal, either side is zealous in y^ religion they hold: if he
make reconing of ye name of ye Church, they take it as well to the one side as
to the other: if he make reconing of the multitude, there are many on either
side, but neither side has so many as has the Turk. Whether then may a man
turn himself, and to which side may he safely join? In this case we find the
comfort and profit of the word of God. In this case S. Paul tells us,
whatsoever things are written aforetime, are written for our learning: to
lighten our eyes, to resolve our doubts, and to guide our feet. This light
God has kindled in his mercy, to lighten them that sit in darkness. Except
he had left us a sparkle of this light, we had perished, and become like to
Sodoma and Gomorrha.

David says, Psalm. 119.
Thy word is a Lantern to my paths, and a light to my feet. By it I may see
the way which is before me: by it I can escape danger, and by it I can keep
the path wherein I ought to walk. When Christ perceived that the Capernaites
and the Jews, John. 6.
misliked his doctrine, and went back and walked no more with him, he said to
ye xij. Will ye also go away? You are my disciples, who^ I have chosen out of
this world: will you also go away? Simo^ Peter answered him, Master, to who^
shall we go? thou have the word of eternal life. If we forsake thee, who shall
instruct us? thy word is the word of eternal life.

With this word Christ confounded the Scribes and Phariseis, and put them to
silence. Maike. 7.
Ye reject (says he) the commandment of God, that ye may observe your
own tradition. For, Moses said, Honor thy father and thy mother, whosoever
shall curse father or mother, let him die the death. But ye say, if a man say
to father or mother, Corbam, that is, by the gift that is offered by me thou
may have profit, he shall be free. With this word he confounded them, for
misusing of the Temple by buying and selling, It is written, Matthew. 21.
mine house shall be called the house of prayer: but ye have made it a den
of thieves. With this word he put them to silence, and confounded their error,
in y^ they thought it lawful for a man to put away his wife for every fault:
Matthew. 19.
From the beginning it was not so. With this word he confounded the Devil, and
chased him from him: It is written, Matthew. 4.
man shall not live by bread only, but by every word that proceeds out of
the mouth of God: And again, It is written, thou shall not tempt the Lord thy
God: And again, It is written, thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him
only shall thou serve.

This word confounded the Arians and all sects of heretics. What is become of
Marcion, of Nestorius, of Valentinu^ of Menander, of Sabellius, of Eutyches,
and others? they are blown away as smoke before the wind: the word of God
has confounded them, and beat them away. As Dagon fell, and brake his hands
and neck, and could not stand in the presence of the Ark of the Lord: even
so shall all falshode fall and hide it self in the presence of the truth of
God. As the Rod of Moses devoured the Rods of the Charmers: as the beams of
the Sun drive away and consume darkness, so shall the word of God chase away
errors.

When the two Disciples walked by the way with Christ, they said between
themselves, Luke. 24.
after their eyes were opened, that they knew him: Did not our hearts burn
within us, while he talked with us by the way, and opened to us the Scriptures?
His words did possess all our senses: this talk was not like common talk, we
felt it forcible in us, as the word of Israel heard Peter declare unto them
at Jerusalem by proof of the Scriptures, Act. 2.
that Christ was come, they were not able to resist the word of God, but were
pricked in their hearts and said unto Peter and the other Apostles Men and
brethren what shall we do? we acknowledge our error: the words which you
speak are most true: they are the words of life: teach us and instruct us what
we shall do. They felt the force of it, and yielded unto it: they did
acknowledge it was the word of God.

S. Augustine after he had continued long in error, Lib. 8. confession. cap.
12.
and withdrewe himself into a secret place where he might make his prayer, and
bewail his ignorance, heard a voice say unto him: Toll, lege, toll, lege,
Take up and read, take up and read. And he forthwith took up the Epistles
of Saint Paul, and opened them, and secretly read the Chapter which he first
lighted on, even these words: Not in gluttony, Romans 13.
and drunkenness, neither in chambring and wantonness, nor in strife and
envying: but put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and take no thought for the
flesh, to fulfill the lusts of the same. Nec vltra volui legere (says he)
nec opus erat. Statim quippe cum fin^ huiusce sententi^e, quasi luce s^curit
atis infusa cordi meo, omnes dubita^ionis tenebrae diffugerunt. I would read
no farther, for I needed not. For when I had read to the end of this sentence,
all the darkness of doubtfulnesse vanished away, as if some clear light of
security were powered into my heart. It was as if it had been said: O man
acknowledge thy misery: thou art naked, cover thy filthiness: put upon thee
Jesus Christ. And forthwith, I felt a fire within me, my heart was lightened,
the scales fell from mine eyes, I was able to see. Thus was he comforted, and
staide by this, the word of God.

This profit of the word S. Cyprian declares. Ciprian: ad Pompeium.
Si ad diuinae tradi^ionis caput, and originem reuertamur, cessat omnis error
humanus. If we return to the head, and the beginning of the Lords
traditions, all error of man must needs give place. Theophilactus writing upon
these words in the Gospel by Saint John, Theophil: in 10. cap. Ioh.
He that enters not in by the door into the Sheepefolde, but climbeth up an
other way, he is a thief and a Robber, says, non ingreditur per ostium, hoc
est, per Scripturas. Non enim vtitur Scripturis testibus, neque Prophetis. Nam
profecto scripturae ostium sunt per quas adducimur ad Deum: illae lupos non
permittunt intrare: prohibent haereticos vt nos securi simus: and de omnibus
rationem dant de quibus voluerimus. Fur igitur est qui non ingreditur per
scripturas in stabulum ouium, and ita per illas deprehenditur. Sed ascendit
aliunde, hoc est, aliam sibi viam and insolitam parat. Talis erit Antichristus.
He enters not in by the door, that is, by the Scriptures. For he does not use
the Scriptures, nor the Prophets, as witnesses. For indede the Scriptures are
the door by which we are brought to God: and they suffer not the Woolues to
come in, they keep of heretics, that we may be in safety: and they teach us
the reason of any thing, wherein we would be instructed: therefore he is a
thief which enters not into the shepefold by the Scriptures. And by the
Scriptures, it apeareth he is a a thief, that climbeth up an other way, that
is, makes himself an other way, a way which was not known, nor beaten. Such
a one shall Antichrist be. What greater profit? they bring us to God: teach
us the truth, and give us reason of all things: they keep us in safety:
suffer not Wolves to devour us, keep off Heretics, bewray a thief, and make
known who is Antichrist. Therefore, upon the Gospel by Saint Luke he
expounds these words, Theophil: in 12. Lucae.
Let your lights be burning, that is, have not your being in the darkness,
and be ye not void of Judgment: but take unto you the light of Gods word:
which will teach you what things you should do, and what things you ought not
to do.

And as the word of God is the light to direct us, and to bewray errors: so
is it also the standerde and beam to try the weightes of truth and
falsehoode. Chrysostom writing upon the four and twentieth of Saint Matthew,
Hom. 49. in opere imperf.
shows it were impossible for a man to stay himself, and find out which is
the true Church, but by the word of God, For it could not be tried by working
of miracles, because the gift of working miracles is taken away: and such false
miracles as carry some show, are rather to be found among false Christians:
nor yet by their conversation and life, because Christians live either as il,
or worse than Heretics. Nulla probatio potest esee verae Christianitatis,
neque refugium potest esse Christianorum aliud, volentium cognoscere fide^
veritatem, nisi tantummodo per scripturas: There can be no trial of true
Christianity, and Christians, which desire to know the truth, whereupon they
may build their faith, have no other refuge, but to try and learn this by the
Scriptures. For (says he) Heretics have the counterfaite and likeness of
those things which are proper to Christ. They have Churches, they have the
Scriptures of GOD, they have Baptism, they have the Lords Supper, and al other
things like the true Church: yea they have Christ himself. He therefore that
will know which is the true Church of Christ, how may he know it, but by
the Scriptures? Therefore our Lord, knowing that there should be such confusion
of things in the latter days, commands, that Christians which live in the
profession of Christian faith, and are desirous to settle them selves upon a
sure ground of Faith, should go to no other thing, but to the Scriptures.
Otherwise, if they had regard to other things, they should be offended, and
perish, and not understand which is the true Church.

The master of the Ship, when he is on the maine Sea, casts his eye always
upon the Load Star: and so directs and guides his ways. Even so must we
which are passengers and strangers in this world, ever settle our eyes to
behold the word of God. So shall no tempest ouerblowe us: so shall we be
guided without danger: so shall we safly arrive in the haven of our rest. The
Prophet David therefore says: Blessed are they that keep his testimonies, and
seek him with their whole heart. Their faces shall not be ashamed: they shall
not be confounded which have respect unto his commandment. Blessed is the
man whose delight is in the law of the Lord, and, in that law do the exercise
himself day and night. The Law of the Lord is perfect converting the soul:
the testimony of the Lord is sure, and gives wisdom unto the simple. This
is the rule of our faith: without this, our faith is but a fantasy, and no
faith: for faith is by hearing, and hearing by the word of God. John. 5.
Therefore Christ says, Search the Scriptures, they are they that testify of
me. There shall ye find testimony of my doctrine, there shall ye know what is
the will of my heavenly Father, and there shall you receive the comfort for
everlasting life. John. 8.
Again, He that follows me shall not walk in darkness but shall have the
light of life. If a man keep my word, he shall know the truth, he shall never
see death. Therefore Baruch says, Baruch. 4.
O Israel, we are blessed, for the things that are acceptable unto God, are
declared unto us. This is thy blessedness, herein has God showed his favor
unto thee, he has revealed the secreats of his will unto thee, and has put
his word in thy mouth. He shows his word unto Jacob, his statutes and his
judgments unto Israel: he has not dealte so with every nation, neither
have they known his Judgments. Therefore the Prophet David teaches us to
pray unto God for the knowledge of his word, Psalm. 25.
Show me thy ways O Lord, Psalm. 25.
and teach me thy paths. Take not thy holy spirit from me, Psalm. 51.
and incline my heart unto thy testimonies: Give me understanding, Psalm. 119.
that I may learn thy commandments, open mine eyes, that I may see the
wonders of thy Law. Psalm. 13.
And, Lighten mine eyes, that I sleep not in death: that I may discern
between safety and danger, that I may know truth to be the truth, and error
to be error.

Thus I have declared part of that profit which grows to us by the word of
God: but it does not only direct our judgment in the trial of truth, but
does also graffe in us a boldness and constancy in the defense of the
truth. Solomon says, cle. 27.
A fool changes as the Moon: He is always unstable, and inconstant, he
knows not, neither what to do, nor what to believe: he is sometimes full, and
sometimes empty: and turns and changes as the Moon: He builds and lays
his foundation upon the sand: therefore his house falls to the ground. He
halteth on both sides: sometimes worshippeth God, and sometimes worshippeth
Baal: he is neither hot nor cold: he ebbeth and flows like the waves of
the sea, he doubts and staggereth, and rests in nothing. He knows not the
truth, he knows not that the scripturs are the word of God, so he wandereth
in the dark, and knows not the way in which he walks: He has no feeling,
no heart, no understanding. He is unfaithful toward God, and keeps no faith
toward man: he is wavering in all his ways. And why? because he knows not
the will of God, nor has the light of his word to guide his feet.

But a wise man is one and steadfast as the sun. He builds his house upon a
rock, and that rock is Jesus Christ the son of God. Therefore his house is
never shaken down. Be the storm or tempest never so rough, yet it shall stand
fast like Mount Sion, because his trust is in the name of the Lord. He
knows that his name is written in the Book of Life, he knows that he
belongs to the Lords Sheepefolde, and that no man can take him away out of
the Lords hand. Psalm. 23.
In this boldness David says, Though I should walk thorough the valley
of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil: for thou art with me: thy
rod and thy staff they comfort me. Psalm 27.
And again, the Lord is my light and my salvation, whom shall I fear? And
again, Psalm. 219.
Except thy laws had been my delight, I should now have perished in mine
affliction: 2. Kings. 19.
when Ezechias heard y^ proud message of Sennacherib sent to him and his people
by Rahshaketh, that they should not obey Ezech. nor trust to him, when he said,
The Lord will deliver you: and, let not thy GOD deceive thee, in whom thou
trustest: he went up into the house of the Lord, and prayed unto the Lord,
to save him and his people out of their hands, that all the kingdoms of the
earth might know, that he is GOD alone. Even so the Apostle: Whether we live
or die, we are the Lords. Romans 14.
And in this boldness our savior Christ settled himself to bear their
reproaches, Luke. 22.
and to carry his Cross: Father, if thou will take away this cup from me,
nevertheless, not my will, but thine be done. Thus they that are taught by the
word of God, to put their trust in the Lord, and are thereby rooted and settled
in him, can not be removed by any practice of Satan, but stand fast, and
continue for ever.

Which shall more plainly appear, if we look back into the times of
persecution, and behold the boldness of constancy of the Saints of God.
They were brought before Magistrates, cast into priso^s, spoiled of their
goods, cruelly murdered. Some were hanged upon gibbets, some run through with
swords, some torn with wild horses, some drowned in the water, and some burnt
in the fire. They were hated of all men for the name of Christ. They were
despised as the filth of the world, and dung of the earth. Yet continued they
faithful and constant. They armed their hearts with the comfort of Gods
word: thereby were they able to resist in the evil day. They were faithful
until death, therefore GOD gave them a Crown of glory.

When they were called before Kings, and Princes, and others of authority, and
commanded to forsake the truth they had learned, and the comfort which they
took in the truth, they answered in this manner: O my gracious Lord, I would
feign do your commandment: I am your subject: I have done faithful service
with my body, and with my goods, but I cannot serve you against God: He is King
of Kings, and Lord of Lords: He is my Lord, before whom I stand: I have put my
life in his hands. He has forbidden me to do this thing which you
command: I cannot therefore do it. Judge uprightly, whether it be meet to
obey you, rather than God. My living, my wife, my children, and my life, are
dear unto me. I am a man like others, and have mine affections. Yet neither
living, nor wife, nor children, nor my life is so dear unto me as the glory
of God. I am but a pore worm, yet am I the work of his hands. God has
put his word in my mouth: I may not deny it. I may not bear false witness
against the Lord. My life is not dear unto me in respect of the truth. I
know if I should deny him to save my life, I should lose it: and if I lose
my life for his sake, I shall find it. That which your authority shall lay
upon me, is not done without his will. All the hairs of my head are numbered. I
owe you obedience, I will not resist your power, for if I should resist, I
should resist the ordinance of God. I am subject to you for conscience sake.
I will forsake my country, my goods, my children, and my self at your
commandment. I will say to mine own flesh, I know thee not: only I can
not forsake my Lord God.

Dear sir, you fight ^ot against me. Alas, what am I? What can I do? You
fight against God, against the most holy, against him, which can command
your life to go out of your body: it is a hard thing for you to kick against
the spur. It is no hard matter for you to kill me: for so mighty a Prince to
kill so wretched a worm. But this I declare to you, that my blood which you
shed is innocent, and shall be required at your hands.

It may please God to give unto you repentance, and the knowledge of the
truth. If my blood may be a mean thereto: if my blood may open your eyes: if my
blood may soften your heart: it could never be spent in a better cause.
Blessed be the name of God which has made me his instrument for your so
happy conversion: this is the only thing wherein I can not yield. The Lord
has spoken unto me: I have heard his voice: my heart has felt it: my
conscience knows it: I can not deny it. No sword can cut me from it: no
water can drown it: no fire can burn the love I bear unto it: there is no
creature in heaven or earth, that can carry me from that blessed hope I have
conceived by his word.

So constant is he that has learned the word of God, and has set his
delighte upon it, and is through it assured of the will of God. Heaven shall
shake, the earth shall tremble, but the man of God shall stand upright. His
foot shall not fail: his heart shall not faint: he shall not be moved. Such
a ground, such a foundation, such a rock is the word of God. Blessed is the
man whose hope is in the name of the Lord. He shall build upon a sure place:
he lays his foundation upon the corner stone. He needs no army to make him
strong: he needs no friends to comfort him in adversity. His strength is
within, the gates of hell shall not prevail against him. His comfort is
inwardly, within his heart. He speaks to God, and God unto him. His eyes
behold the kingdom, and power and glory of God.

But what say we of the Fathers, The authority of the Fathers.
Augustine, Ambrose, Hierom, Cyprian, etc. What shall we think of them, or
what account may we make of them? They be Interpretors of the word of God.
They were learned men, and learned Fathers: the instruments of the mercy of
God, and vessels full of grace. We despise them not, we read them, we
reverence them, and give thanks unto God for them. They were witnesses unto
the truth, they were worthy pillars and ornaments in the Church of God. Yet
may they not be compared with the word of God. We may not build upon them: we
may not make them the foundation and warrant of our conscience: we may not put
our trust in them. Our trust is in the name of the Lord.

And thus are we taught to esteem of the learned Fathers of the Church, by
their own judgment: by that which they have written, either for the credit
of their own doings, or of the authority which they have thought due to the
writings of others. S. Augustine said of the Doctors and Fathers in his time:
Aug. ad For^un^^^num, Ep. 111.
Neque quorumlibet a^sputationes, quamuis Catholicorum, and laudatorum hominum,
velut Scripturas Canonicas habere debemus: vt nobis non liceat, salua
honorificentia quae illis debetur, aliquid in eorum scriptis improbare, aut
respuere: si forte inuenerimus, quod aliter senserint, quae veritas habet.
Talis sum ego in scriptis aliorum, tales esse volo intellectores meorum:
Neither weigh we the writings of all me^, be they never so worthy and
catholic, as we weigh the canonical Scriptures: but that saving the
reverence that is due unto them, we may mislike and refuse somewhat in their
writings, if we find that they have thought otherwise, than the truth may
bear. Such am I in the writings of others, and such would I wish others to
be in mine. Some things I believe, and some things which they write, I can not
believe. I weigh them not as the holy and Canonical Scriptures. Cyprian was a
Doctor of the Church, yet he was deceived: Hierome was a Doctor of the Church,
yet he was deceived: Augustine was a Doctor of ye Church, yet he wrote a Book
of Retractations, he acknowledged that he was deceived. God did therefore give
to his Church many Doctors, and many learned men, which all should search the
truth, and one reform an other, wherein they thought him deceived. S.
Augustine says: Aug in Ps. 57.
Auferantur de medio chartae nostrae, procaedat in medium codex Dei: audi
Christum dicentem: audi veritatem loquetem: Take away from amongst us any our
own Books: let the Book of God come amongst us: hear what Christ
says: hearken what the truth speaks. He is the wisdom of his father, he
can not deceive us. Again he says: Aug. Epi. 48.
Audi dicit dominus, non dicit Donatus, aut Rogatus, aut Vincentius, aut
Hilarious, aut Ambrosius, aut Augustinus: Hear this, the Lord says: hear
not this, Donatus says, or Rogatus, or Vincentius, or Hilarious, or Ambrose, or
Augustine says. Al these were learned, most of them were holy: yet says
Augustine, we may not yield to that which is said by learned men: but we must
yield our full consent and belief to the word of God. Orig. in Hier. cap. 1.
Origin says Necesse nobis est in testimonium vocare sanctas Scripturas.
Sensus quippe etc. We must needs call to witness the holy Scriptures: for
our judgments and expositions, without those witnesses, carry no credit.
Mark well: Aug. contra Crescen. Gra. li. cap. 29.
our words and expositions and constructions, unless they be warranted by the
Scriptures, are not enough, they carry not credit. Augustine says: Nos nullam
Cipriano facimus iniuriam, cum eius quaslibet literas, etc. We offer no wrong
to S. Cyprian, when we sever any his Letters or Writings from the Canonical
authority of the holy Scriptures. Thus speaks Aug. a Doctor of the Church of
Cyprian another Doctor also of ye Church. Cyprian was a bishop, a learned
Father, a holy man, and a Martire of Christ: yet says Augustine his word is
not the Gospel: his word is not the word of God: there is no wrong done to
him, though his writings carry not like credit as the holy Scripture.

I could show many the like speeches of the ancient Fathers, wherein they
reverence the holy Scriptures, as to which only they give consent without
gainsaying: which can neither deceive nor be deceived. In this sort did Origin,
and Augustine, and other Doctors of the Church speak of themselves and of
theirs, and the writings of others, that we should so read them, and credit
them, as they agreed with the word of God. Hoc genus literarum non cum
credendi necessitate, Aug. contra Faustum. lib^ 12. cap. 5.
sed cum iudicandi liberate legendum est: This kind of writings is to be
read not with a necessity of believing them, but with a liberty to judge of
the^. S. Paul says, Gal. 1.
though that we, or an Angel from heaven preach unto you otherwise, than that
which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed. Aug. lib. 3. cap. 6.
contra lit. Petil.
Out of which place, S. Augustine speaks thus: Sieve de Christo, sieve de eius
Ecclesia, sieve de re quacunque alta, quae pertinet ad fidem, vitamque nostram,
non dicam, si nos, sed si Angelus de caelo nobis annuntiauerit praeter quam
quod in Scripturis legaltbus and Euangelicis accepistis, anathema sit. Whether
it be of Christ, or of his Church, or of any thing else whatsoever, perteining
either to our life, or to our faith: I will not say, if I my self, but if an
Angel from heaven shall teach us otherwise, than ye have received in the books
of the law, and in the Gospels, hold him accursed.

Now, to conclude this matter, ye same father says: Aug. lib. 2. ca. ^. cont.
Cresc.
Ecclesiastici iudices, vt homines, plerumque falluntur: The judges or Doctors
of the Church, as men, are often deceived. They are learned: they have
pre-eminence in the Church: they are Judges: they have the gifts of wisdom,
and understanding, yet they are often deceived. They are our fathers, but not
fathers unto God: they are stars, fair, and beautiful, and bright, yet they
are not the Sun: they bear witness of the light, they are not the light.
Christ is the Sun of righteousness, Christ is the light, which lighteneth
every man that comes into this world. His word is the word of truth. He is
the dayspring which has visited us from an high: he came down from the
bosom of his father: he shall guide our feet into the way of peace. Of him God
the father spoke: Mat. 3.
This is my well-beloved son, in whom I am well pleased, hear him. He is the
Lamb without spot, out of his mouth goes a two edged sword. This is he in
whom all the ends of the world shall be blessed, hear him, give heed to his
saying, embrace his gospel, believe his word. Thus much touching the credit
and authority which is to be given to the writings of ancient fathers.

S. Paul speaking of the word of God, 2. Tim. 3.
says: The whole Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable
to teach, to improve, to correct, and to instruct in righteousness. To teach
the truth, to improve falshoode, to correct all vice, to instruct in all
virtue. Again I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ: Romans 1.
for it is the power of God unto salvation to every one that believes. Basil.
praefat. in Psalm.
S. Basil says: The Scripture of God is like an Apothecaries shop, full of
medicines of sundry sorts, that every man may there choose a convenient
medicine for his desease. There are salues, and ointmentes to cure all
maladies. Whosoever can not be cured by the word of God, his disease is grown
desperate, and past cure.

Many think, the Apostles speech is hardly true of the whole Scripture, that
all and every part of the Scripture is profitable. Much is spoken of
genealogies, and petidegrees, of lepers, of sacrificing goats, and oxen, etc.
these seem to have little profit in them, but to be vain and idle. If they
show vain in thine eyes, yet has not the Lord set them down in vain. Ps.
12.
The words of the Lord are pure words, as the silver tried in a furnace of
earth fined seven times. There is no sentence, no clause, no word, no
syllable, no letter, but it is written for thy instruction: there is not one
jot, but it is sealed and signed with the blood of the Lamb. Our
imaginations are idle, our thoughts are vain: there is no idleness, no
vanity in the word of God. Those Oxen and Goats which were sacrificed, teach
thee to kill and sacrifice the uncleanness and filthiness of thy heart: they
teach thee that thou art guilty of death, when thy life must be redeemed by
the death of some beast: they lead thee to believe the forgiveness of
sins, by a more perfect sacrifice, because it was not possible that the blood
of Bulls and Goats, Heb. 10^
should take away sins. That leprousie, teaches thee to know the
uncleanness and leprousie of thy soul Those Genealogies and Petidegrees lead
us to the Birth of our Savior Christ. So that the whole word of God is pure
and holy: No word, no letter, no syllable, no point or prick thereof, but
is written, and preserved for thy sake.

Art thou a King? Read the Scriptures, thou shall find who has stablished
thine estate: and what duty thou owe to God. God there tells thee: By me
Kings rule, Prou. ^.
and Princes decree justice. I have given thee authority, thou cariest my
sword: I have put a crown upon thy head: thou art my servant, walk before
me, let thy heart be perfect in my sight.

Art thou a subject? Read the Scriptures, they will teach thee to know thy
duty. Romans 13.
There Paul bids thee, give tribute to whom tribute: custom to whom custom:
fear to whom fear: honor to whom honor is due. Ye must be subject, not
because of wrath only, but for conscience sake. For he bears not the sword
for naught: for he is the Minister of God to take vengeance on him that does
evil.

Art thou a Minister? Read the Scriptures, they will teach thee thy duty. The
Prophet says to thee: Esai, 58.
Cry aloud, spare not: lift up thy voice like a trumpet, and show my people
their tra^sgressions. The Apostle says unto thee: 2. Tim. 4.
Preach the word, be instant, in season and out of season. Watch in all things,
do the work of an Evangelist, make thy ministerye fully known. Thou shall
give an acompt for the souls of the people, their blood shall be required at
thy hands.

Art thou a Father? have thou children? Read the Scriptures, they will teach
thee: Eccles. 7.
if thou have sons, instruct them. Eccle. 30.
Again: He that teaches his son, grieueth the enemy, and before his
friends he shall rejoice of him. Give him no liberty in his youth, and wink
not at his folly. Chastise thy child, and be diligent therein, 1. Sam. 2.
least his shame grieve thee. Ely the Prophet, by sparing his wanton children,
cast away himself, and his children. They were slain, the Ark of God was
taken, and old Ely fell down and brake his neck.

Art thou a Child? Ephesians. 6.
have thou a Father? Read the Scriptures, they will teach thee: Children obey
your Parents in the Lord, for this is right. Honor thy father and mother
(which is the first commandment, with promise) that it may be well with thee,
and that thou may live long on earth. And again: Children, Colos. 3.
obey your Parents in all things, for it is wel-pleasing unto the Lord.
Prou. 30.
The wise man warns thee, The eye that mocketh his father, and despises the
instruction of his mother, let the Ravens of the valley pluck it out, and the
young Eagles eat it.

Has God blessed thee in Wealth? Art thou rich? Read the Scriptures, they
will teach thee: 1. Tim. 6.
Be not high minded, and trust not in uncertain riches, but in the living God,
which gives us abundantly all things to enjoy. Again, Ps. 62.
Trust not in oppression and robbery: be not vain: if riches increase, set
not your heart thereon. Thou shall depart, and leave them behind thee: they
shall forsake thee. Thou shall dye, thou know not how soon. Solomon shows
thee: Prou. 11.
Riches avail not in the day of wrath: but righteousness delivers from death.

Art thou poor? and suffer scarsitie in this world? Read the Scriptures,
they will teach thee. Job. 1.
Say with Job. Naked came I out of my mothers womb, and naked shall I return
again. Learn of Solomon: Prou. 16.
Better is little with righteousness, than great revenues without equity. And
again: Prou. 28.
Better is the poor that walks in his uprightness, than he that peruerteth
his ways, though he be rich. S. Paul says: 1. Tim. 6.
Godliness is great gain, if a man be content with that he has: for we
brought nothing into the world, and it is certain, that we carry nothing out.
And again, Let him that is poor, labor, and work with his hands, the thing
which is good, that he may have to give to him that needs.

Art thou a Merchant? Usest thou to buy and sell? Read the Scriptures, they
will teach thee: 1 Thessalonians. 4.
This is the will of God, that no man oppress or defraude his brother, in any
matter. Prou. 20.
Thou shall learn, that diverse weights and diverse measures are abomination
unto the Lord, and deceiptfull balances are not good.

Art thou an Usurer? thy case is hard: yet hear the Scriptures, they will
teach thee. Exodus 22.
God commands thee thus: If thou lend money to my people, to the poor with
thee, thou shall not be as an Usurer unto him: ye shall not oppress him with
usury. Leuit. 25.
Again, if thy brother be impouerished, and fallen in decay with thee, thou
shall relieve him: thou shall take no Usury of him, nor vantage: thou shall
not lend him thy vittailes for increase, but thou shall fear thy God, that thy
brother may live with thee. And, Mat. 7.
Whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you, eue^ so do ye to the^. And,
Ps. 15.
He that gives his money unto Usury, shall not enter into the kingdom of
heaven.

Art thou a Fornicatour and live in adultery? Read the Scriptures, they will
teach thee: 1. Cor. 6.
He that commits fornication, says S. Paul, sins against his own body.
Know you not that your body is the Temple of the holy Ghost? Know you not that
your bodies are the members of Christ? Shall I then take the members of Christ,
and make them the members of an Harlot? 1. Pet. 1.
God forbid. As he which has called you is holy, so be ^e holy in all manner
of conversation, 1. These. 4.
says S. Peter The reason is set down by S. Paul: For this is the will of
God, even you holiness, and that you should abstain from fornication, that you
may be holy both in body and in spirit. Heb. 13.
And, Whoremongers and adulterers God will judge. They shall have no
inheritance in the kingdom of Christ, and of God.

Art thou a servant? Read the Scriptures: they will teach thee. Coloss. 3.
Servants be obedient unto the^ that are your Masters, according to the flesh
in all things, not with eye service as men pleasers, but in singleness of
heart, fearing God. And whatsoever ye do, do it heartily, as unto the Lord,
Tit. 2.
and not unto men. Again, please your Masters, not aunswering again, be no
pickers, but show all good faithfulness, that you may adorn the doctrine of
God our savior in all things.

Art thou proud? Romans 11.
Read the Scriptures, they will teach thee. 1. Cor. 14.
Be not high minded, but fear. What have thou, that thou have not received? If
thou have received it, why reioicest thou as though thou had not received it?
Mat. 11.
and, learn of me, that I am meek, and humble in heart. And, Iam. 14.
God resists the proud, but gives grace to the humble.

Art thou in adversity? Read the Scriptures. Great are the troubles of the
righteous: Psa. 34.
but the Lord will deliver him out of them all. Ps. 91.
And he shall call upon me, and I will hear him: I will be with him in
trouble. I will deliver him, and glorify him. 1. Pet. 3.
And Saint Peter tells thee, the eyes of the Lord, are over the righteous
and his ears are open to their prayers. God is faithful, 1. Cor. 10.
which will not suffer you to be tempted above that you be able, but will give
the issue with the te^tation, that ye may be able to bear it. The Lord is
near unto all them that call upon him, Psa. 145.
yea to all that call upon him in truth.

Art thou A sinner? have thou offended God? read the Scriptures, they will
teach thee. Amos. 5.
Hate the evil, and love the good. Psa. 37.
And again, fly from evil and do good, Luke 15.
and dwell for ever. Rise up, and go to thy father, and say unto him, Father I
have sinned against Heaven, and against thee, and am no more worthy to be
called thy son.

Do thou despair of the mercy of God? read the Scriptures, they will
teach thee. Mat. 9.
Christ tells thee, I came not to call the righteous but sinners to
repentance. Again, Mat. 11.
Come unto me al ye that are weary and laden, and I will ease you. Ezech. 18.
At what hour soever a sinner does repent him of his sin from the bottom of
his heart, I will put all his wickedness out of my remembrance, says the
Lord. Ezech. 33.
Again, I desire not the death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from
his way, Psalm. 145.
and live. And, the Lord is good to all, and his mercies are over al his
works.

Art thou going out of this life? read the Scriptures: they will teach thee, I
am the resurrection and the life: Ioh. 11.
he that believes in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live, and
whosoever lives and believes in me, shall never dye. Say with Saint Paul.
Philip. 1.
Christ is to me both in life, and in death advantage. I desire to be
loosed and to be with Christ.

What should I say more of the Scriptures, how profitable, and comfortable
they be in all cases and parts of our life? in adversity, in prosperity, in
life and in death, they are our especial comfort. If we must fight, they are a
sword: if we hunger, they are meat: if we thirst, they are drink: if we have
no dwelling place, they are a house: if we be naked, they are a garment: if we
be in darkness, they be light unto our going.

They are comfortable to kings, to subjects, to old men, to young men, to man
and to wife, to father and to child, to master and servant, to captain and
soldier, to preacher and people, to the learned, to the unlearned, to the
wise, and to the simple.

They are comfortable in peace, in war, in heaviness, in joy, in health and
sickness, in abundance, in poverty, in the day time, in the night season, in
the town, in the wilderness, in company and when thou art alone. For they
teach faith, hope, patience, charity, sobriety, humility, righteousness,
and all godliness. They teach us to live, and they teach us to die.

Therefore has Paul said well, The whole Scripture is profitable: It is full
of great comfort: It makes the man of God absolute, and perfect unto al good
works. Perfect in faith, perfect in hope, perfect in the love of God, and of
his neighbor: perfect in his life, and perfect in his death. So great, so
large and ample, and heavenly, is the profit which we do reap by the word
of God.

Now it follows we consider how necessary, The necessity of the
Scriptures.
and needful it is for us to be guided by the word of God, in the whole trade
of our life. The word of God is that unto our souls, which our soul is unto
our body. As the body dies when the soul departs, so the soul of man
dies, Deuteronomy. 8.
when it has not the knowledge of GOD. Man lives not by bread only, but by
every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God. Behold says God, Amos.
8.
I will send a famine in the land, not a famine of bread, nor a thirst of
water, but of hearing the word of the Lord. Their tongue shall wither, their
heart shall sterue, they shall dye for hunger: They shall wander from sea to
sea, and from the North unto the East, shall they run to and fro to seek the
word of the Lord, and shall not find it. Esa. 59.
They shall stumble at noone days, as at the twilight: they shall grope for
the wall like the blind: and truth shall fall in their streets. For, how shall
they be saved unless they call on the name of the Lord? Romans 10.
how shall they call on him, in whom they have not believed? How shall they
believe in him of whom they have not heard? and how shall they hear without a
Preacher? and how shall they preach except they be sent? Chrysostom therefore
says, Neither can it be, I say, it can not be, that any man shall attain to
salvation, except he be always occupied in spiritual reading. The wise man
faith, Where there is no prophecy, Pro^. 2^.
the people decay. Where the Scriptures are not opened, when there is none that
can edifye, and exhort, and comfort the people by the word of God, they must
needs perish: for they know not the way in which they should walk: they
know not whom to honor, nor upon whose name they should call: they know
neither what to believe, nor what to do. Hell has enlarged it self, and has
opened his mouth without measure, and they that are wilful and ignorant, and
the children of darkness, go down into it. They become thrall, and captives
unto Satan. Their heart is bound up, they understand nothing: their eyes
are shut up, they can see nothing: their ears are stopte up, they can
hear nothing. They are carried away as a pray into Hell, because they have not
y^ knowledge of God.

So does Christ tell the Sadduces: Mat. 22.
Ye are deceived, because you know not the Scriptures, nor the power of GOD.
Thus he teaches, that error is the child of ignorance. The cause why you are
so deceived, is because you know not the Scriptures: You have hated the light,
and loved darkness: You have neither known the Father nor me. He that
knows not the truth of God, knows not God. Herein, in this case there is no
plea of ignorance. Ignorance shall not excuse us. Hom. 17. ad Hebraeos.
Chrysostom says: Dices, non legi: non est haec excusatio, sed crimen. Thou will say I have not read the Scriptures: this is no excuse, but a sin.
Again he says, Hom. 2. in Mar.
This is the working of the Devils inspiration, he would not suffer us to see
the treasure, least we should get the riches. Therefore he counsaileth
us, that it utterly avails us nothing to hear the Laws of God: least that
upon the hearing he may see our doing follow. Greg. in pastor. li. 1. ca. 1.
Gregory says: Qui e^quae sunt domini, nesciunt: a domino nesciununtur: Who
so know not the things that pertain unto the Lord, be not known of the
Lord. Hom. 27. in Numeri.
Origin also gives reason of this practice of Satan. Unto the Devils it is a
torment above all kinds of torments, and a pain above all pains, if they see
any man reading the word of God, and with fervent study searching the
knowledge of Gods Law, and the mysteries and secrets of the Scriptures.
Herein stands all the flame of the Devils: in this fire they are tormented:
for they are seized and possessed of all them that remain in ignorance.

Carneades a Philosopher, was wont to say of his Master and Reader Chrisippus,
if it had not been for Chrisippus, I never had been any body. He was my
Master and teacher: he made me learned: whatsoever I have, I have it of him.
How much better may we use the like words of the Scripture? and say, unless it
were for the word of God, our wisdom were nothing, and our knowledge were
nothing. Whatsoever we have, we have it by the word. Without it, our prayer
were no prayer: without it, our Sacraments were no Sacraments: our Faith were
no Faith: our Conscience were no Conscience: our Church were no Church. Take
away the light of the Sun, and what remains but darkness? Heaven and
Earth are darkened. No man can see his way, or discern the things about him.
Even so, if y^ word of God be taken away, what remains, but miserable
confusion, and deadlye ignorance.

When the Philistines had shorn the hairs of Sampson, they fell upon him,
took him, bound him, and plucked out his eyes: they daunced about him, and
made scorn and games of him. We are Samson, the strength of our hairs is the
knowledge of the will of GOD: It is laid up in our heads, in the highest and
principal part of us: if that be shorn off, if we be kept from hearing,
reading, and understanding of the word of God: then will error, superstition,
and all wickedness get the upper hand, and fall upon us, and bind us, and
pluck out our eyes: and make scorn of us, and utterly destroy us.

When the people of Jerusalem were besieged and wanted food to eat, they
fed on Rats and Mice, and many unwholesome and filthy things. A woman was
driven for want of meat to do a cruel part upon her own child: she took her
own babe, which was the fruit of her own body, killed it, cut it in pieces,
dressed it, and fed upon it: a loathsome meat, especially, for a mother to eat
her own child. But she was driven to it by extremity and hunger: it was so
cruel a thing to lack wherewith life might be preserved.

Even so fared it with us, and our Fathers, after it pleased God to take away
his Gospel, and to send a famine of hearing the word of the Lord. We were
driven to eat those things which were loathsome and horrible to behold, we
were driven to feed upon our own children, even the fantasies and vanities
of our own heart. There was no substance in them, they could not feed us.

In this case were the children of Israel, when they grew weary of the word
of God, and left the ordinances set down unto them. God had no pleasure in
them, their prayers and sacrifice were not accepted. Esaias. ^.
I can not suffer says the Lord, your new Moons, nor Sabbaoths. nor
solemn days. Who has required this of your hands?

In such case were the Scribes and Phariseis, when they forsook to be guided
by the word of God, and took away the key of Knowledge, they fed upon their
own devises, they neglected the comma^dements and will of God, and followed
their own traditions. Therefore Christ reproved them: Mat. 15.
O Hypocrites, Esaia^ prophesied well of you, saying: This people draws near
unto me with their mouth, and honors me with their lips, but their heart
is far off from me. But in vain they worship me, teaching doctrines men's
precepts.

Therefore, if we seek to know the Sacraments of the Church, what they
are: if we would be instructed in the Sacrament of Baptism, or in the
Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ: if we would learn to know our
Creator, and to put the difference between the creator and a creature: if
we desire to know what this present life is, and what is that life which is
to come: if we would believe in God, and call upon the name of God, and do
worship unto God: if we would be settled in perfect zeal, and true
knowledge: if we would have an upright conscience toward God: if we would
know which is the true Church of God, it is very needeful that we hear the
word of God. There is no other word that teaches us unto salvation.

Now it remains we speak of the delectation and pleasure which the word of
God gives. Joy and pleasure, by reading the Scriptures.
The word of God is full of sad and grave counsel, full of the knowledge of
God, of examples of virtues, and of correction of vices, of the end of this
life, and of the life to come. These are the contents of the word of GOD.
These things (say you) are great, and weighty of themselves: there is no
vanity or pleasure in them.

They are great and weighty, I grant, and because they are so weighty, they
be the more worthy, that we hear them. But we must take a delight and settle
our fancy, that it may like of the weight and greatness. They were unto the
Prophet David, more sweet than home, and the honey comb. If we taste them
with such an affection as he did, we shall feel and see the great, and
weighty, and heavenly pleasure which is in them.

Many are delighted in the stories of Julius Caesar, of Alexander the Great,
of mighty and victorious Princes. They have pleasure to read of their wars,
of their victories, and of their triumphs. And many take their pleasure in
travel to far countries, to see the diverse fashions and behavior of men.

If it were possible we might stand upon such a Hill, from which we might at
once see al parts of the world, the Cities and Towns, and Mountains, and
Forests, and Castles, and gorgeous buildings: and all the Kings and Princes of
the world, in their princely estate: if we might see the variety of the whole
world, how some live quietly in peace, others are turmoyled in war: some live
in wealth, others in poverty and misery: some rise, others fall. To see and
behold so great variety of things, it cannot be but it would delight us.

Such a Hill, from whence we may take view of so great variety, such a story
in which we may read of noble princes, of their wars and victories, is the
word of God. Upon this Hill you may at once behold all the works of his hands,
how he made Heaven and Earth, the Sun and Moon, the Sea and Floods: the
fishes in the water, the fouls in the air, and the beasts in the field. Upon
this Hill you may stand and see his Angels, and his Archangels, and blessed
spirits, how some of them fell, and some continued in glory: how God has
sent them in message, how they have come down from Heaven to serve the sons
of men.

Here you may read of the wars of the God of Hosts, how he has pitched
his tents in the midst of his people, and has gone before them, and fought
for them. How the Amorrheans, and Canaanites were rooted out: how the
Amalekites were overthrown by the lifting up of Moses hands in prayer: how
the wall of Jericho fell down flat at the sound of a Trumpet, and the shooting
of the people: and how 185. thousand Assirians were slain in one night by the
hand of one Aungel when God raughte out his hand from Heaven to give victory
to his people.

Here may you see how God plagued, and overcame his enemies: how he drowned
Pharao in the red sea, and his horses and men, and Chariots altogether. Her^
may you see Nabuchodonosor a mighty Prince, so bereft of his wits, that he
forsook his Palaces, and the company and order of men, and lived in the
fields after the manner of beasts. Here may you see how God stroke King
Antiochus and King Herod with filthy diseases, and caused lice to eat their
flesh. How he sent down fire and brimstone from Heaven and destroyed Sodom
and Gomorrha, for their sins. How he made the earth open and swallowe up
Dathan and Ab^^am, how King Ozias was stricken with Leprosy, and carried from
the Temple, and cut off from his kingdom. What stories of any princes or people
in any age can report unto us so strange battles, so mighty conquests, so
wonderful deliverance in extremities, so dreadful subduing of the enemies, as
the hand of God has wrought, and the story of the Scriptures declares unto
us?

This word also shows the goodness and mercy of God toward the people
which put their trust in him. How he made them terrible to their ennimies:
how he made their enemies their footestoole: how he led them safe thoroughe
the red Sea: how he sent his Angel to go before them, and guide them: how he
gave them water out of a rock, and rained down bread from Heaven: how he
brought them into a Land that flowed with Milk and Honey, and swear unto them,
that he would be their GOD, and they should be his people.

In this word, are to be seen wonderful and strange works of God, such as
are beyond the course of nature, and pass the reason of man. That the Sea
parted, and stood on both sides as a high wall: that at the word of Joshua,
the Sun stood still, and went not on his course: Ios. 10.
Ezechias spoke the word and required it, 2. Kings. 20.
and the Sun went back ten degrees. At the word of Elias, fire came down
from heaven to consume his sacrifice. Here may you see an Ass open his mouth
and speak, and reprove his Master: three servants of God walk in a hot burning
furnace without hurt: Daniel in the den among Lions and not devoured: Peter in
the raging Sea and not drowned: Leapres cleansed: the lame to go: the dumb to
speak: the deaf to hear: the blind to see: the dead to rise out of their
graves and live: simple and unlearned men to speak in strange tongues: the
devil to go out of the possessed, and to say, I know thou art Christ the
son of God.

Here may you see twelve pore seely men without spear or sword, or force,
make conqueste and win the whole world. No power could repress them, no
might could withstand them. It is reckoned a great matter for a King, or a
nation to yield submission unto an other King or nation. It must therefore be
a matter of great wonder to see al Kings throw down their Maces, and all
people to yield before so few, so simple, so unarmed: And to acknowledge,
they embraced lies, and lived in ignorance: and that these twelve are the
servants of the highest: and to see how God has chosen the foolish things of
this world, to overthrow the wise: and the weak things of this world, to
confound the mighty things. Such force did God give to their words. He made
them the sons of thunder: they shook the foundations of the world: they
threw down whatsoever stood against them.

Here may you see the fight of Gods elect children. How they patiently
suffered afflictions in their bodies, rather than they would deny the truth of
God: they gave their backs to the scourge, their necks to the sword, their
bodies to the fire. No tyrant, no menacings, no rack, no torment, no sword,
no death could remove them from the love of the Gospel which they had
received. The more of them were cut down, the more did spring up: the more
were killed, the more were left alive. De ciuit. dei li. 22. ca. 6.
Augustine says, Ligabantur, includebantur, torquebantur, vrebantur, and
multiplicabantur: They were bound, and shut up, and racked, and burnt, and
yet were increased. This is the victory that has overcome ye world. For the
Lord answered S. Paul, 2. Cor. 12.
My power is made perfect through weakness. It lives in death, it is made
whole and sound, by wounds and stripes: it is increased by those means,
whereby men destroy it. Jacob saw a ladder stand upon the Earth, and the top
of it reach up into heaven: and the Aungelles of God go up and down by it.
This was but a dream, and vision in his sleep, yet when he awoke he took
pleasure and comfort of this Vision,

We have not only the delight of this with Jacob, but we have other far
greater visions. We see Esaias beholding the Lord as he sat upon an high throne:
we see Paul taken up into the third heavens: we see the glory of God appear,
and hear the voice which came out of the cloud, saying: Mat. 17.
This is my well-beloved son in whom I am well pleased. here him. We see Jesus
Christ the son of God, borne of a Uirgin, and how he made himself of no
reputation. Phil. 2.
and took on him the form of a servant, and was made like unto men, and was
found in shape as a man. That he humbled himself, and became obedient unto the
death even the death of the Cross: We hear him cry with a loud voice. My
God, Mat. 27.
my God, why haste thou forsaken me? Luke. 23.
We hear him say, Father forgive them: for they know not what they do. And,
Father, into thine hands I commend my spirit.

Here we may see, the Sun to be darkened, that the Moon gives no light: the
Earth to shake, the rocks cleave asunder, the veil rent, the Graves to open,
and Christ rise from the dead, and go up into heaven, and sit at the right
hand of this father.

Here may we see the overthrow of Babylon, Re^e. 14.
which made al nations to drink of the Wine of the wrath of her fornication.
How she is destroyed with the breath of Gods mouth. Here we behold the
resurrection of the dead: and four and twenty Elders sit before God on
their seats, and the ancient of days sit upon his throne: and the judgment
seat, and the Books opened, and all flesh appear before him, and how some
are taken into everlasting life: and some are sent into everlasting death.

What tongue is able to express these pleasures and delights, which are laid
open to us in the word of God? We buy Images and Pictures, and Mappes of men,
and of diverse things, and Countries. But what Map or Picture can show us the
like variety and change of things.

We purchase Lands, and have a liking so to do. Here we are taught, how we
may come to that land which shall stand with us, and in which we shall
continue for ever.

To see any one of these, it were great pleasure, either the creation of heaven
and earth, or the Angels, and Archangels, and blessed spirits: or the
battles of the God of Sabbath: or Amalech dashed in pieces like a Potters
vessel: or the walls of Jericho blown down with the sound of a trumpet: or
Pharao drowned in the sea: or Nabuchodonosor eating grass among the beasts:
or Antiochus smitten from heaven: or Sodom and Gomorrha burnt with fire and
brimstone: or the earth to open, and swallow up the wicked: or the sea to stand
like a wall: or water to come out of a stone: or bread to come from heaven: or
the Sun to stand still, or to change his course: or an Ass to speak and
teach his Master: or fire to be extreme hot, yet not burning: or Lions
hungry, yet not eating their meat; or the Sea tempestous, yet not drowning:
or blind to see, deaf to hear, dumb to speak, dead to rise: or ignorant men
to speak in languages they never learned: or the Devil to roar, and confess
Christ: or God sitting in his Majesty, and Christ at his right hand: or
Babylon thrown down, and become a Tabernacle of foul spirits, and a den
for the Devil: or Christ to sit in judgment, and give sentence upon the quick
and the dead: to see any one of all these wo^derous works of God, it were great
pleasure.

How can it be then, but that we rejoice and take delight to see so many, so
great so marvelous, so heavenly, and so glorious wonders in one heap
altogether? How far would we ride, or go, to see the triumph of a mortal
King? Here is to be seen the triumph of God, the Lord of Lords, and the King
of Kings: how he has made the name of his Son, triumph over principalities
and powers, and over the whole world. Here is a Paradise full of delights, no
tongue is able to speak them, they are so many: No heart is able to conceive
them, they be sogreat.

Here is a shop, wherein is set out the wisdom, and knowledge, the power,
the judgments and mercies of God. Which way soever we look, we see the
works of his hands. His works of creation, and preservation of all things:
his works of severe justice upon the wicked, and of gracious redemption to
the believer. If we desire pleasant Music, or excellent harmony: it speaks
unto us the words of the Father, and the consent of the Son: the excellent
reports of the Prophets, Apostles, Angles; and Saints of God, who have been
all taught by the holy Ghost. If we would learn, it is a school, it gives
understanding to the simple. In it there is, that may content the heart, the
ear, the eye, the taste, and the smelling. It is a sauer of life unto life.
Ps. 34.
Oh taste ye and see, how gracious the Lord is, says the Prophet David. So
manifold and marvelous are the pleasures which are given us in the word of
God. God has made them, and wrought them all for the Sons of men.

Thus have I performed promise, and simply and homely opened those four
things which I took in hand. I have declared what weight and Majesty the
word bears: what huge harvest of profit we may reap by it: how needful
it is for us travailing thorough the wilderness of this life: and what repast
and pleasure we may find in it.

But, all this notwithstanding, some take exception, and say: the Scriptures
are dark and doubtful, the matters are deep, the words are hard, few can
understand them. One takes them in this sense, an other in a sense clean
contrary. The best learned can not agree about them: they are occasion of many
great quarrels: ^^euel. 5.
John sees this book sealed with seven seals, and an Angel preaching with a
loud voice, who is worthy to open the book, and to loose the feales thereof?
No man ca^ open it, no man can read it. ^. Pet. 3.
S. Peter says, among the Epistles of Paul, some things are hard to be
understand, which they that are unlearned and unstable, pervert as they do
all other Scriptures, unto their own destruction. And S. Paul says: ^. Tim. ^.
God dwells in the light that none can attain unto, whom never man saw,
neither can see.

Therefore, although the Majesty be never so weighty, the profit, the
necessity, and the pleasure never so great: yet it is not good for the people
to read the^. Pearls must not be cast before swine, nor the bread of the
children unto dog^. Thus they say. In deed the word of God is pearls: but
the people are not swine. They may not read them (say some): they are not able
to weelde them: the Scriptures are not for the people. Hereof I will say
something, and a word or two of the reverence and fear, with which we ought to
come to the hearing of them.

They say, the Scriptures are hard, and above the reach of the people. So
said the Pelagian Heretic Julian, whom S. Augustine therefore reproves:
Aug. lib. (...) Iulia.
Exaggeras quam sit difficilis, pancisque con^^niens eruditis, sanctarum
cognitio li^erarum: Ye enlarge and lay out with many words, how hard a
matter the knowledge of the Scripture is, and meet only for a few learned
men. You say the Scriptures are hard, who may open them? There is no evidence
or trial to be taken by them: they are fit only for a few learned men, they
are in no wise fit for the people. Thus said Julian an Heretic.

But God himself, and the ancient Fathers of ye Church said otherwise. God
says in Deuteronomie, Deuteronomy. 30.
this commandment which I command thee this day, is not hid from thee,
neither is it far of. It is not in heaven that thou should say, who shall
go up for us to heaven and bring it us, and cause us to hear it, that we may
do it? Neither is it beyond the Sea, that thou should say, Who shall go
over the Sea for us, and bring it us, and cause us to hear it, that we may do
it? But the word is very near unto thee: even in thy mouth, and in thy
heart, for to do it. Thou need not run hither and thither, nor wander
over the Sea, nor beat thy brains in searching what thou should do, or by
what means thou may live vprightlye: the word and commandment of God will
teach thee sufficientlye. Ps. 19.
The Prophet David says: The commandment of the Lord is pure, and gives
light unto the eyes. And, Thy word is a lantern unto my feet, and a light
unto my paths. Thy word is not dark, it is a light unto my pathe, it gives
light unto the eyes. What is clear if the light be dark? Or, what can he
see, which can not see the light?

Human knowledge is dark, and uncertain. Philosophy is dark, Astrology
is dark, and Geometry is dark. The Professors thereof oftentimes run a
masket: they leese themselves, and wander they know not whether. They seek
the depthe and bottom of natural causes: the change of the elements: the
impressions in the air: the causes of the rainebowe, of blasing stars, of
thunder, and lightning, of the trembling and shaking of the earth, the motions
of the planets, the proportions and the influence of the celestial bodies. They
measure the compass of heaven, and count the number of the stars: they go
down and search the mines in the bowels of the earth: they rippe up the
secrets of the Sea. The knowledge of these things is hard, it is uncertain.
Few are able to reach it. It is not fit for every man to understand it.

But the holy spirit of God, like a good teacher, applies himself to the
dullness of our wits. He leads not us by the unknown places of the earth,
nor by the air, nor by the clouds: he astonieth not our spirits with natural
vanities. He writes his law in our hearts: he teaches us to know him, and
his Christ: he teaches us, that we should deny ungodliness and worldly
lusts, Tit. 2.
and that we should live soberly, and righteously, and godly in this present
world: he teaches us to look for the blessed hope, and appearing of the
glory of the mighty God, and of our Savior Jesus Christ. This matter is
good, and it is plain: the words are plain, and the utterance is plain.
Chrysostom says: Hom. 3. de Lazaro.
proprere a Spiritus gratia dispensauit illa, temper auitque, quo Publicani
piscatores, etc. Therefore has the grace of the holy Spirit disposed and
tempered them so, that Publicanes, and Fishers, and Tente makers, Shepeherdes,
and the Apostles, and simple men, and unlearned, might be saved by these
books: that none of the simpler sort might make excuse by the hardenesse of
them: and that such things as are spoken, might be easy for all men to look
on: that the laboring man, and the servant, the widow woman, and whosoever is
most unlearned, may take some good, when they are read. For they whom GOD ever
from the beginning endewed with the grace of his spirit, have not gathered all
these things for vain glory, as the Heathen writers use, but for the
salvation of the hearers.

Some things in the Scriptures are hard, I deny it not. It is very expedient
that somewhat should be covered, to make us more diligent in reading, more
desirous to understand, more fervent in prayer, more willing to ask the
judgment of others, and to presume the less of our own judgment. Gregory
says: In Ezech. hom. 6. lib. 1.
Magnae vtilitatis est ipsa obscuritas eloquiorum Dei. Facit enim, etc. The
hardenesse which is in the word of God, is very profitable: For it causes a
man to take that profit by pains, which he could not take with negligence.
If the understanding were open, and manifest, it would be little set by. Lib.
4. c^. 13. in Johan.
Cyrillus says: Omnia plana and recta sunt illis, qui cognitionem inuenerunt:
fatuis vero etiam facilima^ ob secura videntur: All things are plain and
straight to them, that have found knowledge: but to such as are fools the
most easiest places seem hard. Cyril. in Io. 14.
And again: Eaequae perspicua sunt, difficilia sunt haereticis. Quomodo enim
in maleuolam animam intrabit sap^entia? Those things which are plain, are
hard unto Heretics. For how can wisdom enter into a wicked heart? It is
true, which S. Peter has said, some things are hard to be understand. But
it is also true, that they which pervert them unto their own destruction are
unlearned, and unstable: that is, they to whom they are hard, have not their
eyes opened, that they may see the light of the word: or they be wicked, and
turn the truth of God into lies, and abuse the Scriptures to their own
damnation. The Howlet sees not by the brightness of the Sun, not because
the Sun beams are dark, but for that his eyes are weak, and cannot abide so
clear light: it is therefore but a pretense and a color for their ignorance,
and a means to deceive the people more boldly with their errors, when they
charge the word of God with darkness and hardness. For how many hundred
places are there which be as clear as noone day? God says: Exodus ^^.
I am the Lord thy God, thou shall have none other gods before me. Thou shall
make thee no graue^ image, neither any similitude of things that are in heaven
above, neither that are in the earth beneath, nor that are in the waters under
the earth, thou shall neither bow down to them, neither serve them. Again he
says: Wisd. 14.
that is cursed that is made with hands, both it, and he that made it: he,
because he made it: and it, because it was called God, being a corruptible
thing. And again: Ps. 97.
Cursed be al they that worship carved images, and delight in vain Gods. This
is the word of God. What darkness is in any of these sayings?

God says: Exodus 22.
If thou lend money to my people, to the poor with thee, thou shall not be as
an Usurer unto him: ye shall not oppress him with usury. Again: Ezec. 18.
If a man has not given forth upon usury, neither has taken any increase,
etc. he shall surely live: but he that has given forth upon usury, or has
taken increase, shall he live? He shall not live. Rom 6. Ezech. 18.
And, the wages of sin is death. And, the soul that sins, it shall die.
And again: Ephesians. 5.
This ye know, that no whoremongers, neither unclean person, nor covetous
person, which is an Idolater, has any inheritance in the kingdom of Christ,
and of God. Let no man deceive you with vain words: for, for such things
comes the wrath of God upon the children of disobedience. These are the words
of God, and what darkness is in them?

Saint Paul says: Romans 12.
If it be possible, as much as in you lies, have peace with all men. Abhor
that which is evil, and cleave to that which is good: avenge not your selves,
but give place unto wrath. Again, Romans 13.
Let every soul be subject to the higher powers, there is no power but of
God. He is the Minister of God for thy wealth: but if thou do evil, fear:
for he bears not the sword for naught. These be the words of God, what
darkness is in them? Saint John says: Ioh. 1.
Christ is the Lamb of God, which takes away the sins of the world. And, 1.
Ioh. 1.
the blood of Jesus Christ his son, cleanses us from al sins. Saint Peter
says: 1. Pet. 1.
His own self bare our sins in his body on the tree, that we being
delivered from sin, should live in righteousness. Christ says: Ask, and
it shall be given you: Luke. 11.
seek and ye shall find: knock, and it shall be opened unto you. Mat. 11.
And again, Come unto me all ye that are weak and laden, and I will ease you.
The Prophet says: Whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord, shall be
saved. These be the words of God. loel. 2.
What darkness is in them? What eye so simple, but he may see them?

The ways of the Lord are straight, and his words plain, even unto the
simple. Hom. 3. in 2. ad Thessa.
C^rysoft. says: Omnia clara and plana sunt in scriptures diuinis: quaecunque
necessaria sunt, manifest a sunt: All things are clear and plain in the holy
Scriptures. Whatsoever things there is necessary for us, is also manifest:
Some things are covered, as men cover precious stones, and precious garments.
They are covered, and yet we see them. We see them, and yet they are covered.
Yet all things that are necessary are plain and open. Clemens says: Nullis
caelatum est verbum, Clem. Alex. in Orat. ad genesis
lux est communis, omnibus illucescit hominibus, nullus est in verbo Cymmerius:
The word of God is hid from no man: It is a light common unto all men: there
is no darkness in Gods word. Mark, it is a common light, and shines to all
men. It is as bright and beautiful as the Sun, there is no dungeon or
darkness in it. Lib. 1. cap. 31.
So says Irenaeus: Scripturae in aperto sunt, and sine ambiguitate: and
similit^r ab omnibus audiri possunt: The Scriptures are plain, and without
doubtfulnesse, and may be heard indifferently of all men All men may hear
them, even all sorts of men without exception.

Where be they then which say it is not lawful for the people to have the
word of God, and that the Scriptures are not meet for their reading? they are
bread: they are drink: they nourish unto everlasting life: great cruelty it
is to sterue Gods people to death. Are they unfit to have the Scriptures,
because they be poor? Christ says: The poor receive the glad tidings of
the Gospel. Mat. 11.
And, Mat. 5.
Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. They
want riches, and worldly glory, but God gives his fear and grace to them, as
well as to the rich. Are they unfit to read the Scriptures, because they are
not bred up in other learning? 1. Cor. 2.
S. Paul says: I esteemed not to know any thing among you, but Jesus Christ,
and him crucified. The Prophet David says: Psa. 94.
Blessed is the man, o Lord, whom thou teach in thy law. Mat. 11.
And Christ says: Thou have hid these things from the wise, and men of
understanding, and have opened them unto babes. The Apostles were sent into all
the world to preach the Gospel unto every creature, to learned and unlearned,
to poor and rich. There is no man too poor, none too rich, none too young,
none too old. Whosoever has ears to hear, he has learning enough, to be a
hearer.

As for the wisest and learned men, in matters of this world, they have not
always proved the readiest and most willing to set forth the glory of GOD.
They have not been the meetest scholars for this school. Who were they that
resisted Moses and Aaron, the servants of God? Not the people, but the wisest
and best learned in Aegipt. Who were they that stood against Elias? not the
people: but the learned and wise men, and the Prophets, and Priests of Baal.
Who were they that stoned and killed the Prophets? not the people: but the
chiefest and wisest in Israel. Who were they that resisted Christ, and his
Gospel, and sought to deface the glory of God? not the people: but the
Scribes and Phariseis, and high Priests, and at the troup of their Clergy.
They called Christ, a deceiuer: and Beelzebub: a companion of Publicanes and
Harlottes: they lay in wait every where to entrappe him: they sued him to
death.

Saint Paul says for conclusion in this matter: 1. Cor. 1.
It is written, I wil^destroye the wisdom of the wise, and will cast away the
understanding of the prudent. Where is the wise? Where is the Scribe? Where is
the Disputer of this world? Has not GOD made the wisdom of this world
foolishness? For seeing the world by wisdom, knew not God, in the wisdom
of God, it pleased God by the foolishness of preaching, to save them that
believed. Brethren, you see your calling, how that not many wise men, after
the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble, are called, but GOD has chosen
the foolish things of the world, to confound the wi^e: and God has chosen
the weak things of the world, to confound the mighty things, and vile
things of the world, and things which are despised has GOD chosen. Mark,
says he, how mercifully GOD has dealt with you. Few of the learned sort,
few such as are counted wise, embrace the Gospel with you, or join with you
in Faith, or keep you company. God has let the^ be deceived in their wisdom.
They take themselves to be wise, and yet are become fools. And, contrary to
worldly judgment, God has made you, which were weak and simple, and of no
reputation, wise, and righteous, and sanctified, and redeemed in Christ Jesus.
And Christ says: Mat. 18.
Except ye be converted, and become as little children, ye shall not enter
into the kingdom of Heaven.

Therefore, the godly father Chrysostom calls upon the people, to read and
hear the Scriptures. Hom. 9. in ^p. ad Coloss.
Audite saeculares omnes: comparate vobis Biblia, animae pharmaca. St nihil
aliud v^^is, vel, nou^m Testamentum acquirite: Apostolum, Euangelia, Acta,
continuos and sedulos doctores: Hear me ye men of the world: get ye the
Bible, that most wholesome remedy for the soul, if ye will nothing else,
yet at the least, get the new Testament, S. Paul's Epistles, the Gospelles,
and the Acts, that they may be your continual and earnest teachers. And
again: Chrysostom. ho^ 2. in Io^.
Neque in hoc tantum consessu, sed domi quoque vir cu^ vxore, pater cu^ filio,
inuicem de his frequenter loquantur, and ultro, citroque sua^ and fera^t and
inquirant sententia^, velintque hanc probatissima^ inducere consuetudinem:
Hearken not hereto, only here in the Church, but also at home, let the
husband with the wife, let the father with the child, talk together of these
matters, and both too and fro, let them both enquire, and give their
judgments, and would God they would begin this good custom.

In like sort says Orig. Orig. in Esai. hom. 2.
Vtinam omnes faceremus illud quod scriptum est, scrut amini Scripturas: Would
God we would al do accordingly as it is written search the Scriptures. It
were a token that we do love Christ. Then would the Father love us, and
Christ would love us, and show himself unto us: and he, and his Father would
come unto us, and dwell in us. Hom. 9. ad Co^oss.
Chrysostom says: Hoc omnium malorum caussa est, quod Scripturae ignorantur:
This is the cause of all ill, that the Scriptures are not known. To know
nothing of Gods laws, Hom. 3. de ^azaro.
says he in an other place, is the loss of salvation, ignorance has brought
in heresies, and vicious life: ignorance has turned al things vpside down. S.
Hierome expounding those words of the Apostle: Hierom. in 3. cap. Ep. ad
Coloss.
Let the word of Christ dwell in you plenteously, says Hic ostenditur
verbum Christ^, no^ sufficienter sed abundanter etiam laicos habere debere, and
docere se inuicem, vel monere: Here we are taught, that the lay people ought
to have the word of God, not only sufficiently, but also with abundance, and to
teach, and counsel one another.

And now to conclude what the learned Fathers, and ancient Doctors have said
in this matter. Theodoretus says: Lib. 5. de cura^dis graecor. affect.
Passim videas haec nostratia dogmata non ab ijs solum teneri, qui sunt
ecclesiae magistri, populorumque praeceptores, sed ab ipsis quoque sutoribus,
fabrisque ferrarijs, lanificibus, etc. Ye may commonly see, that our doctrine
is known, not only of them that are the Doctors of the Church, and the
Masters of the people: but also even of the Taylours, and Smithes, and
Weauers, and of al Artificers: yea, and further also of women, and that not
only of them that be learned, but also of laboring women, and Sewsters, and
Servants, and handmaides: Neither only the Citizens, but also the
Countriefolkes do very well understand the same. Ye may find, yea, even the
very ditchers, and deluers, and cowheards, and Gardners, disputing of the holy
Trinity, and of the creation of all things. Thus we see there was a time
before ignorance crept into the Church, and got the upper hand, when the
word of God was not counted hard, and dark, and doubtful: when children,
and women, and servants, and men of the Country had the knowledge of God, and
were able to reason of the works of God. Then went it well with them: they
could not easily be deceived, because they had that word which bewrays the
these: they carried with them like good exchaungers the weights, and
touchstone, and were able to try coins whether they were true or false. Such
were the people, such was the state of Gods Church in those days.

Gold, and silver, and lands, and possessions, are the portions but of few.
They are not common to al alike. Pro. 19.
The wise man says, House and riches come by inheritance of the Fathers. But
the word of God, the Law, and the Prophets, the Apostles, the Guangelistes,
the gift of the spirit, and the knowledge of God are given unto al men: they
are made common for all men. If the word were ordained but for a few, then
Christ was given into the world but for a few. The heaven was made, but for
a few. The mercy and love of God was but for a few. But the mercy of God is
over al, and upon al, and for all. Al have right to hear the word of God, al
have need to know the word of God. Al have sinned, Romans 3.
and are deprived of the glory of God. Therefore Christ calls all, Mat. 11.
Venite ad me omnes, etc. Come unto me all ye that be weary and laden. Young
men and old men: men and women: rich and poor come to me. Acts. 10.
God is no accepter of persons. It is not the will of your Father which is in
Heaven, Mat. 18.
says Christ, that one of these little ones should perish. Who will, 1. Tim. 2.
that al men shall be saved, and come to the knowledge of truth. God will look
to him that is pore, Esaias. 66.
and of a contrite spirit, and trembles at his words. God will regard such a
one, and make him a fit vessel to receive his truth. Upon him that is such
a one shall the spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of knowledge,
and of the fear of God rest. Not only upon the rich, the wise, and the
learned: but upon him that is pore, and of a contrite heart, and trembles at
his words. Upon him that humbles himself under the mighty hand of God. He is
the temple and the Tabernacle of the holy Ghost. He that is humble in heart,
shall be saved. God resists the proud, but gives grace to the lowly.

Therefore Christ said, Mat. 11.
I give thee thanks O father, Lord of heaven and earth, because thou have hid
these things from the wise and men of understanding, and have opened them unto
babes. Even to such as have no learning, which rejoice in nothing but in thee.
The wise and learned of the world can not hear them, can not see them: but
they to whom it pleased thee to give understanding. It is thy mercy. Flesh
and blood cannot reach the knowledge of thy will. The spirit of the Father
has revealed it. Christ says: John. 1^.
My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me. They will
not follow a stranger. My people are simple as sheep: they are rude, and know
not what they do. Yet they know my voice, and follow me: they know their
Shepherd from a thief: they follow not the call and voice of a stranger.
So we see that God chaceth no man away from hearing his word: he loatheth not
the pore, because of his poverty, he refuses him not: for he is the God of
the pore: they be his creatures, S Augustine says, Deus in Scripturis, Aug.
ep. 3. ad Volusianum.
quasi amicus familiaris loquitur ad cor doctorum, and indoctorum. Almighty
God, in the Scriptures, speaks as a familiar friend without dissimulation,
unto the hearts, both of the learned, and of the unlearned. He abaseth
himself, and speaks to their capacity: for his will is, that all should
come to the knowledge of the truth and be saved.

Now let us consider with what fear^ and reverence we ought to come to the
hearing or reading of the word of God: The Aungel of the Lord appeared unto
Moses in a flame of fire, Exodus 3.
out of the midst of a bushe. When Moses turned aside to see, God said unto
him, Come not hither: Put thy shoes off thy feet for the place whereon thou
stand is holy ground. Again, when God had appointed to speak unto the
people from Mount Sion, Exodus 19.
he said to Moses: Go unto the people, and sanctify them to day, and to morrow,
and let them wash their clothes, and let them be ready on the. 3. day, for
the. 3. day, the Lord will come down in the sight of all the people upon
mount Sinai.

The word of the Lord is the Bush, out of which issues a flame of fire. The
Scriptures of God are the mount, from which the Lord of Hosts does show him
self. In them God speaks to us. In them we hear the words of everlasting
life. We must be sanctified, and wash out garments, and be ready to hear
the Lord. We must strippe off all our affections: we must fall do (...) with
fear: we must (...) speaks: Even God (...) and Earth: God (...) Lord Jesus
Christ: God, (...) judge the quick and the dead: (...) whom al flesh shall
appear.

His word is holy: Let us take (...) into what hearts we bestow it. (...)
ever abuses it, shall be found guilti (...) high trespass against the Lord. We
may not receive it, to blow up our hearts, and wax proud with our knowledge:
We may not use it, to maintain debate and co^tentio^: we may not use it to
vaunt our selves, or to make show of our cunning.

The word of God teaches lowliness of mind: it teaches us to know our
selves. If we learn not humility, we learn nothing. Although we seem to
know somewhat, yet know we not in such sort as we ought to know. The
Scriptures are the mysteries of God: let us not be curious: let us not seek
to know more than God has revealed by the^. They are ye sea of God: let us
take (...) drowned in the. They (...): let us take comfort by (...) take heed,
they burn (...) gaze over hardly upon (...) blemish in their eye sight. (...)
the people of Israel saw the (...) in the desert, they said, Man Hu^ (...)
this? so they reasoned of it, when (...) it up in their hands, and beheld it.
They asked one an other, what good it would do. The Scriptures are Manna^,
given to us from Heaven, to seed us in the desert of this world. Let us take
them, and behold them, and reason of them, and learn one of an other what
profit may come to us by the^ let us know, that they are written for our
sake, and for our learning, that through patience and comfort of the Scriptures
we may have hope. They are given us to instruct us in faith, to strength us in
hope, to open our eyes, and to direct our going.

If we withholde the truth in unrighteousness: if we know our Masters will,
and do it not: if the name of God be ill-spoken of through us: the word of God
shall be taken away from (...) nation which shall (...) thereof: God shall send
(...) on, that we shall believe (...) heart shall condemn us: an (...) beaten
with many stripes.

Therefore we ought (...) give heed to those things (...) hear: we must
consider of them, (...) chew the cudde. Every beast that (...) not the cudde
is unclean, and no^^ for sacrifice. Let us be poor in spirit, (...) meek in
heart: let us be gentle as be comes the Lambs of Christ: and as his sheep,
let us hear his voice, and follow him. Let us be of a contrite spirit and
tremble at the words of God: let us when we know God glorify him as God. So
shall God look upon us: so shall the spirit of wisdom and understanding, and
of counsel, and of knowledge, and of the fear of God rest upon us: so shall we
be made perfect to all good works: so shall we rejoice in his salvation, and
with one mouth glorify God even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.

FINIS.


