AN EXACT and sound Discovery of all the chief Mysteries of Jesuitical
Iniquity. With the whole Body of their Statisme, and Devilish Policy.

Composed and published in Italian, by a most grave and learned Papist, and
faithfully translated by I. B. Gods unworthy Minister.

Printed for Peter Paxton, and are to be sold at the sign of the Crane in
Paul's Church yard, 1619.

To the right Honorable, GEORGE Marquess Buckingham, Viscount Villiers, Baron
of Whaddon, Lord High Admiral of England; Justice in Air of all his Majesty's
Forests, Parkes, and Chases bey^^d Trent, Master of the horse to his Majesty,
and one of the Gentlemen of his Majesty's Bedchamber, Knight of the most noble
Order of the Garter, and one of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Counsel of
England and Scotland.
THat I dare imitate His Majesty, in dedicating a Book unto your Lordship
(since never Subjects had such a King to imitate) I hope your goodness will
be as gracious to pardon my presumption, as it is powerful to conquer all
envy. The quantity of this Treatise, is according to his Majesty's happy
praescription; it is short, and will (I hope) rather direct, then distract
greater employments; nor will the quality I trust be displeasing, though
differing from that of his Majesty's Book. That contains Prayer and heavenly
Meditation; this a Discovery of Jesuitical policy, and hellish Ambition. As
that cannot but enlighten your Devotion toward God, for which your Honors so
royal testimony of the King; so this cannot but enlighten your zeal to the
Commonwealth, which is so generally acknowledged by the people. That among all
other kingdoms, the Jesuits fish especially for this Island, no man doubts:
and I dare promise, that in this little Bark which is steered by one of their
own Mariners, your Honor may plainly discover all the maine baytes they lay
for us. In my foreign service to his Majesty, I have found many such Pylates,
even among themselves our professed enemies; all which by your Honorable command
and encouragement, shall be ready to con^uct us in the way of truth against
this prodigeous Armado of Ignatian Furies, let them sail where they will, we
will beat them with their own Weapons. In the fighting of which good fight
for the truth of Jesus Christ, we shall all glory to have so devout an
encourager as your Lordshippe: but none shall be more ready to venture his
little all in so good a cause then

Your Lordships devoted Beadsman, Isaac Bargraue.

To the Reader.
THis short ensuing Treatise, will serve as the key, to let thee in to the whole
treasury of Jesuitical villainy. It was lent me by one of the most Learned,
Grave, and Wisest Papists that breaths that Air. He will tell us, that all
division and distraction is not found in Amsterdam, or in our Church, since all
other orders are here against the Jesuits, and the Jesuits against the Pope.
He (though a stranger) will inform our miserably-seduced Countrymen, what good
Angels the Jesuits are, whom they so much adore; and to what trusty shepherds
they commit their souls: whose blind obedience and devotion, being made a
sacrifice to Jesuitical ambition, and their religion an only means to betray
the cause of God, their King, and country, have had their merit thus Crowned
with an Italian Proverb: Achimanca un asino faccia metter la sella adosso un
Catolico Inglese. He that wants an Ass, let him set the saddle upon an English
Catholic. Poor Iesuite-ridden souls, whom we cannot but pity, while
Romanists thus deride the^. God so shine into their hearts by the light of his
Spirit, that even the pen of this Papist, may work in them their own souls
conversion, and the confusion of their Enemies. And that it may teach them to
consider, how monstrous the whole Body of Popery must needs be, when these
chief heads thereof the Jesuits, how ever outwardly showing so strict
Discipline and Devotion, yet are inwardly composed of naught but damned
Matcheuilisme and unhallowed Ambition.

AN Impartial Discovery, of Jesuitical Policy.
Written in Italian by a Papist, and faithfully Translated, by I. B.
THat the Religious Order of the Jesuits, was at the first planted in the
Vineyarde of Christ, as a Tree which should produce an Antidote against the
poison of Heresy, and such blossoms of Christian and religious works, as by
the sweet savor of them sinners might be constraind to bid adieu to the
corruption of sin, and to prosecute the sweet smell of Repentance, we need
no clearer demonstration, then the laws and orders on the which this plant was
grounded, by the first Founder thereof, This Exordium will make you know, that
the Author was a papist.
Father Ignatius. And surely, so long as by those first fathers that gave it
life it was cherished with the dew of Charity, and cultiuated conformable to
the intention of the first planter; It brought forth two branches: the one of
love toward God, the other toward their Neighbor. Insomuch that it was a
wonder to consider the plenty of fruits which it brought forth in the
excellent education of Children, the saving of souls, and the increase of the
Catholic Faith. But the Devil, who makes use of all good inventions, but as
a Whetstone, grew as eager and cunning to destroy this work and enterprise,
as the other to promote it: and took occasion even from the greatness it self
of this religious order, and from that admirable progress, which in small time
it had made, to pervert the first institution of it, with an artificial
subtilty, in sted of those two first branches of Charity, now utterly dried up
he has ingrafted two other: the one of selfloue, and the other of profit:
from which the Christian Republique receyues such damage, that happily a greater
cannot be imagined, as I am now about to demonstrate in this Discourse. In the
which, I protest before God, I have no motion either of Interest or passion,
but an innocent zeal of the Public good; for the which I do assure my self
I was borne, and that Princes knowing their Artifice, may prevent them by
opportune remedies.

Now we are to know, that the Religious orders of these Fathers the Jesuits
being enlarged, especially by the education of Children (of which there is
neither City nor Kingdom but has need) was even from the beginning thereof
(by very many) much desired, and by diverse Princes so favored, that in few
years it diffused it self, as far as other orders had done in many hundreds.
This greatness which almost always induces into men's minds a change of
Custom, raised up in the heirs of Father Ignatius, such a love toward their
Society, that esteeming that more profitable unto the Church of God, and more
helpefull in the reformation of the world, then all other Orders, they
concluded among themselves to endeavor with all Art and industry to give
increase to it, and in that to give grows to the cause of Christ the good of
the Church, nay (to use their own words) to the only Patrimony of Christ.

And here I had need of the subtilty of Aristotle to discern, and the
Eloquence of Cicero, to expres those marvelous means; (A thing which for the
nouelty of it to many seems incredulous) by which these Fathers still gain
increase to their society. But it shall be sufficient for me to point out only
some few things, leaving a large room for other men's judgments, to raise up a
form of what Idea themselves shall think fittest. Yet I shall not omit to
propound some few heads, with which I intend to serve the Reader for the ground
of his discourse.

And first, these Fathers the Jesuits, thought it was not sufficient to promote
their society to that pitch of greatness to the which they aspired, only by
teaching, preaching, or administering the most holy Sacraments, with other like
religious exercises; because though from the beginning (as I said) they were
kindly embraced by many people, yet in process of time they perceived, that
either for ill satisfaction, or some other occasion, what ever it was; the
affection of many grew cold toward them; and therefore doubting lest their
growth should end with their infancy, they invented two other means to enlarge
their greatness.

The first, was to work in the minds of Princes, and consequently of as manic
others as they could, a base opinion of all other Religious Societies,
discovering their imperfections and after a cunning manner, from others
depressions, raising their own greatness; and by this means they
impatronized themselves of many Monasteries, Abbeyes, and other maine
possessions, depriving those Religious persons that first enjoyed them, both of
them, and of all that belonged to them.

The second means was, to thrust themselves into affairs of State, gayning
interest with the greatest part of Christian Princes; and that with as subtle
and artificious a device, as ever yet the world brought forth: into which, as
it is very hard to penetrate, so it is (almost) impossible, sufficiently to
explain it.

There resides continually in Rome the Father General, to whom all the rest
render most exact obedience: and there is choice made of some other Fathers,
who from the Assistaunce they always give him, are called his Assistants; and
there is one (at least) of every nation, who from that Nation takes his name.
Hence, one is styled the Assistant of France; a seeond, of Spain; a third, of
Italy; a fourth, of England; a fi^t, of Austria; and so of all other Provinces
and Kingdoms: every one of which, has it assigned to him as his particular
office to inform the Father General of all accidents of State, which occur in
that Province or Kingdom, of which he is Assistant. And this Office he
perfourmes by the means of his Correspondents, who reside in the Principal
Cities of that Province orkingdom: who with all industry first inform
themselves of the State, the Quality, Nature, Inclination, and Intention of
Princes, and by every Currier advertise the Assistants of such accidents as are
newly discovered. And these again communicate all unto the Father General,
who meeting in Council with all his Assista^ts, they make an Anatomy (as it
were) of the whole world, conferring the interest and desseigns of all
christian Princes. Here they consult of al fresh intelligences received from
their Correspondents, and curiously examining them, and conferring them
together, at last they conclude, to favor the affairs of one Prince, and to
depresse the designs of another, as shall be most requisite for their interest
and profit. And as those who are standers by at some game, more easily discern
the stroke, then those that give it: so these Jesuits having in one view the
interest of all princes; know very well how to observe the condition of place
and time, and how to apply the true means of advancing the affairs of that
Prince, from whom they know they shall draw most water to their own Mils.

Howeuer, this is a thing simply evil, that religious men should so much
intermingle with matters of State, it being their duty rather to attend the
saving of their own and other men's souls, being for that end only retired
from the world, but by this means they are more entangled, then the very
seculare persons themselves, and for many most pernicious consequences, we
shall find this their course most wicked, and worthy of a speedy and potent
remedy.

For first, these Jesuits are Confessors to the greatest part of the Nobility,
thoroughout all Roman Catholic estates. Nay, and the better to attend them,
they will not admit poor men, or poor women to their Confessions, but rather
aim to be Confessors to the Princes themselves. So that by this course, it is
easy for them to penetrate every design, every resolution, and inclination,
as well of Princes, as of Subjects; of all which they suddenly inform the
Father General, or his Assistantes in Rome. Now any man that has the lest
measure of understanding, may easily perceive, what a prejudice they bring to
Princes by this device, when only their own interest stirs them up to that,
to which (as to their last end) they direct all their endeavor.

Secondly, whereas secrecy is a proper and inseperable Accident, which so
accompanies the preservation of a State, that without it, the ruin of a State
must needs follow. Therefore all Princes are most rigorous against those, who
discover their secrets, punishing them as the enemies both of them and their
Country. And as on the other side, to understand the designs of other
Princes, makes a man more cautelous, and more able to discern his own estate:
and therefore they use to spend no small sum of money, in the maintenance of
Ambassadors and Intelligencers; yet are oftentimes deceived too in their
relations. But the Jesuits (that is) their Father General and his Assista^ts,
as well by the Confessions and Consultations, which their Correspondents do
make, residing in all chief Cities of the Christian world, as by means of
their other Adherents, of whom we shall Discourse hereafter, are most sincerely
and punctually advertised of all determinations, that are concluded in the most
secret Councelles: so that they better know (almost) all the power,
possessions, expenses, and designs of Princes, then the Princes themselves,
and that without any other expense then the carriage of letters: the which
notwithstanding in Rome alone (as the Masters of the Posts relate to us)
arriseth to sixty, seventy, eighty, and often to an hundred Crowns of Gold for
one Currier. So that they knowing so exactly the affairs of al Princes, do not
only diminish their credit among themselves, but wound their reputation both
with other Princes, and with their own subjects, depressing or advancing their
State at their pleasure: and that so much the easier, because by the same way
of Confessions and Consultations, they enter into the very secrets of the
peoples souls: knowing who stands well affected to the Prince, and who rests
distasted: so that by these relations which they have of State-affaires, they
may easily sow discord among Princes, occasion a thousand iealousies, and by
their insight into the Subjects affection, raise commotions and discord,
bringing into contempt the very person of the Prince. Whence we must conclude
that the interest of State does not comport, that any Prince should confess
himself; much less, that he should permit any of his Confidents, Friends,
Secretaries, Counselors, or other his chief Ministers, to confess themselves
to persons, that attend so diligently to spy outmatters of State and to serve
them selves of this means, to insinuate into the favor of Princes; since there
is this day no want of Religious persons, men both for life and learning, to be
regarded equally with the Jesuits, whom in this kind they may employ, and
who attend nothing else but the government of souls, and of their Monasteries.

Thirdly, which is a greater discovery then yet we have made, or shall make
hereafter, ye are to know that there are found amongst them four sorts of
Jesuits. The first, consistes of certain secular people, of both sexes,
adjoined to their society, who live under a certain obedience, which
themselves call a Blind Obedience; squaring all their particular actions by
the Jesuits counsel, resigning themselves most readily in all things to be
commanded by the^: and these for the most part are Gentlemen or Gentlewomen,
the wealthyest Widows, or the richest Citizens, or Marchantes; from all
whom, as from fructiferous plants, the Jesuits gather every year, a copious
harvest of gold and silver. Of this kind, are those women, who (in Italy) call
themselves Chettine, who are induced by the Jesuits, to forsake the world,
while in the mean time, they get their pearls, apparel, ornaments, furniture
of houses, and finally, very great possessions.

The second sort is, of men alone; but those as well Priests as Laymen: yet
such as live a seculare life, and such as oft-times by the mediation of the
Jesuits, obtain Pensions, Church-liuings, Abbeyes and other reuennews: but
these make a vow to receive a habit of the society, at the pleasure of the
Father General; and therefore they are called Jesuits in Voto: and by the
labors of these men, the Jesuits wondrously avail themselves in the fabric
of their Monarchy. For they maintain in all kingdoms and Provinces, in all
courts of Princes, and Palaces of great men, such of these as shall serve them
in a kind, which I shall declare unto you in the seventh point of this
discourse.

The third sort of Jesuits are those who remain in Monasteries; and these are
either Priests, Clerks, or Conuerts; who because at the first they came not
from that profession; may at the pleasure of the Father General be deprived of
it, although of themselves they have no power to leave it. And these being
such as have no Office of importance, for the most part do simply obey in any
thing that their Superiors command.

The fourth sort is of Politic Jesuits, through whose hands passes the
whole government of religion; and these are they, who being tempted by the
devil, with the same temptation that Christ had in the Gospel, Haec omnia tibi
dabo, have accepted the bargain; and therefore labor to reduce their society
to an absolute Monarchy, and to place the head thereof at Rome, where all the
principal affairs of the Christian world meet to gether. There resides the
head of these Politicians, (which is their General) with a great number of
others of the same profession, who being first informed from their Spies, of
all such weighty and important business, as are to be treated in the Court of
Rome, having first among themselves agreed of such ends, as for their own
interest they desire; each one takes his office to go every day their circuit
through the Courts of Cardinals, Ambassadors, and Prelates: with whom
(cunningly) they insinuat their discourse of such business as is then in hand,
or shortly to be handled, representing it to them after what manner they
please, and in the same shape, that by reflection from their own ends,
themselves do apprehend it; ofttimes changing the aspect of the business, and
showing black for white. And because the first interpretations, made
especially by religious me^, are wont to make a notable impression in themind
of him that hears them: hence it proceeds, that many times, most important
business treated by the Ambassadors of Princes, and other grave persons of the
Roman court, have not atained that success which Princes expected, because the
Jesuits had praeoccupated their minds with their oblique relations, effecting
that those Ambassadors, or other Agents, should have but small credit with them.

And the same artifice that they use with the Prelates of Rome, they use also
with other Princes, either by themselves, or by the means of their Pensionary
Jesuits out of Rome; so that we may conclude, that the greaterpart of
business thoroughout the Christian World, does pass through the Jesuits
hands; and those only take effect, against which they make no opposition.
Most stupendous and impenetrable is the Art that in this kind they use, which
though it cannot by me be perfectly described, yet may it lively be descryed
by any Prince, who will but daigne to read this little touch yt I give of the^;
because he will presently reflect upon what things have past: and as he shall
understand the truth of my discourse, calling to mind with what art things have
been handled, he will discover more of that, which will seem strange and
marvelous unto him. For not being content with this their close Artifice, by
which they thrust the^selus into the affairs of the World, with persuasion
that it is the only means to archieue that Monarchall Jurisdiction at which
they aim; they made supplication to Pope Gregory the thirteenth, That for the
time to come, he would publicly favor their project: and representing it to
him under the public good of the church, they required that he would
command all his Legates, and Apostolical Nuncios, to take to them every one
for his companion and confident, some Jesuit, by whose counsel he should be
governed in all his actions.

Fourthly, by these cunning carriages, and their insight into State business,
the chief Jesuits have gotten the love of many Princes, as well Temporal as
Spiritual; which Princes they do persuade, that they have said and done many
things for their good; and hereupon have followed two weighty inconveniences.
First, that abusing the friendship and goodness of those Princes, they have
not cared to distaste many private, but otherwise rich and Noble Families,
usurping the wealth of widows, and leaving their family in extreme misery:
alluring to their Religion, and to frequent their Schools, the most noble
spirits; who if happily they shall fall out to be unable and unfit for their
purpose, under some honest pretext, they license them from their society; but
withal lay hold of their estates, of which their society will needs be
invested heirs. In the mean time absolutely excluding the poor from their
schools, directly against the orders of the forenamed Father Ignatius, and
the intention of those their Patrons, who gave them their possessions, not that
they should serve their own commodity, but the Christian Commonwealth.

The second inconvenience is, that these Jesuits cunningly make the world
know the friendship and inwardnesse they retain with Princes, setting it
forth a little more then indeed it is, to the end that they may gain the love
of their Ministers, and so procure, that all men shall recur to them for favors;
thus they publicly vant, that they can make Cardinals, Nuncios, Lieutena^ts,
Governors, and other officers; nay some of them have plainly affirmed, that
their General could do more then the Pope himself; and others have added,
that it is better to be of that order which makes Cardinals, then to be a
Cardinal. And these things they divulge so publicly, that there is not any
man who familiarly conuerseth with them, to who^ they relate not these, or such
like things.

Fifthly, having laid the groundwork of this their practicke in State, they
pretend a power to raise or ruin whomsoere they please, and indeed making use
of religion only for a cloak, whereby they may gain credit, they make times
attain their ends. But when they propound any man unto the Prince for
preferment, they never make choice of him who is most fit and deserving; but
rather oppose to such an one, when they know he is not partial on their side:
and always advance such persons as make for their interest, without any regard
whether he be well affected to the Prince, whether meritorious or fit to
undergo that office to which he is nominated: whence there often arises
disturba^ce to the Prince, solleuations and disgusts amongst the people.

Sixthly, as the Master of a Gally, when he perceiues a good gale fair for his
voyage; but with once whistling makes all the gally-slaues fall to their Oars,
and stretch them before the vessel: so when in the Dyets, and assemblies (which
these Fathers continually make by their General and his Assistants in Rome)
they conclude it fit for their turn, that some one person should be promoted
to dignity; the Father General signifyes so much to those that reside
elsewhere; and all those with one consent, at an instant join all their forces
to make him attain that honor which they intend him: and he should be very
ungrateful, if afterward in all occurrents, he should not serve the Jesuits
with the like zeal that they preferred him. And because such a man, nay many
such men (for many dependa^ts in this kind the Jesuits have) hold themselves
more obliged to the Jesuits, then to their Prince, of whom they have received
their honor and greatness, therefore they serve the Jesuits with a greater
affection then the Prince himself. Thus they delude their Princes, who
imagining they have gotten a trusty servant, have only made way for a Spy of
the Jesuits; of whom they oftentimes serve themselves tot he damage of that
Prince, who advanced him. I could with manifest examples confirm this my
Discourse, if daily experience and common fame were not a sufficient
confirmation to it. But not to make my self ouer-tedious I will pass to some
other things, concluding that this happily is the cause, why the Jesuits are
wont to call their Religion, A Grand-Monarchy; as if they governed all Princes
and their ministers at their pleasure. And it is not long since, that one of
the chief of them, being publicly to treat with an illustrious Prince, in the
name of the Society, he began with these words full of arrogancy, and
grounded upon a conceit of their Monarchy; Our Society has always maintained
good intelligence with your Grace, etc.

Seventhly, these Fathers take great pains, to let the World know, that all
those who are any way in estimation with their Prince, have been their
favorites, and borne up by their hands; so that by this means they are more
Patrons of the Subjects affections, then the prince himself. And this is a
notable prejudice unto the Prince; as well because no reason of State does
comport, that religious persons so ambitious and politic, should be so far
Patrons of the will of the Ministers, that whenever they please, they can
cause treason and solleuation: As also that by this means, that is by the
mediation of the Ministers their adherents, they induce into the Princes
service either for Counselors or Secretaries, some of those Jesuits in Voto,
of whom I discoursed before And these again procure the Prince to entertayne
some Jesuit for his Confessor or Preacher. And thus all these together, do
serve as Intelligencers to the Father General; to whom they render an exact
account of all that passes in the most secret Councels. Whence it proceeds,
that many times we see designs prevented, and secrets of the greatest
importance discovered; yet no man can search out the true Author, but often
those are most suspected, who are least in fault.

Eighthly, as by Nature subjects are wont to follow the inclination of their
Prince; so all those that give obedience to their father General, perceiving
that he cheefely attends to matter of State, and by that means endeavors to
improve and enrich their society, they also apply themselves that way; and
making use of their Kindred and Friends, assoile to penetrate the very hearts
of Princes, and their most secret designs, only to give notice of them, either
to the Assistants at Rome, or to the Father General: by this means to procure
themselves their favor, and attain some dignity, which by any other means
they could never have reached. For amongst them, none are ever preferred to any
Office of importance, but only those whom they know prone to advance their
society to that height of greatness to which they aspire, and consequently none
but such as are known to be sufficient in the managing of State-businesse.

Ninthly, as from diverse Flowers and Herbs, by means of a Lymbecke, a man
may draw such an Ointment, as is fit to heal a mortal wound; and as from
several blossoms, Bees suck Honey: so these Jesuits, from the infallible
relation which they have of all Princes affairs, and of all accidents that
occur in every State, by the power of their discourse, they extract from them
their own commodity, which is the only remedy to cure that their invincible
wou^d of Couetousuesse and ambition; and they compose a certain Art of their
own profit, by which they obtain their own ends, as well from other men's
good, as ill; but more often from their il, then from their good.

Thus they are wont to shackle with their Fetters, that Prince into whose
secrets they have spied, propounding to him that they have the only excellent
means to make him the Master of his desires: but when by this means they have
drawn their own purposes from him, considering that the too swelling
greatness of that Prince may one day prove prejudicial unto them, as
Advocates do their causes, they prolong as much as they can the success of
that business; and afterward with strange dexterity and wondrous iugling,
they utterly ruin those designs to which they had given a beginning.

The league of France treated and concluded by them, not long after they
abandoned, when they saw things prosper on the Kings side: and England, so
often promised by them to the Spaniardes, yet in such manner performed, so
confirms this my Discourse, that there needs no farther proof.

Tenthly, from what has been already said, it necessarily follows, that the
Jesuits have no good intention toward any Prince what ever, either
temporal or spiritual; but only serve them so far, as they may serve their
own commodity.

Nay, it follows yet further, that no Prince, much less any under Prelates,
can make the like use of them, because they show themselves at the very same
time, equally affected to all; making them selves French with French men,
Spaniards with Spaniardes, and so with all other, according as the occasion
requires; from which, they do intend to extract their profit. They have no
regard of the prejudice of one more then of another, and therefore those
enterprises in which they have intermedled, have seldom times succeeded well,
because they have no purpose to serve further then their own interest
dictates to them. And in this, the Artifice which they use, is most notorious;
some of them faining themselves to be partial to the crown of France, others
to Spain, others to the Emperor, and some to other Princes, of whom they
desire to be favored.

And if any of these Princes please to make use of some Jesuit, whom he holds
for his confident friend, he immediately writes to the Father General, the
business which he has to treat, and expects his answer, together with
order what he shall do, and conformable to that Commission he rules himself;
never regarding whether that Order be conformable to the intention of the
Prince, who commits the care of that business to him: but if the society be
served, he takes little care, what service he does unto the Prince.

Besides this, because the Jesuits understand the interest of all Princes,
and are most knowing in all things daily treated in secret Counselles, those
who pretend to hold with France, propound to the King, and his principal
Ministers, certain conditions of State, and important considerations, which
are sent to them from their Politic Fathers at Rome. And those that pretend
to hold with the Crown of Spain, do just the same with them, and so with the
rest. From which course of theirs, there arises such a diffidence in the
hearts of Christian Princes, that none give credit to other; which is a maine
prejudice to the public peace, and universal welfare of Christendom: the
which diffidence of theirs, is that which makes it so difficult a thing, to
conclude a league against the common enemy, and precious peace to be of so
little valewe a among Princes.

Furthermore, with these artificious devices, they have so opened the eyes of
the world, and so sharpened men's wits in matter of State, that this day, to
the notable prejudice of the holy Church, they attend to nothing else but
matter of policy, and poyse all their actions in that balance.

But to the end, that these Jesuitical stratagems may yet appear more
plainly, I cannot here conceal the means, by which they in ueigle Princes to
their party. There are some years now past, since one of these Fathers,
called father Parsons, the Assistant of England, wrote a book against the
succession of the King of Scotland, to the Crown of England: And another
Father, called Crittonius, with some others of the same order, in a Book which
they wrote, defended the Title of the King of Scotland; opposing the opinion of
Father Parsons, and faining to be at discord amongst themselves: although all
this was (indeed) cunningly done, and by the command of their Father General,
only for this purpose, that whosoever should succeed in the Kingdom of
England, they might have an excellent Argument, to work in him a great good
opinion of their Society, and to extract their own ends from him.

A fair example to show us, that Princes are the objects of all Jesuitical
actions and determinations: and (by consequence) to make good their own saying,
That their Society is a Grand Monarchy.

Again, that the truth of this may appear, that the Jesuits have no regard,
whether they please or displease any Prince, where it touches upon their own
commodity; although the experience of infinite things past makes it as clear
as the Sun it self; yet the particular which I shall here subioyn, will render
it every way most evident.

There is no person in the World, whom they are more bound to serve and obey
then the Bishop of Rome; not only for many other reasons, but especialy
because they make a particular vow to obey him. Yet when Pius Quintus went
about to reform some of these Fathers, reducing them unto the performance of
their duty in the Quire, they would not obey him; esteeming that a notorious
prejudice to their society: and those few of them, who yielded themselves to
the Popes pleasure, accepting that profession; were always afterward in
mockery called by their fellows, Quintini: nor could ever any of them get the
least preferment among them.

In the same kind, they opposed glorious Saint Charles, Arch-byshoppe of
Millain, who as Legate alatere to his Holiness, endeavored to reduce them to
a Religious Discipline.

But what should I speak of these, since they obey not the Sacred Cannons
themselves, but against their Decrees, make Merchandise of Pearls, Rubies,
and Diamondes, the which they bring from the Indies; and there is an opinion,
that the greatest part of precious Stones, which are sold in Venice, belong to
the Jesuits. The ground of which opinion, has been received from their own
brokers, whom they have employed in the sale of them.

But that they are no faithful servants unto the Bishop of Rome, those
Fathers know well; who for defaulte of their service, were called by process
to Rome. I neither will, nor can name them, nor will I wade farther into this
matter, as well that I may not be compelled to speak of some Prince, whom my
Discourse will not very well please, (my self desiring to do service to all,
and to offend none) as because I intend not here to make an inuectiue against
the Jesuits; but only to give a short and plain draught of their courses
and customs.

For, as many times we behold one afflicted with some grievous infirmity,
sending forth such lamentable cries, as reach heaven it self; and every one
perceyues that the man is terribly indisposed, but no man is able to discern
the original cause of his evil: so the whole world complains of the
Jesuits; some for being persecuted, others for being treacherously served by
them: but the mischief still remains among us. Nor is the cause thereof easily
discovered; which is nothing else but a prodigeous and immense desire, which
they have to increase their own power: in respect whereof, they esteem in
nothing to distaste any man, to deceive Princes, to oppress the poor, to
extort from Widows their estates, to ruinate most noble Kingdoms, nay many
times, by their intermingling with alimportant business, to cause iealousies
and despite among Christian Princes.

Now, as there would follow a great inconvenience, if that part which were
last formed by Nature, as an instrument to serve the rest that are more noble;
should attract unto it self all the purest blood and vital spirits, because
this were the way utterly to dissolve the whole: So it is as inconvenient, that
the religion of the Jesuits, planted into the body of the holy Church, as an
instrument for the conversion of Heretics, and the reduction of sinners to
Repentance, should bring within their own power, all the most weighty and
important affairs of Princes and Prelates, and extracting from them the very
life and spirit of their interest, should convert them unto their own
commodity. Because from hence both private and public peace is disturbed,
many deprest which were worthy to be exalted, and many exalted which were
worthy to be deprest, with a thousand other inconveniences, that would follow
upon it.

I could adduce many Reasons, taken from experience it self, to demonstrate
what an ingordgious ambition the Jesuits have to increase their greatness: but
it shall here suffice to make it known from Father Parsons own words,
recorded in a Book of his composed in the English tongue, and entitled, The
Reformation of England. Where having first blamed Cardinal Poole, and having
also observed many wantes and imperfections in the Council of Trent; at length
he concludes, That when England should return to the Romish Catholic Faith,
he would reduce it to the form and state of the Primitive Church, making
common all Ecclesiastical goods, and assigning the charge of them unto seven
Sauij or Wise men, which should be Jesuits, and who should make distribution
of goods at their pleasure. Nor is it his will, nay he forbiddes it under a
grievous penalty, that any religious person, of what order soever, should
return into England without their License, resolving that none should enter
there, but those who should be maintained by Alms.

But as it often falls out, that selfeloue so blinds the wisest man, that he
beecomes the vnwisest; it is most ridiculous which the same Father subioynes in
that place. When England (says he) shall once be reduced to the true Faith,
it will not be convenient, that the Pope (at the least for five years space)
should look to receive any fruit from the Ecclesiastical Benefices of this
Kingdom; but remit all into the hands of those seven Sauij, who should
dispense them, as they conceived best, for the good of the Church. This being
his design, that the first five years being past, by some other invention (of
which they are very full) they would re-confirme the same privilege for five
years more, and so onward, till they had utterly excluded his Holiness from
England. Now who sees not here (as in a Table) the Covetousness and the
Ambition of the Jesuits, naturally described; together with the desire they
have, to make themselves Monarchs? And who sees not, with what cunning they
endeavor to promote their own interest, procuring it either from others good,
or ill? What should I say more of them? In the time of Gregory the thirteenth,
did they not make it their request, that they might be invested of all the
Parish Churches in Rome? That they might there lay a foundation of their
Monarchy? And that which they could not get in Rome, have they not finally
obtained in England; where not long since they have chosen an Arch priest, one
of the Jesuits in Voto; who in sted of protecting the Clergy, like a ravening
Wolf persecutes all such Priests, as are not dependent upon the lesuites,
driving them to terms of desperation, and depriving them (under a great
penalty) of mutual communication: so that by this time almost all the English
Romish Clergy are Jesuits in Voto, nor do they accept any into their
Colleges, who has not past his word to become a Jesuit: so that when that
kingdom shall return to the Ancient Faith, England will be like to give a
beginning to an absolute Jesuitical Monarchy, because all the Ecclesiastical
reuennews, all the Abbeyes, Benefices, Bishopprickes, Archpriestships and other
dignities shall be conferred only by the Jesuits.

I here let pass many things as the pretentions, which they make concerning
other men's estates, how jealous they are of their welfare, and desirous of
their prosperity: as the favor which they endeavor to gain from Princes, by
making them believe, that their subjects are most deuote to their religion,
and consequently that they are able to make them well affected to the person of
their Prince. Such evident things as these, I leave for every one to observe;
and with four brief considerations I will conclude this present Discourse.

First, that men of such high spirit, and such reaching designs, are always
lovers of novelty, ever searching for it, and begetting it; because without
some new raised motions, it is impossible they should attain their ends. And
therefore, the Jesuits cannot be helpful to any Prince, that either loves
peace, or the conservation of his own estate, since they are more likely to be
the cause of much trouble and commotion; nay happily to put in compromize his
whole state, if he favor not their party, or be not partially gouernd by their
counsel.

Secondly, if these who have not temporal jurisdiction, are able to cause such
great, and so prodigious disturbance in the World, what think you would they
do, if one of them should by chance be created Pope? First, he would stuff
the Consistory with Jesuits, and by that means perpetuate the Popedom to
them: and then directing themselves by their insight, and interest of State,
and having the Arm and power of the Pope, they would be enabled to put in
danger the estate of many Princes, especially of those who are neigh bors and
confiners.

Thirdly, it would be the design of that Pope (if he could by any means) to
inuest their order of some City, or temporal Jurisdiction, with the which
they would afterward make way for a thousand other designs, whichthey could
never effect without the damage of other Princes.

Fourthly, when the Consistory should be entirely Iesuited, the whole
patrimony of Christ would be in their hands; and as one that has the dropsy,
the more he drinks, the more he thirsts; so their Ambition growing with their
greatness, would occasion a world of trouble. Now, because there is nothing more
subject unto change then matter of State, these fathers with all their power
and cunning, would endeavor to alter the course of affairs, that they might
finally in duce the form and project of their own government, and by that
means absolutely immonarchize the^ selves. They have had it long in their heads
to gain into their society the son of some Prince, who should absolutely
inuest the company of his state; and this they had long since attained, if
some others wisely spying out their design, had not prevented them. But had
they once obtained that, they would without any difficulty, have made
themselves Patrones of the state Ecclesiastical; and as they are very
inuentiue and subtle, they would afterward have foud out a thousand ways how
to enlarge it. Thus they would have wanted no means, that might make the^
masters of their proiects: and if nothing else would have done it, the ielousies
which they would have raised in the minds of their confining princes, would
have don the^ no small service.

It is therefore most necessary, that for the preservation of public peace,
and for the maintenance of states, for the increase of the holy Church, and
for the common good of the whole world, that Paul the fifts Holiness,
together with other Princes, should set bounds and limits to this society, whose
desires are so extremely inordinate, least happily that follow, which was
anciently effected by the Dauidi, (whose courses the Jesuits seem to imitate)
who were not destroyed, til the time of Claudius the Emperor.

And when I shall be commanded to write my opinion, concerning an opportune
remedy how to rectify these fathers without any hurt to them, but indeed to
their great good (desiring rather to make them Monarchs of souls, which are
the treasury of Christ, then of the world, or of the profit of the world,
which is nothing else but vile dung) J am ready to perform it with charity,
and with all that ability, which it shall please God to bestow upon me.

Laus Deo.

FINIS.

