A Sermon preached at Paul's Cross, on the first Sunday in Lent; Martij 1.
1600.

With a short discourse of the late Earl of Essex his confession, and
penitence, before and at the time of his death.

By William Barlow Doctor of Divinity.

Whereunto is annexed a true copy, in substance, of the behavior, speech,
and prayer of the said Earl at the time of his execution.

AT LONDON Printed for Matthew Law, dwelling in Paul's Churchyard near
Watling-streete, 1601.

To the Reader.
ALthough Thucidides had never spoken it, Lib. 1.
yet experience shows it to be true, (...), that hearing is not liable to any
account, but (...) whatsoever a man speaks, it lays open to other men's
censure both his person, and his relation; which is either good or bad says
Nazianz. not by desert and truth, Apologer.
but Secundum praeiudicium allatum, or affectionem innatam says Seneca, as the
prejudice of his auditors is, Senec. Epist.
which they bring with them, or the disposition of their natures bred within
the^: Neither of these hetherunto have I either feared or fled, but, as I never
made suit to preach any where, so being either commanded, or requested, I
never refused the most public assemblies, as being diffident of that
doctrines verity which should pass from me, or guilty of any calumniation
which might, justly, touch me. Custom makes some speak ill, but wisdom
teaches even Philosophers to despise it, and religion wills Christians to
forgive it. The rule of Seneca is an oracle for truth, a comfort to a
guiltless mind, Vt quisque est contemptissimus, Quod in Sap: non cadit
iniuria.
ita solutissimae linguae est, the basest sorted, and the lewdest of life, have
the most lavish tongues. Yet, I confess, that the addressing my self to this
sermon (containing in it matter rather of state then divinity, and being like
unto the preamble of the Pharisees in my text, (...), subject to offense one
way, either to them of authority if I should renounce this duty, or the
auditorie if I should speak of uncertainty) was, as the Apostle speaks, 1.
Cor. 2.
(...) with much fear and trembling: and therefore, as it is well known, from
the time of this purpose for the Cross, but three days in all, till the
Saboth for the Sermon, I was not one day from the Court, still laboring to
inform my self of every thing which I doubted, that I might in these
calumnious times, keep my self, for any thing I would there deliver; from the
controlment either of ill tongues, or mine own conscience: to which purpose I
both framed a short preface personal, before I entered the discourse, which
might essuier and rub out all opinion fore stalled; and abstayned from all
bitterness against the person and action of the late Earl, least thereby I
should exasperate minds not resolved; and compared every speech of his,
uttered by me, both with his confession to the Lords, whose witness therein I
humbly request, appealing thereunto; and with that conference he had with us,
let my associates be judges, which might satisfy any but even indifferently
affected. Notwithstanding all this my care and pains, the malignitie of the
meany is such, that, as if I had either with Ananias lied unto the holy Ghost,
and had preached mine own damnation, as it pleased some to blaspheme, it was
given out that I was stricken, if not with madness, yet with a dreadful
sickness; or, as if I had spoken treason, that I was, the next day, committed
close prisoner to the Tower; or at least, I had highly offended her majesty,
and received a great check from the Council. The two first my body can
answer, which has been, I thank God, ever sithence, In latitudine sanitatis
et libertatis, both in health, and at liberty: the two last cannot be
thoroughly confuted by me, without some opinion of vanity and self glory,
unless that be checking, Eurip^d.
which Euripides calls (...) honorable words above my deserts. Other, with
more virulence, though with less violence for penal charge, frame matter of
hard judgment out of the discourse it self; first general, that I have
broken the Canon both of religion and law, in revealing a penitents confession,
which was with remorse, and private. The cases wherein a Confessor may publish
what he hears, are too many for this short preface, the learned and judicious
know them, to the peeueshly affected, it is but lost labor to name them.
First, his confession was not auricular, but in the audience of three or four.
Secondly the crimes he confessed were notorious by his conviction, and under
his hand by subscription. Thirdly they were repeated and diuulged not ad
scandalum, nec animo damnificandi, as the scholemen speak, to scandalize or
annoy him, but to satisfy them who desired resolution, and to glorify God
whose spirit had wrought this conversion; and, as Doctor Montford knows, it
was promised by me, in both our names, that we would, as occasion served, give
public and open testimony of that his penitence and detestation of his
offense. Secondly, in particular, because in one part of my preface I said, I
was not a penny the richer, nor a step the higher for him, albeit I
celebrated his glory at the cross, for Caliz victory: therefore hence they
conclude that I now spoke of the spleen, and preach for rewards. Malice
marres logike and charity both: this inference has no coherence with my
words, if either the precedentes were observed, which I made in answer to a
slanderous obloquy, That I was a time seruer; or the consequents, That I never
moved him to prefer me, nor yet left to love him, and honor him one jot the
less for it. But this makes that speech of Seneca true, Nec deerunt qui te,
Senec. de benef.
etiam per ornamenta, ferient, there are some so full of rancour who will turn
a man's glory into his shame, and reprove him for things he should be commended:
did I at that time labor for the place? yea rather as M. Doctor Stanhop
knows, I used all the means I could to avoid it, alleging both the
shortness of the time, but three days full; my late being in that place,
scarce two months before: my youth and vnexperience in those state matters;
and such other delays, till as he knows, it was enjoined by a commandment
peremptory: did I, after it, press the court, solicit the Earl, affect any
advancement by him? God knows that I lie not, he never saw me, till, half
year after his return from Caliz, he sent for me, about a matter of
difference, in some points of religion, Wright.
between a Popish priest and my self, to take knowledge of me: at which time
he promised me honorably, and, I think, if I had used his means, his promise
had been payment. Now then my argument holds thus, if I neglected to observe
so great a personage, so favored, so able to prefer me, so willing by
promise to do it, I was no time seruer nor preacher for rewards, And thus
again it may be enforced, if I was believed and by the auditory applauded for
my celebration of that victory, the circumstances and substance whereof I could
deliver but only upon report and intelligence: much more in this case am I to
be credited and approved, having so certain grounds for my relation. But from
what spirit these objections proceed, may soon be gessedat; which, a
disposition, either at the cross or in this epistle, bitterly eloquent,
knowing what I know, would lively describe to be that of Babell in the prophet,
stand apart come not near me, for I am holier then thou: Esa. 65.5.
but as in my sermon, so here I renounce all tart and sour speech: but it
makes me remember that excellent sentence of Philo, De vita Mos. lib. 3.
(...), that the vulgar sort will grow reproachfully mad against him, who
pleases not them in their madness.

I little expected, yea not suspected, as the Lord knows, and many can
witness, that I should be sent unto him, but being sent, and hearing his
confession so ape^t and voluntary, and withal knowing the ouer-harried
passions of some murmurers, it was my duty in conscience to reveal it and
satisfy all, as my self was fully satisfied; whose affection, that settled
persuasion I had of his allegiaunce, through that his great semblance of
religion, had I not hard and scene what I did, had before ouerswayed from
inclination to any contrary suspicion of him. An other objection is, that I,
promising to speak nothing upon report, urged that conference between the
Deane of Norwich and him: first, the rule in law is, condentis est
interpretari, a man is fittest to expound himself. By that word nothing, I
meant nothing concerning this crime of his, and his confession: secondly, I
read it out of the paper, making it known it was but a report: thirdly, I
urged nothing of it, but that which agreed with like words which he had spoken
in my hearing, else where. The other base and gross untruths, that I rayled
upon the Earl; and of my self, accused mine own natural countrymen the
citizens, to be a base people, as some have given out, I refer for their
answer unto the tenor of my sermon, which here I have printed, and presented
unto thee, Reader, as near as I could guess, and as some of good place which
hard it, and since that read it, think, every word as I spoke it; upon my
credit nothing but one is altered to my knowledge, that concerned him, which
then I uttered, only one or two things added which then I forgot. If thou have
in thee the affection of a christian, and a good subject, read and be
satisfied, it is that which was intended, and I indeauoured: but if thou have
Magus his disease, Acts. 8.
the gall of bitterness excrea, disgorge thy spite, know that I esteem not
thy slanders, nor regard thy reproaches, and dissemble it never so cunningly,
I am not the principal thou aymest at, but according to the proverb Faber
cadit cum ferias fullonem, it is the state thou greeuest at, not my sermon. And
least I seem to speak this at random, let that be observed which is given out
for a truth, and my denial thereof will scarce be credited: how the late Earl
at the time of his execution song either the 54. or the 94 Psalm, for upon the
number they cannot agree, there being no such thing mentioned at all: mark the
tenor of those Psalms and then judge of the reporters spirits, and what they
intend I conclude with Samuel and Paul: 1. Sam. 15.21. 2. Cor. 13.
Obedience is better then sacrifice, and charity believes things not judging
amiss. Vale.

Thine in Christ Jesus William Barlow.

The answer of our Savior Christ unto the tempting Pharisees.
Mat. 21.22. Give unto Caesar the things of Caesar.


Very fitly have the ancient fathers resembled the Devil unto Nimrod, that
mighty hunter before ye Lord. Genesis 10. Genesis 10
who not only goes on hunting himself compassing the earth, Job. 1
as Job. 1. but has his huntsmen, both with their Hou^d^ Philip. 3. beware of
Dogs. Philip. 3.^
And also with their toils and Ne^s, 2. Tim. 2.^
2* Tim, 2 with both these he lays for Christ with his Hounds, Mar. 12. (...)
(it is an hunting word) that they might take him to kill him. Mar* 12.
In the 15 verse of this Chapter, he spreeds his Nets, (...) (it is an hu^ting
word too). that they might entangle him in his talk. In so much that, if you
read this Chapter, and there see the Herodians with the Pharisees, ^ the
Saduces after the Herodians, and the lawyers after the Sadducees setting upon
him, you shall see y^ verified, which by Prophecy, David spoke in his person of
him both, Psalm. 22.16
Psalm. 22, Many Dogs are come about me. And that also, Psalm. 140, 5
Psa. 140. The proud have laid^ their snares for me. Which snares of the Devil
are of two sorts, the Graecians call them (...) and (...), in Scripture they
are named Laqu^i quaestuum. 1. Timoth. 6. as honors, wealth, 1. Tim. 6.^
etc. the snares of gain: and Laquei quaestionum the snares of questions,
which David calls Malum lab^^orum, the wickedness of the lips* Psalm. 140.
Psalm. 140.9.
The first, Satan himself spread to catch him, Luke 4*6.
Luke 4. when he promised him the Kingdoms of the world, and the glory of
them. Here, his Huntsmen lay the other to entrap him in matters both of
Religion, and policy: Ver. 36.
of Religion, in that question of the Lawyers, ver. 36. about the greatest
commandment, thereby to inlorappe him in blasphemy, if he had preferred one
before the other. And in that case of the resurrection propounded by the
Saducees, Ver. 24.
ver. 24. to catch him in an heresy: Of policy, in this question of paying
tribute. But as in vain the Net is laid before the eyes of the birds that
have wings and fly aloft, Prou. 1.17.
Pro. 1. so fondly do they in putting forth questions to take him in a trap,
in whom are hid all the treasurs of wisdom and knowledge. Col. 2. By a man of
ordinary strength. Colos. 2.
a threefold rope is not easily broken. Eccles. 4. Eccles. 4.1^
But a man of Sampsons pith though it be seven fold, will crack it like a
thread of flare, Iud. 16.9.
Judge. 16. So the righteous Lord will break the snares of the ungodly in
pieces, Psa. 129. Psalm. 129, 4
Because, though hand joined in hand, never comes but with damage, and malice
joined with fraud, has an unknown advantage: Yet there is neither counsel,
nor understanding, nor wisdom, against the Lord, Prou. 21, 30
Pro. 21. And never was that prophecy of Esaias verified more then in this
Chapter, Gird you, and you shall be broken in pieces: gather a counsel
together, and it shall be brought to naught, Esaias. 8, 9
Esa. 8. The question propounded is very dangerous, S. Basil calls it (...), a
question that has a downfall ^n both sides, for if he had answered
negatiuely, they would have accused him of treason against the Emperor: and so
they did not withstanding, Luke. 23.
Luke 23. We have found this man denying tribute to be paid to Caesar. If his
answer had bin affirmative, they had accused him of blasphemy against God and
their state, they being commanded to be subject to none but God himself, who
had promised to be the^r God and King, Deuteronomy. 7
Deuteronomy. 7. But these dangers our Savior preuenteth with this answer, Give unto
Caesar the things of Caesar, and unto God the things of Gods. That is, give
unto Caesar tribute, whose money it is, give unto God your selves, whose people
you are. But first Caesar, and then God, for they two have interchangeably
borrowed names: it pleases God to be called a King in heaven, Psalm. 20, 9
Psa. 20. and the King is called a God on earth, Psa. 82. therefore he which
denies his duty to the visible God, his prince and Soueraign, cannot perform
his duty to the God invisible. Certainly, a mind inclined to rebellion, was
never well possessed of religion.

Now to the words, Give: It is no marvel though Christ do call his yoke Suaue
iugum, a sweet yoke, Math. 11. because as Saint John expoundes him, his
commandments are not grievous, 1. John. 3. for the whole sum of
Christianity, is contained in one word, Romans 13.
diligite, Romans 13. and that is suaue verbum, a sweet word: and the whole
duty of a Christian is comprised in one word, Date, and that is facile verbum,
an easy word, for what is more easy then to give? Luke 6.
Give alms unto the poor largely, Luc. 6. and obedience unto your superior
reverently, Rom, 13.7.
Romans 13. both of them cheerfully: For God loves a cheerful giver, 2 Cor.
9.3. Romans 12.
2. Cor. 9.3 Grudging marres charity, Romans 12. and like the Coloquintida in
the potage, 2. Reg. 4.
2. Reg. 4. Vertit amorem in amororem, says Saint Bernard, it turns love
into bitterness, 1. Cor. 9.6.
and (...) in (...) says Saint paul. 2. Cor. 9.6. It makes a blessing of
devotion, to be a wrest of extortion. So muttering marres royalty, Psalm 58.
and as thorns under a pot, psalm. 58. turn a still fire into a crackling
flame, so it turns obedience into rebelling. Wherefore that speech of
Lactantius is very proper and effectual, Lactantius.
nothing so much commends the duty of a man as voluntarium, Aquin. 15.
that it be willingly performed: for voluntas est mensura astionu^, according
to the Schoolmen, the will does regulate and makes the action good: and God
rewards the will, not the gift: the facility of the giving, not the wealth
of the doner, 2. Cor. 8.
2. Cor. 8. And that is it which made Saint Peter to counsel us to do our duty,
1. Pet. 5.^.
not (...) of necessity and force, but (...), willingly and readily. And it is
the commendation of Servants, much more of Subjects, that they obey (...) from
their soul, Colo. 3. Ephesians. 6.5.
not to the eye only Colos. 3. and Ephesians. 6.7. (...) of good will, not by
compulsion: and so much of this word, Give: the sum whereof, Romans 13.4.
is that of Saint Paul, Romans 13.4. that we discharge our duty to Caesar, to
our Sovereign, of conscience, not of constraint: that it be given by us, not
forced from us unto Caesar.

The Queen of Saba pronounced Israel blessed because Solomon was their king a
man borne in their own country, Reg. 10
1. Reg. 10. and Solomon himself accounted that kingdom, whatsoever, happy,
whose king was, as Nazianz. Eccle. 10, 17
reads the place Eccl. 10.7. (...) the son of a man free borne: yea it is the
law of God himself that his people should choose a king, from among them, one
of their brethren. Deuteronomy. 17 Nehe. 9, 37
Deuteronomy. 17. Notwithstanding, if it please God in his indignation to place over a
land, a tyrant, qui ditescat ex afflictionibus populi, Nehem. 9.37. Which
should make himself mighty by his peoples oppressions: as, in this place,
Caesar a forrenner and a stranger: Judge, 9, 7
whether the Olive tree, or the Bramble bush. Iud. 9.7. The Olive, a king under
whose sweet nature and clemency they live merrily and richly: Esop.
or the Bramble, a sharp prince to be as a thorn in their sides to vex them
cruelly: or, as it is in the Apolog, a stock that lies still, and lets them
do whatsoever seem good in their own eyes: or a Storcke that by exactions
will pick out their eyes, yet is he Gods ordinance and minister, Romans 13
Romans 13. And therefore, by Saint Peter his rule, to be obeyed for the Lords
sake. 1. Pet. 2, 13
1. Peter, 2. for though he be the Lords enemy, yet is he the Lords anointed,
1. Sam. 24
1. Sam. 24. So David called King Saul after God had rejected him.

They therefore who with Shebah, 2. Sam. 20.1. 2. Sam. 20, 1
will make a secession from their prince, proclaiming as he did, We have no
part in David, nor inheritance in the son of Isay: or as Jeroboam, who with
ten tribes fell from Rhehoboam, because he had turned his fathers scourges
into Scorpions, 1. Reg. 12
1. Reg. 12. they who think that they may either Occidere, or Excidere, kill
their liege, or fall from him, Aut deponere a throno, aut exponere periculo,
depose and thrust them out of their seat, or expose them to danger or fear,
are guilty not only of rebellion but of irreligion. And here I might
encounter that traiterous libeller Parsons, who, as it is thought, under the
name of one Dolman, makes the crown of England a tennis ba^l, and tosseth it
from Papist to Puritan, and from Puritan to Protestant, but the fault or
vantage, viz. the whole sway of disposing it, when it is void (as I hope to
God none here shall see it void) he ascribes to the late Earls power of
placing it where it should please him, and to him therefore he dedicates his
book, in my conscience I am persuaded, a principal, if not the original
poison of the late Earls heart: wherein also he spends much labor, and
fills many leaves in proouing, by stories of scripture, tha^ it is lawful
for the subject to rise against his sovereign, yea to depose him, yea to
murder him, if he be misled by other, or misgouerne himself, but time cuts
me off. My exhortation to you is, beloved, that you will believe Jesus rather
then a Jesuit, who wills his disciples and all christians to possess their
souls in patience, Luke 10.
Lu. 10 albeit they be persecuted even to death by their Princes: and S. Paul,
who adiudgeth him to damnation which resists the ordinance of God, To. 13.
Romans 13,
If you desire some stories of scripture, see Saul an Apostala, rejected by
God, not dejected by Samuel, Ieroboa^ plagued, not dispossessed: Ahab reproved
by Elias, not deprived: Nabuchodonosor punished from heaven, not deposed by his
subjects. The law of God is straight in this case, it bridels the mouth that it
speak not evil of the King, Exodus 21.
Exo. 21. it binds the heart not to imagine evil against him, Eccle. 10.
Eccle. 10. and the civil law punishes with death, even the very thought of
bringing the prince into any danger or fear: in which point Bodi^ is
plentiful and peremtorie. The sum of this part is that of the prophet Dan.
2.21. Dan 2, 21
that the inthronising and deposing of Princes, is Gods only prerogative
royal: and the conclusion shall be an argument, that if obedience be due unto
Caesar, a tyrant and a forrenner, much more are we to perform it to our prince,
a most gracious loving Queen, and borne among us: of whose clement and mild
government we may say with* the wise man, Prou. 30.
Pro. 30. Many daughters have done excellently, but thou surpassest them all.
Of her severity in justice, that of the Poet, Illa dolet, qu^ties ^ogitur
esseferox.

The third part follows, The things of Caesar. God has created ^ appointed
man a governor over all his works, Psalm. 8.
Psa. 8. but he has exalted kings to rule and govern men, and to that purpose
has advanced them above others, as the head above the members, as the Cedar
among the trees, as the sun among the stars, and as God himself among the
Angels. Three special ensigns of honor he has given them, a crown of gold,
Psa. 21. Psalm. 21. Psalm. 45
for their sublimity, a scepter of righteousness, Psa. 45. for government, Romans
13
a sword of vengeance, Romans 13. All which they bear not in Pompam for a show
only, and not for use, but the crown exacteth of us reverence: the scepter,
obedience: and the sword, fear: so that their majesty is to be honored, their
authority obeyed, their power feared: and sithence these require large
maintenance, 1. Reg. 4. 1. Reg. 4
their expense must be supplied, and because they lie open to manifold
dangers, with our prayers they must be assisted, 1. Tim. 2. so then honor, 1.
Tim. 2.
obedience, fear, subsidies, prayers, are among many other, the things due
from subjects to their Caesar.

To speak of all these fully is impossible, in respect of the short time
allo^ted me for meditation, scarce three days, and for delivering unto you,
two hours, whereof one is spent, I will shut them with an use fitting our
present purpose. If these, or at least the three first, had been given to our
most gracious sovereign, by some of late, neither had her majesty ^eene so
disquieted, nor the realm thus scandalized, nor so many in their states and
lives overthrown, of which I am now to speak.

BUt first I must crave pardon to premise a short preface, both in respect of
my self which am to speak, ^ of the late Earl also, of whom I (...) to
speak. For my self, it is necessary, because, if you bring prejudice to the
speaker, be the relation never so true, it will not be believed. A prejudice you
must needs have against me, if it be true, which some ill affected, and foul
mouthed have given out, that because we, being commanded by authority, on the
Saboth after the insurrection, in our several cures, did describe the nature
and ugliness of the rebellion, are become time seruers and men pleasers,
leaving the great man that is dead, and now cleaving to others, and closing
with them for preferments. A sore imputation as may be laid upon the ministers
of Christ, and followed with an heavier judgment from God then they are aware
of who thus speak. For a curse is laid upon us in the prophecy of Jeremy,
if in the Lords work, in such holy places and exercises as these, we avoid
not all negligence, and Saint Gregory adds fraudulenter: fraudulently he
deals, who either gives titles, as Job speaks, or becomes a servant to
men, which S. Paul abhors* Now, he is said to give titles, that either
praises him that is not to be praised, or imputes faults to men which they
have not committed, or does rengrege or amoinder, that is, make greater or
less the faults committed: and if I do thus, says Job, My maker will confound
me, Job, 32. a dreadful judgment: and so for the other, Job. 32.
If I yet labor to please men, I am not the servant of Christ, Gala. 1.
says S. Paul, Gala. 1. a fearful separation. But of all other why should
this be imputed to me, who about four years sithence, in this place, upon
the like suddayne warning, celebrated to ye glory of both the generals, the
right honorable the Lord Admiral, and the late Earl, the victory at Caliz:
at which time, and long since, he soared in his highest pitch of favor with
her Majesty, and yet from that day to this, though it were given out that he
would (...) me, I am not either a penny the richer or a step the higher for
him: and intruth I never moved him, neither did it move my affection from him,
which I continued as entire unto him as any follower of his, till his open fall.

My reverence to their Lordshipe I acknowledge, and will perform what is due,
and I am able: but flattery of great personages, and popularitie with the
multitude I ever abhorred as a Parasiticall Simony, and leave it to them who
have no desert to raise them, but aurum cum aura a smooth tongue, and a bribing
purse. Notwithstanding. I am a subject, and so, nature and scripture bind me
to obedience, being therefore by name, appointed by the honorable Lords to be
present at the late Earl his execution, I thought my self bound in
conscience, both to God, her Majesty, and the State, within as short time as
might be, to declare unto you, what my self in his case know, and what is fit
for you to hear: not only that you may be satisfied by this my discourse, but
also incited to give God the glory, for your escaping this dangerous intended
course: wherein I will deliver nothing upon mere information and report, which
is sometimes malicious, often times parciall, at all times uncertain, but what
these ears of mine have heard from his own mouth, in that two hours
conference with him before his death, and these eyes of mine seen under his
own hand, and subscribed wi^h his name, which since his death I humbly desired
to see, which was both honorably and easily granted unto me, that I might
speak nothing whereof I have not by those two means certain knowledge: for
by Gods help neither man nor Angel, much less any hope of title, which is
but a pu^^, shall make me to utter any untruth, willingly, in such places as
this, which may either put my mind into the hell of my conscience in this
life, or cast my soul into the hell of Diuelles in the life to come: neither
was I moved to it, but only to declare what I have either ex occulo, or
oraculo, as ^ern. speaks, from his own writing, and confession to us.

Now for the late Earl: dead he is, and his soul, no doubt, with the saints
in heaven: you will say then that dead men bite not, according to the proverb,
nor by reason, or religion should be bitten: that is, their falls and faults
should not be reulcerated nor revived after death: for Homer vpbraides the
Grecians with that immanitie, for scorning at Hectors body dead, and wounding
it: upon whose comparison, blaming their barbaris^e, the proverb is rife, that
Mo^tuo Leoni (...) insu^tant Lepores, if the Lion be dead, every dastardly Hare
will be treading upon him whose lock they feared while he lived. Yea Solomon
notes it as a point of Atheism to prefer a living Dog before a dead Lion:
wherefore David took another course, and though Abner had been his enemy
living, yet being slain, he both lamented his death, and celebrated his
praise. Know ye not (says he) that a Prince, and a great man is fallen this
day in Israel? 2. Sam. 3.38.
2. Sam 3.38. but, beloved, there is a difference in faults of men, as in
diseases some hurtful only to the parties themselves, some loathsome and
infectious to others: the first are to be buried with their bodies, and
forgotten, but the other will annoy, and therefore must be remembered after
death. In scripture some kings, who were vicious, had their faults touched
even after their burial, but no more: yet some are never named in scripture,
but their sin is branded upon their name, as often you may see of Jeroboam,
never mentioned, but presently is added, the son of Nebat, which made Israel
to sin: and would to God the same earth which covers the late Earl his
body, could also cover the sin and offense he died for, which himself
confessed to be a leprousie which had infected far and near. Now you know,
that though a Lepor avoid the house or die, yet he leaves behind him both the
house, and air daungerously contagious: and I pray God though he be dead,
that the remainder and contagion of his offense, cause us not, too often, to
call his fault to memory. But in my conscience I am persuaded, that there is
none so inhumane or barbarous, that records it as triumphing and insulting at
it: but with a double commiseration both of his fall, and of his soul, as then
it was. First (give him his due) who grieves not that a man so noble by birth,
so honorable in office, so gracious with his prince, so witty by nature, so
learned by conference and study, so religious in profession, so valiant in
war, so beloved of the commons, so followed and honored by men of all
sorts, should not use those great favors of God and his sovereign to gods
glory and his countries good? for could he in any moderation have carried
himself, and have been contented with his great state, what good might he
have done to this church and realm, to men of state, of religion, of learning,
of war? but as fire, if it be well and rightly used, burns in the house to
the good and profit of the family: but if mislayed or abused, burns the
house to the undoing of the inhabitants: so had he been contented to have
been (...) a certain great man, great among the rest; and not affected with
Magus, Act. 8. to be (...) the only great man, Act. 8.
and none to be great but he; in honor he might still have lived and preferred
others, whereas he is not now fallen alone, but, which is a woeful case, has
overthrown many of all sorts with himself: so true is that of divine Plato,
(...) that great natures scil. men of great minds and parts, prove either
excellently good, or dangerously wicked: it is spoken by Plato, but applied by
Plutarch unto Coriolanus, a gallant young, but a discontented Roman, who might
make a fit parallel for the late Earl, if you read his life: and this was
caused, as he often confessed to us, by the seducement of vanity. I told him it
was pride, but his word was vanity and lewd counsel.

Secondly who does not commiserate his soul, as then it was? though now I am
persuaded his repentance was so hearty, that it is in heaven: that, being guilty
to himself in his conscience (which now appears by his voluntary confession
to us, and written) of so great an off^nce and a bloody sin, they are his
own words (for if there be any hard word in all my discourse concerning his
act and plot, it is his own) should stand so confidently upon his
insti^^cation and clearing himself at the Barre^: Whose crime loathsome to
himself in the memory thereof, and Most d^ngerous to the Realm, I will not
A^grauate with any precedent circumstances, which all the world knows, and
himself with sighs acknowledged to us, either her Majesty's infinite favors,
his high aduancements by her, her large bounty to him, both in giving him huge
sums of money, and forgiving him all his fathers debts, and his own too,
whatsoever. Nor will I mention his often standing out with her if he were
thwarted, his disobedience and manifold contempts, besides the exhausting of
her Majesty's treasury in Ireland. Nor her clemency in his punishment for
them, which she said, most graciously, should be ad corr^ctionem not ad
ruina^^, for his chastisment, not for his overthrow: not called to any open
bar for answer, not fined by purse, not diuested of any office* only
sequestered from some of them, one place of honor reserved unto him, not
committed to any common p^^son, but first to the custody of the Lo^^ Keeper,
after that to his own house with a keeper; and after that at his liberty,
they were the words of her Majesty: I will now leave him, says she, under
no other guarde, but of his own discretion

But one thing I cannot omit, which much moved me against him, (though I
honored him as much as any follower of his, who carries with him a good
subjects heart) which perhaps you know not, namely his strange Apology of
himself unto Master Deane of Norwiche, sent unto him by the Lords for his
souls good, the nex^ day after his arraignment, who vr^ing him to acknowledge
his offenses, the late Earl utterly denied, That in any thing he had done he
was guilty of offending Almighty God. But because I promised to give you
nothing of report, I call to mind the very speech he uttered unto my Lords
Grace of Canterbury in Lambeth house, the night of his apprehension. Oh, my
Lord, says the Archbishop, I am sorry to see this day, that you have so far
forgot your self: the Earl replied smilingly, that the sincerity of my
conscience, and the goodness of my cause does comfort me: this speech argues
he thought himself not guilty of offending God. As if a good intention, we
will suppose it so, does make the action good. The Canon Lawyers say, that God
loves Aduerbes better then Adjectives, he cares not how good quam bonum, but
quam been, how well, and by what good means it is done which we intend. The
justifying of an ill execution upon a good purpose and meaning, is the utter
subversion of all religion and policy: an opinion forged at the fire of hell,
and hammered at the Anuile of the Popes faculties. The same Deane asking him
why he refused to come to the Lords, being sent for by the appointment of her
Majesty, he answered that, by Scripture, and thus reasons, David refuses to
come to Saul when he sent for him: Ergo I might lawfully refuse to come to
Queen Elizabeth.

Here a divine cannot be patient, to see Gods word alleged in despite of
Gods ordinance, thus the devil dealt with Christ Math. 4. Math. 4.
in quoting a place of Scripture to justify the breaking of his neck. And
Clement the Friar who killed Henry the third the French king, reasoned thus
with himself to his bloody murder out of Gods book, Judge. 3.
Ehud killed king Eglon, therefore I may kill Henry. Eglon was a king, so is
Henry. What then? Eglon signifies a Calue and Henry is a Caluenist, Ergo I may
kill him by authority of Scripture. It is recorded by Mercurius Gallobelgicus
in his first book. Merc. Gallobel.
Let Papists lay these grounds, and make these proofs, I am sorry that any, who
carries the name of a Protestant, should argue thus. It is the speech of
S^lomon, he that wrings his nose, fetches out blond, which Gregory fitly
applies, that he which wresteth the scripture from the true sense, brings
forth either an herisie or a frenzy, it is that which the learned call
Glossa (...), when an interpretation like a Uiper, eats out the bowels of the
text. For, God be thanked, there is no semblance of this example makes for his
refusal Because (...) was rejected by God, but Queen Elizabeth is the chosen
and the beloved of God, which from heaven by his providence over her, as in
shielding her from many, so from this Presumptuous attempt, he has
demonstratiuely showed. David by a Prophet, at Gods appointment, was anointed
king, so was not he. But I urge this no further, because it is not within his
confession verbal or written, to which I promised to stand, yet to show you
how far he was gone that way, the word he used to us of Leprosy, makes that
good which he spoke in a passion to the Deane, If you knew how many motions
have been made to me to do my best to remove such evils as the common wealth
is burdened with, you would greatly wounder. It seems the contagion is spread.
To which the Deane replying, that extraordinary attempts must have
extraordinary warrants, and willed him to show his authority, his answer was,
that He was Earl Marshall of England and needed no other warrant. Yet that was
not so, because he was sequestered from it long before. But his conclusion
peremptory what should I (says he) reason with you upon this point, seeing we
hold not one principle, which was, that he might remove evils from the land,
for that was it which from the beginning to the end he held, as by complaint to
us of some things to be reformed, he insinuated. Indeed the wise man says
Prou. 25. Remove the wicked from the King, Prou. 25.
and his throne shall be established in judgment: but who must remove them,
and by what means? he there shows by similitude, as the dross must be taken
from the ^^luer: The Gold-finer must do it, by the fire; so just authority and
lawful means; the first over Kings is Gods alone, as before I proved,
otherwise, as S Augustine speaks of impatient worldlings, Nisi homini Deus
placiterit Deus non erit, unless God please men, he shall be no God: so in
this case of discontented subjects, except the prince please them, she shall be
no prince, and all shall be accounted wicked who satisfy not their humors.
Belooued, see here what it is, when it pleases God to leave a man to himself;
or as the Earl said of himself, to be carried away and puffed up with vanity
and wordly love, in his first speech upon the scaffolde.

This stiffness of his, both at the bar, and with the Deane, my associate and
my self hearing, not understanding of his repentance, we agreeed between us,
fearing he would so have dealt with us, to have beat him down, and to have
wounded his ha^t with the dreadful judgments of God: yet afterward to have
raised him again with the comfortable promises of the Gospel: but when we
came unto him, we found him more open to reveal, then beca^e us to inquire,
and more resolute himself, then we, upon the sudden, could have made him,
and we more welcome a great deal then we expected: for he most heartily desired
God so to bless us as our coming did comfort him: and so fell into expressing
the memory of this his purposed mischief, with such detestation and remorse,
that I, fearing as the Apostle speaks of that Corinthian, 2. Cor. 2.7.
2 Cor. 2 7. that he should be overcome with overmuch heaviness laid before
him the comfortable speech of S Paul* that Christ Jesus came into the world to
save sinners, though a man were peccatorum maximus, 2. Tim. 1.17
1. Tim. 1.17. but says Doctor Montford unto him, who had been at his
araignement: I wounder your Lordshippe thus guilty to your self, could be so
confident at the bar, it offended many of your very good friends: yea, but
now says the late Earl, I am become another man, the cause thereof he
ascribed to the work of Gods spirit within him; and the means to his
chaplain Master Ashton who was there present with us, for he, as he said to
the honorable the Lord Keeper and the rest, has plowed up my heart, as he said
to us, has brought me down and humbled me. And then he told us he had
satisfied the Council with his voluntary confession under his own hand
subscribed with his name, wherein though I have, said he, detected many (already
apprehended) yet I hold it my duty to God and the Realm to clear my
conscience. For some three or four days before his execution he made means
by master Warbarton one of her Maisties gentlemen Pencioners, to have some
conference with three or four of the Lords of her Majesty's Counsel, wishing
also if it pleased her Majesty, that master Secretary Cecill might be sent
with them: whereupon the Lord Keeper, Lord Treasurer, and the Lord Admiral,
taking Master Secretary with them, came unto him, to whom he clearly laid
open the whole project and purpose, penitently confessed it, expressed his
hearty sorrow for his confidence at his araignment, asked forgiveness of the Lord
Keeper, and, by him, of the rest whom he caused in his house to be imprisoned:
particulerly and vehemently in christian charity desired Master Secretary to
forgive him that great injury which at the Bar in his passion, by unjust
calumniatio^, he had cast upon him, and of them also he requested forgiveness
whom he had challenged for his enemies, and had charged with such great, but
false imputation. (All which, in gross and general, he confessed to us,
forgiving and asking forgiveness) and so after an entire reconciliation with
tears on both sides shed, he moved two requests, the one very earnest, the
other most necessary the first was, it would please them to move her majesty
that he might die pr^uately within the Tower; the reason thereof he expressed
unto us in the morning of his execution, of which anon. The second was, that
he might have liberty to set down in writing what in word he had confessed
to them, and other things which either at the bar he had denied, or should
then occure to his memory. The confession it self filles four sheets of
paper, every word in his own hand, and his name at the end, which my self
have seen, and will show unto you so much as is fit: the preface thereof I
have transcribed for your sakes, and this it is, Since that God of his mercy
has opened mine eyes, and made me see my sin, my offense, and so touched my
heart as I hate it both in my self and others, I will as God shall enable my
memory, set down how far we all are guilty, and where, and by what degrees
our sin, this offense grew. The chief, and the brief is this, his purpose
of surprising the court with a power; the places allotted to four persons, S.
Christopher Blunt the gate with a company; S. John Dauis the hal a third to
master the guard by seazing the halberts; S. Charles Dauers to possess the
privy chamber with another company; all this confess by himself, and the
rest under their hands.

Here now imagine with your selves what aff^ighting even the rumor thereof had
been to a prince of that sex, a Lady Queen in a time of peace, and the peace
so long by her means continued: in her own court and chamber; the proverb
is, Leaves loquntur, ingentes stupent, that slight feared make women shrike,
but if they be great and sudden, they cast them into aswoune; and I doubt if
in that (...) she should have swounded, they would have taken it for death, and
have ^^stowed little pains to fetch her again. But resistance being made, as
it is not possible but there would, there must needs be blood shed: now think
you what an horror would this have been to her gracious nature, to have seen
blood running in her chambers?

Then look to the commanders, two of the principal, stiff and open Papists,
and the fourth, by report, affected that way, what danger to her person, to
religion, to the Realm they may guess, who have read the libelles of B^zi^^,
Reyno^d^, Gifforde and others of that church, writing slanderously of her
Majesty's person, blasphemously of our religion; and basely of our Realm and
policy. You may remember the state of Israel, when they were forced to sharpen
their axes and tools, and have no weapons but from the Philistines. 1. Sam. 13.
1. Sam. 13. And such a slavery and misery, assure your selves, had ours been
for Prince and religion, if we had stood to the courtesy of armed Papists
and their reformation. Perhaps you will say, that this was but like the grouth
of a Tadstoole, Oritu^, moritur, a nights conceit, but vanished in the morning.
Yea, but himself voluntarily confessed to us, that it was plotting and
devising not long after he lay in the Lord Keepers house: even then when he
protested that he had made a divorce between the world and himself; But he
meant no hurt to the Queens person, say you. Surely that he^ protested both in
his confession to the Lords and to us, and writes it, that when he sent the
Articles to Drury house to be considered of, by his accomplices, he put in that
caveat still, that as little blood might be shed as could, and that the Queens
own person might receive no harm And we will believe it. Marry the question
is first, w^ether it had been in his own power at the time of their rage and
in whot blood to have kept her safe? certainly, as we objected to him, (...)
which could not, as him self, to (...) confessed, restrain them from
murdering the Queens subjects when he stood upon his defense in his house,
they being but a few, must not think he could have stayed them in the Court,
the object of their revenge. For being many, and many of them needy, what
Rapine would have satisfied them? being youthful, and lustful, what Rapes
would have stanched them? being discontented and reuengefull, what blood would
have glutted them? and the chief of them Pop^sh and armed, would they not have
said, which comes even now to my mind, as that bloody Story once said; What
do we pruning the boughs and branches, let us strike at the root.

For mine own part, I profess, I would trust never a Papist in the world, if
he might have her at that vantage. God be thanked that this is but an
imagination, for had it come ab ima^ine ad rem, from a purpose to an effect;
God knows, says he himself to us, what danger and harm it had wrought to
the Realm*

But in this point of the Queens safety, what think you of summoning a
Parliament, which four or five under their hands, and himself (...) has
confessed. Who should have called it, she or they? It is a controversy
between us and the Papists, whether the Emperor or the Pope, have the
absolute authority of calling a Council, but it was never made question, that
I can read, in England who ha^^ authority to call a Parliament, either the
Prince or the Peers. Among the Spaniards and French they may says Bodi^, but
apud A^glos, in the Realm of England, ne^ admi^ti possunt ^mu^ntus, nec
dimitti absque (...) ^dict^, without the Princes warrant it cannot either be
sumoned or dis^^^ued. Why, she should have done it* how? voluntarily or by
force? the first we may not imagine that she would so soon yield: if the
second, where is the safety of her person? unless you count that safety for a
Prince to be a prisoner to her subjects. God forbid we should have felt the
Issue of this, nay God be thanked says he to us, that it was prevented. And
withal gave God like thanks that he had made him this example to be justly
spewed out of the land. Which word Spewed he enforced with a violence, arguing
himself thereby to be, unto this Realm, as a furfet unto the stomach, both a
burden and a danger. He saw himself a burden in this charge of soldiers,
being a burden to the City and country, which but for him had now been
spared: he felt himself a burden, as it seemed, to us by longing and
desiring, which often he did, that the time of execution were come. A danger he
confessed himself to be in these words of his, which I pray you observe, he
knew that the Queen could not be in safety so long as he lived upon the
earth. I will stretch nothing to far, but yet mark this, if her safety were
so uncertain, he being a prisoner in the Tower, what could her safety have
been when he was possessed of her court with an armed power?

But why do I either amplify by circumstance, or enforce by argument the
haynousnesse and danger of this plot? if I had the tongue of men and Angels, I
could not better, nor would in more bitter terms express it, th^^ himself
has done in four epithet^s or adiunctes in his prayer to God, or in his
speech to the Lords, or in both upon the Scaffolde: desiring God to forgive
him his great sin, his bloody sin, his crying sin, his infectious sin:
why these words, for none of them is, Basil
as Basil speaks, (...) (...) idle word. First, great in comparison of his
other sins, which he on the Scaffold laid out in odious terms against
himself: his delicta juuentutis, not that they were little sins, (...) unto
us, in his Chamber, he confessed that sometimes in the Field encountering the
enemy, being in any danger, the weight of his ^^nnes lying heavy upon his
conscience, being not reconciled to God, quelled his spirits, and made him the
most timorous and fearful man that might be. But this sin exceeded them
a^l, even that which we objected to him in his chamber, and he acknowledged,
which the Schoolmen call Vactans conscientiam, so wasting and spoiling his
conscience, as that not one good thought was left in his heart. That sin which
Moses calls the sin with an high hand Nomb. 33. himself called it, Nom. 33.
a Presumptuous sin. Secondly, great in it self, because as the Nabis in
Egypt is a beast shaped of many beasts and Hannibals army in Liui^, was
colluui^s omnium gentium, the miscellan of all nations: so this his offense and
treason, the compound of all the famous rebellions either in Gods book, or our
own land: (which himself in other words scatteringly expressed:) consisting
of Abners discontment, of Corahs envy, of Absalons popularity, of Shebas
defection, of Abimelechs faction, and banding his family and allies, of Hamans
pride and ambition: in pretense final, all one with that of Henry Duke of
Lancaster, against Richard the second, remoouing certain which missed the
King. In pretense original, that of Kettes and Tylers (...) the King, as they
in your city cried in that insurrection for the Queen* for the Queen.

The second word was his bloody sin. It should have been no dry rebellion,
for how could it be? in that he who could hardly repress the rage of his own
people from murdering ^^^ honorable counselors in his own house, they
being the men not aym^^ at in show of their reformation should not be able to
stay their armed fury at the place designed for the execution of their intent.
But here you of the (...) will say, it should not have been bloody to us, he
loved us well: be it so: yet I will tell you his opinion uttered of you the
very might of his apprehension, and his being in Lambeth house, in the hearing
of the Lord Archbishop, of the Lord Admiral, of the Lord of Effingham, and
diverse other, and my self among the rest, That you were a very base people:
that he trampled up and down your city without any resistance: that he would
undertake with four hundredth men of his choice to have ouerrunne your city:
that he passed many of your lanes and chains baraccadoed (it was his word)
without one blow offered at him, in his return from Ludgate to Queenchith.
Again, what his conceit was of your love to him, his own speeches shall
testify, whereby he argued that you were both a danger to his body and his
soul: in the first, I telling him that his relieng upon the peoples
plausibilitie spurred him on, but now they had deceived him. True (says he) a
man's friends will fail him; and adds to that a very divine speech, All
popularitie and trust in men is vain, whereof my self have had late
experience. Thus he accounted your love at the best to be but vanity, or as he
said i^ the prophet, Esa. 37.66
an Aegiptian reed, which either breaks and fails him that leans on it
or pearceth his hand to his hurt: in-sinuating hereby, that, ha^ he not trusted
upon you, he would not have ventured so far: and thus you seemed by his
words to have indaungered his body, as being a remote motive to that his
action. Then the request which he so earnestly made unto the Lords for his
private death within the tower, was principally because of you: for in the
morning he conf^^^sed himself much bound to God, and her majesty that he
should die thus privately, because he feared, least if it had been public,
your acclamations should have houen him up (for this (...) much doubted in
himself even in (...) small company which was there, (...) therefore desired
God still to grant him an humbled spirit: and requested us if we either see
his countenance, eye, or tongue wander, that we would interrupt him) and so
have withdrawn his mind from God, and have b^ene a temptation unto him: and
thus he took your love to him, but as a danger to his soul: but think you it
had not been unto you a bloody day, if it had been effected what they
purposed: now hear and tremble; being asked what he meant by taking the tower
of London, sithence his principal project was for the court^ he answered, that
he meant it should have been a bridle, to your city, mark^ that word, a
bridle has raines and a bit: so that if you had made an head for him against
the Queen (which I hope you wou^d not) he would have given you the raines, you
should have gone on without any restraint to have been rebels to your prince
and country: but if you had united your force against him as good subjects (and
as I am fully persuaded you would) they are his own words, if happily the
City should have misliked his other attempt, then you should taste of the Bit.
They call it the playeng of the Bit in the horse mouth: but I believe the
playing of the Ordinance from the Tower would have fetched both you^ houses
down, and your blood out.

The third word, his crying sinne^ which word is borrowed from Genesis 19. Where
the sins of Sodom are said to cry up to heaven, namely, to fetch down
vengeance from God, so intolerable they were, and one of those sins was
pride; which, I well bold to tell him, was the ground of all this action, and he
took it very well. This also argued, that there was blood in this sin, for
the first crying sin we read of was Caines murder Genesis 4. The last word was
his infectious sin, the meaning thereof he explaned to us in our conference
with him (which I named before) that it was a leaprosie which had infected far
and near. Which unfolds both the greatness of the danger, and ^^gueth that
the contagio^ of the sin is not gone with him. Doctor Montfo^d asked him if
there were not an oath taken by them for secrecy and resolusion. He utterly
denied that: how durst you trust each other being so many said we? His answer
was that they were firmly persuaded each of others faithfulness mutually, as
any one of them could be of his own heart to himself. Now then, the time
being more then spent, confer these points together, all out of his own
words, and begin with the last first, they are thirteen in all.

1. THis conspiracy thus banded. 2. The offense contagiously, and generally
dispersed. 3. His sin crieng to God for present vengeance. 4. A sin bloody
in execution, if effected. 5. Great in it self, the compound and mixture of
all rebellions. 6. His life a danger to the Queen. Mark that. 7. Himself a
surfeit to the realm, to bespewed out justly. 8. Articles propounded, disputed,
concluded so long together against the state. 9. The court surprised with an
(...) power, and the Queen mu^ed up with her own vassalles. 10. A Parliament
to be summoned. 11. The chief places of the court at the command of Papists,
armed and attended, neither with the welthiest, nor the contentedst men. 12.
The command of the tower, as a bridle to you of this city. 13. His hard
opinion and censure of your baseness and unfaithfulness to the Queen.
And then judge you with what safety to the Queens person; with what peace to
the land; with what hope of the Gospels continuance; could this man have lived,
if he had been remitted: and think with your selves whether you may not
iustlye conclude that it was the most dangerous plotte that ever was hatched
within this land. What now remains? but to conclude with my text, Give unto
Caesar the things of Caesar, our most gracious Sovereign, I mean; honor her,
obey her, fear her, but above all pray for her, that she being the light of
this land may shine among us as long (...) the two great lights of heaven, the
Sun and the Moon endures. This God grant for his mercy sake, Amen.

Certain observations.
IN one only thing Doctor Montford differs from me viz. where I report that
the Earl said this plot was framing when be lay at my Lord Keepers. That word
when, Doctor Montford thinks, should be not long after: I have great
inducements of circumstance and substance to hold my oppinion still: but, at
his earnest entreaty, I have altered it, and for thy sake, reader, no^ed this,
least he should accuse me of obstinacy, ay thu of difference in my report: yet
it no the w^^akneth the force of that which I owrre urge, namely, that it was
no late, nor sudden devise, but by his own words, a year old, at least: In
the rest we i^^pe together.

2. The said Doctor Montford presently after my Sermon, put me in mind of one
thing, somewhat material, arguing what conceit the Earl had of his own
purpose and action. For we speaking of the constancy of Martyrs at their
death; and of that place of Paul* Romans 8.18. The Earl, with passion, said that
they dyed in a good cause, but he should dye in ^ BAD CAUSE, To comfort him I
^^plyed that albeit he dyed not for Christ, y^^ I doubted not but he should dye
in Christ.

3 Another thing I call to mind, noted by me, but forgotten in my Sermon, how
the Earl speaking to us of some his accomplices apprehended in this action, but
NOW, says he, I am in my soul persuaded they will prove good subjects. Which
word Now, referred to his death, confirms those words of his cited in my
Sermon that his life was no safety to the Queen. Himself being taken (...)
the Cynosura of their affections.

The true copy, in substance, of the late Earl of Essex, his behavior,
speech, and prayer, at the time of his execution.
ON Wednesday the xxv. of February An. Domini. 1600. called Ashwednesday,
about eight of the clock in the morning, was the sentence of death executed
upon Robert Deuoreux Earl of Essex, within the Tower of London, where a
scaffold being set up in the court, and a form near unto the place, whereon
sat the Earls of Cumberland, and Hertforde, the Lord vicecount Bindon, the
Lord Thomas Haward, the Lord Darcie, and the Lord Compton: The Lieutennant with
some sixteen partisans of the guarde was sent for the prisoner, who came in a
gown of wrought velvet, a black satte^ suit, a felt hat black, a little ruff
about his neck, accompanied from his chamber with three Divines, Doctor
Montford, Doctor Barlow and Master Ashton his Chapleine^ them he had
requested, not to part from him, but observe him, and recall him, if either his
eye, countenance, or speech, should bewray any thing which might not beseem
him for that time: all the way he desired the spectators to pray for him, and
so ariuing on the skaffold, he vayled his hat, and with obeisance unto the
Lords, to this effect he spoke. viz.

MY Lords, and you my Christian Brethren, who are to be witnesses of this my
just punishment, I confess to the glory of God, that I am a most wretched
sinner, and that my sins are more in number then the hayres of my head, I
confess that I have bestowed my youth in wantonness, lust, and uncleanness,
that I have been puffed up with pride, vanity, and love of this worlds
pleasures. And that notwithstanding diverse good motions inspired into me from
the spirit of God, The good which I would, I have not done, and the evil which
I would not, that have I done. For all which I humbly beseech my Savior
Christ to be a Mediator to the eternal Majesty for my pardon: especially for
this my last sin, this great, this bloody, this crying, this infectious
sin, whereby so many have for love to me been drawn to offend God, to
offend their Sovereign to offend the world; I beseech God to forgive it us,
and to forgive it me most wretched of all; I beseech her Majesty and the state
and ministers thereof to forgive it us; and I beseech God to send her majesty a
prosperous reign and a long, if it be his will: O Lord grant her a wise and
understanding heart: O Lord bless her and the Nobles, and the ministers of
the church and state. And I beseech you and the world to hold a charitable
opinion of me for my intention toward her Majesty, whose death, I protest I
never meant, nor violence to her person. I never was I thank God Athist, not
believing the word and scriptures, neither Papist trusting in my own merits.
But hope for salvation from God only, by the mercy and merits of my Savior
Christ Jesus. This faith was I brought up in, and herein I am now ready to die.
Beseeching you all, to join your souls with me in prayer, that my soul may
belifted up by faith above all earthly things in my prayer, for now I will
give my self to my private prayer: yet, for that I beseech you to join with
me, I will speak that you may hear me. And here, as he turned himself aside
to put of his gown, Doctor Montford requested him to remember to pray to God
to forgive all his enemies if he had any. To whom he answered, I thank you for
it: and so turning himself again to the Lords and the rest, he said, I desire
all the world to forgive me, even as I do freely and from my heart forgive all
the world. Then putting off his Gown and Ruff, and presenting himself before
the block, kneeling down, he was by Doctor Barlowe encouraged against the
fear of death. To whom he answered, That having been diverse times in places
of danger; where death was neither so present, nor yet so certain, he had
felt the weakness of the flesh, and therefore now in this great conflict
desired God to assist and strengthen him: and so with eyes fixed on Heaven,
after some passionate pauses and breathings, he began his prayer in effect
following.

O GOD, Creator of all things, and judge of all men, thou have let me know by
warrant out of thy word, that Satan is then most busy when our end is
nearest, and that Satan being resisted will flee. I humbly beseech thee to
assist me in this my last combat: and seeing thou acceptest even of our desires
as of our acts: accept I beseech thee, of my desires to resist him, as of true
resistance, and perfect, by thy grace, what thou see in my flesh to be frail
and weak, give me patience to bear as becomes me, this just punishment
inflicted upon me by so Honorable a trial: Grant me the inward comfort of thy
spirit: let thy spirit scale unto my soul an assurance of thy mercies, lift my
soul above all earthly cogitations: and when my life and body shall part, send
thy blessed Angels which may receive my soul, and conuaye it to thy joys in
heaven.

Then concluding his prayer for all Estates of the Realm, he shut up all with
the Lords prayer, reiterating this petition: Lord Jesus forgive us our
trespasses, Lord Jesus receive my soul: Then desiring to be informed what was
fit for him to do for disposing himself fitly for the block, the Executioner
on his knees presented himself, asking him forgiveness: to whom the Earl
said, I forgive thee* thou art welcome unto me, thou art the minister of
justice. At which time Doctor Montford requested him to rehearse the Creed,
which he did, repeating every article after the Divines. So opening and putting
off his doublet, he was in a Scarlet Wastecoate, and then ready to lie down,
he said he would only stretch forth his Arms, and spread them abroad, for
then he was ready: So bowing toward the block, the Doctors requested him to
say the two first verses of the 51. Psalm, which he did: and then inclining
his body he said. In humility and obedience to thy commandment, in
obedience to thy ordinance, to thy good pleasure, O God, I prostrate my self
to my deserved punishment, Lord be merciful to thy prostrate servant: so lyeng
flat along on the bordes, and laying down his head, and fitting it upon the
block, stretched out his arms, with these last words, which he was requested
to say. Lord into thy hands I commend my spirit. His head was severed from his
body by the axe at three strokes. But the first deadly, and absolutely
depriving all sense and motion.

Thomas Montford.
William Barlow.


