THE GOLDEN CABINET OF true Treasure: Containing the sum of Moral
Philosophy.

Translated out of French and enlarged, by W. IEVVEL, Mr of Arts, of Exeter
College in Oxford.

AT LONDON, Printed by H.L. for John Crosley. 1612.

To the Right Honorable and most virtuous Lady, the worthy Patroness of
Learning, ALICE, Countess of Darby, etc.
RIght Honorable: virtue was once esteemed the woorthiest shelter against the
tempestuous storms of worldly violence. But now (such is the misery of these
times) though she deserve most, yet is she least desired.; and is so far from
being a Protectrix, that she her self does want a Patronage. Our
predecessors were wont to say, Vilius argentum est auro; virtutibus aurum.
As gold surpasses silver in account:
So in true value, virtues gold surmount.


But those good days are past: and the rudenes of our times gives the Lie to
that worthy Sentence; saying clean contrary, Gold has all the glory; and
she is the only goddess: unto whose sacred Altar each one (almost) will
sacrifice his life, his soul. He that is wealthiest, now is accounted
worthiest: And to be virtuous (say the worldlings) is not the way to
possess riches. Oculo eligunt, non animo. The eye of the body preuailes now
far more with man, then the eye of the soul.

The glittering luster of a pompous train, draws with it all your brave
minds, and stately Gallants (according to the worlds phrase) when as poor
forsaken Virtue shall be constrained Tymon-like to live alone. They will scarce
ever deigne to look on her: or if they do, it will be in disdain; taunting at
her desolate and friendless condition; saying scornfullie: Is this she that
thirsts to be the mistress of many followers, yet cannot preserve her self
from ragged poverty? Vice is so short a cut to honors, pleasures, and profit
(as the world terms them) that they dare maintain, there needs no virtue:
saying with Seneca, Cum vitia prosunt, peccat qui just facit. He is held most
foolish; that deals most faithfully; and accounted most simple, that is most
sincere. Behold the height of monstrous iniquity: every vice has its
protection; but, naked Virtue wants a Patronage. Which she would willingly not
beg of any, but only of those, that are as ready to proffer it, as she to
sue for it. Wherefore, most boldly she addresseth her self unto your
Honor; being full of confidence (through the Sympathy of both your
affections) to find with you a pleasing Welcome. For although she be worthless
indeed, in the purblinde eye of the fantastic world; yet she is a world of
worth, in the judicious eye of your honorable mind. But, Madame, when your
Ladyship shall behold me, who thus peremptorily intrude into your honorable
presence, you cannot but marvel much thereat: and my much disturbed self
(being almost transformed with amaseme^t) shall stand as mute as a marble
statue. Yet, calling to remembrance that old saying of the Philosopher, Neminem
timendo ad summu^ locu^ peruenire, that fear is a fault in such as seek
preferme^t, I shall be bold to speak, and beseech your Ladyship to accept of
this poor excuse: to wit, that this my presumption was occasioned, through the
favors which my best friend has received from your Honor; firmly obliging
both himself and me to the dutiful performance of our best services. Who^, it
is not to be maruailed at, if you remember not among so great a number as your
Hon. does good unto: forasmuch as you register not, as most do, an exact diary
of your good deeds, in tables of brass. The opportunity of acknowledging this
our obligement, could never (in my weak judgment) be fitter, then by the
mediation of Virtue; who, in requital of my loving and kind office for
bringing her unto your Palace gate, will speak unto your Ladyship in my
behalf. And so hereby I shall attain (I hope) to be hereafter known unto
your Hon: which I account the greatest part of my felicity. Madame: that
heretofore has been accounted vicious, which by too much use is now become a
custom; which is, to depaint the virtues of those unto who^ men dedicate their
books, with immoderate praises. Which I dare not attempt to do; fearing lest
my words (if it were possible) might be prejudicial unto your worthiness: and
also lest your Hon: should have cause to distrust the sincere truth of my
spotless fidelity; It being both an usual and a true saying: Much praising
begets suspicion; and that A flattering tongue has always relation unto a
false heart. Which danger I will avoid; having no occasion to fall thereinto,
sithence the sun needs not the light of a candle to make it seen; nor a
perfect natural complexion, the disgraceful help of artificial tinctures:
It being most true which the Poet says, Fucati sermonis opem men's conscia
laudis Abnuit.
Ingenuous minds, in all true virtues rich,
Do scorn the blason of a flattering speech.
That which Pomponius Mela said of Athens, may (with a modest face) be spoken
of your virtues: Clariores sunt quam vt indicari egeant. So that, if any shall
look into mine Epistle, to see what Encomium I make of your virtues, I must
refer their search to the report of the world: which is a copious Index of
your honorable deeds; it being a task far too difficult for my undertakings:
for, who can paint the heavens? And again, such commonly do most desire
praises, as least deserve them. For in showing their great love of such windy
puffes, what do they less, then give the Lie unto their flattering commenders?
But your Honorable self is most directly opposite unto such as those: and
rather then you will endure it, you will strike the flatterer on the check as
the Emperor Sigismond did: who thereupon being demanded by him, Why do you
strike me; made answer, Why do thou bite me? Your Noble mind loves the
substance only, not the outward show; and ioyeth more in being virtuous
indeed, then in seeming so: whereby you add one virtue more unto your many
others; and deserve exceedingly to be praised, for not desiring it. Thus
beseeching your Honor to deigne the Patronage of this small Treatise, I will
always remain

Your Honors most humbly devoted, William Jewel.

The Epistle to the Reader.
ALl things, for the which men labor and travail in this world, may be
reduced unto one of these three points; Honor, Riches, or Pleasure: and yet
notwithstanding, the greatest part of men are often beguiled of their purposes;
because their election erreth in the means, whereby they might attain unto the
same. For in lieu of aspyring thereunto by virtue (which alone is able to crown
their solicitous and painful endeavors, with the free possession and quiet
enioyance of true honor, true treasure, and true felicity, which they pursue)
they slide voluntarily into vices spacious and pleasant-seeming path: and
(being seduced by false promises and deceitful persuasions, to detest the
pricking thorns of penurious poverty, base disdain, and irksome trauells,
which encounter them in the very threshold of virtues path) are in fine
transported through the resembling-paradise and pleasant way of all delight;
such as vice ^rotesteth the path of Voluptuousnes, Ambition, and Avarice, to
be: and at length (soon enough to see, but too late to repent them of their
erroneous entrance and vain perseverance) they are thrown headlong into a sea
of sadness, grief, and anguish, a thousand thousand dolours, and as many
millions of restless miseries: which they, poor, silly, and deluded
ignorants, at first did surely think they should ^schewe. For such things as
are gilded over with the golden resemblance of honest, pleasant, and
profitable, and yet are not virtuous, will in a while (the adulterate outside
being worn away) appear to be vicious, dommageable, and ignominious: In such
sort that vice is so much the more dangerous, and prejudicial, by how much the
more it resembles virtue.

For this reason have I spent my best endeauours, to set before your eyes that
end and scope, whereunto all the actions and operations of mankind should be
directed: and not that alone, but the means also which conduce unto it; that
so their election may be preserved free from delusion, in the research and
choice of true honor, true riches, and true pleasure. And these are the
precious and rich Jewels which are contained in the Golden Cabinet of true
Treasure; being divided into twelve several chapters: whose heads you may here
behold in order following.

I. The description of Virtue: and of her property in man. page 1 II. The
division of Virtue into four principal parts: from the which, as from their
source, all other subalternate Virtues spring. 31 III. Of such things as are
requisite in the acquist of Virtue, and which make a man perfectly virtuous. 43
IIII. Of the first effect which Virtue produces in man: which is the knowledge
of himself, whereby he may be humbled. 70 V. Of the second effect which
Virtue produces in man: which is the knowledge of vice: and of the evils which
proceed from it: that he may grow in hatred and detestation of them. 95 VI. Of
the third effect which Virtue produces in man; which is both the Theory and
Practice of Conquering himself. 128 VII. Of the fourth effect which Virtue
produces in man: which teaches him to perform his duty toward all men,
demeaning himself worthily in his vocation. 147 VIII. The description of true
Honor: and how it ought to be acquired. 167 IX. The description of false Honor,
the true subject and ground of contentions and quarrels. 190 X. Of the
pretended ground of quarrels, whereunto false honor serves as a subject,
making man to be the worker of his own destruction. 209 XI. The description of
Choler: of the evils which proceed from it: of the causes which produce it: of
the means of correcting, and consequently of avoiding contentions and debates.
223 XII. The description of true and perfect pleasure, wherewith Virtue
accompanies honor, accomplishing man with all felicity. 234
Kind Reader correct those faults, with thy pen.

Page 24. Line 2. read men's. p. 27. l. 13. read ouerdaring rashness. p. 32. l.
25. read Good. p. 49 l. 22. read fleshy. p. 70. read Chap. 4. p. 84. l. 16.
read tamed. p. 107. l. 1. read stomack-settling. p. 256. l. for can only read
only is able to.

In Zoilum.
GRin, snarl, and bark. The more to move me, rack
Thy pois'ned passions, till thine entrails crack.
When all thy spite is spet, thou shall as soon
Supple the hardest flint, or maime the Moon,
As wound my Mind with one least discontent,
Or cross my wonted meanest merriment.
With settled patience, I can well endure
Thy bootlesse, bitelesse barkings; being sure,
That though thou belk-out fire, and bark-out stones,
Thou can not scorch my skin, nor break my bones.
W. JEWEL.

The Golden Cabinet of true Treasure.
The description of Virtue: and of her property in man.
CHAP. I.
MARIUS the Great, with the spoils and pillage which he took from the
Cimbrians, and Teutonians (whom he vanquished) erected two very sumptuous and
magnificent Temples at Rome, the one adioining to the other in the way called
via Appia (where now stands S. Sebastians gate) dedicating one of them unto the
Goddess Virtue, the other unto the God Honor: To the end that the Soldiers
which departed from Rome; addressing themselves unto the Wars, might always
remember Virtue, whereby they were to attain unto Honors stately seat, and
not by any other way whatsoever.

And that the sense and meaning of the Temples dedications might be the better
understood, he ordained that there should be built but two gates only, in such
sort that those which went into the wars, could not enter into the Temple of
Honor but by the gate and passage of Virtues Temple: within the which there
stood carved in Marble, a Goddess, wondrous glorious, and rich in beauty; but
arraied with the respectless and worthless weeds of Poverty, environed on every
side with pricking thorns; signifying unto the World, that none can attain
unto true honor through the wanton delights, and tender niceness of the world,
but rather through troublesome travails, and a million of cares and crosses
which ought to be subdued with mild patience, always persisting constantly in
the intricate, and painful path of virtue. Her torn abillament and ragged
cloak of Poverty declares that she disdaines the glorious frailty and
glittering luster of worldly pomp, and that she rather lodges under pouerties
low roof, then in the rich arrast chamber of a Princes Court: she loves the
ornaments of the soul, not the proud-peacocke deckings of the body.

Whosoever could be so happily blessed as to see her naked (said the wise man)
would incontinently be inflamed with her beauty: But because she is one of the
daughters of heaven; wanting the abundance and superfluity of worldly
treasures, and cannot be entertained but by the mind and soul, nor espoused
but by good manners and civil conditions, the least part of the world seek after
her, by reason of the great authority and respectfull observance which
sinne-steept sensuality and quenchless covetousness, have with men. For they
(being so inamoted, so sick, yea so drunk with the love of these two former
Minions) cannot love any thing but that which is presented unto them by the
wanton election of a lustful eye and allowed by the grateful acceptance of a
covetous heart: which is the sol^ and only reason, that (for the most part) the
body (in their thoughts) has pre-eminence before the soul, and a golden purse
before a proper person.

But if man could know both himself and it, and commit himself to the per^^
perfect guidance of divine reason, he would immediately discern his blamefull
error, and plainly see that the circuling arms of the whole world embrace
nothing that is good, but virtues Then would he see the weak frailty o^ all
other things, and the permanen^ good of never dying virtue.

There is nothing that merits to be in equipage with her: for the acquist of
her only is truly sufficient to crown the life and actions of a mortal man,
with the style of happy, without the borrowed aid, or desired assistance of
any others. For it is by her means, that man's labors makes him Lord of that,
which scorneth the malice of devouring time, or unfortunate misfortune of an
impouerishing shipwreck; of that (I say) which neither fire nor sword, nor
envy, nor any chancing casualty can dispossess him of. She warns him, ^ay
withholdeth him from coveting or desiring that which the world adoreth; as
Greatness, Riches, Volupti^, or Vainglory: She loatheth, she abhors,
the sugared flatt^ry of obsequious tongues, she always charily preserves her
freedom, she still is the mother of some good deed or other, doing indifferently
to rich and poor, high or low, ^^cited thereunto, by an earnest desire he has
of making her self agreeable unto God, and effecting things which may deserve
an eternal guerdon, given by the liberal hand of God the Lord of heaven and
earth in the world to come. She is also the sole divine and immortal quality
in us: she is the only heritage of the soul which is the cause of its
felicity; and which makes her possessours, truly honorable, truly glorious.

Her love is feareles, without envy, without jealous suspicion, without
artificial and sophistical cunning: making her lovers so much the more happy,
by how much more she is desired of the^. He that loves her most, possesses her
most: and he that knows how to possess her aright, is the master of an
invaluable, of an incomparable treasure; in such sort that she has this
peculiar property, to serve as light unto the life, temperance to the luxurious
motions of the mind, a bridle to the affections, patience against injuries, and
consolation in affliction.

She gives pleasant rest and peaceful tranquillity, (without ceasing) unto the
minds and souls of all that have her, causing them to find all the course and
every condition of their lives, relished with perfect sweetness, with perfect
pleasance, with perfect content: carrying always with her, her reward, her
recompense. But if we determine to attribute unto her the vanishing honors
and windy praises of men for her price, her portion, we should deprive our
selves of the privilege which we have of rewarding and satisfying our selves
by our own hands in the menaging of her treasures; and should change the
repose, which proceeds from her, into a gift of fortune, if this stipend, this
reward should be derived from the courtesy and discretion, of mortal men. For
then we should lend our covetous ear unto the praising and pleasing applauses
of their voices, and so (flattery having surprised our facile belief) we
should sooth and delude our selves with fruitless vanity. And again; this were
nothing else but to search for a beneficial reward on earth, which is assigned
to us in heaven, and to change the nature and quality of virtue, (which is al
divine) into a frail and fleeting condition which is earthly. Virtue has
Iealousy (but it is praisworthy) because she will be sincerely and solely loved:
she will thoroughly possess our wills to avoid the peril of hypocrisy, because
she cannot effect any thing without our free consent. She will subdue al
rebellious vices, which assault her through the weakness of humane frailty: and
therefore al her faculties conspire to maintain her forces, and to conserve in
us the name of virtuous, whereby we are honored. Which name we are as soon
unworthy of, as we incline mischieuously toward any vice.

For virtue (in general) is a laudable, and constant habit, which being wroght
in us by true reason, impresseth in our understanding, a perfect knowledge of
the true good, and in the mind and will a free election of things, according
whereunto (as it is requisite and expedient) we must love or hate, take or
leave, she being the neuer-erring Directrix of our affections.

This description deserves well to be examined, she ought (hereafter) to
inform us how we are to distinguish, between the true and the false, in the
research and disquisition which we make of Riches, of Honor, and of Pleasure,
which are the 3. main points whereunto al humane actions are reduced: wherefore
I think it not amiss to spend both time and travel for the declaration hereof.

We say that virtue is a habit, being a quality that springs from the actions
of the will, and powerful appetite of the soul, which by being often
reiterated, becomes at length firm and constant, and inclines our nature either
to ^oue a thing or loath it. To make this habit laudable then, it behooves us
^o conform our selves unto good manners, and that our desires be exercised
^owards the atchieuement of mode^ty, humility, chastity, honesty, fideli^y,
humanity, affability, integrity, bou^^^, verity, liberality, gratitude,
patience in adversity, moderation in prosperity; all which fruits, virtue
produces in such as do conform themselves to her conditions.

Hence it is that she cannot be either given or received as a gift: she must be
sought by a long and a continual exercise of commanding your self, bridling
your affections, and pursuing good without intermission; forasmuch as
discontinuance begets vice.

This habit ought also to be constant, to subdue al difficulties with patience
and perseuera^ce; which are the two soaring wings, that taking our minds from
the fruitless contemplation of base frail and terrestrial things, do raise
them up aloft to the conceit and apprehension, of high, permanent and celestial
things, with a full-settled resolution, to possess them; and being possessed to
preserve them always without change. For perseverance is the perfection and
consummation of all virtues: in such sort that no man can be that, which he is
not every day. None entitle themselves prudent, valiant, just, or by the names
of any other virtues, but such as persevere with immovable constanstancy. For
reason it self teaches, that to express a perfect agent, it suffices to say
it is a constant agent, because vice is incapable either of stop or stay.

She works in us by the shining light, which is infused into the conscience
and mind of man from the glorious beams of true reason, making us to know,
that al good, al honest things, ought to be achieved for the love of
themselves: and that a man should not so much as think, much less desire to
have, or will to do that which is naught, dishonest and ignominious, because it
is contrary unto goodness and virtue, which are the columns of virtues
foundation, and (to speak properly) the two objects which she proposes and
about which she is always conversant.

We say that she impresseth in our understanding a perfect knowledge of the
true good. But now let us define good to be that which is desired of all, to
be beloved of itself, forasmuch as none would desire it were it not good. But
the nature of that which is good, requires also that it be honest, pleasant
and acceptable.

He then is good which has these blessed gifts: humanity, affability,
pleasa^ce, courtesy, simplicity, liberality, modesty, and that declares the
goodness that is in him by his sweet and loving conversation; doing unto
all, such things as are both good and profitable. For bounty and goodness can
be no more without love then fire without heat.

Unto goodness we join verity, forasmuch as it is the basis and foundation of
virtue, and whereon all things are grounded, which are, which ought to be
known, which ought to be believed, said, and done, and without which nothing
can subsist. It is a light which first of all is exceedingly clear and
splendent in it self, and which illuminates the minds and souls of those that
regard her with due contemplation.

The means of seeking, and possessing this verity, consists in the
inquisition, understanding and belief: for (it being a light, a shining, and a
glorious light) it is our fault and not hers if she be hidden, if she be
secret. Wherefore we ought to make a serious search, of her, and understand her
well, before we can believe her, before we can possess her. But it may be,
that the understanding and mind of man is so inuelloped, so muffled with the
thick cloaking and choking clouds of vice, that it cannot be able to give
intertainment unto the knowledge of verity, for as much as it stoppes up the
passage and entrance of the Soul, against both the knowledge and the love
thereof, detaining the spirit captive, and forcing it down under the yoke of
servitude. But as light disperseth the clouds, and drives away darkness,
being utterly unable to have any community at all therewith: so truth
expels ignorance, and never suffers any communities, or has any commerce
with untruth. She discovers that which is secret and hidden, discerning all
things, by their true and proper differences: she teaches to know truly and
certainly the nature and quality of every one, and how to judge infallibly.
Hence it is that such as work mischief, are unwilling, nay they fear to have
their wicked actions made manifest by verity. And contrarily a good man is so
constant, so resolutely assured in his confession, that none can constrain him
to deny or disauow what he has done, what he has said; but rather shows
himself, nay certainly is, ready to seal it with his blood.

Verity needs not any decking ornaments or any help of outward things to
magnify her worth. She takes delight to be naked, and effects many things
of great moment by her pure simplicity: she will not, nay she cannot be
perverted by the flattering eloquence of false witness and calumnious
testimonies: for by her nakedness (which is bright and glorious) she quels them
all, she utterly confounds them.

It may be that she may sometimes be oppugned, but never vanquished. For to be
vanquished, is to be diuerted from a former determinate consultation, to be
changed from an absolutely-intended purpose, or being assaulted to become
subject to the power of an enemy. Even in this sort are we vanquished by the
treacherous affections of a covetous and a greedy mind, making us to forsake
and abandon the paths of virtue. He is truly overcome or vanquished, that has
lost his suit or cause in judgment: and so is he, who being overcome in war
either by strength or stratageme, becomes a servant, (nay, servile slave) unto
his enemy.

But if any of these or the like inconveniences chance to be found in verity,
it must then needs be confessed, that indeed she may be foiled; nay, quite
overcome, by violence, by injustice; but never cease to be the self same in
substance, no more then the purest, the perfectest gold can cease to challenge
the appellation of gold. It is most certain that it may be sometimes
obscurde, and disguised, by calumnious detraction, by slanderous reproach, under
the face-changing visard of treacherous falsehood: but never can be changed into
a truthless fable; forasmuch as that which is, can never be translated into
that which is not. If she be prosecuted by the persecuting hands of bloody
Tyrants, it is not impossible for her to suffer injurious violence, in the
persons of those that follow her, but impossible in her self: for she cannot
be enforced to submit her self unto the pity and compassion of her foe
falsehood, but continues always victorious always triumphant. For verity
subsisteth by itself, and by her own force and power, preserues her essence
to eternity.

In like manner may we say that virtue is a habit in goodness which rests not
contentfully satisfied, by imprinting only in our minds the apprehension and
bare understanding thereof, but gives direction also unto our will; which we
define to be that absolute and free faculty which only is in our power,
whereby we desire the true good, and eschew the evil by the helpful assistance
of reasons conduct. It is most certainly true, that the nature and quality of
our will, cannot tolerate it, to embrace any other thing within the lovely
folding arms of earnest desire, but that only which is vere bonum truly good;
without either coveting or willing that which is any way evil.

But herein lies the cursed cross of all, that vice and falsehood become
eftsoon disguised, counterfeited; and attiring themselves with virtues
abillaments are often represented unto the worldly man under the persons of
goodness and verity.

And again, the affections, breaking their ranks of order, and falling into
monstrous confusion (which is to obey them) do wholely bend the courses of
their desires, toward that which indeed is nothing else but a vain show, a
false shadow of pretended good.

Wherefore it is most necessarily expedient, that she be enlightened by reasons
glittering rays, to be instructed and directed by the guidance of virtue, in
the election of that which is good, and in the discerning of that which is pure
and perfect from that which is false and counterfaite: briefly, so to rule and
govern the affections, that they obey her as dutiful servants, following and
serving her to the atchieuement of the true good.

For indeed humane affections are settled in the minds of men, to cause us to
rejoice, when we have been the authors of any good, affecting the soul as it
were with a joyful trumpet, and to condemn us when we have done evil as a
sharp revenger of the same: so that we being convinced in our selves of doing
evil, our consciences being touched, with the remorsefull feeling thereof, are
incontinently most eagerly displeased, yea most vehemently incensed against
ourselves, as if they sought to work vengeance by our selves against our
selves, and so hereby begetting in us a certain affection which is called
shame; near in condition unto angry ^choler, which with a cruel and a
tormenting hand inflicteth punishment ^on our selves, to redeem our souls
from that disease. To this blameless ^choler (after this sort engendered within
us) may also be added the hart-pining fear of others Judgment. And then
shame and fear conspire together to effect this passion: which having taken
possession in the heart, begets that habit which is called blushing
bashfulnes; whose peculiar property it is to fear not only the ^ase dishonor
and shameful reproach of evil doing, but the merciless judgment of others
also, and dif^aming censure of the common sort.

They are therefore the raines of reasons moderation, which bridle our will from
either declining or perseuering in that which is either evil or erroneous, and
by her divine instructions conformeth us unto that commendable habit, to cause
us to march forward constantly in all that which is inseparably conjoined with
just endeauours, captiuating the affections of our souls, under the prescript
institutions of her laws. But let it be, that that the mind of man is stored
with many sundry affections, as love, hate, boldness, fear, sadness, joy, hope,
despair, anger, envy, a wicked, and a good will: yet notwithstanding virtue is
neither an affection nor yet any other of the faculties of the soul, but an
usual habit and familiar custom of doing good, through the election and
desire thereof, and a mean between the extremes of affections and passions, in
such sort that a wicked or a good man is distinctly discerned by either vicious
or virtuous actions, and is not (as some would have it) descried by affections.
For to man, for having either loved, or hated, feared or not feared, cannot be
attributed this appellation of evil or good; but he alone, which fears or
fears not, that which he ought or ought not to fear: forasmuch as he that
effects any thing, only by the motion of his will, without advised and
deliberate consultation thereof, cannot in any sort duly challenge unto
himself the title of virtuous: but can rightly do the same, if he have
executed it with willing desire, having before sufficiently consulted and
known it to be good.

In such sort that no man for either loving or fearing absolutely, can deserve
to be reputed good or bad: nor merit either praise or dispraise, but he alone
which loves or fears that which is convenient or not convenient. Because to
love, to hate, to dare, to attempt, to fear, to be angry, to be appeased, to be
melancholy, to rejoice, are all affections, which are indifferent to our soul,
in such sort, as for the things which happily chance unto us, without electing,
or considering them, we cannot be said to merit grace or disgrace, praise or
dispraise. And therefore virtue is said to be a habit of doing well through a
willing desire and free election, and a mean between the extremes of
affections and passions: which ought to busy it self in such sort that she
do not only grace the subject wherein she is, with the style of good, but
the deeds also which proceed from thence; as the graffe which is ingraffed
makes not only the tree good whereon it grows, but the fruits also which
proceed from it.

So that we may well then conclude, that virtue is a very powerful disposition
of the reasonable part of the soul, which disposes and limiteth the
unreasonable part with agreeable conueniency, and decent proportion,
prescribing unto the affections, a well befitting end, whereby the soul
always persisteth in due correspondency, still plotting, still effecting that,
which ought to be done by the rules of reason. But this powerful disposition
(which we may very well call divine reason, whose princely place of residence
is the soul) is properly called a moral virtue, possessing the mean of the
affections, depending between much and little, not absolutely, but in respect.
For that which is absolute, is always the self same thing in all causes and at
all times: but that which is considered in respect of another, falls out
oftentimes to be diverse, according to the variety of those things unto which it
is referred. As for example; If the number ten be too many, and the number
two too few, the number six should be a mean in respect of the two extremes.
But relating it with other numbers, it will then straight way happen to be
diverse, according to the diverse respects of the relation: as if ten miles of
exercise, for remedying a disease be too much, and 2. miles too little, six
miles therefore, will not be perchance justly a mean: and the reason of this
disproportion arises from the manifold diversities of man's complexions: for it
may be, that unto one, six miles will be too little, and to another of the same
disease too much. That is called medium geometricum, a Geometrical mean,
whereunto nothing can be added, and from whence nothing can be subtracted. And
in such sort, it must be understood that virtue is the true and perfect mean
of the affections of the soul, (as the number six is of twelve) not absolutely
but in respect: for, having a regardfull consideration, as well unto the
diversities of the estates and conditions of men, as also unto the times and
diverse occasions of working, it is very necessary that this mean (wherein
virtue consists) be understood respectively. In such sort that being in the
mean between too much, and too little (as six between two and ten) as when
a man fears and loves extremely, as well in excess as in defect, virtue
whose residence is is the mean between both, is unto the one a spur, unto
the other (...) bridle, forwarding the defect of fear ^s far forth as it
ought to be, and represseth the excess of love, for fear it should proceed
farther then virtues ^ounds; observing the convenient op^ortunity both of time
and place. And ^his is that which we are taught by our ^^ench Cato in these
four verses: ^wixt two extremes is virtue resident,
^irectly twixt too little and too much:
(...) naught excessive, nor deficient,
^orrows of none, yet no wa^ts ca^ her touch.


Therefore is virtue said to sit in the ^iddest of the affections, because the
^iddle parts of all things are of greater ^^lue, far more esteem, then the
ex^^eames: and the accommodation of ^is place, gives her more powerful ^^eanes
to resist, yea to repel the inor^^nate affections of the mind with the which
she is environed. For sithence defect and excess, too little and too ^uch,
are vices followers, (of necessi^^e) the mean belongs to virtue; as the white
mark in the very center of the butt, whose eminency will not suffer it to
escape the eyes of any: And whosoever declineth (be it never so little) either
on this or that side, erreth. And even as it is a point of greater difficulty
to touch the white then to roue round about the same: even so it is a great
deal harder, to be virtuous the^ vicious. Vice is infinite, and therefore has
no mean, in such sort that neither too much neither too little, neither
excess nor defect in vice, can make virtue; as a thief, or a murderer, be
it much or little, neue^ cease to be a sinner. For whosoever is a thief, a
murderer, an adulterer, in what sort and measure soeue^ it be, does sin
continually. Contrariwise, virtue has her bounds, her limits, which none can
pass beyond without being spotted with vices blemish: for as rash and
presumptuous a^dacity is the excess of that, which seemly and convenient unto
manl^ fortitude; so is heartlesse fear the monstrous defect of the self same
thing. Wherefore whosoever casts himself ^oo saucily, too presumptuously,
even unto the jaws of danger without cou^^el without consideration, ought not
to ^e accounted wise and valiant, but foo^ish and desperate, and he whom fear
constraines to tremble at the sight of ^n enemy, to be esteemed a coward.

It happens then, when as virtue would preserve a man from destruction, which
is procured eftsone either by over darings, rashness, or trembling cow^rdice,
she carefully retains him with^n the limits of courageous valor, and true
fortitude: As also in like manner, lest he should suffer shipwreck against the
rocks of avarice, or perish in the quicke-sand of prodigality, she most
wisely, most lovingly, directs his course through the passage of liberality.

So, moral virtue in general, instructs man to ouersway and command
(according to the reasonable prescriptio^s of watchful prudence) all the
inclinatio^s and actions of the souls irrational parts, keeping them all within
the circle of mediocritye: cutting off all both the excesses and defects of
passions and affections, holding them within the mean, between too much and
too little; to the end that man might be preserved from error, as well in
regard of his own particular, as for the public weal of humane society. For
the multitude of the wise is the preservation of the world. In like manner the
virtuous only, which through his own will, his own election, does virtuous
actions is to be much commended, and esteemed worthy of great honor. Wherefore
whosoever exercises himself herein, and is endued with this habit, is
accompanied with pleasant delectation and sweet content, as the sun with
light, the gay apparelled spring time with greeneness, and the choycest flowers
with their fragra^t smells. For virtue marches still before him, like an
impregnable shield and an ensign of glory: in such sort that nature has
placed nothing so high, but her endeauours can aspire unto. It is she that
crowns Kings and Princes: yea, it is she that has sceptred the sons of
those, whose hands have been galled with the spade and mattocke. It is she
that has tempered the trembling fearful heart, with bold assurance, and given
prudence to the rash. It is she that strengthens our souls within, with
assured constancy. It is she that expels from our hearts, the hideous
terror of severe death of pining sorrows, and sense-benumming shame, wherewith
the envious endeavor to co^sound us. It is she that armeth us with comfort,
against the loss of children, of friends, of goods: and as soon as opportunity
presents it self, she brings us before dangerous hazards; but with an
intent, to teach us how to overcome them, and lastly leads us by due
perseverance, full unto our God, who is the absolute perfection of all virtue,
and the soueraign good of godly men. Therefore let us say, Whosoever can
virtues nakedness espy,
Will be inamored with her presently,
Leaving frail riches, and the worlds vain pride
To trace her paths, that is so good a guide
Her golden treasur's never will decay:
Her honor's certain, and more bright the^ day
Such as love her, millio^s of pleasur's gain
And whosoever loved her, nere loved in vain
The throne whereon she sits is verity.
She Crowns her sons with immortality,
To cosen and deceive, she never consents
She hates base counterfeiting co^plements
She shows at first the greatness of her pain
And yields content (at last) a blessed gain


The Division of Virtue into her four princi^all parts: from the which, as
from their sourse, all other subalternate virtues spring.
CHAP. II.
AS all the imperfections of the soul are called passions, and vices: even so
their contraries which serve as remedies unto ^he same, are called virtues. And
al^hough virtue be always one, and ^he very same in her self, and in
respect of her self may be said to b^ extreme, being accomplished with (...)
perfection: yet by making distinction of her proprieties, diverse appellation
may be given unto her; as well becau^^ in every good action, there is alwai^^
some particular virtue, which is mo^^ eminent then the rest as also becau^^ she
produces diverse effects, accordin^ to the subject wherein she is: somtime^
conforming her self unto the maner^ conditions, and natural inclination of
such as possess her. For this reason virtue is divided into four princip^^
parts, to wit: Prudence, Temperanc^ Fortitude, and Justice.

Prudence has the preheminenc^ being the first in order, as the most necessary
of them all, for the moderation of worldly things, whereby man is i^ riched
with moral virtue, being a^ infallible rule to square out human^ actions by,
and by the which also he may attain unto the understanding o^ the true God,
and the election of the ways, which lead thereunto. Her office is to consult
advisedly and choose ^isely that she may thereby put that in ^xecution which
virtue commands; ^o wit, that which is honest, and feeme^y, not for any other
end, but only the ^oue of the thing it self.

It is by her, that man is always inue^ed with a well tempered disposition,
^rudently to undertake, and wisely to ^xecute that, which serious and ripe
de^^beration, with a due consideration of ^ll other circumstances, shall truly
^nforme the understanding to be ^ood.

The moral Philosophers have at^^ibuted unto Prudence, the having of ^^ree
eyes; memory, understanding and ^rouidence. With the first eye, she con^^dereth
the times past. With the se^ond, time present; and with the third, that which
is to come. Likewise, the ^rudent man, by the consideration of things past, and
that which has ensu^d them, will judge so (in the like cases) ^f that which is
to come: and then with ^^ng (but, not seeming tedious) deliberation, will
attend the time, consider the perils, understand the occasions: and giving
sometimes place unto time, and always to necessity (still provided, it be not
repugnant to his duty) will at length, courageously set his hand unto the
work. For, the remembrance of things past, to the Prudent man, stands in
great stead concerning things present, and also makes him likewise to foresee
the things that are to come.

He believes nothing suddenly, effects nothing in choler, or in passion, but
refers all his actions both private, and public, to a good end: which is,
to the service of God, and the good of his neighbor. Temperance is a firm and
constant domination of the reason, over concupiscence, and other excessive and
turbulent motions of the spirit.

She preserves in mediocrity, the desires and inclinations of the soul,
redeeming them from vices bondage, whereunto they were captives, reposing them
again in their former free estate. She serves as a bridle (to restrain the
extrauagant courses of voluptuousnes, making a man both good and virtuous, even
in the midst thereof. She serves as an abridgement of all superfluous
covetousness, and wanton affections, as well of the soul, as of the body, and
as a ruling discipline, directing us to govern (by the due choice of time, and
observation of means) such affections as are both natural and necessary.
Briefly, she is the pillar of defense, the flesh-subduer against luxury, the
rasor of wicked thoughts, the rebuker and chastiser of unbridled desires, and
the severe mistress of wanton eyes.

On the other side, she is the nursing mother of clean continence, she
mollifies the heart, and makes reason attend thee, as thy counselling servant
in all thine affairs. This ver^ue is divided into four principal branches:
Continence, Clemency, Modesty, and Order.

Continence appears as well in the actions of sobriety, as of chastity.
Clemency consists principally in pardoning offenses, even when it has fit
and convenient opportunity to revenge.

Modesty is the knowledge of a comely demeanor, even in time of prosperitye, and
of using well the gifts of fortune. Order consists in the disposing of al
things in their proper places, by suiteable degrees and convenient proportions,
to their well being.

Fortitude, being the third Virtue in order, is a certain immortal good,
seated in the power and guidance of the soul, fortified and confirmed by the
diligent study of Philosophy; which importuneth man, both to choose and effect
all things by his own desire, only for the love of the things themselves.

She leads a generous and a noble spirit through the hardest things, most
dangerous, and of greatest difficulty: to the end that it may augment his
honor and give greater cause of joy, when as he has triumphed over such
designs. She aduanceth our minds; and infuseth into our souls, a wondrous
desire of aspiring even to the highest part of that, which is most high most
excellent, most honorable, most commendable, most profitable.

Her greatest undertakings are without fear: she sticks not (after sound
counsel and serious advice) to enterprise actions full of threatening dangers,
and to persevere therein, with immovable constancye. For, Constancy is the
dilligent page of manly Fortitude, and is never from his elbowe, though she
tread the crimson paths of war, and march even up at knees in a field of
blood. Moreover, none of the virtues can be consummated, and truly
accomplished without constancy. He that has one virtue has not always the
other: but he that has this, has all others whatsoever; forasmuch as she is
never found, but even in the full perfection, both of the will and power And
therefore she magnifieth her possessour, making him to disdeigne either the
pinch of sorrow, or the fear of death: making him to account nothing, either
intolerable or troublesome, which is possible to befall a mortal wight; nor
any thing bad, which is either necessary, or inevitable. Briefly, it is the
knowledge of that which ought to be sustained, when as we fight for the
maintenance of Justice.

This virtue is also divided into four principal branches, to wit:
magnificence, Confidence, Patience and Perseverance. Magnificence, is showed in
the atchieuing of great and excellent things.

Confidence appears, when as a generous mind is endued with an assured hope of
the happy success of his undertakings.

Patience appares, in the voluntary and continual sufferance, which is
sustained for the mere love of honesty and virtue.

Perseverance, is seen in the perpetual Constancy, and firm continuance of
dessignes and resolutions, enterprised upon good considerations by the
persuasions of reason.

The fourth and more eminent virtue is Justice: which we define, to be a
constant and perpetual willingness, of doing right and reason unto all, with an
equal and proportionate distribution according to every ones merit and desert.

Wherefore this virtue comprehends within itself, all others whatsoever;
forasmuch as man should not be able to discern just from unjust, thereby to
embrace the one and eschew the other, were he not also endued with prudence:
for as much as this is a peculiar property, solely depending on that virtue. In
like manner also he would hardly be able to put in practice the preceps of
Justice, that is not endued with temperance; wherewith he might moderate all
the passions, and particular affections of his own mind.

Furthermore, he cannot fully perform one of the chiefest and diuinest parts
of Justice (which is, to give help and succor, unto the afflicted and
persecuted soul, when there is need thereof, be it in what danger soever) if,
by reason of manly courage and true fortitude, he do not contemn death,
sorrow, grief, and whatsoever else the world contains, and so to be (as
near as flesh and blood will permit) a perfect imitatour of Divinity.

In such sort that he alone is to be styled Just, which renders good unto as
many as he can, without offering injury unto any one, having no striving
contentions within his own breast, remaining a loving servant to his God, and
a gentle friend unto his neighbor.

This virtue is twofold: Distributa and Co^mutatiue. The Distributive,
consists in giving unto every one according to his merit, whether it be
honor, dignity, or punishment. The Commutatiue, consists in observing our
faith, and credit in our promises and covenants; and never doing unto any, that
which we would not have others do unto us.

From this general fountain, issue forth these four rivers (which by an
Allegory have been termed the rivers of the terrestrial Paradise, which
always water the little world) Prudence, Temperance, Fortitude, and Justice:
which are as necessary to be conioynd, and united in him, which desires to be
perfectly virtuous, as the separation of them would be prejudicial to his
estate. For no man can be temperate, if he be not formerly prudent:
forasmuch as every virtuous action proceeds from knowledge, and
understanding. In like manner man can never be truly valiant and magnanimous,
if formerly he be not temperate; forasmuch as such a one, that is endued with a
generous and an undaunted spirit, without moderation would in a short season
become desperate: and he that should be temperate and not courageous, would in
a short time become a coward. In like manner, Justice without Prudence, and
Temperance, would shortly be transformed into bloody Tyranny. In such sort the
virtues, being united and knit together, are all absolutely perfect: but,
being disioyned once, and separated, they become feeble, and are ouerborn by
the strength of vice. Wherefore these four virtues being ordained as a sure
basis, and firm foundation unto every one, that earnestly desires to be
perfectly virtuous, they ought to serve him as an object and mirror of his
contemplatio^, wherein he shall not only behold the ugly deformities and
defects of nature; but also remedies against the same: to attain unto the
which, three things are to be observed by him, which shall be declared in the
Chapter following.

Of such things as are requisite in the acquist of virtue, and which concur
to the perfect accomplishment of a virtuous man.
CHAP. III.
THREE things ought to be united and conjoined together in the acquist of
Virtue, and full accomplishment of a virtuous Man: Nature, Reason, and Use.

It is the office of Nature, to incline us, Reason to direct us, and Use and
Custom to conform and confirm us.

Nature in general is a certain infused power or faculty, divinely planted in
things created; which attributes unto every one of them, that which
appertains unto them, and from whence they receive, not only a certain quality
of being, but of doing also, and ingendring others like unto themselves.

This we may define to be an instinct, and inclination of the spirit, which is
naturally bestowed on every creature, on some more powerful, on others less,
deriuing an operation from the Qualities of the humors whereof the Creature is
Composed, which instinct inciteth and incourageth the soul to search
diligently, and earnestly to desire that, which is good for her; being always
for the accomplishing of this effect, in perpetual action, in continual
motion: like unto a plot of ground, which freely of its own accord, produces
all kinds of weeds being neglected, and unhusbanded; but being carefully
manured, produces fruits that are exceeding good.

In such sort, that man's nature may not unfitly be likened to a balance, which
is borne down, on that side, whereon the wind beats most, if it be not the
better directed by the skillful hand of science and reason. For although a man
covet and desire that ne^urally which is truly good, because it ^s worthy (for
its own sake) to be beloved; yet notwithstanding through want of a perfect
knowledge of the true good, he suffers himself to be oftentimes transported,
with the flattering outside of a false resemblance.

Wherefore it is most necessarily expedient, to be timely circumspect for the
forming of the natural disposition and ^^nbred qualities of young children, even
as soon as they attain to be capable of reason; and then above all things to
be curiously precise in making provision both of honest, learned, and discreet
teachers. For, even as careful and skillful gardeners, do under prop their
young and tender graffes, with some supporting stays or other, to the e^^ that
they may preserve them straigh^ Even so, wise and discreet teachers season the
hearts of younger youths, with wholesome counsels and good precepts, thereby
the better to conform their manners to Virtues Lore: For, having had a
virtuous education, both in youth and infancy, they will at length in their
riper years, be moderate, sober, well staide, and temperate: and therefore
such tutors are to be chosen as are known to be of honest and civil
conversation, which will read nothing but the wholesome doctrines of good
Authors, nor permit their charge to frequent any companies, or busy
themselves about any actions but such as bear proportion to honest birthes,
and virtuous breedings. But, the greatest, and most especial care of all, is
to be had of the generous and tender plants of noble parents (being the
principal pillars, and chief maintainers of the State) whose tender years
ought to be seasoned with frequent, daily, nay with continual admonititions,
counsels, and precepts, which may gently incite them, and duly forward them,
to the love of virtue, representing always before their eyes, the never dying
records of their fathers deeds, whose immortal fame, honor has registered
unto eternity, that the fresh remembrance thereof, may beget a desire in them,
of worthy imitation; for as much, as good education is the sourse of all
bounty, and virtuous breeding the chief foundation of a blessed life.

A curse therefore shall attend on such fathers, as are neglectiue of their
childrens breeding: and most miserable also is that Commonwealth, wherein
youths education is light accounted of. This is the fountain of rebellion,
sedition, murders, contempt of Princes laws, yea of Princes themselves, of
rapine, extortion, infidelity, heresies, and atheism, and the like.

Again, the grave Philosophers of ancient time, never thought any thing
worthy so much praise as the careful education of young children; having
wisely considered, that good corn can never be reapt, except the field be well
manured, and good seed sown upon the earth: Even so the vile corruption of
our depraved nature, of its own appetite more inclining unto evil, then unto
good, is an obstinate stickler against virtue, making use of her quaintest
devises, treacherously to undermine, and with malicious subtilty to dispossess
her of the soul of man: so that no humane thing whatsoever can withstand such
violent forces, but the virtuous precepts learnd in tender youth.

In such sort, that all those that are not (yet desire to be) conformable to
virtues discipline, ought to solicit the Lord of heaven, and only giver of
soule-sauing grace, with instant and fervent prayers, that his goodness would be
pleased to incline the motions of their hearts, and bend their perverse ^atures
(forward in vice, but froward in ^^e search of virtue) toward the love and
liking of the same.

Reason assisteth us in the prosecuti^n, as a friendly Directrix, and curte^us
leader of a blinded nature: and ^^erefore is she said to be that faculty, and
virtue of the soul, which is called ^^timatiue, or Ratiocinatiue, so excee^ing
necessary unto man. She it is, that ^iueth judgment of things imagined, ^^d
apprehended by the senses, to in^^rme our souls, whether they be true (...)
false, and whether they ought to e^^ct or reject them, being good or ^uill.

On good cause, therefore is the mid^est of the brain, assigned to be her
^hrone, being seated as it were in the ^^ghest, and stateliest, yea the surest
^^d strongest fortress of the fleshly ^^ilding; to sit and sway there (being
(...) the center of all the other senses) as ^mperesse, and commander of them
(...). She it is, that causes the discourse, and gives Judgment both of true
(...) false. She can, yea does discern, bo^^ the according Sympathies, and
threa^ning antipathies, of natural things; (...) accordingly unites, or
separates, wh^^ ought to be united or disioyned, m^king an absolute and a true
distinction betwixt one and other: and so w^^^ due and serious circumspection,
^^counting all the circumstances, ^^ferreth all things to their own prop^^
place.

And therefore it is very requis^^^ that she fully and freely enjoy her proper
accommodation, without inte^medling, intangling, or incombrin^ her self with
either the imagination or the fantasy. Whose Judge she ough^ to be, either to
approve, or condemn^ that which she shall find either to b^ good or evil; and
so to correct, an^ detain them from outward cours^^ with the raines or bridle
of modera^^on. For if Reason should be incombre^^ with them, confusion would
beget suc^ a trouble, that she would never be able to judge (as she ought)
of such ^^ings as they would represent unto ^er; but would be transported
beyond ^erselfe, as if she were deposed from ^er seat: in no other manner,
then if ^^e chamber-maides should be above ^^eir mistress, or at least walk
with her (...) true equipage. But if she remain a^^ne, in her own proper and
peculiar ^^ate free from the troublesome incum^^ances of the other two, after
she has ^ell considered and thoroughly deba^^d with herself all those things
that ^^e brought before her by the other ^^ses, she will straightway
pro^^ounce sentence like a wise Judge: ^^r there is none that judges after ^^r
decree.

Wherefore it is, that her seat of Iu^^^ce, is in the midst; where she only
^^th commission to hear, and deter^ine of all sorts of Causes, of what na^^re
and quality soever: she has ^^rectly behind her, Memory, in ^^ade of a
Scriuener, or Secretary, (...) inrowle, and register within a certain book,
all her ordinances and decrees.

Every good thing also, whereof ma^^ is capable, is preserved in the golden
cabinet of the soul. For this cause the^fore, it is very convenient for man,
(...) be well advised in the search hereof, (...) the end that he may be able
to disce^^ and not to choose the false, and counte^faite, in lieu of the good
and perfect, b^ing (only through the defect of kno^ing: viz. of good, from ill)
oftentime^ deluded with the outward apparance^ fained goodness, which is far
from being so indeed; being only so accounted through error and false opinion
by which the greatest part of men a^^ usually deceived, making them to pr^ferre
imaginary, and apparent good only of the body, before such as (...) real and
essential of the soul, yea suc^ as are temporal, before eternal.

And therefore even as our eyes a^^ unable to do us service, or to beho^^ any
thing in darkness, without the benefit of light: so have our souls gre^^ ^eed
of reasons light, to help our pas^^ge through the darkness of error, and
^^ghtles clouds of ignorance, that they ^^ay thereby gain a power to discern
^erity, from forgery, true good, from ^ined good, and honest vtility, from
(...) contrary.

But even as God out of the bowels (...) his infinite goodness and mercy,
^ath prepared for man, a far more ^^cellent blessing, then for beasts: so
(...) like manner has his bounty ordai^ed means both for the finding and
^^uition of it. The difficulty of finding (whereof some accursed wretches ^re
to accuse God) does wholly pro^^ede from our own imperfections. ^^r, the
darkness of error, and clouds (...) ignorance, which sin has vshered ^^to
our souls, have been the only and ^^solute cause thereof: from the which
^ankinde should have been always ^^ee, had it but persisted in the perfe^^^on
of its first nature.

Yet howsoever, (notwithstanding the ^^fect wherewith the soul is so foulely
blemished,) we always do behold th^^ natural light and glorious lamp (...)
shine brightly in the understanding (...) mind of man, which is in far
greate^^ measure bestowed on him, the^ on br^^^ beasts. In such sort that we
have ab^litie to recount the excellency thereof, by the discourse of reason:
(...) she passes from things known^ to things unknown; going from
generals to specialls, and the^^ discends to indiuidualls. And in l^^^ manner,
she remounts again, by (...) same degrees from one unto anoth^^ and so
compares them all, among themselves. For as soon as the ima^^nation has
received the shapes, (...) impressions of those things, which (...) presented
unto her, by the ministry the external senses, the considerati^^ of reason
immediately succeed^^^ which makes diligent inquisitio^ of^^ that, whatsoever
may be in the vnd^^standing, both of the abundance, and the want that is there;
making it to^^ turn unto her view, the more de^^^^rately to contemplate
thereon, and ^^e better to inform her self what (...) is that she has, or
has not, how (...) is, and after what nature and qua^^ty it is.

Then an on reason abstracteth from ^^^sible things, things invisible, from
^orporeall incorporeall, things secret and mystical from such as are plain
and triuiall, and lastly things gene^^ll from things particular. After this
^^ee referres all these things, to the judgment: which is the chiefest ver^^e
and power of the soul, which ^omprehendeth all the other facul^^es; and which
is reposed in the ^ontemplation of the Spirit, which (...) the end of the
search and inqui^^tion of verity, and as a certain and sure respect of all
other things, which have been collected and cho^en by reason, and received
and appro^ed also by the Judgment.

Wherefore it is, that we say, that ^here is a double discourse of reason in
^an: the one in the theorique and speculation, whose end is verity, and which
having found the same proceeds no farther. The other in practicke, whose end,
for which it works, is good; and which having found, does not re^^ there
only, but passes yet farther forth even unto the Will: which is another power
of the soul, of wondrous excellencye, which God has endowed man with, that he
might thereby, love, desire and follow that which is good, and eschew, hate,
and fly from that which (...) evil; and if he do, or have erred, to return
again into the paths of Virtue by the helpful guidance and direction of
Reason. The will of man has two actions belonging to the same, the first is an
inclination unto good, whereby she desires, she follows, she imbraceth it:
the second is a diuersion from evil, whereby she flies, and forces his self
from it.

Yet howsoever, it is always to be understood, that reason does not sway and
dominere over the will, as Princess and commander, but only as a mistress* to
inform, and as a guide to instruct her, telling and teaching her, what is to
be followed, and what to be fled from. For the will has not any light from, or
by her self, but is illuminated only by the shining rays of the
understanding, that is to say, by reason, and Judgment, which are conjoined
with her.

Even so the will does neither covet, nor reject any thing but that which
reason has formerly declared, ^o be either good or bad: In such sort, that the
act of the will proceeds (indeed) from her self, but is both judged and
counseled by reason, and only borne and brought forth by the will: which
does nothing else but put that ^n execution, which the understanding has
conceived and judged to be good; or fly from that which it reprooueth.

Wherefore if the Will of man do con^oine it self with reason (which is heavenly
and divine) in the pursuit of virtue, she would gain by this her combination,
to be like unto it, and would also then, with great facility, be able to rule
and govern the sensual parts which are under her, remaining always full of
ability, and power to constrain them all to obey her as their Lady and
mistress. But if the will of man disdainefully disesteem her, and contem^^ her
counsels, and in stead of mounting aloft, toward that glorious seat of all
admired excellency, descend toward the ignoble part of filthy sensualitye,
dedicating her self and making a league with it; she shall then be like her
lustful copesmate, and in lieu of her commander, shall be her servant, and
hereby become both base and brutish: where otherwise she might have made that
sensual and earthly part to be celestial and divine, had she chosen rather
to obey Reason then passions, and preferred the heavens before the earth.

Therefore it may be said, that reason produces the same effect in the soul
of a Prudent man, that health does unto a sickly body. For, freeing it from all
torturing passions, it does give a joyful pleasance and a sweet content in
all sorts of conditions whatsoever, making her both apt and ready to all
laudable and virtuous operations.

The third that remains to be spoken of, is Use: whereby nature is fashioned
and confirmed in the habit of true good. We therefore say that it consists
in the continual exercise, as well of the mind as of the body, in the study,
travel, and disquisition of honest things; for as much as that which is done
once and again, yea often reiterated, nay continued with a pawselesse
perseverance, shall be absolutely accomplished at the end.

For even as little drops of water, by the continuance of time, do hollow
and pierce the hardest flint: Even so good manners, and virtuous conditions,
are certain effectual qualities which make a wondrous great impression in
the soul, by a long use. And how rude, and intractable a nature soever it be:
yet at length, by labor and care, diligence and long custom, it is reclaimed,
being made both attentive and obtemperate to reasons precepts.

There are 3. points very remarqueable, whose observation is marvelous
necessary, and of great importance. The first is to contemn slouthfulness, and
eschew all dissolute conversation. The second is to employ the time in such
things as are both honest and profitable, and to forward all our beginnings
with due perseverance. The third is to reap a profitable benefit as well from
the evil of our selves as from the calamities of another.

Concerning sloathfulnes, it is one of Natures monsters. Nature made nothing
idle in the world: but all things (whatsoever) have continual motion. To prove
the which, our souls may serve as a sufficient argument, which are continually
in perpetual action.

And even as the water that makes a standing poole is soon putrefied and
corrupted: even so the natures and dispositions of those that lead their
retchlesse lives in lazye slothfulness, are quickly distempered with a sottish
dulnes; for as much as lazines is not only exceeding prejudicial to the
perfection of the soul, but also a stern enemy to the bodies health: for the
excessive rest which is gaind by idleness, indommageth more (by many degrees)
the sound estate of a healthful person, then a wondrous painful, and
laborious exercise. For great and continual labors do extinguish the heat of
luxurye, and fire of concupiscence: whereas idle sluggishnes adds fuel, and
oil, unto the flames of them. For as much as he that does nothing, learneth
either to do, or to think evil, or perchance both: which our poor souls
are often guilty of, being not busied with some contemplation, wandering and
straying up and down like masterlesse and vnimployed runnagates, easily to be
diuerted from truth and honesty, and as easily induced to follow vanitye: which
causes daily so many contentions, and accursed quarrels, from whence so many
murders usually ensue.

In Consideration whereof a man ought not only to avoid such sluggish
lazynes, but also to eschew the familiar society and inward acquaintance of all
those, whose conversation is either dangerous or unprofitable; forasmuch as
evil examples, and wicked designs, are great corrupters of civil demeanors,
and only deprauers of an honest nature: which being perverted from what is
good, there is no mischief in the world too great for their attempts, their
undertakings. For virtues exercises being once abandoned, idleness transporteth
man unto a play, wherein he durst rail, and revile his loving neighbors, yea
banne and blaspheme the name of God, and at length most barbarously consume his
substance, and despise himself; and then (these things standing thus) runs
into desperate and accursed courses, and makes base conycatching the only
certainety of his future possibilities. Being now become a cousening Gull, he
esteems it no more sinful to rob, than to do that: from robbing he becomes
a murderer; and so by degrees he mounteth still, and never cease till such
time as he have attained unto the highest top of all impiety. For one vice
having once undermined the soul of man, and made an entrance into it, all
other vices find the way more easy.

And as for time, (which their sleepy drowsines will not permit them to
observe) it is so choice, so precious a thing; that it is said to be, solum
sine pari, only that in the world which wants a parallel, has no comparison.
This time I say, cuius neque praeteritum, neque futurum, nostrum potest
appellari, which being either past or to come, cannot be called ours: and the
present passes away so presently, that this moment, this point of time,
deserves rather to be called a little little nothing, then the real
subsistence of any thing. In such sort that these little moment: any minutes
being once lost, a serious debating with our selves at last, shall find them to
be a great diminution of our days; whose redemption being hopeless, they do
leave in our souls a woeful remembrance that they once past by: and
opportunity posting by us, and not finding us within, or (which is as bad) not
ready to entertain her, has left recorded in the tables of our memories (to
our greatest grief of all) that when she proffered her self accompanied with
good occasion in gentle courtesy, we most unkindly, or carelessly either
despised or neglected her: by which neglect we purchased to our selves a
wondrous prejudice: for as much as in the observance of her, wholly depends the
full accomplishment of our affairs. For opportunity being a part of time which
presents her self unto us, her acquaintance, nay her familiarity ought to
be esteemed as of great importance, and not so carelessly to let her pass, and
in passing, lose her; for in suffering her to turn her back, she is past and
we have lost occasion, which being once escaped can never be recovered: from
whence proceeds even as much blame as dommage.

If the Pilot prize winds, times, and tides convenient for his voyage at a
high rate, arming himself with manly courage, to withstand the angry seas
tempestuous outrages, how much more careful ought we to be, to make good and
profitable employment thereof, toward the attaining of the knowledge and
understanding of the celestial Navigations; who are not to pass through the
storms and tempests of the sea, but the surging billows of passions, and
death-menacing outrages of our lewd affections, which are far worse then a
thousand perilous rocks and dangerous shelfs, which every minute, and moment
of our lives, do threaten the shipwreck of our Sovereign good, if we have no
learned by long use and custom, to direct our affections by the rudder of
reason, redeeming our time, by applying our selves unto the practice of such
things, as deserve commendations; to the end that by an entire and full
discharge of our duty consummated by perseuering in our lawful vocation, we
endeavor to fortisie and forward our selves, in the attaining of such things
that can guerd on both our actions and ourselves with an appell^tion of
virtuous in this world, and of truly blessed in the world to come. The third
remarqueable point that ought to be observed in the use, is to make our
experience profitable, forasmuch as it has belonging unto it two means: to
correct our foolishnes, and increase out wisdom. The one is derived from our
own proper evil, the other from the example of others miseries.

The first has the more effectual and prevailing efficacy: but that is
always some thing prejudicial unto whomsoever it happens; and that is the
reason that it comes still, before it be either wished for, or welcome: for
it cannot be entertained without both trouble and dommage.

As for the second each one courteth it, both with a willing and familiar
complement; forasmuch as his own person is somewhat free from peril, and can
behold that in another, (without hurt unto himself) which may advertise him to
virtuous courses.

For the experience which proceeds from the remembrance of others miseries,
is a very powerful doctrine to advise us. For it is a compendious course and
an easy method unto every one, to discern by the success of others, how he
ought to demean himself in the prosecution of business of ^he like condition.

It may then be concluded from this discourse, that every good beginning (next
after God) proceeds from nature, the happy progress, and ample increase from
reasons precepts, and the full accomplishment thereof from use. In such sort
then, to make a man perfectly virtuous, these three things must conspire
together. For nature without reason, and use, is like unto a good field that
lies like a barren desert, being neglectiuely left vnmannured. Reason without
nature and use, is like unto seed that never springs up, because it was never
sown upon the earth. And use also, without nature and reason, is like unto a
good labourer that picketh strawes, or takes less pains, only through want
of ground and seed. And even as a good parcel of ground produces many bad
weeds which destroy and quite choke up the good and profitable fruits, if it
be not carefully preserved and husbanded: Even so a well disposed nature, by
bad instructions, will soon be corrupted and become pernicious: as on the
contrary, having had wholesome education, and virtuous nourture, it will
produce most excellent fruits; which virtue begets in all those, that do
conform themselves unto her disciplines. For she is neither dead, nor barren
in them: as it is most evidently declared, by the sweet and comfortable
effects which she produces in a virtuous man, leading him friendly to the
palace of perfection, whose entertainment is a happy bliss.

The first effect that virtue produces in man: which is, the knowledge of
himself; whereby he may be h^mbled.
CHAP. V.
IT is the knowledge of him^^lfe that he may thereby ^^scend by degrees unto
the ^^^wl^dge of the sovereign good. For it is the duty of ^^^ud^n^^ man, to
look into the natures of things and inquire their causes, to the end that he
may find the divine reason by which they subsist; and having found it may also
serve and adore the same, and afterward derive there from, both pleasance and
profit.

In such sort that every one that set^eth his Sovereign and chiefest good, ^n
any thing that is frail, and corrup^ible, and whereof he takes joy but for a
little time, may be more truly said, to possess a soul replenished with
molesting thoughts and restless perturbations, then, with quiet content and
peaceful tranquillity; and so consequently, labors always with a perpetual
error, and blind ignorance without beginning without end, without felicity:
whereas the sovereign good, (whereunto virtue still attaineth) is a lasting
and permanent beatitude, which comprehends within it self, what good soever
man can wish, and that whereunto man forces himself to aspire to make
himself thereby blessed for evermore.

Therefore when we say that it behooves him to know himself: that is, he ought
to be careful for his soul, preparing her, to the knowledge of God his
Creator, who framed him, after his own Image, to the end that we may thereby
as in a mirror, contemplate on his invisible divinity, the efficient cause of
all wisdom and goodness: and that by the knowledge of the Virtues with the
which God has enriched the soul of man, he might understand how much he is
obliged unto his maker, knowing that he has nothing of himself, but has
received all from God above; and so addressing himself unto him, make a
reference of all his actions unto his glory, being the only cause of his
essence and sole mainetainer of his existence.

To begin therefore to know God, we ought to have a knowledge of our selves, to
understand what we are, and to what end we were ordained.

But the perfect knowledge of our selves (which harbors in the soul) is so
combinde with the knowledge of God (which is man's chief and sovereign good)
that they cannot be tru^y and perfectly accomplished the one without the other.
For in the one, we behold God the Creator, and preserver of the world, who
made al things ther^n, for the use of man, and man only for himself, creating
and forming him for this only cause, after the similitude and likeness of
himself, Just, holy, good, and upright in his humane nature, the which he did
compose of soul and body.

Of a soul inspired by God with spirit and life, indivisible in respect of ^t
self, and yet distinguished in the effects thereof; which are her natural
faculties, to wit, understanding, memory, and the will.

Of a body, perfect in its own nature, ^ormed of the earth, composed especially
of three principal parts, to wit, essence, life, and sense; whereunto the
vegetative, and sensitive soul serve as the middle, between the body, and the
spirit, for a knot and connection of those distances, which were so far
asunder.

And again for the conjunction and union of the soul of man with gods
divinity, it has another middle, ordained by God himself to stand between
these two extremes; which is called, abstraction, or a separating intelligence
which is naught else but a heavenly grace sometimes working on our
understanding, thereby to instruct us; other times, upon our will, thereby to
encourage us unto good. In the first place we call it intelligence: In the
second remorse of Conscience. In such so^^ that it is by her, that all good
fortune happens unto us, when we observe and believe her; and on the other
side* all evil fortune, when we carelessly neglect her.

Therefore O man know thine Original,
And bravely scorn base cel^ o^ earthly seed;
Since thou shall shine^^ h^auens glorious hall,
And art by birth a heavenly plant indeed.
Which is to be understood of the man's first knowledge, created by God ^o make
him partaker of immortality, and permanent felicity: and so to have ^lorified
his Creator, had he not so ^afely defaced his Image.

In the other, we consider man fallen ^om so great a good, of his own
free^ill, for his ingratitude and disobedi^^ce: so that he is utterly despoiled
of al ^he precious ornaments of grace which ^^e received from God in his
Creation; and all manner of iniquity and sen^^all uncleanness, have entered into
his ^ule, and dispossessed Justice and San^tity.

For the which earie-tingling, nay ^ule slaying trespass, he forthwith
^ecame a slave to sin and death; from those tyrannous bondage he can never
be freed by any other means but ^y the world saving satisfaction of ^im, who
is made unto us, through the ^race and mercy of the ever living God, Wisdom
Justice Sanctification, and Redemption. An incomparable treasure, such as
neither flesh nor blood could ever have coniectured. For it was not revealed
unto any, saving unto the members of the mystical body of this Redeemer, whom
the Philosophers of the ancient time did never know.

But, if it have been discerned at any time by some who in the erroneous
opinion of the world, have been accounted wise, or to have lived virtuously in
regard of other men, it cannot be said that God has regenerated them (to
speak properly) that being the gift only peculiar unto his children: but it
has been so, because it has pleased God to repress and quell the fruits of
their vicious nature, without tearing up the very roots themselves that they
might serve for the conservation of estates, and families in the world, even as
it has been best pleasing to his will. And again, we cannot any way
imagine, that there has been any age, so monstrously wicked, that has not
brought forth some men of very eminent virtues, which might serve to be a
shining light, a day star in their times. Yea, there has been found, a
greater number of those which have attained unto the perfection of a virtuous
life, then of those which have benewicked in the highest measure. God always
making herein his bounty, and power to appear, to have the upper hand above
his enemies: also without the same, the world could never have endured long.

But we may say, that all these commendable and worthy virtues are nothing
else, but certain ruinous re^iques of the image of God in man, which are left
there behind, to no other end and purpose but to make us utterly inexcuseable
in all things, and which produce none other effects in us, besides the
performing the office of a glass, which heals not at all, but only makes us
to understand, and know our blots and blemishes, our reproachful disgraces and
disreputations with the God of heaven, so much the better, by how much they are
more Crystal^^e, more clear.

Certainly then, it is a thing much to be deplored, that humane understanding
should be disunited from a divine intelligence. All her beleeuings are but
toyish vanities; all her discourses but absurdities. She very often contradicts
her self and being puffed up with vain glory and ouerweening presumption,
voluntarily forsakes the shining light and burning lamp of the true good, to
embrace error and blind ignorance.

For this cause therefore, the source, and fountain of infinite mercy, ha^^
been pleased, to suffer one little twinkling sparkle of light to remain
always in the soul of man, which might push it forward, to the love of
verity, with an earnest desire to follow after it, because it often pricketh
and spurreth him up, not suffering him to sleep and slumber in the lap of
vice: which little, weak (and scarce lively) sparkle being somewhat increased
by the wind of motion, and aided also, and disposed, by the grace, virtue, and
power of the Author of all good, does inuit and allure nay provoke and
eggeth him being regenerated by the holy spirit (having truly discerned, and
understood his own estate, what he is and that he ought to displease
himself) to inquire diligent^y, and fervently to thirst after that goodness,
that Justice, whereof he was deprived: and that glorious liberty which he had
lost.

The same heavenly grace adds (...) blessing to his holy desires, making his
soul to suck into it, the doctrine of life, thereby to repress, and chasten,
all lewd passions, and vicious inclinations; cleanely purifying it, from all
turbulent motions: Lessoning him also to accept in good part, ^he frail
infirmities of the flesh, only ^s loving and fatherly castigations for his
sin, and necessary means to exercise himself in virtuous actions, ^eeing
held-in therewith as with a ^ridle.

In such sort that man by the knowledge and understanding of himself, has
very great means and occasion^ both of humbling and aduauncing himself.

Of humiliation, by the apprehension of his own vanity, perverse frailetye,
and vile corruption, in which estate he ought to displease his carna^^
humors, and in some sort despise himself, when as he shall behold engraue^ in
his own conscience his perpetual ruin, and utter desolation. And of
glorifying himself, having by this mea^^ ascended unto the knowledge of Go^
his Creator, and Redeemer (which succeeds the other inseparably) an^ so most
constantly to assure himself that millions of his miseries may be salued by
the meanest of his mercie^ whereof he could never find a remedy, no not a
lenitiue, to redeem b^^ a minutes sadness, in himself, when by a true and
unfeigned humility, he disposes himself to the receipt of grace which makes
him able to participate of that glorious immortality and endless felicity,
whereof his soul was robbed by sins tyranny.

But because there is nothing in the whole world, more full of difficulty ^hen
to know our selves, because the ^oo too well conceiting self-love which we
bear toward our selves, and our own actions, blinds the eyes of our
understanding, in so strange a manner, that we cannot behold the incumbring
vices of our souls, and soul imperfections that ouerflowe within us, and
which so runeth our ears with such (...) sense-bereauing flattery, that we
most wondrously sottish, think our selves ^o enjoy a far more full fruition
of sense tickling pleasure in listening to ^he fawning flatteries of such as
wrong ^s, then unto those (which without dissembling) would fully acquaint us
with ^he truth it self. All which things being considered, it is thought
requisite (...) before we conclude our determined purpose) summarily to
anatomize the misery of man, and to give a methodicall direction to be
followed, whi^^ shall teach us the only perfect way (...) the knowledge of our
selves. With o^^ the which, it is a thing most imposs^ble, for any to attain
unto true hum^lity.

First of al then we ought to be mo^^ familiarly acquainted and have an
requisite knowledge of the corruption of our own nature, by the remorse a^^
feeling which every one ought to h^^^ in his own conscience, to constrai^^ him
(whiles he too forwardly ouer^^^neth, with a disdainful and sharp ce^su^^ eye,
all the particular actions of o^^^ men) to return home again at last (...) to
himself and take a suruaye of (...) own sins. For as long as we cha^^^ out
some pretty pleasant fault from our selves, (saying each one has (...) fault,
and this is mine) and so compa^^^^ it with the notorious imperfections (...)
some vicious man, we presently ma^^ great esteem of our virtues, and thir^^
our actions worthy imitution.

But if we descend from these pro^^der cogitations, and in sober sadness en^er
into a due contemplation of our ^^rst form, which bore the resemblance ^f God
himself, and make a collation ^herof with the estate which man is ^ow in, then
shall we be enforced to ^onfesse that the first plant of mankind, ^as
wondrous full of exquisite and admired excellency, but now the glory ^^erof is
utterly defaced; and from be^^g like an Angel, is become like a ^e^^st full of
savage rudenes, or rather ^^ke a forsaken desert, all ouergrowne ^ith thorns
and thistles.

Man being considered in the estate ^f his creation, as he was in the full
in^grity and heavenly perfection wher^ith God innobled his soul, in the Worlds
begininng; the^ should he have ^^st occasion to be esteemed the Me^^opolitan,
chief Prince and Commander of all the Creatures of the World: But being
considered as he (...) to day, and in the estate where into ^ee is fallen,
declining from the com^andeme^t of God his Soueraign Lord by his proud
ambition, then shall h^^ be adjudged the most miserable of th^^ world, and
far inferior unto al God^ Creatures.

O most lamentable and hea^^ change, that man created after God own Image, a
companion unto Angels, crowned with honor and glory Lord of the earth, Citizen
of Heaven one of Gods Domestickes, and an Inheritour of all celestial
happiness, by a change, a sudden change, should be found all naked, miserable,
poor, (...) pitiful creature, yea a thousand thousand times more wretched
then the beasts which he had lamed.

For indeed we durst not affirm the we are now (in regard of our human^
nature) in any thing more excellent then the brutish beasts. And if we would
judge of the truth, as we are taught by reason and experience, was must needs
confess against our selves that they in very many things do^ much outstrip us:
as the harmless Dove in pure simplicity: the diligent ^nt, and painful Be
in labor and ^^dustry: the gentle Storke in kind hu^anity: the Dog in love,
and firm fide^^ty: the Ox and Ass in memory and ^^membra^ce of good turns:
the Lamb (...) mildness: the undaunted Lion in ^agnanimity: the Cock in
watchful^^ss: the Serpent in prudence: and all in ^enerall in content and
sobriety.

And if perchance he do surmount ^^me one in a good nature and virtuous
disposition: for that again he sur^ounteth all others in hatred and ma^^e. For
he is more treacherous, more ^uell then a wolf, more crafty then a ^xe, prouder
then a peacocke, more ^^xurious, more ungrateful then a ^ogge, and far more
dangerous then ^poysonous aspe.

Besides, all the most wicked impie^es (if it be not unlawful to term them
(...)) which are found but particularly in ^^uers brute beasts, (and which
pro^^ed in them also, from the necessity of ^^ture, without having either
Iudge^ent or free election of will, for the perpetration of them) are found al
too firmly inherent in the depraved soul of man, and every one of them in the
highest degree: and for the fuller accomplishing of them (if it be possible)
there is heither industry, nor affection, nor will, nor ought else whatsoever,
which shall not be rackt to constrain the same, to perform its best endeavors.

And shall we then vaunt, and boa^^ of our Judgment and reason, whe^^ there is
nothing besides a misty error and a clowdy darkness? Or of our fre^^ liberty, or
rather licentious loosene of our will? And of our eyes placed (...) the highest
watch toure of the little world, thereby to discern a far o^ and discerning
eschew all vanity tha^ would besiege us? And of our tongu^ which steadeth us in
nothing, but lying slandering and blaspheming? An^ of our hands, which are most
employed as our chiefest instruments for the and murder? And of our feet,
which in the paths of sin, are (as Mercury full of feathers; but in the
paths of ver^^e turned to lead? And lastly, of all the ^ther parts and members of
the Body, those diligent endeavors in lewd ^xercises, make them seem to be
as ^uicke apprentises, or nimble pages to ^niquity.

And so in this manner then we have miserably altered and changed that which
God gave us, wherewith to im^race virtue (but most especially to magnify and
praise his glorious name) unto the service of Satan, of the world of sin,
and of our own concupis^ence.

But if when the resemblance of the worlds Creator appeared in us by the
^lumination of our spirits, and by the ^prightnes of our (then) well tempered
affections, we had some occasion of glorifying ourselves in him: now also ^t
being through our defect so monstrously defaced, or at least so inuelloped with
darkness, and obscurde with clouds that the traces thereof can hardly be
distinguished; have not we then as great, nay a far greater reason of
humiliation; and the more especially for that the image of the Devil has
succeeded it, who being a murderer, and the father of lies, has nothing
within the compass of the earthly Globe, that more resembles him then
wretched man, who is now naturally cruel, proud, and a liar? I would willingly
ask, if man being in this sort disarrayed of the garments of grace and gifts
of God (having not any thing whereof to boast, and yet most profusely boasts)
should not truly merit a public and general detestation, and that al other
creatures should conspire together to vpbraide him with his own arrogance?

In the course then which he is to observe, he should not imitate the Pharisee
but the Publican; to the end, that having by our selfe-obseruing, truly
informed our souls of our miserye, we might forthwith make our recourse unto
humility, which only makes us capable of the perfect understanding of our
own estate; and so consequent^y coming before the throne of God ^erforme
dutiful obeisance unto his ^oly name as well for our Creation, ^s also for all
other good gifts, which ^ee daily and howerly receive from ^is bountiful and
liberal hand, es^^cially for spiritual and heavenly ^^ings, which we alone
enjoy and not a^^y other creature whatsoever. And therefore if we have received
any such ^racious gift from God above, it must ^e disrobed, that we may
attain unto the consideration thereof being na^ed and in its own proper
nature, with ^he more facility. For man is never ^eerer unto a divine
contemplation, ^hen when he meditates on humane ^^ailety. Whosoever coueteth
to be ^ood, must first believe that he is ^aught. For there are not a few
that ^eceiue themselves herein, with the Pharisee; who thinking themselves,
Pru^ent, Just, Liberal, Magnanimous, and Temperate, do ouerswell with
self-con^eit, and glorify themselves, as if they had gained all these virtues,
by their own industry: Although there be not any man that possesses any
thing, which he has not received (as a gift) from heaven.

Knowledge and understanding, together with all the other virtues and ornaments
of the soul; as also the quaint proportion of the body, strength and agility
of the limbs, the sweet feature and beautiful complexion of the face, are
nothing else but precious Jewels and high-prizde treasures, which God has
liberally bestowed on man, to the end that his creatures being so richly
arrayed, both in the external abillaments of the body, as also in the
internal trickings of the mind, they might be the greater honor unto his
Majesty.

We having then nothing in our selves that deserves glory, the consideration
hereof is very available toward the knowledge of our selves; sithence as
often as we regard our Creator, who is our supporting maintenance, we shall
straightway proceed in judgment against our selves, accusing the infinite
defect of our own perfection.

The last and chiefest observation which is to be regarded, (a question being
proposed of knowing ourselves) is to imagine how we are reputed in the
Judgment of God.

For even as the innocence of any accused person, is never truly discernd till
such time as he have been soundly sifted by the subtle examination of a
rigorous and wise Judge: So in like manner, none of us all can truly discern
what we are our selves, till such time as we have passed the strict
examination of Gods Justice, who only knows the secrets of the heart. It is
he only that has all the infallible informations of our whole life, and that
can discern our privy* thoughts, counsels and most hidden desires of our
hearts, according to the which we are to be either justified or condemned.

Add heereunto, that it is he alone, that is free from all such affections,
as avail much in the corrupting of Judgment: for which reason, it is he that
is only fit, only sufficient to be a Judge unto all the World. Wherefore,
every one ought to commit himself unto him, not thinking himself virtuous and
honest, until such time as his neuer-erring sentence have approved the same.
If we take this course, it will (questionles) much deiect our high-touring and
supercilious thoughts: For if we be possessed with a suspicious iealousy of
man's Justice (which is daily subject to corruption and abuse; and that there is
no man so absolutely innocent when he perceives himself called into
question, and his reputation in a ticklish hazard of Judgment, but imagines
that he is not so truly clear and his innocence so great, but that he may
be found culpable in one thing or other, if all his dessignes be sufficiently
examined) what shall we do then when we consider that God is our causes Judge?
who by reason of his infinite wisdom, cannot be either ignorant or
forgetful of the deepest thoughts and most secret imaginations of our hearts,
nor alter or dissemble any thing by reason of his ever constant and
unchangeable will.

Then am I most certainly assured (if we remember his manner and rule of
Judgment) that we shall both know and acknowledge our best estate to be but
dust and ashes, and that the swelling and proud humor which we conceived
before, of our own virtues, will suddenly be quelled, and the ambitious
admiration of our own worth transformed to hate: Our shame alas will be too
too great, being like unto a poor tottered lagragge, that beholds his own
beastly nakedness (...) in the Chamber of Presence of a King or Prince.

Therefore, he shall be ten thousand times happy, that in the midst of
his greatest affairs, sets always before his eyes, the true understanding
of his own nature, to the end, that by the knowledge of himself, he may
ascend by proportionate degrees unto the knowledge of his Creator. Therefore
let us say, Whosoere the knowledge of himself can gain,
Nothing that to be known from him can pass:
The means whereby to the may attain
Is to behold his soul in Wisdoms glass.


The second effect that virtue produces in man: which is, the knowledge of
vice, and of the evils which proceed from it.
CHAP. V.
THE second effect of Virtue, is to teach him to know vice and the
inconveniences proceeding thence: for not to understand any thing thereof,
having been made senseless with long continuance and always pampered with
the carnal pleasures of voluptuousnes, is filthy beastliness, and an ignorance
(much to be lamented) of such things as ought especially to be understood of
him, that would lead a virtuous and an honest life; that by the antithesis or
comparison of Virtue with her most repugnant opposite, he might esteem her
far more amiable, and hate vice with a greater detestation; Which is a
rothing: an infirmity:
A restless travel: a privation:
A grief that does torment the memory:
A living death: an imperfection.


For as Virtue is the life of the soul which causes her felicity; even so is
Vice the death thereof: Forasmuch as it smothereth, nay quite extinguisheth the
shining light of divine reason.

The one has nothing else but goodness and verity for her foundation: and
contrarily the other, has nothing for her supportance but mischief and lying,
which may (very deservedly) be called the cherishing fosterers of accursed
vice, forasmuch as from this marriage as from their source, proceed all sorts
of errors, and impiety. For as to have the inioyance of goodness and verity, is
to be endued with a quality, that is always in action, always bringing
forth effects: even so mischief and lying, are certain qualities, always in
action, always laboring without intercession, for the production of Vice.

But if evil be a defect of good, and lying falshhood a privation of verity,
what then is vice? being an extreme passion wholely destitute of the
assistance of reason, and consequently, a continual travail without repose,
and a perpetually tormenting angariation of the mind. For presently as soon as
virtues motion cease, vice is at hand to take possession.

Which swelling big, and daily gaining strength,
Incroacheth on the soul and marres the mind:
Bereauing man of reasons aid at length,
Who Pilotlesse, is tossed with every wind.
Her first and chiefest care is to charm our credulous senses with her
enchanting pleasures; and having well rooted her wicked self within our hearts,
does straightway captiuate our resistless will, making her a servile and a base
bondslaue unto the affections and passions of the soul: which having deprived
her self of Reasons Pilotshippe (by falling at variance with herself) is
enforced to leave her (now wretched and miserable) self, to be transported up
and down, according to the extrauagant desires of sensuality.

But anguish is the boon that she retains,
To guerdon those that are her dearest minions.
Her pleasures are but brief, endless her pains.
Such hate her most that are of sound'st opinions.
In like manner, the soul that consents unto vice, makes her self an equal
sharer of all the crosses and corruptions that proceed from it. Hence it is
that she is always so ouerfraught with repining sadness, iealousy, vain
hope, despair, inconstancy, and a thousand foolish imaginations, which
continually beget so many errors, so many crimes, so many disobediences and
disloyalties, against her Sovereign, forming and framing al (both) thoughts
and actions directly against his will: In such manner that (being deprived of
the gift of grace) she runs wilfully into the obscure dungeons of mischief
and error, fully opposite and contrary to her own natural quality and
condition, which takes delight in nothing more then light and verity.

Being then destitute of true understanding, she chooses rather the evil
then the good, and falsehood then verity. Miserable and wretched condition of
man! which suffers himself to be thus transported unto vice, which he
ought so much the more to hate, by how much the more inconveniences, and
greater infelicityes it brings to his soul.

This tree of death has 3. sprouting branches, every one whereof spreads it
self into many great boughs, the fruits wherewith they are abundantly laden,
are all sorts of vices and impiety.

The first of them is Avarice, the root of all evils, forasmuch as the nature
and quality hereof is an earnest desire and an endless coveting of all the
riches and treasures of the World: which being congested in an huge heap,
have a powerful virtue to withdraw the eye of the soul, from the soul, to
it, or at least so to blind the same, that she shall never be able to
perform her duty, her honor unto God, nor the well intended actions of her
own Conscience.

Of Avarice there are two kinds: the one is pinching, nigardly, sordide,
sottish, and brutish: of which sort is that, which possesses the hearts and
minds of those base and monstrous misers, who for fear of losing the silver
and gold, (which oftentimes they enjoy, not through their own labors and
industry, but descended unto them closely enwrapped in a chest of iron from
their covetous fathers and grandfathers) do with a sollicitous and pensive
care imprison nay timorously intomb it, within the secret bowels of the earth
for fear of wasting or diminishing it. Yet unto such as these are, their
greedy and insatiable avarice never begets a jot of profit, neither to
themselves nor their successors, forasmuch as the desire of increasing
ingendreth in their corrupted and dunghil-minds so strange a humor of sparing,
that they cannot find in their consciences, more then resistlesse and
peremptory necessity constrains, to provide bread for their even famished
bellies, or convenient apparel to hide their nakedness; but daily feed
themselves on brown bread and potage, and make their best liquor a cup of cold
water. All their labors and industries, all their pleasures, all their
content, and chiefest felicities, consist in the contemplation, admiration, and
idolatrous worship of this their sweet Saint, their good, their God, which
they every moment of time, warm, cherish, sit a brood on, both with the eye
of the body and of the soul, not unlike unto the Tortoyse who burieth her
eggs in a heap of sand. They are such cruel tyrants and merciless enemies to
poor nature, that they will not lend unto themselves, eight or ten angels to
work their own redemption from a detested prison, neither would they by any
means whatsoever, be induced to bestow any thing in procuring a medicine for
their greatest malady. And in this ridiculous and strange manner pass they
over their wretched life in a voluntary poverty, that after their death they
may be styled rich.

The other is more violent and ravenous then the former, which (in some sort)
may be said to be contented with what it has; whereas this, is always
tortured with a desire of having more: which still increases with his
ill-gained gold, not respecting in the scraping in of it (so it be haue-able)
either from what men, or by what mean.

In such sort, that whosoever are overtaken by this passion, may be truly said
to have but a poor conscience. For thus he debateth with himself: What?
shall the impiety of the action deter my soul from the prosecution of mine
own commodity? No: On, and faint not: The sin is but on affrighting bugbeare
and a toye in respect of the gains that are gotten; making a subtle (but
devilish) separation, between honest and profitable, in such a fashion that
neither shame nor fear can repress or repel his covetous cruelty.

Of this kind there are also two sorts. The one is ambitious: as when one man
desires to surpass all others in lands and substances, by what attempts or
passages soever. F^^^in the pursuit of such a prize, nothing shall be refused
that may be helpful.

This kind of covetousness is full of danger, and especially if it be in
such as have authority, and power. For having force and conueniencie within the
lists or compass of their own arms, they have (by way of consequence) a very
commodious and facile means of using violence, and extortion, toward the
increase of their golden dunghils; not with an intent and determination of
sparing parcimony, as the former, but of lavish and profuse luxury, and of
having wherewith to furnish their magnificence, and bou^dlesse liberality so
that (reference being made unto this) it is not so much to be discommended, as
that which comes after. For this has (I know not how) a generous
disposition; and the other following, a violent and insatiable passion, which
kills downright as many as are under the jurisdiction and power of its
command, with sorrow, care, anguish, and travel. For she will drive them
through fields and woods, through thick and thin, by sea and by land, in
winter and summer, night and day, through hot and cold, without the allowance
of one poor minutes rest. And after this manner will she enforce them to
gather riches and treasures, with pains and peril, bereauing them presently
of the right use of them: for covetousness increasing, pleasure is diminished,
nay quite taken away. O truly miserable and unhappy condition! Sithence man is
never so blessed, having the full fruition of all his desires, as he should
be, if he would not desire at all. For if the desire of having, be not
limmited with reasons bounding pillars, which have Ne plus vltra engraven in
them, it is far more full of danger then pinching pouertye, because great
desiring breeds great want, and is no more allayed with with purchased
treasures, then flames are quenched with wood and oil.

For, the desire of having, does always increase by the having of things
desired. The medicinable remedy which he searches after in silver and gold,
for the qualification of his malady, does nothing else but increase his miserye.

Chests and coffers, purses and pouches, bags and budgets may in time be
filled; but the insatiable desire of a covetous man can never: for the bottom
of the sea is not so deep as it.

The covetous man never regards what content he might derive from the
substance which he possesses; but how well he should be, had he but some great
matter which he has not: and therefore presses he all his endeavors by day,
and care by night, for the compassing of that, which had, tormenteth him.

This also is the most miserable, most detestable passion, that ever lodged in
the heart of man. Other desires are capable of sariety, and so by consequence,
of quiet comfort. But this is as far from either, as the earth from Heaven.

The luxurious belly-god absteineth sometimes, from a palate-pleasing morsel,
because he has already ouergorged his stomach: and the swinish drunkard
loathes (now and then) your sparking Claret, stomack-setting Sack, or some
neater wine, because his hogshead belly, is ouertunned already: but the
covetous Vulpone is never satisfied: so infinitely great are his desires, that
they are without satiety, without end. His heart is like the Ocean, whose banks
(though all the Rivers in the world flow into the same) are never the fuller.
And briefly this is Tantalus, who stands full in the midst twixt water and
apples, yet starueth with hunger and thirst.

In such sort, that whosoever is infected with this passion, becomes
insatiable, inhumane, subtle, envious, curious, a liar, iniust, dishonest,
disloyal, faithless, a Villain, a Deceiuer, a Thief, a Traitor, a false
witness, perjured, covetous of another goods, and a wicked wretch unto his
lives end.

O poor covetous wretch, who would not deplore thine infelicity, beholding thee
so cruelly tormented, so pitifully tortured by the merciless executioners of
thine own goods, and so much the more rackt and strapadoed by reason of that
which thou desire? The earth yields thee no such fruits: but the seeds
which covetous and greedy desire has sown in thy care-furrowed heart, spring
up, and produce sullen sadness, perplexed thoughts, anguish, grief and
vexation of spirit. Thy plaints and groans are without intercession: thy
frequent exclamation is, What shall I do? Thy plaints declare thy pains, and
thy demand the want of a lenitiue for thy languishment. O cruel, O strange
passion I little or nothing differing from raging madness: Reader I refer thy
desire of reading more hereof, to the fifth chapter of S. James, who
pronou^ceth sentence against the covetous man.

Ambition is the second branch, being the very next neighbor unto avarice. It
is a desire, (inherent naturally in the soul) of having an apparent glory, and
eminent superintendency above other men. It is not alike in all sorts: but in
some greater, in others less, according to the variety of their humors, and
differences of their spirits: for such as are endued with a more subtle
acuity, and lively nimblenes of apprehension, having also more lofty and
doughty hearts, somewhat elevated above the vulgar pitch, and are humored with
nothing more, then with the attemptings and undertakings of your waightier
affairs, and matters of greatest adventures, are much more subject unto this
then others.

In this accursed poison was Adams soul first steeped, by the deceitful
artifice of Satan: wherewith being drunken he durst aspire unto Divinity, not
(by the assistance of grace) recounting the unspeakable benefits which he
received from his Creator; but not contenting himself with his estate and the
signiory of the whole universe, which God has bestowed on him ouerall the
Creatures of the earth and sea, and air, was inflamde with an unquenchable
desire of making himself equal unto God, who justly incensed against him, (as
well by reason of his presumptuous daring and saucy boldness, as also for his
unthankful and a thousand times worse then brutish ingratitude, debased him so
much the more, by how much the higher he coueted to advance himself;
constraining both himself and all his cursed brood to live in such a sort,
that (now) resistless necessity compels them to cry out, and to confess
themselves to be but men.

Behold therefore what thy first fathers ambition has gained thee: which
abounds in us so much the more, by how much the higher we strain to exalt
our selves above the sphere of our place and calling. For the excessive, and
immoderate desire of glory is in glorious: And then especially it meriteth a
double blame, when for the satisfaction and content thereof, it skilleth not,
whether our endeauours be either honest or dishonest, just or unjust.

It is very usual amongst ambitious men, never to find any condition of life
more distastefull then their own present: and that is the only reason why
they so much wish for that which is to come. To the atchieuing whereof they
always both shuffle and cut, tumbling al things vpside down, bringing in one
change in the neck of another, and never cease until such time as they have
attained unto the ending period of all their lewd desires.

Ambition only in Caesar (as in diverse others also) destroyed in him the
richest, and most admired ornaments of nature, that ever had existence in any
mortal Creature, and made his remembrance bitter and odious, for assaying to
purchase glory, prizde at the ruin and destruction of his Country, which was
the wealthiest, and worthiest Common wealth of all the World.

Alexanders ambition was the decay of the eastern world: And for one Alexander
that has ever gained any thing by his ambition (yet with the prejudice of his
reputation amongst good men) there are many millions that have wrought their
own overthrows: At Pompey, Julius Caesar, Marius, and infinite more both
ancient and modern. When the Poets fained Icarus tumbling headlong into the
sea, for attempting to fly up unto the heavens with wings of wax; and
Phaeton, who was violently thrown down from the skies, when he undertook to
govern his fathers horses and the Chariot of the sun, carrying it round about
the world: they intended nothing else, but to declare thereby, that ambitious
actions, have wicked ends.

She promises unto a man a world of felicities, but pays his expectation with
sorrows and repentance: She promises Crowns, but pays Crosses: she
exalts and places him on the top of a pinnacle, but to this only end to
cast him off, and to break his neck downwards: for the ambitious thoghts of
gayning glory (wyping clean from the memory of man what he is and ought to
be) do make him hate and abandon actions of duty, transporting him (too
easily seduced) beyond the bounds of reason and equity, and so (ere long) his
own dissignes are the first that consult against him, and his own counsels
that procure his ruin. From this source springs up Presumption, Pride,
Arrogance, Ingratitude, Atheism, Infidelity, Injustice, Temerity, Vengeance,
Disloyalty, Perfidiousnes, Oppression, Tyranny, Treason, Rebellion, Factions,
Seditions, Divisions, Quarrels, Contentions, and a thousand of the like
mischiefs, which ruinate Families, Cities, States, Kingdoms and Empires.

In regard whereof, we must observe that Ambition is the principal vice, that
the worthier persons are carefully to beware of. For even as the wood, by how
much the finer and purer it is, is so much the more subject unto worms and
mouldiness: Even so (we see) that the more generous and noble minded
personages, are ordinarily more inclinde, more addicted unto this passion, unto
this desire, then others are.

Neither yet is it mine intent to condemn, or so much as to reprehend that
ambition or desire of honor and renown, which men are to have to live in the
world, with worthy reputation and esteem, and is achieved by the performance
of some high attempts and honorable deeds virtuously done; whence may accrue
profit and commodity unto the common good of the weal public: but this
vainglory, which some labor to enjoy by the mediatio^ of such actions, as are
partly unlawful, partly ridiculous; or this temporal Honor, which is
attributed unto things which have always been, and are yet at this very day,
by a vain and false opinion esteemed admirable amongst men; or a certain
renown and glory which they pretend to acquire, more by a seeming and
counterfaited Virtue, then by that which is so indeed. For virtue will not
permit any that follow her, to be discomfited by vain Ambition: but rather to
know and acknowledge sincerely, with an open heart, the slender meaneness of
their poor abilities, thereby teaching them to have an humble and lowly
demeanor, in the virtuous acquisition of true honor; and not to make any
dependence or hopeful relyance upon the unjust and trustlesse purposes of
vice: which by false honors, vain pleasures, sloth and covetousness, drowns
all her favorites in a sea of miseries.

Voluptuous sensuality is the next that follows: which is nothing else but a
smooth tickling and delightful moving of our carnal appetite, at the very
instant when it does long for the thing desired.

It is engendered within us, by the knowledge which we have of the beauty, the
harmony, fragrant savor and pleasant sweeteness, of those things which our
heart wishes for. But seeing there is no man that can be said to enjoy a
dureable rejoicing in the transitory actions of voluptuousness, men do
oftentimes endeavor to reject the same, that they may thereby gain unto
themselves the quiet fruition of some small content: but they assay it to a
fruitless end. For after a long reiteration of one and the same things, their
desires are cloyed with the use thereof: and then in stead of receiving some
content they find nothing but satiety and a hateful loathing of that they so
much wished for before. In such sort, that voluptuousnes, is nothing else but
an immoderate irregularity in its beginning, a defective want in its progress,
and in its end a distastefull bitterness.

And then again; how many heart-burning molestations, shall the mind be
tortured with, before this imaginary shadow of felicity can be attained unto
How many and great travels, how many heavy perplexities, how many instant
griefs, how many importunate sorrows, how many tedious lothings and odious
detestations shall interpose themselves between man and his desires! Is it not
true, that as soon as pleasure and voluptuousnes have mastered man, in the
self same moment of time sorrow and grief, anguish and annoyance, trouble and
vexation of spirit, hang over his head? And by how much the more the Judgment
is infected with this vice; by so much the more wicked, and violent, are the
affections, and the number of them so much the more increased: which do not
only prejudice the internal faculties of the soul, but hinder also (in a high
measure) the health and safety of the body.

For, from what cause proceed there so many noysom and corrupted humors, so
many incureable yea strange and unknown maladies, as from voluptuousness, and
those accursed pleasures, which we purchase always unto ourselves with the
souls peril, and oftentimes with the destruction of the body which being
obtaind, bring with them (without fail) a thousand thousand occasions of
sorrow and repentance, for one of perfect pleasure and true content.

Sadness, sullenness, melancholy, despair, doleful pensiuenes, and all other
kinds of woeful discontents, are not these the choycest flowers and godliest
shady trees of thy voluptuous Paradise? Are not the Crystal tears, that
trickle from thine eyes, and Crimson drops of blood distilling from thine
heart, the pleasant bubbling fountains of the same? Are not thy griefs, thy
groans, thy sobs, thy sighs, thy lamentations, the eare-inchanting tunes, the
warbling melody, and sweetest shrilling music of the pleasant groves?

O case, O most unhappy case ^as truly lamentable as it is strange; and then
which, nothing deserves more, our most serious and considerate deliberations,
thereby that we may be lessoned to know the greatness of our miseries, and
the corruption of our Judgment, and to change our erroneous opinion whereby we
strive to persuade our selves that there is no other content in the world, but
that, which may be attainde unto, with the satisfaction of our depraved
desires. Whence it is, that we preserve with all possible care, and fear of
losing, that, which finally is to us, the only cause of our own destruction;
and by loving whereof, we separate our selves far off from the love and
pursuit of such riches, such honor, and such pleasures as are truly perfect,
truly certain. Thus then may we see that virtue is soon drowned in the
midst of pleasure.

In this only point the Covetous man becomes prodigal; and the Ambitious
man tumbling headlong from one extreme unto another, lives like aswine in
voluptuous sensuality. For the unbridled desires of the voluptuous can not
have any contenting satisfaction, or determinate end: because that inioying one
pleasure for a little while, they (shortly) desire, and woo a greater, a
quainter and a more ticklish delight: and so their wishes (being void of firm
resolution and settled constancy) creep still groueling forward, til they fall
into the searchless depth of disastrous calamity.

Man through unlawful irregular and immoderate pleasures, grows to be
Intemperate, a Gourmandizer, a lickorous, a sweet-mouth'd companion, a drunken
tossepot, an incontinent lecher, whoorish, adulterous, prodigal, effeminate,
cowardly, impudent, slanderous, sloathfull, lazy, a gamester, a poor snake, a
penurious starueling, and in the end a miserable wretch.

So then, the evils that sprout from these three branches, (as from their
stock) are linked one unto another (as it were) with a massye chain, which
draggeth man unto all kinds of impiety whatsoever, (the end of one being the
beginning of another) never leaving him, until such time, as they have brought
him full unto the gates of hell. For vice is always blind, and runs
heedelesly into apparent dangers: She inticeth man to assay all sorts of
villainies: she is more full of perils then the miserablest chance that can
befall a man: She makes him accursed within, that is in the outward show a
blessed man. For indeed she is nothing but a glorious-outsided sepulcher
stuffed within with worms and rottennes.

She being masked under the false appearance of virtues ornaments, does
oftentimes beguile unwary man, lending his ear too attentively to her
enchanting phrases, and heart-beguiling flatteryes; in such sort, that by her
cunning subtlety she induces his desires to covet that which they ought most
to fear, to love what they should hate, and follow what they should fly from:
blinding him in such a fashion, that he (poor credulous wretch) establishes
all his felicity in the frail fruition of earthly vanities; never imagining
that he, that settleth his hope of happiness in them, is never without a
soul, full stored with restless disturbances, and torturing vexations; and so
by consequence is nothing else but in perpetual servitude unto his own
passions.

Wherefore there is no danger or affliction whatsoever that can befall a
mortal man, but is better to be undergone, then to suffer himself to be made
a slave to vice; sithence it is the most cruel detestable Tyrant that can be
imagined in all the world: such a one as never gives one minute or moment of
repose and quiet, unto the heavy soul wherein it harbors. For howsoever she
underprop his sitting or lying, with soft cushions or pleasing pillowes,
thinking by these nice and dallying flatteries to sooth and smoother-vp his
painful languishment and so to lul his charmed thoughts asleep yet
questionless the soul of him shall always be found full of anguish, horror
and confusion. The lewd and vicious man experienceth us, that it is a great
deal harder to work actions of impiety then of godliness. For the vicious man
in the resolution of wicked purposes is much disturbed by the remorsefull
pleadings of his own conscience; which cannot be adjudged the meanest torment:
for it cries on him without intercession; More of thy self, then others be
asham'de.
Thy self art most wronged by thine own offense.
And of thy self, thy self (first selfely blamde)
Must give account to thine own Conscience.


It is also a great trouble to search out lurking corners and secret nookes,
which may serve as retyring couertures to his mischievous actions. But how
closely soever he cloak his wickedness, he fears to be descried even in
darkness it self: inasmuch as he bears always within him a tel-tale
conscience, which (being notable by any bribes nor by the world it self to be
suborned) will absolutely bewray his impious deeds: Crying on him continually;
Thou labour'st much, and take great pain in wast,
To hide thy fault. For none could er'e prevail,
Nor shall thou now: for it will appear at last.
For from himself, who can himself conceal?


Finally, admit that sin be both conceived and borne, yet sweet mean must
have sower sauce, and one pleasure must be purchased (or not had) with a
thousand pains and as many perils: yea hell it self is within the conscience.
For the law of duty pronounces, It is unlawful to do evil. And presently
the Conscience produces at once all the testimonies that can be, the
Information, the Judge, the Condemnation, the Executioner, and the punishment.
The law of Honor trumpeteth out by the mouth of Fame, the reproachful shame
and shameful reproach of base dishonor, condemning the remembrance both of
the vice and of the vicious man. And yet again this is the worst of all, that
the death and destruction of the body is not the last affliction to a wicked
man For if death did bring unto man (as to the bruit beasts) an absolute
privation of all sense, and a total annihilation of the soul, certainly the
vicious should enjoy a far greater advantage then the virtuous, in the
fruition of all their wishes, and desires (in this ^^fe) and not be punished in
the world to come. But the Justice of the Euerli^ing God pronounces most
clearly and with a high voice, The longer that a wicked man does live
Without repentance, so much the more pain
He shall endure (where God will none forgive)
In hell, which God for such did first ordain.


For God does not punish all wicked offenders, in the earth; to the end that
all might understand that there is a future judgment, in the which, all the
impious actions, and mischievous intents of wicked men shall receive vengeance.
As also he rewards not all good men, with temporal blessings, here in this
lower World; to the end that all should know that there is another place where
God will reward the patience of the virtuous with a Crown of glory.

Again: God does not inflict his punishments on all the wicked; neither yet
bestows he blessings, or benefits outwardly on all the good: for fear lest it
might be imagined that the virtuous followed and embraced virtue through hope
of receiving a reward and for the sake of an earthly blessing* and that they
eschewed vice, for fear only of the worlds punishment. For by this means,
virtue should be no longer virtue, forasmuch as there is no action that can
truly challenge this glorious appellation, if the agents intention regard the
hope of an earthly recompense, and does not atchieue the same for the love of
virtue only, that thereby he may be rendered agreeable unto God, who alone is
able to crown his deeds with everlasting blessedness.

Accursed then is the condition of al wicked men, their lives are lamentable,
and their deaths miserable; sithence vice depriues them of that most excellent
good, which virtue bestows on such only, as do conform themselves unto her
discipline.

(...) us discover Vices cousenage:
^^d then its love will soon be turnde to hate.
(...) Virtue will our soul so much engage,
^at the other will seem harsh and out of date.
(...) not astonished Reader, if thou tread
^^tht full of grief and seeming misery.
^^e ways with bitter anguishes are laid,
^^at Virtue trauells; not with voluptie.
The third effect that Virtue produces in Man: which is, both the theory and
practice of conquering himself.
CHAP. VI.
THE third effect, is both the theory and practice of ouercomming our selves.
Which renowned and victorious Conquest, we ought to strive so much the more
courageously to attain unto, by how much the more we know our natures strong,
and desperate in the eager resistance of our assaults; sithence all the
rebellious passions, and lewd affections which are within us, are so many
proclaimed-traiterous enemies, which by a treacherous insurrection against
Reason, their dread Sovereign, will rack their abilities (at the highest) to
conquer man, and so to ransacke and rob the poor soul, of its tranquillity
which is her chiefest and most precious treasure.

Well then, sithence whatsoever inciteth us, is either passion or affection,
as well that which sets us forwards, to the acquist of Virtue, as that which
compels us to embrace vice, (according to the natural disposition of every
one) we may conclude, that our passions and affections are the true
declarances of what we are, forasmuch as there is nothing (whatsoever) in us,
whereunto we are more obsequious then unto them, be it in the undertaking of
actions either good or evil.

Wherefore there is nothing that a Prudent man ought to take greater heed of,
then to keep them always obedient unto reason, neither whose conquest can be
more glorious then the subduing of his own affections, not more dishonorable
then to yield unto them.

To this end therefore, virtue teaches us, not to deprive our selves of wishes
and desires; but that we should continually repress and master them for there
is no man how stupidous and dull soever, that is not sometimes moved with the
delights of pleasures, and touched now and then with glory and honor.

For Nature being very precisely curious as well in being magnified by
propagation, as also, in being conserved in her perfect estate, by the
honorable atchieuements of a virtuous life, has stamped in our souls, a
desire of delight, and a ticklish rejoicing in corporal pleasures: in the
fruition of which, we are sure, to give unto our selves, too too licentious a
scope, if the moderation of Reason do not interrupt us.

On the other side also, Nature has imprinted in our hearts a great desire of
praise and glory: as well because this ^ast desire, should resist the disorder
of the former, through fear of blame and imputation, which is never separated
from a too voluptuous life, and disordered pleasures; as also that it might
serve as wings unto our wills, whereby they might desire, and soar aloft unto
the glorious, and celestial palace of Virtue, where Honor also is inthroned
with state and majesty: and so hereby we might at last attain unto that end,
for the which we were at first ordained by our Creator. Yet notwithstanding,
this is the difference between our two appetites: The former being sensual,
may be defaced in a virtuous man by a long and a continual exercise of
commanding himself, and his tumultuous passions; rendering them obseruant, and
dutiful homagers unto Reason, whereby they may be made convenient, and capable
of all good purposes, that there shall not remain in him, the least jot of an
extrauagant motion. Even in such sort, that being so utterly extinguished by
temperance, there shall be left no more appearance of their being there, then
if they never had been there at all.

The second cannot be so utterly extinguished but the print thereof will still
remain in all men generally. For a good man desires to be honored for his
Virtues: and although he seek not after glory through ostentation; yet does he
not despise deserved praises, or at least uses his best endeavors to be worthy
of the same: and for the having hereof, his own merit does appease his mind.

On the other side: the wicked man deceiving himself, as well in the knowedge
of Glory, as in the disquisition of the same, may be more fitly said in
respect thereof to fly from it, then to follow after it. And the fear of
being blamed, and branded with base ignominy (he always justifying himself)
makes us to discern most palpably the great desire he has to be accounted
virtuous.

Both of them tend then toward the prize of honor and reputation. But having
attainde unto the angle of Pythagoras, in the which both good and bad actions
meet together: the one trauaileth toward the right hand, and the other
turns toward the left; and so the ends of this their progress are no less
diverse then their ways are different wherein they walked. For desire is the
counterpoise of the soul, which makes it incline and weigh down the balance
on that side, in the which the will is placed.

But because our desires are very different, and are not equal in facility and
ease, man does oftentimes deceive himself in making choice. For voluptuousnes
and sensuality follow us continually, they accompany us at all times, and in
all places, they offer themselves unto us, they court us lovingly, and the
means to enjoy them is very easy. Again they promise us delights, pleasures,
rest, content, honor and liberty. So that indeed there needs a great deal of
constancy to preserve our silly souls from ruin and destruction: and which
sugared persuasions to withstand, we are not only urged and pricked forward
with shame and fear of reprehension, but also established and confirmed by the
glorious exemplary deeds of such as are truly generous.

Contrarily, honor is distanced a great way from us: and besides, the path
that leads unto it, is maruailous straight, laborious and painful. Whence it
comes that the way (which is only one) is hard to keep: it is as toylsome and
slippery as can be possible. The path of Virtue (through which such as tend
toward Honor are to pass) is full of pricking thorns, affrighting terrors,
tedious irksomnes, and grievous anguish. It is subject to the opprobrious
obloquies of backbiters. And last of all, the access thereof is so difficult,
that it meriteth almost to be called impenetrable.

Man therefore, when constantly resolving with himself, to proceed always in
that path which leads him to the stately palace of true Honor, (maugre all
painful and dangerous occurrences whatsoever) bequeatheth all delicious
sensuality, and voluptuous pleasance, unto the delicate, neat, spruce,
effeminate and sweet faced womans-man; and wholly dedicates him self and his
indeauors unto the gauling labors and (almost) intolerable travails of severe
Virtue.

It is more then reasonable, that he (by the generous and fearelesse resolution
of a noble courage) being arrived unto the farthest end of so great a design,
should now be recompensed with a crown of Honor: for the gaining whereof he
enterprizde a journey so painful so dangerous.

Nature then has imprinted in the minds of all, a love of Honor and a desire
of praise, and above all, a certain opinion that true glory cannot be
achieved by any other means but virtuous actions. In such sort that we must
take especial care not to be so unnatural, as to prise glory at a mean value;
nor yet to think, that she can be acquirde by the wicked actions of impiety.

Behold therefore the necessity both of the theory and practice of Virtue: which
consists as well in the knowing and doing of good, (which we ought always
to embrace and follow) as in the auoydance of that which is evil, which we
should shun as a venomous serpent. The wound which vice has stabbed in the
soul, cannot be cured by repentance alone: but the correction and amendment
of our life is also required. The grief thereof ought to be expeld by Virtue,
and not by a contraryvice: for the Covetous miser becoming a Prodigal,
tumbleth headlong from one extreme into another.

Virtue ought to place herself in the very center of the souls affections: the
soul ought to command the senses: and the senses ought to guide the body; in
such sort as it is by their assistance that the affection becoms from being
corporal to be spiritual. They are the chariot that translateth this living
clot of earth, unto the Temple of Immortality.

An admirable means, had we so great a blessing as to be able to attain unto
the knowledge thereof. Yet far more admirable, if we could use it well. For
even as the life of the soul is divine Grace, and the life of the senses the
assistance of Reason: even so the helpful support of the body has its whole
dependence on the orderly guiding of the senses, being assisted by the first
mouer, whose office it is to spiritualize them, being brought unto it.

For if the soul would be contented to live unto her self, without toyling
and troubling her self for her companion, she would deprive her self of all
her glory, being not able to be conioynd unto that unity, (whereunto she
aspireth) by any other means but by doing well: So that then her salarye
wholly depends on the administration and government of the body, for therein
only her action consists.

For how can she employ her self otherwise? by what means can she appear
unto the world, but by her faculties? Therefore it is very requisite, that she
aid and succor them, guide and govern them, as long as they remain
together; that thereby at length triumphing in glory for having vanquished the
Devil, the World, the Flesh and its affections, she may bring them unto the
fruition of eternal blessedness.

Contrarily, if she (by yielding too obsequiously unto their lustful
appetites, and wanton concupiscences, forgetting both office and place) should
slave her self to the servile subjection of their desires, she should truly
merit (by suffering her self to be thus transported by their lewd and carnal
affections) to be deprived of all her sovereignty; forasmuch as (by giving too
facile an observance to their flattering persuasions) she has frustrated the
serious intention of her Creator, which was, that she should assimulate unto
her self by virtuous actions, such things as were impure and subject to the
dregs and blemishes of sin, that so at her return she might bring them with
her to be conioynd in him. The course then that she is to observe in such
contrarieties, is, so to demean her self, that both the senses and her self
be nothing but Reason, that is to say, that she be not so spiritual that she
forget her self to be conjoined with a body, whereof she ought to have great
care, to rule and govern it: Nor yet so corporal, that she should be
unmindful of her purer essence, and that she is the second cause of both their
felicities. So the^, Virtue producing these effects in a prudent man,
impresseth in the soul of him, not only a knowledge of that which is just,
honest, and profitable, that he may thereby love and embrace it; but also of
that which is unjust, dishonest and unprofitable, that he may thereby shun
and hate the same, holding his affections under the rule and moderation of her
laws, to the end that he may not be made a bondslaue to his enemy, being
fallen under the power of Vice.

And what is more miserable in the world then servitude? And what servitude
greater, then to be in a slavish subjection to a man's own disordered
affections? On the other side, what greater happiness in the world then liberty?
And what greater liberty then to be master and commander of a man's self?

If the victory that is achieved, ought to be valued according to the dignity
and worth of him that is conquered, it is most certain, that the Conqueror
shall be as great as was his glory whom he conquered. In such sort, the
renowned victory which Achilles won when he conquered Hector, was so much
the more noble, by how much Hector was more mighty and valiant. Furthermore,
there is nothing in the World so great as man, nor any thing in man so
excellent as his soul and courage, which is the greatest and most puissant
thing within the compass of the Universe. For questionless that is chiefest,
that is noblest, which approaches nearest unto the first beginning. But the
soul of man does most resemble God, because of his understanding, use of
reason, and freeness of will, which she has far above all the parts of
man's body, and all other terrestrial creatures whatsoever. Whence it
necessarily follows, that the reasonable soul is the most worthy, most
noble, of all the universal World.

If man, then, gain the conquest over his own soul, he ought to be esteemed
more victorious then he that has subdued and conquered the whole world.

Wherefore it is, that man's chiefest content (during his continuance in this
life) is the souls quiet and peaceful tranquillity: which cannot be gotten by
things directly contrary, such as are restless desires, and greedy
covetousness, wherewith the soul is miserably tormented.

Nor yet does the peace and tranquillity of the spirit, properly consist in the
exemption of grief and sorrow; but also, in the freeing of it, from such
violent passions, as plunge the vicious in a sea of sadness.

So that then he only is to be accounted free, which domineereth over his own
affections, and withstandeth the violence of such ill-seasoned desires, as
without resistance would destroy him. If we esteem that man to be attended on
by an unhappy chance and a miserable fortune, which having been once a Lord and
Commander, is now tumbled headlong down by some disastrous accident or other,
into the subjection of his own vassal; what then shall we say of him that is
voluntarily becomme a servile bond-slaue not only unto his passions, but also
unto such things as are senseless and dead? (such as are gold and silver, and
the like worldly vanities) and so at length a servant to sin and (which is
worst of all) unto the Devil himself.

Is not this a great punishment of God, that man out of his own free will,
(for want of knowing and understanding himself) should make himself a servant
and a slave unto those things, whereof he (if he would eschew Vice, and
embrace Virtue, so to use his goods and fortunes with moderation) might have
the mastery and full command?

Therefore if there be any sparkle of Judgment remaining in us, whereby we
may discern the treacherous conspiracies and domestical treasons which our own
passions, contriue against us, shall we not blush to suffer our selves to be
so shamefully surprised, by those toyish fopperies, which the least foresight
in the world would utterly have queld? Have our painful indeauors in the school
of Virtue gained no greater profit, then that frail riches, and worldly
vanities, should have greater power and pre-eminence over us then Reason? Are
we willing our selves to deface that relic of Gods image and resemblance in
us, that we may become wholly brutish? Do we love and long for that, which we
ought to hate? to embrace that which burns us? and to kiss that which
consumes us? O, where then is virtues love, and the affection due to her? O,
where is the laudable desire of Glory and Honor? whereunto all truly generous
and noble spirits do aspire by civil demeanours, and commendable actions.

Well then, let us contemn all Ambition, for Ambitions sake, save only that,
which by arming our minds with true humility makes us so valiant against our
selves, as to overcome our selves; in such sort, that flaying off our old skin
with all his stains, blemishes, spots, and imperfections, we may put on a
clean, a fair and a beautiful skin, not only laudable for its meekenes,
mildnes, patience, liberality, humanity, modesty, and fidelity toward all men;
but also for its fortitude, constancy, and Justice toward our selves, whereby
we may be able to daunt, yea to subdue our greatest enemy, who has by smooth
insinuation, fortified himself even in the Cittadell of our own understanding
with a resistlesse and immutable resolution of forcing from us that little
little residue, that small sparkle of brightness, which suruiueth in us: to the
end that being altogether in darkness we might with greater facility, slide
into the soul wracking Charibdis of voluptuous sensuality; from which, it is
almost impossible to be redeemed. And last of all, if generous and magnanimous
spirits, present themselves within the lists, ready to undertake just and
lawful combats; What nobler victory shall we obtain then, by conquering the
passions and affections of our own selves? that reason hereby may gain the
prehemine^ce over our unruly wills, which have inclined our credulous souls to
embrace all mischievous and wicked actions. And then may we justly triumph in
so great a victory, when we our selves have conquered our selves, in so
lawful and just a combat, being ready now to enter (which is the guerdon of
our Conquest) into the possession of the souls soueraign good, which
consists in the tranquillity of the mind, and peace of Conscience. And
therefore we will conclude this Chapter with these verses; Our own selves
Conquest is great victory.
For in our selves, ambush our greatest foes.
And the sole means, our selves to glorify,
Is by our Reasons force to vanquish those.


The fourth effect that Virtue produces in Man: which teaches him to perform
his duty toward all men, demeaning himself worthily in his Vocation.
CHAP. VII.
THe fourth effect is to teach man his duty toward other men, that he may
thereby discharge the same worthily, according to his place and calling, be it
either publicly or privately. For we are instructed by nature and confirmde by
experience, that men cannot live one without another: in such sort, that from
our beginning, our Country, our Parents, our friends, our neighbors, will, yea
ought to be profited by our indeauors. So that we are not to ascertain our
selves of the security of any other fortress in this life, but of doing,
counselling, and saying, all such things as are truly accounted honest and
virtuous: all this being but the discharge of that duty and service which
nature obliges every one to do.

So that then if we will be guided by the direction of Nature, we ought to
labor for a public good, and to employ for the conseruatio^ of humane
society our goods, our travails, our industry, yea whatsoever is within the
lists of our ability. For no man lives a more shameful life, then he that
always lives unto himself, and thinks on nothing but his private gain. And he
lives most worthily which lives unto himself as little as is possible. Neither
indeed can any man live in greater honor and reputation the^ he, that thinks
his imployme^ts never bestowed better, then for the general commodity of the
weal public.

In such sort that a virtuous man feels himself so lively touched in soul,
with an earnest desire of profiting those, with whom he lives; that he
indeauoureth himself to assist and succor them, and not to be daunted by the
greatness of pain or the fear of peril.

He esteems his country as his own proper mansion; wherein every one ought to
labor for the common good. He foreseeth that no man is able to protect his
private house from being rifled, when the enemies have the whole City. And
therefore every one ought to carry his hogsheads and ladders to the breach, that
they may by their dilligent endeavors makevp the reparation and withstand the
assault. But if every one should retire himself, and cowardly fly unto his
house, hiding and locking up all his money, plate, jewels, and other
necessaries; the city being surprizde, he does not only lose his gold, but
with his gold, his glory. Wherefore to secure thy particular, thou must bestow
thy labors and travails in the defense and safety of the general: which
cannot be (when the City is besieged) except they show themselves one to
another like faithful friends and loving Citizens.

We are therefore obliged in duty each toward other, in this World: to the
end that we labor not only for our selves, but for all those also, which
stand in need of our assistance, having always recorded in our memories, that
golden sentence; Do unto others what thou would have others do to thee. For
there is nothing more repugnant both to the law of nature, and of men, the^ to
make that the increase, thy profit, which cannot be had, but by the prejudice
of another. For Nature will not, nay cannot tolerate, that what increases our
golden heap should be the cause of another heaviness. In such sort that
whosoever would follow nature, cannot be mischievous or noisome some to his
like, but would choose rather to endure the crosses of the world, and the
fretting afflictions of contemptible poverty, then to augment his fortunes and
exalt himself, by the wrongful deeds of bloody tyranny: forasmuch as the evil
of the soul (which is impiety) is a thousand times worse then the evil of the
body.

Therefore every one ought to have an especial regard, that the actions which
he practices be honest and just; and that the end whereunto they are
referred, be also profitable unto the common use and society of those, with
whom (whiles we breath) we are always conversant.

For the great, rich, and potent men, can very hardly, (or scarce at all) live
without the succor and help of the meaner sort: for these are they which
turmoyle and tumble up and down, to dress their grounds, and husband their
possessions. In like manner, the mighty statesman, and so al descending to the
Mechanics, can not live the one without the mutual help and succor of the
other; God being pleased to show herein, the great care and providence which he
had of binding the^ together with the indissoluble knotte of mutual necessity.

It is also requisite that every ones pains and industry, be accompanied with
trustiness, and loyalty: to the end that the fruit and profit that the one may
produce by the furtherance of the other, be just and honest, to the continual
maintenance of humane society; which being taken away, al things would be
destroyed by confusion: so that bounty, Justice, truth, and honesty, would
violently be carried down the stream, when as private gain should be preferred
before the performance of civil duty; or when it is deliberated, whether that
which is full of profit and commodity may be achieved, not sinning against
honesty and Virtue. Which proposition is quickly affirmed by such greedy minds
as are easily drawn into such inconveniences.

A happy life, which consists in the perfect use of virtue, cannot be
accomplished, if it want the assistance of corporal and external goods, which
serve as aides and instruments to the better and more happy execution of honest
desires: and therefore it happens oftentimes that the fear which men have of
falling into poverty (esteeming it the greatest evil in the world) leads
the^ to desire the goods and riches of the world; and to this effect persuades
the^ that it is their duty to labor for them and to possess them (as being one
of the 3. main and principal points, to the obtaining whereof, all the actions
and industries of men are finally reduced) thinking by the gaining of them, to
commit themselves to a retired settlement and restfull quietness, not
considering the sentence of that wise Philosopher; that he that would truly
and perfectly become rich, should endeavor not to increase and augment his
riches, but to diminish his greedy desire of having: because such as leave
their desires without bounding limmits do daily increase their poverty and
want.

As on the other side, the most excellent Virtue and nearest approaching unto
God himself, is that which causes man to want as few things as is possible.
For to wish or covet nothing, is to be in some sort like unto God, teaching us
to content our minds with that little, which we have, and not to account any
poverty either ashame or a reproach unto us, save only that, which proceeds
from sloathfulnesse and ignorance, or rather from riotous expense, and
luxurious superfluity. For when poverty is found in a man of an honest and
civil conversation, one that is laborious, painful, stout, and wise, it
serves as an infallible cognizance of his magnanimity and lofty courage; such
a one as imployeth his mind in the atchieuement of greater matters without
incumbring it in the search and pursuit of respectlesse vanities: such as are
the riches of the world. And therefore we may say; External goods which
worldly men adore,
Are not called goods if we them truly name.
Subject they are to change, for evermore:
But virtue only, still persists the same.


Wherefore it is, that the liberty and freedom of the wise man's soul (that
knows the natures and qualities of external goods) is never troubled with
their pensive perplexity; being certainly assured that his felicity is not a
jot the greater, nor his content any thing increased, by being environed on
every hand, with an infinite mass of riches and treasures, if he have not the
fruition of that true joy and comfort, which only proceeds from the souls
tranquillity.

But because we ought not to live in the world, like idle droanes we are bound
by duty to employ the talent which God has bestowed on us, to the commodity of
diverse others besides ourselves, indeauouring to augment the same by all just
and honest means, without the dommage and prejudice of any; that we may
hereby be true imitatours of the painful Be, converting all things into
sweet and gentle meeknes, contenting our selves with that which is necessary,
and spending the residue to help and succor those that want it.

For the life of Man, with his industrious pains, is not praised because he is
rich, and mighty; but because he is just and friendly, and has the true use of
the riches which he has gotten: forasmuch as liberality is the excellent use
of that means, which God has placed in our hands, to be a help and succor
unto many. So that natural duty (which we call the source of all laudable
actions, and foundation of honesty) obliges us, to do nothing against the
commodity of the common good, nor to seek after any thing by the detriment of
another; but to render unto every one with a good will and a cheerful
countenance, such things as rightly appertain unto him.

For even as our duty is the end and scope whereunto Virtue tends, to wit
that we should duly respect honesty and a seemly carriage in all our actions:
Even so it is necessary and requisite, that the commodity which accreweth unto
us by the mediation of our industrious and painful endeauours, be honest and
profitable both together: because there is nothing profitable that is separated
from honesty; this disjunction being the fountain of al wicked vices.

So that whenever we see profit presented unto us, if we perceive that
there are ingredie^ces of vice mixed with it, we ought to eschew the one, for
the others sake: thinking it to be as full of annoyance unto the peace of the
soul, as a sweet potion mixed with poison, to the safety of the body.

For equity and reason would have some distinction between duty, and that
which is called commonly profit, there being as great a difference and
separation between them, as there is between honesty and this profit. For
this kind of profit makes man not to fear to violate his promise, and to
profane that which has been both ordained by the law of God, and confirmd also
by the laws of men; always provided that it bring him gain. And the other on
the contrary side, makes him (with a liberal and free mind) to imploye his
goods, travails and industry, yea whatsoever lies within the compass of his
ability, to make them profitable and available unto every one; not incited
thereunto through a certain hope of a gainefull recompense: although indeed
such as receive any thing, are bound also by duty to be grateful to their
benefactors, and to render such things unto them for their good deeds, as the
proportion of the benefit requires, and their abilities can affoorde.

Yet howsoever, Virtue obliges those that are well storde, to do pleasures
unto others more freely then to receive, because it is far more honorable to
oblige then to be obliged, to give then to take, forasmuch as he that
conferreth rewards on others, exercises a very good and an honest action: but
he that receives, does only exercise an action of profit. And profitable is
much less gracious then honest. For that which is honest is stable and
permanent, furnishing him that gives, with a constant gratification: whereas
that which is profitable, slideth quickly away and is soon lost; neither is
the remembrance thereof so agreeable and pleasant to the mind. And again,
those things are esteemed the more precious by how much the dearer they are.
Therefore it is better to give then to receive, because giving costeth more
then receiving.

Wherefore whosoever has been obliged by receiving, ought to redeem his
liberty if he can possible. For it argues not a virtuous and a valiant
spirit, to remain long in the arrereages of courtesy. But if we have bin
beneficial unto any, by the friendly performance of a civil courtesy, we^
should desire to have that obligation stand uncancelled rather then to have it
required by a mutual recompense, sithence the mind is well contented with the
honor of friendly performances: which commonly coueteth rather to deserve
something and not to receive, then to receive and not to merit: forasmuch as to
merit is honorable; but to have the enioyance of its desert, is deemed nothing
else but profitable.

Yet there is always a regard to be had (in actions of honesty) unto the sort
and quality of the obligation: For a general good, ought to be preferred
before a particular, and a man of merit before such a one as merits nothing.
Wherefore, it is, that this desire is unjust and dishonest, which indeauoureth
nothing else but to extract profit and commodity from every one, without doing
good unto any one; and to receive any kindness whatsoever, without showing so
much as a willingness to reward, valuing true honor and glory (achieved only
by virtuous actions) at a mean reckoning; nay, scarce accounting either of
them of any esteem at all. For indeed it is almost impossible for such, as
use all the means they can for the reaping of profit, to do that unto Honor
which is her due: Forasmuch as dishonest gain is a careless regard, nay an
absolute despisall of true glory; the shining sple^dour whereof every virtuous
heart ought to be jealous to preserve, not suffering it to be eclipst by the
obscure clouds of base actions; but most especially the nobler sort, and such
as have bin exalted to the highest dignities, whether by letter, or Arms. For
Honor exacts the performance of duty so much the more severely in those, by
how much their worths and dignities have more distinguished them from the vulgar.

Therefore it is that the golden Merchant is not so much honored as the simple
Soldier. For the one heapeth up a mountain of treasure, respecting only
his own enriching: the other practices but few means, and those also as
instruments of Honor: and the only end of all his parsimony, is wholly
referred unto the acquist of Glory.

And then if natural Duty have obliged all sorts of men, to do their best
endeavors (in their several vocations) to accomplish something, that may be
profitable to the public good; it stands with greater reason, that she
should oblige those, which are the bright lamps, and glorious stars of
honor, (either by place or parentage) to the end that they might enlighten the
meaner actions of other men, by the shining luster of their examples. Which
they can never do, but by clearing first their own hearts from filthy
covetousness; forasmuch as that is the principal cause, which makes men
forgetful of those things which appertain to the purchase of Honor: wholly
addicting their minds to riches, and suffering the^ to think on nothing, save
that alone, which serves for increase of their revenues: whereon being wholly
bent, they often times practice base, and ignoble actions (which in fine, procure
their miserable ruin) against those that are of their own profession. Wherefore
it is very expedient for him that desires earnestly to embrace virtue, to
propose her always before his eyes, as the only object whereat he aymeth, and
not to esteem of any profit, save only that which is attaind unto by her
accord.

For how-soeuer the imposturous hypocrite, and dissembling wretch, seem more
fair in his affairs, according to the censure of the World, then the plain
honest and open hearted man; yet certainly it is better to be unrespected
with the last, then with the first to be in great esteem. For the ends of such
are always miserable. And therefore they that seek after nothing but their
own private gain, are miserably deluded: because whatsoever their greedy
minds induced them to follow, was false riches and cou^terfeit treasures. For
true riches are not gaind, but by the performance of our duties, grounded on
Virtue: which is naught else but the practice of doing well to all, not in
regard of gain, or hope of recompense, but only in respect of Virtue it self:
which is, and ought to be, the sole profit of an honest man. She it is that
makes all things profitable. And he that takes care to perform his duty, is
never guerdor less. For the observance thereof being well employed, procures us
esteem and credit amongst men: credit preferres us to the dignity of some high
place, wherein are gained orderly and quiet riches: which are to be accounted
of, far more then great abundance mischieuously gotten. It is a worthy cement
that firmly unites honest and profitable. For if they be disioyned, Vtility
is nothing but deluding cosenage: and Ouerreaching, an irreligious policy:
which severely binds the trembling-guilty conscience to answer for the same
It behooves therefore every particular man, to be (as well in art, as
industry) constantly resolved, and resolutely confirmed, in three especial
points, before the atchieuement, or execution of any action. The first is, that
his enterprise be just. The second is, that the means which he practices by
(for the attainment thereof) be lawful. The last is, that he surpass not the
bounds of his own vocation, be it either public or particular; but always
contain himself within its limits, and do his best for the common good. For,
than this, there is nothing more agreeable unto God, nor more beseeming an
honest man.

Let us then learn our deuoir toward men, to the end that we may render
thanks unto God for all. First, for the good which he has given us: next, for
the good which we have had, to make it truly profitable, and for the
prosperous success thereof: and lastly, for the reward which we are sure to
obtain: I mean the beatitude and felicity, which is the true ground of perfect
goodness.

We have formerly declared, what are Virtues effects in man, (making him to
love and follow her) besides the recompense which she has in her self and of
her own nature. And because recompense has a very great power over us, and is
able to cause us to affect things a great deal the more, Virtue will never be
without the same.

Now, by how much the more her excellency surmounteth the worths of other
things; so much the richer, and more precious are the salaryes which she
presents to virtuous men. These are Honor and Pleasure; a double good,
without which, she never marches: whereof (now following) we make description.

The Description of true Honor: and how it ought to be acquired.
CHAP. VIII.
ALl our actions whatsoever do usually tend toward Perfection. We desire her
for her own sake; being not able to be contented without her. Imperfection is
the mother of displeasure, and nurse of discontent.

For which cause, as many as have treated of beatitude, affirm that we ought
(if we wish for true content, true felicity) to desire perfection. For, none
can be said to be truly happy, but such as have attained unto the perfect
accomplishment of the same. Her supporta^ce has no refere^ce to the goods
honors and pleasures of the Body: because perfection is not found in the^,
being frail, inconstant, momentary, and liable to decay, through times
tyranny. We ought therefore to seek after Wisdom, and embrace the virtues of
the soul: whose condition being permanent, and estate eternal, they scorn
the violence of alteration; whose constancy also is never moved with the
battering storms of angry fortune.

So then if all things labor for perfection, and desire that which is good and
agreeable unto them, it stands with greater reason that the soul of man should
covet that which is not only appertinent, but wondrous necessary. The soul
then being an immortal essence, it is clear that it ought not to appropriate
such things unto it self, as are frail and full of change: but ought rather
to be richly adorned and glorified, by such as are permanent and proper only to
its own nature.

Amongst all the goods and treasures of the soul, the acquisition of the
Honor which proceeds from virtuous actions, whether civil or military,
challenges the highest place; forasmuch as the pleasure and glory which
accompany the same, are fully accomplished with absolute perfection.

But because the way of Virtue (through the which such as would attain unto
perfection, are to pass) is near adjoining unto that of vice into the which,
poor mortal wights (being miserably deceived and guld) do easily slide,
sithence in very many things there is a great resemblance twixt virtue and vice
(so that were not we directed by the infallible guidance and safe conduct of
Reason, and lively rouzed out of dull neglect, by the help and assistance of
virtue her self) we should too too often take false cou^terfeited honor in fled
of that which is true and perfect indeed.

We ought therefore to take an especial care, that our slight regard in the
election, cause us not to err in the choice thereof. For true Honor is never
achieved but by Virtue and performance of duty, which are as it were its
legitimate and natural parents: without the which, Honor can no more be,
then heat without fire or the shadow without the body. For otherwise it would
be nothing else, but as a fantasy of Honor, or a bubble of vain glory:
which is oftentimes engendered in the vain and deluded imagination of the
distempered brain of him which lives for the world only; without having any
respect at all, unto the principal end of his being here, and which never
attaind unto so much knowledge, as to be able to discern what true Honor is,
much less to know how it may and ought to be achieved.

Let us define it, to be the shining brightness of a virtuous and worthy
action, which is reflected from our own Conscience, unto the sight and view of
those with whom we live.

It may be also called a graceful respect, or a renowned reputation which
every one ought to have, in recompense of his merit and worthiness, declared
unto the world by many great and glorious deeds, approved so to be by the
general acknowledgement of all good men.

It is not then an imaginary fantasy, but rather a splendent brightness, or a
twinkling light, which makes him that is the subject hereof, and with whom
she is enamored, to shine as the sparkling rays of a precious diamond. It is a
divine good, a celestial treasure, to whose pure nature it is absolutely
contrary, to permit any wicked or vicious person to enjoy the high-priz'd
title, and appellation of Honorable.

And therefore it is not won but by striving (first of all) against our own
affections, and by conquering them: turning fruitless and toyish vanities,
ouerweening and arrogant presumptions, towering and to pless ambition, into a
remote and an eternal banishment: yea, exiling also with them the quenchless
desire of our own private gain, that we may sincerely tender all our actions,
all our industries, unto the public good of other men; but most especially to
our countries good.

For those that are born to be magnified by the enioya^ce of honorable and
glorious appellations, do never desire any thing more ordinarily, more
earnestly, then to perform as many profitable and worthy actions, unto others,
as are within the reach of their abilities; and to sacrifice their tender
hearts last drop of blood to redeem their Country from an imminent danger: so
that their glory being thus moystned by the honorable effusion of their own
blood, it shall flourish and wax green in the eternal Springtime.

So then the esteem and reputation which men should desire, consists
principally in two points. The first is, that we be always found sincere and
upright as well toward ourselves as to all other men; to the end that the
testimony which comes from our own consciences unto the sight and view of
those with whom we live, may serve us in stead of a warrant and an approbation
against false report: forasmuch as Verity is the shield of Honor.

The second is, to glorify our selves rather by surpassing others in every
good duty, and office toward them, then by respecting of any other advantages
whatsoever for our selves; be it either worldly reputation or particular profit.

For it is in this duty (which is truly virtuous, truly charitable) that
generous and well tempered spirits will employ themselves (always confined
within the limits of their own vocation) to acquire and possess that great
and invaluable treasure of Honor, that crown of glory, whereof (having once
merited it by virtuous deeds) they never are deprived again.

For can any one rebuke those that daily accumulate desert upon desert, and
never desist from enriching the former good deeds, by seconding them with the
like? showing themselves to be truly seasoned with a generous disposition,
wishing always to encounter any new occasions that shall be sortable to their
desires: greedy of no other glory, beside the testimony of their own souls:
disesteeming utterly the favorable Judgment of other men. For every action is
so much the more laudable in it self, by how much the farther off it is from
ostentation, or desire of applause.

And although it be not every ones fortune, to be able to attain unto the
height and top of Honor, or to establish it unto eternity: yet they must not
therefore be discouraged and exanimated from the pursuit thereof; but think
that there is no one how mean soever, but ought to make more account of that
little which he can attain unto, in his own vocation, then of all the rest
of his whole wealth and riches; because (in such a case) Honor cannot be made
altogether immortal, by reason of the incapacity of the subject: yet howsoever;
it is the greatest, the most illustrious, most commendable, and most durable of
all the goods which man inioyeth: forasmuch as by it, he leaves unto the world
a good testimony of his life, and to his own posterity a good example.

But forasmuch as the Qualities, Conditions, and Resolutions of such generous
and noble spirits, which make Arms their profession, are different from other
estates, which never trauail but for their own particular and private
vtilities; whereas these here propose especially before their eyes, the
public good of the common wealth, assuring them a quiet peace, purchased by
their trauells, their dangers, their wounds, their woes, their grievous
sufferances, and conseruing the general good by their industry, valiance and
perseverance: Honor therefore is most deservedly called the lawful guerdon,
and true recompense of virtuous actions. For, sithence Virtue participateth of
a divine nature, it necessarily follows, that she cannot be recognized or
sufficiently rewarded with gold or silver; but rather with those things, which
draw near unto divinity: such as are Honor and reputation, rightly
appropriate unto him unto whom it justly appertains.

But it appertains unto none more justly then unto the gentle, generous, and
valiant Captain: neither shines it so magnificently, so gloriously, in any
affairs, as in the courageous atte^pt^^ of martial enterprises. We behold
continually such as are the legitimate sons of dantless Mars, to be full of
courage and stomach even in their swaddling clothes and afterward in
process of time to be wise in counsel, sober in necessity, patient in
adversity, just in the midst of power, cautelous in execution, diligent to
follow wheresoever fortune leads them, despising ease and not respecting life
when it stands upon the point of Honor, not setting their valiance at a price,
nor his virtuous deeds for a mercenary stipend; eschewing always evil, to
embrace what is good, not through fear or force, but through a voluntary and
free respect of Virtue only: which (in stead of recompense) does crown them
with glory, which makes them so remarqueable above other men, as much as the
Diamonds value is esteemed above other precious stones: yea as much as the
sun surpasses in glory, the starry tapers of the firmament: yea so much I
say does Honor outstrip in true esteem, al other earthly treasures
whatsoever: whose frail inioyance the world permits us to have no longer,
then for the continuance of a fleeting breath. But Honor makes those that are
absent present; yea the dead alive, through the fresh remembrance of their
noble deeds, translated carefully from age to age, carrying with it still in
triumphant state their truly virtuous and admired actions, borne on the golden
wings of purest eloquence, that never move, but in the services of honorable
Personages.

This Crown, therefore, is lawfully due unto those, that spend their lives in
the service of their Prince and country; who voluntarily exposing themselves
unto apparent dangers, to shield the same from foreign invasions, bring back
with them many glorious scarres, the noble emblemes of an undaunted courage;
together, with a minde-appeasing testimony in their consciences, of performing
faithful services unto their Prince, and of doing their best endeauours, for
the preservation of their country: without the which, it could not choose but
endure a miserable languishment. For how could life have been any way
grateful unto us; having lost our Religion, our Laws, our Liberty, and our
purity of life, which are, next to God, the necessary maintenances of our
being? So that then these things, being forcibly ravished from us, we cannot
wish to live any longer in this world.

This duty, this service (which they perform toward their country) being of
so great importance, conferreth on them a deserved Title of Nobilities; which
crowns them with such shining light, as shall reflect a splendent brightness
to posterity. For sithence neither the country, nor the liberty thereof, can
be secured, but under the protection of defensive arms; it consequently
follows, that such as make profession thereof, and have assigned themselves
thereunto, for the common good and safety of their country; should not only be
respected and honored, but also recompensed with an eternal guerdon: in such
sort, that the virtue and prowess of an honorable man, has always been
accounted the subject of his Nobility; being approved (in all ages) by the
common suffrage of every one. So that then Honor was given unto men for a
salary, a recognizance of some virtuous deeds, being a glory unto him whiles
he lived, and afterward a grace translated by descent to his posterity.

It is great honor from illustrious ligne
To be descended, by our Predecessors:
But greater far by our own light to shine,
(Then by their luster) unto our successors.
It behooves every one therefore to have a great regard, that we obscure not
the sparkling luster of that glorious sun, by degenerating from the virtue of
our ancestors, whose descending Honor has enlightened us.

Into which loathsome dungeon of base ignominy, such ordinarily precipitate
themselves, as being respectless of their deuoir, prefer their own quiet
peace, before their princes service: and their private gain before their
Countries Honor; never considering that Virtue crowns only those which
persevere unto the end. And that man cannot immortalize his name on earth, that
gives way to drowsy lazynes: it being utterly anent reason and honesty, that
he which changes virtue into vice, should in any sort be honored and
respected: forasmuch as nobility by birth, can stand in no other stead unto
such as show themselves vicious by their ignoble deeds, but to condemn their
folly and increase their shame.

For vice is so much the more deformed and ugly, in those of noble races, by
how much the patterns of their fathers actions are more eminent. In such sort,
that the dead bones and ashes of their predecessors which bought at so dear a
price that splendent light, whereby they shine so gloriously in the world, will
rise and menace cruel torments against them, if they conioyne themselves with
vice, and her associates, to bandy against virtue and her adherents: seeking
vengeance of the wrongs which they receive by the participation of dishonor
imposde on them and on their family, in recompense of that honor whereby they
left their progeny illustrious.

Therefore have arms been permitted unto noble personages, that they might
bear them always, as the recognizance of honor, under the confident hope,
that those (having bin suckled in their Cradles with the milk of Honor, and
afterward grown up in virtue, by the mediation both of Art, traditions, and
examples of their ancestors) would not make a league with any that should be
virtues enemies; preferring private profit, before the service of the Prince;
and private gain before their Countries good.

For the order of Knighthood was instituted in ancient time, to fight in
defense of Religion, to defend their country, to serve their Prince faithfully
in the wars; being sent by him unto the same, to maintain the wronged causes
of Widows, Orphants, and others that are injuriously oppressed. For to fight for
Religions cause, is a spiritual act, which God will guerdon in the life to
come. To defend and protect the country wherein we live, is to regard the
conservation of mankind. To do service unto the Prince, is to cancel the
bonds of our natural allegiance. To redeem the oppressed from afflictions
and miseries, is a noble deed, and truly virtuous; it being the fruitful
effect of godly charity. For he that delivers not the wronged from
oppression, nor opposes himself against tyranny for their deliverances sake
(having means, power, limbs, and al opportunity whatsoever) does infringe the
knot of humane society, which ought to be preserved inviolable amongst true
Christians: and for neglect hereof, he ought to be liable unto as reproachful
an infamy, as severe a punishment, as he that has betrayed his parents and
friends unto a cruel death.

Wherefore Nobility ought to be in continual exercise, as well in the midst
of dangerous hazards, in time of war; as in civil and honest affairs in time
of peace, but principally in charitable deeds. For tilting, hunting, running
at ring, and the like, are not sufficient exercises, to make your virtue
appear unto the world: she passes by such without respect, requiring
attempts of greater adventure.

Great Personages have oftentimes desired occasions full of danger to present
themselves unto them; that they might by such undertakings give a luster unto
the greatness of their undaunted courages, whose light may be compared unto the
sun it self. Moreover, it is not unto childish apprentises, or simple
ignorants, that the conduct and guidance of difficult exploits are committed;
but unto those rather, which by long experience, have been made fit and
capable of the same. For Virtue never adorneth any one with wisdom and
modesty, but she also accomplisheth him, with valiance, and magnanimity. She
takes from him the fear of danger, of grief, of sorrow and of death, making
him to triumph boldly, treading on the head of danger, with the foot of
constancy, and so to direct all his actions unto Honors glorious title, as the
archer his arrow to the white.

Wherefore if we be men and not monsters in nature, why do not we tend
toward this perfection? trampling under our feet with courageous hearts, all
the dangerous difficulties which strive to divert us from virtues path;
sithence it is by her that we are truly virtuous, truly blessed.

This worthy resolution is far more excellent then the possession of all the
treasures and honors of the world: which noble and heroic minds continually
despise, as things frail, transitory, and vain; and therefore seek after
felicity and beatitude in things more dureable and permanent. For these two,
are in the soul of man through a necessary consequence, of one and the same
Verity, to wit to be happy and to be virtuous: the last is as necessary unto
man, as the first is naturally desired of him. But as the desire of being
happy is very great, so is it also very vain, without this verity; which
teaches us that the chiefest science in the world is to be an honest man, and
the greatest Honor to be happy.

For Honor, not conformable to virtue, to our duty, and to conscience, cannot
enjoy the sweet society of perfect glory, and permanent felicity. And therefore
it is nothing else, but a windy vapor, proceeding from swelling pride, and
vain presumption; whose recompense at last is shame, hatred, and the derision
of the whole world, and unspeakable punishment in the world to come.

But that which proceeds from virtue, inciteth every one that is endued with a
generous disposition, to erect unto himself an eternal monument, by glorious
atchieuements, and heroicke deeds; arming him with an invincible and
courageous constancy, to march boldly in the very face of danger it self;
sustayning infinite labors and travels, tearing through the briars and thorns
of a thousand inconueniencies, aduising him not to court Honor, either through
ostentation or ambition: for were it possible for him to attain unto the end
whereat he aymeth, without indurance, he would not by his good will, cast
himself into an Ocean of perplexities; in such sort then that he thrusts
himself forwards, only, because he being dull and gross, cannot be purified
of these great incu^brances, but by the fire of afflictions.

But having opportunity now to look back on the manifold difficulties which
he has surmounted through the performance of his deuoir, guided by the
aidance of a just conscience he arriues unto the field of Honor: where his
Temples are crowned with a Chapplet of liberty; as truly exempted from the
malice both of death and oblivion, as his intention was remote from gain or
profit, only aiming at the good of his country and the service of his Prince:
in such sort, that he has purchased unto himself a renounced memory
throughout all ages.

So that then the soul finding it self adorned and beautified with such rich
and in estimable treasures, reapeth great joy from this great felicity: which
being rooted in the very bottom of his heart that possesses her (and not in
external and frail riches) accompanies the soul and the honor thereof,
unto the highest heavens, where both shall be immortalizde togethers. Therefore
say we; The wings of Fame
mount Honor to the sky;
Where Virtue crowns it
with Eternity:
Whereas the Virtuous,
amongst a shower of darts
Sought it, thrust-foorth
by brave and noble hearts.
Back therefore, Epicure,
in sugared pleasure
Bathing thy soul:
Thou shall be crownde by leisure;
Since she preserues her lawrells
for such spirits,
As duly challendge them
by Virtuous merits.
Back, Wanton womans-man,
which without pain
Would purchase Honor: Back.
Thy hope is vain.
Favors avail not: labors
have the price;
And those which for her sake
would sacrifice
Their blood, their limbs, their lives,
that are so dear,
Their souls; nay, more, had they
what were more near.


The description of false Honor; the true subject and ground of Quarrels and
Contentions.
CHAP. IX.
ALthough virtue be contrary unto both the extremes of vice; in the midst of
which she has her seat: yet nevertheless, she is more directly opposed unto
one of them them then to the other, and bears greater conformity with the
one then with the other. For, Fortitude inclines more to audacity, then to
timidity: and the liberal man resembles more the prodigal, then the covetous
wretch.

By reason whereof, such as cannot discern the true from the counterfeit, by
the aidefull ministry of reason, are easily transported into one of the
extremes, according to the inclination of their affections: in such sort, that
vice being full of deceitful mischief, and gaining the assistance of our
affections; besieges the understanding, conquereth our reason, and then
carries the wavering soul, destitute of a Pilote, according to the inconstant
wind of every fantastical occasion: which being seduced by the external
senses, gives way unto the flattering charms of a deadly foe: Which as a
Tyrant,
proud in victory,
Gives power to the senses
over each action:
Whose chiefest comfort
and triumphant glory,
Is to see reason made a slave
to passion.


As oftentimes it falls out in a point of Honor: whereof the greatest part
of men make a vaunting brauado, rather through a vain ambition of seeming
greater then other men, then for the true and zealous affection which they
bear toward virtue, which they untruly challenge to themselves.

For if Honor be nothing else but the resplendent glory of a virtuous action,
and a celestial good that cannot, nor will not permit, that any evil deed
should be adornde with honors title; how is it possible that a man may be
called virtuous and valiant, which is not stomackfull in anything save
mischief, that is never armed but to oppress the innocent, never does his
uttermost but against the just, nor enterprizeth any thing save only that
which is quite contrary to the general design of those that desire peace in
stead of war, repose in stead of sedition, and loving amity in stead of
enmity? Without all question such valiance and adulterate fortitude, whose
object is nothing but blood and death, is to be accounted no otherwise then a
savage brutishness; nay, far more beastly then that of the unreasonable
creatures; which are never offensive unto any, save those twixt whom and them
nature proclaims a perpetual Antipathie: but such as are of the same species,
do never offend their own companions.

But amongst other shames, or rather most ignoble and base infamies, this is
not the least, that a Gentleman should stain his Rapier in the blood of his
neighbor; nay, oftentimes of his own father, and for a trifle, or smaller
matter: of such a one (I say) with whom before, he made but one bed, used but
one table, but one purse. Tell me, I pray, whence proceeds this false and base
imagination in thee, that thou think true Honor to consist in surpassing
others by strength of body, and in making the weak to tremble at thy feet? Or
that he is not to be esteemed valiant, that insulteth not imperiously over
another, or assaulteth not another life, or sheds his blood? False and
counterfeit Honor, is the father of those adulterate brats. For ambition also;
being one of false honors sons, is never quarrellesse; each one would have
the place, and every one contests with his companion for the chiefetainity;
striving with every Oar one to debase another; in such sort that the most
desperate sticksneaging Cauallier, is held with them to be the stoutest
gallant. And at this very day, virtue is transformed into vice, and true
valiance into rashness; not without the approbation of all; or (at least) the
most part, apologizing only in this manner: It is my duty to defend mine
honor. Advise your incensed gallant, to any other course besides fighting, he
swears, it is simple, base, cowardly, and the infallible mark of a Capon-harted
dastard. He swears, he will be revenged: and the furious flames of his
distempered mind, must be extinguished with his friends heart blood: take this,
and take all; his Honor is more precious then his life: he had rather
translate his name unto posterity unblemished, then live to suck a hundred
years light air. He must sacrifice himself unto his own passion, and serve
as an oblation, to be offered up (in a bloody duellu^) unto the devil himself,
to the eternal damnation of his soul.

This mischief proceeds either from ignorance, or from the contempt of the
knowledge of true Honor, and perfect use of virtue; which teaches men a
means, to temper the violent heat of their unbridled furies, and advises them
^ather to be silent, then not to speak ^el, rather to receive injury, then to
of^er it, to bestow on others, rather the^ to ^^ke from others, to travel in
the rough ^ay of virtue, not to wa^der up and down (...) the fruitless pursuit
of false Honor, and last of all, rather to pardon all disgraceful wrongs, then
to be revenged on any one. For the greatest revenge, the honourablest victory
that we can gain over our enemies, is, to surpass them in diligence, in
bounty, in magnanimity, in good and courteous deeds; wherewith they will
sooner know and acknowledge themselves conquered, and constrained to shut their
mouths, and to bridle their contumelious tongues, then by any other forcible
courses whatsoever.

Wherefore, a virtuous man is not to consider any other thing in all his
intendments, but whether they be just, or unjust, good, or evil; to the end
that by reasons judgment, he may be able to discern the truth from falsehood,
and to declare, that he proposes unto himself, no other end, but justice and
equity.

And therefore, such as subject themselves, to the indurance of labors and
travels, for iniust causes; or fight desperately for peculiar profit, under
what pretense soever, being not forwarded through the sincere love of virtue
alone; cannot brauado it, or swagger it out (but falsely) that they are endued
with such worthy qualities, as ar truly requisite to a generous mind. For such a
victory, as is bought with the blood of those, which have very slenderly, or
happily scarce offended us at all, is an exquisite defeature of true renown:
but the other is far more noble, and far (beyond comparison) more
commendable, in that he knows to overcome himself, in giving pardon to his
enemies. For the number is but small of those which are found to be so just,
that they can easily forget, and slightly ouerpasse great injuries received;
that being a peculiar property unto the magnanimous, and truly noble courage:
which shows himself angry with him alone, which seeks to stain the glory
of his Honor, by the injurious and devilish imputations of ignoble deeds. In
such sort, that to pardon these insolences, and to forget such apparent
wrongs, acted by those, on whom he may with facility revenge himself, is a
deed that merits noble praise, and is only proper to a virtuous and heroicke
spirit; who is both able and willing to repress the fury of his passions,
crying for revenge, and not to recompense ill deeds for ill. Not that it should
not be lawful for a Gentleman or a Soldier, to demand a reason of the wrong
which is offered unto him, and most especially in an action of honor, which
was gained by military prowess: but yet too, he ought to proceed in the
managing hereof in such sort, as his own conscience may always serve as a
sufficient testimony of the truth and equity of his quarrel: which ought
always to be grounded on a just cause; and so to clear the blemishes of his
reputation by lawful means, and honorable satisfactions. For whosoever
groundeth his quarrel on no reason, or requires greater satisfaction then he
ought, dishonoreth himself; for as much as Honor consists in the entire
discharge of duty: which obliges us not to do any thing, contrary either to
equity or our own consciences, under what color or pretext soever; neither
thorough fear of torments, or death it self; but to continue firm and
constant, in the laudable action and perfect use of virtue, addicting our
selves wholly to such things as are just, honest, and seemly for their own
sake, and being not provoked by any other means.

For Honor cannot subsist where virtue is defective: neither can virtue
justify this title, except the ground thereof be verity; because the Court
of verity is Honors throne. In such sort, that a man's honorable reputation is
much blotted, if when he receives the Lie, he free not himself of that
ignoble imputation: because virtue being founded on verity, it follows that
as soon as verity is deficient, virtue also fails; and so by consequence our
honor is lost. Therefore a man without verity, is unfurnished of Honor; but
having it, can never be dishonored, by what wrong soever.

Wherefore a prudent man, will never give the Lie, without mature deliberation;
knowing full well, that he should prejudice his own reputation, if he should
slanderously do it, without a necessary and just occasion. He is not ignorant
that the sequel of such a word untimely spoken, will be fighting and
swaggering, or rendering some other sufficient satisfaction unto the party (in
such sort) abused: so that he will temper the heat of his choler with sober
meekness; doing nothing in momentary passion, which afterward should cause
him to repent.

And as it is far from his intent and will, to be offensive unto any, either
in word or deed; so also he takes especial regard, that all his purposes be
so surely founded on reason and verity, that his distastefull words do not
minister just occasion of exception, unto any of those, with whom he usually is
conversant.

For although such a one, to whom the lie is given iniustly, and without any
reason, cannot absolutely lose his Honor and reputation; yet notwithstanding
it prevails oftentimes so far with many, that it makes an impression in
their fantasy; inducing them to think, that he which has in such a manner
received it, is a man destitute of virtue, being taxed to be a man without
verity: so that the vulgar (which usually are more inclinable to evil, then
unto good) cannot be persuaded, to imagine any other thought of him but evil,
as long as these his wrongs remain unsatisfied.

In respect whereof, the Lie unjustly given, is a great offense, both to the
heart and honor, of him that received it.

For to speak properly, and within the terms of Reason; No one can work
another man's dishonor, except he first dispoile him of his virtue which
accompanies him, and with whom Honor dwells continually. A man may take a
weapon from a man, how stout and valiant soever he be, and so disarme him: he
may receive a box on the ear, a bastonado, or a cracked crown; because these
are chances, which oftentimes manhood cannot withstand: it being most true
which is used prouerbially, Qui contemptor est vitae sua Dominus est alienae:
That he that regards not his own life, becomes by his desperateness the
Master of another man's. But a wise and prudent man cannot be overcome, arming
himself with virtues shield; which can never be taken from him that does
possess her. And therefore indeed there is no one that can deprive a man of
his honor; save he himself, by sequestring himself from virtue, and verity,
to addict himself wholly to vice and falsehood.

Be thou then virtuous, and thou shall be honored; neither shall thou need to
fear of being dishonored by yniust disgraces. For it is a treasure that cannot
be taken away from the virtuous; who affect not praise for ostentations sake,
but love. Honor only is the guerdon of their merit; which ought always to
be judged and approved by the grave and virtuous, and not by the vulgar
ignorants; much less by the vicious and quarrelling Hacksters: because the
opinions of such are still suspected; as well because they want judgment, to
discern virtue from vice, as also because the affections of the vulgar are so
full of corruption, that ordinarily they love, they desire evil more then good.

Wherein all the ambtious pursuers of false Honor, do most apparently bewray
these follies. For we should account him a senseless Idiot, that should
question a blind man concerning the color of his Cloak; and yet we do not
consider, that when we depend upon the rash approbation, and brainlesse censure
of the wavering and inconstant multitude, we refer the judgment of our
Honors and Lives, unto such ignorant Simplicians, as have no insight at all in
things, that are worthy either of praise, or dispraise.

Therefore ought we only to undergo the censures of the virtuous and grauer
sort of men; who consider the honor of another, as if it were their own, and
never consent that any shall be honored, but those, whose virtue duly
challenged it. For indeed we err as often as we weigh the virtuous actions,
and honorable deeds of others, in the unjust balance of our own passions:
and therefore wise and honest men ought to be obseruant of the merit, and not
either to praise or dispraise the same, for the Actors sake; because our
passions overthrow our judgment, and cause our censures to be justly deemed
unjust.

He is judged unworthy of Honor, that proffers wrongs and injuries unto
others: nay, he is the Author of his own dishonor; declaring by his actions
unto the world, that his breast enfoldeth within it a malignant, and a wicked
spirit, to do such deeds as want the supportance and patronage of Reason.

For all circumstances being well considered, there can be no sufficient reason
found, why men should wrong and iniure one another: sithence God has endued
man with judgment, accompanied with reason; by whose helpful assistance he
ought to decide all differences whatsoever, and not to conclude them with
reuengefull cruelty: because injury and revenge is properly an unjust action,
or a deed without reason; which cannot proceed from a generous mind: to whom
it is more agreeable, to receive wrong it self, then to proffer injury and
disgrace to others.

So that the first cause, which instigateth the heart of any to be injurious,
can be nothing else, but iniquity and base villainy; which is the true source
of unjust and dishonest actions. Therefore he is to be reputed dishonest and
most unworthy of honor and esteem, that is the willing Author of another
unjust disgrace: and such a one ought to be disesteem'd, nay, despised of al
men; unless he give just and convenient satisfaction unto the party injured,
without constrayning him to right himself by combat in the field. Which if he
refuse to do, it is most certain that the injury and disgrace, returns unto
him that either did it, or spoke it; even as the dust flies up into the eyes
of him that blows on the same.

Yet howsoever, as every one ought to have an especial regard, not to urge any
with injurious wrongs, and then to raise an unjust quarrel on such unlawful
grounds: so also having proceeded so far, that he has undertaken it, he must
be careful on what conditions he desist therefrom. For both the one and the
other, is prejudicial to his honor; which ought always to be conformed unto
the conscience, which is the infallible touchstone of truth: in such sort,
that we must not be wilfully obstinate in the eager pursuit of an unjust
quarrel, being accused by our own consciences. For sithence verity is such,
that no man can live vnfaulty in this world, he is to be accounted worthy of
greatest praise, that most carefully observes it; and having declined,
redeemes his error, by rendering due and rightful satisfaction for the same.
Wherefore he is so far from meriting any blame, that oftentimes he augmenteth
his honor and reputation, because like a man he gouernes himself by the laws
of reason and modesty; there being nothing more unjust, more dishonest, then
scornfully to reject or disesteeme the same; for that a man is only a man, as
long as the actions of his life are guided by the address of Reason. For that
which is achieved by her helpful directions, is seemly, and good, and always
praised of all: but that which is attempted without her consent, is unseemly
and naught, and always blamed of all. Therefore let us say: True Honor, that
on virtue
grounded is,
Guerdoneth man
with true felicity:
But what on vice and falsehood
founded is,
Does wrap him in
distress and misery.


The pretended ground of Quarrels is, false Honor: which causes a man to be
the Author of his own destruction.
CHAP. X.
A Quarrel is the complainte of an offense, which we pretend to have been
done against our Honor. Honor is assaulted either by word or deed. The deed
lies in the violence of the hand of him, that is offensive either to body or
goods.

Yet notwithstanding a noble mind, groundeth not his quarrel, on any
detriment, procurde either through the ransacking of goods, or grieuance of a
blow received; but on the offense, which may diverse ways redound thence, unto
his Honor.

For such as have the enioyance of more eminent places then others, advanced
thereunto, either by lineall descent, or their proper merits, make small or no
account at all of wealth, but as it is the instrument of glory only: and
therefore do not think either loss of goods, or other afflictions, to be
injurious disgraces, as long as their Honor is not interressed. For if injury
be properly defined an unjust action; and in that unjust action be also
ransacking of goods; they never account any thing unjustly done against them,
when they are spoiled of nothing, which they rightly term their own goods;
which is the precious treasure of their Honor. As for example: a man of arms,
addressing himself unto the wars, incountreth his enemy face to face, is
vanquished, is exceedingly abused in his person, loses his goods, receives
wounds, and pays a ransom: yet for all this, he shall not make a particular
complaint hereof, because he has not lost any thing of his own; that is to
say, which has been prejudicial to his Honor: and therefore having lost
nothing of his own proper and principal good, it consequently follows that
it cannot properly be said to be an action of injury.

But if his Honor be reproached, and his reputation defamed, he is much
injured; and in righting himself for such a disgrace, he seeks satisfaction,
so much the more discreetely, the more worthily, by how much his courses are
more conformable to the laws: which never constrain any one to endure that,
which is a blemish unto his name, and a spot unto his renown.

Yet because there are diverse quarrels, which arise daily amongst young brauing
gallants; whose ground is only the damage, either of goods or body (when the
prejudice of virtue and honor only ought to be the final end of our noble
resolution) the first causes of such rash and foolish quarrels should quickly
be extinguished (as a fire wanting fuel) if they had not strength of body to
swagger it, and great means to contribute unto the charge thereof. For riches
and treasures are honorable, being imployd in virtuous actions, which is
Honors mother: in such sort that the greater the treasures are, which heaven
has profused on great men; the greater is the glory wherewith it crowns
them. For fulness and perfection of strength is generally reverenced by the
Law of Nations: which commands us to honor those, which can do much;
forasmuch as their designs are so much the more excellent, by how much they
are more able to effect what they vvoulde do.

Behold then why virtue (which is not a fained or an imaginary point) is
touched to the quick, when as any one endammageth the means of her
performances, which have dependaunce on the body and goods: so that good men
do exercise their virtues when as they use their means with a prudent hand,
and conform the actions of their bodies unto Temperaunce, Modesty,
Magnanimity, and other honorable and worthy employments; making both the one
and the other to appertain to the conservation of their honor.

But when the injury by deed proceeds from swaggering, brauadoing, and
audacious temeritie; such a fantastical and capricious humor is so irregular,
so immoderate, that the repression thereof deserves no mean reward: and then
specially, when the rebuker shall not have any peculiar interest therein.
But when the disgrace or injury is directed unto him, he is so much the more
earnestly provoked, by how much the more his courage and manhood is called into
question by the ouerweening faucines of the offender. For whether this
audacious swaggerer, desire to make proof thereof, and so he be incited through
the disparagement of this affront: or, whether he proceeded so rashly, that he
imagines the party that incountreth him, to be of too base a mind, to dare
to make show of revenge; Both the one and the other intention offends, and
gives sufficient cause of complaint, because the honor thereby is much
impeacht.

This ought to be understood to be amongst men of equal strength, or between
such as are of small disparity. For if the greater outbraue the lesser, the
infamy redounds unto the assaulter; because the inequality of strength
debarres him, from the means of working his revenge. And no action that is
constrained, can beget dishonor; no more then an action can be honorable that
is not free.

Touching the injury by word; it is either reproachful detraction, or gybing
foppery: for both the one and the other, has a bitter relish in the ingenuous
apprehension of a generous spirit.

The first, which is detraction, plants the massacring petard of a slanderous
obloquie, against the gates of virtue; to batter down the Palace of Honor: he
says that honor is under vice, and so confounds the glory thereof; it being
only maintained by the supportance of virtue. And although this aspersion be
full of untruths, yet notwithstanding it shakes the whole Fabric; in such
sort, that it is always ready to tumble down, and cannot easily be reduced
unto its former estate again. For Honor ought to be still preserved so pure,
so spotless, that it should be free from the least blot or blemish whatsoever.
For this reason calumnious imputations were utterly condemned, by all laws,
both divine and humane. And because malicious detraction has help, of spuing
forth its venomous poison, as well by writing as wording; all defamatory and
reproachful Libels have always bin severely censured.

The second, which is gybing mockery, are words which very much offend,
especially being spoken by a scornful spirit, which is the source and
fountain of disdain, affording argument of vice and mischief, and
consequently much abating the value of true Honor: whether because a person
that is well borne conceiues thereby a sudden shame (which kindles his
passions with an angry choler, being as yet but green in years) or a greater
indignation; having through the maturitie of his age, attainde unto discretion
to judge of an offense: which is then indeed when wisdom and experience
should furnish him with so much understanding, that he should not give
occasion to be flouted at. Whosoever, then, is provoked in this sort, cannot
choose but conceive a great deal of discontent. For indeed if it be a
difficult thing to a man of worth, to see himself not prized according to his
merit; what spite and vexation would it be unto him, to see whatsoever he
either said or did, to be contemptuously derided at. Yet notwithstanding,
those of the vviser sort, do not think it fit to take every word in
dudgeon, that is spoken pleasantly, because it is not the word that should
offend, but the intention of him that thrusts it out, as the gunpowder the
bullet. Wherefore we ought to observe that, more then the word, although it
seem at first to be outrageous. For even as praises and commendations brought
out in a scuru^e fleering manner, from a depraved intention, and a malignant
spirit, do great injury, and give sufficient occasion of quarrel: Even so a
bitter and a tart jest which issues not from a rancorous disposition, should
not provoke a man to take an offense too suddenly.

The vprightnes and equity of a quarrel grounded on words solely depends on
the intention of the speaker; because it is it that determines al our actions,
al our speakings, either to be good or evil. For even as the will gives
motion unto the members, whereby they stir and do any thing: even so the
intention is the first beginner, of either the good, or the evil, which they
do.

Moreover, beside the intention, this equity may be restrained unto certain
circumstances; which a man of worth, and great esteem (which should not avoid
combat only, but debate also and contention) ought to consider before he
imbarke himself, into any rash and unadvised quarrel; yea, although the
wickedness of the intention were apparently discerned. For he that speaks,
does oftentimes use such general terms: so that if any one interpret them
particularly to concern his own person, he is unjust in his quarrel, and
offers injury unto himself. For applying them to his own life, and seeming
to be much nettled thereby, he does nothing else but proclaim himself
culpable by his own detection; and induces others to believe, that the sting
of his own conscience urges him within, and so enforces him to search
outwardly for an excuse, before he be accused. Therefore it is neither lawful
nor honorable, to except against any words, which may by any means bear an
interpretation of pleasant mirth.

But above all words of base disparagement, that is reputed to be most
offensive, which accuses a man for breaking his word; because it is most
unlawful for us (although it be with great prejudice) to violate our faith, or
to fail in performance: for (our private intercourse amongst men, wholly
depending thereon) he that falsifieth his faith, or credit, does deal
treacherously with a public society, and dissolueth all the bands of commerce
and amity. Again, he that passes his word and credit, and yet observes them
not, makes himself a liar; and so consequently depriueth himself of that
honor, which no man but himself, could rob him of: and by the same means
draws unto himself a note of cowardice, and perfidious treachery. Therefore
if a false and forged imputation be a sufficient and lawful cause of
quarrelling, the promise-breaker then gives just occasion of the like revenge.
For, this is to tax him with an argument of disestimation, whereof it
concerns him to clear himself. And therefore a man being accused of
perfidiousnes, ought to do the uttermost that he can possible to make the
contrary appear unto the world through just and lawful means: to the end that
he may redeem his doubtful reputation from so foul a blemish.

There are other kinds of quarrels which are grounded only on jealous
surmises, which oftentimes are found amongst your vniuster sort. For the first
motion hereof proceeds from envy, which never harbors in a noble breast,
and such a one as is generously borne: whom it behooves to excel all others in
all kinds of worthy qualities, and to love virtue with such a sincere
affection, that all such as are endued therewith, should be dear and precious
in his sight; and therefore far from contemptible hatred. He should be sorry
to see the ignorance, brutishnes, and miseries of another, and not grieve to
behold the excellency, wisdom, and felicity of his companion. Whosoever
quarrelleth with any through envy, is a testimony to prove (against his own
intention) the honesty of him with whom he contendeth; and gives thereby a
sufficient show unto the world of the wrong, which he offers him, forasmuch
as no one can justly complain against a virtuous man. Behold therefore what the
foundation whereon the greatest part of quarrels are wholly grounded. I have
not undertaken here to declare unto you the order and manner of proceeding in
them, nor yet the reason for the determination of them being entered into; but
the remedies alone of avoiding and flying from the^ as well in not departing
from virtue, by doing such things as are contrary to duty and honesty, as also
in not either working or wording that, which may enforce us to an unlawful
combat; in the which a man hazardeth his Honor, his life, his soul, in
sacrificing himself unto his blinded passion. For there is no greater
ignorance, or folly in the heart of man, then to be willing to make God the
Judge and Vmpire of his Duel (which is so odious and abominable in his eyes)
under a false, and devilish kind of hope, that his just judgment will judge
unjustly, to favor us.

But to eschew the detestable combats (which shipwreck our souls) we must
take heed of the tempestuous gusts (that drive us so vehemently against these
rocks) which are the raging storms of our own choler: whereof I presently
intend to speak.

The Description of Choler; of the evils which proceed from it, of the causes
which produce it, of the means of correcting it; and consequently of avoiding
contentions and debates.
CHAP. XI.
CHoler is a hood that blinds the eyes of reason, and hinders them from
beholding the resplendent luster of true Honor: it inueagleth man in so strange
a manner, that he embraces counterfeit and false honor, and inseparably
depriues himself of the reward of virtue.

It is a passion, that disturbeth not only those that are vassals to her
commanding sway, with infinite encumbrances; but all such also, as converse
with them. So that there is no place or region within the bounds and limits of
her jurisdiction, where love and amity may live together, secure and free from
the brutish noise, and hellish molestation of contentious brawles. It is a
raging tempest, that breaks down the masts and rudders of our lives;
tumbling and tossing our frail barks, in the soule-swallowing surges of our
frantic furies; renting the cards of our conuoye, and taking from our sight
the star of our direction, and leaves with us neither help nor hope.

It is a wild fire, that burns whatsoever it come near unto: whose
all-deuouring flames cannot be extinguished, but with wondrous difficulty, if
it be permitted never so little time to diffuse it self. In such sort that a
choleric and angry man, may be said, to differ nothing from a mad man: save
only in regard of time; because it is perpetual in the one, and but temporary
in the other.

Which ought to be an incitation unto all those that do desire a peaceful
rest in their own souls (and not to be a raging firebrand, and a torturing
grieuance unto others) to be marvelous careful to shun this monstrous
passion; sithence it is the root, and source, of the greatest part of
contentions, causeless brawles, and bloody combats, which set the world in a
confused uproar.

To avoid the danger of this hidious monster, we are first to consider the
manifold inconveniences and mischievous evils, which it does beget: then
afterward the chiefest causes: and last of all the means and remedies, of
conquering it.

As for the evils which it does beget, the first and greatest is: that at her
first entrance she quite extinguisheth the light of reason; through whose
deprivation, our affairs are destitute of all help and counsel. She deals
like a bloodthirsty Tyrant, which spoils the State, and takes away all
counsel from the kingdom which he possesses, suffering no one to remain
alive, which may contradict, or oppose himself to his designs; to the end
that all things may be done according to the desires of his depraved will. For
having after this manner forceably taken, from us, our reason, our counsel, and
our judgment, she unjustly usurps over our persons; and makes us to
proceed unadvisedly in all our actions, by the violent instigation of our
rash, disordered and ouerbearing fury.

Whence it may be inferred, that sithence angry and impetuous choler bereaueth
us of the perfect use of Reason, it is the subversion of other virtues. She
inuerteth piety through her mischievous and blasphemous periuries: charity,
through brutish and inhumane cruelty: justice, through violence: and sober
modesty, through raging fury.

She hinders man, from thinking on that which he ought to do; and will not
permit him, either to follow or believe good counsel: for she possesses him,
with such an ouerweening presumption, that he accounts no man's counsel to
be compared unto his own advise. Moreover, she steeps his tongue, in gall and
vinegar: so that it can produce nothing but that, which may be bitter and
sharp to others; and so hereby makes him liable to much calamity. For from
words they proceed to blows, from blows to combats, from combats to
lamentable deaths: which are detested, both of God and men. The causes which
^eget choler, are pride, presumption, impatience and temerity.

Pride depriueth us of the knowledge of our selves: and not only that, but
bereaueth us also of humility, which is necessarily requisite unto a virtuous
man; serving him in stead of a curbing bridle, to moderate the violence and
fury of his Passion; disposing it orderly unto the course of reason.

Presumption obscureth the luster of Prudence, which should enlighten man in
the prosecuting and atchieuing of all his purposes. Impatience destroys
Temperance: whose helpful assistance man's necessity does very earnestly
require, to preserve his inclinations, and desires, in a golden mean, and to
be the moderatrix of all his actions.

Temeritie is the accursed inuerter of equity and justice in man, constraining
him both to do and say al things without reason, al things without counsel.
Whosoever is subject unto this vice is most unworthy of any great command.

Light belief is also an especial cause of choler. For it often falls out,
that he that has tender cares, has bloody hands: because detraction and
obloquie, engender much discontent in the minds of those, that desire to hear
them. Wherefore to enjoy a peaceful quietness, we must not nourish a calumnious
flatterer, by giving opportunity to his knauish prattle. For whosoever is
facilely inclined to listen unto them, is not far from choler, from blood,
from murder.

The means of remedying this passion, is to anticipate our choler, and to
range it according to the direction of reason; and not to attend it till the
rage be kindled: but at the self same point of time as soon as we have any
sensible perceiuance of any alteration in our spirits, or that the pulses of
our hearts have somewhat a nimbler and a stronger motion then appertains to a
good and perfect temperature, we ought to do unto it as to a fire, which we
quench with all diligence, as soon as it is kindled; not looking on it, till it
has seized on the ioysts and rafters of the house: because, when all things
should be embraced by the fearful and merciless flames, it is in vain to
seek for help. In like manner we ought not to defer the application of our
remedy, till such time as we be scorcht, and burnt, with the furious flames of
our incensed choler: but, even when we perceive passion within us, and
occasions without us, egging and spurring us forwards to this fiery rage, we
must at the very instant employ all the faculties of our souls, to mainetaine
our safety, and to resist the violence which assaulteth us. For there is a
mean to preserve our selves therefrom (as from a Tyrant) by not yielding
obedience at first, nor suffering it to have any power or authority over us.
But if we give it time and leisure to extend and fortify it self, it will get
the start of us, by little and little, and at last become to be invincible.

And because the tongue is a very dangerous instrument of choler, it imports
us also to be marvelous vigilant, and careful to observe, what and how great
faults this passion makes us guilty of by talking, when our tongue is at
liberty, to the end that we may restrain it, with prudent circumspection,
within the railes that are ordained by nature, as its prison.

But if every one would remember his condition and quality in this world,
bidding his last adieu to pride and presumption, through humility: or had we
reapt so much profit in virtues school, as to have brought all our affections
subject unto reason: had we learned there, to bear with just indifferency
both pains and pleasures, labors and rest, penury and plenty, grief and
gladness, and to have framed al our conversation with Temperance; without all
contradiction, we should not have been so propense, so prone, to be enraged
with choler as we are.

And who can imagine us able to undergo any great employments, or to sustain
such violent passions (as oftentimes assaults a virtuous man) when as we are
so easily surmounted and overcome by choler? and that pleasant conceited
syllable, or a little word slipping out unawares, should so vvaspe us, and so
far transport us beyond our selves, that we should seem not to have as much
as one scruple of either constancy or reason?

Let us therefore learn to barracado the doors of our hearts, against the
forcible assaults of choler; fortifiing them so securely on every quarter,
that it may have no encouragement to attempt to enter. For there is no heart
more valorous, or courage stouter, then that, which can repress the fury of
his passion: nor worthyer trophies them those, which may be procured from our
selves: nor triumphs more glorious or magnificent, then when our reason can
lead our conquered affections as slavish servants and servile captives. Which
if they could prevail, and get the victory, they would insult like bloody
minded Tyrants over us; taking away by cruel violence, the peaceful
tranquillity and pleasures of the soul, which virtue gives to Honor, as
solacing associates; being the chiefest, the comfortablest companions, that
man's heart can wish for. And of these I mean to treat in this chapter
following.

The description of true rest, and perfect pleasure, wherewith Virtue
accompanies Honor; accomplishing man, with all felicity.
CHAP. XII.
ALL men naturally desire pleasure and ease; and labor in the world to no
other end, but to settle themselves in such an estate, as may crown their
affections with content. All their practices and endeavors, all their plots
and counsels, all their restless purposes, and painful enterprises, aim at
no other mark but this. But who is it that finds what he searches for?
Every one complains on the misery of his own condition, and bewailes the
peruersitie of his froward fortunes, informing the world by these his doleful
moanes, that he continues still unsatisfied.

The reason hereof is, because he seeks in this life, that which is not
here; and therefore it is impossible to be found. They search with watchful
eyes, and restless hearts, that celestial pearl, in the dunghill of the
world, which is reserved in heaven, for those that will exclaim against the
vanities of the world, and the frail incertaintie of all things therein: for
those (I say) that bend all their studies, to extirpate the love and liking,
which they bear toward the world, out of their hearts and minds, presenting
them by the assistance of virtuous contemplations, unto the GOD of heaven; In
whom they obtain (as in a haven of security) that sweet repose, and quiet
comfort, which they sought in this life, with an earnest and vehement, but a
fruitless pursuit. For we learn by infallible demonstrations, deduced from
the knowledge of our own selves, that this life on earth, is but as it were a
pilgrimage, a short (yet tedious) journey, whereby we travel, or tend toward
another place, which is celestial: wherefore we ought to demean both our
selves, and substances, with such a golden moderation (whether it be in giving
satisfactions to our urgent necessities, or elss in our pleasances and
delightful recreations) that al conspire for the advancement of us, unto that
other place which is the celestial treasury of our sovereign good.

It is a thing maruailous full of difficulty to be attained unto: but being
gained, it is as full of profit, ease, and pleasure; yea such a thing, as in the
acquisition whereof, no pains or perils should seem hard, or fearful.

For, this is a prize so precious, that the least and meanest particle thereof,
is thoroughly sufficient (of it self) to recompense a world of pains.

And because the remonstrances and characters which may be composed, setting
forth virtues beauty and excellency, gently inuiting us to embrace her; and
the manifold discourses of vice showing unto the world her ugly, monstrous,
and deformed shape, enforcing us to detest and hate her; are not sufficient
remedies to cure our depraved passions, and to appease the perturbations of our
spirits; pleasures and pains are proposed unto us in the school of virtue, to
be the Directrices of al our actions; the one serving as a reward and salarie
to encourage us to virtue, the other as a torture to deter us from vice: for
there are no intendments, or actions either plotted or performed, but it is
through the consideration and respect either of the one or other.

It remains therefore, in the conclusion and vpshot of this little tract, to
represent unto you, what and how wondrous great the delectation and pleasure
is, which a virtuous man reapeth in the inioyance of this rich and great
treasure of honor and happiness, which virtue endoweth him with very profusely
here in this life, but most abundantly in the life to come. Let us therefore
know, what pleasure and delectation is.

We define it to be a contentment, full of pleasure and delight, proceeding
from a perfect action, accompanied with the knowledge and understanding thereof.

Sensible creatures are capable of action: but because it is without the
understanding of such things as they do, they cannot have any delectation
thence.

Yet notwithstanding every action, done with knowledge, does not beget pleasure
and delectation. It must be perfect also, if you will have it pleasant. For
imperfection, and defect, breed always more displeasure, then content.

Two things are necessary to the perfect accomplishment of an action; and so by
consequence to the fruition of pleasure.

A good constitution, in the faculty that works, and in the object also
whereon it works.

There is small comfort in looking on any thing, when the eye is badde, and the
object worse. And poor content (God knows) shall a man enioie in hearing,
when as the ear is (almost) deaf, and the music dull: But if the
prospectiue which we behold, be full of glory, and the eye good, the music
curious, and the ear acute, then shall our eye content us with beholding: and
our ear with hearing. The like may be said of the other senses. Furthermore
all delectation is not individual: for there are diverse (yea as many) sorts
of them, as there are perfect actions done with understanding.

Every action that is joined with knowledge, issues from the senses, and is
perfected by them. Thence it is, that there being in man two sorts of senses,
senses of the body, and senses of the soul: there are also found in him, two
sorts of actions, one of the body, the other of the soul: and two kinds
likewise of delectations; the one corporeal, the other spiritual.

The delectation of the body, is external, and proceeds from the perfect
actions of the external senses, which are five in number (every one of them
having a delectation proper unto it self, and which it most affects) to
weet, seeing, hearing smelling, tasting, and touching: so that there is nothing
more admirable amongst the works of nature, then the senses natural
combination, and their subjection to the body.

The spiritual delectation is internal, and issues from the perfect action
of the faculties of the soul: so that, the more perfect the action is, the
more pleasant is its delectation: And by how much also the faculty is more
excellent, and the object more perfect, so much the perfecter shall the action
be; and so by consequence so much the greater shall its pleasure be.

Wherefore it follows, that the delectation which proceeds from the perfect
actions of the soul, does far surpass the other, issuing from the actions
of the body: because the powers and faculties of the soul are far more
efficacious and excellent then those of the body, according to the proportion
of the soul above the body, and as much as the object of the soul (which
properly is virtue and verity) does surmount in excellency all the objects of
the corporeal senses: so that the true joy, true peace, and true rest of the
soul (wherein only consists true and perfect pleasure) bear great
correspondency with truth and virtue.

There is no delectation then, which is truly worthy to be desired by man,
but that which proceeds from the actions of the soul; that only being
peculiar unto him, sithence beasts participate of all other as well as he.

And albeit the body have its distinct pleasures apart from the soul, yet they
cannot be either truly pleasant or laudable in man, if they be not contained
within the precincts of moderation and virtue.

I will grant a man to have as acute an eye as the sharp-sighted Lynx, and that
he stand contemplating on the fairest, the most admired object of the world,
he may certainly conceive some pleasure from such an action: but if it be
wanton, lewd, erroneous, too much, or to a wicked end, that action neither is,
nor ought to be imagined laudable. For their is no true and laudable pleasure
without perfection, nor any perfection but within the lists of virtue.

Furthermore, amongst corporal pleasures some are natural, others vicious and
superfluous.

The natural pleasures are indifferent, and are either good or bad, according
to their use and end unto the which they are referd. For being used with
mediocritie, and applied only unto their own proper end (which is preservation
of health, and continuance of the bodies perfect disposition) they are then
(without question) worthy to be praised; much less then, to be either rejected
or despised.

Such as show themselves to be of too austere and rugged a disposition, in the
inioyance and use of natural pleasure, are too too extreme. For God did not
make the creatures of the world only to serve us, and our necessities; but that
they should also afford us pleasure and delight. Which may easily be proved by
the variety of the manifold and curious colors, the diversity of harmonious
sounds, the differences of pleasant tastes, and multiplicitie of fragrant
smells, which he particularly has appropriated unto every kind of creature;
showing thereby to have had more regard to give content and pleasure to our
senses, then food and sustenance unto our bodies.

Whence it may be inferd, that superfluity (which is both vain and vicious in
all things being eschewed, we ought not to refuse or show our selves
disdainful, to accept the honest pleasures and moderate delights, which God
does offer to us in his Creatures; and therefore are not either to be rejected
or despised.

The severe Stoickes (which would have the desires of men even in these
moderate inioyances of delectation, to be stupid and senseless) are as sharply
censured, as the dissolute and loose Epicures, which take from their
strong-headed affections, Reasons bridle; being always too tractable to the
vain inducements of sensual appetite.

For such as would deprive man of his natural affections, because they dispose
and allure him unto certain vices, may be fitly likened unto those, that
obstinately maintain, that none ought to drink wine, because oftentimes it
makes some men drunk; or that a man should not ride a gallop, for that diverse
men have been destroyed thereby.

But what should become of us, if we were entirely despoyled of our natural
affections? We should have no more power to turn either to the one hand, or
the other, then if a dead palsy had benumbed our senses.

The affections are the nerves, and synnewes of the spirit: which serve to
contract, to slacken, to lift up, to lay down, to stir and settle her,
wheresoever she will; even as the body is moved and removed, by its
ligaments. Wherefore they ought to be preserved and moderated; not taken away
and utterly destroyed. We are to imitate in this a well experienced horseman;
who for to tame and manage well his horse, will not take from him agilitie, and
courage; but endeauours especially to bring him to run, to turn, to rise, to
curuct, to stand, how and when it pleases him, and not according to the horses
will: Even so when as we perceive our affections inclining to stubborn
disobedience, we must correct and reform them with judgment and reason, and
not attempt indiscreetly wholly to mortify and extinguish them.

We must not then disallow, and reprove natural pleasures, in the like sort as
we do such as are vicious and superfluous, nor yet condemn the desire of them
or their fruition. For both in the one and the other, that mean may be
observed, which is commended in all things.

Yet howsoever, we must not take so much pleasure and delight, that it
prejudice the health and safety of our souls; nor yet so little, that our
bodies grow feeble and sickly, through defect thereof. In so doing, whosoever
recreateth himself with the moderate delectation of an honest pleasure, shall
be much better reputed, then he that voluntarily refuses so great a good,
which freely prostitutes it self to his acceptance. For he neglects it,
either through despisall, superstition, or arroganee: thinking to seem more
wise in refusing, then his Creator was in offering it.

As for vicious and dishonest pleasures, they are to be detested, of
necessity: sithence such as are engendered by gourmandizing and ebrietie, do
not only make men like to beasts, but a great deal worse.

For they never eat and drink with such a greedy insatietie, but that they
have always remembrance and power to retire themselves into their own nests
and dens; whereas man tons such disproportionate measure of wine into his
belly, that reason and judgment (for all their shifts) are drowned in the
deluge: through loss of whom, he that (ere whiles) was rational (but now
insensible) vnknowes his friends, his familiar acquaintance, his servants, nay
himself. Moreover; his capacity of wine destroys the capacity of his wit, and
makes him absolutely unfit for any performances; beside the wrong it does unto
his reputation, to the health of his body, and (which is worst of all) to the
safety of his soul.

Voluptuous sensuality, and worldly delight, are always inseparable from a
gluttonous belly; which have the power to transform men into hogs, utterly
depriving them of the love and knowledge of virtue and honesty. Such as hunt
after them, are induced thereunto by an apparent resemblance of true felicity
promised by voluptie: but they find themselves (incontinently) strangely
benumbed both bodies and souls; in such sort, that the one can deliberate and
determine nothing but that which is dishonest: and the other is as impotent in
the execution of good: and so at last it is the utter overthrow both of their
sense and reason.

Volupty is not a jot more gracious unto wealth and riches, the^ it is unto the
soul and body: for there is no patrimony or inheritance, so infinite in the
world, which it will not devour in a little time. The greatest treasury that
ever was seen or heard of, was that of the Romans. For beside the pillage of
gold and silver which they rauaged from all the richest cities and kingdoms of
the earth, the revenues also of the Provinces were yearly brought in to
maintain expenses and supply their wants: And yet notwithstanding, the
voluptuous prodigality of one Heliogabalus, of one Co^modus, of one Caligula,
or of one Nero has clean exhausted it within 2. years.

It is not only through want of bread and wine that Venus waxes cold, but also
through the penury of gold and silver. For besides the heavy expenses which are
required for the maintenance of volupty; what and how many disbursments must
there be, not only for the preparation of curious feasts and banquets, but also
for inuesting our proud selves in rich and gay apparel, hoping to seem thereby
magnificent? Is it possible (unless men were bereaved of the use of reason, nay
of common sense) that they should buy at so dear a rate, not repentance only,
but poverty, shame, derision and disdain? what do I say? nay: the
indignation of Heaven and the flames of hell.

It seems (all things considered) not repugnant to reason, to attribute unto
such, the titles of forelorne and hopeless castawayes. For how can they be
reputed less, which with so scornful a heel kick at prudence and reason,
contemn virtue and honesty, neglect their souls, destroy their bodies,
profuse their gold, their silver, their substances, their revenues, and
whatsoever else is theirs, with so prodigal, so vain, and so needless a
lauishment? And last of all, utterly to abandon the country, which first
nourisht them?

Those that seek their beatitude in vicious, wanton, and worldly pleasures,
thinking that they obtain the same when they enjoy them; are they not
exceeding wide from what they aimed at? yea certainly, so much the wider, for
that their minds being prepossessed by the cunning seizure of false
persuasions, debar them from hearkening unto that, which would willingly and
freely acquainte them with their transgressions, redeem them from that
misery, and evidently declare unto them wherein true and perfect beatitude
consists. For indeed we cannot be crossed with greater infelicitie, then by
establishing our happiness in that, in which alone consists our misery; and in
that also we being miserable, cannot imagine our selves to be so, nor credit
those that do persuade the same.

Prosperity and welfare is untimely wished for by any, save only those that
are capable thereof, and with an earnest zeal desire the same. Which the
vicious and wicked cannot do; because the way which they persevere in, and
which seems unto them fair, pleasant, and spacious, does lead them to
perdition.

Wherefore he that wants that which he loves, cannot be called happy:
Neither can he which has that which he loves, if that which he has be any
way offensive: Neither may he be accounted happy, which has that which is
singularly good and profitable, if he love not that, which he has: because
those which covet that, whereunto they cannot attain, do always rest
exceedingly tormented. Such as have that, which they ought not to desire, are
not only beguiled, but much abused too: and such as desire not that, which is
requisite to the accomplishment of their felicity, are crazie, wey-ward, and
disdainefull: which cannot be by any means, except he to whom it happens
always remain a miserable wretch.

Therefore we say, that all true pleasure and delectation proceeds from an
action that is perfect. And the spiritual actions of the soul, being much
more able to attain unto a high perfection then the others of the body, which
only crawle along upon the ground; It behooves man to settle his pleasure and
content in them. But these also cannot be said to be truly perfect (and so by
consequence not delectable) except they bear a consenting uniformity with
Reason.

Wherefore it follows of necessity, that the highest and heartiest pleasure
is found in the inioyance of virtue; because she persuades us to love and
embrace that which is truly good.

But there is no good, so good as God. He is the beginning, source, and
fountain of all goods, that are within the reach of our desires.

Wherefore it imports us (if we wish for true content and blessed happiness)
to extend our desires even unto God himself. He is the sole and perfect
object, which our souls ought to propose unto themselves. He is the end of
ends, and the last mark which virtue aims at. He is the delight of all
delights: He gives delectatation, without tedious satiety, without end.

He is a paradise of solid pleasures.
He is a sun, whose glory still does shine.
H' is water, sprinkling our hearts-sprouting treasures.
H' is such, whose essence no one can define.
What is it then, that hinders us from being inflamed with the love of
Virtue? sithence by her sweet conduct, we gain the possession of so great a
treasure. She hides not her self from our beholdings; but always obiecteth
unto our eye, the radiant luster of her beauteous face, hoping to entice our
dull and senseless hearts, to be enamored with the accomplished perfection
which is reflected on us, from the golden rays of her resplendent glory.

There is no remedy: we must needs take heart, and courageously surpass those
encountering difficulties, which stand in the very entrance of her Temple.
Nothing that is rare and excellent, can be achieved without pains and
industry. For, nature has anexed difficulty unto greatness, to crown the
atchieuement with the greater Honor.

Sithence then there is nothing more excellent then virtue, in whose right hand
is held the palm of Glory, and in whose left a crown of Honor; Let all our
designs stand on tip-toe to reach unto her: Let us spare no labors nor
pains, no toils nor travails, to gain the society of so gracious a Guide;
sithence by her, only we mount to heaven. We behold her always there
permanent, although very few present themselves unto her, or desire inioyance
of her dearest self. The greatest part of men have a far better liking of
the fair and spacious ways of vice; preferring her silke^ carpet strewed with
the choicest and most fragrant sorts of flowers, before the rocks and thorns
of virtues path: whereby we show, that we are either ignorant in choosing; or
that we choose peruersly what we ought not to choose.

Know, man, whatsoever thou art, that virtue can only ennoblish thee with
honor and glory, to accomplish thee with true goodness and perfect pleasures, to
exalt thee unto the heavens, and to co-vnite thee and thy soul with God.
Herein consists al man's felicity: and unto this is referred whatsoever is
contained in the Golden Cabinet of true Treasure.

FINIS LIBRI.
Officium beneuoli animi, finem non habet.

